Exploring the film growth in perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11448K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11448K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6029-6049Exploring the film growth in perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Jing 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhizai 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Wang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Zhiwen 
            Jin
          
          
        
      *
      School of Physical Science and Technology, Key Laboratory of Special Function Materials and Structure Design (MoE), National & Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Optical Conversion Materials and Technology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. E-mail: qianwang@lzu.edu.cn; jinzw@lzu.edu.cn
Received 
      24th November 2020
    , Accepted 19th January 2021First published on 1st February 2021AbstractIn the past ten years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown great potential for development, with their maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) reaching 25.5%. However, poor perovskite films with low coverage, pores, and small grain size are often obtained in the actual preparation process. These issues not only make it more difficult to achieve a high PCE, but also lead to the easy decomposition of films in the environment. A fast nucleation rate and low crystallinity are main reasons for the poor film quality. Therefore, it is possible to control factors that affect the growth of perovskite films to obtain high-quality films. Here, we first introduce the theoretical mechanism of film nucleation and growth. Afterwards, some main influencing factors in the growth of perovskite films are summarized, including the choice of substrate materials, annealing process, precursor composition, additive engineering and solvent engineering. Next, we present some insight into the growth of 2D and 2D/3D mixed perovskite films. Finally, we propose some views on the future development of PSCs.Jing ZhaoJing Zhao received her B.S. Degree in the School of Optoelectronic Engineering, Changzhou Institute of Technology. She is currently an M.S. student at Lanzhou University. Her main research interest focuses on inorganic semiconductor materials and solar cells.Zhizai LiZhizai Li received his B.S. Degree in the School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University. He is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Zhiwen Jin. His main research interest focuses on inorganic semiconductor materials and solar cells.Meng WangMeng Wang received his B.S. Degree in the School of Shandong University of Technology. He is currently a M.S. student under the supervision of Prof. Zhiwen Jin. His main research interest focuses on inorganic semiconductor materials and solar cells.Qian WangQian Wang is a Researcher with the School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University. She received her B.S. and PhD Degree in Materials Chemistry from Lanzhou University of China in 2011 and 2016, respectively. She joined Lanzhou University in 2018. Most recently her research interest focuses on quantum dot-based devices and structural design in optoelectronic device.Zhiwen JinZhiwen Jin received his B.S. Degree from Lanzhou University in 2011 and PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. He joined Lanzhou University in 2018 as a Professor with the School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University. His research interests include inorganic semiconductor materials, thin-film photoelectric devices and device physics.
1. Introduction
Perovskites have great research potential because of their large absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy, long carrier diffusion length, and low-cost and simple solution manufacturing.1–8 The development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has shown an amazing leap, from an initial power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 3.8% to the officially certified highest efficiency of 25.5% to date.9–14 Each efficiency improvement is not only related to device structure improvements, but also closely related to the promotion of film quality.15–20 In general, high-quality films possessing the characteristics of uniform coverage, non-porous and dense, and large grain size can achieve a high PCE.
However, films prepared by many researchers have varying degrees of quality problems in the actual experimental process, such as low density and coverage, and poor grain uniformity.21–25 For example, most films contain numerous grain boundaries. These grain boundary defects not only affect the carrier transport, but also become channels for water molecules to enter the perovskite, which ultimately leads to a lower PCE and unstable device.26–30 Although methods such as solvent engineering, additive engineering and component engineering have emerged to improve these problems, there are still differences in film quality under the reference experimental conditions.31–35 Thus, the emergence of these problems has forced researchers to continuously explore the film formation mechanism and consider how to precisely control the growth of perovskite films.
In this review, we mainly focus on the growth of perovskite films in PSCs. We first recall the classical theory of crystal nucleation and growth, involving Ostwald ripening in the film growth process. Subsequently, the factors that may affect the growth of the 3D film in the film preparation process are mainly explored. The main factors include annealing, substrate materials, precursor composition, solvent engineering, and additive engineering. Then, we present some insight into the growth of 2D perovskite films and 2D/3D perovskite films. Finally, we list some shortcomings that still exist and provide our views on the future development of perovskite film growth.
2. Classical theory
The preparation of high-quality films is related to nucleation and growth. This section mainly introduces the basic nucleation and growth theories. During the film formation process, nucleation and growth are inseparable in terms of time. However, nucleation and growth are introduced separately for a better understanding.
2.1 Nucleation theory
Nucleation can be divided into homogeneous nucleation and heterogeneous nucleation. Homogeneous nucleation refers to the uniform distribution of newly produced nuclei throughout the parent phase, whereas heterogeneous nucleation usually occurs on the surface of the container or at the interface.
An important parameter involved in homogeneous nucleation is the Gibbs free energy (ΔG). There are two factors that change the total free energy. The first is the bulk free energy (ΔGV), which represents the difference in free energy between the solid and liquid phases. The second is the formation of a solid–liquid boundary during this process. The phase boundary is associated with the surface free energy (γ), which is positive. The Gibbs free energy value is the product of γ and the surface area of the nucleus (4πr2) according to the following equation: (1)
At a certain temperature, ΔGV and γ are certain values, and thus ΔG is a function of r. The change in the curve of ΔG with r is shown in Fig. 1a. It can be seen that ΔG reaches its maximum value (ΔGN) when the radius is rc. The nucleus with a radius of rc is called the critical nucleus, and rc is called the critical radius. When r < rc for an embryo, its growth will lead to an increase in the free energy of the system. Thus, the embryo of this size is unstable and difficult to grow, which eventually melts and disappears. When r ≥ rc, the free energy of the embryonic growth system decreases, and the embryos become stable nuclei.
 Fig. 1  (a) Diagram of the classical nucleation theory. ΔG is the free energy change and is a function of nuclear radius (r) for homogeneous nucleation.162 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Illustration of the contact angle (θ) for heterogeneous nucleation. (c) LaMer diagram for monodispersed particle formation (homogeneous nucleation), where Cs is the solubility, Css is the minimum concentration for nucleation, i.e., the minimum supersaturation level for homogeneous nucleation, and Cs Max is the maximum concentration for nucleation.163 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the three major growth mechanisms: island growth (Volmer–Weber), layer growth (Frank–van der Merwe), and layer-island growth (Stranski–Krastanov). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.164 
Then, the number of crystal nuclei formed per unit volume of liquid per unit time is controlled by two factors, namely the nucleation work factor  and the probability factor of atomic diffusion  when the temperature is lower than the melting point (Tm). The nucleation rate is as follows: (2)
In eqn (2), K is the proportional constant, and ΔG* is the work required to form a critical nucleus (referred to as nucleation work), Q the diffusion activation energy, k the Boltzmann constant, and T the absolute temperature. In addition, the nucleation rate is closely related to the degree of supersaturation, temperature and surface free energy.
Heterogeneous nucleation is more common than homogeneous nucleation. It appears on the interface or surface. Because the surface energy and the energy barrier are low, it is easy to form heterogeneous nuclei. Fig. 1b presents the wetting relationship between the film and the substrate. The heterogeneous nuclei mainly consist of three interfaces of substrate-surface (γSL), substrate-liquid (γSI), and liquid-surface (γIL). Then, the contact angle can be expressed as the following formula: (3)
The formula of the Gibbs free energy required for heterogeneous nucleation is as follows: (4) (5)θ can vary from 0 to 180°. When θ = 180°,  (homogeneous nucleation work), the substrate has no effect on nucleation; when θ = 0, and , heterogeneous nucleation does not need to do nucleation work, which is the condition of complete wetting.
2.2 Growth theory

2.2.1 LaMer diagram. 
The crystal growth process can be divided into two steps. Firstly, the solute molecules diffuse from the solution to the crystal surface, and then the solute molecules are deposited on the crystal surface.36 In general, the nucleation and crystal growth process of perovskites is generally described by the LaMer diagram (as shown in Fig. 1c), which can be mainly divided into three stages. In the first stage, small molecules accumulate in the solution. In the second stage, factors (including solvent removal and temperature increase) may produce a supersaturated environment where nucleation begins. The third stage is that the crystal grows and further nucleates after nucleation. When the solute consumption rate is greater than the solvent evaporation rate, the solution concentration drops below the critical radius value. Nucleation growth occurs instead of nucleation. Therefore, it is theoretically possible to regulate the growth of the perovskite film by controlling nucleation or growth.


2.2.2 Growth models. 
The formation of a film requires multiple nucleated crystals to gather through growth, and different growth patterns are formed structurally due to various factors. There are three classic growth patterns, including island growth, layer growth and layer-island growth, as shown in Fig. 1d. Island growth was first proposed as the Volmer–Weber model. The Volmer–Weber model uses the nucleation theory, which assumes that the crystal film grows from the 3D crystal nucleus on the substrate, and the relative number and growth rate of the crystals are determined by the interface and surface free energy. In the island growth model, small clusters form nuclei directly on the substrate and then grow into islands. For the island structures, the molecular contact in the sediment is stronger than the deposition between molecules and the substrate.37 Then, based on the stratified growth of elasticity theory (Frank–van der Merwe model), the concept of critical mismatch is derived. Relative to island growth, the density between sediment molecules and the substrate is greater than that between sediment molecules, and the density decreases with an increase in layers. Finally, layer-island growth (Stranski–Krastanov model) was proposed based primarily on atomic calculations, which assumes that a number of 2D crystals are initially formed.38 The 3D crystals with natural lattice constants will grow above these layers after reaching the critical thickness. The reasons for this pattern are as follows: (1) the sudden increase in free energy at the interface between two crystal structures changes the energy balance, which is conducive to 3D crystal growth and (2) the formation of a mound alleviates the pressure.
It is found through experiments that the film growth model is mainly related to the lattice mismatch and the wettability of the film substrate. The film grows into an island pattern when the wettability is poor. This model also requires the deposition temperature to be sufficiently high and the deposited molecules should have a certain diffusion ability. The layered growth mode is achieved with good wettability and small lattice mismatch. When the wettability is better and the degree of mismatch is greater, it is an island-layer growth model.


2.2.3 Ostwald ripening. 
The growth of the film may involve Ostwald ripening. From small nucleation to grain growth, different shapes are formed depending on the growth mode. The small lumps continue to accept new deposited atoms and merge with other small lumps to gradually grow.39 The number of lumps quickly reaches saturation. As the merging of small lumps continues, a new lump is formed on the vacant substrate surface. The larger lump continues to swallow the nearby smaller lumps, and the isolated lumps connect with each other as the “swallowing” progresses. Finally, some isolated holes are constantly filled to form a continuous and complete initial film.

3. Regulate 3D perovskite film growth
Understanding the factors that affect film growth can help researchers to prepare more efficient films. Hence, this section mainly introduces the common factors that can control the growth of thin films, including the choice of substrate materials, annealing process, precursor composition, solvents and additives.
3.1 Substrate materials
Substrate materials play an important role in controlling the nucleation growth of films. Different substrate materials will affect the wettability and distribution of the precursor, and ultimately affect the morphology of the film. Here, the growth of the perovskite film is discussed. For PSCs, the substrate transport layer materials are mainly inorganic oxides, organic conductive materials, metal oxides, and metal sulfides (such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, fullerene and its derivatives, and NiOx, PEDOT:PSS).40–44 Some of them are hydrophobic materials with a large contact angle, which leads to a slower nucleation rate, a smaller number of grains and a larger size. These materials can increase the flatness of the film, reduce defects and improve the device efficiency. However, there are also some substrate materials that produce some chemical or physical reactions during the film growth process, which cannot be eliminated.45,46
Taking TiO2 as an example, TiO2 is widely used in the electron transport layer (ETL). The structure of the TiO2 ETL can be divided into compact TiO2 (c-TiO2) and mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) in PSCs. It was found that the PCE of c-TiO2 PSCs was inferior to that of m-TiO2. The distance required for electron diffusion in m-TiO2 is relatively shorter and the contact area between the perovskite and mesoporous electronic conductive materials is larger.47 However, from the perspective of film growth, perovskite was deposited on c-TiO2 and m-TiO2 substrates, and the film on the c-TiO2 substrate exhibited a larger grain.48 In fact, studies have found that due to the existence of holes and high surface energy on the substrate, the contact angle of m-TiO2 is very small, close to zero. However, the contact angle of c-TiO2 is very large. Generally, a large contact angle on the surface can inhibit the nucleation of the perovskite film, thus allowing the nucleated crystal to grow longer and promoting the growth of the crystal grains.49 In addition, the perovskite precursor is deposited on m-TiO2, and multiple nucleation points are formed due to the existence of holes, which is also the reason for the small grain size of m-TiO2. Considering the high efficiency of m-TiO2 as a substrate, the small grain size may hinder the further improvement of stability. Some researchers came up with the idea of attaching CdSe quantum dots on the surface of the m-TiO2 layer to allow it and the perovskite grains to be in close contact. The specific preparation method is shown in Fig. 2a. This method can be understood as the CdSe quantum dots acting as a seed-mediated layer to ensure a more uniform and denser perovskite film.50
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the normal spin coating process and the CdSe QD seed-mediated method for fabricating PSCs.50 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Scheme of the fabrication processes of spin coating. (c) Scheme of the fabrication processes of spray coating.53 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag. 
Although the technology of TiO2 as a substrate material is mature and the device efficiency is high, the shortcomings of its high-temperature preparation and low electron mobility may hinder the commercial application of PSCs. Therefore, it is urgent to solve these problems of TiO2. The first solution is to optimize the preparation method of the TiO2 ETL, and the second is to find other materials to replace it, such as SnO2 and ZnO.51,52 For example, compared with ordinary TiO2 prepared by spin coating, Su and coworkers used a new TiO2 prepared at low temperature by spraying technology. The contact angle changed from 37.8° to 15.3°. In terms of morphology, the grain size of ordinary perovskite is large, but the pore diameter of their film was up to 50 nm. The improved film was compact and uniform without pores. In the annealing process, the common spinning coating method speeds up the evaporation of solvent and produces a saturated environment, while the film produced by crystallization nucleation has a large grain size on its surface. However, due to some factors such as high temperature and volatile solvents, the film may be over-annealed and perforated, as shown in Fig. 2b. As shown in the Fig. 2c, this spraying technology provides a rough surface, significantly improves the surface wettability, and inhibits dehumidification of the perovskite film deposited during annealing, resulting in a continuous and dense film morphology.53 In addition, substrate materials such as SnO2 and ZnO are also used. Some doping is used to modify the interface to improve the smoothness of the film and the hydrophobicity of the surface. Finally, uniform nucleation and a film with good quality, high crystallinity, and repeatability are achieved.41
A suitable substrate material can improve the morphology of the film and reduce the non-radiation recombination, thus improving the PCE of the device. However, some chemical reactions inevitably occur during or after the film deposition, which affect the quality of the film.54 For example, CdS has a low band gap (∼2.4 eV) and can be used as a substrate transport layer material. Studies have found that when CdS is used as an ETL, with Cd added to the perovskite, the grain size of the perovskite film increases significantly, and the unreacted precursors in the film decrease. However, when the concentration is higher than 0.5%, other substances obviously appear in the grains of the film or at the grain boundaries. Further exploration found that ammonium methyl iodide (MAPbI3) is volatile and easy to be decomposed into methylamine (MAI) and hydrogen iodide (HI), which is a well-known strong acid. HI will dissolve CdS, and eventually form a second phase of (MA)2CdI4 or MACdI3 in a series of ways, which not only reduces the quality of the film, but also may hinder electron extraction, thereby reducing the performance.55
In summary, the selection of suitable substrate materials is an essential link in the future development of PSCs. The substrate material is the platform for the continuous crystallization of perovskite, which affects its crystallization quality. The selection of the substrate material not only needs to start from physical properties such as energy level matching and electron mobility, but should also consider a series of chemical factors to pursue a dense and uniform film.
3.2 Annealing
From the precursor solution to the formation of the perovskite film, annealing is an important step. In this process, some solvents or additives can be eliminated, thus accelerating the reaction of the precursor solution to produce perovskite, and finally improving the morphology of the film. Thus, different annealing conditions affect the quality of the film.56

3.2.1 The heat source. 
In the annealing process, there are many heat sources, as shown in Fig. 3a and b.57–60 Different annealing methods have their own characteristics. Hot plate annealing is a commonly used annealing method because of its simple material technology and low cost, and it is also a mature method. However, this annealing method can only transfer heat from the bottom up, resulting in uneven heat distribution. Some precursor solutions first enter the saturated state and crystallize to form the perovskite phase, while others are relatively slow. The appearance of the film is difficult to control and some holes may appear. In addition, prolonged annealing can also be a serious problem. The decomposition of some organic compounds in the precursor may affect the film quality and device performance due to prolonged annealing. Thus, to save time and achieve even heat transfer, researchers offered have developed other methods of annealing.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of hot plate and air-heated oven annealing approaches.61 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of radiative thermal annealing approach.62 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the transformation of MAPbI3 from the liquid to solid phase in an MA atmosphere. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of the preparation procedure of perovskite films based on the solvent engineered method with DHA and TSA process.75 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (e) Schematic diagram of the annealing treatment of perovskite films under solvent vapor.79 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (f). Cross-sectional SEM images of the TA and SA perovskite films with a thickness of 1015 nm.78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Publications. 
Wang et al. used an oven as a heat source for annealing. The heating temperature in the oven is well controlled, and the heat is transferred in all directions. The heating is more uniform, which not only shortened the annealing time, but also made the film more uniform and improved the efficiency of the devices.61 Also, some researchers have used radiation annealing technology with a shorter heat exchange process and lower energy consumption. The grain size of the film showed that there was almost no difference between the grain size from hot plate annealing for 10 minutes (min) and radiation annealing for 3 min, indicating that the energy transfer of radiation annealing is faster.62 Furthermore, the time for photonic flash sintering is shorter. It can be completely annealed within 1 ms. Overall, the shape of the film is smooth and dense, but the crystalline state of the area near the airflow is not uniform due to the forced action of the airflow. The PCE (11.3%) of the fabricated device was lower than that of the 90 min hot plate-annealed sample (15.2%), but the open circuit voltage (VOC) increased from 1.03 V to 1.05 V.63
In general, hot plate annealing is still the dominant method in the laboratory, mainly because of its low cost and the high efficiency of the prepared devices. However, from the perspective of the future development of PSCs, microwave radiation and other methods are essential. This is because films needed with a large area are required, and these methods can shorten the time and save space relatively.


3.2.2 Annealing environment. 
The annealing environment is another important annealing condition, where different atmospheres affect the film formation and device stability. Perovskite is known to be sensitive to water. When the humidity reaches a certain value, organic–inorganic perovskites are easily decomposed, and the phase transition of inorganic perovskite occurs. Therefore, the preparation of perovskites is usually carried out under an inert gas atmosphere. However, the precursor solution is annealed in a glove box, but some additive gases may not be completely removed from the glove box, thereby entering the perovskite lattice, affecting the quality of the film. Furthermore, the long-term supply of inert gas is not conducive to low-cost industrial production in the future. The consideration of the annealing environment must be combined with many factors. Common annealing environments include vacuum-assisted annealing, air annealing and annealing under certain organic gas atmospheres.64,65
A vacuum-assisted thermal annealing method was proposed in which CH3NH3I (MAI) and PbCl2 were mixed with the precursor at a molar volume of 3:1 to generate a non-porous, well-crystallized perovskite film of pure MAPbI3, accompanied by the release of by-products of gas CH3NH3Cl (MACl) (or other similar forms of organic chloride). A perovskite with high stability was obtained compared with the traditional method. The main reason was that MACl played a key role in the formation of the perovskite film. In the process of thermal annealing, MACl was generated at a certain rate, and the release rate of MACl was faster than the formation rate, which was the key to prevent the formation of perovskite pores and promote the crystallization of perovskite.66 Unlike vacuum annealing, Qi et al. performed MAPbI3 perovskite annealing in air with a humidity of 50%. They believe that similar MAPbCl3 products have similar effects on MAI and are conducive to the crystallization of MAPbI3. This not only can increase the grain size, but also change the composition of the film, and ultimately improve the PCE of PSCs. In addition, it has also been confirmed that the water that may be adsorbed before or during annealing is completely removed after annealing. The degradation of PSCs will not be affected after equipment assembly.67
For annealing in an organic gas atmosphere, MAPbI3 typically undergoes liquid–solid phase transition under the atmosphere of methylamine (MA), leading to the formation of homogeneous high-quality films with low defects and large grain size. A schematic of the main transformation is shown in Fig. 3c. Firstly, MAPbI3 is placed in MA gas at room temperature to immediately form a colorless MAPbI3·xMA liquid phase. Then, it is placed on a hot plate, and the colorless phase begins to turn to dark yellow when the temperature reaches 55 °C. The yellow film is considered to be the intermediate stage, MAPbI3·(x–y)MA. Additionally, the equilibrium molar ratio (x–y) depends on the substrate temperature because the continuous discharge of MA will lead to supersaturation when the temperature exceeds the critical temperature, which leads to nucleation growth in the MAPbI3 surface.68
In conclusion, different annealing environments have their own advantages and disadvantages. For example, the vacuum annealing environment mentioned above makes some solvent gases unable to volatilize in time, and the cost of a vacuum atmosphere is relatively high. Air annealing is the cheapest annealing method, which is also worth advocating, and thus provides a reference for industrial production in the future. For organic annealing, its efficiency may be higher than that of the other two films, but the gas flow rate control is at a high cost. Therefore, the appropriate annealing atmosphere should be selected according to the actual situation to get the best result.


3.2.3 Annealing temperature. 
The annealing temperature is the key link of converting the precursor solution into perovskite. A suitable temperature can promote the growth of crystal grains, ensure the crystallization of the perovskite, and remove the solvent on the surface. Generally, the annealing temperature of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite is 140 °C, while that of inorganic perovskite is as high as 200 °C.69–71
Therefore, many researchers have studied the effect of annealing temperature on the film and explored a variety of methods. One is one-step annealing, where the glass plate is directly annealed on a hot plate to remove the solvent. The other is the gradient annealing method, which first helps to form a film and then forms the desired phase structure. Studies have found that films have better surface coverage (for example, better crystallization and morphology) when formed through multiple annealing processes.72,73
Among them, the typical study of one-step annealing is that by Grätzel and his team on the influence of the MAPbI3 annealing temperature. It was found that the annealing temperature and annealing time of the perovskite are inversely proportional. When the temperature is low (60 °C), the annealing time is long, and most of the precursors cannot form perovskite crystals, thus failing to form a uniform film. However, when the temperature rises to 80–100 °C, the typical structure of its perovskite is visible and clear. When the temperature reaches 120 °C, the perovskite crystal structure is clear, and the crystal grain size is larger. This series of changes shows that high temperature can remove excess solvent residue and promote the formation of the perovskite crystal structure. In the process of nucleation and crystallization, the higher the temperature, the fewer the nucleation sites, and the rapid crystal growth can form a large perovskite crystal structure.74 Subsequently, the same film was prepared by gradient annealing. The specific method is shown in the Fig. 3d. The initial annealing temperature was 60 °C for 3 min and then the annealing temperature was 100 °C for 10 min. Compared with the direct annealing at 100 °C, this not only produced a smoother film and better contact between the perovskite and covering layer, but also produced denser perovskite crystals, which improved the repeatability. The main mechanism of film formation is that direct annealing leads to the rapid release of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) from MAI–PbI2–DMSO, resulting in poor crystallization control, and thus affects the quality of the film. On the contrary, the crystallization process of perovskite can be slowed down by initial annealing at 60 °C, which reduces the precipitation rate of DMSO and slows the formation of hydrogen bonds between MAI and PbI2. Also, the embedding of organic MA+ into the inorganic Pb–I framework can be delayed. Therefore, low temperature preheating is conducive to the growth of MAPbI3 crystals, making it more controllable.75
In addition, high quality perovskite films can also be prepared by high temperature rapid annealing. Wei et al. prepared MAPbI3 by annealing at 250 °C for 10 s. They found that the perovskite grains rapidly became coarse under the high-temperature annealing condition at 250 °C, and a high-quality perovskite film with large columnar grains was formed. Accordingly, the PCE of the optimal solar cell increased from 12.35% to 16.35% because the grain size increased at high temperatures and there was less interfacial recombination. The higher coarsening speed at a high temperature may be due to the lower activation energy in the solvent atmosphere, which leads to faster grain boundary migration.76
Although annealing appears to be a simple method, the relationship between annealing time and annealing temperature needs to be further explored to form high-quality perovskite films.


3.2.4 Annealing procedure (solvent annealing). 
Solvent annealing treatment refers to the introduction of a soluble solvent (or partially soluble) to assist crystallization during the thermal annealing process of the precursor solution to form perovskite films,77 as shown by the schematic diagram in Fig. 3e. Solvent annealing can grow perovskite grains more rapidly compared with ordinary annealing, mainly because the polarity, cation, boiling point and solubility of different solvents greatly affect the kinetic growth of films.
For example, dimethylformamide (DMF) is used as a solvent for solvent annealing to prepare MAPbI3 films. During this annealing process, the grain size of solvent annealing significantly increased. Specifically, the grain size of solvent annealing reached 1 μm which was equivalent to the thickness of the film, while the grain size of ordinary annealing was only 260 nm. Because PbI2 and MAI are dissolved in DMF, the DMF vapor provides a humid environment, causing the precursor ions and molecules to diffuse farther than that in solid thermal annealing, which promotes grain growth and yields larger grain sizes. The cross-sectional SEM images of the thermally annealed and solvent-annealed perovskite films are shown in Fig. 3f.78
Subsequently, based on the fact that solvent annealing can increase the grain size, Lau et al. studied the morphology difference of MAPbI3 with different solvents such as water, γ-butyrolactone (GBL), DMF and DMSO. They found that the film was continuous, pinhole free, and its crystallinity increased significantly after annealing with GBL and DMSO. This was attributed to the fact that the solvent vapor molecules condense on the surface of the perovskite film when placed in a closed space, and the high base temperature will lead to its re-evaporation, during which a simple dynamic near equilibrium may exist. Under the pressure of the film on the hot plate and a limited solvent vapor, the evaporated solvent molecules do not cause widespread dissolution or irreparable damage. Also, this may lead to the formation of liquid or quasi-liquid phases on the surface. The liquid phase binds adjacent grains and melts a large portion of the grain boundary. The atoms pass through the liquid–solid interface into the liquid phase and recrystallize in areas where the chemical potential is low and the particles are not in close contact.79 It can be seen from the research findings above that solvent annealing is worthy of studying and discussing.

3.3 Precursor composition
The precursor composition mainly includes ion doping or substitution, and excessive AX and BX2 phenomena. Ion doping not only can cause lattice distortion, but also affect the crystal grain changes during the film growth. Excessive AX and BX2 also play a certain role in film growth, such as passivating grain boundaries, increasing crystallinity, and improving the morphology.

3.3.1 Doping or ion substitution. 
Ion doping and substitution have many advantages, including increasing the carrier life, reducing the interface defect density, and accelerating the charge transfer.80–83 The mechanism of these points can be mainly explained by the electron properties, energy level arrangement, carrier recombination dynamics, etc., and here, we mainly mention the role of ion doping for the growth of films. For the growth of films, ion doping can regulate the crystallization process of perovskite films to maintain the stability and high efficiency of the perovskite.84–87
It has been reported that the doping of alkali metal ions can adjust the recrystallization process of perovskite films.88 Taking Na+ as an example, doping Na+ into the MAPbI3 precursor can significantly increase the grain size and the efficiency, which can be improved by 3–4% on average. This is because a low concentration of Na+ acts as a nucleation site to promote the growth of large grains during the growth process. In addition, the high fluidity of Na+ during annealing promotes grain boundary migration, resulting in the growth of large grains.89
In addition to the abovementioned knowledge on Na+, the doping of Mn2+ into CsPbI2Br also explains how to control the growth of films in detail. Not only CsPbI2Br grains with a high aspect ratio of up to 8 were obtained, but also the efficiency after doping reached 13.47% compared with the reference efficiency of 11.88%. As shown in Fig. 4a, the growth process of Mn2+ in the annealing process of CsPbI2Br is clearly revealed. A small amount of Mn2+ is inserted into the voids of the CsPbI2Br lattice matrix during the annealing process, and the increase in the lattice constant causes a slight change in the structure. Simultaneously, excessive Mn2+ ions are distributed around the CsPbI2Br crystal. The distorted structure and Mn2+-enriched environment slows down the crystallization process of perovskite, contributing to a highly crystalline and uniform perovskite layer. Eventually, excessive Mn2+ accumulates at the grain boundaries, especially on the surface of the CsPbBrI2 film, which can exert a passivation effect and further improves the quality of the film.90
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram for MnCl2-driven crystalline grain growth with surface passivation.90 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (b) Cross-sectional STEM image of HMPA10-coated FTO glass obtained by FIB milling.91 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic representation of the coating process used to form the CH3NH3PbI3 films with and without a grain boundary healing layer via Lewis acid–base adduct intermediates.96 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
In summary, the most intuitive effect of ion doping for the growth of perovskite films is the improvement of film quality. Therefore, understanding the mechanism of ion doping such as the location of doping will be beneficial to the control of perovskite morphology.


3.3.2 BX2- and AX-rich precursors. 
The PbI2 is a typical BX2-rich-type precursor commonly found among the perovskite precursors.91,92 It is found that excess PbI2 mainly exists at the grain boundary, the interface between the perovskite and ETL or the perovskite and hole transport layer (HTL), as shown in Fig. 4b, which mainly acts as a passivation. Later, it was found that PbI2 deposited on m-TiO2 has a positive effect on growth.93 The PbI2 crystals are located in m-TiO2, which is beneficial to the increase the grain size of the perovskite microcrystals during the growth process. The grain boundary is reduced, and the defects are also reduced. In addition, MAI is a typical AX-rich type precursor. It has a similar effect to PbI2, as shown in Fig. 4c.94,95 Park and coworkers showed that excessive MAI on the perovskite grain surface of prepared MAPbI3 not only inhibited the carrier recombination near the grain boundary but also enhanced the carrier mobility at the interface between perovskite and H(E)TL, improving the quality of the perovskite layer.96 However, it is also necessary to control this excessive amount reasonably due to its negative impact on the performance of devices, although there are few reports supporting this in the literature.

3.4 Solvents engineering

3.4.1 Solvent. 
The commonly used solvents mainly include DMSO, DMF, and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP).97–100 Most of these solvents have many functions as follows: (1) polar aprotic solvents are formed as Lewis bases (electron pair donors) and metal halides are formed as Lewis acids (electron pair acceptors), which both bind to form Lewis acid–base adducts (intermediate phase) to delay the crystallization rate and (2) passivating the grain boundaries.
The Lewis base in the solvent can be mainly divided into O donor and S donor, where the O donor is mainly DMSO, DMF and NMP.101–103 The quality of the film prepared using DMSO is higher than that using DMF because DMSO molecules not only have a stronger interaction with PbI2 than DMF, but also have low volatility. As shown in Fig. 5a, strong ligands easily form an intermediate phase, similar to MAI–PbI2–DMSO, PbI2–DMSO, etc.104 The formation of the intermediate phase can slow down the crystallization rate, increase the grain size, and easily form a uniform and non-porous film. It has been reported that in the formation of FAPbI3 films, NMP is often used to replace the typical O donor DMSO to form a stable intermediate phase, thus leading to a uniform and pinhole-free film.105 This is because according to the experimental results, the morphology of FAPbI3 films prepared using DMSO showed regional differences. One part of the film contained pinholes and cracks, while the other part was relatively uniform with large roughness. Under the same conditions, the FAPbI3 film prepared using NMP had a flat surface, uniform surface and no pinholes. These differences are shown in Fig. 5b. Through infrared and computational analysis, the interaction between NMP and FA is stronger than that of DMSO, which is conducive to the formation of stable FAI-PbI2-NMP admixtures.
 Fig. 5  (a) Intermediate phase production diagram.104 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (b) Structure diagram of the influence of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) on the morphology of FAPbI3 film, including the molecular structure of DMSO and NMP, photographs and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of FAPbI3 perovskite film.105 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the action of thiourea on the growth of perovskite crystals, where the S atoms in thiourea form Lewis acid–base adduct (orange line) or the hydrogen bond (blue line) with NH2 groups in perovskite crystal. NH2 groups form a hydrogen bond with iodine atoms in perovskite crystal.107 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic showing film crystallization and corresponding charge transporting characteristics.110 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc Publications. 
As a typical S donor, thiourea is more alkaline than the O donor.106 As shown in Fig. 4b, thiourea contains two –NH2 groups and one S donor. Thus, it can form hydrogen bonds with perovskite crystals or Lewis acid–base adducts, thereby delaying the growth of perovskite crystals and combining adjacent perovskite crystals to form a dense perovskite film.107
In addition, there are some mixed solvents (such as DMSO–DMF mixed solution) or a mixture of solvents and additives that have a positive effect on the growth of the film,108,109 for example urea. As shown in Fig. 5d, the precursor solution containing urea and DMSO increased the activation energy of perovskite crystallization and reduced the crystallization rate of perovskite, thereby increasing the grain size of the film. Simultaneously, urea can passivate the defects. Therefore, the steady-state PCE of the MAPbl3 PSC increased from 16.80% to 18.25% after urea was added.110
Although these solvents have different ligands, most of their functions are slowing down the nucleation speed, reducing the existence of grain boundaries and improving the quality of the film during the process from precursor solution to perovskite film. Thus, we believe that this method is an important step to further obtain high crystalline films.


3.4.2 Anti-solvent. 
Anti-solvent refers to a solvent that cannot dissolve the perovskite material and can be mixed with the solvent in the perovskite solution (toluene, ether, etc.).111,112 It not only can quickly remove the solvent in the precursor, but also increase the saturation rate in the precursor solution, resulting in the rapid and uniform nucleation of the perovskite to form dense and smooth films.113,114 The main preparation method is shown in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 6  (a) Solvent engineering procedure for the preparation of a uniform and dense perovskite film.165 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Springer Nature Publications. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed solvent–solvent extraction deposition mechanisms.115 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Mechanism of the OTG-induced phase stabilization of CsPbI3 perovskite.128 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Publications. 
Using NMP as the solvent and diethyl ether (DE) as the anti-solvent, a smooth and complete perovskite film was prepared at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 6b.115 The reason for this is that DE has the abovementioned effects and is not soluble in the perovskite precursor and does not react with solid perovskite. In addition, DE has a low boiling point of only 35 °C and can be dried in the environment. NMP is used to improve the solubility of the perovskite precursor and ensure the formation of films. The possibility of the formation of an intermediate phase in the solvent mentioned above is very low because NMP has a high boiling point, which prevents the formation of a complex induced by evaporation at low temperatures.
It is worth noting that the mechanism of film growth is different when an anti-solvent and polar solvent are used at high temperature. For example, when some anti-solvents are rotated, the precursor solution rapidly saturates and then nucleates. However, due to the high temperature, the anti-solvent evaporates, and the polar solvent forms an intermediate phase, which slows down the crystallization rate and forms a smooth film.
Previously, researchers compared the difference between CB and diethyl ether (DE) on FA0.5MA0.5PbI3. They found that regarding the morphology of the film, the morphology of the selected CB film showed a rough surface and many pores after it was completely crystallized. However, a dense polycrystalline morphology film was formed using DE as the anti-solvent. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR spectroscopy) showed that this is mainly because DE as anti-solvent can form an DMSO–MAPbI3 intermediate phase and then gradually convert to FAPbI3, while the intermediate phase could not be seen in the CB films.116 As described in the previous section, the intermediate phase can slow crystallization, increase the grain size, and reduce the pore defects. In addition, the poor film morphology of CB as an anti-solvent may be due to its poor volatility, which will remain in the gaps of the perovskite film during spin coating. Later, a study found that the addition of isopropanol (IPA) can quickly remove the residual CB in the perovskite film, thereby reducing the grain boundary density of the perovskite film.117
Therefore, the majority of solvents and anti-solvents are mixed, which not only acts as anti-solvents, but also as the solvent. Liu et al. chose a mixture of ether and n-hexane as an anti-solvent to prepare a film and found that the ether in the mixed solution was conducive to achieving high nucleation density, which is conducive to the formation of a dense film. The n-hexane can slow down the conversion rate of the MAI·PbI2·DMSO intermediate phase into perovskite, thereby preparing a film with high crystallinity and superior performance.118
The use of an anti-solvent is mainly to rapidly increase the saturation of the precursor for rapid nucleation, thus forming a continuous and dense film. It is worth noting that the use time of the anti-solvent needs careful study because of the different solvents, concentrations, and rotation rate methods, which can also be affected by environmental factors (such as temperature).

3.5 Additive engineering
Perovskite films with a large grain size and low defect density are essential for high efficiency PSCs. Among the numerous ways to improve the morphology of perovskite films, additives play an important role in perovskite crystal growth and crystallinity kinetics.119–122 There are many types of additives (such as polymers, fullerenes, halogenated salts, inorganic acids, and solvents), and their roles are different.123–127 This section will introduce some typical additives.
Generally, it is considered that high humidity is harmful to perovskites. Therefore, there are many ways to prevent water from entering the film. For example, using the steric hindrance of organic ligands not only can suppress the lattice distortion caused by moisture or polar solvents, but also improve the crystallinity to a certain extent, as shown in Fig. 6c.128 However, it has been discovered that water also has positive effect on the formation of perovskite films with the deepening of research.129 Adding 2% water to DMF not only can increase the surface coverage of the MAPbI3−xClx film and the grain size, but also decrease the pinhole density. The main reason for this is that: (1) compared with DMF, the boiling point of water is lower and its vapor pressure is higher, which make the growth of the perovskite controllable and (2) MAPbI3−xClx·nH2O is produced, which has a certain resistance to water molecule corrosion during the annealing process.130
In addition to water as an additive, there is a type of inorganic acid that is relatively common and has positive effect. Because inorganic acids, namely HBr and HI, can increase the solubility of perovskites, a more saturated environment is obtained and nucleation is promoted. In addition, they may react with PbI2 to form an intermediate state, which reduces the crystallization rate of the perovskite film. The use of DMF as a solvent and HBr as an inorganic acid additive has been reported because HBr can delay nucleation to form a fully covered and continuous perovskite film.131 In addition, researchers found that when HBr was added to the MAPbI3−xClx precursor solution, the prepared film had good surface coverage and strong crystallinity. This is because the Br ion is a very strong donor and can combine with Pb2+ to form a uniform solution.132 Similarly, HPbI3 (formed by a mixture of HI and PbI2) was added to the FAPbI3 precursor. A slow crystallization process resulted from the H+ and FA+ ion exchange in the [PbI6]4− octahedral structure.133 The results showed that the prepared FAPbI3 film possessed a purer crystal phase and a stronger (110) preferred orientation.
Simultaneously, the role of organic salts in organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites is also very significant. According to reports, the addition of MACl to the MAI and PbI2 perovskite precursors results in the formation of the MACl–MAI–PbI2 intermediate phase, which delays the growth of the MAPbI3 film crystals, leading to an increase in perovskite crystallinity and growth in the preferred orientation.134 In addition, it has previously been found that organic salts act as glue or soft templates to control the initial form of the solution formed by the main perovskite precursor components.135 The morphology and surface coverage of the perovskite film on the plane substrate are controlled by the subsequent annealing process.
In general, the use of additives is a common way to prepare small-area perovskite films. There are many differences in the mechanism of film growth with different additives. Most additives improve the final crystallinity of the film to some extent. It is believed that with the continuous improvement of technology and materials, the role of various additives will be increasingly obvious.
3.6 Other factors
In reality, many researchers are confused because their experimental results do not match that of reference studies. The reason for this is because of the details of the experiments.
The first thing to mention is the aging time of the precursor. From the above reasons, it can be seen that the main components in the formation process of perovskite films, such as solvent, anti-solvent and additive, control the morphology of perovskite by controlling the process of crystal growth. One small detail is that before the film is formed, the age of the solution is a factor that cannot be ignored. In one experiment, PbI2 and MACl were dissolved in DMF at 70 °C in a nitrogen-filled glove box to observe the particle characteristics from 1 h to 48 h. It was found that the optimal condition was 48 h, where the particle size was the largest, and the average PCE in the prepared planar device structure was more than 15%. In fact, these results can be well described by the LaMer diagram, which describes the aging effect of precursors in three different regions as follows. Firstly, the formation of a saturated environment, with the rapid increase of intermediate concentrations of PbI2 and MACl, then rapid nucleation occurs, and finally, diffusion growth with the formation of larger crystals to reduce the concentration of the precursor solution.136
Secondly, waiting a few minutes before annealing. In this way, the solvent cannot be immediately run out of the precursor film. By enhancing the diffusion of the solvent in the film, this ensures the formation of an intermediate phase in the post-annealing process, which slows down the nucleation speed and improves the quality of the film. In the preparation of CsPbI3 PSCs, it was noted that the film quality was better after waiting several minutes before annealing. The main preparation process is shown in Fig. 7a. They thought that the high boiling point solvent DMSO (189 °C) could not completely escape from the precursor film after spin coating, and the remaining DMSO could enhance transport and diffusion. Later, they saw from the SEM image, as shown in Fig. 7b, that there were many pores without the solvent-controlled growth (SCG) method, whereas the morphology of the film using the SCG method was uniform, dense and non-porous because the SCG method slowed down the evaporation rate of the solvent, and then improved the quality of the film.137
 Fig. 7  (a) Solvent-controlled growth (SCG) for CsPbI3 deposition. (b) SEM images of annealed CsPbI3 perovskite precursor films without and with SCG.137 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic representation of static and dynamic spin-coating. (d) Morphologys of the layers and interfaces in 3D reconstructed s-PSC and d-PSC.138 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Previously, the factors affecting the growth of the film were discussed in terms of perovskite film layer, whereas this also relates to other layers in the device preparation. Later in 2020, Meng et al. explored the influence of the spin-coating method of the HTL, which is on the perovskite layer, HTL, ETL and its interface morphology. They proposed that HTL prepared by the dynamic spin coating method for PSCs had the advantages of higher efficiency, better film uniformity, and lower interface roughness than the HTL prepared by the static spin coating method. Fig. 7c shows a schematic of the dynamic spin coating and static spin coating methods. During the deposition of the dynamic spin-coated perovskite film, the continuous dropwise addition of the precursor solution helps to retain the intermediate phase and promote the mixing of cations, resulting in a high-quality perovskite film. Because 4-tert-butylpyridine (tBP), acetonitrile (ACN), and lithium salt need to be added to HTL, in the static preparation process, the HTL solution needs to wet the perovskite, which covers the entire surface before spin coating. During this period, tBP and ACN can partially dissolve the perovskite layer. In contrast, the low dynamic roughness may be ascribed to the fact that dynamic spin coating reduces the corrosive effect of tBP and ACN on the perovskite layer in the HTL solution.138 The morphology simulation diagram of its corrosion is shown in Fig. 7d.
Therefore, for future commercial development of 3D PSCs, in addition to the main factors that have been discussed before, a large number of experimental details are still worth exploring and following (Table 1). This is because some of the chemical and physical phenomena behind these details are key factors affecting the film quality.
Table 1 Comparison of the photovoltaic performance of the factors affecting the growth of 3D PSCs films




Factor
Type
Perovskite
Device structure
PCE [%]
Ref.




Substrate material
m-TiO2
MAPbI3
FTO/m-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
15.68

50



ZnO
MAPbI3
FTO/ZnO/Al2O3/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
15.55

45



SnO2
(FAPbI3)x(MAPbI3)1−x
ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
20.54

40



CdS
MAPbI3
FTO/CdS/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
11.60

55



Annealing
Hot plate
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
17.78

77



Microwave
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
14.91

57



Photonic flash
MAPbI3
FTO/Al2O3/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
15.23

63



Radiation
FAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
14.15

58



Oven
MAPbI3−xClx
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/Al
14.9

61



Vacuum
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/PFN-Br/Ag
14.5

66



Air
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
12.7

67



Organic atmosphere
FAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
23

65



Gradient
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
19.8

75



Solvent
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al
15.6

78



Precursor composition
Lanthanide ions doping
CsPbBr3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/Carbon
10.14

87



Cl− doping
CsPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au
16.07

82



Na+ doping
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/C60/Al
14.2

85



Mn+ doping
CsPbI2Br
FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au
13.47

90



BX2 rich
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
17.09

91



AX rich
MAI
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
20.4

96



Solvent engineering
DMSO
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
19.7

104



DMSO
FAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au
20.2

97



DMF
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/BCP/Ag
3.9

12



NMP
FAPbI3
ITO/c-SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
19.34

105



Thiourea
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
19.80

106



DE
MAPbI3
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
15.2

115



CB
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au
17.08

118



Additive engineering
6TIC-4F
CsPbIxBr3−x
ITO/NiOx/PVK/ZnO/C60/Ag
15.6

126



Ethylammonium chloride
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
20.03

122



HPbI3
Cs1−xDMAxPbI3
FTO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/C60/BCP/Ag
12.62

123



Zwitterion
CsPbI3
ITO/PTAA/PVK/PCBM/C60/BCP/Carbon
11.4

127



HBr
MAPbI3−xClx
ITO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
15.76

132



Water
MAPbI3−xClx
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/Bphen/Ag
16.06

130



Other factors
Precursor solution aging
MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/C60/Al
15.22

136



Solvent-controlled growth
CsPbI3
ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
15.7

137



Spin coating method
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
18.2

138





4. Film formation of 2D perovskite
4.1 2D perovskite
The general structural formula of 2D perovskite is L2(ABX3)n−1BX3n+1 (n is an integer), where L is a long-chain organic cation (such as BA+ and PEA+); A is a monovalent metal or organic molecular cation (such as Cs+, CH3NH3+ and C2H5NH3+); B is a divalent metal cation (such as Pb2+, Cu2+, Sn2+), and X is a halide anion (such as Cl−, Br−, I−),139–141 and n represents the number of layers of the metal halide octahedron.142Fig. 8a shows a 2D perovskite with different lattice arrangement layers. It can be seen that when n = 1, it is a pure 2D perovskite, and when n tends to ∞, it is a standard 3D perovskite.143–145 Similar to 3D perovskite films, the crystallization process of 2D perovskite films is also related to the solution composition, crystallization process, annealing, etc. The growth of 3D perovskite films is random, which can be observed mainly from the morphology, grain size, and coverage. In contrast, long-chain organic cations exist in 2D perovskites, and their growth mode is different from that of 3D perovskites. According to research, the growth of 2D perovskites may be related to n, which can be divided into horizontal growth, vertical growth and random arrangement growth relative to the substrate, as shown in Fig. 8b. When the value of n is small, it tends to grow horizontally, and when the value of n is large to a certain extent, it grows vertically.146–148 This classification is related to the 2D crystallization process. In the spinning and annealing process, the organic cation spontaneously forms a concentration gradient. Due to the large size of organic molecules and the rapid crystallization rate under annealing, it is difficult to quickly form a stable 2D perovskite structure. The top tends to form a 3D perovskite, while the bottom tends to form a 2D perovskite with a small n phase because of the large concentration of organic molecules. With further annealing, the solvent continuously evaporates, and the concentration of organic molecules increases, forming a 2D perovskite phase with a large n. At the end of crystallization, the concentration of organic molecules reaches the maximum value, forming a 2D perovskite with a small n.
 Fig. 8  (a) Hybrid perovskite increases with the thickness n of the inorganic plate and tends to the 3D structure diagram.141 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Two-dimensional diagram of different growth modes.146 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Publications. (c) Diagram of regulating the vertical growth of 2D perovskite.149 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Publications. 
Because the carrier transport is convenient and efficient during vertical growth, researchers often hope to achieve vertical growth. Yuan et al. used solvent phase nucleation control to achieve a high crystallinity and vertical preference 2D perovskite.149 The principle is similar to that of inducing quasi-2D perovskite on quasi-3D perovskite with large n value. As shown in Fig. 8c, the specific growth process is divided into three key stages: the formation of the PbI2 solvent phase (PDS) (stage I), PDS reaction to produce quasi-3D perovskite (stage II), and quasi-3D perovskite as a template inducing quasi-2D perovskite to grow directionally on its surface (stage III). Among them, the preformed PDS in stage I has a very important regulating effect on the nucleation and growth of the Q-2D perovskite crystals in stage III. Also, it is an important factor in determining the morphology of 2D perovskite films. During solvent volatilization, the PDS is produced by heterogeneous nucleation at the solution–air interface. This stage is conducive to the formation of a liquid surface template (quasi-3D perovskite), which induces the directional growth of Q-2D perovskite grains from top to bottom. Then, a type of high-conductivity plane and perpendicular to the crystal orientation of the substrate is formed.
In general, 2D perovskites are known for their excellent stability. Among the various growth patterns, the ideal arrangement is the vertical arrangement of crystals. It can be seen from the above examples that it is advisable to improve the crystal orientation in perovskites by regulating the precursor solution. Therefore, it is necessary to study the crystallization kinetics of 2D perovskites, which can further improve the efficiency and repeatability of the device.
4.2 2D/3D perovskites
The main 2D/3D perovskites can be divided into two types: (1) 2D perovskite is mixed with 3D perovskite or 2D perovskite is inserted the grain boundaries of 3D perovskite, which can passivate defect and inhibit recombination.150,151 (2) Two different dimensions of perovskite grow alternately, one as the bottom layer and the other as the overburden layer.152–154
The first type of growth phenomenon is typically the added 2D PEA2PbI4 perovskite is mainly concentrated at the grain boundary of the 3D perovskite, which not only significantly improves the moisture-proof stability of the film, but also improves the PCE, as shown in Fig. 9a. The PCE reached 20.64% (certified stable PCE 19.77%). Then, XRD showed that the addition of the 2D PEA2PbI4 perovskite enhanced the full width half maximum (FWHM), indicating improved crystallinity. With an increase in the content of the 2D PEA2PbI4 perovskite, the preferred orientation along the plane (001) is enhanced. The reason for this phenomenon is that the large molecule phenethylammonium added in the 2D perovskite precursor interacts with the FAPbI3 crystal during the crystallization process, promoting the formation of a cubic phase. In addition, the grain boundary is functionalized after crystallization.155
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the device incorporating polycrystalline 3D perovskite film with 2D perovskite at the grain boundaries.155 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic illustration showing the induction of 2D growth at the base of a 3D perovskite film. (c) Top-view SEM images of the surface morphology of the film for 3D, 2D/3D perovskite films, depicting their differences in grain size and their corresponding contact angles.159 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Publications. 
For the alternative growth of perovskite films of different dimensions, the film growth is different. Using 3D perovskite as the substrate, a thin layer of 2D perovskite was applied on the surface, which changed the interface energy level and reduced the recombination of interface charges. Finally, the PCE of the PSC was up to 19.89%.156 In this case, the 3D perovskite had a vertical grain boundary, indicating that the thin film was composed of MAPbI3 crystals. The 2D perovskite alone had poor surface quality, with a large number of small-size crystals and pinholes. The surface of the 3D–2D perovskite showed some crystals smaller than that of the 3D film. Although the overall growth of the perovskite grains was not affected, the 2D perovskite on the top of 3D perovskite was unfavorable for the perovskite films in air due to their smaller grain sizes because the number of moisture absorption paths may increase. Subsequently, researchers placed a 3D perovskite layer on the 2D perovskite and found that the 2D perovskite at the bottom could induce the directional growth of 3D perovskite crystals, thereby obtaining a film with good crystallinity.157,158 As shown in Fig. 9b, Kim et al. used EDA+ to establish 2D/3D perovskite films. When the NH+ amide group reacted with MA+, a 2D (EDA2) MAPnIn+1 layer was formed, which then grew into large 3D crystal. Fig. 9c shows the top view SEM images of the 3D and 2D/3D perovskite films and their corresponding contact angles. Unlike the micron-sized grains in the 3D perovskite film, the 2D/3D perovskite film exhibited larger grains of 2 μm. The reason for this phenomenon is that the large grain size reduces the traps, which affects the growth kinetics of the top 3D perovskite layer and maintains a strong and stable perovskite framework. The hydrophobicity of the 2D/3D perovskite film was greatly improved, and the contact angles were 93.1° for the 2D/3D perovskite film and 68.9° for the 3D perovskite film. In addition, the reduction and fusion of the grain boundaries prevent the rapid penetration of water into the film. The ultra-thin 2D layer can play the same role in preventing the migration of ions to the ITO electrode, thereby improving the optical stability of the 2D/3D perovskite device. Consequently, the PCE of the 2D/3D PSCs was 15.02%, while that of the 3D perovskite cell was 13.10%.159
In general, the band gap width of 3D perovskites is suitable for light absorption, with high photoelectric conversion efficiency, but very poor moisture resistance. The 2D perovskites have chains of molecules that can block moisture to a certain extent. However, 2D perovskites are often inefficient due to their wide band gap and difficult growth mode to control. Therefore, combining 2D and 3D perovskites can enhance the moisture resistance and improve their efficiency, which is also of great significance for the development of perovskite devices in the future (Table 2).
Table 2 Photovoltaic properties of 2D PSC films grown in different forms




Type
Perovskite
Device structure

J
SC [mA cm−2]

V
OC [V]
FF [%]
PCE [%]
Ref.




2D
(CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10
FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
9.42
0.929
46
4.02

142



PDAMA3Pb4I13
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/C60/BCP/Ag
18.0
0.97
74.3
13.0

145



(PEA)2(Cs)39Pb40I121
FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au
19.51
0.991
70.4
13.56

144



(3-APN)2PbI4
ITO/NiOx/(3-APN)2PbI4/PCBM/Ag
5.73
1.097
54
3.39

143



(PXD)(MA)2Pb3I10
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/BCP/Ag
19.33
1.07
73.25
15.6

149



Mixed 2D-3D or 2D passivated 3D
EDAPbI4–CsPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
14.53
1.15
0.71
11.8

150



PEA2PbI4–FAPbI3
ITO/c-SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
24.44
1.12
76.5
21.06

155



GUA-FA0.95Cs0.05PbI3
ITO/SnO2/ZnO/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
24.41
1.14
79.6
22.2

152



EDBEPbI4–MAPbI3
FTO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
23.53
1.13
79.2
21.06

151



Layer 2D/3D
(EDA2)(CH3NH3)P0.5I2.5–MAPbI3
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/Al
21.94
0.90
75
15.02

159



BA2CsPb2I6Br–CsPbI2Br
FTO/c-TiO2/PCBM/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
16.80
1.079
80.1
14.5

154



Layer 3D/2D
MAPbI3–PEA2Pb2I4
FTO/NiO/PVK/PCBM/PN4N/Ag
21.80
1.17
78
19.89

156



MAPbI3−xClx–PEA2Pb2I4
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/LiF/Ag
19.09
1.07
68.1
13.8

153





5. Challenges and outlook
PSCs exhibit excellent PCEs, which are dependent on high-quality, reproducible and stable films. Generally, the films of PSCs are mainly 3D and 2D films. However, there are still some mechanisms in the film growth process that have not been fully explained, and some key issues that need to be resolved. In this section, we propose some challenges in the film growth process and provide our views on the future of perovskite films, as follows:
5.1. Exploring the influence of the perovskite precursor liquid regarding physical and chemical properties on nucleation growth
Firstly, preparing high-quality films not only makes the device more efficient, but also improves the process repeatability. When different chemical reagent concentrations are used, they exhibit different solubilities in the same solvent. This changes the concentration ratio and affects the crystallization. In addition, the viscosity of some chemical reagents is different, and some of them are easy to remain on the substrate during the spin coating process. Thus, the effect of these factors on film growth needs more exploration.
5.2. Exploring the effect of film thickness during film growth
The film thickness mentioned here not only refers to the thickness of the perovskite but also the thickness of some ETL. Taking the thickness of the 2D perovskite is as an example, many reports mention that when the thickness of the film increases, the vertical growth of the 2D perovskite is more obvious. Theoretically, the color of a general perovskite film is black. When the film thickness increases, its refraction and reflection increase, which will reduce the transmittance. However, in the actual preparation process, the thickness of the perovskite layer is related to many factors. Studies have found that when the thickness of the perovskite film increases, its grain size also increases. If the film thickness is too thin, the grain size will be smaller, and photogenerated exciton quenching will easily occur, which will increase the main energy consumption of PSCs and reduce their efficiency. Although a film with a larger grain size is conducive to efficient photo-generated charge extraction, a film with an increased thickness will make the charge transport path grow, and it will take longer for the charge to reach the electrode and to be extracted. Furthermore, there is more opportunity for recombination before the charge reaches the electrode. Therefore, it involves many factors, which requires careful study. In addition, the ETL in the three-dimensional perovskite also has a certain relationship. When the thickness of the electron transport layer is very thin, the perovskite film not only has a low coverage, but also may shunt directly with the glass substrate to reduce the efficiency. When the thickness is very thick, the effect on the growth may be small, but the efficiency has a great effect on the prepared device.54
5.3. Further understanding the research on ionic liquid with respect to the growth of perovskite films
Ionic liquids are liquid at low temperatures (<100 °C) and their performance in PSCs is usually as follows: firstly, they are used for interface modification, effectively improving charge transfer and reducing hysteresis and secondly, they are used as perovskite precursors. Previous studies have shown that certain ionic liquids can replace polar solvents, enabling perovskite films to not only have better crystalline orientation but also enhanced hydrophobicity. In addition, some ionic liquids can be added to the perovskite precursor to form small nano-scale agglomerates during the spin coating process. This is conducive to their uniform nucleation and may change the viscosity of the solution. These effects are mainly related to the special properties of ionic liquids (anion and cation structure and interaction), which makes the further study of ionic liquids on film growth interesting.
5.4. In-depth study of film growth differences under various preparation methods
The preparation methods of perovskite films are mainly divided into vapor deposition and spin-coating. The spin-coating method is conventional in the laboratory. Spin-coating can be divided into one-step spin coating and two-step spin coating. For example, Park et al. studied the difference between the one-step method and the two-step method on the film morphology. They found that there was uneven coverage in the one-step preparation process, and CH3NH3PbI3 was not formed. The two-step method resulted in uniform coverage and the formation of cubic crystals. This was attributed to the difference in wettability. Subsequent research found that some chemical reactions occur such as the competition between CH3NH3+ and Pb2+,160 which requires further exploration to determine the different growth mechanisms in the preparation method.
5.5. Deepening the understanding of interface modification and grain boundary passivation mechanism
In addition to the nucleation rate, grain size, crystallinity, etc. mentioned before, film growth inevitably results in the formation of many defects (interfaces and grain boundaries). The use of interface modification and grain boundary passivation can alleviate defects, enhance carrier transport, and improve the efficiency and stability. Although these methods have been proposed and used, there still are many problems that need to be explored to determine their in-depth mechanism of action. For example, the crystallinity, grain orientation, and lattice distortion are ignored at the grain boundary and need to be studied.
5.6. Speeding up the large-area growth of thin films
Mainly small-area films have been studied, but the development of large-area films is a promising way for the commercialization of PSCs. There are many preparation methods for large areas, such as slot-die coating, spray coating, blade coating, and ink jet printing.161 Different methods also have huge differences in film growth, such as annealing in the preparation process or selection of materials.
Finally, we firmly believe that with in-depth exploration of film growth from classical theory to practical control factors. Future PSCs can not only be greatly improved in efficiency, but also have a huge improvement in stability. In addition, these will also give a further boost to the commercialization of PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52073131, 51902148, 61704099, 61874166, U1832149, 51801088 and 51802024), the Natural Science Foundation of Gansu Province (20JR5RA227, 20JR5RA217 and 20JR5RA278), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (lzujbky-2020-61, lzujbky-2019-88 and lzujbky-2020-kb06).
References
Q. A. Akkerman and L. Manna, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 604–610 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiana, Q. Guob, L. Liua, B. Xu and W. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16786–16795 RSC .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 881–886 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Z. Jin, D. Chen, D. Bai, H. Bian, J. Sun, G. Zhu, G. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800007 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, D. Bai, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, J. Sun, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703246 CrossRef .
W. Zhu, W. Ma, Y. Su, Z. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Ma, L. Bai, W. Xiao, T. Liu, H. Zhu, X. Liu, H. Liu, X. Liu and Y. Yang, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 112 CrossRef CAS .
D. Giovanni, M. Righetto, Q. Zhang, J. W. M. Lim, S. Ramesh and T. C. Sum, Light: Sci. Appl., 2021, 10, 2 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, H. Chen, Z. Fang, X. Meng, C. Zuo, M. Lv, Y. Tian, Y. Fang, Z. Xiao, C. Shan, Z. Xiao, Z. Jin, G. Shen, L. Shen and L. Ding, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907257 CrossRef CAS .

NREL,  2020, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/device-performance.html Search PubMed.
C.-H. Chiang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and C.-G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 808–817 RSC .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Jeng, Y.-F. Chiang, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bian, D. Bai, Z. Jin, K. Wang, L. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1500–1510 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Zhao, W.-K. Zhou, X. Zhou, K.-H. Liu, D.-P. Yu and Q. Zhao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16243 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lédée, G. Trippé-Allard, H. Diab, P. Audebert, D. Garrot, J.-S. Lauret and E. Deleporte, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 2598–2602 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Kan, J. Shi and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 16844–166849 CrossRef .
S. Nair, S. B. Patel and J. V. Gohel, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 100449 CrossRef .
D. Shen, X. Yu, X. Cai, M. Peng, Y. Ma, X. Su, L. Xiao and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20454–20461 RSC .
H.-H. Fang, F. Wang, S. Adjokatse, N. Zhao, J. Even and M. Antonietta Loi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16056 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kang, I. Dursun, G. Liu, L. Sinatra, X. Sun, M. Kong, J. Pan, P. Maity, E.-N. Ooi, T. K. Ng, O. F. Mohammed, O. M. Bakr and B. S. Ooi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 94 CrossRef .
R. Szostak, S. Sanchez, P. E. Marchezi, A. S. Marques, J. C. Silva, M. S. Holanda, A. Hagfeldt, H. C. N. Tolentino and A. F. Nogueira, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2007473 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
J. Qi, L. Li, H. Xiong, A. C. Wang, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26154–26161 RSC .
J. Qi, S. Chen, C. Lan, A. C. Wang, X. Cui, Z. You, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. L. Wang, H. Wang and Z. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001185 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, X. Liu, L. Lyu, D. Niu, Q. Wang, J. Huang and Y. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 120, 215–220 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Kye, C.-J. Yu, U.-G. Jong, Y. Chen and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2196–2201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. I. Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef .
F. Huang, A. R. Pascoe, W.-Q. Wu, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, J. Zhong, R. A. Caruso and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601715 CrossRef .
X. Cheng, S. Yang, B. Cao, X. Tao and Z. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1905021 CrossRef .
Q. Shan, C. Wei, Y. Jiang, J. Song, Y. Zou, L. Xu, T. Fang, T. Wang, Y. Dong, J. Liu, B. Han, F. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Wang and H. Zeng, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 163 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. Zhang, T. S. Ripolles, T. Kamisaka, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, S. Dai, M. Yanagida, H. Noguchi and Q. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16708–16719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, Q. Li, Y. Yang, K. S. Wong, H. Chen and S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 58–68 CrossRef CAS .
H.-B. Kim, H. Choi, J. Jeong, S. Kim, B. Walker, S. Song and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6679–6683 RSC .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4544 CrossRef .
M. Jung, S.-G. Ji, G. Kim and S. I. Seok, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2011–2038 RSC .
Y. C. Zheng, S. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5116–5121 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Prieto and I. Markov, Surf. Sci., 2017, 664, 172–184 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, C. Bao, Y. Wang, F. Li, X. Zhou, J. Yang, B. Lv, X. Wang, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 7856–7865 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, H. Si, W. Fan, M. Shi, M. Li, C. Xu, Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, A. Sattar, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11573–11582 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wyn Jones, P. James Holliman, L. Bowen, A. Connell, C. Kershaw and D. Elizabeth Meza-Rojas, Materials, 2020, 13, 243 CrossRef .
M. Gong, R. Sakidja, R. Goul, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel, A. Elliot and J. Z. Wu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1772–1783 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke, C. Xiao, C. Wang, B. Saparov, H.-S. Duan, D. Zhao, Z. Xiao, P. Schulz, S. P. Harvey, W. Liao, W. Meng, Y. Yu, A. J. Cimaroli, C.-S. Jiang, K. Zhu, M. Al-Jassim, G. Fang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5214–5421 CrossRef CAS .
H. Si, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Yang, G. Zhang, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
D. Prochowicz, M. M. Tavakoli, M. Wolska-Pietkiewicz, M. Jędrzejewska, S. Trivedi, M. Kumar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. Lewiński, M. Graetzel and P. Yadav, Solar Energy, 2020, 197, 50–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Pascoe, S. Meyer, W. Huang, W. Li, I. Benesperi, N. W. Duffy, L. Spiccia, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1278–1285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, A. L. Vasiliev, W. Wu, M. Yang, S. Pang, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2292–2297 CrossRef CAS .
M.-R. Ahmadian-Yazdi, A. Rahimzadeh, Z. Chouqi, Y. Miao and M. Eslamian, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 025109 CrossRef .
J. Qi, H. Xiong, G. Wang, H. Xie, W. Jia, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 376, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, X. Zhang and J. You, Small, 2018, 14, 1801154 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, Z. Zhao, B. Chen, H. Zheng, L. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901723 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Wu, Y.-T. Lin, S.-H. Chen, M.-H. Jao, Y.-H. Chang, K.-M. Lee, C.-S. Lai, Y.-F. Chen and W.-F. Su, Small, 2020, 16, 2002201 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Wu, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, D. Liu, H. Chen, L. Ji, C. Liu, W. Ahmad, Z. D. Chen and S. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703737 CrossRef .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, R. Younts, B. Gautam, K. Gundogdu and D. B. Mitzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16437–16445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, Q. Ge, S. Wang, M. R. Leyden, L. K. Ono, S. R. Raga, J. Hu and Y. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 548–555 RSC .
Q. Cao, S. Yang, Q. Gao, L. Lei, Y. Yu, J. Shao and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7854–7861 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Pool, B. Dou, D. G. Van Campen, T. R. Klein-Stockert, F. S. Barnes, S. E. Shaheen, M. I. Ahmad, M. F. A. M. van Hest and M. F. Toney, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S.-G. Kim, D. Lee, H. Shin and N.-G. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 308–321 RSC .
Q. Chen, T. Ma, F. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Cheng, Q. Chang, R. Yang, W. Huang, L. Wang, T. Qin and W. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000480 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Z. Jin, H. Li and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21257 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dou, V. L. Pool, M. F. Toney and M. F. A. M. van Hest, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5931–5941 CrossRef CAS .
J. Troughton, M. J. Carnie, M. L. Davies, C. Charbonneau, E. H. Jewell, D. A. Worsley and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3471–3476 RSC .
H. M. Cronin, K. D. Jayawardena, Z. Stoeva, M. Shkunov and S. R. Silva, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 114004 CrossRef .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, W. R. Tress, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Yang, F. Fu, Z. Wang, C. E. Avalos, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhan, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, L. Zheng, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2020, 370, eabb8985 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Xie, D. Zhang, H. Su, X. Ren, K. S. Wong, M. Gratzel and W. C. Choy, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 639–646 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Raga, M.-C. Jung, M. V. Lee, M. R. Leyden, Y. Kato and Y. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Jacobs and L. Zang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10743–10746 RSC .
P. Docampo, F. C. Hanusch, N. Giesbrecht, P. Angloher, A. Ivanova and T. Bein, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081508 CrossRef .
A. Dutta, R. K. Behera, S. K. Dutta, S. Das Adhikari and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6599–6604 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bai, H. Bian, Z. Jin, H. Wang, L. Meng, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, Y. Yang, Y. L. Zhao, M. Che, L. Zhu, X. Q. Gu and Y. H. Qiang, Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 2017, 217, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, T. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11450–11461 RSC .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Liang, W. Yu, S. Yu, Y. Wu, X. Guo, S. Liu and C. Li, Small, 2018, 14, 1800181 CrossRef .
X. Cao, L. Zhi, Y. Jia, Y. Li, X. Cui, K. Zhao, L. Ci, K. Ding and J. Wei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 524, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tu, J. Wu, X. He, P. Guo, T. Wu, H. Luo, Q. Liu, K. Wang, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, Z. Lan and S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4376–4383 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Gao, X. He, Q. Ye, L. Ouyang, D. Zhuang, C. Liao, J. Mei and W. Lau, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24008–24015 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni, Y. Sanehira, M. Ikegami and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6668–6674 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, H. Wang, J. Feng, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 175–182 CrossRef CAS .
T.-B. Song, T. Yokoyama, S. Aramaki and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lu, G. V. Biesold-McGee, Y. Liu, Z. Kang and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4953–5007 RSC .
S. C. Watthage, Z. Song, N. Shrestha, A. B. Phillips, G. K. Liyanage, P. J. Roland, R. J. Ellingson and M. J. Heben, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2334–2341 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14173–14180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, Y. Zhao, X. Yang, Y. Wang, B. He and Q. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802346 CrossRef .
C. Li, A. Wang, L. Xie, X. Deng, K. Liao, J.-a. Yang, T. Li and F. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24150–24163 RSC .
S. Bag and M. F. Durstock, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5053–5057 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bai, J. Zhang, Z. Jin, H. Bian, K. Wang, H. Wang, L. Liang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 970–978 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jung, W.-S. Chae, Y. C. Park, J. Kim and M.-J. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122436 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. Halvani Anaraki, B. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. l. Teuscher, J.-E. Moser, H. k. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 RSC .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Fang, A. Z. Stieg, T.-B. Song, H.-H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Lu, J. You, P. Sun, J. McKay, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7269 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Y. Son, J.-W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I.-H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N.-G. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, S. Pan, Z. Lin and J. Peng, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 7910–7915 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hamill, J. C. Sorli, I. Pelczer, J. Schwartz and Y.-L. Loo, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 2114–2120 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Dai, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, Y. Zhou, X. Xiao, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5781–5787 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902579 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Jones, P. J. Holliman, A. Connell, M. L. Davies, J. Baker, R. J. Hobbs, S. Ghosh, L. Furnell, R. Anthony and C. Pleydell-Pearce, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4301–4304 RSC .
L. Zhi, Y. Li, X. Cao, Y. Li, X. Cui, L. Ci and J. Wei, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 30, 78–83 CrossRef .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, C. Lee, H. M. Lee, T.-H. Han, N. De Marco, O. Lin, C. S. Choi, B. Dunn, J. Koh, D. Di Carlo, J. H. Ko, H. D. Maynard and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6317–6324 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Ma, B. Liu, W. Wu, Y. Zhu, R. Ma and C. Wang, Solar RRL, 2018, 2, 1800034 CrossRef .
S.-G. Ko, G.-I. Ryu, B. Kim, G.-J. Cha, J.-H. Ri, G.-S. Sonu and U.-C. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 196, 105–110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Huang, X. Wang, Y. Li, M. Günther, S. Valenzuela, P. Parikh, A. Cabreros, W. Xiong and Y. S. Meng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16720–16730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiao, Y. Bai, X. Meng, T. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Hu, Y. Qu and S. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604944 CrossRef .
J.-W. Lee, S.-H. Bae, Y.-T. Hsieh, N. De Marco, M. Wang, P. Sun and Y. Yang, Chem, 2017, 3, 290–302 CAS .
B. Xia, Z. Wu, H. Dong, J. Xi, W. Wu, T. Lei, K. Xi, F. Yuan, B. Jiao, L. Xiao, Q. Gong and X. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6295–6303 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yuan, X. Dong and P. Wang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1041–1048 RSC .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, C. Wu and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Seo, E.-C. Kim, S.-P. Cho, S.-S. Kim and S.-I. Na, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 598–604 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, K. Zhu, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 5, 1700331 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Lee, H. Kanda, X. X. Gao, R. Hu, K. G. Brooks, R. Zia, S. Kinge, N. P. Padture and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, P. Zhang, D. Liu, T. Zhang, L. Ji, X. Gu, Z. David Chen and S. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 616–625 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, S. Yang, L. Lei, Q. Cao, J. Shao, S. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3667–3676 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, Y. Pan, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12602–12652 RSC .
J. Feng, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Niu, Z. Wang, S. Zuo, S. Priya, S. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801418 CrossRef .
X. Ding, H. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Ma, S. Dai, S. Yang and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18258–18266 RSC .
M. Mateen, Z. Arain, X. Liu, A. Iqbal, Y. Ren, X. Zhang, C. Liu, Q. Chen, S. Ma, Y. Ding, M. Cai and S. Dai, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 2477–2486 CrossRef .
W. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4785 CrossRef .
D. H. Kim, C. P. Muzzillo, J. Tong, A. F. Palmstrom, B. W. Larson, C. Choi, S. P. Harvey, S. Glynn, J. B. Whitaker, F. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Lu, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, L. M. Mansfield, Y. Huang, Y. Yan and K. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1734–1745 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Ding, Y. Zhang, T. Kamisaka, Q. Zhao, J. M. Luther, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino, B. Zhang, S. Dai, J. Jiang, S. Tao and Q. Shen, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 798–807 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Liu, Q. Xue, X. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 177 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Dai, D. Cui, T. Wang, X. Meng, E. Bi, X. Yang and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900605 CrossRef .
T. He, Z. Liu, Y. Zhou and H. Ma, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 176, 280–287 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, M. Li, X.-B. Shi, H. Ma, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, E. D. Jung, B. R. Leea and M. H. Song, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7036–7042 RSC .
J. Huang, M. Wang, L. Ding, Z. Yang and K. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55720–55725 RSC .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9412–9418 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12241–12244 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, Y.-H. Lin, J. C. Blancon, S. Tretiak, J. Even, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602159 CrossRef .
P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Q. Jiang, Q. Ye, Z. Chu, X. Li, X. Yang, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2225 CrossRef .
S. Wang, A. Cabreros, Y. Yang, A. S. Hall, S. Valenzuela, Y. Luo, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M.-c. Kim, Ø. Fjeldberg, D. P. Fenning and Y. S. Meng, Cell Reports Physical Science, 2020, 1, 100103 CrossRef .
J. Yan, W. Qiu, G. Wu, P. Heremans and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11063–11077 RSC .
E. Shi, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, Akriti, A. H. Coffey, L. Dou, Y. G. Enzheng Shi and L. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6046–6072 RSC .
Z. Cheng and J. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2646 RSC .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, K. Zhao and Z.-S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18590–18595 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Bian, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Ding and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902529 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, D. Shen, T.-W. Ng, M.-F. Lo and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800710 CrossRef .
J. Dong, S. Shao, S. Kahmann, A. J. Rommens, D. Hermida-Merino, G. H. ten Brink, M. A. Loi and G. Portale, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001294 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
R. Quintero-Bermudez, A. Gold-Parker, A. H. Proppe, R. Munir, Z. Yang, S. O. Kelley, A. Amassian, M. F. Toney and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, D. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Luo, L. Ke, X. Ren, S. Cui, L. Zhang, Z. Li, K. Meng, Y. Lin, L. Ding and Y. Yuan, Solar RRL, 2020, 2000371 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1700841 CrossRef .
P. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Liang, G. Xing, X. Liu, F. Li, X. Liu, X. Hu, G. Shao and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805323 CrossRef .
Q. Yao, Q. Xue, Z. Li, K. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Li, S. Yang, C. J. Brabec, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000571 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, X. Wang, Y.-x. Xu and F. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tai, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, J. Han, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou and H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22675–22682 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, T.-H. Han, C. Choi, S.-Y. Chang, S.-J. Lee, N. De Marco, N. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, Y. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701038 CrossRef .
S. Teale, A. Proppe, E. H. Jung, A. Johnston, D. H. Parmar, B. Chen, Y. Hou, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5115–5119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. S. Kim, J.-M. Heo, M. Pei, I.-H. Park, Z. Liu, H. J. Yun, M.-H. Park, S.-H. Jeong, Y.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Park, E. Oveisi, S. Nagane, A. Sadhanala, L. Zhang, J. J. Kweon, S. K. Lee, H. Yang, H. M. Jang, R. H. Friend, K. P. Loh, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park and T.-W. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3378 CrossRef .
P. M. Hangoma, I. Shin, H. S. Yang, D. Kim, Y. K. Jung, B. R. Lee, J. H. Kim, K. H. Kim and S. H. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003081 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081510 CrossRef .
M. He, B. Li, X. Cui, B. Jiang, Y. He, Y. Chen, D. O'Neil, P. Szymanski, M. A. Ei-Sayed, J. Huang and Z. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16045 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Y.-B. Cheng and Z. Ge, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1653–1687 RSC .
L. Liang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, Q. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Xu, L. Ding, S. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26776–26784 RSC .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3193–3295 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Jing Zhao	Jing Zhao received her B.S. Degree in the School of Optoelectronic Engineering, Changzhou Institute of Technology. She is currently an M.S. student at Lanzhou University. Her main research interest focuses on inorganic semiconductor materials and solar cells.
Zhizai Li	Zhizai Li received his B.S. Degree in the School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University. He is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Zhiwen Jin. His main research interest focuses on inorganic semiconductor materials and solar cells.
Meng Wang	Meng Wang received his B.S. Degree in the School of Shandong University of Technology. He is currently a M.S. student under the supervision of Prof. Zhiwen Jin. His main research interest focuses on inorganic semiconductor materials and solar cells.
Qian Wang	Qian Wang is a Researcher with the School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University. She received her B.S. and PhD Degree in Materials Chemistry from Lanzhou University of China in 2011 and 2016, respectively. She joined Lanzhou University in 2018. Most recently her research interest focuses on quantum dot-based devices and structural design in optoelectronic device.
Zhiwen Jin	Zhiwen Jin received his B.S. Degree from Lanzhou University in 2011 and PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016. He joined Lanzhou University in 2018 as a Professor with the School of Physical Science and Technology, Lanzhou University. His research interests include inorganic semiconductor materials, thin-film photoelectric devices and device physics.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Diagram of the classical nucleation theory. ΔG is the free energy change and is a function of nuclear radius (r) for homogeneous nucleation.162 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Illustration of the contact angle (θ) for heterogeneous nucleation. (c) LaMer diagram for monodispersed particle formation (homogeneous nucleation), where Cs is the solubility, Css is the minimum concentration for nucleation, i.e., the minimum supersaturation level for homogeneous nucleation, and Cs Max is the maximum concentration for nucleation.163 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the three major growth mechanisms: island growth (Volmer–Weber), layer growth (Frank–van der Merwe), and layer-island growth (Stranski–Krastanov). Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.164	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram of the normal spin coating process and the CdSe QD seed-mediated method for fabricating PSCs.50 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Scheme of the fabrication processes of spin coating. (c) Scheme of the fabrication processes of spray coating.53 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of hot plate and air-heated oven annealing approaches.61 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of radiative thermal annealing approach.62 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of the transformation of MAPbI3 from the liquid to solid phase in an MA atmosphere. Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation of the preparation procedure of perovskite films based on the solvent engineered method with DHA and TSA process.75 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag. (e) Schematic diagram of the annealing treatment of perovskite films under solvent vapor.79 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (f). Cross-sectional SEM images of the TA and SA perovskite films with a thickness of 1015 nm.78 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH Publications.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagram for MnCl2-driven crystalline grain growth with surface passivation.90 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (b) Cross-sectional STEM image of HMPA10-coated FTO glass obtained by FIB milling.91 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic representation of the coating process used to form the CH3NH3PbI3 films with and without a grain boundary healing layer via Lewis acid–base adduct intermediates.96 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Intermediate phase production diagram.104 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (b) Structure diagram of the influence of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) on the morphology of FAPbI3 film, including the molecular structure of DMSO and NMP, photographs and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of FAPbI3 perovskite film.105 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the action of thiourea on the growth of perovskite crystals, where the S atoms in thiourea form Lewis acid–base adduct (orange line) or the hydrogen bond (blue line) with NH2 groups in perovskite crystal. NH2 groups form a hydrogen bond with iodine atoms in perovskite crystal.107 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Schematic showing film crystallization and corresponding charge transporting characteristics.110 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Inc Publications.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Solvent engineering procedure for the preparation of a uniform and dense perovskite film.165 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014, Springer Nature Publications. (b) Schematic illustration of the proposed solvent–solvent extraction deposition mechanisms.115 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Mechanism of the OTG-induced phase stabilization of CsPbI3 perovskite.128 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Publications.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Solvent-controlled growth (SCG) for CsPbI3 deposition. (b) SEM images of annealed CsPbI3 perovskite precursor films without and with SCG.137 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic representation of static and dynamic spin-coating. (d) Morphologys of the layers and interfaces in 3D reconstructed s-PSC and d-PSC.138 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

Substrate material	m-TiO2	MAPbI3	FTO/m-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	15.68	
50

ZnO	MAPbI3	FTO/ZnO/Al2O3/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	15.55	
45

SnO2	(FAPbI3)x(MAPbI3)1−x	ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	20.54	
40

CdS	MAPbI3	FTO/CdS/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	11.60	
55

Annealing	Hot plate	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	17.78	
77

Microwave	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	14.91	
57

Photonic flash	MAPbI3	FTO/Al2O3/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	15.23	
63

Radiation	FAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	14.15	
58

Oven	MAPbI3−xClx	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/Al	14.9	
61

Vacuum	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/PFN-Br/Ag	14.5	
66

Air	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	12.7	
67

Organic atmosphere	FAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	23	
65

Gradient	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	19.8	
75

Solvent	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/C60/BCP/Al	15.6	
78

Precursor composition	Lanthanide ions doping	CsPbBr3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/Carbon	10.14	
87

Cl− doping	CsPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au	16.07	
82

Na+ doping	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/C60/Al	14.2	
85

Mn+ doping	CsPbI2Br	FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au	13.47	
90

BX2 rich	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	17.09	
91

AX rich	MAI	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	20.4	
96

Solvent engineering	DMSO	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	19.7	
104

DMSO	FAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au	20.2	
97

DMF	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/BCP/Ag	3.9	
12

NMP	FAPbI3	ITO/c-SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	19.34	
105

Thiourea	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	19.80	
106

DE	MAPbI3	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	15.2	
115

CB	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au	17.08	
118

Additive engineering	6TIC-4F	CsPbIxBr3−x	ITO/NiOx/PVK/ZnO/C60/Ag	15.6	
126

Ethylammonium chloride	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	20.03	
122

HPbI3	Cs1−xDMAxPbI3	FTO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/C60/BCP/Ag	12.62	
123

Zwitterion	CsPbI3	ITO/PTAA/PVK/PCBM/C60/BCP/Carbon	11.4	
127

HBr	MAPbI3−xClx	ITO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	15.76	
132

Water	MAPbI3−xClx	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/Bphen/Ag	16.06	
130

Other factors	Precursor solution aging	MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/C60/Al	15.22	
136

Solvent-controlled growth	CsPbI3	ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	15.7	
137

Spin coating method	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	18.2	
138


 	Fig. 8  (a) Hybrid perovskite increases with the thickness n of the inorganic plate and tends to the 3D structure diagram.141 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Two-dimensional diagram of different growth modes.146 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Publications. (c) Diagram of regulating the vertical growth of 2D perovskite.149 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Publications.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the device incorporating polycrystalline 3D perovskite film with 2D perovskite at the grain boundaries.155 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic illustration showing the induction of 2D growth at the base of a 3D perovskite film. (c) Top-view SEM images of the surface morphology of the film for 3D, 2D/3D perovskite films, depicting their differences in grain size and their corresponding contact angles.159 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Publications.	 

2D	(CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10	FTO/TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	9.42	0.929	46	4.02	
142

PDAMA3Pb4I13	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/C60/BCP/Ag	18.0	0.97	74.3	13.0	
145

(PEA)2(Cs)39Pb40I121	FTO/TiO2/PVK/PTAA/Au	19.51	0.991	70.4	13.56	
144

(3-APN)2PbI4	ITO/NiOx/(3-APN)2PbI4/PCBM/Ag	5.73	1.097	54	3.39	
143

(PXD)(MA)2Pb3I10	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/BCP/Ag	19.33	1.07	73.25	15.6	
149

Mixed 2D-3D or 2D passivated 3D	EDAPbI4–CsPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	14.53	1.15	0.71	11.8	
150

PEA2PbI4–FAPbI3	ITO/c-SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	24.44	1.12	76.5	21.06	
155

GUA-FA0.95Cs0.05PbI3	ITO/SnO2/ZnO/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	24.41	1.14	79.6	22.2	
152

EDBEPbI4–MAPbI3	FTO/SnO2/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	23.53	1.13	79.2	21.06	
151

Layer 2D/3D	(EDA2)(CH3NH3)P0.5I2.5–MAPbI3	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/Al	21.94	0.90	75	15.02	
159

BA2CsPb2I6Br–CsPbI2Br	FTO/c-TiO2/PCBM/PVK/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	16.80	1.079	80.1	14.5	
154

Layer 3D/2D	MAPbI3–PEA2Pb2I4	FTO/NiO/PVK/PCBM/PN4N/Ag	21.80	1.17	78	19.89	
156

MAPbI3−xClx–PEA2Pb2I4	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/PCBM/LiF/Ag	19.09	1.07	68.1	13.8	
153


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
