The role of surface ligands in determining the electronic properties of quantum dot solids and their impact on photovoltaic figure of merits   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR06116A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06116A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1072-1080The role of surface ligands in determining the electronic properties of quantum dot solids and their impact on photovoltaic figure of merits†

        
          
            Prasenjit N. 
            Goswami
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Debranjan 
            Mandal
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Arup K. 
            Rath
          
        
      *
      CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Dr. Homi Bhabha Road, Pune, 411008, India. E-mail: ak.rath@ncl.res.in
Received 
      17th August 2017
    , Accepted 4th December 2017First published on 4th December 2017AbstractSurface chemistry plays a crucial role in determining the electronic properties of quantum dot solids and may well be the key to mitigate loss processes involved in quantum dot solar cells. Surface ligands help to maintain the shape and size of the individual dots in solid films, to preserve the clean energy band gap of the individual particles and to control charge carrier conduction across solid films, in turn regulating their performance in photovoltaic applications. In this report, we show that the changes in size, shape and functional groups of small chain organic ligands enable us to modulate mobility, dielectric constant and carrier doping density of lead sulfide quantum dot solids. Furthermore, we correlate these results with performance, stability and recombination processes in the respective photovoltaic devices. Our results highlight the critical role of surface chemistry in the electronic properties of quantum dots. The role of the size, functionality and the surface coverage of the ligands in determining charge transport properties and the stability of quantum dot solids have been discussed. Our findings, when applied in designing new ligands with higher mobility and improved passivation of quantum dot solids, can have important implications for the development of high-performance quantum dot solar cells.
1. Introduction
The solution processed inorganic semiconductor quantum dot based solar cells have shown steady improvements over the years to emerge as a promising contender for next generation solar cell technology.1–4 Control over synthesis techniques,5 advancements in post-synthesis processing2,6 and maneuver over a passivation strategy3,4,7,8 have contributed critically to their progress in photovoltaic and other optoelectronic applications. A large proportion of surface atoms along with the associated minuscule volume of quantum dot (QD) particles introduce surface dominance in determining the electronic properties of QD solids. Unsaturated surface atoms often result in the formation of dangling bonds, leading to the creation of intermediate states of varying energies across their band gaps.9,10 This may give rise to a range of phenomena in QD solids, namely, the formation of band tails, uncontrolled doping, and the formation of midgap trap states. Trap states are detrimental to both current and voltage generation as they reduce charge carrier mobility, decrease band edge carrier lifetime, and increase photocarrier recombination by providing alternate pathways through midgap states.9 Moreover, degradation of interfacial properties by means of Fermi energy pinning and reduction of built-in potential across a junction also make the intermediate states unfavorable in photovoltaic applications.8,11 Surface chemistry plays a crucial role in eliminating the formation of intermediate states in QDs by passivation of surface atoms through appropriate ligands. Surface ligation pushes the intermediate states deep inside the valence band12 or the conduction band9 and thus produces a cleaner band gap QD solid.
Lead sulfide (PbS) QDs have dominated the spectrum of QD solar cells due to their wide band gap tunability, solution phase processability, ambient stability, and high performance.13 The as-synthesized PbS QDs are off-stoichiometric (band gap ∼1.3 eV), where the (111) crystal facets are terminated by Pb atoms and the (100) facets constitute both Pb and S atoms.14,15 The surface ligands are thus designed such that they interact with the empty orbitals of the electron deficient metal atoms of the QD surface. A plethora of surface ligands, that includes small chain organic molecules with suitable anchoring groups,16,17 atomic size halide ligands3,18 and the most recent organic–inorganic halometallate ligands,4,19 have been studied for effective passivation of the QD surface to develop high-performance photovoltaic devices. Among the various groups tested so far (SH, COOH, CN, and NH2), thiol (SH) has turned out to be the most suitable anchoring group for PbS QD solar cells.4,20 Thiol terminated organic ligands generally result in p-type doping,12 whereas iodine18 and halometallate4 passivation yield n-type doping to PbS QDs. Organic ligands generally yield low mobility QD solids (<10−2 cm2 V−1 S−1) which have been attributed to their longer dot-to-dot distance and high tunnelling barrier for charge carrier transportation, thereby limiting their performance in QD solar cells.11 In comparison with inorganic ligand passivated QD solar cells, organic ligand passivation has, however, reported to yield higher open circuit voltage8,21,22 and shown improved resilience over ambient degradation.3,4 To date, the highest performance has been obtained by interfacing an n-type PbS QD layer passivated by an inorganic ligand PbI3− with a 1,2-ethanedithiol (organic ligand) capped p-type PbS QD layer.4 A better understanding of the ligand induced modulation of the electronic properties of QDs may inspire designing novel organic ligands that would lead to higher mobility and superior preservation of the QD surface.
Different aspects of the role of surface ligands in the electronic properties of QDs have been revealed in previously published reports.8,9,11 Changes in the anchoring group and the dipole moment of the surface ligands have been shown to shift the positions of the valence and the conduction bands of QD solids,17,23 which enables the modulation of the interfacial properties in photovoltaic applications. The introduction of electron accepting and electron donating functional groups into the surface ligands has been used for remote doping of QD films.24–26 Control over surface coverage and facet selective steric properties of QDs has led to the formation of superstructures with long-range translational and orientational orders in QD solids.27 Recently, the use of π-conjugated ligands has shown bulk like optical absorption and broad band optical absorption enhancement in colloidal QDs.28,29 The use of thiophenol derivatives as the ligand in PbS QDs has been reported to result in up to 300% improvement in absorption over bulk values.28 The drastic increase in the absorption coefficient has been attributed to the mixing of the ground state ligand orbitals leading to a subsequent increase in the density of states of the QDs. The charge carrier mobility of QD solids has been reported to increase exponentially with a decrease in the ligand size when the dielectric constant of the environment is maintained.30 The mobility of the QD solid, however, strongly depends on the anchoring groups31,32 and the energy levels (HOMO/LUMO) of the surface ligands.33 Surface ligands which only produce high mobility QD solids are not necessarily the best suitable for photovoltaic applications;34 effective passivation of the QD surface to create clean band gap is also a desirable quality that is deemed from a good ligand.11 It has been found that longer ligands show a high photoluminescence quantum yield, an indication of clean band gap due to the reduction in dot-to-dot coupling, but leads to inefficient carrier mobility; the opposite is true for shorter ligands.16,35,36 In the case of the asymmetric ligands having different terminal anchoring groups, the correlation between the charge carrier mobility with the ligand size and anchoring groups has not been well understood to date. For example, it has been reported that 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) capped PbS QDs show almost an order of magnitude higher mobility than 1,2-ethanedithiol passivated PbS QD films, despite the fact that the latter ligand is a shorter MPA.16,37 It is safe to say that achieving both the desirable high electrical mobility and clean band gap is not mutually exclusive and could be attained through a better understanding of the role of ligand mediated phenomena in QD solids. A detailed study on the impact of various ligand types on the electronic properties of QD solids is, therefore, necessary to develop novel ligands for high-performance solar cell applications.
Given the aforementioned complexities in the choice of surface ligands, we posit to study a series of ligands, chosen judiciously with varied sizes and functionalities, to understand the overall impact of the ligands on the photovoltaic figure of merits. Among the various ligands used in this study, MPA has been extensively studied in quantum dot solar cell development and has reported the highest efficiency to date among organic ligands.2,7,38,39 The other organic ligands studied here, namely thioglycolic acid (TGA),36 thiolactic acid (TLA) and 3-chloro-1-propanethiol (CPT),40 however, have rarely been explored in previous reports. TGA and TLA are particularly interesting due to the fact that they possess similar terminal anchoring groups such as SH and COOH to MPA, but they are ∼1.54 Å shorter than MPA.36 General notion suggests that smaller ligands would reduce the dot-to-dot separation and thereby increase the compactness, carrier mobility and dielectric constant of the QD solid. Higher mobility and higher dielectric constant are of significant importance in solar cells for fast carrier transport and dielectric screening of Coulomb attraction between the photo-generated carriers for their efficient delocalization. Our results suggest that PbS QD films, passivated using TGA and TLA, give rise to lower mobility and lower dielectric constant than those of MPA treated PbS QD films. The photovoltaic performance of MPA passivated photovoltaic devices shows higher photocurrent whereas TGA and TLA passivated solar cells show higher open circuit voltage and superior stability in their solar cell performance. Through a series of optoelectronic characterization studies namely photo-CELIV, transient photocurrent, transient photovoltage, light intensity dependent short circuit current and open circuit voltage measurements, temperature dependent study and XPS measurements, we provide a detailed electronic and physical understanding of ligand mediated properties of PbS QD solids and corroborate our results to explain their performances in solar cell devices.
2. Results and discussion
Photovoltaic devices are fabricated by utilizing a layer by layer solid state ligand exchange approach as reported previously.2 The device fabrication process is given in detail in the Experimental section (ESI†). In a typical process, a thin layer of oleic acid capped PbS QDs is deposited by a spin coating process. A ligand solution is applied to the PbS thin film for a brief period of time for complete removal of oleic acid and passivation of the PbS QD surface by the applied ligand. Successful completion of the ligand exchange process is confirmed from the attenuated total reflectance (ATR) mode Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) study (Fig. S1†).
A schematic representation of the photovoltaic device architecture is shown in Fig. 1a. In order to probe ligand mediated solar cell performance, we have selected MPA, TGA, TLA, and CPT as organic ligands (respective molecular structures are shown in Fig. 1a) to passivate the PbS QD surface. TGA, TLA, and MPA possess thiol and carboxylic acid as terminal anchoring groups. TGA has one carbon atom less than MPA (straight chain) and TLA (branched), however, the effective distance between the anchoring groups in both TGA and TLA is one carbon length (∼1.54 Å) shorter than MPA. CPT consists of the same number of backbone carbon atoms as MPA while the terminal acid functional group has been replaced by chlorine. From here on, we would refer to both TGA and TLA as short chain ligands due to their shorter inter-anchoring-group distances. The cross-sectional image (Fig. 1b) shows the relative thickness of each layer for an optimized MPA ligand based solar cell. Optimized solar cell performances for various ligand passivated PbS QD films are shown in Fig. 1(c) and the comparison of solar cell performances under 1.5 A.M. illumination is given in Table 1. MPA and TGA treated devices show comparable performances whereas TLA and CPT treated solar cells show much lower efficiencies. MPA shows the highest short circuit current density (Jsc), however, it is interesting to note that the short chain ligands (TGA and TLA) give rise to higher open circuit voltages (Voc) than the longer chain ligands (MPA and CPT). This is of crucial importance due to the fact that QD solar cells suffer from higher open circuit voltage loss (0.55–0.75 V for 1.1 to 1.4 eV band gap)41 compared to CIGS (0.35 V for 1.1 eV), c-Si (0.38 V for 1.12 eV band gap) and hybrid perovskite (0.4 V for 1.5 eV band gap) solar cells.22 Therefore any reduction in open circuit voltage loss is considered critical for QD solar cell development. Furthermore, while investigating the stability of different ligands in solar cell applications, it is observed that short chain ligands show improved stability over MPA (Fig. 1d). During a period of 180 days, the power conversion efficiency of MPA treated sample reduced to 50% of its original value, whereas both TGA and TLA treated solar cells retain more than 90% of their pristine efficiency (stability data for Voc, Jsc, and FF are given in Fig. S2†).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the solar cell device architecture and the molecular structures of the studied ligands are shown in (a). Cross-sectional image of a prepared solar cell with the scale bar is shown in (b). Current density vs. voltage characteristics of PbS QD based solar cells, treated with various ligands, are shown in (c). Colour codes for the respective ligands are shown as legend. (d) depicts the stability test and shows the evolution of normalized power conversion efficiency (PCE) with storing time for the three ligands. 
Table 1 Comparison of photovoltaic performances




Ligand type

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




PbS@MPA
0.576
24.00
47.4
6.55


PbS@TGA
0.629
22.56
44.1
6.25


PbS@TLA
0.610
14.22
40.3
3.50


PbS@CPT
0.526
21.43
38.2
4.31




Competition between the carrier transit time and carrier recombination time gives rise to the photocurrent generation in solar cells. The carrier transit time in a solar cell is inversely proportional to mobility (; d: device thickness, μ: mobility, and V: applied voltage). In our studied device structure of n–p junction solar cells, the n-type layer (TiO2) acts as a transparent window layer. Under panchromatic solar illumination, a gradient of photo-generated carriers is created across the PbS QD layer thickness where a majority of the carriers are created close to the junction.42 In such a scenario, the majority of the photo-generated electrons can easily reach the n-type layer, whereas the photo-generated holes need to travel across the full PbS QD layer thickness to reach the counter electrode. Therefore determination of hole mobility may provide valuable insights into the photocurrent generation process for the studied ligands. Photo-CELIV, a powerful technique to determine majority carrier mobility (hole, in our case), has been used widely for QD and other thin film solar cells.43,44 We utilize the photo-CELIV technique to determine hole mobility of PbS films treated with various surface ligands. Details of the experimental procedure are given in the Experimental section (ESI†). Applied offset voltage, as well as the time delay between the light pulse and the voltage pulse, are kept constant during the measurements, while the voltage ramp for the devices is varied to maintain the condition of lower extraction current as compared to capacitive displacement current.43 The PbS QD layer thickness is kept in between 220 nm and 450 nm for the photo-CELIV study. The current evolution and the voltage ramp for various surface ligand treated photovoltaic devices are shown in Fig. 2a–d. PbS QD solids treated with longer ligands (MPA and CPT) show higher dielectric constant and hole mobility as compared to shorter ligand (TGA and TLA) passivation (Fig. 2e and f). These observations are in stark contrast to the common notion that shorter ligands would generate higher mobility and higher dielectric constant by reducing the dot-to-dot separation. Furthermore, hole mobility determined from photo-CELIV experiments are consistent with the forward bias J–V characteristics (S4†) and the series resistance results (Table S1†) of the respective photovoltaic devices, both in the dark and under illumination. A high mobility results in low series resistance in solar cells for the respective ligand types.
 Fig. 2  (a)–(d) represent the photo-CELIV measurements for MPA, TGA, TLA and CPT treated PbS QD solar cells respectively. Current evolution and the applied voltage pulse, as a function of time, are shown in the same plots for the respective devices. (e) and (f) show the variations in hole mobility and dielectric constant of PbS QD layers treated with various ligands (details of the data analysis are given in Fig. S3†). 
It has been shown that the carrier transport in QD solar cells is dominated by the drift motion over diffusion in determining their photovoltaic figure of merits.45 Free carrier concentration and dielectric constant play important roles in the formation of depletion width across the n–p junction. This prompts us to determine depletion width and carrier concentration in the respective PbS films treated with various ligands as they fundamentally control the photocarrier extraction process. Capacitance measurements at varied applied biases in the low-frequency region have widely been used for this purpose to characterize QD solar cells.5,7,12 Depletion widths at zero bias are determined from the C–V plots (Fig. 3a) and the free carrier densities are determined from the slope of the 1/C2vs. V plots (Fig. 3b, details of the data analysis are shown in S5†).7 Depletion width is the highest for MPA treated PbS layers (Fig. 3c), indicating the highest contribution from drift mediated photo-carrier extraction among the ligands. The maximum depletion width along with the lowest carrier binding energy arising from the high dielectric constant of MPA treated PbS may have led to the highest short circuit current generation in their solar cell operation. On the other hand, the TGA treated PbS layer shows the lowest free carrier density (Fig. 3c) suggesting that TGA treated PbS is the most intrinsic in nature among the studied ligand types. The ascending order of carrier densities, as determined for PbS layers treated with various ligands (TGA < TLA < MPA < CPT), is in agreement with the trend in the open circuit voltage generation for the respective solar cells (TGA > TLA > MPA > CPT). We surmise that incomplete/imperfect surface passivation leads to external doping and intermediate states in the QD solid, which may result in Fermi energy pinning across the junction and loss in open circuit voltage in solar cells.
 Fig. 3  Capacitance–voltage (C–V) and 1/C2–V plots for solar cells treated with various ligands are shown in (a) and (b) respectively. Depletion width at zero bias and carrier density as determined from the C–V and 1/C2–V plots for the PbS layers with different surface ligand types are shown in (c). 
Considering the incompetence of the CPT ligand in photovoltaic operations (high carrier density and low open circuit voltage generation) we exclude it from further studies of recombination processes in solar cells. Transient photovoltage and photocurrent measurements are employed to determine the carrier lifetime and carrier transit time of solar cells to obtain a more vivid understanding of the underlying photovoltaic processes for the different ligands. Transient photovoltage measurements are carried out by biasing solar cells with white light to produce constant open circuit voltage and simultaneously applying small perturbing light pulses to determine the charge carrier decay under open circuit conditions (details of the data analysis are shown in S6†).2,22 Photocarrier lifetimes for MPA, TGA, and TLA treated PbS layers, as determined from open circuit voltage decay measurements, are shown in Fig. 4a. At any given Voc, MPA or TLA treated PbS shows lower lifetime values compared to TGA treated PbS. This implies that the recombination process is the slowest in the TGA treated PbS layer. Carrier lifetime values determined from transient photovoltage measurements are consistent with the carrier density values from capacitance measurement as higher carrier density leads to faster recombination and lower lifetimes in QD solids. This further explains previous observations that higher lifetimes generally yield higher open circuit voltages in photovoltaic devices.41 However, it is difficult to ascertain if the lifetime for different ligand types is limited by the bulk recombination inside the PbS layer or the interfacial recombination at the TiO2–PbS interface. The knowledge of carrier lifetime, mobility, built-in potential and depletion width as determined experimentally, enables us to estimate drift and diffusion lengths for PbS QD layers treated with different ligands (Table 2).44
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of photocarrier lifetimes for various ligand types as determined from transient photovoltage measurements. (b) Current transit times for various ligand types under short circuit conditions. 
Table 2 Diffusion and drift lengths of a PbS layer for different surface ligands




Ligand type
Diffusion length (nm)
Drift length (μm)




PbS@MPA
105
1.3


PbS@TGA
105
1.35


PbS@TLA
38
0.19




Diffusion and drift lengths for the hole (Table 2) are determined under 0.9 sun illumination (refer to S6† for more details). Both drift and diffusion lengths for MPA and TGA treated PbS layers are comparable while the values are significantly low for TLA treated solar cells. Carrier transit times in photovoltaic devices are estimated from the transient photocurrent (TPC) decay measurements.22 Transient photocurrent decay for the various ligand based solar cells is shown in Fig. 4b. Carrier transit times for MPA, TGA and TLA are 1.1 μs, 1.7 μs and 2.86 μs, respectively, in agreement with their respective mobility values. While high transport lengths facilitate photo-generated charge carrier extraction, high transit times increase the probability of photocarrier recombination inside solar cells. Drift length, diffusion length and carrier transit time further explain similar short circuit current in MPA and TGA treated solar cells and lower current in TLA treated solar cells.
To elucidate the role of surface ligands in the charge generation–recombination process of solar cells, we have studied incident photon intensity dependent Jsc and Voc generation of the studied photovoltaic devices. For the light intensity dependent investigation, we have chosen monochromatic illumination at 635 nm. Photons at this wavelength have high penetration depth inside the PbS layer (extinction coefficient of PbS in a long wavelength range is low) and are expected to excite the PbS thickness uniformly even at relatively lower intensities. In photovoltaic devices, the dependence of Jsc on light intensity (φ) is expressed as Jsc∝φp, where p is the power exponent. p ∼ 1 indicates generation limited current extraction and p ∼ 0.75 indicates space charge limited carrier extraction in solar cells.46 Higher ‘p’ values (Fig. 5a) of MPA (0.92) and TGA (0.93) treated devices indicate a more balanced transport of photo-generated electrons and holes which may lead to superior charge extraction in those solar cells. The diode ideality factor (η) is also known to carry important information regarding the photocarrier recombination process in a solar cell. The value of η is unity when the recombination process is determined by band-to-band recombination of photo-generated carriers, whereas the involvement of intermediate states in carrier recombination dynamics makes η greater than unity (1 < η < 2).22,41 Under 635 nm monochromatic laser illumination, the estimated values of η are 1.11, 1.20 and 1.40 for MPA, TGA and TLA treated photovoltaic devices, respectively (Fig. 5b, details of the data analysis are given in S7†). This implies that trap assisted recombination within the depletion layer of the PbS film is the lowest for MPA, intermediate for TGA and the highest for TLA treated photovoltaic devices. The qualitative density of trap state estimation for the respective ligand types, as predicted from the values of η, corroborates well with photocurrent generation under solar cell operation (Fig. 1c) and intensity dependent Jsc values under monochromatic illumination (Fig. 5a).
 Fig. 5  Intensity dependent (a) current density and (b) open circuit voltage variation for solar cells treated with different ligands. Monochromatic illumination of 635 nm laser light is used for the intensity dependent study. (c) Temperature dependent Voc of photovoltaic devices for different ligand types measured at 1.5 A.M. solar illumination is shown. Extrapolation of the high-temperature linear region of Voc to determine Ea for various ligands are shown by the dashed lines. 
Transient photovoltage measurement (Fig. 4a) shows lower photocarrier lifetimes for MPA treated solar cells as compared to TGA and TLA treated solar cells, despite the fact that MPA yields higher photocurrent. Photocarrier recombination in photovoltaic devices can occur in three possible regions inside the device: (i) recombination inside the bulk of the PbS layer, (ii) TiO2–PbS interface recombination and (iii) recombination inside TiO2 and MoO3 transport layers. We can ignore the lifetime contribution from the transport layers due to the fact that they also act as filter layers for the holes and the electrons (TiO2 and MoO3, respectively) and therefore are deprived of opposite charge carriers for recombination. However, interface recombination can play a critical role in determining the overall photocarrier lifetime in solar cells. In order to explicate the role of the TiO2–PbS interface in the recombination process for the studied ligands, we have performed temperature dependent characterization of J–V characteristics under illumination. In the case of a single thermally activated carrier generation–recombination mechanism, open circuit voltage of a solar cell can be expressed as ,38,41,47 where Ea is the activation energy, q is the electronic charge, J00 is the prefactor and η is the diode ideality factor. Two distinct regions are observed in the Vocvs. T plots (Fig. 5c) for the solar cells. In the low-temperature range (<200 K) open circuit voltage seems to saturate with the decrease in temperature, whereas Voc increases linearly with the decrease in temperature in the high-temperature range (>200 K). The freezing of intermediate trap charges in the low-temperature region could possibly make them ineffective to modulate the quasi Fermi levels of the PbS layer under illumination and therefore leads to saturation in Voc generation.41,47 In the high-temperature range, where η, J00 and Jsc are independent of the temperature, extrapolation of the Voc–T plot at T = 0 K provides Ea. Activation energy bears a deep physical significance for the recombination processes in the solar cells. Ea, when equal to the band gap (Eg) of the PbS layer, implies the dominance of band to band recombination, whereas the lower values of the activation energy imply the significance of interfacial recombination.38,41 As shown in Fig. 5c, Ea is 0.91 eV for the MPA treated PbS layer, much lower than TGA and TLA ligands (1.18 eV). This suggests that high interfacial recombination of photocarriers at the TiO2 interface for MPA treated PbS possibly limits their lifetime values rather than the bulk of the PbS layer. Considering that the first excitonic peak position for PbS QDs (Fig. S8(a)†) is 1.24 eV, the observed activation energies for TGA and TLA treated PbS are highly encouraging. This implies interfacial recombination at the TiO2–PbS interface and the open circuit voltage loss in TGA and TLA treated films are significantly lower. This result is crucial from the stand point that open circuit voltage loss has been reduced by a smaller size passivating ligand.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of PbS QD films passivated with the studied ligands has been carried out to better understand the surface properties. Since the ligands are anchored through the –SH group to the terminal Pb sites of the QD surface, we focused on the S 2p XPS peaks to determine the surface properties. The high-resolution XPS S 2p spectra for PbS QD films treated with MPA, TGA and TLA are presented in Fig. 6(a)–(c) respectively. Deconvolution of S 2p spectra is carried out based on previously published reports.5,8,48 The S 2p doublet peaks for Pb–S are fitted with a splitting energy difference of 1.18 eV and a peak area ratio of 2:1. Further details of the XPS analysis are given in Table S1.† The S–C and S–S peaks in the spectra arise from the bound thiol contribution of the surface ligands.8 Thus, atomic percent determination of S–C and S–S would provide valuable information regarding the surface coverage of different ligands on the PbS QD surface. The relative atomic percentages of MPA, TGA, and TLA treated PbS films for S–C are 14.3%, 20.4%, and 20.3%, respectively, and those for S–S are 12.4%, 16.1%, and 17.5%, respectively. The higher presence of the S–C and S–S bonds in PbS films for TGA and TLA ligands clearly suggests a higher surface coverage for the ligands than MPA. The higher surface coverage could possibly originate from lower steric repulsion in the case of shorter ligands. XPS S 2p spectra also indicate the presence of PbSO3 and PbSO4 (or R–SO) on PbS films. The relative atomic percentages of the oxidative species for MPA, TGA, and TLA are 10%, 8.6% and 7.8%, respectively, indicating higher oxidation in MPA treated PbS samples. This is consistent with relative surface coverage (S–C and S–S) for the respective ligands as higher coverage leads to better preservation and lower oxidation of the PbS QD surface. This further explains higher stability in TGA and TLA treated photovoltaic devices as higher ligand coverage inhibits degradation processes that originate from the ambient operation.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of XPS S 2p spectra for (a) MPA, (b) TGA and (c) TLA passivated PbS QD films. Gray (scatter + line) represents the experimental data and the black line represents the fitted experimental results. Peak positions corresponding to binding energies 160.30 eV and 161.48 eV are attributed (red) to the doublet splitting of S for PbS. Peaks at 161.38 eV (blue), 162.56 eV (wine line), 164.8 eV (olive), and 166.1 eV (orange) correspond to the S–C bond, S–S bond, PbSO3 and PbSO4 respectively. 
It is observed and verified from complementary experimental techniques that shorter passivating ligands TGA and TLA yield higher open circuit voltages than MPA. Since the difference between the conduction band minimum of the n-type TiO2 layer and the valence band maximum of the p-type PbS layer fundamentally controls the open circuit voltage generation, we posit to determine them from complementary absorption and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopic (UPS) techniques for the studied ligands (Fig. S9a–c†). Fig. S9d† shows the conduction band and valence band positions of the PbS QD films treated with various ligands. It can be seen that the valence band position of PbS QDs for different ligand types does not follow entirely the trend of Voc generation in solar cell devices, for example, TGA despite having a shallower valence band energy produces higher Voc than MPA. We attribute the Voc generation to the interface (TiO2/PbS) properties and electron trap formation in PbS QD films. Capacitance–voltage measurements and temperature dependent Voc results show that MPA treated PbS possesses the highest free carrier density and more pronounced trap mediated recombination at the TiO2/PbS interface. XPS study shows that MPA treated PbS films possess the highest amount of oxidative compounds in the form of PbSO3 and PbSO4 at its surface which is known to form electron trap states near the conduction band of PbS QDs.5 Therefore, we infer from the above observations that MPA treated films create the maximum number of electron trap states which limit the quasi-Fermi level splitting between the electrons and holes across the interface under illumination and results in the reduction in open circuit voltage. The origin of photocurrent generation and fill factor for different ligand types has been explained by mobility, dielectric constant, depletion width, and diode ideality factor. The reason for the lower hole mobility and the lower dielectric constant of PbS QD films for short chain ligands (TGA and TLA), as compared to MPA, however, is difficult to ascertain. Low hole mobility in TGA and TLA could possibly originate from higher hole trap density and trap energy distributions for holes (close to the valence band) in their respective PbS QD films.16,36 Shallow hole traps near the valence band edge may result in lowering the hole mobility due to continuous trapping and de-trapping and subsequent increase in the carrier lifetime (Fig. 4a). The observed dielectric constant values may be rooted in the different dielectric constant of the ligands and packing of QD solids. Therefore in designing new short chain organic ligands, relative dielectric constant of the ligand should be taken into consideration along with other prevailing factors.
3. Conclusions
In summary, we have investigated photovoltaic figure of merits of PbS QD solar cells for various surface ligands with varied sizes and functionalities. We have shown the non-trivial behavior of the decrease in hole mobility and dielectric constant with the reduced ligand size for PbS QD solids. This underpins the importance of surface ligands in controlling the carrier transport properties of QD solids via trap state formation. We have shown that shorter ligands can produce a higher open circuit voltage in QD solar cells by diminishing surface oxidation and thereby eliminating electron trap states near the conduction band through a higher degree of surface passivation. High surface coverage for TGA and TLA leads to improvement in the stability of QD solar cells under ambient working conditions. Our study highlights the role of ligand chemistry in tuning various electronic properties of QD solids like mobility, dielectric constant and doping density through surface passivation which would be valuable in designing new surface ligands for QD based electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by DST Nanomission, India (no. SR/NM/NT-1011/2105 (G)) and SERB extramural funding, India (no. EMR/2015/002415).
References
J. M. Luther, J. B. Gao, M. T. Lloyd, O. E. Semonin, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3704–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. J. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. X. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. P. G. de Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Z. Lan, F. J. Fan, G. Walters, A. R. Kirmani, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, X. H. Wang, R. Debnath, R. Wolowiec, E. Palmiano, L. Levina, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, D. Jamakosmanovic and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 869–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stavrinadis, S. Pradhan, P. Papagiorgis, G. Itskos and G. Konstantatos, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 739–744 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, I. J. Kramer, A. R. Barkhouse, X. H. Wang, G. Konstantatos, R. Debnath, L. Levina, I. Raabe, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3374–3380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Cao, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, D. So and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16035 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353, 5523 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Wang, Y. Q. Shang, P. Kanjanaboos, W. J. Zhou, Z. J. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1130–1143 CAS .
M. J. Yuan, D. Zhitomirsky, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. W. Kemp, Z. J. Ning, X. Z. Lan, J. X. Xu, J. Y. Kim, H. P. Dong and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5586–5592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Yuan, M. X. Liu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16016 CrossRef CAS .
O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, P. Stadler, Z. J. Ning, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8448–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zherebetskyy, M. Scheele, Y. J. Zhang, N. Bronstein, C. Thompson, D. Britt, M. Salmeron, P. Alivisatos and L. W. Wang, Science, 2014, 344, 1380–1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Jeong, J. Tang, H. Liu, J. Kim, A. W. Schaefer, K. Kemp, L. Levina, X. H. Wang, S. Hoogland, R. Debnath, L. Brzozowski, E. H. Sargent and J. B. Asbury, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 89–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Brown, D. Kim, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, M. G. Bawendi, J. C. Grossman and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5863–5872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Ning, O. Voznyy, J. Pan, S. Hoogland, V. Adinolfi, J. X. Xu, M. Li, A. R. Kirmani, J. P. Sun, J. Minor, K. W. Kemp, H. P. Dong, L. Rollny, A. Labelle, G. Carey, B. Sutherland, I. G. Hill, A. Amassian, H. Liu, J. Tang, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 822–828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sytnykt, S. Yakunin, W. Schofberger, R. T. Lechner, M. Burian, L. Ludescher, N. A. Killilea, A. YousefiAmin, D. Kriegner, J. Stangl, H. Groiss and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1246–1256 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Tang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 12–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Ning, Y. Ren, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, P. Stadler, X. Z. Lan, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6295–6299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pradhan, A. Stavrinadis, S. Gupta, Y. Bi, F. Di Stasio and G. Konstantatos, Small, 2017, 13, 1700598 CrossRef PubMed .
H. I. Wang, H. Lu, Y. Nagata, M. Bonn and E. Cánovas, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4760–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shim and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nature, 2000, 407, 981–983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oh, D. K. Kim and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4328–4334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Kirmani, A. Kiani, M. M. Said, O. Voznyy, N. Wehbe, G. Walters, S. Barlow, E. H. Sargent, S. R. Marder and A. Amassian, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 922–930 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Choi, C. R. Bealing, K. F. Bian, K. J. Hughes, W. Y. Zhang, D. M. Smilgies, R. G. Hennig, J. R. Engstrom and T. Hanrath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3131–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Giansante, I. Infante, E. Fabiano, R. Grisorio, G. P. Suranna and G. Gigli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1875–1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Debellis, G. Gigli, S. Brinck, I. Infante and C. Giansante, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, J. Puthussery, S. Gaik, R. Ihly, H. W. Hillhouse and M. Law, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1960–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. D. Klem, H. Shukla, S. Hinds, D. D. MacNeil, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 212105 CrossRef .
W. K. Koh, S. R. Saudari, A. T. Fafarman, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4764–4767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Scheele, D. Hanifi, D. Zherebetskyy, S. T. Chourou, S. Axnanda, B. J. Rancatore, K. Thorkelsson, T. Xu, Z. Liu, L.-W. Wang, Y. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2532–2540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, O. Voznyy, L. Levina, S. Hoogland, K. W. Kemp, A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3803 CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Tolentino, E. R. Smith, J. Zhang, M. C. Beard, A. J. Nozik, M. Law and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16228–16235 CAS .
J. Chang, Y. H. Ogomi, C. Ding, Y. H. Zhang, T. Toyoda, S. Hayase, K. Katayama and Q. Shen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 6358–6367 RSC .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. H. Wang, R. Debnath, D. K. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Rath, F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, M. Bernechea, S. L. Diedenhofen and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4741–4747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mandal, P. N. Goswami and A. K. Rath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 123902 CrossRef .
A. H. Ip, A. Kiani, I. J. Kramer, O. Voznyy, H. F. Movahed, L. Levina, M. M. Adachi, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8833–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. M. Chuang, A. Maurano, R. E. Brandt, G. W. Hwang, J. Jean, T. Buonassisi, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3286–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, M. C. Beard, S. Choi, J. M. Luther, M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3904–3910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mozer, N. S. Sariciftci, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, R. Osterbacka, M. Westerling and G. Juska, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 112104 CrossRef .
K. W. Johnston, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. P. Clifford, S. H. Myrskog, S. Hoogland, H. Shukla, J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 122111 CrossRef .
X. Z. Lan, S. Masala and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 233–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L. Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743–3752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Speirs, D. N. Dirin, M. Abdu-Aguye, D. M. Balazs, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2916–2924 CAS .
D. G. Castner, K. Hinds and D. W. Grainger, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 5083–5086 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06116aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the solar cell device architecture and the molecular structures of the studied ligands are shown in (a). Cross-sectional image of a prepared solar cell with the scale bar is shown in (b). Current density vs. voltage characteristics of PbS QD based solar cells, treated with various ligands, are shown in (c). Colour codes for the respective ligands are shown as legend. (d) depicts the stability test and shows the evolution of normalized power conversion efficiency (PCE) with storing time for the three ligands.	 

PbS@MPA	0.576	24.00	47.4	6.55
PbS@TGA	0.629	22.56	44.1	6.25
PbS@TLA	0.610	14.22	40.3	3.50
PbS@CPT	0.526	21.43	38.2	4.31

 	Fig. 2  (a)–(d) represent the photo-CELIV measurements for MPA, TGA, TLA and CPT treated PbS QD solar cells respectively. Current evolution and the applied voltage pulse, as a function of time, are shown in the same plots for the respective devices. (e) and (f) show the variations in hole mobility and dielectric constant of PbS QD layers treated with various ligands (details of the data analysis are given in Fig. S3†).	 

 	Fig. 3  Capacitance–voltage (C–V) and 1/C2–V plots for solar cells treated with various ligands are shown in (a) and (b) respectively. Depletion width at zero bias and carrier density as determined from the C–V and 1/C2–V plots for the PbS layers with different surface ligand types are shown in (c).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of photocarrier lifetimes for various ligand types as determined from transient photovoltage measurements. (b) Current transit times for various ligand types under short circuit conditions.	 

PbS@MPA	105	1.3
PbS@TGA	105	1.35
PbS@TLA	38	0.19

 	Fig. 5  Intensity dependent (a) current density and (b) open circuit voltage variation for solar cells treated with different ligands. Monochromatic illumination of 635 nm laser light is used for the intensity dependent study. (c) Temperature dependent Voc of photovoltaic devices for different ligand types measured at 1.5 A.M. solar illumination is shown. Extrapolation of the high-temperature linear region of Voc to determine Ea for various ligands are shown by the dashed lines.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of XPS S 2p spectra for (a) MPA, (b) TGA and (c) TLA passivated PbS QD films. Gray (scatter + line) represents the experimental data and the black line represents the fitted experimental results. Peak positions corresponding to binding energies 160.30 eV and 161.48 eV are attributed (red) to the doublet splitting of S for PbS. Peaks at 161.38 eV (blue), 162.56 eV (wine line), 164.8 eV (olive), and 166.1 eV (orange) correspond to the S–C bond, S–S bond, PbSO3 and PbSO4 respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06116a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
