Efficient perovskite solar cells via surface passivation by a multifunctional small organic ionic compound   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA02222E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA02222E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8313-8322Efficient perovskite solar cells via surface passivation by a multifunctional small organic ionic compound†

        
          
            Xin 
            Wu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Lu 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuo 
            Xu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Selina 
            Olthof
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Ren
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yucheng 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Gao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Shengzhong (Frank) 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Applied Surface and Colloid Chemistry, Ministry of Education, Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Advanced Energy Devices, Shaanxi Engineering Lab for Advanced Energy Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, China. E-mail: rxd0313@snnu.edu.cn; feigao@snnu.edu.cn
bDalian National Laboratory for Clean Energy, iChEM, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, Liaoning, China, University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China. E-mail: szliu@dicp.ac.cn
cDepartment Chemie, Universität zu Köln, Luxemburgerstr. 116, Köln, 50939, Germany
dMaterials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA
Received 
      25th February 2020
    , Accepted 3rd April 2020First published on 4th April 2020AbstractSurface passivation is a proven strategy for preparing high efficiency planar perovskite solar cells. Herein, we report an effective surface passivation strategy using the multifunctional small organic ionic compound 1-ethylpyridinium chloride (EPC) in combination with (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05. It is found that the nitrogen atom in the pyridine group forms chemical bonds with under-coordinated lead ions in the perovskite film whereby the defect density is significantly reduced. The organic groups, including ethyl and pyridine, furthermore provide higher hydrophobicity for improved moisture stability. Finally, the chlorine anions were also found to play an important role in the defect passivation while further improving the perovskite crystallinity. Detailed theoretical study confirms that the EPC is indeed a good passivation agent for multiple defects. As a result, the power conversion efficiency is increased from 19.52% to as high as 21.19% via the EPC passivation and the devices show reduced hysteresis and increased stability.
1. Introduction
In past decade, organic–inorganic halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have developed rapidly owing to their superior optoelectronic properties such as appropriate bandgap, long charge carrier lifetime, high absorption, and excellent charge carrier mobility. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) has quickly increased from 3.8% to 25.2%.1–17 Meanwhile, the theoretical efficiency, based on the Shockley–Queisser limit, is above 30%.18 This difference between these two values mainly originates from charge carrier recombination, both inside the perovskite film and at the interfaces to the charge extraction layers of the device. Huang's group reported that the main reason for charge recombination in polycrystalline perovskite film is the large number of defects at the perovskite films surface and grain boundaries.19 Clearly, defect passivation is an essential aspect when it comes to further improving the efficiency of the PSCs.
Two kinds of approaches are used to suppress recombination and improve the efficiency of charge carrier transport and exciton separation. One option is to introduce additives into the perovskite precursor solution. For example, Sargent's group introduced [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) into the perovskite film. Here, the PCBM was reported to cover the perovskite grain boundaries and significantly reduced recombination losses and hysteresis.20 Liu's group developed NbF5 as an additive to be used in FA-based perovskite films. NbF5 can bind to the constituents of the perovskite, which decreases the trap-state density and improves, both, stability and performance; efficiencies as high as 20.56% have been achieved this way.21 Zhan's group prepared the fused ring electron acceptor doped perovskite film which showed enhanced electron extraction and suppressed bimolecular recombination, yielding a PCE of 21.7%.22 Zhu's group introduced a diboron compound into the perovskite absorber layer, which was reported to reduce the defect density by reacting with residual FAI and increased the efficiency up to 21.11%. Seok's group added additional iodide ions into the organic cation solution forming the perovskite film, which also decreased the defects density of the perovskite film; here, solar cell devices reached 22.1%.17 Grätzel's group designed a new bifunctional molecular additive (the mercapto-tetrazolium and phenylammonium (SN) moieties), the introduction of SN not only passivates the surface defects, but also act as a structure-directing function for high quality perovskite film formation, consequently, achieving a PCE exceeding 20% for 1 cm2 active device area.23
Another approach is surface passivation. When photogenerated charge carriers pass from the perovskite into the hole transport layer (HTL), defects at the surface of the perovskite film can trap these charges and decrease, both, the open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF). The function of surface passivating species is to reduce or eliminate those defects, thereby inhibiting the charge carrier recombination and improving the efficiency of the device. For example, Grätzel's group added polymethyl methacrylate into the antisolvent solution by which surface defects were effectively passivated, improving the device performance up to 21.6%.24 Huang's group used quaternary ammonium halide to passivate the surface defects and obtained a certified PCE of 20.45%.19 Liu's group introduced tris(pentafluorophenyl)boron into the antisolvent to modify the perovskite surface, which helped to form large grain sizes and efficiently reduced the defect density; a high PCE of 21.6% was obtained.25 Zhu's group used guanidinium bromide to form a stable capping layer on top of the perovskite film. They found that this layer reacts with excess PbI2, thereby passivating the defects and improving the performance of the device to 21.51%; notably a VOC of 1.21 V was reached using an inverted PSC structure.26 Similarly, You's group adopted PEAI to react with excessive PbI2. By reducing the defect density and inhibiting the non-radiative recombination, a certificated PCE of 23.32% was obtained with a VOC of 1.18 V.13
In these studies additives or surface passivation strategies were used to improve the perovskite film quality and thereby the device performance. Here, most of these additives or passivators can only passivate one type of defect, either the positive or negative charged ones. However, perovskite can exhibit a wide range of defects, such as antisite defects PbI3−, under-coordinated halide ions, under-coordinated Pb2+, iodine vacancy, etc. Thus, it would be desirable to have a passivator that could simultaneously passivate multiple kinds of defects.
In the present work, a multifunctional small organic ionic compound, 1-ethylpyridinium chloride (EPC), was developed to passivate defects at the surface and grain boundaries of perovskite films. Compared to other the state-of-the-art studies in literature, this material combines several properties in a unique way: (1) the nitrogen atom in the pyridine group forms chemical bonds with under-coordinated lead ion on the perovskite surface which significantly reduces the defect density. (2) The organic groups, including ethyl and pyridine, provide increased hydrophobicity for improved moisture stability. (3) The chlorine is also assisting in the defect passivation and in addition improves the perovskite crystallinity. Overall, we can show that the hole extraction was improved and charge accumulation and recombination at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface were suppressed via EPC passivation. Employing this approach in PSC, the hysteresis was reduced and both the VOC and FF were increased. Overall, the PCE was increased from 19.52% to 21.19%.
2. Results and discussion
The mixed (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 perovskite films were prepared via a spin-coating approach. The surface of the perovskite film was then passivated using solutions of EPC in iso-propanol (IPA) at different concentrations. We first investigated the effect of EPC concentration on crystallinity of the perovskite film. Fig. 1a shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite film that were treated with these different concentrations. Clearly, the perovskite films show a high degree of orientation as only few reflexes are visible. No impurity phase, such as remaining PbI2, can be observed in any of the samples. We further analyzed the crystallinity of perovskite film by comparing for the various EPC concentrations the intensities of the (110) reflexes, as well as their full width half max (FWHM) as shown in Fig. 1b. The relative intensity of (110) signal first rises for concentrations up to 1 mg mL−1, while beyond that point it decreases again. The trend observed for the FWHM is exactly the opposite, since for a better crystallinity (i.e. less disorder) a narrower FWHM is expected.27 Overall, the perovskite film with the best crystallinity is achieved for an EPC concentration of 1 mg mL−1. Absorption spectra of the perovskite films with and without EPC passivation were also studied by Lambda 1050. As shown in Fig. S1,† the absorbance of the perovskite film is slightly enhanced by EPC passivation, which is attributed to the improvement of film crystal quality. The absorption onset is not changed before and after EPC passivation, therefore, there is no observable changes in bandgap. In order to further explore the relationship between EPC and the perovskite film, layers without and with EPC were characterized by Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy (FTIR). These spectra are shown in Fig. 1c, while subfigure 1d shows a close-up of the CN bending mode. This signal shifts from around 683 cm−1 for a pristine EPC layer to 675 cm−1 when EPC is deposited onto the perovskite, indicative of a strong interaction between the passivating ionic compound and under-coordinated lead ions. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement were conducted to explore possible changes in core level binding energy of lead, as shown in Fig. 1e. As XPS is a very surface sensitive method it is ideally suitable to probe changes induced by EPC at the surface. Two peaks, located at 138.39 and 143.25 eV, were observed which can be assigned to Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2, respectively. These peaks shift to higher binding energy by more than 300 meV after EPC treatment (centered at 138.73 and 143.60 eV), showing that the positive charge on the lead increased. The reason for this change lies in the high electronegativity of the nitrogen in the pyridine that leads to a partial charge transfer from Pb to the pyridine.28,29
 Fig. 1  Investigations of the perovskite films with different concentration of EPC (a) XRD patterns; (b) relative intensity and FWHM of the (110) peak. (c) FTIR spectra of pure EPC, perovskite film without and with EPC passivation, the inset picture is the molecular structure scheme of EPC. (d) Close-up of the FTIR spectra in the region of the CN bending mode. (e) XPS analysis of the Pb 4f core level region. (f) and (g) SEM images, (h) and (i) contact angle measurement. 
To study the effect of EPC on surface morphology of perovskite film, field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of the perovskite film with and without EPC were measured and are displayed in Fig. 1f and g. Clearly, the perovskite film is very different upon the EPC passivation. Firstly, the surface is smoother for the pristine perovskite film, after the EPC passivation, small particulates appear on the surface of perovskite film. The grain size of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation is analyzed. As shown in Fig. S2,† the grain size of the perovskite film is increased via EPC passivation, this result is consistent with the trend of the FWHM in the XRD measurement. AFM is also used to study morphology of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation. As displayed in Fig. S3,† the morphology of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation is very similar based on the SEM images. In order to further study the distribution of EPC, EDX mapping is carried out. There is no obvious difference in element content of the perovskite film with and without EPC (Fig. S4†). Fig. 1h and i show the contact angle measurements of water on pristine and passivated perovskite films. Lager contact angles were observed for perovskite films with EPC, which is attributed to the hydrophobic properties of ethyl and benzene group in this ionic compound. This means EPC will effectively slow down the destruction of perovskite film by ingress of water molecules and it can be expected to improve the stability of PSCs. We investigated the film stability using XRD during the humidity test (Fig. S5†). Strong diffraction peaks located at 14.13° and 28.26° are observed, corresponding to the (110) and (220) crystal planes of the FA-based perovskite film. There is no PbI2 peak detected in the as-prepared perovskite film. After aging for two days in humidity condition (30–40 RH%), both the PbI2 and δ-phase peaks located at 12.80° and 11.89° appeared, and both peaks grow as the exposure time is extended (Fig. S5a†). For the perovskite film with the EPC passivation, neither the PbI2 nor δ-phase peaks were detected after 2 days of aging test, and the peaks grow very slowly, demonstrating that the moisture stability of the perovskite film is effectively improved by the EPC passivation (Fig. S5b†).
To investigate the electrical properties, specifically the apparent trap state density (Nt), of the perovskite film without and with EPC passivation the space charge limited current (SCLC) method was applied. Here, electron-only and hole-only devices were fabricated with a structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/PCBM/Ag and FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au. The dark current–voltage (I–V) curves with and without EPC are shown in Fig. 2. The following eqn (1) was used to calculate the Nt of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation.30–32 (1)where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, ε is the relative dielectric constant of the perovskite, e is the elementary charge, L is the thickness of the perovskite film. The trap-filled-limit voltage (VTFL) can be obtained from the kink point of the dark I–V curve. The Nt (electron) of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation are 1.15 × 1016 and 1.73 × 1016 cm−3, respectively (Fig. 2a and b). The hole-only devices are also evaluated using the same method. The Nt (hole) of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation are 4.11 × 1015 and 5.76 × 1015 cm−3, demonstrating that both electron trap density and hole trap density are significantly reduced by EPC passivation (Fig. 2c and d).
 Fig. 2  Dark I–V curves of the devices with and without EPC passivation to reveal VTFL kink point behavior. (a) and (b) Electron-only devices. (c) and (d) Hole-only devices. 
The steady-state photoluminescence (SSPL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) of the perovskite film deposited on glass substrate were measured to study the effect of EPC passivation on the charge carrier recombination. As shown in Fig. 3a, the SSPL intensity of the perovskite film with EPC passivation is much higher than that without EPC, indicating a significant reduction in charge carrier recombination at surface and/or grain boundary related trap-states and a high crystal quality, in agreement with the XRD results. Furthermore, the SSPL peak of the perovskite film with EPC passivation shows a small blueshift, which is indicative of a reduced trap density near the band-edge of the perovskite film. It is also agreed with the theoretical study that the EPC can passivated the traps at the perovskite surface and/or grain boundary by filling the deep traps and/or shifted deep taps to shallow traps,21,33 which is discussed in detail in theoretical study part. The TRPL spectra of the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation are presented in Fig. 3b and fitted with a biexponential formula; the extracted parameters are listed in Table S1.† The perovskite film with EPC passivation exhibits a significantly longer average charge carrier lifetime (τave = 314.83 ns) compared to the unpassivated one (τave = 126.91 ns). Again, this can be attributed to the reduced defect density at the surface and the grain boundaries upon EPC passivation.19
 Fig. 3  (a) SSPL and (b) TRPL spectra with 510 nm laser excitation of perovskite films deposited on glass substrate. (c) Steady-state PL and (d) TRPL spectra of glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD samples. 
The interfacial charge carrier transfer dynamics were also investigated via by SSPL and TRPL by introducing an HTL next to the perovskite. Fig. 3c shows the SSPL spectra of a glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD sample with and without EPC passivation. This time, the SSPL intensity was found to be significantly lower for the passivated sample, indicating that holes are more efficiently transferred into the HTL. Again, a blue shift was observed for the SSPL peak of the glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD sample with EPC passivation. Fig. 3d displays the TRPL spectra of the glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD sample with and without EPC passivation. The τave was decreased from 58.08 ns to 45.16 ns via EPC passivation (Table S2†) due to the accelerated the hole extraction into the HTL, in agreement with the results mentioned before.
More detailed information on the charge carrier dynamics can be gained from time-resolved femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy; the setup is sketched in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b and c show 2D plots of the TA signal of an as-prepared and a EPC passivated perovskite film upon excitation with a 550 nm pump laser. Scans at specific delay times are extracted in Fig. 4d which show that the perovskite film exhibits a negative transient bleaching of the band edge transition due to charge separation. The recovery of the bleaching reflects the decay of the population of the photoexcited charges in the perovskite, depending on the sample and pump pulse intensity. To avoid extensive Auger recombination, a low pump fluence (0.5 μJ cm−2) was used in these experiments. It was ensured that multiple-excitation effects were not detected by confirming that the relaxation dynamics were independent of the pump fluence as shown in Fig. S7.†
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the TA setup. (b) and (c) 2D TA spectra of the as-prepared and passivated perovskite films, respectively, excited at 550 nm with a pulse of 0.5 μJ cm−2. (d) Extracted individual TA spectra of the as-prepared perovskite film. (e) Normalized bleaching kinetics at 778 nm for the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation (pump light intensity: 0.5 μJ cm−2). (f) Normalized bleaching kinetics at 778 nm for the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD film with and without EPC passivation (pump light intensity: 0.5 μJ cm−2). 
For the as-prepared perovskite film, the fit of the kinetics at 778 nm exhibits two time constant, 0.9 ns (50%) and 3 ns (50%). The faster decay process is attributed to non-radiative recombination of charge carriers via defect or trap states. The slower decay process could be associated with the recombination of free electrons and holes inside the perovskite film. In the case of the EPC-passivated perovskite film, the fit of the kinetics shows only one exponential decay with a time constant of 21.3 ns (Fig. 4e). The longer lifetime suggested a lower surface recombination rate due to the effective surface passivation.
The charge carrier transfer dynamics across the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interfaces can also further be investigated using the TA method. The results, shown in Fig. 4f, indicate decay kinetics with a fast decay process (55 ps, 32%) and a slow decay process (1.2 ns, 68%), which could originate from the photoexcited hole injection from the perovskite film to spiro-OMeTAD layer, the decay lifetime extracted from TA curves are listed in Table S3.† By comparing the decay of perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD film with and without EPC passivation, we estimate the hole injection rate kHT and the hole injection efficiency to be about 0.45 (ns)−1 and 52%, 0.8 (ns)−1 and 95% in perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD and passivated-perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD respectively. This is in good agreement with the TRPL results above showing once more the effective passivation of charge trapping states at the enhanced charge extraction at this interface.
In order to further evaluate the passivation effect of EPC on perovskite surface, extensive theoretical study is conducted on this subject. Both the PbI2-terminated surface and the FAI-terminated surface are analyzed. The first shows common Pb–I antisite defects and the latter would result in Pb-cluster defects. We calculated the density of states (DOS) of pristine PbI2-terminated surface and FAI-terminated surface, and each surface containing the defects, and the ones with EPC passivated, as shown in Fig. 5. Comparing the DOS of pristine PbI2 surface and Pb–I antisite containing PbI2 surface with and without EPC passivation, we found clearly obvious localized edge states appeared near the conduction band edge (CBE), which is caused by the Pb–I antisite defect and eliminated via EPC passivation (Fig. 5b). For the FAI-terminated surface, although no obvious new edge states are observed with the appearance of Pb-cluster defect, more severe localizations of CBE can be detected by increased the intensity of edge peak. What more interesting is their edge peaks are broadened with the EPC passivation, indicating a mitigated edge state (Fig. 5d). These results shown that the EPC have multifunctional passivation effect on defect states of different perovskite surfaces.
 Fig. 5  The effect of EPC passivation on defect states of different perovskite surfaces. (a) PbI2-terminated surface with Pb–I antisite defect and (c) FAI-terminated surface with Pb cluster defects. (b) DOS of the pristine PbI2 surface and Pb–I antisite surface with and without EPC passivation. (d) DOS of the EPC passivated and unpassivated FAI terminated surface with a Pb cluster defect. 
The results presented above indicate that the use of EPC in PSC could be a very promising approach to enhance overall efficiency. To test this, planar PSCs were fabricated with the device structure displayed in Fig. 6a. (FAPbI3)0.95(MAPbBr3)0.05 was used as the absorber layer, which was sandwiched between compact TiO2 and a spiro-OMeTAD layer. Fig. 6b indicates the location of the EPC on the surface of the perovskite crystallite. If the surface exhibits either positively or negatively charged defects, they can be mitigated by an ionic compound via coulombic interaction. Overall, this establishes an electrically neutral surface, which is beneficial for the charge carrier transport. The cross-sectional SEM image of the complete device structure is displayed in Fig. 6c, where the thickness of TiO2, perovskite, spiro-OMeTAD, and Au were about 50, 550, 200, and 80 nm. The perovskite film morphology is excellent here, with grains reaching throughout the whole layer thickness, which is beneficial for charge carrier transport.
 Fig. 6  (a) Device structure of the PSCs, (b) schematic diagram of the interface passivation mechanism, and (c) the cross-sectional image of complete planar PSCs. 

Fig. 7a shows the J–V curves of the champion devices without and with EPC passivation. The photovoltaic parameters extracted from J–V curves are listed in Table S4.† The device without EPC passivation shows a PCE of 19.52% (VOC of 1.044 V, FF of 0.769, JSC of 24.28 mA cm−2), while a superior efficiency of 21.19% was obtained after EPC passivation (VOC of 1.053 V, FF of 0.805, JSC of 25.01 mA cm−2). The series resistance (Rs) and shunt resistance (Rsh) can be extracted from the J–V curves. While the Rs values are rather similar, Rsh is dramatically increased by EPC passivation. This further shows that any shunting current is suppressed by EPC passivation which also results in a better FF. The hysteresis index (HI) is estimated according to the equation of HI = [JRS (0.8 VOC) − JFS (0.8 VOC)]/[JRS (0.8 VOC)]. The HI is 0.079 for the device without EPC passivation and is reduced to 0.023 after EPC passivation. As traps are often associated with the appearance of hysteresis this is likely related to reduce trap-state density of the perovskite film with EPC passivation. Fig. S7† provides information on the statistics of the prepared photovoltaic devices with and without EPC passivation. Detailed parameters of the champion device are summarized in Table S5.† It is clear that the average values of all parameters are improved upon passivation. The average VOC increases from 1.045 ± 0.011 to 1.059 ± 0.006 V due to the decreased non-radiation recombination and the enhanced charge carrier lifetime (see Fig. 2d). At the same time the average FF was significantly improved from 0.753 ± 0.01 to 0.789 ± 0.008, due to reduced trap-state density and enhanced hole extraction.34 Overall, the average PCE is reproducibly improved from 18.75 ± 0.37% to 20.64 ± 0.36% via EPC passivation. Fig. S8† presents JSC as function of light intensity of the PSCs with and without EPC passivation. A linear correlation with the slope closes to 1 was observed, indicating that the bimolecular recombination in the devices is negligible (Fig. S8a†).35 Fig. S8b† displays the linear relationship between VOC and light intensity. In previous publications it was shown that the value of the slope can be associated with trap-assisted recombination.36–38 For device without EPC passivation, we find a slope 1.56 kT/q, while this value is decreased to 1.12 kT/q after EPC passivation. So again, this is a clear indication that trap-assisted recombination is dramatically reduced.
 Fig. 7  (a) J–V curves, (b) EQE spectra of the best-performing PSCs, (c) stable output current density and PCE measured as illumination time and (d) dark stability of the PSCs. 
External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements are shown in Fig. 7b, the integrated JSC (JIn) of devices with and without EPC passivation are 24.11 and 23.28 mA cm−2, respectively. The high JIn of the device with EPC passivation can be linked to an improvement of the perovskite film crystallinity. Compared to the JSC obtained from J–V curves, the JIn is slightly lower than JSC, which may be caused by capacitive current owing to J–V hysteresis.39Fig. 7c shows the curves of photocurrent density (Jph) as function of illumination time (at AM 1.5) while keeping the device at the maximum power point. We observe that the current density of the device without EPC passivation is slowly declining with illumination time. The stabilized PCE of the champion devices with and without EPC passivation are 20.74% and 18.58%, respectively. The corresponding photocurrent density of 21.12 and 23.05 mA cm−2 match well with the values obtained from the J–V curves.
We also investigated the stability of the devices with and without EPC passivation. The change in normalized PCE values is displayed in Fig. 7d. Notably, the device with EPC passivation maintains 89% of its initial efficiency after 260 h when stored under ambient condition (temperature: 20–30 °C, relative humidity: 20–30%) in the dark. In contrast, the device without EPC passivation drops to 61% of its initial efficiency under the same conditions. In addition to the stabilization due to decreased trap density, this is confirming of the previous hypothesis that the increased hydrophobicity of the EPC treated perovskite slows down the decomposition caused by moisture.
3. Conclusion
In this work, the multifunctional small organic ionic compound EPC was developed which is able to enhance the photovoltaic performance and reduce hysteresis effects. Furthermore, the stability of PSCs could be improved. The pyridine group in this passivating compound forms a chemical bond with under-coordinated lead ions at the perovskite surface which significantly reduces the density of defect state. The organic groups, including ethyl and pyridine, provide higher hydrophobicity for improved moisture stability. Furthermore, the chlorine anions also play an important role in defect passivation, in addition to its assistance in better perovskite crystallinity. Based on above merits, the hole extraction and charge transfer were improved at the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface by reducing recombination and preventing charge accumulation. In PSCs this improved the average FF from 0.753 ± 0.012 to 0.789 ± 0.008. As a consequence, a high PCE of 21.19% was obtained via EPC passivation, along with the decreased hysteresis. This work provides an effectively approach for improving the performance of the PSCs.
4. Experimental
Materials
PbI2 and PbBr2 were purchased from TCI. HC(NH2)2I (FAI), CH3NH3Cl (MACl) and CH3NH3Br (MABr) were received from Xi'an p-OLED Co. (China). Dimethylformamide (DMF), chlorobenzene (CB), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), acetonitrile, 4-tert-butylpyridine (t-BP), and lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) were bought from Sigma-Aldrich. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Advanced Electron Technology Co., Ltd. 1-Ethylpyridinium chloride (EPC) was purchased from Aladdin. TiCl4, ethanol, diethyl ether and isopropanol were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Corporation Co., Ltd.
Device fabrication
FTO coated glass substrates were first cleaned ultrasonically for 30 min with 2% Hellmanex aqueous solution and then rinsed with ultrapure water and ethanol. Before being used, the substrates were treated by an O2 plasma for 20 min. The compact TiO2 layer was prepared by a chemical bath deposition process with 0.2 M TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 1 h. The substrate was annealed at 200 °C for 30 min and treated by O2 plasma for 20 min before use.
The precursor solution was prepared by adding PbI2 (647.4 mg), FAI (241.6 mg), PbBr2 (25.3 mg), MABr (7.7 mg), and MACl (33 mg) into 1 mL DMF/DMSO (8:1, v/v) which was then stirred for 5 h. For the surface passivation, EPC was dissolved at various concentration in IPA.
The perovskite precursor solution was spin-coated onto TiO2/FTO substrates at a speed of 1000 rpm for 5 s with a ramping rate of 1000 rpm s−1 followed by 5000 rpm for 25 s with a ramping rate of 2500 rpm s−1. 0.5 mL diethyl ether was dripped onto the spinning substrate 10 s prior to the end of the program, then the perovskite film was immediately heated at 150 °C for 10 min on a hotplate. For EPC-passivated perovskite film, 50 μL of EPC/IPA solution was spin coated dynamically on a rotating substrate at 4500 rpm for 30 s. Then the substrate was annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. After cooling the substrates down for a few minutes, a spiro-OMeTAD solution, consisting of 90 mg spiro-OMeTAD, 36 μL t-BP, and 22 μL of LiTFSI solution (520 mg LiTSFI in 1 mL acetonitrile) in 1 mL of chlorobenzene, was spin coated dynamically on a spinning substrate at 4500 rpm for 30 s. All procedure was completed in a nitrogen filled glovebox. Finally, an 80 nm gold top electrode was thermal evaporated on the spiro-OMeTAD layer.
Characterization

Device characterization. 
XRD measurements were performed using a Bruker D8 with CuKα radiation (1.15406 Å). XPS measurements were carried out using an ESCALAB 250 XPS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Al Kα X-ray excitation. FESEM (SU-8020, HITACHI) was used to study the morphologies the perovskite film. Water contact angles were taken by a dataphysics OCA 20 system. FTIR were acquired with a Bruker Vertex 70. EQE was measured by a QE-R quantum efficiency measurement system (ENLITECH), which was calibrated before use by a reference silicon detector. SSPL and TRPL measurements of the perovskite films were done using a PicoQuant Fluo Time 300 with 510 nm laser excitation pulsed at a frequency of 40 MHz for SSPL, or 1 MHz for TRPL. In the TA setup, used for characterization of the charge carrier dynamics, the excitation source was a regeneratively amplifed Ti:sapphire laser with a wavelength of 775 nm (light conversion, 1030 nm, 150 fs, and 100 kHz repetition) and a high-speed spectrometer was used to detect the probe beam (Ultrafast systems, HELIOS). A portion of the 1030 nm output pulse was pumped to generate light pulses (210 nm to 1620 nm) by an optical parametric amplifier as pump light. The other portion of the output light was concentrated into a sapphire window to produce a white light continuum as light source. The pump beam was focused at the sample with a beam waist of about 500 nm, the emission from the samples was collected by a monochromator (Omni-λ300i series Monochromator) through an optical fiber. The J–V curves of the PSCs were measured using a Keithley 2400 under ambient conditions at room temperature. The light source was a 450 W xenon lamp. The light intensity was adjusted to one sun illumination (100 mW cm−2, SAN-EIELECTRIC XES-40S2-CE) with an NREL-calibrated silicon solar cell.


First-principles calculation. 
First-principles calculation was performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The projector-augmented wave (PAW) method and the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) were employed to describe the interaction between ion-cores and valence electrons and the exchange–correlation effects, and an energy cutoff of 400 eV was set for the plane-wave function's expansion. Surface slabs were modelled as PbI2-terminated or FAI-terminated symmetric (001) slabs of the cubic structure, the EPC passivated PbI2-terminated slab contains 9 layers with a total number of 427 atoms, and the EPC passivated FAI-terminated slab contains 7 layers with a total number of 380 atoms, during the structural optimization, the top three layers are set free to relax while the bottom layers are fixed. For better comparison, we align the valence band maximum of pristine surface, surface with defect, and the EPC passivated surface to the same position.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks Selina Olthof for proof reading the final version of the manuscript. This work was funded by the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDA17040506), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2017YFA0204800/2016YFA0202403), the 111 Project (B14041), the Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team (IRT_14R33), the Chinese National 1000 Talents Plan Program (1110010341), National University Research Fund (GK201903051).
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Im, C. R. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. W. Park and N. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088 RSC .
H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. R. Hong, J. B. You, Y. S. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Nie, H. H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, M. Yang, A. R. Krause, Z. Zhou, K. Zhu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T. Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H. W. Shin, S. I. Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, G.-H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 1 CrossRef .

Best Research-Cell Efficiency chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20190923.pdf Search PubMed.
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803019 Search PubMed .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yuan, F. Qian, S. Yang, Y. Cai, Q. Wang, J. Sun, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807850 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Dai, S. Chandrabose, K. Chen, K. Liu, M. Qin, X. Lu, J. M. Hodgkiss, H. Zhou and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 14938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, X. Li, J. V. Milić, D. J. Kubicki, N. Pellet, J. Luo, T. LaGrange, P. Mettraux, L. Emsley, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4482 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qian, S. Yuan, Y. Cai, Y. Han, H. Zhao, J. Sun, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900072 CrossRef .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Zhang, D. Cui, Y. Liu, Q. Wei, H. Fan and S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3816 RSC .
L. Meng, C. Sun, R. Wang, W. Huang, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, T. Huang, J. Xue, J.-W. Lee, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fu, Y. Zhao, Q. Li, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1829 RSC .
X. Ren, D. Yang, Z. Yang, J. Feng, X. Zhu, J. Niu, Y. Liu, W. Zhao and S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niu, J. Lu, X. Jia, Z. Xu, M.-C. Tang, D. Barrit, N. Yuan, J. Ding, X. Zhang, Y. Fan, T. Luo, Y. Zhang, D.-M. Smilgies, Z. Liu, A. Amassian, S. Jin, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 7181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, L. Xie, W. B. Kim, D. G. Lee, H. S. Jung and S. Liu, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900176 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei, W. Ma, X. Zeng, X. Zhan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604545 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ren, Y. Liu, D. G. Lee, W. B. Kim, G. S. Han, H. S. Jung and S. Liu, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 401 CrossRef .
J. Chen, S.-G. Kim and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801948 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, R. Yang, K. Wang, C. Wu, X. Zhu, J. Feng, X. Ren, G. Fang, S. Priya and S. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3239 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, X. Zhou, R. X. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, X. L. Wang, C. Li, S. Z. Liu and R. P. H. Chang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Yang, S. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Wu, N. Yuan, W. H. Zhang and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805660 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, C. Lee, H. M. Lee, T. H. Han, N. De Marco, O. Lin, C. S. Choi, B. Dunn, J. Koh, D. Di Carlo, J. H. Ko, H. D. Maynard and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02222e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Investigations of the perovskite films with different concentration of EPC (a) XRD patterns; (b) relative intensity and FWHM of the (110) peak. (c) FTIR spectra of pure EPC, perovskite film without and with EPC passivation, the inset picture is the molecular structure scheme of EPC. (d) Close-up of the FTIR spectra in the region of the CN bending mode. (e) XPS analysis of the Pb 4f core level region. (f) and (g) SEM images, (h) and (i) contact angle measurement.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Dark I–V curves of the devices with and without EPC passivation to reveal VTFL kink point behavior. (a) and (b) Electron-only devices. (c) and (d) Hole-only devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SSPL and (b) TRPL spectra with 510 nm laser excitation of perovskite films deposited on glass substrate. (c) Steady-state PL and (d) TRPL spectra of glass/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD samples.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the TA setup. (b) and (c) 2D TA spectra of the as-prepared and passivated perovskite films, respectively, excited at 550 nm with a pulse of 0.5 μJ cm−2. (d) Extracted individual TA spectra of the as-prepared perovskite film. (e) Normalized bleaching kinetics at 778 nm for the perovskite film with and without EPC passivation (pump light intensity: 0.5 μJ cm−2). (f) Normalized bleaching kinetics at 778 nm for the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD film with and without EPC passivation (pump light intensity: 0.5 μJ cm−2).	 

 	Fig. 5  The effect of EPC passivation on defect states of different perovskite surfaces. (a) PbI2-terminated surface with Pb–I antisite defect and (c) FAI-terminated surface with Pb cluster defects. (b) DOS of the pristine PbI2 surface and Pb–I antisite surface with and without EPC passivation. (d) DOS of the EPC passivated and unpassivated FAI terminated surface with a Pb cluster defect.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device structure of the PSCs, (b) schematic diagram of the interface passivation mechanism, and (c) the cross-sectional image of complete planar PSCs.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) J–V curves, (b) EQE spectra of the best-performing PSCs, (c) stable output current density and PCE measured as illumination time and (d) dark stability of the PSCs.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta02222e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
