Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) for electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and dinitrogen to value-added products: a review  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03756G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03756G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1959-2008Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) for electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and dinitrogen to value-added products: a review

        
          
            Hesamoddin 
            Rabiee
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Ge
          
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Xueqin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shihu 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mengran 
            Li
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Zhiguo 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *a
aAdvanced Water Management Centre, Faculty of Engineering, Architecture and Information Technology, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Queensland 4072, Australia. E-mail: z.yuan@awmc.uq.edu.au; s.hu@awmc.uq.edu.au
bCentre for Future Materials, University of Southern Queensland, Springfield Central, QLD 4300, Australia. E-mail: lei.ge@usq.edu.au
cSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia
Received 
      30th November 2020
    , Accepted 4th March 2021First published on 4th March 2021AbstractElectrochemical reduction of gaseous feeds such as CO2, CO, and N2 holds promise for sustainable energy and chemical production. Practical application of this technology is impeded by slow mass transport of the sparingly soluble gases to conventional planar electrodes. Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) maintain a high gas concentration in the vicinity of the catalyst and improve mass transport, thereby resulting in current densities higher by orders of magnitude. However, gaseous feeds cause changes to the GDE environment, and specific features are required to efficiently tune the product selectivity and improve reaction stability. Herein, with a comprehensive review of the challenges and advances in GDE development for various electrocatalytic reactions, we intend to complement the body of material-focused reviews. This review outlines GDE fundamentals and highlights key advantages of GDE over conventional electrodes. Through critical discussion about steps in GDE fabrication, and specific shortcomings and remedial strategies for various electrochemical applications, this review discusses connections, unique design criteria, and potential opportunities for gas-fed reactions and desired products. Finally, priorities for future studies are suggested, to support the advancement and scale-up of GDE-based electrochemical technologies.
Hesamoddin Rabiee
Hesamoddin Rabiee received his Bachelor of Chemical Engineering from Iran and his Mphil from The University of Adelaide, Australia, in 2017 with the Dean's Commendation for research excellence. He started his PhD at The University of Queensland in 2018 with Prof. Zhiguo Yuan at the Advanced Water Management Centre, in collaboration with the School of Chemical Engineering. His PhD focuses on fabrication of novel electrodes for efficient CO2 electrochemical reduction to value-added products. His research interests revolve around the design and developement of advanced materials for energy applications and green technologies such as gas electrocatalysis (e.g. CO2), membrane separation, CO2 capture, and desalination.
Lei Ge
Lei Ge is a senior research fellow in the Centre for Future Materials at the University of Southern Queensland, and an adjunct fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering at the University of Queensland, Australia. He completed his PhD in 2013 at The University of Queensland. His research focuses on material design for gas processing including CO2 electrolysis, membrane separation and gas adsorption. He has contributed more than 100 journal papers (H index = 37) and several industry reports for Australian unconventional gas companies.
Xueqin Zhang
Xueqin Zhang just received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Queensland, Australia in 2021 and Master degree from Zhejiang Gongshang University, China in 2015. His current research interests include bio/electrochemistry for energy and water applications, and microbiological fundamentals for anaerobic oxidation of methane.
Shihu Hu
Shihu Hu received his Master degree in Environmental Engineering and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Queensland, Australia, where he currently works as a senior research fellow. His research interests include bioelectrochemical methane and CO2 conversion to valuable chemicals, microbial nitrogen and metal cycles, and integrated urban water and wastewater management.
Mengran Li
Mengran Li completed his PhD at The University of Queensland in 2016. He is now a postdoctoral research fellow at UQ developing CO2 electrochemical technologies for iron-steel making processes. His current research activities are mainly focused on the fundamental and applied aspects of CO2 electrochemical conversion, solid oxide fuel cells, and electrochemical water oxidation.
Zhiguo Yuan
Zhiguo Yuan received his PhD degree in Control Engineering from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1992. He joined the Advanced Water Management Centre at The University of Queensland, Australia in 1998. His research focusses on urban water management, including resource recovery from wastewater and other wastes. He has to date published over 450 peer-reviewed journal papers, with >30000 citations and an h-index of 95 (Google Scholar, March 2021). He is a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering, and was listed in Engineers Australia's Top 100 Most Influential Engineers in 2015.

Broader context
Global warming linked to anthropogenic CO2 emissions has drawn great attention of the world to preserve the environment for the future generations via novel technologies. The conversion of gaseous feeds (e.g., CO2, CO, N2) to fuels and other value-added products using renewable electricity is a promising approach to building sustainable and ‘green’ energy systems. Over the past decade, a tremendous effort has been devoted to designing advanced materials, and optimizing operations of electrocatalysis. Active, cost-effective and stable electrodes are critical for achieving the desired efficiency and selectivity. Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) have shown a great performance for such applications, having shorter gas diffusional lengths and higher concentrations of gaseous feeds on the electrocatalyst surface. The precise fabrication/design of GDEs for each reaction/product remains a challenge. In this paper, we present a comprehensive, critical review on the fundamentals and design criteria of GDEs, and on the specific features of GDEs for CO2/CO/N2 reduction reactions based on their respective unique challenges, desired products, and limiting factors. We further identify the remaining challenges and future research priorities, moving towards commercially viable electrocatalytic conversion rates.

1. Introduction
Building sustainable and ‘green’ energy systems is critical in an era of climate change coupled with increasing global energy demand and population growth.1–3 Renewable energy has become economically feasible, owing to advances in wind and solar technology. The price of solar photovoltaic (PV) power generation has decreased by more than 70% since 2010, and renewable electricity will be cheaper than- or comparable to fossil fuel-derived electricity in the near future.4 However, the fluctuating nature of renewable energy resources, particularly solar and wind, requires large-scale batteries and hydroelectric energy storage.5,6 Considering the limited suitability and short-term nature of these storage methods, electrolysis/electrocatalysis is an attractive option because it stores electrical energy in the form of stable chemical bonds.7,8 Combining renewable resources with electrocatalytic conversion of small molecules such as carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), dinitrogen (N2), and water at ambient conditions, is an innovative step towards the sustainable production of fuels, chemicals, and fertilizers9–13 (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of electrocatalysis integration with fuel/chemical production and energy resources. The electrolyzer can be powered by renewable resources/power plant. CO2 and N2 are sourced from the atmosphere or waste streams. 
Captured from point sources or the atmosphere, CO2 could become a feedstock for a variety of fuels or valuable chemicals via the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR).14–16 Using CO2RR can simultaneously mitigate CO2 emission while storing renewable fuels/electricity for use on-demand.17,18 CO2RR can be operated at ambient conditions with tunable products and shows greater promise than other CO2 utilization technologies such as biochemical, photosynthetic, thermo-catalytic, and photocatalytic processes.19,20 As a more versatile reagent than CO2, CO is used in many industrial transformations, and is a key component of the Fischer–Tropsch synthesis of hydrocarbons.21 Although CO is a major product of CO2RR, direct electrocatalytic reduction of CO (CORR) to hydrocarbons has many advantages over CO2RR, thus CORR is now regarded as a separate class of electrocatalytic reactions.22 Moreover, N2 electrocatalytic reduction reaction (N2RR) to ammonia has also attracted much attention as it enables the sustainable production of fertilizers locally at the point of application and required concentration.23,24 Therefore, distribution costs from the large-scale, centralized Haber–Bosch-derived fertilizer suppliers can be avoided using N2RR.25
Considering the advantages of these emerging electrocatalytic reactions for chemical production, intensive research has been carried out by leading groups such as Nørskov et al., Sargent et al., and Jaramillo et al. in recent years.7,26–28 Electrocatalytic conversions often use aqueous electrolytes, since water is a sustainable, abundant, and inexpensive source of electrons and protons, and water electrolysis is a well-established technology.10 However, gaseous electrochemical conversions in aqueous electrolyte involve gas/liquid flows, and the low solubility of gaseous reactants (CO2, CO, N2) limits the overall rate of reaction. Hence, the electrocatalytic reaction rate is dependent on a sufficient supply of gaseous reactants to meet the production rate on the heterogeneous electrocatalyst surface using high current densities with fast electron transfer kinetics.29
The electrode structure plays a key role in the reaction rate by supplying adequate gaseous reactants. To date, research studies have mostly examined the efficiency of electrocatalysts in conventional H-cell reactors, with catalysts deposited on substrates such as glassy carbon or carbon paper immersed in non-flowing electrolyte (Fig. 2a).30 Since gaseous reactants are supplied from the bulk electrolyte, the reaction is mass transport limited, and the diffusion of gaseous reactants to the electrocatalyst is insufficient. Therefore, high-rate conversions (high current densities) cannot be achieved, limiting practical application. In recent years, studies have switched to flow-cells (Fig. 2b–d) to improve the mass transfer and achieve commercially-relevant rates for gaseous electrocatalytic reactions in aqueous electrolytes.31–33 A non-GDE flow electrolyzer (Fig. 2b) is equipped with a planar electrode comprised of metal foils, catalysts loaded on a substrate (e.g. glassy carbon, carbon paper),34 or porous electrodes (metal foams),35,36 and the gas is supplied to the electrode from bulk electrolyte (Fig. 2e). In contrast, GDE-based flow-cells (Fig. 2c and d) continuously supply gaseous reactants to the electrochemical cell through the porous structure of the GDE (Fig. 2f), resulting in a sufficient gas concentration close to the catalyst surface. Therefore, GDEs enable high-performance electrocatalytic conversion, with increased contact between the electrolyte, catalyst, and gas.37
 Fig. 2  Schematic of (a) Laboratory electrochemical H-cell reactor for gas reduction at the cathode; (b) flow-cell reactor with a planar electrode. Gaseous reactant is dissolved in the catholyte and reduced on the planar electrode; (c) flow-cell reactor with GDE. Gaseous reactant is supplied through a GDE. Liquid products are mixed with catholyte and gas products are collected in gas feed side; (d) membrane electrode assembly (MEA) reactor with a GDE. GDE is attached to an ion-exchange membrane as solid catholyte and gas/liquid products are collected in the feed side. Gaseous reactant is humidified (contains water vapour). Gas reactant and product(s) transport to and from a catalyst layer on (e) planar electrode with catalyst (CL) loaded on a substrate, and (f) GDE, comprising current collector, gas diffusion layer and catalyst layer, CL and current collector are. 
Several excellent material-centric review papers have been published in recent years, focusing on electrocatalyst development for CO2RR,20,26,38–63 CORR,22,64 N2RR,65–73 electrolytes,74–76 and CO2RR/CORR/N2RR electrolyzer design and engineering challenges.77–90 This body of work has clarified the role of electrocatalysts/electrolytes and reactor design in the development of energy- and cost-efficient processes for CO2, N2, CO reduction in aqueous electrolytes, accelerating the sluggish kinetics of the electrochemical reactions. In addition, it has enriched our fundamental understanding of catalytic mechanisms and governing factors in order to tune the catalytic pathways and product selectivity of the reactions.91–93 Application of GDEs for bio-electrochemical systems,94,95 alkaline fuel cells,96 and proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells97–105 has also been widely reviewed. In particular, fabrication of GDEs for emerging CO2RR, CORR, and N2RR processes present unique issues, which need to be addressed based on the reaction conditions and desired products.
Herein, we conduct the first comprehensive, critical review on GDEs for CO2RR/CORR/N2RR applications with an in-depth analysis focusing on GDE design criteria and specific features of reactions based on unique challenges, desired products, and limiting factors. Categorizing GDE applications by gaseous feed, this review goes beyond GDE fabrication, and describes how recent strategies have successfully mitigated shortcomings of GDE implementation for various reactions/products. GDE-based electrolyzers, GDE principles, fabrication methods/steps, and the effect on CO2RR/CORR/N2RR performance are discussed in Section 2. Applications of GDEs in CO2RR/CORR/N2RR for various products, the required design criteria, shortcomings and remedies, and operational parameters are discussed in Sections 3–5. The progress of fuel cell-like electrolyzers as a promising design with technological advantages for CO2RR/CORR/N2RR is covered in Section 6. This review concludes with discussion of future research priorities for optimizing GDE-based electrolyzers, and moving towards stable and commercially viable electrocatalytic conversion rates.
2. GDE-based electrolyzers, principles, and fabrication
2.1 GDE-based configurations
GDE-based flow electrolyzers can be established in diverse configurations.30,106 The most common configurations use flowing electrolytes (Fig. 2c, pioneered by Kenis),107,108 and membrane electrode assembly (MEA) (Fig. 2d).109,110 For the MEA design, the GDE is attached to an ion-exchange membrane; therefore, there is no flowing catholyte between the catalyst layer (CL) and ion-exchange membrane. The MEA configuration is also known as ‘fuel cell-type’, ‘zero-gap’, ‘catholyte-free’ or ‘gas-phase electrolysis’.111–113 In both the Kenis and MEA configurations, ion-exchange membranes (anion-exchange, cation-exchange, or bipolar) play an important role in the balance of ions, liquid product(s) crossover, and performance,114–120 however, these details are out of the scope of this review.
Gas flow in a GDE-based electrolyzer is via flow-by and flow-through configurations.121 The flow-by is the common configuration, with the gas flowing alongside the GDE, entering the GDE pores by diffusion. The gaseous reactants are collected on the same GDE side as the gaseous feed, and the liquid products are mixed with the electrolyte (Fig. 2c and f). The flow-through configuration is less common, and the gas is forced to diffuse through the GDE pores and dissolve in the electrolyte. Therefore, product accumulation occurs on the opposite side to the feed and in the electrolyte outlet.
2.2. Gas diffusion pathway on GDEs
The gas diffusion direction and pathway differ between a GDE and a planar electrode. With a planar electrode, gaseous reactants move towards the electrode surface from the bulk electrolyte, as seen in Fig. 3a. Therefore, electrocatalytic reactions rely on the concentration of dissolved gas in aqueous electrolyte, which is low under atmospheric conditions, following Henry's law. At atmospheric pressure and 25 °C, the solubility of CO2, CO, and N2 in water is 34.5, 0.98, and 0.71 mM, respectively. In contrast, gaseous reactants are directly supplied to the CL in a GDE system, maintaining a high concentration of reactant gas in the vicinity of the GDE.29,31 In addition, the gas diffusion pathway to the CL significantly shortens when a GDE is used. Modeling studies show that the gas diffusion pathway to the electrode surface from a nearby gas-phase, is ∼50 nm for GDE, in comparison with >50 μm for planar electrodes through the hydrodynamic boundary layer of a saturated bulk electrolyte (Fig. 3a and b).31,122 GDEs enable a much shorter diffusion pathway and high-concentration gaseous feed in close proximity to the CL, so that conversion reactions are not hindered by mass transport across the hydrodynamic boundary layer.29 This leads to more than one order of magnitude higher reaction rates for GDEs.29,37
 Fig. 3  Schematic of gaseous feed concentration versus current density and distance from the catalyst, and proposed reactant and product diffusion pathways and directions for (a) planar electrode (gas supplied via diffusion from bulk electrolyte on the microscale ∼50 μm) and (b) GDE (gas supplied from a nearby gas–liquid interface ∼50 nm). The shorter gaseous feed diffusion pathway and reverse diffusion direction (from the feed stream rather than bulk electrolyte), significantly improve the conversion rates for GDEs. 
Adequate supply of gas reactants to the catalyst surface becomes crucial at higher current densities to maintain a high rate of reactant consumption. Modeling predicted that the gas concentration profile within the electrochemical reaction area on a planar electrode plunges to near zero when increasing the current density to a certain value (Fig. 3a, green profile). This “mass-transfer limited” current density is approximately 10–20 mA cm−2 for CO2RR, above which the reaction rate is restricted due to insufficient CO2 diffusion from the bulk liquid.29,76 In contrast, the gas concentration gradually declines when a GDE is employed, and ultra-high partial current densities (>1 A cm−2) for CO2RR can be achieved28,123,124 (Fig. 3b, green profile). For CORR and N2RR, the ‘mass-transfer limited’ current density can vary, considering the respective reaction kinetics/mechanisms, and the catalyst activity. However, CO/N2 respective aqueous solubilities are lower than that of CO2, thus a trend similar to that of CO2 can be presumed. This necessitates the use of GDEs for high-rate electrochemical conversion reactions for small gaseous molecules.125
GDE and planar electrodes also have differing gas concentration profiles as a function of distance from the catalyst surface.123 While, GDE gas concentration is highest on the CL surface, for planar electrodes the gas concentration is lowest on the catalyst surface and highest towards the electrolyte bulk (Fig. 3, purple profiles). This is due to the difference in respective gas diffusion direction relative to the catalyst surface.
2.3. GDE fabrication and structure
In the fabrication of GDEs for emerging CO2RR/CORR/N2RR processes, much can be learned from GDEs used for PEM fuel cell applications that have matured over the last two decades.96–102,126–131 GDE design can draw on similarities in fabrication/design methods, electrical conductivity, and gas diffusion layer. However, some unique features must be considered, and herein, the main steps involved in the GDE fabrication, and factors that affect operational performance are reviewed. The main components of a GDE can be seen in Fig. 2f. The current collector, which is attached to the GDL and not in direct contact with the catalyst layer, is usually made from metal mesh or foam, and can be used as a current distributor to enhance the charge transfer.132 The catalyst layer (CL) is where the gaseous feed, electrolyte, and electrocatalyst are in intimate contact to form the triple-phase interface where electrochemical reactions occur.133,134 The CL is deposited on a gas diffusion layer (GDL), which plays a vital role in gas distribution and water management; therefore, its hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity should be carefully tuned.

2.3.1. Gas diffusion layer (GDL). 
The following characteristics are required for optimal GDL operation and performance: (1) high conductivity for electron transfer, (2) high porosity for gas diffusion, (3) smooth surface to accommodate the CL, and (4) high water-repellence to prevent flooding. Flooding is caused by electrolyte leaking into the GDE, blocking GDE pores, and thereby reducing the active catalytic sites and blocking gas pathways. Flooding triggers severe HER (H2 evolution reaction) because the aqueous electrolyte is exposed to the carbon GDL, which aggravates HER in the potential window of CO2RR, ultimately resulting in GDE performance failure.106,135 GDLs can be categorized as either single-layer or double-layer; in the latter case, a hydrophobic microporous layer (MPL) is inserted between the CL and macroporous layer.
2.3.1.1. Single-layer GDL. 
A single-layer GDL is a macroporous substrate (Fig. 2f, without the MPL) which is usually made of carbon material, imparting good electroconductivity and chemical resistance. Single-layer GDLs can be fabricated via a three-step procedure:
(1) Carbon materials (commercial carbon black such as Vulcan® or Mogul®, acetylene black, graphite flake136,137) are mixed with water, solvent (e.g. isopropyl alcohol), and a hydrophobic binder such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, the most common binder) or polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF).138–140
(2) The mixture is cast into a film by rolling or hydraulic pressing.132
(3) The film is subsequently sintered at 350–380 °C, which leads to the melting of the hydrophobic agent (PTFE melts at 327 °C) and binding with carbon materials.
Commercially available non-woven carbon GDLs such as Toray, Freudenberg, Avcarb, and Sigracet at different thicknesses and PTFE content, which are supplied as both single- or double-layer types, have been used as the GDL in numerous electrochemical studies.141,142 In addition to carbon-based GDLs, metal-based (such as stainless steel or titanium) and PTFE-based (such as Gortex membrane) GDLs have been utilized for GDE fabrication.143,144
In the fabrication of single-layer GDLs, the content of the hydrophobic agent determines surface hydrophobicity, gas permeability, and electrical conductivity of the GDL. GDLs with a higher PTFE content are more hydrophobic (larger contact angle). However, the hydrophobicity reaches a maximum then decreases, because excessive PTFE content contributes to a rough GDL surface. Fig. 4a-left shows changes in hydrophobicity based on PTFE content in the carbon paper (CP) GDL.145 GDLs with high PTFE content may also exhibit higher electrical resistance due to the insulative nature of PTFE (Fig. 4b), and this affects electron transfer to the CL.146 Therefore, it is necessary to tune the hydrophobicity of the GDL as it can significantly affect performance for the formation of the desired product. For instance, as seen in Fig. 4c, if the PTFE content is too low (CP-13%), the FE (faradaic efficiency) of the desired product of CORR (i.e. ethylene) is less than half that of the optimized PTFE content, due to the inability of the GDL to prevent flooding. The thickness of GDL is another important factor affecting GDE electrochemical performance. Thinner GDLs deliver more gaseous reactants to the CL, but if the GDL is too thin, flooding is likely to occur.146 GDLs with a thickness of 190–250 μm have been used in most GDE studies.
 Fig. 4  (a) Changes in water contact angle (hydrophobicity) of Cu-loaded GDEs with various single-layer GDL (PTFE 13, 25, 35 wt%, carbon paper (CP)) and dual-layer GDL (PTFE 10, 25, 35 wt% in microporous layer (MPL), PTFE 25 wt% constant in CP). Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, Wiley; (b) effect of PTFE content of the macroporous layer (10, 30, 50 wt%) on electrical resistance in an Ag-loaded GDE fabricated for CO2RR (CFS = carbon fiber substrate). Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier; (c) effect of PTFE content of CP (13%, 25%, and 35%) on the FE and current density of ethylene from CORR. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
2.3.1.2 Dual-layer GDL. 
Dual-layer GDLs were introduced for better water management, and mitigation of flooding in fuel cells.97,147 A dual-layer GDL is composed of a macroporous- and a microporous layer (MPL), where the latter is sandwiched between the macroporous layer and the catalyst layer (CL) (Fig. 2f). The MPL is normally a thin layer with small pore sizes and volumes, comprised of carbon black powder and a hydrophobic agent, like PTFE97 or PVDF.140 The MPL is fabricated in a similar way to the macroporous layer, which involves casting a mixture of carbon materials, water, solvent, and a hydrophobic binder (PTFE) onto one side of the macroporous layer, followed by sintering to create a porous structure and enable bonding to the carbon content.148 As seen in Fig. 4a, applying an MPL with the optimized PTFE content improves the hydrophobicity of the GDL as compared with using a single-layer design. The MPL can be applied on commercial single-layer GDLs (like Toray or Sigracet) to optimize water-proof performance. Some commercial GDLs are equipped with an MPL (e.g. Sigracet 29 BC GDL), and therefore can be used directly for the CL deposition step.149 The introduction of an MPL improves the performance of electrolyzers in several ways through maintaining separation between liquid and gas, reduced electrode ohmic resistance, less contact resistance between the CL and the macroporous layer, and improved structural integrity.97,145,147
The MPL needs to be sufficiently hydrophobic to keep the electrolyte confined to the CL side, and provide a proper substrate for a uniform CL coating. This prevents exposure of the carbon GDL to the electrolyte, therefore suppressing HER and substantially enhancing the formation of the desired products (for example CO2RR performance on an Ag-loaded GDE enhanced with an MPL, Fig. 5a and b).146 Without the MPL, Ag catalyst is irregularly distributed on the GDL surface, and penetrates the macroporous layer (Fig. 5a, bottom), which substantially reduces the reaction selectivity (Fig. 5b). In addition, MPL has a special granular micro-porous structure, schematically depicted in Fig. 5c, which improves the gas feed diffusion at the gas/liquid/solid interface, and the reaction rate.145 Thereby, as shown in Fig. 5d for CORR to hydrocarbons, a double-layer GDL with 20 wt% PTFE in the MPL outperformed a series of GDEs prepared without an MPL. Similar to a single-layer GDL, the PTFE content in an MPL affects the electrical resistance (Fig. 5e), and can substantially alter the formation of the desired product (Fig. 5f). Excess PTFE content causes increased electrical resistance, while limited PTFE content cannot provide sufficient hydrophobicity (contact angles in Fig. 4a). Generally, a PTFE content of less than 20 wt% will not effectively prevent electrolyte flooding into the GDE. MPLs with a thickness of 15–20 μm generally provide a smooth substrate to accommodate the CL, as a thicker MPL may cause gas transfer limitations due to the lengthened diffusion path.138,146 The comprehensive review of GDLs for fuel cells published by Park et al. is also relevant for application to other emerging electrochemical reactions.97
 Fig. 5  (a) Micro-CT (computed tomography) images (left), and cross-sectional SEM images (right) of Ag-sprayed on carbon paper GDL with and without MPL. MPL provides a smooth substrate and penetration of catalyst layer is seen for GDL without MPL; (b) CO partial current density on an Ag-based GDE with and without an MPL (arrows show the corresponding SEM images for GDE with and without MPL). Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier; (c) Schematic of triple-interface for a Cu-loaded GDE with an MPL to improve the CO diffusion in the interface; (d) FE and current density for CORR with a Cu-based, single-layer GDE in 1 M KOH with varied PTFE content (5, 13, and 25 wt%), and double-layer GDL with an MPL with 25 wt% PTFE. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, Wiley; (e) Electrical resistance of Ag-based GDEs with varied PTFE content in the MPL at a cell potential of −2.0 V; (f) CO partial current density on an Ag-based GDE as a function of PTFE content of the MPL. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 


2.3.2. Catalyst layer (CL). 
The catalyst layer (CL) comprises electroactive cathodic materials where the electrochemical reactions occur. The CL is usually located on the electrolyte side of the GDL (Fig. 2f). While GDL preparation and optimization for CO2RR, CORR, and N2RR are similar, the CL properties determine the efficiency of each reaction for the desired product(s).150,151 The CL provides an efficient triple-phase interface through the formation of abundant microchannels containing a thin layer of electrolyte to guarantee sufficient gas delivery and electrolyte-catalyst contact.136 Therefore, to be active the catalyst should be covered by the electrolyte in equilibrium with the gas-phase reactant.29 The wettability/hydrophilicity, therefore, has a pivotal role in the stabilization of interfacial gas concentration and enhancement of the electrolyte-catalyst interface.152–154 The CL fabrication methods can be categorized as either ink-based or ink-free.
2.3.2.1 Ink-based methods for catalyst deposition. 
The catalyst layer is commonly prepared using catalyst ink. The ink comprises catalyst powders, solvent (e.g. water, ethanol, or isopropyl alcohol), and a non-volatile ionic binder (ionomer) as the conductive scaffold (e.g. sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene (Nafion)).155 Carbon black or carbon nanotubes (CNT) are often used as the catalyst support (loaded with nanocatalysts), or mixed with the catalyst ink to improve electrical conductivity within the CL.156,157 When the catalyst ink is deposited on the GDL, the solvent evaporates, and microstructures form. Parameters which affect the overall performance of the GDE include catalyst ink composition (Nafion and catalyst fraction), solvent choice, evaporation rate/conditions, and the method of ink deposition.123 These parameters affect mass transport of reactants/products through the CL, concentration of the gaseous reactants on the CL, formation of triple-phase interfaces, and the morphology, ohmic resistance, and electrical conductivity of the CL.158–161
Air-brushing, drop-casting, and hand-painting are common ink-based methods of catalyst deposition,162,163 schematically shown in Fig. 6a1–a3. Air-brushing facilitates the formation of a well-defined, thicker CL due to rapid evaporation of the solvent and instantaneous fixation of scattered ink mists on the solidified ink.123 For the same catalyst loading, the drop-casting and hand-painting methods result in a much thinner CL due to a slow solvent evaporation rate, and permeation of the catalyst ink into the GDL (Fig. 6b and c). Increasing the CL thickness leads to increased diffusional mass transfer resistance; in this way, the feed gas concentration can be favorably modulated. In addition, drop-casting and hand-painting methods can result in an uneven CL with catalyst agglomerations (Fig. 6c1 and c2), and therefore, fewer electrochemically active sites for the reactions as compared with the air-brushing method.162 A non-uniform CL may lead to the exposure of aqueous electrolyte to the carbon GDL, and severe HER occurs on the wetted carbon substrates in the potential window of CO2RR/CORR/N2RR.135 Therefore, the CL should be sufficiently thick and uniform to minimize the contact between the electrolyte and the carbon-based GDL and to prevent HER.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of fabrication procedure for a CL with various ink-based methods: (a1) Drop-casting; catalyst ink is cast by a pipette on GDL, (a2) Hand-painting; catalyst ink is painted by a brush on GDL and (a3) Air-brushing; catalyst ink is sprayed by a spray gun on GDL; (b1–b3) cross-sectional SEM images of Cu-based CLs prepared with respective ink-based methods; (c1–c3) energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of Cu for CLs prepared by respective ink-based methods (0.6 mg cm−2 catalyst loading for all methods); (d) FE of CO2RR as a function of current density for various catalyst deposition methods. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (e) Effect of Cu nanoparticle loading on product selectivity of CO2RR (1 loading = 2.12 μg cm−2). Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2017, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.; (f) effect of Nafion content on the formate FE from CO2RR for an Sn-based GDE in 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte as a function of cathode potential. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
Experimental results have confirmed that a CL prepared by air-brushing performs better than that prepared by drop-casting and hand-painting (Fig. 6d). For example, the formation of C2+ products from CO2RR is significantly higher on an air-brushed Cu-based GDE due to the thicker CL and a modulated local CO2 concentration, optimal for multicarbon production. Hand-painting and drop-casting methods increase the local gas concentration due to the thinner CL, however, this is not desirable for C2+ formation from CO2RR. When using an air-brushing method, the optimal gas concentration on the CL plus the uniform coating also leads to a lower HER (Fig. 6d). Air-brushing the CL at an elevated temperature also facilitates rapid solvent evaporation, and results in a thicker CL. Therefore, the gas concentration can be modulated by air-brushing at higher temperatures, e.g., air-brushing at 75 °C produced a CL almost 3 times thicker than that at 25 °C.123
Modelling studies show that at a given gas permeability, local gas concentration gradient within the CL increases with the CL thickness. This means that with a thicker CL the local gas concentration is lower.123 In addition, an increase in the CL thickness (with constant catalyst loading) results in a higher porosity within the CL, which leads to a higher diffusivity (D = ε1.5, where D and ε represent diffusivity and porosity, respectively166) and a better gas mass transport. Meanwhile, local gas concentration is also directly related to the gas surface coverage at the CL. Therefore, the local gas concentration at the surface of a GDE can be modulated via altering CL thickness, porosity or catalyst loading. Controlling the local gas concentration and optimizing surface coverage of feed gas and adsorbates are pivotal to controlling the product selectivity of electrochemical reactions. For example, for selective ethylene production from CO2, high *CO coverage is crucial.167 Conversely, a high CO2 coverage (high CO2 concentration) increases the concentration of unreacted CO2 and this is not ideal for efficient coverage of the target adsorbate (*CO) towards ethylene production.168 A higher CL thickness and porosity with identical catalyst loading was already observed for air-brushing (Fig. 2c3). In other words, porosity and thickness of the CL can be modified by selecting the optimal CL deposition method to modulate gas diffusion, concentration and surface coverage for a desired product/pathway.123
In addition to better control over the structure of the deposited CL, the air-brushing method is also more favorable in terms of scalability, as a fully automated air-brush can be used for large-scale and uniform deposition of catalyst ink with accurate control on catalyst loading.162,169 GDEs as large as 10 × 10 cm2 have been fabricated via air-brushing a Sigracet GDL for CO2RR.169 This can be a good preliminary demonstration, although fabrication of larger GDEs and further technological optimization according to industry standards are required for large-scale electrolyzers.
The amount of catalyst loading in the CL can also affect the GDE performance and product distributions. Increasing the loading in the CL leads to a higher current density as more catalytic active sites become available, however, a higher catalyst loading does not necessarily mean a better FE for the desired product(s).137 More catalytic active sites can alter the GDE potential (at a constant current density), and consequently the product distribution of electrocatalytic reactions. For example, it was seen that increasing Sn loading resulted in increased FE of CO and HER during CO2RR, and therefore a lower selectivity for the desired product, formate.170 A higher catalyst loading usually results in a higher concentration of intermediates, due to more catalytic active sites, which can alter the reaction pathways. For instance, increasing the Cu nanoparticle loading on a carbon-based GDL, turned product selectivity of CO2RR to C2+ hydrocarbons, and suppressed HER and C1 hydrocarbons (Fig. 6e).164 Thus, the fraction of the catalyst in the CL needs to be uniquely tailored based on the reaction and the desired products.
In addition to the catalyst loading, the ionic binder content (e.g. Nafion) influences GDE performance by impacting CL microstructure, gas diffusion, and catalytic pathways,165,171 or by directly participating in the reaction as a co-catalyst.172 Although some studies have shown comparable or even slightly better performance with (co)using PTFE as the catalyst binder, Nafion (a sulfonated tetrafluoroethylene) is the most commonly used ionic binder for CL fabrication.173 Nafion creates a spanning network to form pores within the CL, connects the catalyst particles and conducts protons/ions, therefore plays a decisive role in proton transfer and the Nafion fraction influences the electrode performance via changing in the microstructure of the CL. A low Nafion content leads to decreased ion transport within the CL, catalyst powder aggregation, and higher ohmic resistance. However, an excessive use of Nafion may hinder the CL contact with the electrolyte, reducing the open pore volume in the CL and subsequently the gas permeability, increase mass transport polarization, and thus negatively impacting the GDE performance.
The optimal amount of Nafion can be calculated based on the catalyst loading, desired CL thickness, and densities of the catalyst particles and ionomer. The ionomer ratio must be above the percolation threshold, above which a well-connected network of ionomer is formed with the CL, facilitating ion and electron transfer.174 Size of the catalyst affects the optimal ionomer content. For example, Mamunya et al. reported a lower percolation threshold for larger size particles.175 Generally, the percolation threshold is higher for smaller particles, meaning that a higher ionomer content is required when smaller size particles (such as nanoparticles) are used.176
The efficiency of electrochemical reaction can be greatly improved by using the optimal Nafion content. For example, for formate production from CO2RR, an increase in the Nafion content to 20 wt% resulted in the highest FE of formate, while FE decreased for higher contents of Nafion (25 wt% and 50 wt%) (Fig. 6f).165 Nafion at 20–30 wt% has been commonly used for the preparation of catalyst inks. To minimize the cost, it is preferable to minimize the Nafion consumption by using efficient CL deposition methods such as air-brushing, which reduces Nafion consumption by 92% compared to the casting method.142
The size of the electrocatalyst affects the performance of the electrochemical reactions. Nanosized catalysts generally provide more active sites to keep pace with intermediates formation, especially at high current densities.177 For example, it was seen that the FE for propanol from CORR decreased with the current density when micro-size catalysts were used (Fig. 7a).178 In comparison, a CL prepared with 40–60 nm Cu particles showed a stable FE for propanol when the current density increased from 100 to 300 mA cm−2. More importantly, the nanostructure and shape of the electrocatalysts alter the catalytic pathways and the selectivity of the reactions, therefore the electrocatalysts need to be tuned based on the reaction and the desired product(s).48,179 Generally, high-curvature electrocatalysts such as nanosheets, nanodendrites, or nanoflowers with high roughness factors and sharp spots (e.g. edges, corners) have an abundant active surface area and can provide more active sites, as compared with spherical electrocatalysts.56,180–183 It was observed that a GDE for CORR prepared via Cu nanosheets had an acetate production rate almost twice that of Cu spherical particles (Fig. 7b),177 owing to the higher surface area, and unique nanostructures (Cu(111) surfaces) which selectively reduced CO to acetate. In summary, several variables within the CL, such as fabrication method, ink composition, and electrocatalysts loading/nanostructure/size need to be optimized for the relevant reactions and the desired products.
 Fig. 7  (a) Effect of Cu electrocatalyst size on the FE of CORR to propanol as a function of current density in 1 M KHCO3. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (b) acetate molar production fraction from CORR with Cu electrocatalyst shapes as a function of potential in the 2 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (c) preparation of self-supported Cu-based GDE using a Cu gauze. Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, researchers have attempted new methods of GDE preparation to simplify the procedure. Zhang et al. prepared a self-supported Cu-based GDE by modification of common GDE fabrication methods.184 With this method, a Cu gauze goes through thermal annealing or chemical oxidation to form CuxO nanowires to act as the catalyst for CO2RR (Fig. 7c). Subsequently, a solution of PTFE and carbon black is spray-coated on the gauze and treated at 350 °C; thus, the framework of the Cu gauze becomes a GDE via a simple process. Luo et al. followed a similar procedure with a Zn-electrodeposited Cu mesh as the CL, achieving over a seven-fold increase in the current density of CO2RR to CO, as compared with the stand-alone Zn mesh as a planar electrode.35 With this preparation method, the CL (mesh or gauze) is directly in contact with the electrolyte without requiring the use of any ionic binder. Moreover, other pure or electrodeposited metal gauzes/meshes can be transformed into a self-supported GDE for electrocatalysis without complicated steps.
2.3.2.2. Ink-free methods for catalyst deposition. 
Ink-free methods require a lower catalyst loading than ink-based methods, and can be directly applied on a GDL for uniform deposition without using an ionic binder.185 Electrodeposition, sputter-, pulsed laser-, and ion-beam deposition are approaches developed for minimizing the amount of electrocatalyst, with applicability for mass manufacturing.186–189 Of these methods, sputtering has attracted attention as an inexpensive and easy method for uniform CL deposition (as thin as 10 nm on a GDL, conductive or non-conductive), without using additives, which can cause impurities in the CL.187 In addition, the layer deposited via sputtering has high stability and strong interaction with commercial GDLs, and the layer thickness can be controlled via the sputtering duration or number of cycles.190 Sputtering can be applied directly on PTFE-based GDLs, which is advantageous as ink-based methods may not be practical due to the high hydrophobicity of a PTFE GDL surface.191
Recently, Dinh et al. fabricated a series of Cu-based GDEs by direct sputtering on a PTFE GDL to generate CLs of varied thicknesses, to optimize the FE and current density (Fig. 8a).192 While a 10 nm coated CL cannot uniformly cover the substrate and provide enough catalytic active sites, for CLs thicker than 25 nm, the intermediates production rate is excessive, and this interrupts the reaction mechanism of the desired product (CO dimerization step to C2H4 production). Therefore, a layer that is thick enough to provide complete cover can enhance CO2 mass transfer, vital for electrolysis at high current densities or high cathodic potentials.29,37 The thinner CLs may have a slightly lower conversion rate due to fewer active sites, however, at high current densities, this is less important, and it can be neutralized by the higher FE.
 Fig. 8  (a) CO2RR to C2H4 FE in the current density range of 200 to 300 mA cm−2 for a Cu-based GDE prepared via sputter coating with various thicknesses. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (b) schematic of Sn electrodeposition on a carbon GDL with SEM images of the deposited layer. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) effect of various electrodeposition methods (Galvanostatic, potentiostatic, pulse) on FE of formate (HCOOH) with Sn-deposited carbon paper in 0.3 M KHCO3, better FE is observed for the GDE prepared via pulse electrodeposition (UPED). Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (d) morphology of electrodeposited bismuth films prepared by galvanostatic electrodeposition resulting in nanocube shape (left) and pulse-current resulting in nanosheet shape (right). Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Electrodeposition is another common ink-free method used to uniformly deposit various pure metals or alloy catalysts on conductive substrates,108,195–198 with potential for fabricating large-scale GDEs.199,200 During electrodeposition, metal ions are reduced on the surface of a substrate which serves as the cathode. Unlike conventional ink-based methods, no ionomer is required, and the deposited film is in direct contact with the carbon-based GDL (Fig. 8b).193,201 Factors such as electroplating solution, additives, type of substrate, applied potential/current, and the method of electrodeposition are of great importance in determining the morphology and electrocatalytic performance of the deposited film.35,108,202,203
Electrodeposition comprises three main methods: constant current (galvanostatic), constant potential (potentiostatic), and pulse electrodeposition, where electrodeposition stops for a designated duration and then restarts. The catalytic performance with pulse electrodeposition is better than that with the other two methods (Fig. 8c).188 Electrodeposition also tunes the morphology of the CL (Fig. 8d), altering the product selectivity.194 It is speculated that during the off-time in pulse electrodeposition, the ion concentration around the electrode is replenished via ion diffusion from the electroplating bulk, which is beneficial for the formation of uniform particles on the substrate.204 In addition, sonication during electrodeposition results in better ion movement towards the GDL, and uniform deposition.204
Both electrodeposition and sputtering have the potential for scale-up. In particular, sputtering offers precise control on catalyst loading and thickness.205 Recently, GDEs with an area of 136 cm2 have been fabricated by electrodeposition of Ag on a carbon paper GDL to be used in a 10 × 10 cm2 cell for CO2RR.199 This scale is larger than most GDEs reported in the literature, although larger GDEs are required for industrial application. Information about the progress and application of other ink-free methods such as ion-beam assisted deposition, co-sputtering techniques (for bimetallic catalytic films such as Pt–Ru, Pt–Ir, Pt–Co, Pt–Ti), pulsed laser deposition, ultrasonic- and electro-spray deposition can be found in other publications.186,206–209 The development of these advanced catalyst deposition methods has resulted in a significant decrease in catalyst consumption (one to two orders of magnitude) as compared with the first-generation methods from the 1990s. These practical improvements are a significant step toward meeting the requirements for large-scale application.210,211


2.3.3. Fabrication of GDEs for membrane electrode assemblies (MEAs). 
MEA fabrication for fuel cell applications has matured over the last two decades, which is helpful to develop efficient MEAs for CO2RR/CORR/N2RR.212 The preparation of GDEs for MEA-type systems involves steps similar to catalyst deposition using the ink-free or ink-based methods,185,213–215 except that GDEs should be in close contact with the ion-exchange membrane (i.e., zero-gap configuration).126 The GDE can be prepared by ink-free/ink-based methods, and subsequently attached (or hot-pressed) on the ion-exchange membrane to fabricate an MEA.216,217 This is referred as the GDL-based MEA fabrication method. The method of attaching the carbon GDL to the ion-exchange membrane is of great importance to the fabrication of a defect-free and highly conductive MEA. Hot-pressing is a common technique for the attaching and it was found that for a flexible carbon substrate (e.g., carbon cloth), hot-pressing carbon cloth to the ion-exchange membrane increased conductivity and reduced contact resistance.212 Conversely, when a brittle carbon-based GDL (e.g. Toray paper) was used, hot-pressing led to structural changes (broken graphite fibers) and interrupted electronic pathways in the GDL, and consequently caused further resistance. Therefore, the conditions applied during hot-pressing (such as temperature, pressure and duration) should be tuned based on the substrate utilized.
Alternatively, the catalyst can be directly deposited on the ion-exchange membrane, and then a carbon-based GDL is inserted to the cell together with the MEA, which is called membrane-based MEA fabrication.111,113,218,219 This method is more commonly used due to the superior CL/ion-exchange membrane interface.220 In addition, MEA is prone to swelling due to hydration during electrochemical reactions and CL directly attached to the ion-exchange membrane shows better stability if swelling happens. To further improve the connection between the deposited CL and ion-exchange membrane, usually the membrane is hot-pressed (at around 120 °C).212,221 Both the GDL-based143,222–224 and membrane-based111,113,126,225,226 methods have been employed to fabricate MEAs for CO2RR/CORR/N2RR, but their differences in stability and efficiency need to be compared in future studies. Comparing two MEAs prepared via the GDL-based and membrane-based methods for fuel cell application revealed the superior performance of the membrane-based fabrication method in terms of reduced ohmic resistance and improved current density.212

3. GDEs for carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR)
There is an urgent need to develop efficient CO2 valorization technologies, and CO2RR research has been rapidly expanding, potentially providing a sustainable solution for the current carbon cycle crisis.93,227–229 CO2RR in aqueous electrolyte is capable of selective formation of various products in the presence of an appropriate catalyst and applied potential.28 CO2RR forms products including syngas (CO + H2), ethylene, methane, ethanol, and formate, which have a collective market size of over 500 Mton per year.230,231
Developing suitable electrolytes74,75,173,232 and efficient electrocatalysts to improve the sluggish kinetics of CO2RR,43,45,76,93 is vital to progress large-scale CO2 electrolyzers. Companies such as OPUS12, CERT, Dioxide Materials, Siemens and Evonik are taking the first steps towards commercial application of CO2RR technologies. Efficient electrocatalysts should be selective and able to suppress competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in aqueous electrolytes which affects the product selectivity. Metals, especially transition metal elements and their associated compounds with vacant orbits, have been the most common choice of electrocatalysts for GDE fabrication for CO2RR.42 It is well-known that metals such as Au, Ag, Pd, Ru, and Zn are selective for CO production,35,233–235 while metals such as Pb, Bi, In, Hg, and Sn are selective for the production of formic acid/formate.148,155,236–241 To date, copper is the only heterogeneous electrocatalyst that has shown a propensity to produce valuable hydrocarbons and alcohols, such as ethylene and ethanol from CO2RR.26,54,242 Therefore, if hydrocarbon products are of primary interest, Cu or Cu-derived materials should be employed.38,243–245 In addition to pure metals, various types of metal-based catalysts such as metal alloys (e.g. bimetallic),246–250 nitrogen-doped metals,251 Metal–Organic Frameworks (MOF),252,253 sulfur-modulated metals,254–256 and metal-free carbon-based catalysts257 have been synthesized to improve the product selectivity of CO2RR.
3.1. Towards commercially viable CO2RR
For practical applications of CO2RR, it is necessary to achieve high current densities (>200 mA cm−2), high selectivity towards the targeted product(s), and long-term operational stability (>20000 h).17 Achieving high current densities requires sufficient CO2 supply, while CO2 solubility in aqueous electrolytes is low (33.4 mM). This is effectively addressed using GDE-based electrolyzers, achieving ultra-high CO2RR current densities.28,258 For product selectivity, use of suitable electrolytes and tuning of electrocatalysts are of great importance.74,259,260 Extensive research has been carried out on the development of electrocatalysts for CO2RR, and the underlying pathways to different products.38,41,42,60,261 For the electrolyte type, the recent studies on CO2RR with GDEs or flow-cell CO2 electrolyzers tend to employ alkaline electrolytes (e.g. KOH or NaOH),28 rather than neutral electrolytes (e.g. KHCO3, NaHCO3) because: (1) OH− ions adsorbed or proximate to metal catalysts may play a role in modulating active catalytic sites,192 (2) Parasitic HER is significantly suppressed in alkaline electrolytes,28,232 and (3) Alkaline conditions present significantly lower ohmic resistance, especially at high current densities (>200 mA cm−2).262,263 For stable operation, it is necessary to tailor GDEs with durable electrocatalysts, and to overcome the challenges mentioned in the next section.
It should be noted that the higher current density obtained with GDEs affects the electrode surroundings differently to when a planar electrode is used. Fig. 3 shows respective concentration profiles of reactant gases at/near the surface of planar electrodes and GDEs. Modeling shows that CO2 concentration near the surface of a planar electrode in an H-cell drops rapidly to almost zero at current densities of 10–20 mA cm−2.31,123,124 Another important difference is the local pH in the immediate vicinity of the electrodes,266,267 which is higher (pH >12) on a GDE than on a planar electrode in an H-cell, particularly at high current densities (>200 mA cm−2), regardless of the electrolyte type (Fig. 9a and b).31,268 This is due to the production of a large quantity of OH− from water reduction, and the slow movement of OH− ions away from the electrode. The high local pH is beneficial because HER is sluggish in alkaline conditions; therefore, HER is less severe on GDEs.269,270
 Fig. 9  Profiles of local pH changes as a function of current density on the electrode surface in (a) H-cell with a planar electrode; (b) GDE-based electrolyzer. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) Schematic of a GDE in normal- and flooded operation. CO2 flux to the CL decreases, and HER increases with flooding. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, Wiley; (d) perspiration on the back of an Sn-sprayed GDE before and after applying current densities of 0 and 100 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.265 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
3.2. Challenges of GDE-based CO2RR
Despite the advantages of GDEs for CO2RR, there are two main challenges: flooding (penetration of aqueous electrolyte into the GDE) and carbonation (interaction of CO2 with hydroxide). Flooding is a challenge for all GDEs regardless of gaseous feed and application, causing severe HER in aqueous medium (Fig. 9c). Carbonation is unique for CO2RR, and is problematic for the overall stability and integrity of a GDE.
Flooding can be improved by PTFE treatment of GDLs, as discussed in the GDL fabrication section. Generally speaking, susceptibility to flooding is based on the differential pressure across the GDE,265 and the pore size and hydrophobicity, following this order: large hydrophilic pores > large hydrophobic pores > small hydrophilic pores.29 Conventional carbon-based GDLs with PTFE treatment have a high hydrophobicity; however, these GDLs lose their hydrophobicity and become hydrophilic under cathodic conditions.125,192 It was observed that the water contact angle of a carbon-based GDL decreased from 145° to 117°, and the oxygen content at the GDL surface doubled after 1 h operation at −0.8 V vs. RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode) under CO2RR conditions.192 Breugelmans et al. observed that under cathodic conditions of CO2RR, the electrolyte diffuses through the GDL and perspires on the back of the GDE;265 while this does not happen when GDL is simply immersed into the electrolyte125 (Fig. 9d). This is caused by the electro-wetting effect, and therefore, GDEs are more susceptible to flooding at higher current densities due to the lower surface tension.135,271
GDE flooding during CO2RR can be correlated with increasing current density.135,264 Leonard et al. observed that an Ag-loaded GDE was stable over 5 h with constant CO fraction in the gas product. However, a catastrophic failure occurred at higher current densities (over 100 mA cm−2), and the GDE transitioned from CO to H2 production within 30 min of operation (Fig. 10a). GDE flooding was found to be related to the double-layer capacitance at varied current densities, as seen in Fig. 10b. The capacitance can be used as a way to predict flooding and GDE failure during CO2RR, as increasing capacitance indicates the extension of the electrode–electrolyte interface into the GDE. To further evaluate GDE flooding, the water breakthrough pressure was measured for the GDL and GDE after electrolysis at varied current densities,264 observing that: (1) Immersing GDEs in the alkaline electrolyte without passing faradaic current (open circuit voltage) does not dramatically compromise the hydrophobicity; (2) Introducing an MPL significantly improved the breakthrough pressure of the GDL (Fig. 10c); and (3) GDEs operated at higher current densities showed substantially lower breakthrough pressures, probably due to chemical degradation of carbon-based GDL.272
 Fig. 10  (a) Sudden drop in CO production with time at varied current densities (25–196 mA cm−2); (b) sudden increase in the capacitance of GDEs at varied current densities (25–196 mA cm−2), attributed to flooding (OCV = open circuit voltage); (c) breakthrough pressures for pristine GDLs and Ag-loaded GDEs decrease with increasing applied current density; (d) post-CO2RR SEM images of Ag-loaded GDEs at 25 and 196 mA cm−2 showing liquid percolation in carbonation sites. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
In addition to flooding, the effect of carbonation-accelerated electrode failure, especially at higher current densities (which produces higher alkalinity), needs to be taken into consideration.31,125 Carbonation is a major issue for GDEs, occurring on the GDE surface during CO2RR under alkaline conditions.121 Numerous crystallized salts remain in the pores after GDE flooding, particularly at a high current density (196 mA cm−2), attributed to the interaction between CO2 and hydroxide, leading to carbonation (Fig. 10d). The defects caused by carbonation result in water percolation through the pores; therefore, at high current densities both flooding and carbonation are likely to occur.
In summary, GDEs likely have a charge threshold for flooding, above which the GDE fails. GDE failure begins with carbonate salt precipitation, followed by electrolyte percolation into the crystals and GDE pores.
3.3. Remedies for carbonation and flooding
Carbonation-derived flooding has been reported in several recent GDE-based studies with carbon-based GDLs for CO2RR,273,274 with some efforts to recover the GDEs by washing after electrolysis.264,265,274,275 Endrodi et al. restored GDE performance by washing for 10 s each hour to rinse out the precipitated K2CO3 before larger plaques could build-up, as shown in Fig. 11a.275 However, rinsing with water can only partially recover the initial peak performance, suggesting that the salt crystals are deeply embedded in the GDE porous surface, and this makes total salt removal unlikely via superficial rinsing.264 In addition, crystallization may irreversibly damage the porous structure of the GDE leading to a higher permeability and reduced hydrophobicity.276 A fast diagnosis is the key to recover GDEs before irreversible damage is caused by precipitation and flooding. Any sharp and unusual fluctuations, and changes in current density, product fractions, or capacitance are indications of performance failure.264 Crystallization during CO2RR can also be mitigated or delayed by improving pressure balance at the gas-electrode–electrolyte interface via changing CO2 feed or catholyte flow-rate. Verma et al. increased the CO2 feed flow from 17 to 75 sccm (standard cubic centimeters per minute), which improved pressure balance and resulted in a more stable current density over an 8 h electrolysis.274 It should be noted that increasing the CO2 feed or catholyte flow-rate may delaminate the CL, and adversely affect GDE electrochemically active sites.136,277 Regular rinsing of the GDE in response to a slight decrease in efficiency may prolong electrolyzer lifetime.274 However, this may be at the expense of process feasibility and impractical for industrial electrolyzers, where equipment disassembly and reassembly is costly and compromises cell reliability. This scale-up issue calls for innovative flooding-resistant designs.
 Fig. 11  (a) Recovery of CO2RR FE for CO and current density on a Cu-based GDE in alkaline electrolyte by hourly rinsing with 50 ml water. Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (b) schematic of a GDE with non-conductive Gortex membrane as the GDL. Current collection is through the CL. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (c) graphite/carbon nanoparticle/Cu/PTFE GDE for enhanced flooding-resistance. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (d) FE of ethylene over a carbon- and PTFE-based GDL loaded with Cu catalysts at −100 mA m−2 in 1 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (e) schematic of reverse-assembled GDE for flooding resistance (NPs = nanoparticles); (f) stability of reverse-assembled and standard-assembled Ag-based GDEs at −0.6 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
One promising option to resolve these issues is decoupling the hydrophobic and conductive requirements of common carbon-based GDLs. This means that GDLs do not need to be conductive, thus it is easier to focus on water-repellency and porosity of the GDL. In this case, the role of electron transfer is passed from the GDL to the CL, with a design shown in Fig. 11b. Therefore, a non-conductive GDL with excellent porosity and water-resistance, such as a PTFE membrane, can be employed. Wallace et al. primarily used this design with a Gortex membrane, which is a low-cost commercial PTFE membrane with a tunable pore structure, high stability in alkaline conditions, up to 90% overall porosities, and exceptional hydrophobicity.144,278 Sputtering catalyst deposition is preferred for PTFE GDL because the hydrophobic surface may not accommodate a CL made via ink-based methods, and sputtering gives a smooth and uniform CL. This design is also advantageous due to the direct electron transfer to the CL, while in conventional configurations, there might be ohmic losses in the charge transfer from the current collector and the GDL to the CL.
Inspired by the decoupled design, Dinh et al. used a PTFE GDL,192 which was sputtered with Cu catalyst, then spray-coated with carbon black nanoparticles to electrically connect the CL, and provide a uniform distribution of current density over the geometric surface (Fig. 11c). Ultimately, a graphite layer was added to act as the current collector. Carbon nanoparticles and graphite layers prevented the diffusion of OH− to the bulk electrolyte, and thus diminished CO production and contributed to a high FE for the desired product (ethylene). This GDE configuration showed 150 h stable operation without loss in ethylene selectivity at current densities between 75 and 100 mA cm−2, which was a 300-fold increase in the operating lifetime compared to the GDE fabricated via Cu sputtering on a carbon GDL. The carbon nanoparticles on top of the Cu layer played a vital role in the GDE stability by preventing bubble accumulation on the GDE surface, maintaining GDE hydrophobicity, and managing wettability, which is discussed in the next section.279 The GDE without this layer showed a sudden loss of ethylene FE within 30 h. Buonsanti et al. also doubled the electrode stability by switching from a carbon-based GDL to a PTFE-based GDE (Fig. 11d). However, they ultimately observed a sharp decrease in the FE of ethylene due to flooding.280 Buonsanti et al. did not use graphite and carbon nanoparticle layers, and the results of this study highlight the need to optimize the CL.
To tackle flooding, Cheng et al. used a reverse-assembled GDE, in which the MPL faces the electrolyte and the CL directly faces the CO2, as shown in Fig. 11e.281 This unconventional orientation maintained a thin electrolyte layer on the catalyst which likely enhanced the rate of CO2 reduction.29,37 FE of CO in 1 M KOH was stable for 3 h for the reverse-assembled GDE. In comparison, the standard configuration FE of CO decreased to 75% and 80% after 1 h and 2 h, respectively (Fig. 11f). This indicates that carbon-based GDEs in the standard orientation are vulnerable to flooding under alkaline conditions, despite treatment of the MPL with 5% PTFE; a simple reverse configuration may be a feasible solution.
3.4. Wettability management
Managing the CL wettability is as important as addressing flooding and carbonation issues for high-rate stable GDE operation.222,282,283 Achieving an efficient current density for gas-related electrochemical reactions goes hand in hand with improving GDE wettability to create abundant catalyst-electrolyte interfaces.284,285 Variation of wettability over triple-phase interfaces can alter the gaseous reactants/products transportation and catalyst-electrolyte contact, and ultimately influence gas diffusion and electron transfer processes.268,286 In this condition, the catalyst is in contact with electrolyte which contains limited available gaseous reactant. Improving GDE surface wettability and maximizing the contact between electrocatalysts and the electrolyte ensures sufficient supply of gaseous reactants.
Sargent et al. recently designed a novel GDE structure that enabled efficient CO2 electrolysis to multicarbon products at current densities higher than 1 A cm−2.28 In this design, a PTFE GDL sputtered with Cu catalyst, and coated with an ionomer layer with hydrophobic and hydrophilic functionalities (perfluorinated sulfonic acid), was used to decouple gas, ion, and electron transfer (Fig. 12a and b). In doing so, the hydrophobic domains promoted gas transport and prevented flooding from blocking the gas diffusion pathway. At the same time, water uptake and ion transport occurred through the hydrated hydrophilic domains, increasing the three-phase volume. The modeling results also showed that in the standard configuration without this ionomer, CO2 is available only within less than 1 μm of the GDE surface (Fig. 12c, left). In comparison, for the ionomer-treated GDE, CO2 availability increases to the scale of several micrometers, meaning that the reaction interface of gases, ions, and electrons is extended, and the current available for electrochemical conversion of the gas reactant increases (Fig. 12c, right). This design resulted in a substantially higher CO2RR current density as compared with the GDE without ionomer treatment (Fig. 12d). The same trend was observed for CO and O2 as the reactant gases, indicating the significance of GDE wettability to extend the electrochemical reaction zone, and remarkably elevate the current density for various gas-fed electrochemical reactions with limited aqueous solubility.28
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of gas and aqueous electrolyte transport decoupling; (b) schematic of metal catalyst deposited onto a PTFE hydrophobic fiber support with a flat ionomer layer conformally coating the metal; (c) modelled gas reactant availability along the catalyst's surface for the GDE with decoupled mechanism (left: without ionomer treatment, right: with ionomer treatment); (d) CO2RR performance of a Cu-sputtered PTFE GDE without (black dots) and with (blue dots) ionomer treatment. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (e) Schematic of interfacial structures of Au-loaded GDE without plasma treatment (top, contact angle 155°), 0.5 min plasma treatment (middle, contact angle 110°), and 2.5 min plasma treatment (bottom, contact angle, contact angle 22°); (f) current density (left) and FE (right) of CO for untreated Au-loaded GDE (contact angle of around 155°) and plasma-treated GDEs from 0.5 min to 2.5 min (contact angles smaller than 155°). Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
In addition to a coating layer treatment, another method to improve wettability and maximize the reaction zone involves applying a time-controlled air plasma treatment to introduce more oxygen groups on the GDE surface and improve the hydrophilicity. Shi et al. found that a brief plasma treatment (30 s) can improve the contact between the catalyst and the electrolyte (Fig. 12e middle) as compared with the untreated hydrophobic GDE with poor catalyst-electrolyte contact (Fig. 12e top).152 In contrast, a longer plasma treatment led to the exposure of the electrolyte to the carbon GDL (Fig. 12e bottom), which sacrificed the FE of CO, as HER increased due to excessive hydrophilicity of the GDE surface, with the contact angle dropping to 22° (Fig. 12f). The difference seen in the FE between the optimized plasma-treated GDE and others is more obvious at higher current densities (>100 mA cm−2). This indicates the importance of GDE wettability for provision of sufficient catalytic active sites by maximizing and stabilizing the CL-electrolyte interface.287 Engineering the contact interface and wetting of the electrode can also regulate CO2RR selectivity. Cai et al. reported that an optimized modification of the surface of Cu nanoarrays with PTFE changed the electrode surface from aerophobic to aerophilic.286 This led to enhanced CO2 adsorption and limited proton supply, therefore HER was suppressed and FE of C1 products increased. Thereby, the interfacial structure and wettability can affect the gaseous feed transportation and fundamentally alter the performance especially at high current densities.288 These recent studies show that thinking beyond the conventional GDE fabrication procedure to address technical issues such as flooding, carbonation, and wettability, significantly improves performance in a gas-fed electrochemical system.
3.5. Recent advances in GDEs for CO2 reduction to formic acid/formate
Formic acid is a major product of CO2RR, and numerous GDEs have been designed for this purpose (Table 1). It has been proposed both as a key intermediate feedstock for renewable chemical production and as a safe and convenient liquid for in-situ hydrogen storage with the possibility of being directly fed to a formic acid fuel-cell.289,290 Following the success of GDEs used in fuel cells as the catalyst support and mass transport promoter,291 GDEs have also been employed for the stable production of formic acid.120,148,225,289,292–298 The concentration of formate/formic acid produced from CO2RR must be maximized for further processing, to avoid expensive separation steps.299,300 Chen et al. recently obtained the highest formate production performance at 500 mA cm−2, with over 90% FE in a scalable reactor design (Fig. 13a) using a 25 cm2 GDE loaded with carbon-supported SnO2.301 A bipolar membrane (BPM) was used to prevent CO2RR product crossover. An aqueous electrolyte layer separating the GDE from the BPM effectively decreased the H+ concentration to suppress HER. The catholyte layer thickness was 1.27 mm, tuned to balance the buffering effect, maximizing CO2RR selectivity while minimizing resistive ohmic losses. This thickness was enough to reduce the concentration of H+ near the GDE via establishing a concentration gradient, and through the kinetics of SO42− protonation (K2SO4 was used as electrolyte). This design proved to be scalable through optimization. The formate partial current density was substantially improved, as compared with the previous scalable industry design (Dioxide Materials Inc.), in which alkaline-stable Sustainion™ anion exchange membrane was employed.116,299,302
Table 1 Summary of GDEs used to convert CO2 to formate/formic acid




Catalyst material
Catalyst loading
Electrolyte
GDE preparation method
Current collector/GDL
Faradaic efficiency and total current density
Stability note
Ref.




Sn powder (100 mesh)
0.7 mg cm−2
MEA-type
Drop casting of catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 70% with 27 mA cm−2 at −1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—

142



Sn nanopowders
0.7 mg cm−2
0.45 M KHCO3 + 0.5 M KCl
Drop casting of catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 71% with 40 mA cm−2 at −1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—

295



Sn nanopowders (10–15 nm)
1 mg cm−2
0.45 M KHCO3 + 0.5 M KCl
Drop casting of catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL
Carbon
FE of 70% with 150 mA cm−2 at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Stable FE at about 70% with rate of 5.45 mmol m−2 s−1

148



Sn nanopowders
5 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Spraying catalyst ink (Sn powder + Nafion + PTFE + water) on GDL
Carbon based GDL rolling-pressed on copper mesh
FE of 87% with 22 mA cm−2 at −1.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—

139



Electrodeposited Sn on the Nafion-bonded GDL from SnCl2 solution
1 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Sn electrodeposited on Nafion-bonded GDL
Carbon based GDL rolling-pressed on copper mesh
FE of 75% with 35 mA cm−2 at −1.2 V vs. RHE
11% loss in FE of formate after 10 continuous runs

297



Electrodeposited Sn on the GDL
2.6 mg cm−2
0.5 M NaHCO3
Sn directly electrodeposited on a carbon GDL
Toray carbon paper
FE of 71% with 8.5 mA cm−2 at −1 V vs. RHE
Stable for 6 h without significant loss

298



Sn powders (100 nm)
0.67 mg cm−2 to 6.55 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Air-brushing catalyst ink (Sn powders and Nafion) on GDL
Sigracet GDL 10BC
FE of 81% with 16 mA cm−2 at −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—

165



SnOx-CNT
3 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Air-brushing SnOx-CNT and Nafion and isopropyl alcohol on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
FE of 77% with 10 mA cm−2 at −1.25 V vs. RHE
Over 20 h of continuous electrolysis at 1.25 V Vs. SHE.

237



Ru, Pd alloy particles
1 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Drop casting catalyst ink (Nafion + catalyst + water) on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
FE of 90% at −1.1 V vs. NHE, current density of 80 mA cm−2
—

312



CuSn alloy particles
—
1 M KOH
Casting catalyst ink (Nafion + catalyst + water) on GDL
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
FE of 82% for formate at −1.0 V vs. RHE with 148 mA cm−2
—

309



Two-Dimensional SnO2 Nanosheets
0.5 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
4.5 mg of SnO2 Nanosheets 1.8 mL of Milli-Q water, 2.7 mL of isopropyl alcohol, and 8 μL of 5 wt % Nafion solution to form catalyst ink. Carbon fiber paper
Sigracet 39 BC GDL
FE of 94.2% with current density of 471 mA cm−2 at −1.13 V vs. RHE
3 h stability with no changes with 200 mA cm−2 and 90.2% FE of formate

292



Bi nanoparticles
0.75 mg cm−2
0.5 M KCl + 0.45 M KHCO3
Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 70% and 300 mA cm−2
Highest concentration of formate produced was 18 g L−1 at 300 mA cm−2

293



Bismuth nanosheets
—
0.5 M KHCO3
Electrodeposition on GDL
GDL prepared via rolling press of carbon black and PTFE on Cu mesh
FE of 91.46% for formate
After 10 runs GDE showed FE of 65% at −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl

196



Bismuth nanosheets
—
2 M KHCO3
BiBr3 solution in DMSO drop-casted on GDL and heated to 140 °C
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 90% at 200 mA cm−2
—

303



Sn nanoparticles (40–100 nm)
3 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Catalyst ink manually coated GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 90% with 50 mA cm−2
50 mA cm−2 over 60 min, 1.47 mmol m−2 s−1, 1.9 g L−1

120



Sn particles (60–80 nm)
5 mg cm−2
MEA-type
Spraying catalyst ink (Sn + Nafion + water) on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
A current density of 200 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 3.7
500 h a current density of 140 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 3.5 V

299



SnO2 microsphere via hydrothermal process,
3 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Coating catalyst ink on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 62% at −1.7 V vs. SHE
Stable current density over 12 h of continuous electrolysis

294



2D-Bi catalyst
0.4 mg cm−2
Modified MEA-type (all-solid-state reactor)
Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet BC 35 GDL
FE of 90% for the production of 12 M formic acid
100 h continuous and stable generation of 0.1 M HCOOH

313



Bi (grain boundary-enriched nanoparticles)
0.7 mg cm−2
Modified MEA-type (all-solid-state reactor)
Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet BC 35 GDL
FE of 90% for pure solutions (up to nearly 100 wt.%)
30 h stable operation at 30 mA cm−2 with formate FE >90%

304



Sn
—
0.1–2 M KHCO3
Electrodeposition
Carbon cloth (CC, CeTech)
FE of 62.5% at −0.76 V vs. RHE with 18.7 mA cm−2
72 h without changes in FE of formate

193



Carbon-supported SnO2 (<100 nm)
0.5 mg cm−2
1.0 M K2SO4
Hand-painting catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL
Sigracet 39BC GDL
FE of 90% with 500 mA cm−2
11 h stable performance at 150 mA cm−2 with FE 85–90% for formate

301



SnO2 particles (100 nm)
4 mg cm−2
1.0 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + isopropyl alcohol + water) on GDL
Freudenberg GDL
251 mA cm−2 at −1.43 V vs. RHE
0.5 M formate being produced within 1 h

289



Sn nanoparticles
2 mg cm−2
MEA-type
Spraying catalyst ink on Nafion cation exchange membrane
—
FE of 93.3% at a cell voltage of 2.2 V with 52.9 mA cm−2
Formate concentration of 41.5 g L−1 was obtained

111



Tin oxide-derived 2D nanosheets
0.5 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Hand-painting catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL
CeTech GDL240 GDL
Partial current density of 116 mA cm−2 at −1.03 V vs. RHE
—

314



Sn nanoparticles prepared via impregnation electroreduction
—
0.5 M KHCO3
Impregnation of carbon black-Sn2+ on GDL, following an electroreduction to Sn
GDL made from carbon black, PTFE and copper mesh
FE of 87% at −1.2 V vs. RHE and partial current density of 62 mA cm−2 for formate
10 cycles test without significant performance drop

315





 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of a novel GDE-based cell with a thin layer of catholyte buffer (green area) and a bipolar membrane (BPM) for efficient formate production (HCOO−). Reproduced with permission.301 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (b) formate concentration, FE, and energy efficiency of flow-cell CO2RR directly feeding a formate fuel cell. Reproduced with permission.289 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) FE of 2D bismuth-loaded GDE as a function of current in H-cell and flow-cell configurations. Reproduced with permission.303 Copyright 2018, Wiley; (d) bismuth (Bi) nanosheet directly electrodeposited on carbon-based GDL. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (e) dependence of formic acid product concentration on the N2 gas flow rate under a fixed overall current density of 200 mA cm−2. Utilizing dry N2 gas flow, up to nearly 100 wt% pure formic acid was achieved; (f) schematic of an all-vapor-phase operation CO2 electrolyzer to produce high-purity formic acid (AEM = anion exchange membrane, CEM = cation exchange membrane, PSE = porous solid electrolyte). Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
Maximizing formate concentration facilitates its direct utilization in a closed loop of ‘electricity–formate–electricity’, which is a promising approach towards sustainable CO2RR to formate. Recently, Xiang et al. directly used produced formate from CO2RR in a fuel cell to generate power.289 Formate (0.5 M) was produced after 1h of CO2RR at a current density of 251 mA cm−2 in an alkaline electrolyte flow electrolyzer, fabricated with a GDE loaded with commercial SnO2 (supported on carbon black). A formate production yield of 22 g L−1 was achieved after 1 h operation (Fig. 11b), one of the highest reported for GDE-based electrolyzers. This high rate was due to the synergy between the alkaline electrolyte and GDE. Direct feeding of the product to a formate fuel cell produced a peak power density of 92 mW cm−2. This high formate production rate was further improved using 2D SnO2 nanosheets as the electrocatalyst in the GDE.292 Due to the significantly large surface area of thin nanosheets (3 nm in thickness), Li et al. achieved a new record for formate production among monometallic Sn-based catalysts at a large current density of 471 mA cm−2 with 94.2% FE. These recent high production rates show the enormous potential for energy production via CO2 reduction to formate with direct utilization.
GDEs for formate production mainly use Sn (tin) electrocatalyst; however, other promising electrocatalysts such as Bi (bismuth), In (indium) or CuSn alloy are being explored.305–308 Wang et al. recently showed that FE for formate with an Sn-loaded GDE could be improved via alloying with Cu.309 This is due to stronger adsorption of the HCOO* intermediate (required to produce formate) on CuSn intermetallic regions, leading to the suppression of HER. Bi-loaded GDEs are also attracting much attention because Bi needs a smaller overpotential as compared with Sn to produce formic acid.310 While metallic Bi has a formate FE of around 70%, De Arquer et al. boosted its performance by selectively enriching highly active Bi (Bi (110) facets) via preparation of the 2D nanosheets from BiOBr template, resulting in much higher current density compared to Bi (Fig. 13c).303 As a result, the GDE prepared with this 2D Bi-based catalyst performed stably over 65 h, reaching a record FE value of 90% with over 200 mA cm−2 current density in non-alkaline electrolyte (2 M KHCO3) (Fig. 13d). The modification of electrocatalyst chemical structure and resultant catalytic active defects, significantly improves GDE efficiency.254,255,306 Wang et al. directly electrodeposited uniform Bi nanosheets on a carbon-based GDL (Fig. 13e) and achieved up to 91% FE for formate.196 Through nanostructure tailoring, nanosheets of Bi303 and SnO2292 improve GDE CO2RR performance. In particular, nanosheets present abundant corner and edge sites, which facilitate strong local electric fields and contribute to the selective reduction of CO2 to formate.194,311
3.6 Recent advances in GDEs for CO2 reduction to CO (carbon monoxide)
Carbon monoxide is a major product of CO2RR, produced through a 2-electron transfer reaction. This process is of great importance as CO can be further converted to various hydrocarbons via the Fischer–Tropsch process or CORR.64 In addition, if the ratio of CO and H2 production is tuned precisely, syngas can be directly produced from CO2RR.316–318 Silver (Ag) and gold (Au) are the most-studied electrocatalysts for fabricating GDEs with an FE of 90–100% for CO.274 To date, large-scale application has been limited by the cost of these catalysts; therefore, maximizing catalyst efficiency is a priority.

3.6.1. Improving Ag/Au utilization in GDEs. 
A newly developed method for GDE preparation via MOF-mediated synthesis (Metal–Organic Frameworks) showed good CO2RR to CO performance with 385 mA cm−2 current density, over 96% FE, and only 0.2 mg cm−2 of Ag loading.319 In this method, a silver coordination polymer is built on porous support via multiple layer deposition, and subsequently electro-decomposited resulting in a highly uniform Ag-based CL on the GDE, schematically depicted in Fig. 14a. MOF-mediated synthesis proved more efficient than conventional CL deposition methods such as drop-casting, resulting in a catalyst layer (Fig. 14b and c) which minimized exposure of the electrolyte to substrate, avoiding HER. In addition, a high mass activity was recorded (1864–1926 mA mgAg−1), which is an important step towards minimizing costs where precious metal catalysts are utilized.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of Ag-loaded GDE preparation via MOF-mediated layer-by-layer method; SEM images of Ag-loaded GDEs prepared via (b) conventional drop-casting, (c) MOF-mediated layer-by-layer method shown in (a). Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (d) schematic of CL modification with CNT (MWCNT = multi-walled carbon nanotubes). Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) TiO2 as the catalyst holder to fabricate a GDE for efficient CO2RR to CO. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2014, Wiley. 
In another study, Ma et al. incorporated multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) to act as a conductive scaffold for Ag nanoparticles, owing to the van der Waals forces and high length-to-diameter ratio of MWCNT (Fig. 14d).320 By doing this, an Ag loading of 0.2 mg cm−2 was achieved for the Ag + MWCNT CL (Fig. 14d, ES3). It achieved a higher current density (350 mA cm−2), and the same FE of CO, as two other orientations (Fig. 14d, ES1 and ES2) with 1 mg cm−2 Ag loading. Incorporation of MWCNT improved the CO2 diffusion rate with microchannels, and reduced the charge transfer resistance within the CL;321 therefore, ES2 and ES3 configurations both had a higher current density than ES1 (Fig. 14d). The CL was prepared via drop-casting of Ag + MWCNT in ethanol without ionomer. This is beneficial as ionomers can potentially cover and deactivate the catalysts. Silver can also be loaded on MWCNT274 or support such as TiO2, assisting CO2 adsorption, decreasing overpotential by stabilizing the CO2− intermediate, and acting as a redox electron carrier to facilitate CO2RR to CO (Fig. 14e).322,323 Using TiO2 offers a few advantages: (1) TiO2 is 5–10 times cheaper than Ag, and (2) Super-fine Ag particles (sub-10 nm) can be loaded onto TiO2. It is known that electrocatalysts with diameter less than 10 nm have substantially better catalytic performance than larger particles, but without support, are susceptible to agglomeration.238,324 The GDE loaded with Ag–TiO2 catalyst showed very similar performance to the unsupported Ag-loaded GDE, with 2.5 times less Ag consumed, and over 90% FE for CO with a current density over 100 mA cm−2.325
Combining a low loading of Au with high current density for CO2 reduction to CO, a recent GDE loaded with Au clusters (Au25(SR)18) has shown exceptional activity for CO formation with both concentrated and diluted CO2 streams.326 The GDE prepared with Au clusters (Fig. 15a) allowed substantially lower Au loading at 16 μg cm−2 as compared with Au nanoparticles loaded on carbon black with 0.39 mg cm−2 loading. The Au clusters also displayed higher- and very stable selectivity for CO in 10% CO2 gas stream, which is the typical CO2 concentration in flue gas (Fig. 15b). This suggests that an energy-intensive CO2 purification step may be unnecessary, provided the electrocatalyst has high sensitivity to adsorb CO2 from the dilute stream. In this case, the GDE performance is not affected by low CO2 concentration in the vicinity of the electrocatalyst.327 Gold clusters have electron-deficient and low-coordinate atoms, which set them apart from Au nanoparticles. Thus, extraordinary current densities up to 540 mA cm−2 can be achieved when Au is used in a GDE. In addition, these porous-structure electrocatalysts help to mitigate bubble formation on the GDE surface.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of Au clusters and nanoparticles loaded on carbon black (C) to fabricate a GDE for CO production; (b) CO production selectivity on Au clusters and Au nanoparticles at −0.36 V vs. RHE as a function of CO2 partial pressure. Reproduced with permission.326 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (c) schematic of CO bubble formation on GDE surface, interrupting the catalyst-electrolyte interface (inactive reaction sites); (d) cell voltage instability at various current densities (5–80 mA cm−2), and severe cell voltage fluctuation at high current densities (60–80 mA cm−2). Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (e) GDE fabricated from non-conductive PVDF nano-fibers by composite deposition of Cu and Sn. PVDF is coated by polydopamine (pDA). Cu and Sn are deposited on pDA layer to form a Cu/Sn alloy catalyst layer. Reproduced with permission.332 Copyright 2019, Wiley; (f) electrochemical spontaneous precipitation (ESP) method to fabricate Cu/In-loaded GDE. Reproduced with permission.262 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
In production of gaseous products (such as CO or ethylene), bubble accumulation is an issue as it interferes with the electrolyte-catalyst reaction interfaces by covering the CL (Fig. 15c).328 This phenomenon increases the ohmic resistance and triggers voltage instability which is more likely to occur at higher current densities with higher formation rates for the gaseous products (Fig. 15d).279 Loading a CL with a sharp-structured electrocatalyst, e.g. nanoneedles or nanorods, is an effective way to mitigate bubble accumulation, and to increase the active surface area to minimize the impacts of slight bubble formation. These catalyst morphologies reduce the time required for nucleation and release of the bubbles, therefore bubbles depart the CL at a much smaller size, and do not grow on the catalyst surface.122


3.6.2. GDEs with non-noble electrocatalysts. 
GDE-based CO2RR studies to produce CO have mainly focused on using Au and Ag due to their high conversion selectivity.274 However, it is more economical to consider earth-abundant options to reduce the cost of GDE preparation. Catalysts made from non-noble metals such as alloys of Cu/Sn and Cu/In offer promising performance for CO2RR to CO;170,246,329–331 however, their GDE-based performance is yet to be widely evaluated. Alloy powders can be used to make the CL ink for conventional GDE fabrication,309 but other methods are being developed offering improved control over the alloy ratio, the key to tuning product selectivity.
Ju et al. used non-conductive electrospun polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) nanofibers to fabricate a Cu/Sn alloy GDE.332 Nanofibers were coated with polydopamine to provide nuclei for electroless Cu deposition to make PVDF conductive, prior to Sn electrodeposition on the Cu layer forming the alloy (Fig. 15e). Using the electrodeposition duration to carefully control the amount of Sn deposited, a CO partial current density above 100 mA cm−2 was achieved with over 80% FE. The CO partial current density was improved almost ten-fold, as compared with other Sn-deposited Cu planar catalysts,239,330 owing to enhanced CO2 mass transport using the GDE. Recently, Xiang et al. used a novel method to fabricate a GDE with bimetallic Cu/In for CO2RR to CO via electrochemical spontaneous precipitation (ESP, Fig. 15f).262,263 Combining a GDE flow cell with strongly alkaline electrolyte (1 M KOH), achieved a current density of ∼200 mA cm−2 with over 90% FE of CO. EPS consumes zero-energy, simply comprising immersion of a Cu2O-coated GDE in an In3+ solution, resulting in a spontaneously formed In layer, tunable by immersion duration. These recent improvements in methods to develop GDEs have lowered the Ag/Au loading significantly. In addition, the use of Cu/Sn and Cu/In alloys262,309,332 has reduced the dependency on expensive Ag/Au for selective CO production. A summary of GDEs fabricated for CO2 reduction to CO can be found in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of GDEs used to convert CO2 reduction to CO




Product (CO or CO/H2)
Catalyst material
Catalyst loading
Electrolyte
GDE preparation method
Current collector/GDL
Faradaic efficiency and total current density
Stability note
Ref.




CO/H2
Ag and Ni nanoparticles
2 mg cm−2
[EMIM][BF4] ionic liquid
Spraying catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
CO2 electrolysis at 100 mA cm−2 with 2 V cell voltage
Thousand hours stability

333



CO
Au catalyst
0.18 mg cm−2
2.0 M KOH
Automated air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
99% CO FE with 158 mA cm−2 partial current density
At least 8 h stability

274



CO
Ag nano-particles, <100 nm
—
10 M KOH
Painting catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
FE of 80% for CO and 32% conversion ratio per pass
—

327



CO
Carbon nanotube containing Ag catalyst
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
CO partial current density of 350 mA cm−2 with FE of >95% for CO, cell potential of −3 V
—

320



CO
Ag/TiO2
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Painting catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
CO partial current density of 101 mA cm−2 and FE of 90% for CO
—

325



CO/H2
Dendritic Ag
—
0.5 M KHCO3 + PEG
Electrodeposition from AgNO3 solution
Avcarb MGL370 GDL
80% FE of CO at −1.5 V vs. SCE
—

204



CO
Sn/Cu
—
0.1 KHCO3
Electroless Cu deposition on dopamine coated PVDF, and then electrodeposition of Sn on Cu
PVDF nanofiber membranes
80% FE of CO with above 100 mA cm−2 current density
135 h stability without significant changes

332



CO

fac-Re(diimine)(CO)3Cl and carbon nanotubes
1 mg cm−2
Nafion film
Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
FE of 8% at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—

321



CO
Copper–indium binary catalyst
4–5 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Electrochemical spontaneous precipitation of In on GDL
Cu2O-loaded carbon GDL
90% FE of CO and current density of 200 mA cm−2 at −1.17 V vs. RHE
—

262



CO
Single-atom nickel
0.2 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Infiltration of Ni precursor in a template, carbonization, and silica etching. Catalyst drop-casted on GDL
AvCarb GDL
50 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V vs. RHE
300 mA cm−2 with 99% FE of CO in MEA-type

334



CO
Ag
2 mg cm−2
10 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 39 BC GDL
EE of >80% for CO at 300 mA cm−2
10 h stability at pressurized 7 atm in 7 M KOH at a full cell potential of 2.8 V with current density 100, FE > 80%

335



CO
Ag
—
5 M KOH
Sputtering of Ag on GDL
PTFE membrane with a pore size of 450 nm
200 mA cm−2 with >95% FE of CO at a pressurized electrolyzer
6 h performance without decay at a cell voltage of −2.20 V and 250 mA cm−2

336



CO
Ag
—
1 M KHCO3 and 1 M KOH
Sputtering of Ag on GDL
PTFE membrane with a pore size of 450 nm
CO with FE >90% at current densities above 150 mA cm−2
Over 100 h of operation

337



CO
Ag coordination polymer
0.2 mg cm−2
0.1 M KHCO3
A layer-by-layer method, followed by electro-decomposition of coordination polymer
Carbon GDL
Partial current density of 385 mA cm−2 at around −1.0 V vs. RHE
Stable operation with high FECO (>96%) at 300 mA cm−2 for over 4 h

319



CO
Ag
—
MEA-type
Electrodeposition from 0.01 M AgNO3 solution onto H2SO4-treated GDL
AvCarb GDL
80% FE of CO at −1 V vs. RHE with 20 mA cm−2 current density
−350 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 3.4 V

201



CO
Au
120 μg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop casting of ink (water-ethylene glycol-n-propyl alcohol mixed) on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
96% FE of CO at −0.4 V vs. RHE with 70 mA cm−2 current density
12 h stability at A constant current density of 100 mA cm−2

152



CO
Ag nanoparticles
0.3–3 mg cm−2
1 M CsOH
Automated air-brushing of catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
CO partial current density of 417 and 866 mA cm−2 with FE of 100 and 98% at cell potentials of −2.5 and −3.0.
—

338



CO
Au25 clusters loaded on carbon black
16 μg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop casting of ink (water + Nafion) on GDL
Ce-Tech carbon GDL
540 mA cm−2 at −0.8 V vs. RHE
12 h stable operation

326



CO
Ag Nanocubes


MEA-type
Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
80 mA cm−2 with CO FE of >80%
—

339



CO
Coral-nanostructured Ag
0.5 mg cm−2
MEA-type
Electron-beam (e-beam) evaporation
Sigacet 39 BC GDL
312 mA cm−2 with CO FE over 90%
30 h stable operation at 100 mA cm−2 with CO FE > 90%

189



CO
Cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanoneedle
—
1 M KOH
Drop casting of ink on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
212 mA cm−2 with CO FE over 95% at −1.2 V vs. RHE
24 h stable operation of −1.0 V vs. RHE

183



CO
Ag, Au, Pd, pseudocapacitive nanoparticle/ordered-ligand interlayer
0.13 mg cm−2
1 M KHCO3
Drop casting of ink on GDL
Sigacet 39 BC GDL
400 mA cm−2 with CO FE over 98% at −1.2 V vs. RHE
6 h stable operation at 200 mA cm−2

340






3.7. Recent advances in GDEs for CO2 reduction to hydrocarbons (methane, ethylene) and alcohols (ethanol, methanol, and propanol)
In addition to CO and formic acid, other valuable chemicals can also be produced using Cu-based electrocatalysts with appreciable selectivity towards C2+ products.54,195,247,260,341–343 The current section focuses on CO2RR for production of methane, methanol, and other C2+ products such as ethylene, ethanol, and propanol.344 Synthesis of these products is challenging due to multiple proton-electron transfers, requiring selective electrocatalysts and modulation of CO2 concentration via CO2 flow operational conditions or CL porosity/thickness.123,345 Because CO is the critical intermediate in formation of these products, optimal levels of CO should be made available on the catalyst surface. While much GDE CO2RR research has focused on Cu-based electrocatalysts for the synthesis of these products, single product selectivity remains a major challenge.

3.7.1. Production of methane. 
Selective formation of methane from CO2 is uncommon since methane formation is suppressed on Cu-based electrocatalysts under alkaline conditions, similar to HER (local pH of GDE is alkaline as shown in Fig. 9b).192,198 Methane is the main product when electrolysis takes place at a lower temperature (e.g. 0 °C) using specific Cu-based catalysts such as polymer-supported Cu–Pd nanoalloy,346 Cu–porphyrin complex,347 or nano-Cu/glassy carbon catalyst.348 The preparation of these catalysts is complicated, with low feasibility for scale-up. Recently, Zhang et al. fabricated a GDE loaded with a highly dispersed, single-site Cu–N catalyst for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to methane in a flow cell reactor with 1 M KOH electrolyte.349 With a methane partial current density of 100 mA cm−2 (methane/ethylene ratio of 4:1), this study showed that limited size Cu nanoparticles favor methane production by suppressing the C–C coupling step required for ethylene production.348 Wang et al. recently found that lowering CO2 coverage on the CL is the key to high FE of methane from CO2RR on a Cu-based GDE, favoring the protonation of *CO to *CHO, the main intermediate for methane generation.350 Feeding diluted CO2 (75% CO2) to the GDE achieved the highest-reported partial current density of 108 mA cm−2 for methane. Further research is required to synthesize methane-selective electrocatalysts for CO2RR under alkaline or locally alkaline conditions, and to tune methane selectivity using operational variables.


3.7.2. Production of C2+ hydrocarbons and alcohols. 
For C2+ products, a GDE prepared with a nanoporous Cu catalyst with pore size 100–200 nm exhibited an excellent high partial current density of 400 mA cm−2 and FE of 62%.273 The nanoporous CL offered abundant catalytic active sites, and resulted in one of the highest current densities for C2+ products with good stability after 2 h electrolysis. During high-rate electrolysis, managing the transport of gaseous products through the GDE is challenging as bubble accumulation can trigger voltage instability, and disturb gas and ion diffusion pathways to/away from the catalytic sites, or block the catalytic active sites, as seen in Fig. 15c and d.279 Nanoporous Cu offers the desired porosity (Fig. 16a), provided that the catalyst loading is adjusted carefully. A high catalyst loading results in increased gaseous product accumulation, which leads to a drop in performance (0.8 mg cm−2 was the optimum loading in this study). This highly porous CL also enhances the catalyst surface accessibility, and prevents the negative effect of carbonation at the electrode–electrolyte interface, which degrades performance, as previously explained.274
 Fig. 16  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the nano-porous copper catalyst on GDL. Reproduced with permission.273 Copyright 2018, Wiley; (b) FE of C2+ products under various applied potentials (−0.2 to −0.9 V vs. RHE) over halogen–Cu catalyst GDEs; (c) Formation rates of C2+ products under various applied potentials over halogen–Cu catalyst GDEs in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; This study shows the highest rate and FE for C2+ products; (d) schematic of the Cu-loaded GDE with polymer intrinsic microporosity layer (PIM) improving ethylene production performance. Reproduced with permission.354 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (e) schematic of the layered structure of the tandem GDE with a ZnO layer over a Cu layer; (f) combined layer of Cu + ZnO as the CL. Reproduced with permission.356 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
For ethylene and C2+ products, the novel ionomer-treated PTFE-based GDEs mentioned in Fig. 12a and b, resulted in one of the highest current density with over 900 and 1200 mA cm−2 for ethylene and C2+, respectively, with stability for over 150 h.28 However, a recent series of GDEs with halogen-modified Cu electrocatalysts demonstrated a record-breaking current density of 1.6 A cm−2 with 80% FE for ethanol and ethylene.124 With almost seven-fold higher C2+ formation rate and doubled FE as compared with a GDE with unmodified (bare) Cu (Fig. 16b and c), this study revealed that molecular modification of Cu substantially improves GDE performance. It has been shown that facile doping of fluorine or sulfur can greatly enhance the catalytic activity and selectivity of the catalysts.254,255,351,352 If ethanol is the single product of interest, deoxygenation and the production of ethylene should be suppressed. Wang et al. recently reported 52% FE of ethanol for a Cu-based GDE coated by a nitrogen-doped carbon (N–C) layer.353 Necessary for ethanol formation, the (N–C) layer has a strong electron-donating ability and can suppress breaking of the C–O bond.
Inspired by the ionomer treatment method, (Fig. 12a) establishing a high CO2 concentration on the GDE surface and preventing bubble accumulation, Perry et al. coated the CL with a layer of polymer with intrinsic microporosity (PIM) (Fig. 16d).354 This drop-casted PIM thin layer is permeable to the electrolyte, and on contact, a CO2-saturated layer of electrolyte is formed on the Cu-based CL. Therefore, CO2 is stored in a triphasic environment for facile reduction, improving the efficiency of CO2 reduction to ethylene, provided that the thickness of hydrophilic PIM is optimized to avoid a negative impact on the water-repellence of the GDE. This design showed high surface hydrophobicity stability with prolonged operation, and corresponding improved stability of ethylene production.355
Another new CL design to improve the hydrocarbon selectivity of CO2RR integrates Cu with a CO-generation catalyst to fabricate a ‘mixed catalyst’ CL. For example, ZnO, in the CL can enhance the C–C coupling kinetics by increasing the local concentration of key intermediate, CO. Zhang et al. tried this by designing a Cu/ZnO tandem GDE, as shown in Fig. 16e.356 The ZnO layer feeds CO to the Cu layer, maintains a high concentration of CO for further reduction to hydrocarbons, and increases the CO utilization efficiency. This tandem design showed improved performance with current density and FE of C2+ products, 1.8 and 1.3 times, respectively, higher than that of the mixed Cu + ZnO GDE, as shown in Fig. 16f. The main concept behind the tandem design is that the CO produced on the ZnO (or Ag layer) layer diffuses back to the Cu layer, effectively maintaining a high CO concentration on the GDE.357 This study introduced a new method of tuning C2+ product selectivity by considering a mixture/layers of different catalysts in the CL of a GDE, without any atomic- or nano-scale adjacent. It should be noted that for selective hydrocarbon production from CO2RR on a GDE, the Cu catalyst nanostructure and surface chemistry play critical roles.280 For example, a GDE fabricated with Cu nanocubes showed substantially better catalytic activity and selectivity for ethylene formation than a GDE made with Cu nanospheres.358 The Cu nanocubes, rich with (110) facets, have better C–C coupling to the intermediate *CO than (111) facets, enabling high activity for C2 products. In addition, Cu nanocrystals with a single-crystal nature have a similar catalytic activity to the highly polycrystalline and disordered catalysts with surface defects (e.g. high-angle grain boundaries, steps, and corners), thereby enhancing single product selectivity.108 Therefore, the selection of appropriate electrocatalyst in terms of the nanostructure, shape, and facet is necessary for optimal performance and selective production of hydrocarbons/alcohols from CO2RR.38,39,42,47,49,56,260
Fewer studies have focused on using a GDE-based electrolyzer to produce multicarbon liquid products such as methanol and propanol from CO2, than to produce ethylene and ethanol.341,359–361 Albo et al. used Cu2O- and Cu2O/ZnO-loaded GDEs to reduce CO2 to methanol,362–364 since Cu-oxide and oxide-derived Cu have shown better catalytic activity for CO2 reduction to C2+ products, as compared with metal Cu.365–367 Cu2O- and Cu2O/ZnO-loaded GDEs with FE of around 55% outperformed most Cu-based catalysts used for conversion of CO2 to methanol.363 Cu2O is prone to losing catalytic activity due to the reduction of Cu+ to Cu during the cathodic reaction. However, Cu2O/ZnO-loaded GDE exhibited superior stability as compared with the Cu2O-based GDE, despite having a lower FE for methanol. Similarly, a GDE prepared with CuAg alloys performed well for high-rate C2+ formation due to the presence of Ag to stabilize Cu2O in the CL.195 Given the economic value of these products (especially propanol) from CO2RR, more studies are being carried out in GDE-based flow cells, focusing on modulating the selectivity of Cu via molecular modifications.195,368 As presented in Table 3, the highest selectivity recorded for CO2RR multicarbon products is for ethylene.124 Selective CO2 reduction to multicarbons apart from ethylene remains a challenge, mainly because the product selectivity of Cu catalyst decreases due to the conversion of CO2 to formate, CO, H2, and ethylene.38 In this regard, direct CO reduction (CORR) has exhibited better performance than CO2RR, as discussed in the following sections.
Table 3 Summary of GDEs used to reduce CO2 to hydrocarbons and alcohols




Main products
Catalyst material
Catalyst loading
Electrolyte
GDE preparation method
Current collector/GDL
Faradaic efficiency and total current density
Stability note
Ref.




Methane
Pyrolyzing Cu(II) precursors absorbed on carbon black
0.06 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop casting catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
Methane FE of 42%, partial current density of 100 mA cm−2 at −1 V vs. RHE
—

349



C2+ products
Nanoporous Cu by chemical reduction
0.8 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Painting catalyst ink on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
62% FE for C2+ products with current density of 653 mA cm−2
2 h stability at 200 mA cm−2

273



Ethylene
Cu nanocubes
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop casting catalyst ink
Freudenberg GDL
FE of 60% and current density of 144 mA cm−2 for ethylene
—

358



Methanol
Cu2O (<5 μm)
1 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Air-spraying catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL
Toray GDL
45.7% FE of methanol at −1.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl
Over 20 h at constant current of 10 mA cm−2

362, 363



Ethylene and ethanol
Cu nanoparticles
0.1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (catalyst + Nafion + tetrahydrofuran) on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
46% FE of ethylene and ethanol with current density over 200 mA cm−2
Stable over 4 h electrolysis

374



Ethylene and ethanol
Cu–Ag alloys
0.5 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (catalyst + Nafion + tetrahydrofuran) on GDL
Sigracet 35 BC GDL
60% and 25% FE for ethylene and ethanol, respectively, at −0.7 V vs. RHE with the current density of 300 mA cm−2
—

195



C2+ alcohols
Cu-based catalysts
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop casting catalyst ink on GDL
Carbon-based GDL
FE of 32% with 126 mAcm−2 for C2+ alcohol production
—

368



Ethylene
Cu
—
1 M KHCO3
Cu sputtered on GDL
PTFE-based GDL
FE of 72% for ethylene with a current density of 230 mA cm−2
190 hours stability in MEA-type system

375



C2 products
Cu
0.18 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Cu sputtered on GDL
PTFE-based GDL
(FE) of 68% for C2 products at cell voltage of 3.0 V with 350 mA cm−2
10 h stable utilizing 15% CO2 (v/v) and 4% O2 (v/v) mixture gas feedstocks

371



Alcohols
Cu/Bi metal–organic framework-based
1 mg cm−2
0.5 M KHCO3
Air-brushing of catalyst ink on GDL
Toray carbon paper GDL
FE of 36.9% for methanol at 20 mA cm−2, 18.2% for ethanol at 10 mA cm−2
Stable over 5 h of operation

376



Ethanol
Cu/TiO2 nanoparticles modified nitrogen-doped graphene
1 mg cm−2
0.2 M KI
Drop-casting of catalyst ink on GDL
Carbon paper GDL
FE of ethanol up to 43.6% at −0.75 V vs. RHE
—

377



Ethylene and ethanol
Cu
2 mg cm−2
MEA-type
Sputtered Cu, 150 nm thickness
Porous PTFE membrane (0.45 mm pores)
80% FE for ethylene and C2+ products, 50% FE of ethylene, and direct production of 4 wt% ethanol
100 h steady ethylene production at >100 mA cm−2

110



Ethylene and ethanol
Fluorine-modified copper
0.25 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL
Carbon based GDL (GDL, YLS-30T)
Current density of 1.6 A cm−2 C2+ FE of 80%
40 h of operation at a constant current density of 400 mA cm−2

124



Ethylene
Facet-tuned Cu
110, 250, 440 μg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL
Sigracet BC39 GDL
Ethylene FE of 57% at −0.65 V vs RHE
6 h stability at 100 mA cm−2; flooding happens

280



Ethylene
Cu
—
1 M KOH
Cu was sputtered on GDL, polymer with intrinsic microporosity (PIM) was coated on Cu layer
Freudenberg carbon paper GDL
FE of 45.5% with −67.4 mA cm−2
2 h stable performance following a decay in FE of ethylene

354



C2+ products
Cu/ZnO tandem CL
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing Cu-based catalyst ink on GDL, Air-brushing ZnO-based ink on Cu layer
Sigracet 34BC GDL
FE of >80% with 450 mA cm−2 current density for C2+ products at −0.7 V vs. RHE
10 h stable performance at 600 mA cm−2 with FE of 40% and 20% for ethylene and ethanol

356



Ethylene
Cu–Al alloys
—
0.3, 1, 3, 10 M KOH
Cu was evaporated on GDL by thermal evaporation. Al was sputtered on Cu layer
Sigracet 39 BC GDL
FE of 80% at current density of 400 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH
50 h stable ethylene formation with FE over 80% at current density of 400 mA cm−2

378



Ethanol
Cu with nitrogen-doped carbon.
0.19 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Cu was sputtered on GDL. nitrogen-doped carbon was sputtered on Cu
Freudenberg H14C9 GDL
FE of 52% for ethanol at 300 mA cm−2 for nitrogen-doped carbon layer with 34% N
15 h stable performance in MEA-type system without catalyst degradation

353



Methane
Cu
—
1 M KHCO3
Cu was sputtered on GDL (∼100 nm thick)
PTFE GDL
48% FE pf methane with a partial current density of 108 mA cm−2
22 h stability at current density of 225 mA cm−2 with 48% methane FE and CO2 at 75%

350







3.7.3. Effect of CO2 concentration and flow rate. 
In addition to electrocatalyst and CL design, gas feed concentration, and flow rate are two key operational parameters which enhance the formation of C2+ products on GDEs, by boosting C–C coupling through modulating the local CO2 concentration.345 As seen in Fig. 17a, with the dilution of CO2 feed to 50%, the required potentials to achieve a current density of 100 or 200 mA cm−2 were similar to those using pure gas. However, for 25% CO2 or less, the potential increased along with a higher FE of HER and a lower FE of C1 or C2+ products, due to the low local CO2 availability.123,369 Moreover, the 50% CO2 feed showed a substantially higher FE for C2+ at 200 mA cm−2 as compared with pure CO2. This is due to the lower *CO2 surface coverage which leads to more optimal coverage of *CO and other intermediates required to enhance FE of C2+ products. At 100 mA cm−2 (correspondent to a lower potential), FE of C2+ products remained constant, but the FE of C1 products was positively correlated to each respective CO2 feed concentration. This indicates the differing effects of CO2 concentration on C2+ and C1 products, and that the C–C coupling rate (which is essential for C2+ products formation) is more sensitive to the local CO2 concentration at higher current densities.
 Fig. 17  (a) FE of CO2RR products at various CO2 feed concentrations (25–100%) and 100, 200 mA cm−2 current densities; (b) FE of CO2RR products at various CO2 feed flow rates (5–40 sccm or standard cubic centimeters per minute) and 100, 200 mA cm−2 current densities. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (c) FE of C2 products (ethylene and ethanol) for 15% CO2 (v/v) feed stream, with and without the presence of O2 at 1 bar and 15 bar in 1 M KOH as a function of cell voltage, as compared with 100% CO2 (v/v) at 1 bar; (d) stability of CO2RR to C2 products on a Cu-PTFE GDE coated with hydrophilic ionomer at 10 bar absolute pressure in 1 M KOH electrolyte, with feed gas containing 15% CO2 (v/v) and 4% O2 (v/v); (e) schematic of a Cu-PTFE GDE coated with a hydrophobic (left) or hydrophilic (right) nano-porous ionomer to minimize the adverse effects of O2 impurity. The hydrophilic layer slows O2 diffusion making the GDE O2-tolerant. Reproduced with permission.371 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Reducing the pure CO2 flow rate from 40 to 5 sccm increased the C2+ product FE exponentially to 60.3%, while the FE of C1 products exhibited the opposite trend (Fig. 17b). The potential and H2 FE remained relatively constant for various flow rates, indicating that CO2 availability was sufficient even at 5 sccm. A lower CO2 flow rate helps to optimize the local CO2 concentration for enhanced C–C coupling. Therefore, CO2 concentration and flowrate, in addition to the microstructure of the CL (as shown in Fig. 6d), need to be precisely regulated to tune the product selectivity of CO2RR to C1 or C2+ products.370 The importance of flow conditions has been underestimated in previous studies, and poor FE of multicarbon products from CO2RR can be attributed to the lack of optimized CO2 concentration/flow rate.
While regulating local CO2 concentration is necessary to tune the CO2RR selectivity, the capacity to use a diluted CO2 feed, similar to industrial gas streams such as flue gas with 15% CO2, is a necessary step to scale-up GDE-based electrolyzers without a CO2 pre-purification step. However, it was seen that dilution of the CO2 feed to less than 50% reduced the FE of C1 or C2+ products (Fig. 17a, 25% CO2 diluted feed).
Operating CO2RR at an elevated pressure can neutralize the negative effect of diluted CO2 feed (Fig. 17c). This is a more economical option than a CO2 purification step, and aids HER suppression.275,335 Therefore, a higher FE for C2 products from CO2RR was observed with simulated flue gas at 15 bar, as compared with pure CO2 at 1 bar (Fig. 17c, blue and black lines). However, the effect of O2 impurities in real industrial flue gas streams (4% v/v), and the competing ORR,372 which may consume up to 99% of the applied current, should not be overlooked.373 In addition, pressurization does not stop the parasitic ORR when O2 impurity exists (Fig. 17c, dashed line). One way to address this issue is by slowing O2 transport to the CL surface through a selective coating barrier on the GDE. For this purpose, O2 diffusion and adsorption on the CL can be avoided via an O2-repelling ionomer layer as schematically shown in Fig. 17e.371 The hydrophilic ionomer coating was able to impede O2 diffusion because when the hydrophilic nanopores are filled with electrolyte, O2 diffuses less readily than CO2 through the nanopores, due to the volatile nature of O2 in aqueous solutions. In addition, the hydrophobic barrier provides a non-selective gas-phase diffusive pathway for both CO2 and O2. The GDE with a hydrophilic coating can convert O2-containing dilute CO2 feeds with a FEC2 of 68% and over 10 hours of stable operation (Fig. 17d), comparable with successful CO2RR to C2 products generated with pure CO2 feed.192,195 In addition, as shown in Fig. 12 and 16d, a hydrophilic layer on the GDE can improve the GDE wettability and ion transport, and increase the FE of the desired product. A summary of the GDEs fabricated for CO2 reduction to hydrocarbons and alcohols is given in Table 3.

3.8. Key findings and challenges in GDE-based CO2RR
• Efficient GDE-based CO2RR with selective electrocatalysts for CO (Au, Ag) and formate (Sn, Bi) has been achieved.
• Selective GDE-based CO2RR to multicarbons besides ethylene remains a challenge as the product selectivity of Cu catalyst decreases due to the conversion of CO2 to formate, CO, H2, and ethylene.38
• Increasing the single-pass conversion of CO2 and purity of the gas/liquid products is critical to reducing the cost of CO2RR in real applications. Operating conditions such as CO2 flow/concentration should be optimized to maximize single-pass conversion. This is crucial for gas products which are often mixed with unreacted CO2.
• Carbonation and flooding are still major issues with using GDEs for CO2RR. Although ultra-high current densities have been achieved28,124 further studies are needed to confirm stability over time. In particular, new electrocatalysts should be assessed for at least 100 h. Long-term stability tests also are needed to determine electrocatalyst durability in terms of morphology and active sites.
• GDE stability should be assessed in real CO2 gas streams with impurities. Impurities not only decrease CO2 concentration in the proximity of the CL, but impurities can also interrupt CO2RR mechanisms or cause changes to the electrocatalyst surface chemistry. Therefore, more attention should be given to examining the durability of GDEs with feeds simulating real gas streams.
4. GDEs for carbon monoxide reduction reaction (CORR)
4.1. Advantages of GDE-based CORR over CO2RR
Carbon monoxide reduction reaction (CORR) is an early stage, promising electrocatalytic process, which solely uses Cu and Cu-based materials as electrocatalysts.64,150,379–382 CORR presents a huge economic opportunity because the conventional method of CO conversion i.e., the Fischer–Tropsch process, is energy-intensive and operated at high temperatures (200–400 °C) and pressure (up to 200 atm).383 CORR produces various multicarbon and oxygenated products,384 and exhibits similar pathways to CO2RR, after CO2 is converted to surface adsorbed CO (COads) as the first intermediate to multicarbon products.385,386 However, given the different properties of CO and CO2 when dissolved in an aqueous electrolyte, CORR holds several advantages over CO2RR, when designing an alkaline GDE-based electrolyzer to produce multicarbon products.178
As previously discussed, carbonation during CO2RR is a major issue and makes alkaline CO2RR fundamentally unsustainable.22,232,274,337 CORR can circumvent this issue, owing to the inherent stability of CO in alkaline conditions (Fig. 18a), and high selectivity of CORR to C2+ products.22,145,177,226,387 In addition, CO2 to formic acid requires fewer electrons (2e−), and is classified as a dead-end pathway in CO2RR, competing with multicarbon production.178,388 Moreover, for the same multicarbon product, less electron transfer is needed in CORR as compared with CO2RR, e.g., ethanol/ethylene production requires 12e− in CO2RR, and 8e− in CORR. Importantly, during alkaline CO2RR the catholyte pH drops, even at 0 mA cm−2, due to the rapid equilibrium reaction between CO2 and KOH (Fig. 18b).389 This local pH drop does not happen for CORR. At 300 mA cm−2, the OH− concentration under CORR conditions is one order of magnitude higher than under CO2RR, although the bulk pH is identical at 13.5 (Fig. 18b). Higher OH− concentration indicates lower ohmic resistance in close proximity to the CL and improved HER suppression.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustrating the CO2 interaction with OH− to form CO32−, and stability of CO in alkaline electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (b) pH profiles for CO2RR/CORR in 1 M KOH under various current densities as a function of distance from the CL (x = 0 means on the GDE surface); (c) cell voltage and CO2RR/CORR product distribution (bars) on an oxide-derived Cu-based GDE at 300 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH; (d) cell voltage and product distribution of CORR (FE) in 2 M KOH at 500 mA cm−2 on an oxide-derived Cu-based GDE, EtOH = ethanol, PrOH = propanol, AcO− = acetic acid/acetate. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
These advantages highlight the superiority of CORR over CO2RR particularly for multicarbon production at high current densities (>200 mA cm−2).390–392 Direct CO feeding increases the near-surface concentration of CO, which is widely accepted to be a key reaction intermediate for the formation of C2+ products.150,178 A comparison of CO2RR and CORR using a Cu-based GDE in a 1 M KOH at 300 mA cm−2 revealed that the total FE of C2+ products from CORR (80%) was much higher than that from CO2RR (55%) (Fig. 18c, black circles). Moreover, in CO2RR over 20% of FE is dedicated to CO (15%) and formic acid (7%), which limits the FE of C2+ products.107,178 The overall cell voltage increased by ∼100 mV when the feed changed from CO to CO2, due to the additional energy required to activate CO2 relative to CO, and pH drop when CO2 was used. This, along with CORR lower electron demand for the same product, implies that less energy input is required for CORR over CO2RR. In addition, acetic acid as a techno-economically useful chemical,22,177 has a much lower FE in CO2RR than that in CORR (Fig. 18c). Furthermore, the GDE used for CO2RR showed a sharp increase in the cell voltage after 40 min, due to carbonate-derived flooding. In comparison, the CORR voltage was fairly stable with a slight increase (Fig. 18d), probably due to the build-up of gas bubbles at high current density.
4.2. Recent advances in GDEs for CORR

4.2.1. Production of ethylene. 
Han et al. recently for the first time used a Cu-based GDE for CORR (Fig. 19a), observing a significant increase in ethylene partial current density as compared with feeding CO via purging (Fig. 19b, increase from 0.9 to 50.8 mA cm−2).136 Following Han et al., several studies by Sargent et al. and Jiao et al. used GDEs for selective CORR to hydrocarbons by modifying the Cu nanostructure of the electrocatalyst.107,149,168,177,181,387 Recently, a record-breaking FE of 53% and a current density of >800 mA cm−2 were achieved in CO reduction to ethylene by constraining CO coverage on a Cu-loaded GDE using a mixture of CO and N2.168 Using pure CO on a Cu-loaded GDE usually results in an FE of up to 30% for ethylene in 1 M KOH (Fig. 18c and 19c);107 however, feeding 10% CO gas increased the FE to 53%. Therefore, the key to more selective ethylene production from CORR on a Cu-loaded GDE is to constrain operating conditions such that CO availability is neither too high (promotes oxygenates) nor too low (causes HER). A high concentration of CO leads to a higher density of *C2 intermediates at the catalyst–electrolyte interface, which subsequently react with hydroxide ions to form acetate, or are further reduced to C3 product, propanol (Fig. 19d right-side). An optimized CO concentration restricts further reduction of intermediates (Fig. 19d left-side), and ethylene selectivity can be effectively tuned. Using a diluted gas stream also increases performance, for example, a sharp increase from 25% to 75% in CO single-pass conversion was observed when 40% CO was used instead of pure CO, indicating that the majority of the pure CO stream exits the cell unreacted.226
 Fig. 19  (a) Fabrication procedure for a Cu-loaded GDE for CORR; (b) flow-through GDE-based and flow-by CO bubbling (non-GDE) for CORR to ethylene. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (c) the FEs of CORR products at various CO concentrations (2.5–100%) at an applied potential of −0.44 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH; (d) schematic of porous GDE with CO reduction at the catalyst–electrolyte interface, showing how CO-deficiency and CO-surplus conditions influence product selectivity. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (e) FEs of C2 and C3 products from CORR for Cu nanocatalysts of various morphologies (scale bar: 100 nm). Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (f) total current density and FEs of CORR products on a GDE with Cu nanosheets as the catalyst in 2 M KOH, as a function of the applied potential. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 


4.2.2. Production of ethanol, acetate, and propanol. 
Ethylene is usually the dominant product of CORR if typical Cu particles are used as the GDE electrocatalyst (Fig. 18c and d). However, the production of C2+ products, such as ethanol, propanol, and acetate, is also feasible by CORR, in contrast to the inefficient selectivity of these products from CO2RR.178 In particular, products such as propanol and acetate are techno-economically appealing based on the commodity price and the average electricity price (assuming 2–3 V required cell voltage for electrolysis),22 although electrochemically produced ethanol at present cannot compete with the subsidized ethanol produced from corn.230 Unlike ethylene, whose FE can be improved via constraining CO, a high CO concentration on a Cu-based GDE is required to boost the oxygenation and formation of propanol/acetate (50–100% CO concentration, Fig. 19c).393 This explains the relatively higher FE of propanol/acetate in CORR than in CO2RR. Moreover, for C2+ products such as propanol, the nanostructure and active sites of Cu electrocatalyst need to be accurately tuned to promote the appropriate intermediates for the production of these hydrocarbons.180,394,395 For example, highly fragmented copper exhibiting a mixture of Cu(111) and Cu(100) facets selects for C1 and C2 intermediates, respectively, and these two intermediates are simultaneously required to convert CO to propanol, a liquid engine fuel.380,387
For propanol production, a GDE prepared with Cu nanoparticles with open cavities (as seen in Fig. 19e) showed superior FE as compared with solid nanoparticles or half-open cavities.181 It was observed that an open Cu nanocavity structure promotes C3 formation via the nanoconfinement of C2 intermediates, leading to an FE of propanol twice that achieved with solid particles. The highest documented FE of propanol from CORR has been 23%, obtained using copper ‘adparticles’. Adparticles possess a high density of undercoordinated atoms, which serve as preferential sites for n-propanol formation.394 For acetate production, the highest partial current density of 131 mA cm−2 was achieved with a 2D nanosheet Cu-loaded GDE (Fig. 19f).177 This was due to the exitance of Cu(111) steps, instead of Cu (100) and Cu(110), which effectively suppressed the formation of ethanol and propanol, and led to a higher FE of acetate as compared with spherical Cu particles. Therefore, to precisely tune the product selectivity of CORR, careful consideration should be given to the molecular structure and nanostructure of Cu electrocatalysts used in a GDE.46


4.2.3. Effect of CO concentration and flow rate. 
Increasing the single-pass conversion of CO is an important engineering requirement, as a low feed conversion strongly affects the product separation- and overall process cost.217 This can be achieved by reducing CO concentration in the feed and as can be seen in Fig. 20a, by using 40% CO flow, CO conversion substantially increases from around 20% to over 60%.226 Besides CO concentration, another operational parameter influencing GDE-based CORR is the CO flow rate. At a lower CO flux (0.125 vs. 0.5 cm3 min−1), a higher overpotential (by 70 mV) was required to attain a current density of 144 mA cm−2 (−1.49 V vs. −1.56 V, Fig. 20b and c).226 This means that more energy input is required for a given current density. Thus, the cell becomes less energy-efficient, resulting from insufficient CO supply. In addition, at a lower CO flux, HER becomes dominant at higher potentials/current densities (Fig. 20c, black bar). As the supplied CO is insufficient to maintain the rate of CORR to hydrocarbons on the GDE, the current is consumed by HER. In summary, the CO stream concentration and flow should be adjusted based on the applied potential (or current density) for the desired product, to achieve both high CO single-pass conversion and high FE. A summary of GDEs fabricated for CO reduction to various products can be found in Table 4.
 Fig. 20  (a) Product distributions and single-pass CO conversions as a function of CO concentration in the inlet gas stream with 1 M NaOH catholyte; partial current density of CORR product distributions as a function of GDE potentials with (b) 0.5 sccm CO flux; (c) 0.125 sccm CO flux. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Table 4 Summary of GDEs used to convert CO




Main products
Catalyst material
Catalyst loading
Electrolyte
GDE preparation method
Current collector/GDL
Faradaic efficiency and Total current density
Stability note
Ref.




Ethylene
Cu-nanoparticle
7 mg cm−2
10 M KOH
Carbon powders, Teflon, and copper acetate solution applied onto Cu gauze and pressed after air drying; Cu nanoparticles generated by reduction in forming gas at 325 °C.
Cu gauze
50.8 mA cm−2 for COR to C2H4 was achieved at −0.85 V vs. RHE at −15 °C
FE of C2H4 was stabilized between 13.7 and 18.4% during the first 2 h of operation

136



C2 Products
Cu catalyst by NaBH4 reduction of Cu(OAc)2 in 2-ethoxyethanol
250 mg cm−2
1 M NaOH catholyte
AvCarb 2230, a commercial PTFE-treated GDL with an MPL
AvCarb 2230 GDL
65%-76% FE of ethylene. The rest was for ethanol, acetate, and propanol
Direct production of 1.1 M acetate at cell potential of 2.4 V over 24 h

226



Propanol, ethanol, ethylene, acetate
Cu
—
—
Cu was electrodeposited on GDL in an electrolyte containing 0.15 M CuCl2·2H2O
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
A current density of 87 mA cm−2 at −2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. FE of 32.6% for C2H4, 42.6% for liquid-based carbon products
—

396



C2+ products
Commercial Cu powder (0.5–1.5 μm, 99%)
1 mg cm−2
2.0 M KOH
Copper powders annealed at 500 for 2 h were dispersed in catalyst ink and drop-cast onto a GDL
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
91% C2+ selectivity at a C2+ partial current density of 635 mA cm−2
1 h at 500 mA cm−2 Stable cell voltage 3.05–3.25 V and stable FE

107




n-Propanol
Highly fragmented Cu
∼0.8 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (Nafion + catalyst powder + methanol) on GDL
Freudenberg carbon Paper GDL
20% FE of n-propanol at −0.45 V vs. RHE
—

387



Acetate
2D Cu nanosheets via chemical reduction
0.5 mg cm−2
2 M KOH
Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
FE of 48% acetate partial current density up to 131 mA cm−2
3 h at −0.7 V vs. RHE with acetate FE over 40%

177



Ethylene
Cu nanopowder from a chemical reduction of CuSO4·5H2O
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + ethanol) on GDL
Toray carbon Paper GDL
Ethylene FE of 52.7% at −0.7 V vs. RHE
24 h stable performance with ethylene FE of over 40% at −0.8 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH

145



Ethylene
Cu-nanoparticles (40–60 nm)
3 mg cm−2
1 M KHCO3
Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL
Freudenberg carbon Paper GDL
89% FE for C2 and C3 products at −300 mA cm−2
20 h at −200 mA cm−2 with slight FE decline

178



Acetamide
Cu nanoparticles (25 nm)
0.6 mg cm−2
1 M KOH + NH3 co-electrolysis of CO and NH3
Painting catalyst ink (Cu catalyst + Nafion + isopropanol + CNT)
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
40% FE of acetamide at −0.65 V vs. RHE
8-hour stability for CO electrolysis with 2:1 (mol/mol) NH3:CO in 1 M KOH at 100 mA cm−2

149




n-Propanol
Nano Cu with nanocavities
1 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + methanol) on GDL
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
Propanol FE of 21% with 7.8 mA cm−2 at −0.56 V vs. RHE
—

181




n-Propanol
Cu adparticles
0.75 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + methanol) on GDL
Freudenberg GDL
23% FE of propanol at 0.47 V vs. RHE, partial current density of 11 mA cm−2
—

394



Hydrocarbons and multicarbon oxygenates (mainly ethylene and acetate)
Cu powder (Dendritic shape, <45 μm)
1.0 mg cm−2
0.1 M KOH
Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu powder + Nafion) on GDL
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
80% FE of hydrocarbons and multicarbon oxygenates with more than 100 mA cm−2 current density
2 h stability with negligible changes

182



Ethylene
Copper oxide
1.0 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu oxide + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL
Sigracet 29 BC GDL
FE of 52% with >800 mA cm−2
Stable performance at 150 mA cm−2 with FE of 71%

168



C2+ alcohols (ethanol, propanol)
Cu nanoparticles (∼100 nm) incorporated with Pd
1.0 mg cm−2
1 M KOH
Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL
Sigracet 28BC GDL
40% FE for alcohols and a partial current density of 277 mA cm−2
5 h stable operation with unchanged FE for alcohols

395






4.3. Key findings and challenges in GDE-based CORR
• GDE-based CORR has gained much attention as a separate class of gas-phase electrochemical reaction due to advantages over CO2RR for sustained C2+ production, e.g., ethylene and acetate in alkaline electrolyte.22
• Cu is the only electrocatalyst used for GDE fabrication for CORR, and it is intrinsically non-selective. Therefore, the significance of electrocatalyst morphology/nanostructure to tune selectivity towards a single product should not be underestimated.180
• GDE-based CORR selectivity can be also tuned via tailoring CO concentration and flow rate to regulate the catalytic pathways of CORR toward the desired product and improve single-pass conversion.
• Selective production of techno-economically appealing products such as propanol (with highest recorded FE of 23–26%107,394) is still an issue with ongoing efforts in the development of selective electrocatalysts. Recently, alloy electrocatalysts for CORR have shown promising results and this opens a new avenue for developing more selective electrocatalysts for CORR.384
• Due to superiority of CORR over CO2RR for production of multicarbon chemicals, a two-step system which combines CO2 to CO (step 1), and CO to multicarbons (step 2), may offer an efficient alternative to direct reduction of CO2 to multicarbons.390,391
5. GDEs for nitrogen reduction reaction (N2RR)
5.1. Importance of aqueous N2RR
Ammonia (NH3) is the second most commonly produced chemical for industrial applications, used as a fertilizer, in pharmaceutical production, and as a hydrogen reservoir (17.6 wt% H2).24,25 Currently, ammonia is mainly produced by N2 conversion via the Haber–Bosch method, an energy-intensive process operated at a high temperature (300–500 °C) and pressure (150–300 atm).66,397 This process accounts for over 1–2% of the world's energy consumption, utilizes half of the hydrogen produced globally, and generates around 1% of global CO2 emissions (more than 300 million metric tons annually).398,399 The NN bond in N2 is one of the strongest available, making N2 fixation a kinetically complex and energetically challenging reaction.400 Electrocatalytic N2 reduction reaction (N2RR: N2 + 6H+ + 6e− → 2NH3) has attracted much interest as it can produce NH3 from N2 and water at near ambient conditions,401 with potential for integration with renewable resources.67,402 In nature, biological N2 fixation is carried out by nitrogenases containing FeMo, FeV, or FeFe cofactor as catalytic active sites.403,404 Inspired by enzymatic N2 fixation and based on Quantum chemical calculations, most electrocatalysts contain Fe, Mo, Rh, Bi or Ru as the active site to convert N2.405–412
5.2. Challenges for N2RR
Despite the considerable ongoing progress in the development of electrocatalysts for N2RR,413,414 ammonia selectivity is still extremely low, mainly due to parasitic HER competing in aqueous electrolytes. Therefore, the development of advanced HER-inert and NH3-selective electrocatalysts is a crucial step for N2RR. In addition, N2RR suffers from the same issue as CO2RR and CORR, i.e. low solubility of the reactant (N2 in this case) in aqueous solutions.415 The use of GDEs is expected to increase the local N2 concentration near the electrocatalysts, and boost the conversion efficiency. However, unlike CO2RR/CORR, GDEs have not been widely studied for N2RR.416,417
Most studies on N2RR have reported an ammonia FE of less than 10%, due to competitive HER.418 Although some studies have demonstrated an FE of over 30%, the cells were operated at a high temperature with limited stability and low current densities, usually employing non-aqueous electrolytes such as ionic liquids (ILs).419 ILs have much lower water content than common aqueous electrolytes, and can effectively suppress HER. Certain ILs have high N2 solubility, i.e. 20 times that in water, making them attractive electrolytes for N2RR.420 For example, Zhou et al. obtained up to 60% FE of ammonia using [C4mpyr][eFAP] and [P6,6,6,14][eFAP] ILs, which are known to exhibit high N2 solubility.401 However, the current density was extremely low (less than 0.02 mA cm−2), partly due to the inherently high viscosity of ILs which limits N2 mass transport. A detailed discussion on the effect of electrolyte types on N2RR mechanism and performance can be found elsewhere.23,421 Integrating GDEs (to provide abundant active sites) with ionic liquid electrolytes is likely an important step towards increasing the N2RR reaction rate and current density.
5.3. Recent advances in GDE-based N2RR
Studies on N2RR have mostly focused on the synthesis of new electrocatalysts.65,422 In 1989–90, Yoshiba et al. fabricated GDEs for N2RR to ammonia, with 26 different inorganic catalysts comprising metal oxides, metal sulfides, ZnSe, SiC, Fe fine powder and Carbon black.423–425 In general, Yoshiba et al. obtained just 1–2% FE for the best electrocatalysts (ZnSe and TiB2), with poor stability, and FE approaching zero after 30 min reaction. Recently, Chen et al. fabricated MEA-type electrolyzers for N2RR, as shown in Fig. 21a.426–428 The GDE prepared with 30 wt%-Fe2O3-loaded carbon nanotubes (CNT) showed the optimal results in terms of N2RR current density (Fig. 21b). To prevent potential penetration of ammonia or ammonium ions through the Nafion membrane and oxidation on anode,429 the cell was modified with an additional GDL between the CL and Nafion membrane. This led to a significant decrease in the ammonia crossover, and an increase in the ammonia accumulation rate. Using an alkaline electrolyte (0.5 M KOH) yielded the highest FE (around 0.2%) (Fig. 21c).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of an MEA-type GDE used for electrochemical ammonia (NH3) synthesis; (b) effect of CNT Fe2O3 loading on the current density of GDE; (c) effect of electrolyte type on the ammonia formation rate of GDEs. Reproduced with permission.426 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (d) limiting the proton transfer rate and concentration in the bulk solution with aprotic solvent (e.g. dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) to improve FE of ammonia. Reproduced with permission.430 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (e) the ‘proton transport bridge’ which selectively provides hydrogen species for N2 hydrogenation to boost FE of NH3 and suppress HER. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

5.3.1. GDE optimization methods for selective N2RR. 
The key to selective NH3 production from N2RR is regulating proton and electron transfer in close proximity to the electrode/GDE via changes in the electrolyte type or the electrode surface. The electrolyte can be used to limit proton access via aprotic (or extremely alkaline) solvents with reduced proton donors or non-aqueous electrolytes. This kinetically slows down proton transfer while allowing N2 to pass through (Fig. 21d). This explains why the highest FE was obtained with KOH as the electrolyte (Fig. 21c), as compared with acidic and pH neutral electrolytes, due to the slower rate of proton and cation arrival at the CL, retarding HER. FE of ammonia production on this GDE was correlated to electrolyte pH; KHSO4 (acid, pH 0.6), which has the highest proton concentration, exhibited the lowest FE, while KOH (base, pH 13.7), which has the lowest proton concentration, exhibited the highest FE. This is because when an active site becomes available for HER or N2RR, HER is the dominant reaction for both thermodynamic and kinetic reasons. Therefore, limiting H+ access can retard HER.430 Reducing the number of proton donors or using a protection layer to hinder proton transport have been successful in suppressing HER for a range of applications.431 The concept of ‘proton transport bridge’ (Fig. 21e), which makes the hydrogen species from water splitting selectively available for N2 hydrogenation, can also be a useful strategy to retard HER and boost FE of NH3.71 Incorporating metal oxides into the catalyst layer provides abundant vacancies for N2 adsorption/activation sites, while metals surfaces can produce hydrogen species, which are favorably utilized for N2RR instead of HER.432
Regulation of H+ in the vicinity of the GDE is also done by employing non-aqueous electrolytes to retard HER, and boost the NH3 selectivity. However, the utilization of conventional carbon-based GDLs for non-aqueous N2RR is hampered due to the absence of hydrophobic repulsion between the electrolyte and GDL, thereby causing flooding (Fig. 22a). Although HER caused by flooding is not an issue for non-aqueous electrolytes, the distance that gas must diffuse in flooded parts decreases the maximum achievable current densities.433 To solve this issue, Lazouski et al. used a stainless-steel (SS) cloth as the GDL for N2RR in a lithium salt in tetrahydrofuran (THF) electrolyte. Unlike carbon-, the steel cloth does not take up electrolyte by capillary action.33 The electrolyte penetration was further controlled via a slight pressure gradient across the GDL (Fig. 22b), which established a well-defined separation of gas and liquid. Because the N2 diffusion pathway was minimized, the resulting FE of NH3 increased substantially as compared with no pressure (Fig. 22c). It was also seen that NH3 can be maintained in both gas and liquid phases, confirming GDE-like behavior of the SS-based GDL. Further, it is desirable to have NH3 in the gas phase as it can simplify separation. An NH3 FE of over 45% at 15 mA cm−2 was obtained for this GDE-based system, higher than other N2RR in non-aqueous electrolytes, owing to the preventive nature of the electrolyte utilized, and compatibility of an SS-based GDE with N2RR conditions.
 Fig. 22  (a) Flooding in a carbon-based GDL in contact with a non-aqueous electrolyte due to absence of hydrophobic repulsion; (b) Stainless steel cloth GDL and slight pressure gradient (ΔP) applied to prevent flooding; (c) effect of N2 pressure gradient across a steel cloth cathode on the FE of NH3 at a current density of 15 mA cm−2 (dashed line represents the onset of the gas breakthrough in the SS GDL). Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (d) schematic of PEBCD electrocatalyst incorporating Li+ deposited on carbon fibers to achieve selective adsorption of N2 on the catalyst. Reproduced with permission.434 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (e) insulative layer on the catalyst with tunnels to pass electrons to the N2 adsorbed sites to retard HER. Reproduced with permission.430 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (f) Structure of a Li–N2 battery with Li–foil anode, ether-based electrolyte, and carbon cloth cathode. Reproduced with permission.436 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
The HER during N2RR can also be retarded by applying a thin layer on the GDE surface that facilitates the adsorption of N2. For instance, Chen et al. deposited a layer of poly(N-ethyl-benzene-1,2,4,5-tetracarboxylic) (PEBCD) incorporating Li+ on carbon fibers (Fig. 22d), which improved the selectivity of N2RR to ammonia.434 In this design, PEBCD acts as the electrocatalyst, while the [O–Li+] sites retard HER, and contribute to a higher rate of N2RR by enhancing N2 adsorption. This method was tested in an H-cell, and achieved an ammonia FE of 2.91%. This study demonstrated that an HER-retarding layer is a promising step toward fabricating efficient GDEs for N2RR. It should be noted that a similar design was used to block O2 diffusion during CO2RR by establishing an O2-repellant layer (Fig. 17d), with promising results.371 An O2-repellant layer on the GDE enables selective adsorption of N2 in the air to the reaction site while blocking O2.
In addition to H+, the transport of electrons can also be regulated on the electrode/GDE surface via tunnels which pass e−, rather than H+ species.430 In this design, an insulative layer covers the CL, passing electrons selectively towards the sites where N2 is adsorbed (Fig. 22e). It has been suggested that the improved NH3 selectivity in photochemical N2 reduction is due to the same mechanism of rate-liming electron transfer.435 Having such a layer on the surface of a GDE is expected to enhance N2RR to NH3 selectivity. The improved NH3 selectivity of the double-layer GDL system in Fig. 21a can also be attributed to the slight increase in ohmic losses, which limits the transfer of both H+ and e− to the CL.

5.4. Alternatives approaches to enhance GDE-based N2RR
In addition to the regulation of H+/e− on the catalyst/GDE surface, it was recently proposed that N2RR could be coupled with other electrochemical reactions. For example, N2RR at the cathode was coupled with a Li anode to make a rechargeable lithium-nitrogen battery (Fig. 22f) with the proposed reversible reaction of 6Li + N2 → 2Li3N in an ether-based electrolyte. This Li-mediator-assisted method had a promising FE of 59% for N2RR.27,436 In this process, the injected N2 molecules accept electrons from the cathode surface (or GDE), followed by direct nitridation by chemically combining N2 with Li metal to form Li3N, which is subsequently protonated to produce NH3 (2Li3N + 6H+ → 2NH3 + 6Li+).437 This integrated approach was recently applied for N2 fixation, achieving FE of over 50% for NH3 formation.438 Moreover, Li–N2 batteries simply require electricity and N2 as the feedstock under mild conditions; therefore, NH3 can be flexibly and locally produced where it is needed.439 Other biological methods can also be coupled with N2 fixation, for example, N2 reduction with nitrogenase as the catalyst and methyl viologen as the electron shuttle. An ammonia-producing H2/N2 enzymatic fuel cell with over 26% ammonia FE was achieved by coupling N2 biological reduction with an H2-oxidizing bacterium.440 The incorporation of enzymes, proteins, or bacterial cells alters the N2RR mechanism, which is beyond the scope of this review.
5.5. Key findings and challenges in GDE-based N2RR
• N2RR is less studied than CO2RR and CORR, and suffers from parasitic HER. The development of efficient electrocatalysts with high FE to selectively generate ammonia is ongoing.
• Fe-, Mo-, Rh-, Bi-, and Ru-based electrocatalysts are known to have active sites for N2RR. To achieve viable NH3 production rates (as high as 10−4 mol h−1 cm−1) and FE of 50%, significant developments are required in GDE structure and electrocatalyst/electrolyte.417,419
• GDE-based N2RR can be effectively enhanced via surface treatment to selectively deliver e−/H+ to CL active sites for N2RR, hindering HER.
• Non-aqueous electrolytes show promising results for GDE-based N2RR due to the absence of HER source, water. Coupling N2RR with Li-based batteries may overcome the FE limitation of conventional N2RR systems. However, larger scale studies assessing the suitability of this approach need to be carried out.
• Based on experience with CO2RR/CORR, it is expected that overall N2RR performance will significantly improve by considering methods of electrode modification, electrolyte/electrocatalyst selection, and GDE fabrication.441
6. GDEs for fuel cell and fuel cell-like (MEA-type or electrolyte-less) CO2RR/CORR/N2RR
So far, this review has focused on CO2RR/CORR/N2RR systems with liquid electrolytes, as the majority of GDE studies use flowing-electrolyte systems. However, fuel cell-like systems without electrolyte, have technological benefits. The application of GDEs for fuel cells is well established and extensively reviewed.96–103,126–131,442 With a fuel cell, oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) on the cathode GDE is coupled with fuel oxidation (usually hydrogen or hydrogen-rich fuels such as methanol, ethanol443) on the anode to generate electricity.214,444 Therefore, the production of gas/liquid value-added products is not intended. In addition, the development of electrocatalysts for ORR has been widely researched.445–449 Pt-based materials are the most commonly used electrocatalysts for ORR with stability for over tens of thousands of hours.187,450–453 The polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell, in particular, has been the most promising type of fuel cell, owing to its high power density, low emissions, and low weight and volume as compared with other fuel cells.454 A PEM fuel cell has a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) consisting of porous anode and cathode GDEs in contact with opposite sides of an ion-exchange membrane (i.e., the PEM)215 (Fig. 23a). PEM fuel cells have been widely assessed and simulated for large-scale applications,455–457 and benchmarks have been set for the development of new GDEs, electrocatalysts, and data analysis/presentation.442,458–460
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of a membrane electrode assembly comprising a cathode GDE to deliver the feed gas (CO2, CO, N2), anode GDE for anodic aqueous electrolyte, and a polymer electrode membrane (PEM, or ion-exchange membrane). Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (b) effect of anion exchange membrane thickness on the flux of water to the cathode during CO2RR at 200 mA cm−2; (c) performance of an MEA-type CO2RR with and without cathode flooding. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (d) dependence of formic acid product concentration on the N2 gas flow rate under a fixed overall current density of 200 mA cm−2. By utilizing dry N2 gas flow, up to nearly 100 wt% pure formic acid was achieved; (e) schematic of an all-vapor-phase operation CO2 electrolyzer to produce high-purity formic acid (AEM = anion exchange membrane, CEM = cation exchange membrane, PSE = porous solid electrolyte). Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
6.1. Advantages of fuel cell-like systems
The successful experiences with PEM fuel cells, and the shortcomings and limitations of CO2RR/CORR/N2RR in systems with a flowing electrolyte, has recently encouraged researchers to develop CO2RR/CORR/N2RR systems without catholyte.37,110,143,201,216,223,226,275,302,396,461–467 MEA-type CO2RR/CORR/N2RR (or zero-gap or fuel cell-like) systems offer technical advantages such as lower cell overpotential and resistance due to absence of liquid catholyte, scalability, ease of operation, and decreased risk of catalyst poisoning from trace impurities in liquid catholytes.78 Gabardo et al. compared CO2RR via an MEA-type reactor with electrolyzers containing either neutral or alkaline catholytes, observing superior product and voltage stability, and energy efficiency for the MEA-type.110
Water is critical to facilitate ion transport between the cathode and anode, and is a proton source for electrochemical reduction. Therefore, usually an aqueous electrolyte is used for the anodic water oxidation half-reaction.113,461,462 However, recent studies have used anodic H2 oxidation to make an all-vapor-phase electrolyzer.304 The gaseous feed (CO2/CO/N2) is usually humidified before entering the cathode GDE to keep the MEA humidified.110 Generally, an anion exchange membrane (AEM) is used as AEM facilitates the flow of OH− between the anode and cathode.113,222,468 Cation exchange membrane-based MEAs show poor performance since they create a highly acidic environment in the cathode side that favors parasitic HER.462
6.2. Recent advances in fuel cell-like systems for CO2RR
CO has been the main targeted product of MEA-type reactors for CO2RR,143,201,216,223,302,461,463–466 and recently a record-setting current density of 0.5 A cm−2 with over 85% FE for CO was achieved.113 However, a few factors should be considered to ensure viable long-term operation of MEA-type CO2RR. Firstly, CO32−/HCO3− species (produced from CO2 neutralization) or anion products (such as formate) may cross over to the anode side through the AEM,462,469 similar to reactors with a flowing electrolyte.114 This leads to a substantial overestimation of catalytic performance if the inlet CO2 flow is used for calculating partial current densities and FE.462 This issue considerably decreases CO2 utilization in the reactor, and less than half the consumed CO2 goes towards the target products. Therefore, measuring the actual molar outlet flow from the cathode during CO2RR is a more accurate way to report the efficiency and selectivity data. Yin et al. showed if the ratio of CO2 flow rate to the consumption rate is less than 10, OH− is the main charge carrier through AEM, and transfer of CO32−/HCO3− species into the anode side is negligible.113
Flooding is another issue affecting MEA-type systems, although no flowing catholyte is used. Similar to flooding in PEM fuel cells,128,470,471 flooding of an MEA-type electrolyzer occurs when water transfer from the anode side through the AEM is more than the water required for the reaction (e.g. >5 mg cm−2 h−1 for CO2RR). This transfer becomes more severe at current densities higher than 200 mA cm−2.222 Reyes et al. showed that flooding can be mitigated by managing MEA hydration via tailoring the GDE hydrophobicity, and thickness and water uptake of the AEM.222 AEM with high uptake properties (related to ion exchange capacity) show less water transfer to the cathode GDE, however, they suffer poor mechanical strength due to swelling.472 Similar to that observed in PEM fuel cells,470 thinner AEMs exhibit a better performance in reducing water transfer (Fig. 23b), presumably due to lower water content in AEM, and higher water repellence from the hydrophobic cathode. Finally, increasing the cathode GDE hydrophobicity (via increasing PTFE content) resulted in a better water-repellence due to higher hydrophobicity, as observed in Section 2 GDE fabrication. Through tuning these 3 parameters in an MEA, flooding can be effectively avoided, resulting in 450 mV less overpotential and substantially higher CO partial current density (Fig. 23c).
Although flooding is to be avoided, adequate hydration of an MEA is necessary to overcome the limitation in anion transport through the cathode GDE ionomer and AEM, which leads to voltage loss.473 One way to simultaneously avoid MEA flooding and to ensure sufficient hydration is using a vapor-water anode feed (instead of aqueous-based flowing anolyte), which also helps to avoid salt precipitation in CO2RR.264 This should be done at an elevated temperature to enhance ionic conductivity and ionomer hydration properties of AEM. Higher temperature also increases production rates of compounds with higher activation energies (e.g., ethanol, propanol) on a Cu-based MEA.473 However, CO2 solubility and, therefore, concentration decreases in the ionomer at higher temperatures, and the mole fraction of inlet H2O vapor is higher at elevated temperatures. Therefore, while vapor-water anode feed can effectively suppress flooding, sufficient water supply can be achieved when the operating temperature is higher than ambient (such as 350 K).
Due to the absence of diluting electrolyte, MEA-type systems are capable of producing high-purity liquid products.111,225,299,304 Wang et al. successfully produced formic acid solutions of up to nearly 100 wt% (Fig. 23d) in a modified all-solid-state GDE-based electrolyzer with grain boundary-enriched Bi electrocatalyst.304,313 The conventional MEA-type electrolyzer was modified for all-vapor-phase operation, using humidified N2 gas instead of an electrolyte in the middle chamber to collect formic acid through the AEM (Fig. 23e). In this design, hydrogen oxidation on the anode side (instead of water oxidation) was used to release protons, thereby simplifying the device level engineering as liquid electrolyte was entirely avoided. The generated formic acid vapor was collected by a cold condensation step. By using humidified N2 at 10 sccm, a formic acid concentration of 61 wt% or 14.8 M was obtained; a purity which has never been achieved in other high-rate electrolyte-based designs.116,301 This was further improved with dry N2 to minimize water vapor involvement, and consequently, formic acid with an unprecedented purity of nearly 100 wt% was achieved. In this design, a porous solid electrolyte (PSE) layer was used to assist fast ion conduction, while not introducing impurities (Fig. 23e). In addition, the generated formic acid can be stably and continuously carried through this porous layer in vapor form to the N2 gas flow. This design intrinsically solved issues related to aqueous electrolytes such as flooding. Formic acid production at a high concentration opens a new avenue for direct utilization of formic acid in a fuel cell.474 A similar approach can be applied for other liquid products, such as alcohols, where the post-CO2RR separation step is costly.475 A study using an MEA-type CO2RR to multi-carbon products showed 80% FE of C2+ products (3.9 wt% ethanol and 1.3 wt% n-propanol).110 Therefore, more studies are required to achieve a higher concentration of alcohols and other C2+ products using MEA-type systems.
6.3. Recent advances in fuel cell-like systems for CORR
Using an MEA-type reactor for CORR, Ripatti et al. produced concentrated C2 products with high single-pass conversion on a Cu-based GDE and a cation exchange membrane (Nafion) (Fig. 24a).226 This resulted in the production of ethylene as the main gaseous product (Fig. 24b) and 1.1 M acetate, much higher than the highest acetate concentration achieved in an alkaline electrolyte CORR reactor (0.024 M).107 MEA-type electrolyzers can be conveniently operated at an elevated pressure, which has both technological and electrolysis performance advantages.275 It was seen that performing CORR in an MEA-type electrolyzer at 4 bar, rather than 1 bar, substantially improved stability (FE) with no significant performance decay (Fig. 24c and d). Unlike MEA-type CO2RR, MEA-type CORR does not suffer from the transport of HCO3−/CO32− anionic species from the cathode to the anode, which unfavorably affects performance.462,469 The feed gas humidity, which facilitates ion transfer, is an important parameter and affects the performance of an MEA-type electrolyzer.476 Sullivan et al. recently observed that 30% humidification of the CO stream was optimal, at which a current density of 87 mA cm−2 was achieved, with 33% FE for ethylene, and 43% for liquid products (75% for C2+ products).396 In contrast, 5% humidity caused drying of the anion-exchange membrane, causing a large cell resistance. In addition, higher humidities (50%–100%) did not improve CORR selectivity, and resulted in higher HER. CORR was also performed in an all vapor-fed system using humidified N2 in the anode and 5% humidified CO. Despite a large decrease in HER, the AEM dries out in this low humidity, causing large cell resistances and increased cell voltages.396
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of a catholyte-free MEA-type GDE with cation exchange membrane (Nafion) for CORR; (b) partial current density of products as a function of MEA-type reactor cell voltage. Long term stability of MEA-type CORR at (c) 4 bar and (d) 1 bar. Stable performance is observed at 4 bar. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
6.4. Key findings and challenges in MEA-type systems
• MEA-type systems have several advantages over flowing-electrolyte systems for application, such as ease of scalability and lower ohmic resistance.
• Issues such as hydration management of the MEA and product(s)/CO2 crossover need to be regulated during GDE and ion-exchange membrane fabrication. Because crossover of HCO3−/CO32− anionic species is not an issue for CORR and N2RR, MEA-type electrolyzers can be more promising for these reactions than for CO2RR.462,469
• MEA-type systems have shown promise for CO production (from CO2RR). However, for liquid products such as alcohols, MEA may swell, affecting durability of the MEA.
• Electrolyte type, catalyst-electrolyte interface, and wettability of the electrocatalysts play important roles in reaction selectivity in liquid electrolytes.74,152,477 More studies are required on these factors in MEA-type systems to better understand the mechanism of electrocatalytic reactions, and catalyst and ion-exchange interface formation for selective formation of products.478
7. Perspectives and recommendations for future work
In this review, we thoroughly examined the challenges and advances in using GDEs for a variety of emerging gas-fed electrochemical reactions based on unique design features. GDEs are able to increase the current density by 2–3 orders of magnitude over 1 A cm−2 for CO2RR and CORR, as compared with non-GDE configurations, owing to much shorter gas diffusion pathways and enhanced mass transport, which maintains high gas reactant concentration in the vicinity of the GDE surface. This review approached GDE optimization from a new angle by appraising the specific criteria for both gaseous feed and the desired products. Overall, new GDE designs should aim to prevent flooding, minimize HER, provide high surface wettability, and manage rough bubbling at the electrode surface. Various GDE fabrication methods were discussed, along with parameters to enhance performance such as GDL hydrophobicity, catalyst deposition method, and catalyst ink composition. In addition, GDE performance was discussed in terms of operational variables such as gas flow and concentration, highlighting recent, successful GDE designs that tackle the common issues of conventional GDEs. The product selectivity of GDE-based electrolyzers was discussed, with brief reference to the most common electrocatalysts used in the catalyst layer. Following, are the key conclusions and perspectives for future work on GDEs and GDE-based electrolyzers.
7.1. GDE design to target the desired reaction
It was seen that CO2, CO, and N2 reduction reactions have inherent characteristics relating to respective aqueous solubility, behavior according to pH, and activity/specificity on the catalyst surface. Following, are key criteria to guide GDE fabrication and operation for specific reactions and products.
• For CO2RR and CORR, ultra-high current densities (>1 A cm−2) can be obtained, meaning that reactions are transport-limited if GDEs are not employed. Strategies such as an ionomer coating, plasma treatment, or a highly porous CL are effective solutions to issues such as rough bubble formation of gaseous products (e.g. CO, ethylene), poor wettability, and vulnerability to flooding. The selectivity of CO2RR/CORR can be adjusted by modifying electrocatalyst nanostructure/shape, changing the gas flow/concentrations, designing ‘mixed catalyst’ CLs, or employing a coating layer to facilitate reactants diffusion and extend the triple-phase interfaces. Regulating the local CO2/CO concentration via CL thickness and feed gas concentration/flow rate are the key operational factors to tune intermediates formation and CO2RR/CORR selectivity. For example, selective formation of methane from CO2RR, or ethylene from CORR on a GDE, can be achieved using diluted- rather than pure gas feed (Fig. 19d).
• For N2RR, regulating the H+/e− transport to retard HER is the key role of GDEs to obtain high FE of NH3. We propose that tailoring a porous hydrophobic layer on the CL (Fig. 25a) can effectively slow the rate of H+ transport to suppress HER, and maximize local CL N2 concentration to enhance adsorption of N2. In addition, considering non-aqueous electrolytes and integration of GDE-based N2RR in Li-mediated electrolyte can boost FE of NH3.33 Therefore, these specific features should be considered in designing an efficient GDE for the desired reaction.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of the proposed hydrophobic layer to regulate H+ transport to the GDE to enhance NH3 selectivity of N2RR; (b) schematic of a two-step cascade reaction to reduce CO2 to CO in the first step, and CO to hydrocarbons in the second step; (c) schematic of CO2RR/CORR in the presence of NH3 to extend C–C products to C–N products, where NH3 is N2RR-derived. 
7.2. GDE design and operation to prevent flooding
For carbon-based GDLs at high current densities, flooding exacerbates HER and leads to GDE failure. As seen in Tables 1–4, many studies have used Toray or Sigracet carbon paper GDLs without any further treatment prior to ink-based CL deposition. Carbon-based GDLs lose their hydrophobicity, and are highly prone to degradation under cathodic reaction conditions or due to carbonation during CO2RR. These commercial GDLs are neither waterproof nor designed for electrochemical reactions, and exhibit micro-cracks on their surface, even after the CL deposition.265 This significantly reduces the lifespan of the GDEs and increases the capital cost of an electrolyzer. PTFE-based GDLs (Fig. 11b and c) such as Gortex with significant water-repelling activity and stability, are low-cost with tunable pore structure, and thus a viable replacement for conventional carbon GDLs. Optimization of the CL, catalyst ink, and the GDL, as discussed in Section 2 and emphasized in recent studies,123,145,264 remain important factors that should not be underestimated.
7.3. Integration of GDE-based CO2RR/CORR/N2RR electrolyzers for better selectivity and new commodity chemicals
• CORR exhibits several advantages over CO2RR for the selective production of multicarbon products, and the simplicity of using alkaline electrolytes. A promising 2-step approach to multicarbon production reduces CO2 to CO with a non-alkaline Ag-based GDE, followed by CORR using an alkaline Cu-based GDE for C2+ products, as shown in Fig. 25b.390,391 Unlike the inefficient formation of C2+ products, CO2RR to CO can be suitably carried out in non-alkaline electrolytes.337
• Although a GDE-based two-step reactor seems promising, we presume that additional engineering complexities will be introduced, requiring further study. Firstly, the CO produced in the CO2RR step needs to be at the required concentration for the second step. Therefore, a purification step seems to be inevitable. Secondly, the CO production rate of the first step needs to be adjusted to the consumption rate in the second step, thereby a multi-parameter design in terms of the GDE surface area, catalyst loading, separation step, electrolyte, and gas feeds flow should be carried out. Thus, a two-step reactor is likely to have a higher initial installation cost and capital expenditure considering these complexities. However, this is offset by the decreased requirement for electricity and associated costs. This integrated concept is not limited to CO as the feedstock for the 2nd reactor. For example, ethylene from CO2RR/CORR, can be electrochemically oxidized to ethylene oxide, which is a common ingredient in detergents and solvents, and is currently manufactured via thermochemical oxidation at high temperature and pressure.479
• CO2RR/CORR can be also coupled with N2RR to produce new chemicals, as shown in Fig. 25c. CO2RR and CORR can generate important industrial multicarbon feedstocks through C–C bond formation. CO2RR/CORR can be co-electrolyzed in the presence of NH3 to promote C–N bond formation, for amide products such as acetamides, which are commonly used in the polymer/pharmaceutical industries, or urea for agricultural fertilizer.149,480 However, N2RR requires considerable technological advancement to be an option for integration with CO2RR/CORR. Importantly, the concept of electrochemical C–N bond formation can be extended to other bonds to produce a much wider range of chemicals containing carbon-heteroatoms through integrated CO2RR/CORR processes.
7.4. Significance of standardized protocols, modeling, and advanced characterization techniques
• Standard operational procedures are required for emerging GDE-based CO2RR/CORR/N2RR. Since the cost of a flow-cell apparatus is no longer significantly higher than batch H-cells, we believe that researchers’ attention will turn to GDE-based flow electrolyzers. Clark et al. highlighted the urgent need for standardized protocols for data acquisition and reporting, similar to those developed for fuel cell performance and battery testing, to benchmark catalyst and electrolyzers for electrochemical reactions.442,458,481 Liu et al. also published an introductory guide to assembling and operating GDE-based flow electrolyzers for CO2RR.125 Combined with numerous material-centric review papers and this complementing review focused on GDE fabrication and challenges, researchers have access to sufficient knowledge and guidance to test new electrocatalysts in GDE-based electrolyzers.
• Accurate modeling is required to analyze inherent transport phenomena, kinetic tradeoffs, and explore design space for physical properties. GDE performance and multiscale processes are governed by multiple factors. Along with experimental approaches, continuum models of reactant(s) and product(s) transport need to be developed to enable optimization of mediating factors, and a better understanding of GDE physiochemical features during electrolysis reactions. For example, flooding at high current densities leads to an uneven distribution of gas feed within the CL, and poor utilization of the catalyst. Or, the amount of electrolyte diffusion into the CL depends on the current density, and manipulation of the GDE surface porosity and electrolyte/gas flow rate can greatly improve the partial current density of the targeted product.29,37 Therefore, changes in various parameters in the vicinity of the GDE (such as pH, transport of gas and liquid products, and OH− production) can be predicted by modeling, enabling GDE-based electrolyzers to be operated under optimal gas and electrolyte flow, at the desired high current densities.482
• Artificial intelligence can assist in accelerating and guiding the development of advanced electrocatalysts.378 For example, integration of machine learning/modeling with density functional theory (DFT), as a platform to provide the required data such as adsorption energies, has been employed recently to predict catalytic active sites on the surface of multi-metallic systems.378 This has assisted exploration outside the limitations of conventional single-metal electrocatalysts, for improved GDE-based electrolyzers.249 Coupling multiple levels of theoretical computations and machine learning moves beyond simply altering the physical properties of electrocatalysts in the CL, and tailoring new materials with selective sites for the desired reaction/products.360 For example, it was found that FE as high as 97% for CO2RR to C2+ products on intrinsically non-selective Cu can be obtained by employing DFT and machine learning to identify selective sites on Cu.150
• Characterization of the interfacial phenomena on GDE surfaces via in situ (operando) and ex situ probes provides a better understanding of the effects of operating conditions and GDE structure.483,484 Examples include: identifying catalytically active sites via in situ X-ray spectroscopy and electron microscopy,485–488 evaluating the physics of the GDE surface (e.g. pore size, roughness) by X-ray computed tomography,489 and probing reaction intermediates near GDE surface by operando mass spectrometry.490 This is necessary to understand the atomistic electrode–electrolyte interfaces, and to identify the challenges of long-term and stable electrochemical reactor operation.491
7.5. Development of GDEs with a new design/shape
The procedure for manufacturing planar GDEs is complex requiring different steps for the GDL and CL. More importantly, the active area of a planar GDE is limited by the size of the electrochemical reactor; thus, increasing the area of the electrolyzer is equal to having more GDE stacks in a multilayer electrolyzer.275 Hollow fiber gas diffusion electrodes (HFGDEs) are able to resolve some of these issues, owing to their tubular shape (Fig. 26a and b), which provides a much higher surface area as compared with planar GDEs in a certain volume.
 Fig. 26  (a) Cu HFGDE employed as an electrode for CO2RR at 20 ml min−1 CO2 flow Reproduced with permission.492 Copyright 2016, Nature Springer; (b) cross-section SEM of a Cu HFGDE (scale bar: 100 μm); (c) Schematic of Sn electrodeposition on Cu tubular electrode to tune CO2RR selectivity for formate production. Reproduced with permission.493 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (d) schematic of fabrication of lung-inspired pouch-like GDE including sputtering Au on polyethylene membrane, rolling and sealing the edges; (e) schematic of the detailed structure of the pouch-like GDE (dashed square from (d)); (f) enlarged image of the dashed square in e, representing the details of the three-phase interface. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2018, Nature Springer. 
Recently, Cu-based HFGDEs made via the facile dry-wet spinning process was used for CO2RR to CO/syngas production.492 Gas was purged from the lumen side of the HFGDE into the electrolyte, thus the entire outer surface of the HFGDE comprised catalytic sites for the formation of triple-phase interfaces (Fig. 26a and b). This resulted in significantly better performance than other planar electrodes. In previous work, we tuned the selectivity of Cu-based HFGDEs for formate production by electrodeposition of Sn (Fig. 26c),493 outperforming most other Sn-based GDEs. There are other studies that use HFGDEs for CO2RR,494–496 and emerging bio-electrochemical applications for CO2 conversion.497,498 Another GDE of novel design is the lung-inspired, pouch-like electrode comprised of a polyethylene membrane sputtered with gold (Fig. 26d).191 In addition to the simplicity of electrode fabrication, the hydrophobic polyethylene is highly water-resistant yet gas-permeable, thus the central sealed compartment is separated from the external electrolyte. This design offers abundant access to catalytic active sites at the three-phase interface, and enables local pH tuning in the pouch, to effectively suppress HER (Fig. 26e and f). This electrode design showed high performance (92% FE and 25.5 mA cm−2 for CO) when tested in an H-cell, however, its efficiency for other products or gaseous reactants is yet to be investigated. Given the ease of processability and promising results obtained for the pouch-like electrode and HFGDE, these two designs will likely become popular in coming years.
7.6. Catholyte-free (MEA-type) reactors hold promise for CO2RR/CORR/N2RR
MEA-type gas electrochemical flow reactors are not widely studied, particularly for CORR and N2RR. There are many intrinsic challenges associated with flowing-electrolyte systems, such as flooding and high ohmic resistance of the liquid electrolyte. An MEA-type flow reactor resolves these issues, plus it is possible to run the reactor at elevated pressure. Higher pressure increases the gas concentration and boosts conversion rate, making it feasible to easily implement with high-pressure industrial point source gas feeds.499 MEA-type electrolyzers are more favorable for CORR and N2RR than CO2RR because of practical limitations in the transport of HCO3−/CO32− anionic species to the anionic chamber during CO2RR.462,469 More studies are required to increase understanding of the catalyst and ion-exchange interface for selective electrosynthesis of various products. In addition, the production of liquids such as alcohols may lead to MEA swelling, limiting the product scope.
7.7. Challenges of industrial-scale GDE fabrication and systems

7.7.1. Large-scale, uniform GDE fabrication. 
Ink-based methods have the potential for large-scale GDE fabrication, given the experiences of fuel cell applications.500 Catalyst ink solutions are susceptible to agglomeration, which causes a non-uniform CL.501 To ensure optimal uniformity and viscosity, some modification is necessary, such as changing the ink pH by the addition of a dispersant/surfactant to stabilize colloidal ink suspension (zeta potential measurement can be carried out to check colloidal stability). In addition, large-scale GDE fabrication for multi-stack electrolyzers can be quite challenging due to the pressure sensitivity,502 thereby parallel operation of electrolyzers with optimal GDE size can be the route for industrialization GDE-based systems 106.
• GDE long-term stability: Moving toward scale-up of CO2RR/CORR/N2RR requires stable operation, ideally for >20000 h.17,230 Long-term stability tests in research studies are limited (up to 300 h), but recently Dioxide Materials have developed a CO2RR to CO electrolyzer with over 6-month stability 464. Electrocatalysts may lose activity due to contamination via adsorption of organic intermediates or physiochemical changes (such as surface chemistry or valence state) under cathodic conditions. Therefore, it is necessary to integrate new fabrication methods with optimized GDE operational parameters for improved stability.
• Product purity: The presence of unreacted CO2/CO/N2 in gaseous products, or mixing of liquid products with the electrolyte necessitates a post-purification step. MEA-type (electrolyte-less) reactors can produce high-purity liquid products, but gas products are mixed with unreacted gaseous reactants. High-purity products may be directly utilized without purification. For example, high-purity hydrocarbons generated in CO2RR/CORR enable direct feed to a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) to develop a regenerative energy storage cycle,503 providing that CO2/CO presence in the product stream is minimized.
• Large-scale synthesis of electrocatalyst: Most advanced and efficient electrocatalysts have tailored nanostructure, and are usually made via multi-step procedures for laboratory-scale systems. Synthesis of these electrocatalysts on a large-scale may not be practical or desirable through conventional methods used in the laboratory.

7.8. Other technical issues to be considered
• Economic incentive to design GDEs to operate with low-grade or dilute gas feeds. Feeding the electrolyzer with 100% CO2, CO or N2 necessitates pre-purification, adding to the complexity and cost of the process. Further research is necessary on the use of realistic gas feeds, for example, using artificial flue gas (15% CO2 with oxygen impurity) instead of pure CO2. GDEs can be designed to be selective for the reactant feed gas through surface modifications,371 or alternatively by operating under elevated pressure to increase the gas reactant concentration.336 In both cases, the electrocatalyst may perform differently, and further research is required on the use of industrial gas streams in GDEs.
• Re-assessment of ions/carbon balance and the importance of efficient ion-exchange membranes. In GDE-based electrolyzers, the loss of volatile products due to evaporation into the off-gas stream needs to be considered as it can be as high as 30% of liquid products for CO2RR.504 In addition, nonvolatile products can cross the AEM through electromigration, leading to a substantial underestimation of product selectivity. CO2 may also pass the AEM in the form of HCO3−/CO32− anions after reaction with OH−, and become oxidized on the anode.114,505 The development of efficient ion-exchange membranes, e.g. bipolar,469 is of great importance to prevent cross-diffusion. Moreover, CO2 consumption and a mass balance must be considered carefully when evaluating catalytic selectivity of gas products on GDE-based electrolyzers.
• Anodic reaction considerations. When it comes to the economic feasibility and whole-cell efficiency of a GDE-based electrolyzer, the anodic chamber also needs to be properly considered. OER is the most common anodic reaction in GDE-based CO2RR/CORR/N2RR. Based on thermodynamic analysis for CO2RR coupled with OER, ∼90% of the overall energy requirements come from the anodic OER.506 However, overpotential caused by anode, cathode, catholyte, and the ion-exchange membrane in a flow-cell exhibits a more balanced energy demand for anode and cathode.88 Presumably, finding alternative anodic co-reactions with lower energy requirements, for example, organic oxidation (such as with glycerol),506,507 or coupling treatment of wastewater with CO2RR/CORR/N2RR508 will benefit the energy efficiency of a GDE-based electrolyzer. This approach offers new avenues to use high-volume building block chemicals, which are otherwise considered a waste product, without increasing CO2 emissions, to lower electricity requirements and move towards carbon-neutral CO2RR/CORR/N2RR.
Finally, this review mainly focused on three emerging electrochemical reduction reactions, i.e., CO2RR, CORR, and N2RR. However, GDEs can be beneficial for gas electro-oxidation reactions such as CH4 or H2 oxidation.509,510 H2 is used as the fuel for H2/O2 fuel cells or biofuel cells, and as the electron donor for cathodic wastewater treatment.511 Importantly, GDEs can overcome mass transfer limitations caused by the limited solubility of H2 in water.304,512 Methane is a powerful greenhouse gas, and electrochemical or microbial oxidation of methane has attracted much attention. Anodic CH4 oxidation to hydrocarbons513 or methane-powered microbial fuel cells514 are other technologies where conversion of gas with low aqueous solubility is involved, and GDEs application/integration is relevant. Both CH4 and H2 can be utilized as the electron donor for CO2RR/CORR/N2RR, by a dual-GDE electrolyzer. In addition, recent work has focused on enzymatic/microbial CO2 reduction to chemicals using biocatalysts, and GDEs have been able to improve the sluggish microbial conversion rate.515–517 Therefore, GDE application can be extended to other electrochemical systems where reduction or oxidation of gas in an aqueous medium is mass transport limited.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr Eloise Larsen for editing the manuscript. This study was funded by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through Laureate Fellowship FL170100086 awarded to Professor Zhiguo Yuan. H. R. is supported by The University of Queensland (UQ) Research Training Scholarship. X. Z. is supported by UQ International Scholarship (UQI).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Lackner, Science, 2003, 300, 1677–1678 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 RSC .
IRENA(2019), Renewable power generation costs in 2018, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
M. Arbabzadeh, R. Sioshansi, J. X. Johnson and G. A. Keoleian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3413 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Shaner, S. J. Davis, N. S. Lewis and K. Caldeira, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 914–925 RSC .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Martín and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Joule, 2019, 3, 2602–2621 CrossRef .
M. F. Lagadec and A. Grimaud, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1140–1150 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, J. L. Hitt, J. A. Turner and T. E. Mallouk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 12558–12563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Karthick, S. Sam Sankar, K. Sangeetha, P. E. Karthik and S. Kundu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 744–771 RSC .
Gurudayal, J. Bullock, D. F. Sranko, C. M. Towle, Y. W. Lum, M. Hettick, M. C. Scott, A. Javey and J. Ager, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2222–2230 RSC .
V. R. Stamenkovic, D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 57–69 CrossRef PubMed .
L. J. Müller, A. Kätelhön, S. Bringezu, S. McCoy, S. Suh, R. Edwards, V. Sick, S. Kaiser, R. Cuéllar-Franca, A. El Khamlichi, J. H. Lee, N. von der Assen and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2979–2992 RSC .
A. Otto, T. Grube, S. Schiebahn and D. Stolten, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3283–3297 RSC .
R. Sharifian, R. M. Wagterveld, I. A. Digdaya, C. Xiang and D. A. Vermaas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 781–814 RSC .
J. M. Spurgeon and B. Kumar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1536–1551 RSC .
C. E. Creissen and M. Fontecave, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2002652,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.202002652 .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazabal and J. Perez-Ramirez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 RSC .
Y. Y. Birdja, E. Perez-Gallent, M. C. Figueiredo, A. J. Gottle, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 732–745 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Nielsen, X.-M. Hu, K. Daasbjerg and T. Skrydstrup, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 244–254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, K. Ithisuphalap, Y. Li, S. Mukherjee, J. Lattimer, G. Soloveichik and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104469 CrossRef CAS .
O. Elishav, B. Mosevitzky Lis, E. M. Miller, D. J. Arent, A. Valera-Medina, A. Grinberg Dana, G. E. Shter and G. S. Grader, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5352–5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Comer, P. Fuentes, C. O. Dimkpa, Y.-H. Liu, C. A. Fernandez, P. Arora, M. Realff, U. Singh, M. C. Hatzell and A. J. Medford, Joule, 2019, 3, 1578–1605 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schwalbe, M. J. Statt, C. Chosy, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, A. C. Nielander, S. Z. Andersen, J. M. McEnaney, J. G. Baker, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and M. Cargnello, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1542–1549 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Garcia de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. McCallum, A. R. Kirmani, D. H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, Y. C. Li, F. Li, J. Edwards, L. J. Richter, S. J. Thorpe, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 661–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Weng, A. T. Bell and A. Z. Weber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 16973–16984 RSC .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Burdyny and W. A. Smith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1442–1453 RSC .
D. Higgins, C. Hahn, C. Xiang, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Z. Weber, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 317–324 CrossRef .
N. Lazouski, M. Chung, K. Williams, M. L. Gala and K. Manthiram, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191–1800196 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luo, J. Zhang, M. Li and A. Zuttel, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3783–3791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Wang, D. Raciti and C. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5657–5663 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Weng, A. T. Bell and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1950–1968 RSC .
J. Zhao, S. Xue, J. Barber, Y. Zhou, J. Meng and X. Ke, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4700–4734 RSC .
P. Prabhu, V. Jose and J. M. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910768 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lü, H. Bao, Y. Mi, Y. Liu, J. Sun, X. Peng, Y. Qiu, L. Zhuo, X. Liu and J. Luo, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1012–1028 RSC .
A. Liu, M. Gao, X. Ren, F. Meng, Y. Yang, L. Gao, Q. Yang and T. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3541–3562 RSC .
M. Li, S. Garg, X. Chang, L. Ge, L. Li, M. Konarova, T. E. Rufford, V. Rudolph and G. Wang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000033 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ross, P. De Luna, Y. Li, C.-T. Dinh, D. Kim, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 648–658 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198–210 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
D. H. Nam, P. De Luna, A. Rosas-Hernandez, A. Thevenon, F. Li, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 266–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Torbensen, D. Joulié, S. Ren, M. Wang, D. Salvatore, C. P. Berlinguette and M. Robert, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1512–1518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, S. Cao, J. Hou, Z. Li, B. Zhang, P. Zhai, Y. Zhang and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000588 CrossRef CAS .
A. Modak, P. Bhanja, S. Dutta, B. Chowdhury and A. Bhaumik, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4002–4033 RSC .
F. P. Pan and Y. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2275–2309 RSC .
P. Trogadas and M. O. Coppens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3107–3141 RSC .
C. Yang, S. Li, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, H. Liu, F. Jiao, Z. Guo, X. Zhang and W. Hu, Small, 2020, 16, 2001847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Gao, R. C. Bao, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15458–15478 RSC .
K. A. Adegoke, R. O. Adegoke, A. O. Ibrahim, S. A. Adegoke and O. S. Bello, Sustainable Mater. Technol., 2020, 25, e00200 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zheng, H. C. Liu and Y. W. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6090–6123 CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Li, S. X. Guo, X. Zhang, F. Li, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 59–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-Z. Zhang, B.-Y. Wu, Q. Li, L.-L. Lu, W. Shi and P. Cheng, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zheng, H. C. Liu and Y. W. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6090–6123 CAS .
R. Francke, B. Schille and M. Roemelt, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4631–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Jiang, M. Gao, T. Ma, W. Sun and H. Pan, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105504 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, V. Reddu, A. C. Fisher and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 374–403 RSC .
Z.-Z. Wu, F.-Y. Gao and M.-R. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021 10.1039/d0ee02747b .
X. Tan, C. Yu, Y. Ren, S. Cui, W. Li and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 765–780 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Li, M.-J. Cheng and Q. Lu, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 49–65 CrossRef .
J. Wang, S. Chen, Z. Li, G. Li and X. Liu, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1067–1079 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, K. Zhang, Z. Liang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5658–5716 RSC .
X. Y. Cui, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800369 CrossRef .
J. H. Zhou and Y. W. Zhang, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3, 591–625 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1730–1750 RSC .
G. Duan, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, K. A. M. Gasem, P. Wan, D. Ding and M. Fan, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2020, 81, 100860 CrossRef .
J. Feng and H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13896–13915 RSC .
C. Yang, Y. Zhu, J. Liu, Y. Qin, H. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang and W. Hu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105126 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, W. Ding, H. Zhang and S. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 672–687 RSC .
J.-B. Vennekötter, T. Scheuermann, R. Sengpiel and M. Wessling, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 202–213 CrossRef .
M. Moura de Salles Pupo and R. Kortlever, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2926–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Konig, J. Vaes, E. Klemm and D. Pant, iScience, 2019, 19, 135–160 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, Y. Huang, M. Wu and Y. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1587–1604 CrossRef CAS .
S. Garg, M. R. Li, A. Z. Weber, L. Ge, L. Y. Li, V. Rudolph, G. X. Wang and T. E. Rufford, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1511–1544 RSC .
S. Liang, N. Altaf, L. Huang, Y. Gao and Q. Wang, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 35, 90–105 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807166 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Lee, N. H. Cho, S. W. Im, M. S. Jee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min and K. T. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14043–14057 RSC .
X. Xue, R. Chen, C. Yan, P. Zhao, Y. Hu, W. Zhang, S. Yang and Z. Jin, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1229–1249 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qin and M. Oschatz, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 878–889 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, J. Guo, X. Li, P. Patel and A. Seifitokaldani, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 473–506 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, C. Xia, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Wang and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, 3111–3127 CrossRef PubMed .
U. O. Nwabara, E. R. Cofell, S. Verma, E. Negro and P. J. A. Kenis, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 855–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Perry, P.-k. Leung, L. Wang and C. Ponce de León, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2020, 20, 88–98 CrossRef CAS .
D. Salvatore and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 5, 215–220 CrossRef .
P. Ganji, R. A. Borse, J. F. Xie, A. G. A. Mohamed and Y. B. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 2000096 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Tufa, D. Chanda, M. Ma, D. Aili, T. B. Demissie, J. Vaes, Q. Li, S. Liu and D. Pant, Appl. Energy, 2020, 277, 115557 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Exner and H. Over, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 1240–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef .
Q. Lu and F. Jiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 439–456 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Horst, K. M. Mangold and D. Holtmann, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2016, 113, 260–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bajracharya, K. Vanbroekhoven, C. J. Buisman, D. Pant and D. P. Strik, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int, 2016, 23, 22292–22308 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bidault, D. J. L. Brett, P. H. Middleton and N. P. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 39–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. W. Lee and B. N. Popov, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 5850–5865 CrossRef CAS .
R. Omrani and B. Shabani, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 28515–28536 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Majlan, D. Rohendi, W. R. W. Daud, T. Husaini and M. A. Haque, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 89, 117–134 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jayakumar, Front. Energy, 2019, 13, 325–338 CrossRef .
J. Park, H. Oh, T. Ha, Y. I. Lee and K. Min, Appl. Energy, 2015, 155, 866–880 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cindrella, A. M. Kannan, J. F. Lin, K. Saminathan, Y. Ho, C. W. Lin and J. Wertz, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 146–160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Andersson, S. B. Beale, M. Espinoza, Z. Wu and W. Lehnert, Appl. Energy, 2016, 180, 757–778 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Tang, Z. Wang, Z. Shi, S. Wu, D. Song, J. Zhang, K. Fatih, J. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, R. Abouatallah and A. Mazza, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 103–117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Litster and G. McLean, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 61–76 CrossRef CAS .
B. Endrődi, G. Bencsik, F. Darvas, R. Jones, K. Rajeshwar and C. Janáky, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 133–154 CrossRef .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 748–755 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. C. Ma, J. I. Gold, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3313–3321 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Weng, A. T. Bell and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1950–1968 RSC .
C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O’Brien, J. P. Edwards, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Joule, 2019, 3, 2777–2791 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, Y. E. Kim, M. H. Youn, S. K. Jeong and K. T. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6883–6887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ju, G. Kaur, A. P. Kulkarni and S. Giddey, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, H. Peng, X. Wei, H. Zhou, J. Gong, M. Huai, L. Xiao, G. Wang, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2455–2462 RSC .
M. Ma, E. L. Clark, K. T. Therkildsen, S. Dalsgaard, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 977–985 RSC .
D. A. Salvatore, D. M. Weekes, J. He, K. E. Dettelbach, Y. C. Li, T. E. Mallouk and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 149–154 CrossRef .
J. J. Kaczur, H. Yang, Z. Liu, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, Front. Chem, 2018, 6, 263 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Strain and J. M. Spurgeon, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 35, e298–e302 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, S. Kim, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8854–8861 RSC .
M. Ramdin, A. R. T. Morrison, M. de Groen, R. van Haperen, R. de Kler, L. J. P. van den Broeke, J. P. M. Trusler, W. de Jong and T. J. H. Vlugt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 1834–1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, X. Zhang, J. Jung, Y. X. Cai, X. F. Hou, Q. Zhang and J. L. Qiao, Catal. Today, 2018, 318, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. Duarte, B. De Mot, J. Hereijgers and T. Breugelmans, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5596–5602 CrossRef CAS .
T. Burdyny, P. J. Graham, Y. Pang, C.-T. Dinh, M. Liu, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4031–4040 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Tan, K. B. Lee, H. Song and J. Oh, Joule, 2020, 4, 1104–1120 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Ma, S. J. Xie, T. T. Liu, Q. Y. Fan, J. Y. Ye, F. F. Sun, Z. Jiang, Q. H. Zhang, J. Cheng and Y. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 478–487 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, W. A. Smith and T. Burdyny, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 639–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Sassin, Y. Garsany, B. D. Gould and K. E. Swider-Lyons, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 511–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Dai, H. Wang, X.-Z. Yuan, J. J. Martin, D. Yang, J. Qiao and J. Ma, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 9461–9478 CrossRef CAS .
U. Pasaogullari and C. Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A399–A406 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sazali, W. N. Wan Salleh, A. S. Jamaludin and M. N. Mhd Razali, Membranes, 2020, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lori and L. Elbaz, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 3434–3446 CrossRef CAS .
N. Holmström, J. Ihonen, A. Lundblad and G. Lindbergh, Fuel Cells, 2007, 7, 306–313 CrossRef .
Q. N. Wang, H. Dong and H. B. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 278–284 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen and X. Feng, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3124–3131 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Zou, L. Tao, Y. Wang, G. Huang, S. Du and S. Wang, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2055–2066 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, R. Kas, W. A. Smith and T. Burdyny, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 33–40 CrossRef .
L. H. Han, W. Zhou and C. X. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 855–860 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kopljar, A. Inan, P. Vindayer, N. Wagner and E. Klemm, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 1107–1116 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Park, Y. J. Sohn, T. H. Yang, Y. G. Yoon, W. Y. Lee and C. S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2004, 131, 182–187 CrossRef CAS .
Q. N. Wang, H. Dong, H. Yu and H. B. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Park, S. Kim, Y.-I. Park and M.-H. Oh, J. Phys. Conf., 2009, 165, 12046–12049 CrossRef .
S. Salomé, R. Rego and M. C. Oliveira, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 143, 109–115 CrossRef .
G. K. S. Prakash, F. A. Viva and G. A. Olah, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oh, Y. S. Park, H. Park, H. Kim, J. H. Jang, I. Choi and S.-K. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2020, 82, 374–382 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tiwari, G. Tsekouras, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28176–28186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, H. Y. Su, D. Liu, R. Huang, X. Meng, X. Cui, Z. Q. Tian, D. H. Zhang and D. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 160–166 CrossRef .
B. Kim, F. Hillman, M. Ariyoshi, S. Fujikawa and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 312, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Weber and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A677–A688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Del Castillo, M. Alvarez-Guerra, J. Solla-Gullón, A. Sáez, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, J. J. Lv, T. Cheng, B. H. Ko, J. J. Zhu, W. A. Goddard, 3rd and F. Jiao, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 846–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Huang, Y. L. Chen, T. Cheng, L. W. Wang and W. A. Goddard, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2983–2988 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ren, D. Joulie, D. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2019, 365, 367–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shi, J. Guo, X. Zhang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, Z. Han, Y. Zhao, L. Shang, C. Zhou, L. Jiang and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3028–3037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-I. Chou, Z.-Y. Siao, Y.-F. Chen, L.-Y. Sung, W.-M. Yang and C.-C. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 536–540 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wicks, M. L. Jue, V. A. Beck, J. S. Oakdale, N. A. Dudukovic, A. L. Clemens, S. Liang, M. E. Ellis, G. Lee, S. E. Baker, E. B. Duoss and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2021, e2003855,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202003855 .
A. Li, H. Wang, J. Han and L. Liu, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2012, 6, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiménez, J. García, F. Martínez, R. Camarillo and J. Rincón, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 337, 135663 CrossRef .
Y. H. He, W. J. Jiang, Y. Zhang, L. B. Huang and J. S. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18428–18433 RSC .
R. N. Bonifácio, J. O. A. Paschoal, M. Linardi and R. Cuenca, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4680–4685 CrossRef .
F. Alcaide, G. Álvarez, P. L. Cabot, R. Genova-Koleva, H.-J. Grande and O. Miguel, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 231, 529–538 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. G. Li and Z. S. Liu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 6799–6811 CAS .
M. Ahadi, M. Tam, J. Stumper and M. Bahrami, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 3603–3614 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Jhong, F. R. Brushett and P. J. A. Kenis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 589–599 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Marepally, C. Ampelli, C. Genovese, F. Tavella, L. Veyre, E. A. Quadrelli, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 21, 534–542 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, C. S. Kley, Y. Li and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10560–10565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Wu, P. P. Sharma, B. H. Harris and X. D. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, E. Birgersson, B. Kim, P. J. A. Kenis and I. A. Karimi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F23–F32 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. F. de Araujo, W. Ju, A. Bagger, H. Schmies, S. Kuhl, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1063–1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Wang, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, F. Li, Y. Wang, C. M. Gabardo, C.-T. Dinh, T.-T. Zhuang, L. Wang, J. Y. Howe, Y. Ren, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1124–1131 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, K. Jiang, N. Ta, Y. Hu, J. Zeng, J. Liu and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 265–278 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Ji, J. Tang, J. Wang, B. Liu, H.-G. Steinrück, K. Lim, Y. Li, M. F. Toney, K. Chan and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 2, 55–61 CrossRef .
Q. N. A. Wang, H. Dong and H. B. Yu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 59970–59976 RSC .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Vennekoetter, R. Sengpiel and M. Wessling, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 364, 89–101 CrossRef CAS .
A. Suzuki, U. Sen, T. Hattori, R. Miura, R. Nagumo, H. Tsuboi, N. Hatakeyama, A. Endou, H. Takaba, M. C. Williams and A. Miyamoto, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 2221–2229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Mamunya, V. V. Davydenko, P. Pissis and E. V. Lebedev, Eur. Polym. J., 2002, 38, 1887–1897 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1290–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luc, X. Fu, J. Shi, J.-J. Lv, M. Jouny, B. H. Ko, Y. Xu, Q. Tu, X. Hu, J. Wu, Q. Yue, Y. Liu, F. Jiao and Y. Kang, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Romero Cuellar, K. Wiesner-Fleischer, M. Fleischer, A. Rucki and O. Hinrichsen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 307, 164–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sartin, Z. Y. Yu, W. Chen, F. He, Z. J. Sun, Y. X. Chen and W. X. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 26489–26498 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Nitopi, A. B. Wong, J. L. Snider, A. C. Nielander, C. G. Morales-Guio, M. Orazov, D. C. Higgins, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 702–708 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Zhuang, Y. Pang, Z.-Q. Liang, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C.-S. Tan, J. Li, C. T. Dinh, P. De Luna, P.-L. Hsieh, T. Burdyny, H.-H. Li, M. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Li, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, D.-H. Nam, Z.-Y. Wu, Y.-R. Zheng, A. H. Ip, H. Tan, L.-J. Chen, S.-H. Yu, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal, 2018, 1, 946–951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, K. Chang, H. Zhang, M. He, W. A. Goddard, J. G. Chen, M.-J. Cheng and Q. Lu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4709–4718 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Gao, S. J. Hu, X. L. Zhang, Y. R. Zheng, H. J. Wang, Z. Z. Niu, P. P. Yang, R. C. Bao, T. Ma, Z. Dang, Y. Guan, X. S. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 8784–8790 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, W. Luo and A. Züttel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26285–26292 RSC .
G. W. Sievers, A. W. Jensen, V. Brüser, M. Arenz and M. Escudero-Escribano, Surfaces, 2019, 2, 336–348 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Saha, A. F. Gulla, R. J. Allen and S. Mukerjee, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4680–4692 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sievers, T. Vidakovic-Koch, C. Walter, F. Steffen, S. Jakubith, A. Kruth, D. Hermsdorf, K. Sundmacher and V. Bruser, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2018, 48, 221–232 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. An, S. S. Li, A. Yoshida, Z. D. Wang, X. G. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Q. Guan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9360–9368 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lee, Y.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, C. H. Choi, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, P. Strasser and H.-S. Oh, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105030 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Ivanova, O. K. Alekseeva, V. N. Fateev, B. L. Shapir, D. D. Spasov, S. M. Nikitin, M. Y. Presnyakov, N. N. Kolobylina, M. A. Soloviev, A. I. Mikhalev and S. A. Grigoriev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 29529–29536 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, G. X. Chen, Y. Y. Zhu, Z. Liang, A. Pei, C. L. Wu, H. X. Wang, H. R. Lee, K. Liu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 592–600 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, P. W. Kang, S. S. Jeon and H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9032–9038 RSC .
S. Kim, W. J. Dong, S. Gim, W. Sohn, J. Y. Park, C. J. Yoo, H. W. Jang and J.-L. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. H. Hoang, S. Verma, S. Ma, T. T. Fister, J. Timoshenko, A. I. Frenkel, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5791–5797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. N. Wang, C. Q. Zhu, C. Wu and H. B. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 138–147 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morimoto, Y. Takatsuji, S. Iikubo, S. Kawano, T. Sakakura and T. Haruyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3004–3010 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Qiu, H.-X. Zhong, T.-T. Zhang, W.-B. Xu, X.-F. Li and H.-M. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6302–6310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oh, H. Park, H. Kim, Y. S. Park, M. G. Ha, J. H. Jang and S.-K. Kim, Coatings, 2020, 10, 341–354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sanchez, T. R. Hellstern, L. A. King and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901824 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Ham, Y. S. Park, A. Jo, J. H. Jang, S.-K. Kim and J. J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2019, 437, 226898 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Tian, S. Garg, T. E. Rufford, P. Zhao, Y. Wu, A. J. Yago, L. Ge, V. Rudolph and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22760–22770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Sun, S. Canepa, H. Sun, M. N. Yesibolati, M. Sherburne, R. Xu, T. Sritharan, J. S. C. Loo, J. W. Ager Iii, J. Barber, K. Mølhave and Z. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11905–11916 RSC .
Y. S. Ham, M. J. Kim, T. Lim, D. K. Kim, S. K. Kim and J. J. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 11315–11325 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Kjartansdóttir, L. P. Nielsen and P. Møller, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8221–8231 CrossRef .
B. Millington, V. Whipple and B. G. Pollet, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8500–8508 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, C. S. Casari, V. Russo and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11947–11950 RSC .
Z. Yang and J. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8859–8878 RSC .
I. Farid, A. Boruah, J. Chutia, A. R. Pal and H. Bailung, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 236, 121796 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43–51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. T. Wagner, B. Lakshmanan and M. F. Mathias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2204–2219 CrossRef CAS .
T. Frey and M. Linardi, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, R. Lin, S. Tang, D. Zhong and Z. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2020, 467, 228355 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ehelebe, T. Ashraf, S. Hager, D. Seeberger, S. Thiele and S. Cherevko, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 116, 106761 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Wiberg, M. Fleige and M. Arenz, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2015, 86, 024102 CrossRef .
N. Fujinuma, A. Ikoma and S. E. Lofland, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001645 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jeng and F. Jiao, React. Chem. Eng., 2020, 5, 1768–1775 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Peng, Y. Wang, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Z. Lu, L. Guo and C. Yan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 26183–26191 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, H. Su, B. G. Pollet, V. Linkov and S. Pasupathi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, H. Su, B. G. Pollet and S. Pasupathi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
A. Reyes, R. P. Jansonius, B. A. W. Mowbray, Y. Cao, D. G. Wheeler, J. Chau, D. J. Dvorak and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1612–1618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ogihara, T. Maezuru, Y. Ogishima, Y. Inami, M. Saito, S. Iguchi and I. Yamanaka, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 19453–19463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. de Jesus Gálvez-Vázquez, P. Moreno-García, H. Xu, Y. Hou, H. Hu, I. Z. Montiel, A. V. Rudnev, S. Alinejad, V. Grozovski, B. J. Wiley, M. Arenz and P. Broekmann, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 13096–13108 CrossRef .
G. Díaz-Sainz, M. Alvarez-Guerra, J. Solla-Gullón, L. García-Cruz, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, Catal. Today, 2020, 346, 58–64 CrossRef .
D. S. Ripatti, T. R. Veltman and M. W. Kanan, Joule, 2019, 3, 240–256 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, L. Tao, G. Saur, J. van de Lagemaat, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2018, 2, 825–832 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Grim, Z. Huang, M. T. Guarnieri, J. R. Ferrell, L. Tao and J. A. Schaidle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 472–494 RSC .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2165–2177 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. McEnaney, B. A. Rohr, A. C. Nielander, A. R. Singh, L. A. King, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Sustainable Energ Fuels, 2020, 4, 2752–2759 RSC .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7075–7084 RSC .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, O. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mezzavilla, S. Horch, I. E. L. Stephens, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 3814–3818 CrossRef .
T. T. Li, B. Shan, W. Xu and T. J. Meyer, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bitar, A. Fecant, E. Trela-Baudot, S. Chardon-Noblat and D. Pasquier, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Mao, J. Liu, Y. Zhou, D. Guay and J. Qiao, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1443–1450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yiliguma, Z. Wang, C. Yang, A. Guan, L. Shang, A. M. Al-Enizi, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20121–20127 RSC .
A. Vasileff, C. Xu, L. Ge, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13965–13968 RSC .
I. S. Kwon, T. T. Debela, I. H. Kwak, H. W. Seo, K. Park, D. Kim, S. J. Yoo, J.-G. Kim, J. Park and H. S. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22879–22883 RSC .
N. Han, P. Ding, L. He, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902338 CrossRef .
D. Raciti and C. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1545–1556 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, T. Y. Wang, J. S. Liang, Q. Li and S. H. Sun, Nano Today, 2018, 21, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Liang, T. T. Zhuang, A. Seifitokaldani, J. Li, C. W. Huang, C. S. Tan, Y. Li, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, Y. Hu, Q. Xiao, P. L. Hsieh, Y. Wang, F. Li, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Zhou, P. Chen, Y. Pang, S. C. Lo, L. J. Chen, H. Tan, Z. Xu, S. Zhao, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3828–3835 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. K. Tzeng, Y. Ji, Y. Li, J. Li, X. Zheng, A. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Gong, L. Cai, Y. Li, X. Zhang, W. Chen, B. Liu, H. Lu, N. A. Melosh, Z. X. Shen, K. Chan, T. Tan, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, P. Tian, J. Li, J. Chen, J. Xu and Y. F. Han, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3955–3959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, M. Heima, R. Luo, R. T. Haasch, J. I. Gold, M. Yamauchi and P. J. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 47–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Cao, N. J. Libretto, X. Li, C. Li, Y. Wan, C. He, J. Lee, J. Gregg, H. Zong, D. Su, J. T. Miller, T. Mueller and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16635–16642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, B. H. Ko, S. Hwang, Z. Liu, Y. Yao, W. Luc, M. Cui, A. S. Malkani, T. Li, X. Wang, J. Dai, B. Xu, G. Wang, D. Su, F. Jiao and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz6844 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Lee, K. D. Yang, D. H. Nam, J. H. Jang, N. H. Cho, S. W. Im and K. T. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704717–1704734 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ju, A. Bagger, G. P. Hao, A. S. Varela, I. Sinev, V. Bon, B. Roldan Cuenya, S. Kaskel, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 944–952 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Lamagni, M. Miola, J. Catalano, M. S. Hvid, M. A. H. Mamakhel, M. Christensen, M. R. Madsen, H. S. Jeppesen, X. M. Hu, K. Daasbjerg, T. Skrydstrup and N. Lock, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Gong, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, C. Y. Pan, L. Zheng, X. Cai, B. Liu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2705–2709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, S. Xie, X. G. Zhang, F. Sun, J. Kang, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, D. Y. Wu and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 892–901 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, P. Deng, D. Liu, S. Zhao, D. Li, H. Wu, Y. Ma, B. Y. Xia, M. Li, C. Xiao and S. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2472–2480 RSC .
Z. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Jiao, K. Mou, X. Zhang and L. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903664 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, T. Sharifi, Y. Gao, T. Zhang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804257–1804270 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, Z. Wang, C.-T. Dinh, J. Li, A. Ozden, M. Golam Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C.-S. Tan, C. M. Gabardo, M. Luo, H. Zhou, F. Li, Y. Lum, C. McCallum, Y. Xu, M. Liu, A. Proppe, A. Johnston, P. Todorovic, T.-T. Zhuang, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2019, 3, 98–106 CrossRef .
S. Garg, M. Li, T. E. Rufford, L. Ge, V. Rudolph, R. Knibbe, M. Konarova and G. G. X. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 304–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Popovic, M. Smiljanic, P. Jovanovic, J. Vavra, R. Buonsanti and N. Hodnik, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14736–14746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Zhang and W. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiang, S. Rasul, B. Hou, J. Portoles, P. Cumpson and E. H. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 601–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, S. Rasul, K. Scott, J. Portoles, P. Cumpson and E. H. Yu, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 30, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Leonard, L. E. Clarke, A. Forner-Cuenca, S. M. Brown and F. R. Brushett, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 400–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. De Mot, J. Hereijgers, M. Duarte and T. Breugelmans, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 378, 122224 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Varela, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2020, 26, 100371 CrossRef .
X. Lu, C. Zhu, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, J. S. Francisco and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15438–15444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yang, R. Kas and W. A. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15891–15900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, P. Schlexer, J. Xiao, Y. Ji, L. Wang, R. B. Sandberg, M. Tang, K. S. Brown, H. Peng, S. Ringe, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and K. Chan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 32–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ren, J. Fong and B. S. Yeo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 925–932 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Löwe, C. Rieg, T. Hierlemann, N. Salas, D. Kopljar, N. Wagner and E. Klemm, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 4497–4506 CrossRef .
A. Rolla, A. Sadkowski, J. Wild and P. Zóltowski, J. Power Sources, 1980, 5, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lv, M. Jouny, W. Luc, W. Zhu, J. J. Zhu and F. Jiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803111–1803118 CrossRef .
S. Verma, Y. Hamasaki, C. Kim, W. Huang, S. Lu, H.-R. M. Jhong, A. A. Gewirth, T. Fujigaya, N. Nakashima and P. J. A. Kenis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 193–198 CrossRef .
B. Endrodi, E. Kecsenovity, A. Samu, F. Darvas, R. V. Jones, V. Torok, A. Danyi and C. Janaky, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1770–1777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shahidzadeh-Bonn, J. Desarnaud, F. Bertrand, X. Chateau and D. Bonn, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2010, 81, 066110 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Jeanty, C. Scherer, E. Magori, K. Wiesner-Fleischer, O. Hinrichsen and M. Fleischer, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 454–462 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wagner, P. Tiwari, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 172–184 RSC .
C. Lee, B. Zhao, J. K. Lee, K. F. Fahy, K. Krause and A. Bazylak, iScience, 2020, 23, 101094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. De Gregorio, T. Burdyny, A. Loiudice, P. Iyengar, W. A. Smith and R. Buonsanti, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4854–4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, I. Sullivan, D. M. Larson, C. Xiang, B. S. Brunschwig and H. A. Atwater, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, M. D. Hossain, C. Xu, Z. Lu, Y.-S. Liu, S.-H. Hsieh, I. Lee, W. Gao, J. Yang, B. V. Merinov, W. Xue, Z. Liu, J. Zhou, Z. Luo, X. Pan, F. Zaera, J. Guo, X. Duan, W. A. Goddard and Y. Huang, Matter, 2020, 3, 1774–1790 CrossRef .
Z. Xing, L. Hu, D. S. Ripatti, X. Hu and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, Z. Lu, X. Sun, L. Jiang and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1590–1598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1778–1779 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, W. Xu, X. Wen, Y. Zhong, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2018, 12, 345–349 CrossRef .
P. Kang, S. Zhang, T. J. Meyer and M. Brookhart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8709–8713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wakerley, S. Lamaison, F. Ozanam, N. Menguy, D. Mercier, P. Marcus, M. Fontecave and V. Mougel, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1222–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, H. A. Miller, M. Bellini, H. Christensen, K. Scott, S. Rasul and E. H. Yu, Sustainable Energ Fuels, 2020, 4, 277–284 RSC .
A. S. Agarwal, Y. Zhai, D. Hill and N. Sridhar, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1301–1310 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Mahmood, D. Masheder and C. J. Harty, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1987, 17, 1159–1170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Jiao, H. Zhang, P. Zhu, H. Ma, C. Chen, H. Xiao and Q. Lu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4975–4982 CrossRef CAS .
G. Díaz-Sainz, M. Alvarez-Guerra, J. Solla-Gullón, L. García-Cruz, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 12–19 CrossRef .
Y. Fu, Y. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Qiao, J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Appl. Energy, 2016, 175, 536–544 CrossRef CAS .
A. Del Castillo, M. Alvarez-Guerra and A. Irabien, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 3557–3564 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Cheng, Q. Sun and H. Yu, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 26, 425–433 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Cheng, Q. Sun, H. Dong and H. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 13711–13721 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Irtem, T. Andreu, A. Parra, M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, S. Garcia-Rodriguez, J. M. Riesco-Garcia, G. Penelas-Perez and J. R. Morante, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13582–13588 RSC .
H. Z. Yang, J. J. Kaczur, S. D. Sajjad and R. I. Masel, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 208–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ramdin, A. R. T. Morrison, M. de Groen, R. van Haperen, R. de Kler, E. Irtem, A. T. Laitinen, L. J. P. van den Broeke, T. Breugelmans, J. P. M. Trusler, W. D. Jong and T. J. H. Vlugt, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res, 2019, 58, 22718–22740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, A. Vise, W. E. Klein, F. C. Cetinbas, D. J. Myers, W. A. Smith, T. G. Deutsch and K. C. Neyerlin, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1825–1833 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Yang, R. Kutz and R. I. Masel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, J3371–J3377 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Garcia de Arquer, O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, M. I. Saidaminov, C. S. Tan, L. N. Quan, A. Proppe, M. G. Kibria, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802858–1802863 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Fan, C. Xia, P. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3633–3641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bohlen, D. Wastl, J. Radomski, V. Sieber and L. Vieira, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 110, 106597 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gong, P. Ding, M. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. Feng, Y. Li, W. Zhou and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2807–2816 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rasul, A. Pugnant, H. Xiang, J.-M. Fontmorin and E. H. Yu, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Sun, S.-X. Guo, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1334–1340 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Zou, X. Hu, S. Ning, X. Wang, X. Kang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27514–27521 RSC .
P. F. Liu, M. Y. Zu, L. R. Zheng and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12392–12395 RSC .
J. E. Pander, J. W. J. Lum and B. S. Yeo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4093–4101 RSC .
N. Furuya, T. Yamazaki and M. Shibata, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 431, 39–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitski, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, M. N. Idros, Y. Wu, S. Garg, S. Gao, R. Lin, H. Rabiee, Z. Li, L. Ge, T. E. Rufford, Z. Zhu, L. Li and G. Wang, React. Chem. Eng., 2021, 6, 345–352 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Wu, C. Zhu, R. Xiong, Y. Deng, X. Wang, C. Wu and H. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 369, 137662 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Ross, Y. F. Li, P. De Luna, D. Kim, E. H. Sargent and P. D. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 257–264 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, N. Xiao, Y. Wang, C. Li, X. Ye, Z. Guo, X. Pan, C. Liu, J. Bai, J. Xiao, X. Zhang, S. Zhao and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18852–18860 RSC .
W. Sheng, S. Kattel, S. Yao, B. Yan, Z. Liang, C. J. Hawxhurst, Q. Wu and J. G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1180–1185 RSC .
R. Wang, H. Haspel, A. Pustovarenko, A. Dikhtiarenko, A. Russkikh, G. Shterk, D. Osadchii, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Ma, W. A. Smith, K. Takanabe, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2024–2031 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Ma, R. Luo, J. I. Gold, A. Z. Yu, B. Kim and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8573–8578 RSC .
K. Murata, H. Tanaka and K. Ishii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 12073–12080 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chu, G. Qin, X. Yuan, M. Xu, P. Zheng and J. Lu, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 205–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Thompson, O. Diwald and J. T. Yates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11700–11704 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, Y. Lan, G. M. Perez, S. Moniri and P. J. Kenis, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, H. Seong, J. T. Song, K. Kwak, H. Song, Y. C. Tan, G. Park, D. Lee and J. Oh, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 5, 749–757 CrossRef .
B. Kim, S. Ma, H.-R. Molly Jhong and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
A. Angulo, P. van der Linde, H. Gardeniers, M. Modestino and D. Fernández Rivas, Joule, 2020, 4, 555–579 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, S. Chen, F. Ma, J. Liang, Z. Miao, T. Wang, H. L. Wang, Y. Huang and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36996–37004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Morimoto, Y. Takatsuji, R. Yamasaki, H. Hashimoto, I. Nakata, T. Sakakura and T. Haruyama, Electrocatalysis, 2017, 9, 323–332 CrossRef .
W. Luo, W. Xie, R. Mutschler, E. Oveisi, G. L. De Gregorio, R. Buonsanti and A. Züttel, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6571–6581 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ju, F. Jiang, H. Ma, Z. Pan, Y. B. Zhao, F. Pagani, D. Rentsch, J. Wang and C. Battaglia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901514 CrossRef .
Z. C. Liu, R. I. Masel, Q. M. Chen, R. Kutz, H. Z. Yang, K. Lewinski, M. Kaplun, S. Luopa and D. R. Lutz, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 15, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Jeong, M. Balamurugan, V. S. K. Choutipalli, E.-S. Jeong, V. Subramanian, U. Sim and K. T. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10651–10661 RSC .
C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, J. P. Edwards, C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, C. P. O’Brien, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2531–2539 RSC .
J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, C. M. Gabardo, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Z. B. Qi, A. Ozden, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Appl. Energy, 2020, 261, 114305 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Dinh, F. P. García de Arquer, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2835–2840 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Bhargava, F. Proietto, D. Azmoodeh, E. R. Cofell, D. A. Henckel, S. Verma, C. J. Brooks, A. A. Gewirth and P. J. A. Kenis, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 2001–2011 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang and P. Xu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 5536–5545 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, S. Yu, F. Zheng, I. Roh, Y. F. Li, S. Louisia, Z. Y. Qi, G. A. Somorjai, H. Frei, L. W. Wang and P. D. Yang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 1032–1042 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hirunsit, W. Soodsawang and J. Limtrakul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8238–8249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vasileff, Y. Zhu, X. Zhi, Y. Zhao, L. Ge, H. M. Chen, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19649–19653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ye, X. Guo and T. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128825 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff, X. Zhou, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7646–7659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, Joule, 2020, 4, 980–982 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, P. Kang, M. Bakir, A. M. Lapides, C. J. Dares and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 15809–15814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng, J. Jiang, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, X. Guo, K. L. Materna, W. Liu, V. S. Batista, G. W. Brudvig and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8076–8079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Manthiram, B. J. Beberwyck and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13319–13325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, S. Verma, S. Kim, T. T. Fister, P. J. A. Kenis and A. A. Gewirth, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 875, 113862 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, A. Xu, F. Li, S. F. Hung, D. H. Nam, C. M. Gabardo, Z. Wang, Y. Xu, A. Ozden, A. S. Rasouli, A. H. Ip, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 3525–3531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, B. Li, W. Deng, Z. Du, Y. Gang, G. Wang and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 252, 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinagawa, G. O. Larrazabal, A. J. Martin, F. Krumeich and J. Perez-Ramirez, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 837–844 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Y. Wang, F. P. G. de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, A. Ozden, Y. G. C. Li, D. H. Nam, J. Li, Y. S. Liu, J. Wicks, Z. T. Chen, M. F. Chi, B. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tam, J. Y. Howe, A. Proppe, P. Todorovic, F. W. Li, T. T. Zhuang, C. M. Gabardo, A. R. Kirmani, C. McCallum, S. F. Hung, Y. W. Lum, M. C. Luo, Y. M. Min, A. N. Xu, C. P. O'Brien, B. Stephen, B. Sun, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 478–486 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Perry, S. M. Gateman, R. Malpass-Evans, N. McKeown, M. Wegener, P. Nazarovs, J. Mauzeroll, L. Wang and C. Ponce de Leon, Chemosphere, 2020, 248, 125993 CrossRef CAS .
E. Madrid, J. P. Lowe, K. J. Msayib, N. B. McKeown, Q. Song, G. A. Attard, T. Düren and F. Marken, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 252–259 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Zhang and J. Wu, J. Catal., 2020, 387, 163–169 CrossRef CAS .
X. She, T. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Li, H. Xu and J. Wu, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100051 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, H. Shen, K. J. T. Livi, D. Raciti, H. Zong, J. Gregg, M. Onadeko, Y. Wan, A. Watson and C. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8461–8468 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, Q. Zhu, C. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, S. Liu and B. Han, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 677–685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Wu, I. McNulty, C. Liu, K. C. Lau, Q. Liu, A. P. Paulikas, C. J. Sun, Z. H. Cai, J. R. Guest, Y. Ren, V. Stamenkovic, L. A. Curtiss, Y. Z. Liu and T. Rajh, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 957–968 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albo, M. Alvarez-Guerra, P. Castano and A. Irabien, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2304–2324 RSC .
J. Albo and A. Irabien, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albo, A. Saez, J. Solla-Gullon, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 709–717 CrossRef .
A. Marcos-Madrazo, C. Casado-Coterillo and Á. Irabien, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5273–5282 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, C. Yu, C. Zhao, H. Huang, X. Yao, X. Han, W. Guo, S. Cui, H. Huang and J. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9904–9910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Velasco-Vélez, T. Jones, D. Gao, E. Carbonio, R. Arrigo, C.-J. Hsu, Y.-C. Huang, C.-L. Dong, J.-M. Chen, J.-F. Lee, P. Strasser, B. Roldan Cuenya, R. Schlögl, A. Knop-Gericke and C.-H. Chuang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 7, 1485–1492 CrossRef .
J. Albo, G. Beobide, P. Castaño and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 18, 164–172 CrossRef CAS .
T.-T. Zhuang, Z.-Q. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. De Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. Min, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, Y. Pang, M. Zhong, B. Zhang, J. Li, P.-N. Chen, X.-L. Zheng, H. Liang, W.-N. Ge, B.-J. Ye, D. Sinton, S.-H. Yu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, J. T. Song, B. Kim, Y. C. Tan and J. Oh, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119049 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lum and J. W. Ager, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2935–2944 RSC .
Y. Xu, J. P. Edwards, J. Zhong, C. P. O’Brien, C. M. Gabardo, C. McCallum, J. Li, C.-T. Dinh, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 554–561 RSC .
D. M. D'Alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 CrossRef PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2016, 354, 1362–1363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Ma, M. Sadakiyo, R. Luo, M. Heima, M. Yamauchi and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernandez, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, A. Ozden, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, C. McCallum, L. Tao, Z. Q. Liang, M. Luo, X. Wang, H. Li, C. P. O'Brien, C. S. Tan, D. H. Nam, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T. T. Zhuang, Y. C. Li, Z. Han, R. D. Britt, D. Sinton, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 577, 509–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Albo, M. Perfecto-Irigaray, G. Beobide and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, M.-P. Yang, Q.-L. Hu, S.-M. Li, H. Wang and J.-X. Lu, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 24, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, K. Tran, Y. Min, C. Wang, Z. Wang, C. T. Dinh, P. De Luna, Z. Yu, A. S. Rasouli, P. Brodersen, S. Sun, O. Voznyy, C. S. Tan, M. Askerka, F. Che, M. Liu, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Pang, S. C. Lo, A. Ip, Z. Ulissi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 581, 178–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Bertheussen, T. V. Hogg, Y. Abghoui, A. K. Engstfeld, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. L. Stephens, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 634–640 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11642–11645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Wang, T. T. Zhuang, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, D. H. Nam, F. Li, C. W. Huang, C. S. Tan, Z. Chen, M. Chi, C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, P. Todorovic, A. Proppe, Y. Pang, A. R. Kirmani, Y. Wang, A. H. Ip, L. J. Richter, B. Scheffel, A. Xu, S. C. Lo, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5186–5192 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Raciti and C. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 741–742 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. C. Higgins, Y. Ji, C. G. Morales-Guio, K. Chan, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 12572–12575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, S. A. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, M. Orazov, C. G. Morales-Guio, X. Y. Liu, D. C. Higgins, K. R. Chan, J. K. Norskov, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7445–7454 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
Y. J. Pang, J. Li, Z. Y. Wang, C. S. Tang, P. L. Hsieh, T. T. Zhuang, Z. Q. Liang, C. Q. Zou, X. Wang, P. De Luna, J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, F. W. Li, C. T. Dinh, M. Zhong, Y. H. Lou, D. Wu, L. J. Chen, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vasileff, X. Zhi, C. C. Xu, L. Ge, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9411–9417 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, D. Perone, S. Malani, Y. Lum, S. Haussener and J. W. Ager, ACS Appl. Energy Mater, 2019, 2, 4551–4559 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Romero Cuellar, C. Scherer, B. Kaçkar, W. Eisenreich, C. Huber, K. Wiesner-Fleischer, M. Fleischer and O. Hinrichsen, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 36, 263–275 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhou and C. X. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1892–1897 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ren, N. T. Wong, A. D. Handoko, Y. Huang and B. S. Yeo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 20–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Che, Y. Pang, C. Zou, J. Y. Howe, T. Burdyny, J. P. Edwards, Y. Wang, F. Li, Z. Wang, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, T. T. Zhuang, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Cheng, T. Wu, Y. Z. Finfrock, L. Ma, S. H. Hsieh, Y. S. Liu, G. A. Botton, W. F. Pong, X. Du, J. Guo, T. K. Sham, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4614–4622 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, A. Xu, F. Li, Z. Wang, C. Zou, C. M. Gabardo, Y. Wang, A. Ozden, Y. Xu, D. H. Nam, Y. Lum, J. Wicks, B. Chen, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Wen, T. Zhuang, M. Luo, X. Du, T. K. Sham, B. Zhang, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Sullivan, L. Han, S. H. Lee, M. Lin, D. M. Larson, W. S. Drisdell and C. Xiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16964–16970 CrossRef CAS .
G. Soloveichik, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 377–380 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. van der Ham, M. T. Koper and D. G. Hetterscheid, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5183–5191 RSC .
T. Kandemir, M. E. Schuster, A. Senyshyn, M. Behrens and R. Schlogl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12723–12726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2986–2988 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, M. Ali, M. Kar, A. N. Simonov, C. McDonnell-Worth, C. Sun, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2516–2520 RSC .
D. R. MacFarlane, J. Choi, B. H. R. Suryanto, R. Jalili, M. Chatti, L. M. Azofra and A. N. Simonov, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Howard and D. C. Rees, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 2965–2982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Burgess and D. J. Lowe, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 2983–3012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Anderson, J. Rittle and J. C. Peters, Nature, 2013, 501, 84–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri, B. Zheng and X. Sun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9550–9554 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wei, Y. F. Zhang, S. Y. Wang, C. Y. Wang and J. M. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13790–13796 RSC .
X. Li, T. Li, Y. Ma, Q. Wei, W. Qiu, H. Guo, X. Shi, P. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801357 CrossRef .
X. Cui, C. Tang, X. M. Liu, C. Wang, W. Ma and Q. Zhang, Chemistry, 2018, 24, 18494–18501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Skulason, T. Bligaard, S. Gudmundsdottir, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Vegge, H. Jonsson and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1235–1245 RSC .
Y.-C. Hao, Y. Guo, L.-W. Chen, M. Shu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-A. Bu, W.-Y. Gao, N. Zhang, X. Su, X. Feng, J.-W. Zhou, B. Wang, C.-W. Hu, A.-X. Yin, R. Si, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 448–456 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H.-L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
J. Deng, J. A. Iniguez and C. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 846–856 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Z. Xing and X. Feng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3166–3180 RSC .
R. Zhao, H. Xie, L. Chang, X. Zhang, X. Zhu, X. Tong, T. Wang, Y. Luo, P. Wei, Z. Wang and X. Sun, Energy Chem., 2019, 1, 100011 CrossRef .
S. L. Foster, S. I. P. Bakovic, R. D. Duda, S. Maheshwari, R. D. Milton, S. D. Minteer, M. J. Janik, J. N. Renner and L. F. Greenlee, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 490–500 CrossRef .
C. S. M. Kang, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 24550–24558 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, C. S. M. Kang, D. Wang, C. Xiao, F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, L. Cavallo, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1219–1224 CrossRef CAS .
T.-N. Ye, S.-W. Park, Y. Lu, J. Li, M. Sasase, M. Kitano, T. Tada and H. Hosono, Nature, 2020, 583, 391–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Furuya and H. Yoshiba, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interf. Electrochem., 1989, 272, 263–266 CrossRef CAS .
N. Furuya and H. Yoshiba, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1989, 263, 171–174 CrossRef CAS .
N. Furuya and H. Yoshiba, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1990, 291, 269–272 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. Perathoner, C. Ampelli, C. Mebrahtu, D. Su and G. Centi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7393–7400 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, S. Perathoner, C. Ampelli, C. Mebrahtu, D. Su and G. Centi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2699–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, S. Perathoner, C. Ampelli, H. Wei, S. Abate, B. Zhang and G. Centi, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3028–3037 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lan, J. T. Irvine and S. Tao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1145–1151 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 706–709 CrossRef .
L. Bu, S. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Shen, D. Su, G. Lu, X. Zhu, J. Yao, J. Guo and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11850–11859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, X. Li, W. Gao, H. Zhang and M. Luo, Sustainable Energ Fuels, 2020, 4, 164–170 RSC .
G. Gourdin, N. Xiao, W. McCulloch and Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2925–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Chen, X. Cao, S. Wu, X. Zeng, L. X. Ding, M. Zhu and H. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9771–9774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Ma, D. Bao, M.-M. Shi, J.-M. Yan and X.-B. Zhang, Chem, 2017, 2, 525–532 CAS .
K. Kim, S. J. Lee, D. Y. Kim, C. Y. Yoo, J. W. Choi, J. N. Kim, Y. Woo, H. C. Yoon and J. I. Han, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 120–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. McEnaney, A. R. Singh, J. A. Schwalbe, J. Kibsgaard, J. C. Lin, M. Cargnello, T. F. Jaramillo and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1621–1630 RSC .
N. Lazouski, Z. J. Schiffer, K. Williams and K. Manthiram, Joule, 2019, 3, 1127–1139 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Milton, R. Cai, S. Abdellaoui, D. Leech, A. L. De Lacey, M. Pita and S. D. Minteer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2680–2683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, M. Yang and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6900–6920 RSC .
M. Inaba, A. W. Jensen, G. W. Sievers, M. Escudero-Escribano, A. Zana and M. Arenz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 988–994 RSC .

          J. G. Speight, in Fuel Cells: Technologies for Fuel Processing, ed. D. Shekhawat, J. J. Spivey and D. A. Berry, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2011, pp. 29–48 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-444-53563-4.10003-3 .
O. Z. Sharaf and M. F. Orhan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 32, 810–853 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Qu, T. Yuan, W. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 1486–1511 CAS .
R. Ma, G. Lin, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, T. Zhang, G. Shan, M. Yang and J. Wang, npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 78 CrossRef .
S. Sui, X. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Su, S. Riffat and C.-J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1808–1825 RSC .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J. P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Firouzjaie and W. E. Mustain, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 225–234 CrossRef .
M. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1802234 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Zalitis, D. Kramer and A. R. Kucernak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4329–4340 RSC .
C. Zalitis, A. Kucernak, X. Lin and J. Sharman, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4361–4376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. F. Ruiz Diaz, K. S. Chen, Z. Wang and X. C. Adroher, Mater. Today, 2020, 32, 178–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kampker, P. Ayvaz, C. Schon, J. Karstedt, R. Forstmann and F. Welker, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 29288–29296 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, X. Xie, B. Xie, Q. Du and K. Jiao, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2019, 130, 555–563 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Atkins, S. C. Savett and S. E. Creager, J. Power Sources, 2004, 128, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, R. R. Rao, J. Peng, B. Huang, I. E. L. Stephens, M. Risch, Z. J. Xu and Y. Shao-Horn, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1806296 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chatenet, J. Benziger, M. Inaba, S. Kjelstrup, T. Zawodzinski and R. Raccichini, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 22763523 CrossRef .
B. A. Pinaud, A. Bonakdarpour, L. Daniel, J. Sharman and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F321–F327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Lim, C.-W. Roh, H. S. Whang and H. Lee, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 31, 244–250 CrossRef CAS .
G. O. Larrazabal, P. Strom-Hansen, J. P. Heli, K. Zeiter, K. T. Therkildsen, I. Chorkendorff and B. Seger, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41281–41288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, Y.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, S. Y. Lee, C. H. Choi, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, P. Strasser and H.-S. Oh, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105030 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Kutz, Q. Chen, H. Yang, S. D. Sajjad, Z. Liu and I. R. Masel, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sato, H. Ogihara and I. Yamanaka, ISIJ Int., 2019, 59, 623–627 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ogihara, T. Maezuru, Y. Ogishima and I. Yamanaka, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 5533–5537 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. P. Edwards, S. Liu, R. K. Miao, J. E. Huang, C. M. Gabardo, C. P. O’Brien, J. Li, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 809–815,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c02401 .
J. R. Varcoe, P. Atanassov, D. R. Dekel, A. M. Herring, M. A. Hickner, P. A. Kohl, A. R. Kucernak, W. E. Mustain, K. Nijmeijer, K. Scott, T. Xu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3135–3191 RSC .
A. Pătru, T. Binninger, B. Pribyl and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F34–F43 CrossRef .
F. Liu, G. Lu and C.-Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A543–A553 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Li, T. S. Zhao and R. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, S. Lu, Y. Li, A. Huang, L. Zhuang and J. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Weng, A. T. Bell and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3592–3606 RSC .
C. Rice, S. Ha, R. I. Masel, P. Waszczuk, A. Wieckowski and T. Barnard, J. Power Sources, 2002, 111, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sebastián, A. Palella, V. Baglio, L. Spadaro, S. Siracusano, P. Negro, F. Niccoli and A. S. Aricò, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 28–40 CrossRef .
Mulyazmi, W. R. W. Daud, S. Octavia and M. Ulfah, MATEC Web of Conferences, 2018, 156, 03033 CrossRef .
Y. J. Sa, C. W. Lee, S. Y. Lee, J. Na, U. Lee and Y. J. Hwang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6632–6665 RSC .
H. Pan and C. J. Barile, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3567–3578 RSC .
W. R. Leow, Y. Lum, A. Ozden, Y. Wang, D. H. Nam, B. Chen, J. Wicks, T. T. Zhuang, F. Li, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 368, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X. Zhu, X. Wen, Y. Zhou, L. Zhou, H. Li, L. Tao, Q. Li, S. Du, T. Liu, D. Yan, C. Xie, Y. Zou, Y. Wang, R. Chen, J. Huo, Y. Li, J. Cheng, H. Su, X. Zhao, W. Cheng, Q. Liu, H. Lin, J. Luo, J. Chen, M. Dong, K. Cheng, C. Li and S. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 717–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Clark, J. Resasco, A. Landers, J. Lin, L.-T. Chung, A. Walton, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo and A. T. Bell, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6560–6570 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. T. Morrison, V. van Beusekom, M. Ramdin, L. J. P. van den Broeke, T. J. H. Vlugt and W. de Jong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, E77–E86 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Malkani, M. Dunwell and B. Xu, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 474–478 CrossRef .
A. Dutta, A. Kuzume, M. Rahaman, S. Vesztergom and P. Broekmann, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 7498–7502 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Velasco-Velez, R. V. Mom, L. E. Sandoval-Diaz, L. J. Falling, C. H. Chuang, D. Gao, T. E. Jones, Q. Zhu, R. Arrigo, B. Roldan Cuenya, A. Knop-Gericke, T. Lunkenbein and R. Schlogl, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2106–2111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Wang, L. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9567–9581 CAS .
S. H. Lee, I. Sullivan, D. M. Larson, G. Liu, F. M. Toma, C. Xiang and W. S. Drisdell, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8000–8011 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Firet, T. Burdyny, N. T. Nesbitt, S. Chandrashekar, A. Longo and W. A. Smith, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 5870–5885 RSC .
S. Komini Babu, H. T. Chung, P. Zelenay and S. Litster, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32764–32777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3748–3779 RSC .
M. Farmand, A. T. Landers, J. C. Lin, J. T. Feaster, J. W. Beeman, Y. Ye, E. L. Clark, D. Higgins, J. Yano, R. C. Davis, A. Mehta, T. F. Jaramillo, C. Hahn and W. S. Drisdell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 5402–5408 RSC .
R. Kas, K. K. Hummadi, R. Kortlever, P. de Wit, A. Milbrat, M. W. Luiten-Olieman, N. E. Benes, M. T. Koper and G. Mul, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10748–10754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rabiee, X. Zhang, L. Ge, S. Hu, M. Li, S. Smart, Z. Zhu and Z. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21670–21681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Lee, S. Han, H. Lim, Y. Kwon and S. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 8, 2117–2121 CrossRef .
D. Bell, D. Rall, M. Großeheide, L. Marx, L. Hülsdünker and M. Wessling, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 111, 106645 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rabiee, L. Ge, X. Zhang, S. Hu, M. Li, S. Smart, Z. Zhu and Z. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 286, 119945 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Alqahtani, K. P. Katuri, S. Bajracharya, Y. L. Yu, Z. P. Lai and P. E. Saikaly, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804860 CrossRef .
K. P. Katuri, S. Kalathil, A. Ragab, B. Bian, M. F. Alqahtani, D. Pant and P. E. Saikaly, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707072–1707090 CrossRef .
S. Lamaison, D. Wakerley, J. Blanchard, D. Montero, G. Rousse, D. Mercier, P. Marcus, D. Taverna, D. Giaume, V. Mougel and M. Fontecave, Joule, 2020, 4, 395–406 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, A. Suominen and A. Tuominen, Energy Proc., 2012, 28, 78–87 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shukla, S. Bhattacharjee, A. Z. Weber and M. Secanell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F600–F609 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hereijgers, H. Ottevaere, T. Breugelmans and W. De Malsche, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 504, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Fernandes, A. Machado, J. Condeço, C. Rangel and T. Pardal, Scale-up of a system for Hydrocarbon production by Electrochemical reduction of CO2, 2011.
J. Zhang, W. Luo and A. Züttel, J. Catal., 2020, 385, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. W. Blom, W. P. M. van Swaaij, G. Mul and S. R. A. Kersten, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 333, 135460 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H. S. Oh and U. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5193–5205 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sabatino, A. Galia, G. Saracco and O. Scialdone, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 150–159 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hou, D. Jassby, R. Nerenberg and Z. J. Ren, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 11618–11635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. V. Fernandez, R. T. Tosello and J. L. Fernandez, Analyst, 2019, 145, 122–131 RSC .
H.-Q. Xia, K. So, Y. Kitazumi, O. Shirai, K. Nishikawa, Y. Higuchi and K. Kano, J. Power Sources, 2016, 335, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Szczesny, N. Markovic, F. Conzuelo, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira, W. Lubitz, N. Plumere, W. Schuhmann and A. Ruff, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4715–4723 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Rocha, R. M. Reis, M. R. V. Lanza and R. Bertazzoli, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 606–610 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, Z. Yang, Q. He, R. J. Zeng, Y. Bai and S. Zhou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 530–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Szczesny, A. Ruff, A. R. Oliveira, M. Pita, I. A. C. Pereira, A. L. De Lacey and W. Schuhmann, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 321–327 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Rodrigues, X. Guan, J. A. Iñiguez, D. A. Estabrook, J. O. Chapman, S. Huang, E. M. Sletten and C. Liu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
E. Blanchet, F. Duquenne, Y. Rafrafi, L. Etcheverry, B. Erable and A. Bergel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3731–3744 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Hesamoddin Rabiee
	Hesamoddin Rabiee received his Bachelor of Chemical Engineering from Iran and his Mphil from The University of Adelaide, Australia, in 2017 with the Dean's Commendation for research excellence. He started his PhD at The University of Queensland in 2018 with Prof. Zhiguo Yuan at the Advanced Water Management Centre, in collaboration with the School of Chemical Engineering. His PhD focuses on fabrication of novel electrodes for efficient CO2 electrochemical reduction to value-added products. His research interests revolve around the design and developement of advanced materials for energy applications and green technologies such as gas electrocatalysis (e.g. CO2), membrane separation, CO2 capture, and desalination.

Lei Ge
	Lei Ge is a senior research fellow in the Centre for Future Materials at the University of Southern Queensland, and an adjunct fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering at the University of Queensland, Australia. He completed his PhD in 2013 at The University of Queensland. His research focuses on material design for gas processing including CO2 electrolysis, membrane separation and gas adsorption. He has contributed more than 100 journal papers (H index = 37) and several industry reports for Australian unconventional gas companies.

Xueqin Zhang
	Xueqin Zhang just received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Queensland, Australia in 2021 and Master degree from Zhejiang Gongshang University, China in 2015. His current research interests include bio/electrochemistry for energy and water applications, and microbiological fundamentals for anaerobic oxidation of methane.

Shihu Hu
	Shihu Hu received his Master degree in Environmental Engineering and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from The University of Queensland, Australia, where he currently works as a senior research fellow. His research interests include bioelectrochemical methane and CO2 conversion to valuable chemicals, microbial nitrogen and metal cycles, and integrated urban water and wastewater management.

Mengran Li
	Mengran Li completed his PhD at The University of Queensland in 2016. He is now a postdoctoral research fellow at UQ developing CO2 electrochemical technologies for iron-steel making processes. His current research activities are mainly focused on the fundamental and applied aspects of CO2 electrochemical conversion, solid oxide fuel cells, and electrochemical water oxidation.

Zhiguo Yuan
	Zhiguo Yuan received his PhD degree in Control Engineering from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1992. He joined the Advanced Water Management Centre at The University of Queensland, Australia in 1998. His research focusses on urban water management, including resource recovery from wastewater and other wastes. He has to date published over 450 peer-reviewed journal papers, with >30000 citations and an h-index of 95 (Google Scholar, March 2021). He is a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering, and was listed in Engineers Australia's Top 100 Most Influential Engineers in 2015.

Broader context
Global warming linked to anthropogenic CO2 emissions has drawn great attention of the world to preserve the environment for the future generations via novel technologies. The conversion of gaseous feeds (e.g., CO2, CO, N2) to fuels and other value-added products using renewable electricity is a promising approach to building sustainable and ‘green’ energy systems. Over the past decade, a tremendous effort has been devoted to designing advanced materials, and optimizing operations of electrocatalysis. Active, cost-effective and stable electrodes are critical for achieving the desired efficiency and selectivity. Gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) have shown a great performance for such applications, having shorter gas diffusional lengths and higher concentrations of gaseous feeds on the electrocatalyst surface. The precise fabrication/design of GDEs for each reaction/product remains a challenge. In this paper, we present a comprehensive, critical review on the fundamentals and design criteria of GDEs, and on the specific features of GDEs for CO2/CO/N2 reduction reactions based on their respective unique challenges, desired products, and limiting factors. We further identify the remaining challenges and future research priorities, moving towards commercially viable electrocatalytic conversion rates.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of electrocatalysis integration with fuel/chemical production and energy resources. The electrolyzer can be powered by renewable resources/power plant. CO2 and N2 are sourced from the atmosphere or waste streams.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of (a) Laboratory electrochemical H-cell reactor for gas reduction at the cathode; (b) flow-cell reactor with a planar electrode. Gaseous reactant is dissolved in the catholyte and reduced on the planar electrode; (c) flow-cell reactor with GDE. Gaseous reactant is supplied through a GDE. Liquid products are mixed with catholyte and gas products are collected in gas feed side; (d) membrane electrode assembly (MEA) reactor with a GDE. GDE is attached to an ion-exchange membrane as solid catholyte and gas/liquid products are collected in the feed side. Gaseous reactant is humidified (contains water vapour). Gas reactant and product(s) transport to and from a catalyst layer on (e) planar electrode with catalyst (CL) loaded on a substrate, and (f) GDE, comprising current collector, gas diffusion layer and catalyst layer, CL and current collector are.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of gaseous feed concentration versus current density and distance from the catalyst, and proposed reactant and product diffusion pathways and directions for (a) planar electrode (gas supplied via diffusion from bulk electrolyte on the microscale ∼50 μm) and (b) GDE (gas supplied from a nearby gas–liquid interface ∼50 nm). The shorter gaseous feed diffusion pathway and reverse diffusion direction (from the feed stream rather than bulk electrolyte), significantly improve the conversion rates for GDEs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Changes in water contact angle (hydrophobicity) of Cu-loaded GDEs with various single-layer GDL (PTFE 13, 25, 35 wt%, carbon paper (CP)) and dual-layer GDL (PTFE 10, 25, 35 wt% in microporous layer (MPL), PTFE 25 wt% constant in CP). Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, Wiley; (b) effect of PTFE content of the macroporous layer (10, 30, 50 wt%) on electrical resistance in an Ag-loaded GDE fabricated for CO2RR (CFS = carbon fiber substrate). Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier; (c) effect of PTFE content of CP (13%, 25%, and 35%) on the FE and current density of ethylene from CORR. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Micro-CT (computed tomography) images (left), and cross-sectional SEM images (right) of Ag-sprayed on carbon paper GDL with and without MPL. MPL provides a smooth substrate and penetration of catalyst layer is seen for GDL without MPL; (b) CO partial current density on an Ag-based GDE with and without an MPL (arrows show the corresponding SEM images for GDE with and without MPL). Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier; (c) Schematic of triple-interface for a Cu-loaded GDE with an MPL to improve the CO diffusion in the interface; (d) FE and current density for CORR with a Cu-based, single-layer GDE in 1 M KOH with varied PTFE content (5, 13, and 25 wt%), and double-layer GDL with an MPL with 25 wt% PTFE. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, Wiley; (e) Electrical resistance of Ag-based GDEs with varied PTFE content in the MPL at a cell potential of −2.0 V; (f) CO partial current density on an Ag-based GDE as a function of PTFE content of the MPL. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of fabrication procedure for a CL with various ink-based methods: (a1) Drop-casting; catalyst ink is cast by a pipette on GDL, (a2) Hand-painting; catalyst ink is painted by a brush on GDL and (a3) Air-brushing; catalyst ink is sprayed by a spray gun on GDL; (b1–b3) cross-sectional SEM images of Cu-based CLs prepared with respective ink-based methods; (c1–c3) energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of Cu for CLs prepared by respective ink-based methods (0.6 mg cm−2 catalyst loading for all methods); (d) FE of CO2RR as a function of current density for various catalyst deposition methods. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (e) Effect of Cu nanoparticle loading on product selectivity of CO2RR (1 loading = 2.12 μg cm−2). Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2017, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.; (f) effect of Nafion content on the formate FE from CO2RR for an Sn-based GDE in 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte as a function of cathode potential. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Effect of Cu electrocatalyst size on the FE of CORR to propanol as a function of current density in 1 M KHCO3. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (b) acetate molar production fraction from CORR with Cu electrocatalyst shapes as a function of potential in the 2 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (c) preparation of self-supported Cu-based GDE using a Cu gauze. Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) CO2RR to C2H4 FE in the current density range of 200 to 300 mA cm−2 for a Cu-based GDE prepared via sputter coating with various thicknesses. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (b) schematic of Sn electrodeposition on a carbon GDL with SEM images of the deposited layer. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) effect of various electrodeposition methods (Galvanostatic, potentiostatic, pulse) on FE of formate (HCOOH) with Sn-deposited carbon paper in 0.3 M KHCO3, better FE is observed for the GDE prepared via pulse electrodeposition (UPED). Reproduced with permission.188 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (d) morphology of electrodeposited bismuth films prepared by galvanostatic electrodeposition resulting in nanocube shape (left) and pulse-current resulting in nanosheet shape (right). Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Profiles of local pH changes as a function of current density on the electrode surface in (a) H-cell with a planar electrode; (b) GDE-based electrolyzer. Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) Schematic of a GDE in normal- and flooded operation. CO2 flux to the CL decreases, and HER increases with flooding. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, Wiley; (d) perspiration on the back of an Sn-sprayed GDE before and after applying current densities of 0 and 100 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.265 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Sudden drop in CO production with time at varied current densities (25–196 mA cm−2); (b) sudden increase in the capacitance of GDEs at varied current densities (25–196 mA cm−2), attributed to flooding (OCV = open circuit voltage); (c) breakthrough pressures for pristine GDLs and Ag-loaded GDEs decrease with increasing applied current density; (d) post-CO2RR SEM images of Ag-loaded GDEs at 25 and 196 mA cm−2 showing liquid percolation in carbonation sites. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Recovery of CO2RR FE for CO and current density on a Cu-based GDE in alkaline electrolyte by hourly rinsing with 50 ml water. Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (b) schematic of a GDE with non-conductive Gortex membrane as the GDL. Current collection is through the CL. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (c) graphite/carbon nanoparticle/Cu/PTFE GDE for enhanced flooding-resistance. Reproduced with permission.192 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (d) FE of ethylene over a carbon- and PTFE-based GDL loaded with Cu catalysts at −100 mA m−2 in 1 M KOH electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.280 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (e) schematic of reverse-assembled GDE for flooding resistance (NPs = nanoparticles); (f) stability of reverse-assembled and standard-assembled Ag-based GDEs at −0.6 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.281 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of gas and aqueous electrolyte transport decoupling; (b) schematic of metal catalyst deposited onto a PTFE hydrophobic fiber support with a flat ionomer layer conformally coating the metal; (c) modelled gas reactant availability along the catalyst's surface for the GDE with decoupled mechanism (left: without ionomer treatment, right: with ionomer treatment); (d) CO2RR performance of a Cu-sputtered PTFE GDE without (black dots) and with (blue dots) ionomer treatment. Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science; (e) Schematic of interfacial structures of Au-loaded GDE without plasma treatment (top, contact angle 155°), 0.5 min plasma treatment (middle, contact angle 110°), and 2.5 min plasma treatment (bottom, contact angle, contact angle 22°); (f) current density (left) and FE (right) of CO for untreated Au-loaded GDE (contact angle of around 155°) and plasma-treated GDEs from 0.5 min to 2.5 min (contact angles smaller than 155°). Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

Sn powder (100 mesh)	0.7 mg cm−2	MEA-type	Drop casting of catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 70% with 27 mA cm−2 at −1.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	
142

Sn nanopowders	0.7 mg cm−2	0.45 M KHCO3 + 0.5 M KCl	Drop casting of catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 71% with 40 mA cm−2 at −1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	
295

Sn nanopowders (10–15 nm)	1 mg cm−2	0.45 M KHCO3 + 0.5 M KCl	Drop casting of catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL	Carbon	FE of 70% with 150 mA cm−2 at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Stable FE at about 70% with rate of 5.45 mmol m−2 s−1	
148

Sn nanopowders	5 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Spraying catalyst ink (Sn powder + Nafion + PTFE + water) on GDL	Carbon based GDL rolling-pressed on copper mesh	FE of 87% with 22 mA cm−2 at −1.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	
139

Electrodeposited Sn on the Nafion-bonded GDL from SnCl2 solution	1 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Sn electrodeposited on Nafion-bonded GDL	Carbon based GDL rolling-pressed on copper mesh	FE of 75% with 35 mA cm−2 at −1.2 V vs. RHE	11% loss in FE of formate after 10 continuous runs	
297

Electrodeposited Sn on the GDL	2.6 mg cm−2	0.5 M NaHCO3	Sn directly electrodeposited on a carbon GDL	Toray carbon paper	FE of 71% with 8.5 mA cm−2 at −1 V vs. RHE	Stable for 6 h without significant loss	
298

Sn powders (100 nm)	0.67 mg cm−2 to 6.55 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Air-brushing catalyst ink (Sn powders and Nafion) on GDL	Sigracet GDL 10BC	FE of 81% with 16 mA cm−2 at −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	
165

SnOx-CNT	3 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Air-brushing SnOx-CNT and Nafion and isopropyl alcohol on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	FE of 77% with 10 mA cm−2 at −1.25 V vs. RHE	Over 20 h of continuous electrolysis at 1.25 V Vs. SHE.	
237

Ru, Pd alloy particles	1 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Drop casting catalyst ink (Nafion + catalyst + water) on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	FE of 90% at −1.1 V vs. NHE, current density of 80 mA cm−2	—	
312

CuSn alloy particles	—	1 M KOH	Casting catalyst ink (Nafion + catalyst + water) on GDL	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	FE of 82% for formate at −1.0 V vs. RHE with 148 mA cm−2	—	
309

Two-Dimensional SnO2 Nanosheets	0.5 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	4.5 mg of SnO2 Nanosheets 1.8 mL of Milli-Q water, 2.7 mL of isopropyl alcohol, and 8 μL of 5 wt % Nafion solution to form catalyst ink. Carbon fiber paper	Sigracet 39 BC GDL	FE of 94.2% with current density of 471 mA cm−2 at −1.13 V vs. RHE	3 h stability with no changes with 200 mA cm−2 and 90.2% FE of formate	
292

Bi nanoparticles	0.75 mg cm−2	0.5 M KCl + 0.45 M KHCO3	Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 70% and 300 mA cm−2	Highest concentration of formate produced was 18 g L−1 at 300 mA cm−2	
293

Bismuth nanosheets	—	0.5 M KHCO3	Electrodeposition on GDL	GDL prepared via rolling press of carbon black and PTFE on Cu mesh	FE of 91.46% for formate	After 10 runs GDE showed FE of 65% at −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
196

Bismuth nanosheets	—	2 M KHCO3	BiBr3 solution in DMSO drop-casted on GDL and heated to 140 °C	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 90% at 200 mA cm−2	—	
303

Sn nanoparticles (40–100 nm)	3 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Catalyst ink manually coated GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 90% with 50 mA cm−2	50 mA cm−2 over 60 min, 1.47 mmol m−2 s−1, 1.9 g L−1	
120

Sn particles (60–80 nm)	5 mg cm−2	MEA-type	Spraying catalyst ink (Sn + Nafion + water) on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	A current density of 200 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 3.7	500 h a current density of 140 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 3.5 V	
299

SnO2 microsphere via hydrothermal process,	3 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Coating catalyst ink on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 62% at −1.7 V vs. SHE	Stable current density over 12 h of continuous electrolysis	
294

2D-Bi catalyst	0.4 mg cm−2	Modified MEA-type (all-solid-state reactor)	Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet BC 35 GDL	FE of 90% for the production of 12 M formic acid	100 h continuous and stable generation of 0.1 M HCOOH	
313

Bi (grain boundary-enriched nanoparticles)	0.7 mg cm−2	Modified MEA-type (all-solid-state reactor)	Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet BC 35 GDL	FE of 90% for pure solutions (up to nearly 100 wt.%)	30 h stable operation at 30 mA cm−2 with formate FE >90%	
304

Sn	—	0.1–2 M KHCO3	Electrodeposition	Carbon cloth (CC, CeTech)	FE of 62.5% at −0.76 V vs. RHE with 18.7 mA cm−2	72 h without changes in FE of formate	
193

Carbon-supported SnO2 (<100 nm)	0.5 mg cm−2	1.0 M K2SO4	Hand-painting catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL	Sigracet 39BC GDL	FE of 90% with 500 mA cm−2	11 h stable performance at 150 mA cm−2 with FE 85–90% for formate	
301

SnO2 particles (100 nm)	4 mg cm−2	1.0 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + isopropyl alcohol + water) on GDL	Freudenberg GDL	251 mA cm−2 at −1.43 V vs. RHE	0.5 M formate being produced within 1 h	
289

Sn nanoparticles	2 mg cm−2	MEA-type	Spraying catalyst ink on Nafion cation exchange membrane	—	FE of 93.3% at a cell voltage of 2.2 V with 52.9 mA cm−2	Formate concentration of 41.5 g L−1 was obtained	
111

Tin oxide-derived 2D nanosheets	0.5 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Hand-painting catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + water) on GDL	CeTech GDL240 GDL	Partial current density of 116 mA cm−2 at −1.03 V vs. RHE	—	
314

Sn nanoparticles prepared via impregnation electroreduction	—	0.5 M KHCO3	Impregnation of carbon black-Sn2+ on GDL, following an electroreduction to Sn	GDL made from carbon black, PTFE and copper mesh	FE of 87% at −1.2 V vs. RHE and partial current density of 62 mA cm−2 for formate	10 cycles test without significant performance drop	
315


 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of a novel GDE-based cell with a thin layer of catholyte buffer (green area) and a bipolar membrane (BPM) for efficient formate production (HCOO−). Reproduced with permission.301 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (b) formate concentration, FE, and energy efficiency of flow-cell CO2RR directly feeding a formate fuel cell. Reproduced with permission.289 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) FE of 2D bismuth-loaded GDE as a function of current in H-cell and flow-cell configurations. Reproduced with permission.303 Copyright 2018, Wiley; (d) bismuth (Bi) nanosheet directly electrodeposited on carbon-based GDL. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2019, Elsevier; (e) dependence of formic acid product concentration on the N2 gas flow rate under a fixed overall current density of 200 mA cm−2. Utilizing dry N2 gas flow, up to nearly 100 wt% pure formic acid was achieved; (f) schematic of an all-vapor-phase operation CO2 electrolyzer to produce high-purity formic acid (AEM = anion exchange membrane, CEM = cation exchange membrane, PSE = porous solid electrolyte). Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of Ag-loaded GDE preparation via MOF-mediated layer-by-layer method; SEM images of Ag-loaded GDEs prepared via (b) conventional drop-casting, (c) MOF-mediated layer-by-layer method shown in (a). Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (d) schematic of CL modification with CNT (MWCNT = multi-walled carbon nanotubes). Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) TiO2 as the catalyst holder to fabricate a GDE for efficient CO2RR to CO. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2014, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of Au clusters and nanoparticles loaded on carbon black (C) to fabricate a GDE for CO production; (b) CO production selectivity on Au clusters and Au nanoparticles at −0.36 V vs. RHE as a function of CO2 partial pressure. Reproduced with permission.326 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society; (c) schematic of CO bubble formation on GDE surface, interrupting the catalyst-electrolyte interface (inactive reaction sites); (d) cell voltage instability at various current densities (5–80 mA cm−2), and severe cell voltage fluctuation at high current densities (60–80 mA cm−2). Reproduced with permission.279 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (e) GDE fabricated from non-conductive PVDF nano-fibers by composite deposition of Cu and Sn. PVDF is coated by polydopamine (pDA). Cu and Sn are deposited on pDA layer to form a Cu/Sn alloy catalyst layer. Reproduced with permission.332 Copyright 2019, Wiley; (f) electrochemical spontaneous precipitation (ESP) method to fabricate Cu/In-loaded GDE. Reproduced with permission.262 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

CO/H2	Ag and Ni nanoparticles	2 mg cm−2	[EMIM][BF4] ionic liquid	Spraying catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	CO2 electrolysis at 100 mA cm−2 with 2 V cell voltage	Thousand hours stability	
333

CO	Au catalyst	0.18 mg cm−2	2.0 M KOH	Automated air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	99% CO FE with 158 mA cm−2 partial current density	At least 8 h stability	
274

CO	Ag nano-particles, <100 nm	—	10 M KOH	Painting catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	FE of 80% for CO and 32% conversion ratio per pass	—	
327

CO	Carbon nanotube containing Ag catalyst	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	CO partial current density of 350 mA cm−2 with FE of >95% for CO, cell potential of −3 V	—	
320

CO	Ag/TiO2	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Painting catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	CO partial current density of 101 mA cm−2 and FE of 90% for CO	—	
325

CO/H2	Dendritic Ag	—	0.5 M KHCO3 + PEG	Electrodeposition from AgNO3 solution	Avcarb MGL370 GDL	80% FE of CO at −1.5 V vs. SCE	—	
204

CO	Sn/Cu	—	0.1 KHCO3	Electroless Cu deposition on dopamine coated PVDF, and then electrodeposition of Sn on Cu	PVDF nanofiber membranes	80% FE of CO with above 100 mA cm−2 current density	135 h stability without significant changes	
332

CO	
fac-Re(diimine)(CO)3Cl and carbon nanotubes	1 mg cm−2	Nafion film	Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	FE of 8% at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	
321

CO	Copper–indium binary catalyst	4–5 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Electrochemical spontaneous precipitation of In on GDL	Cu2O-loaded carbon GDL	90% FE of CO and current density of 200 mA cm−2 at −1.17 V vs. RHE	—	
262

CO	Single-atom nickel	0.2 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Infiltration of Ni precursor in a template, carbonization, and silica etching. Catalyst drop-casted on GDL	AvCarb GDL	50 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V vs. RHE	300 mA cm−2 with 99% FE of CO in MEA-type	
334

CO	Ag	2 mg cm−2	10 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 39 BC GDL	EE of >80% for CO at 300 mA cm−2	10 h stability at pressurized 7 atm in 7 M KOH at a full cell potential of 2.8 V with current density 100, FE > 80%	
335

CO	Ag	—	5 M KOH	Sputtering of Ag on GDL	PTFE membrane with a pore size of 450 nm	200 mA cm−2 with >95% FE of CO at a pressurized electrolyzer	6 h performance without decay at a cell voltage of −2.20 V and 250 mA cm−2	
336

CO	Ag	—	1 M KHCO3 and 1 M KOH	Sputtering of Ag on GDL	PTFE membrane with a pore size of 450 nm	CO with FE >90% at current densities above 150 mA cm−2	Over 100 h of operation	
337

CO	Ag coordination polymer	0.2 mg cm−2	0.1 M KHCO3	A layer-by-layer method, followed by electro-decomposition of coordination polymer	Carbon GDL	Partial current density of 385 mA cm−2 at around −1.0 V vs. RHE	Stable operation with high FECO (>96%) at 300 mA cm−2 for over 4 h	
319

CO	Ag	—	MEA-type	Electrodeposition from 0.01 M AgNO3 solution onto H2SO4-treated GDL	AvCarb GDL	80% FE of CO at −1 V vs. RHE with 20 mA cm−2 current density	−350 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 3.4 V	
201

CO	Au	120 μg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop casting of ink (water-ethylene glycol-n-propyl alcohol mixed) on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	96% FE of CO at −0.4 V vs. RHE with 70 mA cm−2 current density	12 h stability at A constant current density of 100 mA cm−2	
152

CO	Ag nanoparticles	0.3–3 mg cm−2	1 M CsOH	Automated air-brushing of catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	CO partial current density of 417 and 866 mA cm−2 with FE of 100 and 98% at cell potentials of −2.5 and −3.0.	—	
338

CO	Au25 clusters loaded on carbon black	16 μg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop casting of ink (water + Nafion) on GDL	Ce-Tech carbon GDL	540 mA cm−2 at −0.8 V vs. RHE	12 h stable operation	
326

CO	Ag Nanocubes	
	MEA-type	Air-brushing catalyst ink on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	80 mA cm−2 with CO FE of >80%	—	
339

CO	Coral-nanostructured Ag	0.5 mg cm−2	MEA-type	Electron-beam (e-beam) evaporation	Sigacet 39 BC GDL	312 mA cm−2 with CO FE over 90%	30 h stable operation at 100 mA cm−2 with CO FE > 90%	
189

CO	Cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanoneedle	—	1 M KOH	Drop casting of ink on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	212 mA cm−2 with CO FE over 95% at −1.2 V vs. RHE	24 h stable operation of −1.0 V vs. RHE	
183

CO	Ag, Au, Pd, pseudocapacitive nanoparticle/ordered-ligand interlayer	0.13 mg cm−2	1 M KHCO3	Drop casting of ink on GDL	Sigacet 39 BC GDL	400 mA cm−2 with CO FE over 98% at −1.2 V vs. RHE	6 h stable operation at 200 mA cm−2	
340


 	Fig. 16  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the nano-porous copper catalyst on GDL. Reproduced with permission.273 Copyright 2018, Wiley; (b) FE of C2+ products under various applied potentials (−0.2 to −0.9 V vs. RHE) over halogen–Cu catalyst GDEs; (c) Formation rates of C2+ products under various applied potentials over halogen–Cu catalyst GDEs in 1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; This study shows the highest rate and FE for C2+ products; (d) schematic of the Cu-loaded GDE with polymer intrinsic microporosity layer (PIM) improving ethylene production performance. Reproduced with permission.354 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (e) schematic of the layered structure of the tandem GDE with a ZnO layer over a Cu layer; (f) combined layer of Cu + ZnO as the CL. Reproduced with permission.356 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

Methane	Pyrolyzing Cu(II) precursors absorbed on carbon black	0.06 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop casting catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	Methane FE of 42%, partial current density of 100 mA cm−2 at −1 V vs. RHE	—	
349

C2+ products	Nanoporous Cu by chemical reduction	0.8 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Painting catalyst ink on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	62% FE for C2+ products with current density of 653 mA cm−2	2 h stability at 200 mA cm−2	
273

Ethylene	Cu nanocubes	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop casting catalyst ink	Freudenberg GDL	FE of 60% and current density of 144 mA cm−2 for ethylene	—	
358

Methanol	Cu2O (<5 μm)	1 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Air-spraying catalyst ink (catalyst powder + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL	Toray GDL	45.7% FE of methanol at −1.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl	Over 20 h at constant current of 10 mA cm−2	
362, 363

Ethylene and ethanol	Cu nanoparticles	0.1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (catalyst + Nafion + tetrahydrofuran) on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	46% FE of ethylene and ethanol with current density over 200 mA cm−2	Stable over 4 h electrolysis	
374

Ethylene and ethanol	Cu–Ag alloys	0.5 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (catalyst + Nafion + tetrahydrofuran) on GDL	Sigracet 35 BC GDL	60% and 25% FE for ethylene and ethanol, respectively, at −0.7 V vs. RHE with the current density of 300 mA cm−2	—	
195

C2+ alcohols	Cu-based catalysts	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop casting catalyst ink on GDL	Carbon-based GDL	FE of 32% with 126 mAcm−2 for C2+ alcohol production	—	
368

Ethylene	Cu	—	1 M KHCO3	Cu sputtered on GDL	PTFE-based GDL	FE of 72% for ethylene with a current density of 230 mA cm−2	190 hours stability in MEA-type system	
375

C2 products	Cu	0.18 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Cu sputtered on GDL	PTFE-based GDL	(FE) of 68% for C2 products at cell voltage of 3.0 V with 350 mA cm−2	10 h stable utilizing 15% CO2 (v/v) and 4% O2 (v/v) mixture gas feedstocks	
371

Alcohols	Cu/Bi metal–organic framework-based	1 mg cm−2	0.5 M KHCO3	Air-brushing of catalyst ink on GDL	Toray carbon paper GDL	FE of 36.9% for methanol at 20 mA cm−2, 18.2% for ethanol at 10 mA cm−2	Stable over 5 h of operation	
376

Ethanol	Cu/TiO2 nanoparticles modified nitrogen-doped graphene	1 mg cm−2	0.2 M KI	Drop-casting of catalyst ink on GDL	Carbon paper GDL	FE of ethanol up to 43.6% at −0.75 V vs. RHE	—	
377

Ethylene and ethanol	Cu	2 mg cm−2	MEA-type	Sputtered Cu, 150 nm thickness	Porous PTFE membrane (0.45 mm pores)	80% FE for ethylene and C2+ products, 50% FE of ethylene, and direct production of 4 wt% ethanol	100 h steady ethylene production at >100 mA cm−2	
110

Ethylene and ethanol	Fluorine-modified copper	0.25 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL	Carbon based GDL (GDL, YLS-30T)	Current density of 1.6 A cm−2 C2+ FE of 80%	40 h of operation at a constant current density of 400 mA cm−2	
124

Ethylene	Facet-tuned Cu	110, 250, 440 μg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop-casting catalyst ink on GDL	Sigracet BC39 GDL	Ethylene FE of 57% at −0.65 V vs RHE	6 h stability at 100 mA cm−2; flooding happens	
280

Ethylene	Cu	—	1 M KOH	Cu was sputtered on GDL, polymer with intrinsic microporosity (PIM) was coated on Cu layer	Freudenberg carbon paper GDL	FE of 45.5% with −67.4 mA cm−2	2 h stable performance following a decay in FE of ethylene	
354

C2+ products	Cu/ZnO tandem CL	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing Cu-based catalyst ink on GDL, Air-brushing ZnO-based ink on Cu layer	Sigracet 34BC GDL	FE of >80% with 450 mA cm−2 current density for C2+ products at −0.7 V vs. RHE	10 h stable performance at 600 mA cm−2 with FE of 40% and 20% for ethylene and ethanol	
356

Ethylene	Cu–Al alloys	—	0.3, 1, 3, 10 M KOH	Cu was evaporated on GDL by thermal evaporation. Al was sputtered on Cu layer	Sigracet 39 BC GDL	FE of 80% at current density of 400 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH	50 h stable ethylene formation with FE over 80% at current density of 400 mA cm−2	
378

Ethanol	Cu with nitrogen-doped carbon.	0.19 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Cu was sputtered on GDL. nitrogen-doped carbon was sputtered on Cu	Freudenberg H14C9 GDL	FE of 52% for ethanol at 300 mA cm−2 for nitrogen-doped carbon layer with 34% N	15 h stable performance in MEA-type system without catalyst degradation	
353

Methane	Cu	—	1 M KHCO3	Cu was sputtered on GDL (∼100 nm thick)	PTFE GDL	48% FE pf methane with a partial current density of 108 mA cm−2	22 h stability at current density of 225 mA cm−2 with 48% methane FE and CO2 at 75%	
350


 	Fig. 17  (a) FE of CO2RR products at various CO2 feed concentrations (25–100%) and 100, 200 mA cm−2 current densities; (b) FE of CO2RR products at various CO2 feed flow rates (5–40 sccm or standard cubic centimeters per minute) and 100, 200 mA cm−2 current densities. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, Elsevier; (c) FE of C2 products (ethylene and ethanol) for 15% CO2 (v/v) feed stream, with and without the presence of O2 at 1 bar and 15 bar in 1 M KOH as a function of cell voltage, as compared with 100% CO2 (v/v) at 1 bar; (d) stability of CO2RR to C2 products on a Cu-PTFE GDE coated with hydrophilic ionomer at 10 bar absolute pressure in 1 M KOH electrolyte, with feed gas containing 15% CO2 (v/v) and 4% O2 (v/v); (e) schematic of a Cu-PTFE GDE coated with a hydrophobic (left) or hydrophilic (right) nano-porous ionomer to minimize the adverse effects of O2 impurity. The hydrophilic layer slows O2 diffusion making the GDE O2-tolerant. Reproduced with permission.371 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustrating the CO2 interaction with OH− to form CO32−, and stability of CO in alkaline electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (b) pH profiles for CO2RR/CORR in 1 M KOH under various current densities as a function of distance from the CL (x = 0 means on the GDE surface); (c) cell voltage and CO2RR/CORR product distribution (bars) on an oxide-derived Cu-based GDE at 300 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH; (d) cell voltage and product distribution of CORR (FE) in 2 M KOH at 500 mA cm−2 on an oxide-derived Cu-based GDE, EtOH = ethanol, PrOH = propanol, AcO− = acetic acid/acetate. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Fabrication procedure for a Cu-loaded GDE for CORR; (b) flow-through GDE-based and flow-by CO bubbling (non-GDE) for CORR to ethylene. Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (c) the FEs of CORR products at various CO concentrations (2.5–100%) at an applied potential of −0.44 V vs. RHE in 1 M KOH; (d) schematic of porous GDE with CO reduction at the catalyst–electrolyte interface, showing how CO-deficiency and CO-surplus conditions influence product selectivity. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (e) FEs of C2 and C3 products from CORR for Cu nanocatalysts of various morphologies (scale bar: 100 nm). Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (f) total current density and FEs of CORR products on a GDE with Cu nanosheets as the catalyst in 2 M KOH, as a function of the applied potential. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Product distributions and single-pass CO conversions as a function of CO concentration in the inlet gas stream with 1 M NaOH catholyte; partial current density of CORR product distributions as a function of GDE potentials with (b) 0.5 sccm CO flux; (c) 0.125 sccm CO flux. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

Ethylene	Cu-nanoparticle	7 mg cm−2	10 M KOH	Carbon powders, Teflon, and copper acetate solution applied onto Cu gauze and pressed after air drying; Cu nanoparticles generated by reduction in forming gas at 325 °C.	Cu gauze	50.8 mA cm−2 for COR to C2H4 was achieved at −0.85 V vs. RHE at −15 °C	FE of C2H4 was stabilized between 13.7 and 18.4% during the first 2 h of operation	
136

C2 Products	Cu catalyst by NaBH4 reduction of Cu(OAc)2 in 2-ethoxyethanol	250 mg cm−2	1 M NaOH catholyte	AvCarb 2230, a commercial PTFE-treated GDL with an MPL	AvCarb 2230 GDL	65%-76% FE of ethylene. The rest was for ethanol, acetate, and propanol	Direct production of 1.1 M acetate at cell potential of 2.4 V over 24 h	
226

Propanol, ethanol, ethylene, acetate	Cu	—	—	Cu was electrodeposited on GDL in an electrolyte containing 0.15 M CuCl2·2H2O	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	A current density of 87 mA cm−2 at −2.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. FE of 32.6% for C2H4, 42.6% for liquid-based carbon products	—	
396

C2+ products	Commercial Cu powder (0.5–1.5 μm, 99%)	1 mg cm−2	2.0 M KOH	Copper powders annealed at 500 for 2 h were dispersed in catalyst ink and drop-cast onto a GDL	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	91% C2+ selectivity at a C2+ partial current density of 635 mA cm−2	1 h at 500 mA cm−2 Stable cell voltage 3.05–3.25 V and stable FE	
107


n-Propanol	Highly fragmented Cu	∼0.8 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (Nafion + catalyst powder + methanol) on GDL	Freudenberg carbon Paper GDL	20% FE of n-propanol at −0.45 V vs. RHE	—	
387

Acetate	2D Cu nanosheets via chemical reduction	0.5 mg cm−2	2 M KOH	Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	FE of 48% acetate partial current density up to 131 mA cm−2	3 h at −0.7 V vs. RHE with acetate FE over 40%	
177

Ethylene	Cu nanopowder from a chemical reduction of CuSO4·5H2O	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + ethanol) on GDL	Toray carbon Paper GDL	Ethylene FE of 52.7% at −0.7 V vs. RHE	24 h stable performance with ethylene FE of over 40% at −0.8 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH	
145

Ethylene	Cu-nanoparticles (40–60 nm)	3 mg cm−2	1 M KHCO3	Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL	Freudenberg carbon Paper GDL	89% FE for C2 and C3 products at −300 mA cm−2	20 h at −200 mA cm−2 with slight FE decline	
178

Acetamide	Cu nanoparticles (25 nm)	0.6 mg cm−2	1 M KOH + NH3 co-electrolysis of CO and NH3	Painting catalyst ink (Cu catalyst + Nafion + isopropanol + CNT)	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	40% FE of acetamide at −0.65 V vs. RHE	8-hour stability for CO electrolysis with 2:1 (mol/mol) NH3:CO in 1 M KOH at 100 mA cm−2	
149


n-Propanol	Nano Cu with nanocavities	1 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + methanol) on GDL	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	Propanol FE of 21% with 7.8 mA cm−2 at −0.56 V vs. RHE	—	
181


n-Propanol	Cu adparticles	0.75 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu nanosheets + Nafion + methanol) on GDL	Freudenberg GDL	23% FE of propanol at 0.47 V vs. RHE, partial current density of 11 mA cm−2	—	
394

Hydrocarbons and multicarbon oxygenates (mainly ethylene and acetate)	Cu powder (Dendritic shape, <45 μm)	1.0 mg cm−2	0.1 M KOH	Drop-casting catalyst ink (Cu powder + Nafion) on GDL	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	80% FE of hydrocarbons and multicarbon oxygenates with more than 100 mA cm−2 current density	2 h stability with negligible changes	
182

Ethylene	Copper oxide	1.0 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu oxide + Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL	Sigracet 29 BC GDL	FE of 52% with >800 mA cm−2	Stable performance at 150 mA cm−2 with FE of 71%	
168

C2+ alcohols (ethanol, propanol)	Cu nanoparticles (∼100 nm) incorporated with Pd	1.0 mg cm−2	1 M KOH	Air-brushing catalyst ink (Cu Nafion + isopropanol) on GDL	Sigracet 28BC GDL	40% FE for alcohols and a partial current density of 277 mA cm−2	5 h stable operation with unchanged FE for alcohols	
395


 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of an MEA-type GDE used for electrochemical ammonia (NH3) synthesis; (b) effect of CNT Fe2O3 loading on the current density of GDE; (c) effect of electrolyte type on the ammonia formation rate of GDEs. Reproduced with permission.426 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (d) limiting the proton transfer rate and concentration in the bulk solution with aprotic solvent (e.g. dimethyl sulfoxide, DMSO) to improve FE of ammonia. Reproduced with permission.430 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (e) the ‘proton transport bridge’ which selectively provides hydrogen species for N2 hydrogenation to boost FE of NH3 and suppress HER. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Flooding in a carbon-based GDL in contact with a non-aqueous electrolyte due to absence of hydrophobic repulsion; (b) Stainless steel cloth GDL and slight pressure gradient (ΔP) applied to prevent flooding; (c) effect of N2 pressure gradient across a steel cloth cathode on the FE of NH3 at a current density of 15 mA cm−2 (dashed line represents the onset of the gas breakthrough in the SS GDL). Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (d) schematic of PEBCD electrocatalyst incorporating Li+ deposited on carbon fibers to achieve selective adsorption of N2 on the catalyst. Reproduced with permission.434 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (e) insulative layer on the catalyst with tunnels to pass electrons to the N2 adsorbed sites to retard HER. Reproduced with permission.430 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society; (f) Structure of a Li–N2 battery with Li–foil anode, ether-based electrolyte, and carbon cloth cathode. Reproduced with permission.436 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of a membrane electrode assembly comprising a cathode GDE to deliver the feed gas (CO2, CO, N2), anode GDE for anodic aqueous electrolyte, and a polymer electrode membrane (PEM, or ion-exchange membrane). Reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (b) effect of anion exchange membrane thickness on the flux of water to the cathode during CO2RR at 200 mA cm−2; (c) performance of an MEA-type CO2RR with and without cathode flooding. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (d) dependence of formic acid product concentration on the N2 gas flow rate under a fixed overall current density of 200 mA cm−2. By utilizing dry N2 gas flow, up to nearly 100 wt% pure formic acid was achieved; (e) schematic of an all-vapor-phase operation CO2 electrolyzer to produce high-purity formic acid (AEM = anion exchange membrane, CEM = cation exchange membrane, PSE = porous solid electrolyte). Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of a catholyte-free MEA-type GDE with cation exchange membrane (Nafion) for CORR; (b) partial current density of products as a function of MEA-type reactor cell voltage. Long term stability of MEA-type CORR at (c) 4 bar and (d) 1 bar. Stable performance is observed at 4 bar. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic of the proposed hydrophobic layer to regulate H+ transport to the GDE to enhance NH3 selectivity of N2RR; (b) schematic of a two-step cascade reaction to reduce CO2 to CO in the first step, and CO to hydrocarbons in the second step; (c) schematic of CO2RR/CORR in the presence of NH3 to extend C–C products to C–N products, where NH3 is N2RR-derived.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Cu HFGDE employed as an electrode for CO2RR at 20 ml min−1 CO2 flow Reproduced with permission.492 Copyright 2016, Nature Springer; (b) cross-section SEM of a Cu HFGDE (scale bar: 100 μm); (c) Schematic of Sn electrodeposition on Cu tubular electrode to tune CO2RR selectivity for formate production. Reproduced with permission.493 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society; (d) schematic of fabrication of lung-inspired pouch-like GDE including sputtering Au on polyethylene membrane, rolling and sealing the edges; (e) schematic of the detailed structure of the pouch-like GDE (dashed square from (d)); (f) enlarged image of the dashed square in e, representing the details of the three-phase interface. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2018, Nature Springer.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
