Metal organic frameworks for electrochemical applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22989G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22989G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9269-9290Metal organic frameworks for electrochemical applications

        
          
            Adina 
            Morozan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Frédéric 
            Jaouen
          
          
        
      *
      Institut Charles Gerhardt UMR CNRS 5253, Agrégats, Interfaces et Matériaux pour l'Energie, Université Montpellier II, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier cedex 5, France. E-mail: frederic.jaouen@univ-montp2.fr;  Fax: +33 467143304;   Tel: +33 467143211
Received 
      26th July 2012
    , Accepted 13th September 2012First published on 5th October 2012AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have received huge attention in the last years as promising porous materials with unrivalled degree of tunability for a wide range of applications including gas storage or separation, catalysis, drug delivery and imaging. The present review appraises the application of MOFs in the field of electrochemistry. From materials for rechargeable batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells to electrocatalysis or corrosion inhibition, MOFs or MOF-derived materials are gaining momentum in this field. For real breakthroughs, combining their electrochemical properties with appropriate electronic and ionic conductivity will be required.Adina Morozan received her PhD from the University of Bucharest in 2007 on the topic of novel functional materials for fuel cells. After a two-year postdoctoral project on “Enzymes and organometallic catalysts in hydrogen fuel cells” at the laboratory of Chemistry of Surfaces and Interfaces at CEA Saclay, she joined in 2012 the Charles Gerhardt Institute for Molecular Chemistry and Material Sciences in Montpellier. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher and her research activity focuses on synthesis, characterization and degradation studies of non-precious metal catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in a fuel cell environment.Frédéric Jaouen is a CNRS scientist at the Charles Gerhardt Institute for Molecular Chemistry and Material Sciences in Montpellier (France) since 2011. He was awarded the same year by the French ANR a chair of excellence at the University of Montpellier II. He received his PhD in chemical engineering from the Royal Institute of Technology of Stockholm in 2003 under the supervision of Prof. Göran Lindbergh. He then moved to Canada to work with Prof. Jean-Pol Dodelet as a research associate at INRS. His current research focuses on non-precious metal catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells.

Broader context
The chemical and structural diversity offered by metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) presents unique opportunities for catalysis, gas separation, drug storage and delivery, imaging and sensing, optoelectronics or energy storage. Much on-going research in the field of electrochemistry is involved in efficient and clean energy conversion and storage. Breakthroughs with novel materials are required to improve the performance or lower the cost of electrochemical power sources. Compared to inorganic high-surface-area materials that are the working principle of many current industrial electrocatalysts or electrode materials, MOFs offer the theoretical advantage of 100% utilization and improved accessibility of the metal-cation centers due to their regular 3D dispersion in an open structure. Moreover, MOFs are an outstanding platform to create bio-inspired enzyme mimics with high electrocatalytic activity based on abundant transition metals.

I. Introduction
First defined by Yaghi and co-workers in 1995 (ref. 1 and 2) following the pioneering work of Hoskins and Robson3–5 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are crystalline porous hybrid materials comprising coupling units (metal ions or metal–oxo units) coordinated by electron-donating organic ligands. MOFs have the highest specific surface areas reported to date for porous materials (up to 6200 m2 g−1)6,7 and large internal pore volumes with well defined pore sizes and apertures. The term coordination polymer is also used and is often a synonym for MOF, except for the metal-free structures that, by definition, cannot be included in the family of MOFs.8–10
MOFs represent a large class of materials in number, diversity of composition and structure. Examples of large families of MOFs are (i) metal–organic polyhedras wherein transition metal ions are coordinated by either nitrogen or carboxylate electron-donor organic units,11 and (ii) zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) which possess the topology of zeolites but are composed of synthetically versatile imidazolate groups coordinating either ZnII (ZIF −1 to −4, −6 to −8, and −10 to −11) or CoII (ZIF − 9 and −12).12
MOFs can be obtained using inexpensive and high-yield synthesis methods at low temperature (∼250 °C). Synthesis under hydro(solvo)thermal conditions is the most frequent method, but microwave, ultrasonic, electrochemical and diffusional approaches have been investigated as well.13,14
MOFs can be prepared from relatively cheap precursors. Inorganic salts (nitrates, sulfates, and chlorides) are typically used for the metal-ion precursor. The organic linkers are generally multidentate organic ligands such as carboxylates, azoles or nitriles.15,16 In many syntheses, structure-directing agents are also employed to help assembling the building units into a MOF without participating in the formula of the final compound.13,14
In contrast to inorganic microporous materials with high specific surface area, several MOFs present a flexible structure that behaves dynamically and responds to external factors such as guest molecules, temperature or pressure. The entire framework of MOFs is supported by coordination bonds and/or other weak cooperative interactions such as H-bonding, π–π stacking, and van der Waals interaction. Thus, structural flexibility is often expected even under mild conditions,17,18 which allows these MOFs to reversibly modulate their pore size depending on external factors. This flexibility offers new possibilities with exploitable properties that are important for catalysis,19 gas separation,20 drug storage and delivery,13,21 imaging and sensing,22 optoelectronics23 or energy storage.24–26
While the synthesis, chemistry and structure of MOFs and their application in various technological areas have been described in comprehensive review papers,7,14,27–29 their applications in the field of electrochemistry have not been reviewed previously. The investigation of MOFs in this area is quite recent but expanding, as the present review will show. Important applications of electrochemistry are energy storage and conversion (supercapacitors, batteries, fuel cells), corrosion inhibition and reduction of highly oxidizing and toxic compounds. Electrochemistry, by definition, involves the transfer or storage of electrons at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The poor electron-conductive properties of most MOFs would a priori exclude them from being used as electrode materials or electrocatalysts. Nevertheless, MOFs have been successfully used as electrode materials for rechargeable batteries30,31 and strategies have been envisaged to overcome their insulating character.32–35 The redox behaviour of metal cations inside MOFs could provide a pathway for electrons.33 Alternatively, the tuning of the linker structure may lead to better charge transfer inside the framework.34 A bolder but efficient strategy is to mix MOFs with conductive phases (metal nanocrystals, carbon nanostructures, conductive polymers, etc.).32,35,36 This will however provide electron conduction at a macroscopic level, but not necessarily locally inside the MOF particles due to size-exclusion effects defined by the pore apertures.
The present review gives an account of the previous investigations of MOFs as (i) electrode materials for batteries, (ii) electrocatalysts for important reactions taking place in fuel cells or electrolyzers, (iii) electrode materials for supercapacitors, (iv) Li+ or H+ conductive materials for batteries or fuel cells, and (v) as surface films for corrosion inhibition. The review also includes the high surface-area carbons or carbon-based electrocatalysts resulting from the pyrolysis of MOFs. For every application, the state-of-the-art and challenges to be overcome are summarized first. Performances obtained with MOFs or MOF-derived materials are discussed in comparison to those obtained with state-of-the-art materials. For better readability, the acronyms used for the ligands are not explained within the text, but are listed at the end.
II. MOFs as electrode materials for rechargeable batteries
II.1 Positive electrode in Li-ion battery
The rechargeable lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery is the most advanced electrochemical energy conversion device today, and much used for portable electronics. During discharge, Li intercalated/alloyed in the anode material is oxidized to lithium ions (Li+) that migrate to the cathode (positive electrode) where they insert. The main challenges are (i) electrode integrity over many discharge–recharge cycles and (ii) improved capacity. The latter target can only be reached with novel electrode materials. The low energy density of the positive electrode is a main factor limiting the overall energy density of those batteries,37 mostly due to the use of metal oxides with high atomic number relative to the anode material. Current standard materials are LiCoO2 at the cathode and graphite at the anode with capacities of 148 and 372 mA h g−1, respectively.
The first successful use of a MOF as a rechargeable intercalation electrode was reported by Férey et al.30 Before that report, two other attempts had been made but Li-insertion led to the transformation of the host material (Ni-based microporous phosphate or Zn-based MOF) into a Li2O matrix and Ni nanoparticles or Zn-based nanocomposite, respectively.38,39 The groups of Férey and Tarascon realized that a better stability might be achieved through stronger metal–oxygen bonds, using 3d transition metals with fewer electrons in the 3d orbitals than Ni or Zn, i.e. metals in a higher oxidation state (VIII, CrIII, FeIII). Also, to facilitate electron storage or release, a mixed-valence state of the metal was proposed in order to achieve long-range electron delocalization. Based on their previous studies,40 the authors investigated the material FeIII(OH)0.8F0.2(bdc)·H2O. This material was mixed with 15 wt% carbon to form the positive electrode for a Li-ion battery, while Li-metal was used as the negative electrode.30 With the scalar x being defined by LixFe(OH)0.8F0.2(bdc)·H2O, a maximum lithium uptake of x = 0.6 could be reached upon discharge (i.e. Li insertion in the cathode). At higher x-values, the discharge led to an irreversible behaviour, unsuitable for a rechargeable battery. The value of x = 0.6 gives a gravimetric capacity of 75 mA h g−1. This value is quite low due to the limited Li-insertion and/or the low density of the material. Li-insertion up to x = 0.6 was fully reversible for at least 50 cycles.
Changes in the coordination of the Fe ion have been followed by Mössbauer spectroscopy. At x = 0, a pure high-spin state of FeIII was observed while at x = 0.3 and 0.5, an increasing signal of a high-spin FeII appeared. Quantitative analysis of the spectra gave, at x = 0.5, the composition Li0.5FeII0.45FeIII0.55, i.e. a mixed-valence material. The same group also investigated changes in that MOF structure upon Li insertion/extraction by in situ X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS).41 The average oxidation state of Fe was found to decrease below +3 upon Li-insertion, with a maximum molar ratio of 0.5 Li per Fe. While a local atomic reversible rearrangement around Fe was revealed upon electrochemical cycling, the closest Fe–Fe distance was conserved, showing the flexible structure locally around the Fe centres inside this MOF. The local flexibility of MOF materials in general might ultimately be advantageous vs. the more rigid structures of today's battery materials.
More recently, the detailed mechanism of Li-insertion in the same material was investigated with density functional theory (DFT).42,43 Four different sites for Li insertion were identified (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the four crystallographic sites A to D for lithium insertion in the MOF FeIII(OH)0.8F0.2(bdc). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.] 
Upon discharge between 0 < x < 0.25, the A and B sites were predicted to be equally possible (A slightly more favorable), while for 0.25 < x < 0.5, the second Li insertion into the cell (4 Fe atoms) was of similar energy for (i) 2 sites A occupied, (ii) 2 sites B occupied or (iii) 1 site A occupied and 1 site B occupied. The site A lies close to the hydroxyl bridging ligand of the inorganic chains while site B lies close to the carboxylic group of the bdc-linkers.
II.2 Negative electrode in Li-ion battery
Currently, anode materials (i.e. anode during the discharge) used in commercial Li-ion batteries are graphitic carbon materials owing to their high stability and low cost. However, the intercalation mechanism of Li+ in graphite defines a maximum gravimetric capacity of 372 mA h g−1.44 The Li alloying mechanism or conversion mechanism represents alternative approaches.45 Sn and Si are the two prominent candidates for the alloying approach and form the SnLi4.4 and SiLi4.4 alloys with theoretical gravimetric capacities of 993 and 4200 mA h g−1, respectively. However, their large volume changes upon charge/discharge (250–400%) lead to fast capacity decay.44 Nanocomposite materials have been investigated to reduce this capacity decay.46 In the other approach, Li storage by the reversible conversion mechanism is possible for a range of metal oxides (Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu) and has led to experimental capacities of 700–900 mA h g−1 with good cyclability.46,47 These transition metal oxides reversibly react with Li+ according to eqn (1): MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O(1)
The formed Li2O matrix is active and metal nanoparticles are re-oxidized into transition metal oxides during the next discharge. Note that the conversion-reaction concept also applies to metal nitrides, sulfides, etc.45
Several MOFs have been used in innovative ways to form anodes that store Li+via the conversion reaction mechanism. We first review the use of MOFs investigated as such, and then MOFs that are used as a sacrificial framework to form transition metal oxide nanoparticles that are subsequently used as anode materials.
An as-synthesized MOF supporting the conversion-reaction mechanism with Li was first reported by Li et al.39 The Zn4O(btb)2 MOF was synthesized with different morphologies (Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images, Fig. 2), depending on the reaction conditions used during the solvo-thermal step.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of samples of Zn4O(btb)2 obtained under different synthesis conditions: (a) 100 °C then natural cooling, (b) 100 °C then 0.5 °C min−1 cooling rate, (c) 120 °C then 0.1 °C min−1 cooling rate, (d) 90 °C then 0.1 °C min−1 cooling rate. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.] 
Samples (c) and (d), in spite of their different morphologies, yielded the same electrochemical response for Li storage. The materials showed a large irreversible loss during the first cycle, but retained the same capacity during cycles 2 to 50. The gravimetric capacity was however limited to 100–110 mA h g−1 in cycles 2–50, compared to 400 mA h g−1 observed during the first charge. An obvious decomposition of MOF particles during the first charge was observed in situ by Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). In 2010, Saravanan et al. reported on a more successful application of formate MOFs for Li-storage.31 Zn3(HCOO)6, Co3(HCOO)6 and Zn1.5Co1.5(HCOO)6 were synthesized and investigated. The active materials were mixed with 15 wt% carbon black and 15 wt% binder for electrochemical evaluation. The best results were obtained with Zn3(HCOO)6 (Fig. 3). This MOF also shows a large irreversible loss during the first cycle, but interesting stability afterwards. After 60 cycles, the capacity of 560 mA h g−1 was retained, corresponding to 9.6 Li atoms per repetitive unit of the MOF. The authors noted that these results are superior to those obtained with ZnO, showing typically only 200 mA h g−1 after 10 cycles.48 Changes in the structure and composition of the MOF during charge/discharge were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) and TEM. Diffraction peaks were absent after the Zn3(HCOO)6 MOF had been electrochemically charged or discharged.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical evaluation of Zn3(HCOO)6 MOF. (a) First charge/discharge curve, (b) 2nd to 60th cycle, (c) capacity vs. cycle number. The constant current for charge/discharge was 60 mA g−1, corresponding to 0.11 C rate. [Reproduced from ref. 31.] 
However, formate ions were still present after charge/discharge, as indicated by FT-IR, while no signal for Li2O was observed. TEM showed that the initial morphology of the MOF was retained with crystal lattice fringes observed by HR-TEM and the electron diffraction pattern corresponding to those of the initial MOF structure. Based on these results, the following conversion mechanism was proposed (eqn (2) and (3)): Zn3(HCOO)6 + 6Li+ + 6e− ↔ 3Zn + 6HCOOLi(2) 3Zn + 3Li+ + 3e− ↔ 3LiZn(3)
The MOF reacts first with Li+ to form Zn nanoparticles and Li formate during the first charge, followed by LiZn alloy formation on deep charge. Upon the subsequent discharge, the alloy is transformed back into metal nanoparticles and then into zinc-formate MOF. The Co3(HCOO)6 MOF was also investigated. In contrast to Zn, Co does not form an alloy with Li, thereby the second step in the mechanism proposed above does not apply to Co3(HCOO)6. Its capacity stabilized to 410 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles, which is equivalent to 6.8 Li atoms per repetitive unit of the MOF. This is coherent with Co metal and Li-formate formation. Last, the mixed-metal MOF Zn1.5Co1.5(HCOO)6 showed a capacity of 510 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles.
These works show that MOFs are promising as negative electrode materials for Li-ion batteries with performance matching those obtained with the other most recent approaches.
We now turn our attention to the use of MOFs as sacrificial precursors to form transition metal oxide nanoparticles upon calcination. In the conversion reaction mechanism approach for novel anode materials, controlled structure and texture of transition metal oxide nanoparticles is required.49 This is where MOFs can play a key role. Recently, several research groups have synthesized transition metal oxide nanoparticles by using sacrificial MOFs, and investigated such oxides with a controlled structure/morphology as anode materials.50,51 Liu et al. synthesized Co3O4 nanoparticles by calcination at 600 °C of a cobalt-based MOF.50 The MOF was Co3(ndc)3(dmf)4. A pure Co3O4 phase was obtained, with an agglomerate structure of 250 nm, composed of smaller primary particles of 25 nm. The measured specific surface area (5.3 m2 g−1) corresponded closely to the diameter of 250 nm (3.9 m2 g−1 calculated for a bulky sphere of Co3O4 with a diameter of 250 nm). This material was mixed with 5 wt% carbon black and 10 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) to form an electrode that was subsequently tested electrochemically. The capacity was stable over 50 cycles, and even slightly increased with cycling. A reversible capacity of 965 mA h g−1 was obtained after 50 cycles.50 In spite of the agglomerate structure and low surface area of this cobalt oxide material, its capacity for Li storage compares favourably to non-agglomerated cobalt oxide nanostructures investigated by others.49,52 Thus, the primary–secondary Co3O4 structure obtained from a cobalt-based MOF via pyrolysis is a unique feature leading to improved performance for cobalt oxide materials in Li-ion batteries.
In yet another approach for novel anode materials, mixed transition metal oxide materials with a spinel structure are considered. The series AFe2O4 (A = Co, Ni and Zn) and ACo2O4 (A = Zn or Cu) have shown capacities of 600–900 mA h g−1.53,54 ZnMn2O4 has also been recently investigated.44 It showed a high initial capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 and a retained capacity of 600 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles, much higher than the capacity after 20 cycles for ZnO or Mn2O3 taken separately (50 and 200 mA h g−1, respectively).44 The reversible overall reaction (eqn (4)) leads to a theoretical capacity of 1008 mA h g−1. ZnMn2O4 + 9Li+ + 9e− → ZnLi + 2Mn + 4Li2O(4)
ZnMn2O4 was obtained by co-precipitation of metal acetates followed by calcination at 600 °C, leading to spheroidal particles of 30–40 nm diameter. By pyrolysing appropriate MOF precursors, Zhao et al. synthesised the spinel oxides AMn2O4 (A = Zn, Co or Ni) resulting in a unique gypsum-flower-like morphology that is derived from the MOF.51 Other oxide structures obtained by calcination of MOFs are discussed in Section IV.2. The authors started by synthesizing mixed-metal MOFs comprising two metal cations using the corresponding metal acetates and ptcda as a ligand. The synthesized MOFs, ZnMn2–ptcda, present a gypsum-flower-like morphology with a size of ca. 3 μm (Fig. 4a). These MOFs were then calcinated in air at 450 °C, resulting in powders of ZnMn2O4, CoMn2O4 or NiMn2O4, respectively, as well as crystals of ptcda. The spinels retained the morphology of the precursor MOFs, showing gypsum-flower-like morphology of 2–3 μm comprising 60 nm thick platelets as shown in Fig. 4b and c. The specific surface area of this ZnMn2O4 material was 42 m2 g−1 and it has a mesoporous pore structure, as shown by its type-IV adsorption isotherm.51
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the ZnMn2–ptcda MOF precursor. (a) SEM image of ZnMn2–ptcda; (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of ZnMn2O4. [Reproduced from ref. 51.] 
The spinel structure of ZnMn2O4 was investigated as an anode material for Li-ion battery. It was mixed with 15 wt% acetylene black and 10 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) to form an electrode. An initial capacity of 800 mA h g−1 (second cycle) was measured, and it decreased slowly to ca. 500 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles. This is comparable to, but not better than, results obtained with the ZnMn2O4 material obtained by the co-precipitation method and having a crystallite size in the range 50–150 nm depending on the calcination temperature.44
II.3 Positive electrode in Li–S battery
The rechargeable non-aqueous Li–S battery operates on discharge by reduction of S at the cathode and Li oxidation to Li+ at the anode. The reduction of S leads to various polysulphides before ending with the formation of Li2S.55 This type of battery has a high theoretical specific energy (2567 W h kg−1) but suffers from several practical problems, i.e. capacity fading as a result of soluble polysulfide intermediates formed at the cathode (Li2Sn with 3 ≤ n ≤ 6), and the insulating nature of S, Li2S and Li2S2 phases. The positive electrodes recently developed comprise a composite of mesoporous carbon and sulphur, so as to efficiently deliver the electrons throughout the electrode and minimize the diffusion of soluble polysulfide in the electrolyte.56 The capacity retention is still insufficient though, and it is critical to further improve the positive electrode.
The idea behind the work developed by Tarascon's group relies on the use of a MOF as an improved matrix for sulphur confinement.57 The investigated chromium trimesate MOF was built up from oxocentered trimers of chromium octahedra linked with btc-ligands (Cr3O(btc)2X, with X = OH or F). This structure defines two types of mesoporous cages (25–29 Å) connected through microporous windows (5–9 Å). The drawback of this MOF is its insulating nature. Previous work showed however that this is not redhibitory provided the insulating material is mixed with conductive carbon to form the electrode.58 Thus, S was impregnated within the pores of the MOF by melt-diffusion at 155 °C which is the melting point of S. The ratio between MOF and S was adjusted to leave some free space for volume expansion upon sulphur lithiation. The investigated MOF–S composite contained 48 wt% S, and was subsequently mixed with a high surface area carbon black by ball milling. Cells were assembled from this composite, a Li foil, a 1 M Li–organic electrolyte and a glass fiber separator. Melt-diffusion of the MOF–S composite resulted in no crystalline phase for S (from XRD analysis), attesting both a strong interaction between S and the MOF surface, or the impossibility to create an ordered structure within the confined space of the MOF. No amorphization of the MOF was noticed after ball milling. The specific surface area of 360 m2 g−1 for the MOF–S composite indicated the filling of the majority of the pores by S, while the specific surface area for the MOF itself is 1485 m2 g−1. The best compromise between high initial capacity and capacity retention upon cycling was obtained with the MOF–S composite with 50% carbon additive (Fig. 5a and d-blue triangles). This material was further compared to other S-host materials investigated for the same applications, i.e. a mesoporous silica (SBA-15, 7 nm pore aperture, 740 m2 g−1) and a mesoporous carbon obtained from SBA-15 by the template method (1160 m2 g−1).59 The initial capacity of 52 wt% S infiltrated into SBA-15 and mixed with 50% carbon is higher than that of the MOF/S–carbon composite but its capacity fading is faster (Fig. 5c and d-green circles). Finally, the mesoporous carbon obtained by replication of the mesoporous SBA-15 consists of carbon nanorods of 6–7 nm diameter spaced by ca. 2 nm hexagonal arrangement (Fig. 5b). The initial capacity of the mesoporous carbon–S composite is between those of the two others but its capacity fading is the fastest, leading to the smallest capacity after only 32 cycles (Fig. 5d-red squares). Hence, the MOF–S composite resulted in the highest capacity retention which was ascribed to its unique pore shape. Moreover, the existence of polar parts due to coordinatively unsaturated metal cations in MOF may further help in trapping the highly polar polysulfides. The amount of polysulfide species released into the electrolyte during the first discharge was quantified by a four-electrode cell (right hand-side Y-axis in Fig. 5a–c). It clearly demonstrates that the MOF–S composite released the smallest amount of polysulfides. In conclusion, the S confinement is more important than active material conductivity, since the latter can be imparted by additional carbon to form the electrode. Reducing or controlling the MOF particle size may further alleviate the disadvantage induced by its insulating or poorly conductive character.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical behavior during the first reduction of (a) MOF–S + 50% C composite, (b) mesoporous carbon–S, and (c) SBA-15–S + 55% C composite in 1 M Li organic electrolyte at a C/20 discharge rate. The right handside Y-axis in a, b and c is proportional to the amount of polysulfides released in the electrolyte. (d) Cycling performance of the composites in 1 M Li organic electrolyte at a C/10 discharge rate. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.] 
III. MOFs for electrocatalysis
Before going into the review of the results, it is emphasized here that, while in the reviewed literature many studies reported their data against a practical reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, saturated calomel, etc.), we discuss here and give electric potentials vs. the Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE), which is more meaningful for reactions involving protons or hydroxyl-anions and having therefore a pH-dependent thermodynamic potential. The change of scale was done according to eqn (5): E(V vs. RHE) = E(V vs. ref.) + E(V of ref. vs. NHE) + 0.06 × pH(5)where pH is the pH of the electrolyte used for the experiments and NHE is the Normal Hydrogen Electrode defined by aH+ = 1 and aH2 = 1.
III.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction
The hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in acidic or alkaline medium is important for electrolyzers. Large production of H2 at the lowest possible cell voltage is paramount in setting low price electrolytically-produced hydrogen. While most H2 is currently produced by steam reforming of methane (with high CO content), in the future, only H2 produced from water is desirable, for environmental and sustainability reasons, as well as for the sake of the H2 purity, which is paramount for low-temperature fuel cells. The HER is also the cathode reaction in the membrane- and diaphragm chlor-alkali processes used to produce Cl2 and where H2 is a by-product. While in acidic medium, the HER is almost reversible on Pt, in alkaline medium, the same reaction is 2–3 orders of magnitude slower and the associated voltage loss is not negligible even with Pt, the best known catalyst for that reaction.60 More efficient electrocatalysts in alkaline medium or cheaper electrocatalysts for the acidic medium are therefore desirable.61
A new family of hybrid framework materials with uncommon 3D structures such as polyoxometalate-based metal organic frameworks (POMOFs) emerged recently from the connection of polyoxometalates (POMs) to one another through bridging organic linkers.62,63 Polyoxometalates are a vast class of clusters made of oxyanions of transition metals in high oxidation states such as WVI, MoVI or VV, linked together by oxo-ligands. The extensive electrochemical activity of POMs in important electrocatalytic reactions such as NOx, nitrate and nitrite reduction, H2O2 oxidation and O2 reduction64–66 may be further exploited if they are inserted into a rigid framework with a well-defined porous network.
A series of POMOFs containing POMs building blocks connected by btc-linkers was synthesized and revealed promising catalytic activity for the HER at pH 1.67 These POMOFs were developed from ε-Keggin's type POMs with chemical formula ε-PMoV8MoVI4O40−x(OH)xM4, where M = ZnII or LaIII. This structure features an ε-Keggin core surrounded by four metal cations. In their paper, the authors investigated the structure with M = ZnII. In ref. 67, the compound (tba)3[PMoV8MoVI4O36(OH)4Zn4](btc)4/3·6H2O (labelled ε(trim)4/3) was synthesized and characterized. Two other compounds (labelled ε2(trim)2 and [ε(trim)]∞) with different stoichiometries and topologies were also obtained upon slight changes in the synthesis conditions (Fig. 6). It was shown that tba cations not only act as a simple counterion but also as a structure-directing agent, since attempts to replace those with smaller cations failed. After synthesis, the tba cations were exchanged for smaller cations, but this resulted in a partial decomposition of the POMOFs.
 Fig. 6  POM building blocks of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞, a view of their unit cell, and their schematic representation. Comparison of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞ at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, highlighting the electrocatalytic process of HER at pH 1 (1 M LiCl + HCl). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.] 
Cyclic voltammograms in Ar-purged 1 M LiCl + HCl (pH 1) electrolyte showed two redox waves characteristic of the reversible oxido-reduction of Mo centers. The redox waves were centered at ca. +0.42 V vs. RHE (+0.12 V vs. SCE) for ε(trim)4/3 and ε2(trim)2 and +0.20 to +0.18 V vs. RHE (−0.1 to −0.12 V vs. SCE) for ε2(trim)2 and ε(trim)4/3. An electrocatalytic reduction process was revealed with an onset potential of ca. +0.3 V vs. RHE at pH 1 (0 V vs. SCE) and ascribed to HER (Fig. 6). H2 production was verified by online mass spectroscopy with the electrode under potentiostatic control at −0.1 V vs. RHE. However, the value of +0.3 V vs. RHE for the onset potential for HER is very intriguing since it is thermodynamically impossible. One possible explanation for this onset potential significantly above 0 V vs. RHE is a local pH within the POMOFs being lower than that in the bulk electrolyte. Hence, this abnormal behaviour makes it difficult to interpret the curve and separate the electro-catalytic and local pH effects. Electrolytes other than 1 M LiCl + HCl (pH 1) were investigated, by replacing Li+ with smaller cations (Na+, K+, Cs+). The catalytic process for HER was decreased by 2.5–3 when Li+ was replaced by Na+ or K+, and replacement by Cs+ resulted in a drastic alteration of the CV and HER as well as material instability. The following mechanism for HER on this POMOF was proposed (eqn (6)–(8)): POMOF + 2e− + 2H+ = H2POMOF(6) H2POMOF + 2e−+2(Li(H2O)n)+ = [Li2(H2O)2nPOMOF] + H2(7) [Li2(H2O)2nPOMOF] + 2H+ = H2POMOF + 2(Li(H2O)n)+(8)where eqn (6) is the first redox wave (highest potential) and corresponds to POMOF reduction; eqn (7) is the second redox wave and corresponds to the replacement of H+ by Li+ in the POMOF and the concurrent H+ reduction from H2POMOF to H2; eqn (8) corresponds to the replacement of Li+ by H+ without any reduction or oxidation of species. Clearly, this mechanism involves the alkali cation, which ties in with experimental observations. In eqn (8), H2POMOF is regenerated, which allows a cycle of reactions from eqn (7) and (8) to proceed and H2 to be produced in an electrocatalytic process. According to this mechanism, the onset potential for HER would be set by the H2POMOF/H2 redox potential, which might be different from that of the H+/H2 couple.
In summary, the H2 production starting at around +0.3 V vs. RHE would present a great advantage for an electrolysis cell, and could in principle lower the cell voltage and result in lower electrical energy required to produce H2. It remains to be verified if such materials can sustain the high current densities required for an industrial application for water electrolysis.
III.2 Oxygen evolution reaction
The Oxygen Evolution Reaction (OER), the anodic reaction in water electrolyzers and recharging aqueous metal–air batteries, is a very sluggish reaction due to the 4 electrons involved per water molecule instead of only 2 electrons for the HER. Only a few materials combine sufficient electrocatalytic activity and stability at the high electric potential experienced during electrolysis (1.6–2 V vs. RHE). The current state-of-the-art catalyst is considered to be IrO2, but Ir is a very expensive and rare metal, even when compared to Pt.68,69 In alkaline medium, recent perovskites based on more abundant elements have shown mass activities similar to that of IrO2 and one-order of magnitude higher surface-specific activity.70 Nickel-based catalysts71,72 or mixed oxides73,74 are other alternative electrocatalysts for the OER in alkaline medium.
The group of Wenbin Lin synthesized the MOF Zr6O4(OH)4(bpdc)6 doped with various metal complexes (Ir-, Re-, or Ru-based) and investigated their activity for a range of reactions related to solar energy utilization (water oxidation, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, and organic photocatalysis).75 The metal complexes investigated for OER were: (complex 1) [IrIII(Cp*)-(dcppy)] (Cp* = pentamethylcyclopentadienyl); (complex 2) [IrIII(Cp*)(dcbpy)]+ and (complex 3) [IrIII(dcppy)2(H2O)]+. These three Ir-based complexes were evaluated as such for the OER, or after incorporation in the MOF Zr6O4(OH)4(bpdc)6 (labelled MOFs 1–3, with specific surface area 1250–1500 m2 g−1). Water electro-oxidation to O2 was investigated in homogeneous solution at pH 1 with Ce4+ as an oxidant, resulting in a total reaction described by eqn (9), being the sum of two electrochemical reactions (the OER and Ce4+ to Ce3+ electro-reduction). 4Ce4+ + 2H2O → 4Ce3+ + O2 + 4H+(9)
The amount of O2 produced was followed with time and the three Ir-complexes as well as the three resulting MOFs 1–3 showed some activity. The order of activity was 1 > 2 > 3, both for the complexes and the resulting MOF–complex composites. About 6–8 wt% of the complexes were incorporated into the Zr6O4(OH)4(bpdc)6 structure, resulting in an apparent activity being lower for the MOFs 1–3 vs. the pure complexes 1–3. However, with respect to the Ir mass, the activity was equal or higher for the MOF–complex composites. As a control experiment, the parent MOF Zr6O4(OH)4(bpdc)6 was also investigated but showed no activity for the OER, demonstrating the importance of Ir-based active centers.
In summary, activity for the OER at pH 1 was demonstrated by these Ir-complexes and MOFs incorporating such complexes, but since the OER was investigated without performing direct electrochemistry, the lack of control of the electric potential does not allow one to draw a clear conclusion about the absolute activity of such catalysts. Electrochemical investigation of such Ir-complex–MOF hybrid materials would be interesting.
The electrochemical reactivity of the commercially available Fe(btc) MOF (Basolite™ F300) was investigated by Babu et al. in alkaline medium (pH 11.3–12.2).76 At potentials above +1.7 V vs. RHE, an oxidation current was observed and ascribed to the OER (Fig. 7a). However, this oxidation current was not observed if the electrode potential had not been previously scanned at potentials lower than +1.5 V vs. RHE (ca. 0.4 V vs. SCE) (Fig. 7a). The authors noticed that this potential corresponds to the FeII/FeIII redox potential in this MOF and they discuss a possible surface modification of the MOF at low potential that might create iron hydroxides (Fig. 7c). The discussion was however not supported by experimental facts at this stage. The response of the clean Pt electrode gave a smaller oxidation current than observed for the MOF immobilized on Pt, demonstrating a role for the MOF. The phenomenon occurring during the low potential sweep and the exact nature of the active sites need to be identified in the future.
 Fig. 7  (a) Cyclic voltammograms at 50 mV s−1 for the Fe(btc) MOF immobilised on a platinum-disk electrode immersed in aqueous 0.1 M KCl with (i) 2, (ii) 4, (iii) 6, (iv) 8, (v) 10, and (vi) 15 mM NaOH. The inset shows the peak current vs. hydroxide concentration. (b) Cyclic voltammograms at 50 mV s−1 with a start potential of (i) 0.5, (ii) 0.4, (iii) 0.3, (iv) 0.1, and (v) 0.0 V vs. SCE for the Fe(btc) MOF immobilised on the platinum disk electrode immersed in aqueous 0.1 M KCl + 5 mM NaOH. (c) Schematic drawing of MOF attached to the working electrode surface before and after reductive catalyst formation. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.] 
III.3 Oxygen reduction reaction
The slow kinetics of the Oxygen Reduction Reaction (ORR) is responsible for the major source of voltage loss in low temperature H2/air fuel cells, even when the best Pt-based catalysts are used.77 In alkaline fuel cells, a variety of catalysts is available (platinum-group metals (PGM), gold, silver, transition metal oxides and chalcogenides, perovskites and spinels of rather abundant elements, as well as transition metal macrocycles) with ORR activity similar to that obtained with platinum or platinum-group-metals, while in acidic fuel cells, the choice of catalysts is much more restricted due to the poor activity for the ORR or poor durability at low pH of otherwise active materials.78,79 Today, supported Pt nanoparticles, alloyed or not with more abundant transition metals, is the state-of-the-art catalyst for proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cells. Due to the low availability and high cost of Pt, alternative catalysts for the ORR are highly desirable in order to decrease the cost of PEM fuel cells.37 Recently, Fe(Co)–N–C catalysts with molecular active sites of the type metal–Nx obtained by pyrolysis at high temperature have shown interesting activity and power performance in PEM fuel cells.80–82 Pyrolyzed and non-pyrolyzed transition metal macrocycles and complexes have shown interesting ORR activity in alkaline medium83–85 but had, until recently, failed to show sufficient ORR activity in acid medium. Due to the accessibility of metal cations in MOF structures, the high volumetric density of metal-ion sites and high micropore surface area, MOFs are interesting as such or as sacrificial materials to be pyrolyzed, in order to synthesize non-precious metal catalysts (NPMC) for the ORR.
Liu and co-workers from Argonne National Laboratory pioneered the use of MOF as a sacrificial precursor for preparing ORR catalysts.86,87 The cobalt imidazolate framework was selected as a precursor for the synthesis of ORR catalysts through pyrolysis because of its analogous structure with the Co–N4 (or Fe–N4) macromolecules previously used as precursors for the preparation of NPMCs.83 The original MOF structure was not retained after the thermal activation above 600 °C, but it played a key role in generating a high density of catalytic-sites with proper accessibility for oxygen. An optimal stability and activity for the ORR at pH 1 was achieved after pyrolysis of the MOF in inert atmosphere at 750 °C, with an onset potential of 0.83 V vs. RHE and the ORR mechanism characterized by 3.2–3.5 electrons per O2 molecule. These are close to state-of-the-art results for cobalt-based NPMCs. The specific surface area decreased from 300 to 264 m2 g−1 after pyrolysis at 750 °C, but increased to 434 m2 g−1 after removal of cobalt inactive species by acid-washing of the pyrolysed product.
Another MOF, a ZnII zeolitic-imidazolate-framework was selected for its high nitrogen content and high microporous surface area (1700 m2 g−1) in order to form an ORR-catalyst precursor when mixed with 1,10-phenanthroline and ferrous acetate.82 The MOF (Basolite™ Z1200, or ZIF-8) is composed of Zn(MeIm)2 primary units and shows a sodalite-type structure, exhibiting an interesting nanopore topology formed by bridging the ZnII centres to N-atoms of imidazolate ligands. An optimized Fe/N/C-catalyst was prepared from the pyrolysis in argon at 1050 °C, then in ammonia at 950 °C, of the catalyst precursor obtained by low-energy planetary ballmilling of ZIF-8, phenanthroline and ferrous acetate mixed in optimized ratios. After the heat treatments, the catalyst precursor including the MOF is transformed into a nitrogenated microporous carbon structure hosting FeNx active sites. The microporous surface area of the optimized catalyst was ca. 1000 m2 g−1. The activity and power performance of the optimized catalyst were measured in a H2–O2 PEM fuel cell and yielded a current density of 1.2–1.3 A cm−2 at 0.6 V (Fig. 8) and a peak power density of 0.91 W cm−2. This is 2–2.5 times higher than the best previously reported performance for NPMC obtained with the same synthesis procedure but using a high surface-area carbon black as a microporous host80 instead of the MOF (Fig. 8). These new results bring hope that Pt could be ultimately replaced by NPMCs in PEM fuel cells. Stability of the optimized NPMC catalyst is now the main barrier for an industrial application.
 Fig. 8  H2/O2 PEM fuel cell polarisation curves for a state-of-the-art Pt-based cathode (green squares, 0.3 mgPt cm−2), a Fe-based cathode catalyst synthesized using the MOF ZIF-8 (blue stars) and a Fe-based cathode catalyst synthesized using a high surface area carbon black instead of ZIF-8. [Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Commun. (ref. 82), copyright 2011.] 
More recently, modifications of this synthesis method were explored by changing the MOF (Basolite F300, a commercially available Fe–btc MOF with a specific area of 1500 m2 g−1), changing the Fe precursor (Fe–phthalocyanine) or changing the organic precursor (polyaniline).88 Only minor changes in electrochemical performance were observed as long as the catalyst precursor contained ZIF-8 as the MOF, but major negative changes were observed when ZIF-8 was substituted for F300. In contrast to ZIF-8 where Zn native of the MOF conveniently forms volatile products at high temperature, Fe native of F300 only accumulates during heat treatment and catalyzes graphitization, resulting in excess Fe and low microporous surface area after pyrolysis. Moreover, and in contrast to ZIF-8, F300 does not contain nitrogen, which means that the only source of N in the catalyst precursor is phenanthroline or polyaniline. In summary, the MOF chemistry obviously plays an important role for sacrificial MOFs to be used for the synthesis of NPMCs by pyrolysis.
Some ORR catalysts with the preserved MOF structure (no pyrolysis step) have also been recently reported.89,90 It is well known that porphyrins may be used as building blocks to form 2D or 3D MOFs.91–93 The introduction of metallo-porphyrins in MOFs is attractive because of the extraordinary catalytic properties of metal-porphyrins for biological reactions. Kian Ping Loh's group reported in 2012 on a composite MOF structure (G-dye–FeP)n comprising pyridine-functionalized graphene (reduced graphene oxide sheets functionalized with donor–π–acceptor dye containing pyridinium moieties, and labelled G-dye) and an iron porphyrin (5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyl)-iron-porphyrin; labelled FeP). G-dye was used as a building block for the assembly of MOFs. The composite graphene–metalloporphyrin metal–organic framework formed by the combination of G-dye and FeP (Fig. 9) exhibits interesting catalytic activity towards the ORR in alkaline medium with an onset potential of ca. 0.93 V vs. RHE. The larger bond polarity due to nitrogen ligands in the G-dye, the catalytically active iron–porphyrin and the framework porosity act synergistically to afford a near 4-electron ORR pathway.89
 Fig. 9  Scheme of the chemical structures of (a) reduced graphene oxide (r-GO), (b) G-dye, (c) H2–porphyrin, (d) (Fe–P)n MOF, (e) (G-dye–FeP)n MOF, and (f) magnified view of layers inside the framework of (G-dye–FeP)n MOF showing how graphene sheets intercalated between porphyrin networks. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.] 
Another example of a MOF-based NPMC for the ORR is offered by CuII–bipy–btc with btc as a main ligand and bipy as an auxiliary ligand. The latter stabilizes the structure in aqueous medium, since the Cu–btc MOF is not stable enough.90 In Cu–bipy–btc, each CuII center is coordinated with a carboxyl group from btc, one O atom from water, and two chelated N atoms from bipy (Fig. 10b). This coordination type shows a better structural stability in aqueous media relative to the Cu-coordination in Cu–btc (Fig. 10a).
 Fig. 10  (a) Cu coordination in Cu–btc; (b) Cu coordination in Cu–bipy–btc; (c) typical CVs obtained at the Cu–bipy–btc-modified glassy carbon electrode in N2- (dotted curve) or O2-saturated electrolyte (solid curve); (d). typical rotating-ring disk electrode voltammograms obtained with bare (black curve) and Cu–bipy–btc-modified (red curve) glassy carbon electrode (solid curves) and platinum-ring current (dotted curves) under O2-saturated electrolyte. The electrolyte pH was 6. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.] 
The Cu–bipy–btc-modified electrode shows a redox wave at ca. +0.40 V vs. RHE (−0.15 V vs. Ag/AgCl) (Fig. 10c) ascribed to the CuI/II oxidation states. A large increase in the reduction current in O2-saturated medium attests the electrocatalysis of the ORR. A stable electrocatalytic behavior of the Cu–bipy–btc MOF was obtained at pH 6 with an onset potential for the ORR of ca. +0.5 V vs. RHE (ca. −50 mV vs. Ag/AgCl at pH 6) (Fig. 10d), much higher than that obtained with the bare glassy carbon electrode (Fig. 10c). The electron number involved in the Cu–bipy–btc-catalyzed ORR was 3.8 (calculated from Fig. 10d), which is close to 4 expected for the full electro-reduction of O2 to H2O.
III.4 Alcohol oxidation
While hydrogen is by far the most easily electro-oxidized fuel for low temperature fuel cells, the challenges associated with its storage, especially at small scale, leave a door open to the use of alcohols as a liquid fuel with high theoretical energy density for fuel cells. The activity and stability of Pt or PGM, especially under acidic environment, make it a suitable anode electrocatalyst for electro-oxidation in low temperature fuel cells. However, and besides the restrictive aspects of cost and availability, Pt or PGM are readily poisoned by the strongly-adsorbing intermediates of alcohol oxidation, including CO. Therefore, the search for an efficient, cheap and durable anode catalyst is important.
The first example of the utilization of a noble-metal-free MOF-based material as a catalyst for ethanol electro-oxidation was recently reported by Kitagawa's group.94 The MOF was N,N′-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)dithiooxamidato-copper(II) [(HOC2H4)2dtoaCu], a 2D MOF composed of dimeric Cu units with a Cu–Cu bond distance of 2.60 Å and bridging ligands (HOC2H4)2dtoa2−. Each Cu ion is linked to two N, two S and one Cu atom. Previously, Kitagawa et al. had reported a proton conductivity of 10−4 S m−1 for this MOF, at 75% relative humidity and room temperature and an electron conductivity of 10−6 S m−1.95 This MOF was coated on a glassy-carbon electrode, and subsequently investigated in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution. Cyclic voltammetry showed one redox peak centered at 0.35 V vs. Ag/AgCl and ascribed to CuI/CuII. Addition of ethanol resulted (i) in an increase of the redox peak, ascribed to some ethanol oxidation and charge transfer to Cu atoms, and (ii) a sustainable ethanol oxidation current starting at 0.84 V vs. RHE. The product of ethanol oxidation was acetaldehyde (2 electron oxidation), instead of the full six-electron oxidation to CO2. This means that the overpotential for ethanol oxidation is very high, since the ethanol–acetaldehyde redox potential is −0.21 V vs. RHE.
III.5 Nitrite and bromate reduction
Nitrate and nitrite contamination from fertilizers in groundwater is a major concern.96 Removal of these highly oxidizing species could be performed by electrolysis, the ultimate goal being their reduction to the inert gas N2 but many intermediate products exist (NO2, NO, N2O). The nitrate or nitrite electro-reduction to N2 is a complex multi-electronic reaction (5 and 3 electrons to be reduced to N2 for nitrate and nitrite, respectively), and hence very sluggish. The standard thermodynamic potentials for NO3−/N2 and NO3−/NO2− are 1.25 V and 0.835 V vs. SHE, respectively. Standard potentials for nitrite reduction to N2 and ammonium are 1.51 and 0.9 V vs. SHE, respectively. Bromate (BrO3−) is a highly toxic and carcinogenic compound that is formed upon water disinfection by ozone as a side reaction between ozone and bromide anions present in water.97 The BrO3−/Br2 and BrO3−/Br− standard potentials are 1.48 and 1.42 V vs. SHE, respectively.
Electrocatalytic reduction of NO2− to N2O by CuII complexes through one-electron reduction of CuI/CuII set the basis for the synthesis of a novel MOF with similar Cu-coordination.98 The MOF [Cu2(bpdc)2(dpq)2(H2O)]·H2O was obtained from the hydrothermal reaction of copper chloride with the mixed ligands bpdc and dpq.99 Due to its insolubility in water, the MOF could be employed to fabricate MOF/carbon/paraffin paste electrodes, which were then investigated for the electrocatalytic reduction of nitrite. The catalytic currents corresponding to the reduction of nitrite in pH 2 phosphate buffer solution displayed a linear relation with NO2− concentration (0–4 mM range) at a potential of ca. +0.27 V vs. RHE. The electrode also showed a high stability that could be attributed primarily to the insolubility of this MOF. The same MOF was investigated for the bromate electroreduction (see later).
As previously discussed in Section III.1, MOFs incorporating POMs can be synthesized to take advantage of the extensive electrochemical activity of polyoxometallate compounds, if these soluble compounds can be retained in insoluble MOFs.67 A 3D Cu-based MOF incorporating the small polyoxomolybdate {Mo2} has been synthesized via an in situ reaction under hydrothermal conditions.100 In this novel MOF [CuI(pci)Mo2VO5], the (Mo2VO5N)n dimeric chains alternately connect to copper chains via corner-sharing mode to form a bimetallic (CuIMo2VO5N)n layer. These adjacent layers are linked by pci ligands. Both the polyoxomolybdate oligomer and copper ions have catalytic properties, and the [CuI(pci)Mo2VO5]-modified carbon paste electrode has a good electrocatalytic activity toward the reduction of nitrite in acidic medium.100
Another POMOF with electrocatalytic activity for the nitrite reduction was recently reported.101 The Wells–Dawson-type polyoxometalate (As2W18O62)6− was used as a template to build the POMOF Co2(bpy)3(ox)(As2W18O62)·2(H2bpy)·2H2O. Analysis by XRD showed that this compound consists of a non-coordinating POM template and 3D host framework. The electrocatalytic activity of this compound was investigated in 1 M H2SO4 aqueous solution with carbon paste electrodes. In the nitrite-free electrolyte, three stable redox pairs were visible and ascribed to the tungsten centers of the POM. As expected due to the known activity of POMs for nitrite reduction, this hybrid compound also showed electrocatalytic activity toward the reduction of nitrite with an onset potential of +0.28 V vs. RHE (SI of ref. 101).
Yet another POMOF based on the ε-Keggin anion and a Zn-based MOF was synthesized and demonstrated electrocatalytic reduction of bromate (Fig. 11).102 Going from modeling methods to construct and evaluate the stability of several hypothetical POMOFs, the synthesis of a viable and stable structure was achieved, namely [NBu4]3[PMoV8MoVI4O36(OH)4Zn4(bdc)2]·2H2O. Electrochemistry at pH 2 was carried out by entrapping the POMOF in a carbon paste or in polyvinyl alcohol, to analyze the redox waves and the electro-reduction of BrO3−. A linear correlation was found between BrO3− concentration (range 0.2–40 mM) and the peak current at +0.17 V vs. RHE (−0.2 V vs. SCE), thus opening the way for its detection and reduction by this POMOF (Fig. 11).102 The onset potential is ca. +0.36 V vs. RHE (+0.1 V vs. SCE at pH 2), and corresponds to the second redox wave observed in the bromate-free electrolyte. The reaction product is believed to be bromide, based on previous reports on POMs-catalyzed bromate reaction.
 Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammetry of [NBu4]3[PMoV8MoVI4O36(OH)4Zn4(bdc)2]·2H2O at 50 mV s−1 and pH 2 (1 M LiCl in HCl) in the absence of bromate and upon increasing concentrations of bromate (0.2–40 mM). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.] 
The MOF [Cu2(bpdc)2(dpq)2(H2O)]·H2O previously discussed for the nitrite reduction99 was also investigated for the electrocatalytic reduction of BrO3− at pH 2. Some activity was observed below +0.41 V vs. RHE (+0.05 V vs. SCE). Better activity for bromate reduction was observed with the other Cu-based MOF previously synthesized by the same group, with an onset potential of +0.56 V vs. RHE.98
IV. MOFs as electrode materials for supercapacitors
Electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs) are very efficient for the storage or release of electrical energy at very high rates due to the absence of Faradaic reactions in this device. Electrical charges are stored at the electrode–electrolyte interface and the gravimetric capacitance, Cm, of a given porous material is the mathematical product of the average surface specific capacitance, Cs, and the total surface area, S. The surface specific capacitance is however a complex function of the pore size, with, for carbonaceous materials, a decreasing trend with decreasing pore size down to a critical size of ca. 1.5 nm, below which value the specific capacitance increases as the inverse of the pore size.103,104 The latter anomalous increase occurs both in aqueous and organic electrolytes and is due to the distortion of the solvation shell of ions. Microporous carbons with high specific area, short pores and pore size less than 1 nm are therefore expected to be ideal materials for EDLCs. MOFs with controllable pore size in the micropore range (0.6–2 nm) and incorporating pseudo-capacitive redox centers are therefore potential candidates as electrode materials for EDLCs with improved energy density. This is discussed in Section IV.1. Alternatively, MOFs can also be used as a sacrificial microporous template for the preparation of either nano–micro scale metal-oxide materials (Section IV.2) or microporous carbon materials (Section IV.3) and both may find application for EDLC or for other electrochemical applications.
IV.1 As-synthesized MOFs
The introduction of as-synthesized MOFs in EDLCs has been reported only recently.105,106 Since cobalt oxides, and especially Co3O4, are known to be an efficient material for electrodes in supercapacitors,107 Lee et al. synthesized from cobalt nitrate and terephthalic acid a Co-based MOF and investigated its capacitive behaviour in various 1 M aqueous electrolytes, namely LiOH, KCl, LiCl and KOH.105 Only in LiOH-electrolyte did the Co-based MOF show an interesting pseudo-capacitive behaviour (Fig. 12). A gravimetric capacitance of 150–200 F g−1 was reported for the MOF film on an ITO glass substrate. Interestingly, no additional carbon or other conductive phase was mixed with the MOF. The capacitance was retained with a loss of only 1.5% for 1000 cycles. This capacitance is already comparable to that reported for Co3O4 nanoparticles, 200–290 F g−1.107
 Fig. 12  Cyclic voltammetry in various 1 M electrolytes of a Co-based MOF synthesized from cobalt nitrate and terephthalic acid. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.] 
Diaz et al. investigated a Zn-based MOF (MOF-5, Zn4O(bdc)3) partially substituted with Co (Zn3.68 Co0.32O(bdc)3(def)0.75).106 Electrodes were prepared by mixing MOF:carbon black:PTFE in 75:15:10 wt%. From cyclic voltammetry or chronoamperometry in 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (tbaPF6) in acetonitrile, a gravimetric capacitance of only 0.5 F g−1 MOF was estimated. This low capacitance might be due to incompatibility between that particular MOF and this electrolyte, since Fig. 12 clearly shows huge differences in capacitance depending on the electrolyte.
IV.2 Sacrificial MOFs for metal or metal-oxides
Controlled synthesis of the size and morphology of metal or metal oxides is paramount for catalytic applications, including electrochemical reactions. Reduced particle size means more reactive surface per mass of metal, but particle size effect may also lead to changes in the surface-specific activity while crystallographic orientation also tunes the rate of reactions.
A general strategy for the synthesis of carbon-supported metal or metal-oxide nanoparticles starting from MOFs was reported by Poddar's group.108 By heat treatment of various MOFs at 900 °C in N2 or in air, these authors observed the formation of metal or metal oxide nanoparticles embedded in a carbon matrix. For Cu- and Co-based MOFs, metal nanoparticles were obtained after heat treatment in N2 while metal oxide nanoparticles were obtained after calcination in air. For Zn, Mg and Cd based MOFs, pure metal oxide nanoparticles were obtained after heat-treatment in air or in N2. The authors found a correlation between the redox potential of metaln+/metal and the ability of a metaln+-based MOF to form metal nanoparticles. Cu2+ and Co2+ have redox potentials of +0.34 and −0.28 V vs. SHE, while Zn2+, Mn2+ and Mg2+ have much lower potentials of −0.76, −1.18 and −2.37 V vs. SHE, respectively. It was concluded that only metal cations with a potential above a certain value could react with the organic ligands of the MOFs to be reduced to zero oxidation state during pyrolysis in inert atmosphere. Synthesis of zinc-oxide nanostructures from Zn-based MOFs has interested several research groups.109–114 The intrinsic shape of the starting MOF is sometimes retained after its total transformation into an inorganic structure.109,114–116 Nanowires of γ-MnO2 have been synthesized from a Mn–bipyridine MOF.117 The precursor MOF was boiled in an air-saturated NaOH solution, resulting in the displacement of the ligands by oxygen and MnO2 nanowire formation, with diameters of 20–40 nm grown in the [002] crystalline direction. Pure hematite or magnetite nanorods with 70 nm width and 800 nm length were obtained from the pyrolysis in air, or in air and then in N2, of Fe-MIL-88B (a 3D Fe–bdc MOF).115 In2O3 nanorods with different shapes were also synthesized by calcination of In-based MOFs synthesized with various ligands.116 Last, the perovskite structure GdCoO3 was obtained by calcination of a mixed metal-ion MOF.118
Nano/micro Co3O4 materials for EDLCs were prepared by Zhang et al. by calcination of a cobalt(bdc)2 MOF which was used as a precursor.119 Thermogravimetric analysis of the MOF in inert gas showed a loss of the crystalline structure at 365 °C. Calcination of the MOF was carried out at 450 °C, and resulted in the pure phase Co3O4. The resulting material shows a 3D organisation of μm size, composed of spheroidal primary particles of 30–100 nm size (Fig. 13). A specific surface area of 21 m2 g−1 was measured, in agreement with the primary particle size. Cyclic voltammetry in 6 M KOH showed two redox pairs ascribed to the Co3O4–CoOH and CoOH–CoO2 couples. Gravimetric capacitances of 210 and 179 F g−1 were reported at scan rates of 5 and 30 mV s−1, respectively. Stability over 1000 cycles was investigated and the capacitance increased from 206 to 210 F g−1 over the first 130 cycles to subsequently decline to 204 F g−1 after 1000 cycles. Higher calcination temperatures (550 and 650 °C) lead to decreased capacitance, probably due to increased particle size of the resulting materials. This capacity is comparable to that obtained with state-of-the-art Co3O4 materials, 200–290 F g−1.107
 Fig. 13  SEM images (a and b) and TEM images (c and d) of a Co3O4 material obtained by calcination of a Co(bdc)2 MOF. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2012 ESG.] 
IV.3 Sacrificial MOFs for microporous carbons
MOFs have also been investigated extensively as a thermally decomposable template for synthesizing carbon materials with specific surface area up to 3447 m2 g−1. The carbon materials were obtained by thermal decomposition of MOFs120–123 or MOF–organic precursor composites prepared by vapour phase124 or incipient wetness techniques.120,125–127 Furfuryl alcohol has been the reference organic precursor124–127 while two Zn-based MOFs, MOF-5 and ZIF-8, have been investigated as major sacrificial MOFs with a conveniently low boiling temperature of Zn metal, 907 °C.82,120,121,123–127
Carbon materials obtained from MOF-5 (Zn4O(bdc)3) are discussed first. The first work using a MOF to prepare nanoporous carbons124 revealed the importance of the pyrolysis temperature for the structural evolution into carbon. First, MOF-5 was impregnated by furfuryl alcohol through vapour deposition. The authors reported a specific surface area of 2872 m2 g−1 for the carbon obtained after pyrolysis at 1000 °C in argon. On the contrary, the sample obtained at 530 °C had a specific surface area of only 217 m2 g−1 and the material contained much ZnO. After removal of the latter by acid washing, the specific surface area rose to 1732 m2 g−1, showing that pores formed independently of ZnO evaporation occurring at higher temperature. The same group applied the incipient wetness technique for the impregnation of furfuryl alcohol into MOF-5.125 The specific surface areas for samples obtained at temperatures ranging from 530 to 1000 °C, and after acid washing, fall into the range from 1140 to 3040 m2 g−1, with the highest surface area obtained by carbonizing at 530 °C. This carbon is micro–mesoporous with an average pore size of 3.7 nm. Hu et al. demonstrated that MOF-5 can be converted into a micro-mesoporous carbon without any additional organic precursor.120 MOF-5 was simply pyrolysed at 600 and then 900 °C in N2, resulting in an amorphous carbon (no diffraction peaks) having a specific surface area of 1812 m2 g−1. Other porous carbons were prepared by pyrolysis of composites of MOF-5 impregnated or covered with additional carbon precursors (phenolic resin, carbon tetrachloride + ethylenediamine). The resulting carbons were subsequently activated by KOH at 500 °C to further control the microstructure.120 KOH activation resulted in a negative effect on the surface area when phenolic resin was used (decrease from 1543 to 1271 m2 g−1), while the contrary was obtained when the mixture carbon tetrachloride + ethylenediamine was used (increase from 348 m2 g−1 to 2222 m2 g−1). Yang et al. synthesized two Zn-based MOFs with two different bdc-linkers: aminobenzene dicarboxylate and naphthalene dicarboxylate (labelled IRMOF-3 and IRMOF-8, respectively, in their work). After pyrolysis at 900 °C in N2, the carbon materials showed specific surface areas of 1678 and 1978 m2 g−1, respectively.121
We now discuss the second most employed MOF as a thermally decomposable template, namely ZIF-8 (Zn(N2C4H6)2). After impregnation with furfuryl alcohol and pyrolysis in Ar at 1000 °C, a carbon material with a high surface area of 3405 m2 g−1 was reported.126 The pyrolysis temperature was important here as well, since a pyrolysis at 800 °C resulted in a lower surface area of 2169 m2 g−1. Using furfuryl-alcohol-impregnated ZIF-8, another group reported however a surface area (mostly microporous) of only 933–1130 m2 g−1 after pyrolysis at 900–1100 °C in Ar.127 After activation by KOH at 700 °C, areas of 1425–3188 m2 g−1 were reached, with the highest area obtained by subsequent KOH activation of the sample obtained at 900 °C. Last, pyrolysis of ZIF-8 at 700–1000 °C in N2 yielded carbon materials with areas of 520–1110 m2 g−1;123 confirming the results of Almasoudi and Mokaya.127
Park and co-workers synthesized a third Zn-based MOF with terephthalic acid, the simplest bdc-type linker.121 Pyrolysis of the resulting MOF (labelled IRMOF-1 in ref. 121) at 900 °C in N2 yielded a carbon material with an area of 3174 m2 g−1, the highest in that study. This demonstrates the impact, for a given metal, of the functionalization of the ligand used to build the MOF since the two functionalized bdc-type ligands (aminobenzene and naphthalene dicarboxylate) resulted in carbon materials with specific surface areas of only 1750–2350 m2 g−1.121
Apart from Zn-based MOFs, only a few MOFs based on other metal-cations have been investigated as sacrificial MOFs for the production of carbon materials. A cobalt-based imidazolate MOF was synthesized and heat treated at 750 °C, resulting in a carbon material with a surface area of 264 m2 g−1 embedding Co–Nx active sites for the ORR.87 Pyrolysis of iron-based or nickel-based MOFs seems to result either in more graphitic carbon with low surface area, or in carbon nanotubes.122,128 The pyrolysis of [Ni3(btc)2·12H2O] at 500 °C was shown to result in multiwall carbon nanotubes.122 In this case, the Ni-based MOF has a dual purpose: it serves as a carbon source but also provides the catalyst (Ni) required for the nanotube growth.
The charge-storage properties for EDLCs of the resulting carbon materials are now discussed. These materials showed excellent performance and stability both in aqueous (6 M KOH or 1 M H2SO4) and organic electrolytes (1.5 M NEt4BF4 in acetonitrile).120,123–126 The largest capacitances reported by Hu et al. in basic and organic electrolytes from galvanostatic charge–discharge curves at 0.25 A g−1 were 274 and 168 F g−1, respectively. They were obtained with a KOH-activated MOF-derived carbon, which was the sample with the highest area in that study (2222 m2 g−1). In acidic medium, samples obtained after different pyrolysis temperatures (from 530 to 1000 °C) showed different EDLC behaviour.125 However, there was no direct correlation between the surface area of the samples and their capacitance (measured under galvanostatic control at 0.25 A g−1), the highest capacitance being obtained with the 650 °C sample (195 F g−1 for 1521 m2 g−1) while the sample with a higher area (2524 m2 g−1, obtained at 1000 °C) showed a capacitance of only 129 F g−1 (Fig. 14). In acidic medium, capacitances of 200 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 were obtained with two samples having surface areas of 2169 and 3405 m2 g−1.126 These samples were obtained from the pyrolysis of ZIF-8–furfuryl alcohol composites. Due to the high N-content of ZIF-8, these carbons certainly contain nitrogen heteroatoms, however the N-content and possible role in the capacitance was not measured or discussed. Last, from cyclic voltammetry at 50 mV s−1, a capacitance of 110–130 F g−1 was measured for samples obtained from the direct pyrolysis of ZIF-8.123 No loss of capacitance was observed after 250 cycles.
 Fig. 14  Comparison of the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at the current density of 0.1 A g−1 for five carbon samples obtained after pyrolysis at different temperatures of a MOF-5–furfuryl alcohol composite. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.] 
The results obtained with MOF-derived carbons compare well with typical values of gravimetric capacitance obtained with activated carbons, which are 100–120 F g−1 in organic electrolytes and 150–300 F g−1 in aqueous electrolytes.129 However, no clear advantage is tangible and activated carbons may be cheaper and easier to mass-produce compared to MOF-derived carbons.
V. MOFs for battery or fuel-cell electrolytes
V.1 MOFs for lithium-battery electrolyte
Currently, macroporous polymer membranes swelled with lithium salts dissolved in organic carbonates are utilized as a separator in Li-ion batteries.130 The liquid electrolyte restricts the battery shape while the lack of rigidity for the current separator precludes the use of solid lithium as an anode material because of the possible formation of lithium dendrites upon repeated cycling. An alternate solution to avoid those features would be the use of rigid solid separators.131
The use of MOFs as a solid separator was recently investigated.132 The evaluation started by investigating three different MOF structures: MOF-177 (a benzenetribenzoate bridged framework with ZnII sites),133 Cu–BTTri (a triazolate-bridged framework with CuII sites),134 and Mg2(dobdc).135 The ionic conductivities were measured after uptake of a common electrolyte solution (1 M LiBF4 in a 1:1 mixture of ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC)) by the MOFs and pressing of the resulting powder into pellets. The conductivity values ranged from 10−7 to 10−4 S m−1. The Mg2(dobdc) was found to be the most promising MOF with room-temperature conductivity of 1.8 × 10−4 S m−1. The Mg2(dobdc) structure consists of 1D hexagonal channels with diameters around 14 Å that are lined with Mg2+ cations (Fig. 15). This conductivity is still three orders of magnitude below the level desired for a battery electrolyte (10−1 S m−1).136
 Fig. 15  Structure of Mg2(dobdc) and its modification by a Li-alkoxide to form the solid electrolyte. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.] 
Further, the MOF Mg2(dobdc) was functionalized with a Li-alkoxide (i.e. Li isopropoxide, LiOPr), following the assumption that alkoxide anions preferentially bind Mg2+ while leaving Li+ free to move. The functionalized MOF (Fig. 15) was soaked in the same electrolyte as before: 1 M LiBF4 in a 1:1 mixture of EC and DEC. The resulting compound formula was found to be Mg2(dobdc)·0.35LiOPr·0.25LiBF4·EC·DEC. At this stage, XRD analysis showed that the initial MOF structure was conserved. The conductivity (3.1 × 10−2 S m−1) was more than two orders of magnitude that of the Mg2(dobdc)·0.05LiBF4·EC·DEC material obtained after soaking Mg2(dobdc) in the same electrolyte (1.8 × 10−4 S m−1). This total increase in conductivity was partly due to increased lithium electrolyte concentration in the MOF (factor ca. 7) and increased Li+ mobility (factor ca. 25). These results are very promising and represent a new approach for creating solid lithium electrolyte materials. However, the mechanism for improved Li mobility remains unclear.
V.2 MOFs for proton-conductive membranes
Currently, state-of-the-art materials for low and high-temperature PEMFCs are sulfonated fluoro-polymers (e.g. Nafion®) and phosphoric-acid doped polybenzimidazole membranes, respectively.137–139 Proton conductivities reached with such membrane materials are typically 10 S m−1 for Nafion® at 80 °C and 100% Relative Humidity (RH), and 5–20 S m−1 at 150 °C and 0% RH for high-temperature membranes. This results in only 25 mV ohmic loss across the membrane at 1 A cm−2 for a 25 μm thick Nafion® membrane such as Nafion® 211 or 212. Such high conductivities are necessary for high power density PEMFCs. Interfacial contact resistances (ca. 25–50 mΩ cm2) always add to the pure membrane resistance, making the search for even higher membrane conductivities of little significance. However, more robust or cheaper materials with similar conductivity are sought after. In contrast, novel proton-conducting membranes or materials with higher conductivity than the current status at temperatures above 100 °C (anhydrous proton conduction) are required. PEMFCs operating in the range 120–180 °C would present several technical advantages: (a) better tolerance to CO and other contaminants in the H2 fuel, (b) reasonable performance with methanol or ethanol as fuels due to improved kinetics and CO-tolerance, and (c) easier water and heat management.
Since 2003, proton-conducting materials based on MOFs have been investigated, both in hydrated and dehydrated conditions.140 The different approaches investigated so far can be classified into three types: (i) as-synthesized MOFs,141–146 (ii) MOFs loaded with guest molecules or incorporating inorganic nano-structures,147–151 and (iii) MOFs that are chemically modified in a post-synthesis step.152
In approach (i), as-synthesized MOFs, the vast family of MOF crystalline structures can provide size- and shape-tunable pores for proton conduction, with controllable hydrophilicity and acidity. Carboxylic, sulfonic or phosphonic acid functionalities can be introduced in the ligand chemistry of the framework. In this approach, proton conduction is observed only in a hydrated environment (Table 1). Kitagawa's group controlled the hydrophilicity of MOFs to achieve high proton conductivity in oxalate-bridged layered MOFs, {NR3(CH2COOH)}[MCr(ox)3]·nH2O (R = methyl, ethyl or n-butyl, and M = Mn or Fe.143 They are labelled R–MCr. The carboxylic groups provide proton conductivity while the hydrophilicity of the cations {NR3(CH2COOH)}+ is tuned by the NR3 residue. The most hydrophilic sample, methyl–FeCr, showed the highest proton conductivity in that study, ∼10−2 S m−1, at ambient temperature and 65% RH. This MOF shows a 2D layer structure with an interlayer periodic distance of 6.9 Å, enough to host two water molecules. Previously, the same group reported a proton conductivity of 7 × 10−4 S m−1 at 70 °C and 95% RH for the MOF Fe(OH)(bdc–(COOH)2.142 It was the highest conductivity obtained in that work, which investigated several MOFs of the type M(OH)(bdc–R) with M = Al, Fe; R = H, NH2, OH, or (COOH)2. Increased proton conductivity correlated well over two orders of magnitude with a decreased pKa-value of the functional group, R. The highest conductivity reported by that group (Table 1) was however obtained with another MOF, a ferrous oxalate dihydrate MOF.141 It shows a 1D structure with two water molecules coordinated to every ferrous cation, resulting in a 1D ordered array of water molecules. Sahoo et al. investigated the role of halogens (Br or Cl) on the proton conductivity of chiral Zn-based MOFs.145 Four MOFs were synthesized, being structural isomers (Cl− or Br− as the anion coordinating the metal atoms) or enantiomers with respect to the ligand backbone (d or l amino-acid derivative). Only the two MOFs involving Cl-atoms showed proton conductivity (Table 1). The role of halogen atoms with different electro-negativities was thus evidenced. The stronger OH⋯Cl–Zn interaction resulted in increased acidity, which is a major driving force for proton conduction. The group of Prof. Shimizu reported a proton conductivity of ca. 3 × 10−3 S m−1 at 25 °C and 98% RH for a Zn-based phosphonate MOF.144 Metal-phosphonate MOFs with a coordinatively unsaturated metal and ligand are interesting for proton conduction since uncoordinated oxygen atoms from phosphonates may act as H-bond acceptors while unsaturated metal cations impart water retention to the MOF. The Zn-based phosphonate MOF investigated in ref. 144 shows a layered structure with 11.5 Å interlayer distance.
Table 1 Proton conductivities of various metal organic frameworks




Proton conductivity (S m−1)

T (°C)
RH (%)
MOF structure and (when applicable) loaded molecule
Ref.




8 × 10−3
25
65
Methyl–FeCr·3H2O

149



7 × 10−4
70
95
Fe(OH)(bdc–(COOH)2)

142



4 × 10−3
30
98
[Zn(l-LCl)(Cl)](H2O)2

145



4 × 10−3
30
98
[Zn(d-LCl)(Cl)](H2O)2




1.3 × 10−1
25
98
Ferrous oxalate dihydrate

141



3 × 10−3
25
98
Zn3(L)(H2O)2·2H2O; L = [1,3,5-benzenetriphosphonate]6−

144



3 × 10−2
150
0
Na3(2,4,6-trihydroxy-1,3,5-benzene-trisulfonate) loaded with 1,2,4-triazole

147



2.2 × 10−3
120
0
[Al(μ2-OH)(1,4-ndc)]n loaded with imidazole

150



0.8
25
98
(NH4)2[Zn2(ox)3]·3H2O loaded with adipic acid

149



1
200
0
Cr-MIL-101 loaded with CsHSO4

148



0.3
20
100
Sulphated MIL-53(Al)

152





In approach (ii), MOFs loaded with amphoteric guest molecules (imidazole or triazole) or incorporating inorganic nano-structures (polyoxometalates) have been investigated for proton conduction under poorly hydrated or fully dehydrated conditions. Shimizu and co-workers synthesized a MOF based on sodium cations and benzene–trisulfonate ligand that was subsequently loaded with the guest molecule 1,2,4-triazole (Fig. 16).147 While the as-synthesized MOF labelled β-PCMOF2 showed poor proton conduction (3–5 10−5 S m−1 at room temperature and 0% RH, and two orders of magnitude lower conductivity at 80 °C), the triazole (Tz) loaded MOF (β-PCMOF2(Tz)x) showed similar poor proton conductivity at room temperature but a much increased conductivity with increasing temperature. At 80 °C, the conductivity was ca. 3 × 10−3 S m−1 and, at 150 °C, 3 × 10−2 S m−1 (Table 1).147 This demonstrates the importance of triazole in the anhydrous proton-conduction mechanism. In addition, the authors prepared a membrane-electrode-assembly by pressing β-PCMOF2(Tz)0.45 in-between two Pt/C electrodes. An open circuit voltage of 1.18 V was measured at 100 °C for a H2/air fuel cell, which is close to the theoretical voltage and demonstrates the impermeability to H2. The proton mobility in N-heterocycles such as imidazole or triazole and the electrochemical stability of the latter were previously shown.153 This is an interesting approach for high-temperature proton conducting materials but conductivities are still quite low compared to current membrane materials operating at 150 °C.
 Fig. 16  The structure of the metal organic framework β-PCMOF2 including guest triazole molecules and the trisulfonated benzene-derivative ligand. [Reprinted by permission from ref. 154. Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Chem., copyright 2009.] 
In a related work, aluminium-based porous frameworks were reported to conduct protons above 100 °C through the incorporation of imidazole (Im) within the pores.150 The study of two compounds, [Al(μ2-OH)(1,4-ndc)]n and [Al(μ2-OH)(bdc)]n, showed that proton conductivity varies because of the different pore shapes of those structures and of the different host–guest interactions. The highest conductivity of 2.2 × 10−3 S m−1 was obtained at 120 °C with [Al(μ2-OH)(1,4-ndc)]n–Im.
A highly proton-conductive MOF was obtained by introducing adipic acid in a layered oxalate-bridged framework (NH4)2[Zn2(ox)3]·3H2O.149 The conductivity reached 0.8 S m−1 at 98% RH at 25 °C (Table 1). The carboxylic acidic groups of adipic acid are situated in the interlayer space of the framework as well as in the voids of the layer. The water content was shown to be crucial for high proton conductivity, since the dihydrate material obtained at 70% RH showed a proton conductivity of only 6 × 10−4 S m−1.
Ponomareva et al. introduced the acid salt CsHSO4 into a Cr-based MOF devoid of proton-conductive properties.148 Solid acids of the MmHn(XO4)p family (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, NH4; X = S, Se, P, As; n, m and p between 1 and 5) undergo a superprotonic phase transition at 50–230 °C and are interesting as anhydrous proton conductors at high temperature with proton conductivities in the range of 0.1–1 S m−1. The chosen MOF was Cr3O(H2O)Y(bdc)0.15HNO3·13H2O, where Y = F or NO3. This MOF is also known under the label Cr-MIL-101. The results of that study revealed proton conductivity of 10−5 to 1 S m−1 at temperatures of 50–200 °C for these nanocomposites with the formula (1 − x)CsHSO4-(x)Cr-MIL-101, and chemical stability up to 190 °C (Fig. 17). As the amount of MOF in the composite was increased from 0.01 to 0.07, the phase transition temperature was decreased by 10–14 °C and, more importantly, the low temperature proton conductivity was increased by up to 2 orders of magnitude. However, the high temperature proton conductivity decreased at the same time for x > 0.02. The best compromise was obtained for x = 0.02, with 2 orders of magnitude higher conductivity relative to CsHSO4 below the transition temperature and equal conductivity to CsHSO4 above the transition temperature. The large energy of adhesion of CsHSO4 to the MOF surface and disordered state, evidenced by XRD, of the acid salt in the nanopores resulted in the formation of a highly-conductive CsHSO4 phase at low temperature.
 Fig. 17  Schematic structure of Cr3O(H2O)Y(bdc)yHNO3·nH2O: Cr3O clusters are connected to each other through terephthalic linkers; the supertetrahedra formed are joined by vertexes and construct a zeotypic structure with two types of mesocages: small (yellow) and large (blue). Temperature dependencies of proton conductivity for (1 − x)CsHSO4−x [Cr3O(H2O)Y(bdc)yHNO3·nH2O] (x = 0.01–0.07) in comparison with CsHSO4. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.] 
Last, hybrid materials comprising a MOF and Strandberg-type polyoxometalate were investigated.151 Strandberg-type polyoxometalates are heteropoly anions in which organic groups are covalently bonded to a phosphorus heteroatom. Their hybrid material [Mo5P2O23] [Cu(phen)(H2O)]3·5H2O(Cu3Mo5P2) showed a proton conductivity of 2 × 10−3 S m−1 at 25 °C and 98% RH.
In approach (iii), Goesten et al. functionalized the MOF MIL-53(Al) (aluminium terephthalate MOF) in a post-synthesis step by reacting it at room temperature in a solution of H2SO4–Tf2O in nitromethane (Tf2O = trifluoromethanesulfonic anhydride).152 Sulfoxy-acid moieties covalently bonded to the aryl carbons of the organic linker were generated for approximately 50% of the terephthalate linking units. A proton conductivity of ca. 0.3 S m−1 at 20 °C and 100% RH was observed for the sulphated MIL-53(Al) material. The proton conductivity decreased with increasing temperature, but that mostly reflected the decrease in RH since the atmosphere was N2 saturated in water at room temperature.
VI. MOFs for corrosion inhibition
Corrosion inhibitors are required in industrial steps of chemical cleaning and pickling necessary to remove the oxide layer when the metallic surface needs to be protected in order to avoid severe corrosion and metal loss.155 The inhibitor is dispersed in the pickling solution and reduces the metal corrosion by a blocking and/or electrocatalytic action. In an adsorption–blocking method, the adsorption strength of the inhibitor on the metal surface is important. It depends on physico-chemical properties, functional groups, steric factors, molecular size and structure, presence of electron donor atoms and π-orbital character of donating electrons. Organic molecules with heteroatoms such as N, P or S are well-known inhibitors for many metals and alloys in acidic media. Coordination complexes have also been more recently investigated as inhibitors, and possess different cyclic and heterocyclic ligands. MOFs, that may combine metal–ligand complexes and a continuous 2D or 3D structure, topologies rich in π-systems and hetero-aromatic moieties, are potential materials as corrosion inhibitors. A few studies have investigated this effect.156–158
The inhibitor role of the MOF (AgCN)4·(qox)2 for carbon steel in 1 M HCl was investigated.156 This MOF was chosen for its ease of synthesis and presence of two aromatic heterocycles in its unit cell. Its topology is a 2D sheet with deformed six-membered rings and these sheets are close-packed in parallel via H-bonds and π–π stacking (Fig.18a). The nitrogen heteroatoms are important for strong adsorption of the MOF to a metal surface. Corrosion potential and corrosion current densities were measured for various concentrations of the MOF (from 0 to 10−4 M) in 1 M HCl. The working electrode was a polished, flat surface of carbon steel. With addition of the MOF in 1 M HCl solution, a suppression of both anodic and cathodic branches of the polarization curves was reported, but was more pronounced for the anodic branch (Fig. 18b). Clearly, the MOF adsorption on the metal surface retarded both the H2 evolution reaction and the metal dissolution. The corrosion current density was suppressed by almost one order of magnitude from the blank to 10−4 M MOF in solution (4.13 to 0.44 mA cm−2), and the anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes changed from 211, 224 mV dec−1 to 109, 129 mV dec−1, respectively, for the blank and 10−4 M MOF in acidic solution. The parallel change of the anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes with increased MOF concentration supports a blocking action of the MOF and adsorption of the MOF on the metal surface. The adsorption energy was estimated to be ca. 30 kJ mol−1 and ascribed to mixed physi- and chemisorption. The inhibition efficiency (% of corrosion current reduction vs. the blank) at 10−5 M MOF was 67% at 25 °C but decreased with increasing temperature (42% at 55 °C). From the adsorption process investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), the charge transfer was found to increase with increased concentration of MOF while the double layer capacitance decreased with increased MOF concentration. The latter suggests that the MOF is strongly adsorbed and changes the electronic structure of the steel surface. The authors concluded that the MOF network seems to be oriented parallel to the surface via adsorption through non-binding electron doublets from N atoms.
 Fig. 18  (a) 2D-fused deformed six-membered rings in (AgCN)4·(qox)2, (b) potentiodynamic polarization curves for corrosion of C-steel in the absence and presence of different concentrations of the MOF (AgCN)4·(qox)2 at 25 °C. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.] (c) Extended structure of Ag(qox)(4-ab) showing the four parallel molecules surrounding the fifth one, (d) potentiodynamic polarization curves for corrosion of C-steel in the absence and presence of different concentrations of the inhibitor Ag(qox)(4-ab) at 25 °C. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011 Springer.] 
The same authors performed a similar study using another MOF, Ag(qox)(4-ab).158 The unit cell of this MOF comprises a silver atom coordinated to one N-atom of the qox ligand, two O-atoms of the two carboxylate groups and a second silver atom. The extended structure comprises infinite discrete building blocks, which are arranged in a unique way so that four parallel molecules surround the fifth one (Fig. 18c). H-bonds and π–π stacking ensure 3D network cohesion. Electrochemical experiments were performed as above156 (Fig. 18d), and the corrosion current density was suppressed by 84% from the blank to 10−4 M MOF in solution (4.13 to 0.65 mA cm−2). The inhibition efficiency at 10−5 M MOF decreased with increasing temperature (from 97% to 56% as temperature increased from 25 to 55 °C). As before, impedance spectroscopy showed increased charge transfer resistance and decreased double layer capacitance in the presence of the MOF in solution, suggesting that adsorption is the corrosion inhibition process.
Massoud et al. investigated the use of two silver pyrazine MOFs as corrosion inhibitors for mild steel in acidic medium.157 These two MOFs have the composition [Ag2(ampyz)(NO3)2]n and [Ag(2,3-pyzdic)(NO3)]n. [Ag2(ampyz)(NO3)2]n has a 2D sheet structure via NO3 bridging and pyrazino bridging and 3D structure through extensive hydrogen bonding between the amino function of the ampyz and the uncoordinated O from NO3. [Ag(2,3-pyzdic)(NO3)]n has a 1D chain structure and strong hydrogen bonds further connect these chains to form a 3D network. The AgI ion is linearly coordinated to two pyzdic molecules. In contrast to [Ag2(ampyz)(NO3)2]n, this 3D network does not reveal any easily recognizable 3D-net. Corrosion potential and corrosion current densities were measured for various concentrations of the two MOFs (from 0 to 10−3 M) in 0.1 M nitric acid. The working electrode was a polished, flat surface of mild steel. For [Ag2(ampyz)(NO3)2]n and [Ag(2,3-pyzdic)(NO3)]n, the inhibition efficiency was 64% and 50% respectively at 10−3 M MOF-concentration, and the anodic and cathodic Tafel slopes changed from 78, 78 mV dec−1 for the blank solution to 17, 14 mV dec−1 and 32, 32 mV dec−1 respectively for the two MOFs at 10−3 M concentration. The simultaneous decrease of both Tafel slopes in the presence of increased concentration of either MOF suggests that the inhibition acts on both processes, but with a dominant anodic inhibitory effect (metal dissolution). These inhibition efficiencies are comparable to those previously reported for 4-amino piperidine and piperazine free ligands which were 63% and 62% in perchloric acid.159 The important input of those works results from the opening of new possibilities for AgI complexes to be used as corrosion inhibitors and more specifically as microbial corrosion inhibitors since the anti-microbial effect of Ag is well known.
VII. Discussion and conclusions
The crystalline but porous nature of MOFs combined with their vast diversity of chemical functionalization and metal-cation coordination presents a huge potential for catalysis and for electrocatalysis in particular. Such materials are an excellent platform to mimic the complex structure and high catalytic activity of active sites found in enzymes, based on abundant transition metals. Simultaneously, MOFs may show the stability of inorganic nano- or microparticles that are today the working principle of industrial electrocatalysts or active electrode materials. In contrast to pore-free nano- or microparticles where only surface metal atoms in contact with the electrolyte can be electrochemically active for surface reactions, the metal-ion utilization in electrochemically active MOFs can theoretically reach 100% when the framework provides sufficient electron and ionic conductivity. In addition, for electrode materials for batteries, the use of MOFs would change the mechanism of charge/discharge from a slow insertion mechanism (governed by solid phase diffusion and, often, complex phase changes) to a fast surface reaction mechanism similar to that found in EDLCs. Ionic conductivity can be imparted either by the MOF itself or by the electrolyte or guest molecules introduced in the pores of the framework. While values of ionic conductivity for Li-ion batteries and PEM fuel cells have been reported and discussed in Sections V.1 and V.2, a mathematical analysis is necessary to understand the implications of such numbers.
While for a battery separator or fuel cell membrane, the voltage drop across the separator or membrane can be easily calculated from the material's conductivity, the current density and the separator thickness, such a calculation is not straightforward for MOFs inserted in porous electrodes as electro-active materials. The requirements on MOF-conductivity (electronic or ionic) are lower in porous electrodes than in a membrane/separator since electro-catalytically active MOFs can be mixed with other phases presenting a much higher electron and ionic conductivity. Charge transport within the MOF then only needs to take place at the level of the MOF particle size, d, which is often a much smaller distance than that of the porous electrode thickness, L. Fig. 19 is a scheme of an idealized porous electrode with a volume split in 1/3 of a MOF active material and 2/3 of a mixed phase with high electron and ionic conductivities.
 Fig. 19  Scheme of a porous electrode comprising a MOF active material (1/3rd of volume) and a mixed electron and ion conductive phase (2/3rd of volume). In this example, a reduction reaction takes place. 
On the basis of this scheme, one may calculate Ohmic losses due to electron or ion transport from the interface between the MOF and the mixed phase and into the core of the MOF phase. Two values of electrode current densities that are typical for batteries and fuel cells are considered, i.e. 10 mA cm−2 and 1 A cm−2, respectively. Assuming an electrode thickness L of 100 μm (discussed later), this gives average volumetric currents in the porous electrode, Iv, of 106 and 108 A m−3, respectively. Since the electrochemical reaction would take place in the MOF only (the mixed phase is assumed to be electrochemically inactive), the average volumetric current is thus, in our example, 3 × Iv since only 1/3rd of the electrode volume is occupied by the MOF.
From this, one can apply Ohm's law at position x in the MOF phase (Fig. 19, right), eqn (10): dE = ρI(x)dx(10)where E is the electric potential at position x (either the potential of the electronic or ionic phase), ρ the resistivity (Ω m) and I the electron or ion current density at position x (A m−2). Assuming that the local volumetric current in the MOF-phase is uniform, the current density I(x) will be a linear function of x, with I(x = 0) = 0 (by plane symmetry) and I(x = d/2) = 3 × Iv × d/2. The expression of I(x) is then (eqn (11)): I(x) = 3Ivx(11)
Replacing I(x) by its expression in eqn (10), and integrating between x = 0 and x = d/2, one obtains the Ohmic loss (eqn (12)): ΔE = 3/8ρIvd2 = 3/8(1/ρ)Ivd2(12)where σ is the ionic or electron conductivity of the MOF (S m−1) and ΔE the ionic or electronic potential drop from x = d/2 to x = 0. Table 2 presents values of ΔE for several combinations of volumetric current Iv, MOF particle size d, and conductivity σ. If both the ionic and electronic potentials would show a loss, the total practical loss of the electric potential will be the sum of both losses since an electrode potential is defined by the electric potential in the electronic phase minus that in the electrolytic phase.
Table 2 Ohmic losses within the MOF phase for the ideal porous electrode schemed in Fig. 19







I
v (A m−3)

d (nm)

σ (S m−1)
ΔE (mV)




“Battery electrode”
106
200
10−5
1.5


10−6
15


1000
10−4
3.75


10−6
375


“PEM fuel cell cathode with non-precious metal catalyst”
108
200
10−4
15


10−5
150


1000
10−2
3.75


10−4
375


“PEM fuel cell cathode with Pt-like activity”
109
200
10−3
15


10−4
150


1000
10−2
37.5


10−3
375




The calculated values of ΔE are in the range of 1.5–375 mV. Of course, when the ΔE-value is in the order of a Tafel slope (typically 60 mV loss in electric potential either in the ionic or electronic phase results in a one order of magnitude smaller reaction rate), the volumetric current will no longer be uniform within the MOF active material, as was assumed to perform this simple calculation. The volumetric current would become a complex function of x, with higher currents close to the MOF-mixed phase interface, and smaller currents at the core of the MOF phase. A more complex mathematical treatment would then be needed to find the exact solution. However, our present goal is only to find the order of magnitude required for conductivities in order to avoid unacceptable Ohmic losses within the MOF phase.
For a battery application, it is seen that a conductivity as low as 10−6 S m−1 is sufficient if the MOF particles are 200 nm in size or less. For larger particles (1 μm), a conductivity of at least 10−5 S m−1 is preferable. In Section V.1, the ionic conductivities reported for MOFs impregnated with typical organic Li+-containing electrolytes ranged from 10−7 to 2 × 10−4 S m−1,133–135 and even reached 3 × 10−2 S m−1 for one material.135 Therefore, it seems that most MOFs designed with that purpose would fulfil the requirement on ionic conductivity for a battery application. This threshold of ionic conductivity must however also be met by MOFs designed in first instance as an active electrode material for battery, and not as an ion-conductive MOF. Both properties can certainly be met simultaneously, as is de facto shown by the interesting experimental results obtained by MOFs in battery electrodes.30,31,57 The measured electron conductivities of MOFs are discussed later.
For PEM fuel cell application, two cases are considered. The first one assumes a 100 μm thick cathode for a MOF-based non-precious metal catalyst (NPMC) with a volumetric activity similar to that obtained with a state-of-the-art NPMC.82 The second one assumes a MOF-based NPMC with Pt-like activity, for which an electrode current density of 1 A cm−2 with a 10 μm thick electrode would become possible.77 In the first case, the volumetric current in the active material is smaller and hence requirement on the MOF conductivity is lower. In the first case and with small MOF particles (200 nm in size), a conductivity of 10−4 S m−1 is sufficient while for larger particles a conductivity of at least 2 × 10−3 S m−1 is necessary. For the second case, required conductivities are higher by one order of magnitude, i.e. 10−3 and 2 × 10−2 S m−1 for small and large MOF particles, respectively. Proton conductivities experimentally measured at high relative humidity for most MOFs designed for that purpose are in the range 7 × 10−4 to 8 × 10−3 S m−1 (Table 1), with three exceptions showing 0.13, 0.3 and 0.8 S m−1.141,149,152 Other MOFs conducting protons at high temperature and low relative humidity show conductivities of 2 × 10−3 to 3 × 10−2 S m−1 (Table 1) with the exception of the CsHSO4-loaded MOF with a conductivity of 1 S m−1.148 As for batteries, if MOFs designed for a fuel cell electrocatalytic process can also combine the proton conduction reported for MOFs designed for the latter purpose, then it seems that the requirements on ionic conductivity can be met. Perhaps, the most flexible approach to provide a MOF electrocatalyst with proton conductivity would be a modification approach, so that the MOF can be designed in first instance for specific electrocatalytic properties, then functionalized for proton conduction by a post-synthesis treatment.152
The topic of electron conductivity of MOFs has not been discussed so far. Kitagawa et al. reported an electron conductivity of 10−6 S m−1 for a MOF that was also a proton conductor (10−4 S m−1).94 The conductivity of MOFs has been recently reviewed by Givaja et al.160 Electron-conductivities of MOFs measured at room temperature and 1 bar span from 10−12 to 104 S m−1. Cu- or Ag-based MOFs were shown to switch from 10−11 to 10−9 S m−1 with cyanopyridine as a ligand to 7 × 10−4 to 4 × 10−3 S m−1 with pyridine-3,4-dicarbonitrile as a ligand.161 General guiding lines for electron conductivity in MOFs are the mixed-valence oxidation state of metal ions and metal-to-metal direct interaction.160,162 In summary, many MOFs show electron conductivity in the range of 10−2 to 10−1 S m−1, while conductivities at or above 1 S m−1 are rarely encountered.160 Such conductivities are predicted to be acceptable for local transport within MOF particles of 200–1000 nm in size, even for high power density applications such as batteries or PEM fuel cells (Table 2). However, not all MOFs show conductivities of at least 10−2 S m−1 and some are truly insulators. Therefore, the design of MOF materials combining electro-catalytic activity for a specific reaction and the associated necessary electron conductivity will be important in the future.
In conclusion, the analysis of the conductivity requirements tells us that optimized MOFs are suitable as electrode materials in electrochemical applications, including high power density applications, if they are seconded by other materials for the long range transport (1–100 μm) of ions and electrons across porous electrodes. Optimized MOFs could therefore be the ideal material for electrochemists, with uniformly dispersed active sites with a well-defined structure, 100% utilisation of active sites, and mixed electron and ionic conduction, a combination of requirements that is specific to electrochemical reactions. Successful examples of MOF materials in batteries and EDLCs have already been reported.30,31,57,105
MOFs have also been used as a sacrificial template for the synthesis of highly microporous carbons for EDLCs or cathode catalysts for PEM fuel cells.82,86,88,120,123,125 Currently, the highest performance reported for a NPMC at the cathode of a PEM fuel cell involves a Zn-based MOF.82 MOFs have also been used as a sacrificial template for the synthesis of nano- or micrometric metal oxides for EDLCs119 for rechargeable Li-battery anodes.50,51
The investigation of MOFs for electrochemical applications is a recent field and some results obtained with MOFs or MOF-derived materials are at par with the state-of-the-art obtained either with different materials, or with similar materials obtained via other synthesis approaches. However, to date, it is difficult to find examples where the use of MOFs for electrode or electrolyte materials resulted in a clear advantage in performance, durability or cost compared to other materials. The very large spectrum of ionic and electronic conductivities shown by MOFs makes the analysis of their electrochemical properties extremely complicated. A MOF with intrinsically good electrocatalytic properties may show very poor performance if either its ionic or electronic conductivity is poor. For real breakthroughs, MOFs will probably need to be designed and optimized with respect to all these criteria at once.
List of acronyms for the ligands, by order of appearance

bdc1,4-Benzenedicarboxylate
btb1,3,5-Benzenetribenzoate
ndc2,6-Naphthalene-dicarboxylate
dmf
N,N′-Dimethyl-formamide
ptcdaPerylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride
btcBenzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate
tbaTetrabutylammonium
bpdc
para-Biphenyldicarboxylate
dcppy2-Phenylpyridine-5,4′-dicarboxylic acid
dcbpy2,2′-Bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid
MeIm2-Methylimidazolate
bipy2,2′-Bipyridine
dtoa
N,N′-Dithiooxamidato disubsituted
dpqDipyrido[3,2-d:2′,3′-f]quinoxaline
pciPyridine-4-carboxylic ion
bpy4,4′-Bipyridine
oxOxalate
def
N,N′-Diethylformamide
dobdc1,4-Dioxido-2,5-benzenedicarboxylate
1,4-ndc1,4-Naphthalenedicarboxylate
qoxQuinoxaline
4-ab4-Amino-benzoic acid
ampyzAminopyrazine
2,3-pyzdic2,3-Pyrazinedicarboxamide

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche under contract ANR 2011 CHEX 004 01.
Notes and references
O. M. Yaghi and H. L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, G. M. Li and H. L. Li, Nature, 1995, 378, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 5962–5964 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1546–1554 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Abrahams, B. F. Hoskins, D. M. Michail and R. Robson, Nature, 1994, 369, 727–729 CrossRef CAS .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, Y. B. Go, N. Aratani, S. B. Choi, E. Choi, A. O. Yazaydin, R. Q. Snurr, M. O'Keeffe, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2010, 329, 424–428 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xuan, C. Zhu, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1677–1695 RSC .
C. Janiak, Dalton Trans., 2003, 2781–2804 RSC .
R. Robson, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5113–5131 RSC .
K. Biradha, A. Ramana and J. J. Vittal, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 2969 CAS .
A. C. Sudik, A. R. Millward, N. W. Ockwig, A. P. Cote, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7110–7118 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Park, Z. Ni, A. P. Cote, J. Y. Choi, R. Huang, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. K. Chae, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10186–10191 CrossRef CAS .
G. Férey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191–214 RSC .
N. Stock and S. Biswas, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 933–969 CrossRef .
S. Qiu and G. Zhu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 2891–2911 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keskin and S. Kizilel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 1799–1812 CrossRef CAS .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
A. Corma, H. Garcia and F. X. Llabres i Xamena, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4606–4655 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Mueller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1284–1293 RSC .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, G. Maurin, N. A. Ramsahye, F. Balas, M. Vallet-Regi, M. Sebban, F. Taulelle and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6774–6780 CrossRef CAS .
P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati, J. F. Eubank, D. Heurtaux, P. Clayette, C. Kreuz, J.-S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, V. Marsaud, P.-N. Bories, L. Cynober, S. Gil, G. Férey, P. Couvreur and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef .
H. Wu, W. Zhou and T. Yildirim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5314–5315 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Rosi, J. Eckert, M. Eddaoudi, D. T. Vodak, J. Kim, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2003, 300, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vilela, K. Zhang and M. Antonietti, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7819–7832 CAS .
S. T. Meek, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 249–267 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Kuppler, D. J. Timmons, Q.-R. Fang, J.-R. Li, T. A. Makal, M. D. Young, D. Yuan, D. Zhao, W. Zhuang and H.-C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 3042–3066 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt and J. Pastre, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 626–636 RSC .
G. Férey, F. Millange, M. Morcrette, C. Serre, M.-L. Doublet, J.-M. Greneche and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3259–3263 CrossRef .
K. Saravanan, M. Nagarathinam, P. Balaya and J. J. Vittal, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8329–8335 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, A. Schwartzberg, V. Stavila and A. A. Talin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11372–11388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobayashi, B. Jacobs, M. D. Allendorf and J. R. Long, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4120–4122 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Behera, D. M. D'Alessandro, N. Soheilnia and J. R. Long, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1922–1926 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao, J.-X. Yang and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14487–14495 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit and T. J. Bandosz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4753–4757 CAS .
F. T. Wagner, B. Lakshmanan and M. F. Mathias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2204–2219 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tran-Van, K. Barthelet, M. Morcrette, M. Herlem, J. M. Tarascon, A. K. Cheetham and G. Férey, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2003, 6, 29–31 CAS .
X. Li, F. Cheng, S. Zhang and J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 542–547 CrossRef CAS .
K. Barthelet, J. Marrot, D. Riou and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 281–284 CrossRef CAS .
G. de Combarieu, S. Hamelet, F. Millange, M. Morcrette, J.-M. Tarascon, G. Férey and R. I. Walton, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1881–1884 CrossRef CAS .
C. Combelles, M. Ben Yahia, L. Pedesseau and M. L. Doublet, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3426–3432 CrossRef CAS .
C. Combelles, M. Ben Yahia, L. Pedesseau and M. L. Doublet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9518–9527 CAS .
F. M. Courtel, H. Duncan, Y. Abu-Lebdeh and I. J. Davidson, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10206–10218 RSC .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. Rosa Palacin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Pan, Y. Cheng, J. Zhao and G. Yin, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2851–2855 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4397–4401 RSC .
B. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Shioyama, T. Mukai, T. Sakai and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 857–861 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, F. Wang, P. Su, M. Li, J. Chen, Q. Yang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13328–13333 RSC .
N. Du, H. Zhang, B. Chen, J. Wu, X. Ma, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, D. Yang, X. Huang and J. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lavela and J. L. Tirado, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sharma, N. Sharma, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2855–2861 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, F. Nouar, C. Davoisne, T. Devic, D. Gonbeau, R. Dominko, C. Serre, G. Férey and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16154–16160 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dominko, M. Gaberscek, J. Drofenik, M. Bele, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 770–773 CrossRef .
X. Ji, S. Evers, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 325 CrossRef .
W. Sheng, H. A. Gasteiger and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1529–B1536 CrossRef CAS .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K.-C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS .
C. Streb, C. Ritchie, D.-L. Long, P. Koegerler and L. Cronin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7579–7582 CrossRef CAS .
S.-T. Zheng, H. Zhang and G.-Y. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3909–3913 CrossRef CAS .
B. Keita and L. Nadjo, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 262, 190–215 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Caudo, G. Centi, C. Genovese, G. Giordano, T. Granato, A. Katovic and S. Perathoner, in From Zeolites to Porous Mof Materials: the 40th Anniversary of International Zeolite Conference, ed. R. Xu, Z. Gao, J. Chen and W. Yan, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2007, pp. 2054–2062 Search PubMed .
I. M. Mbomekalle, B. Keita, L. Nadjo, P. Berthet, K. I. Hardcastle, C. L. Hill and T. M. Anderson, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 1163–1169 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nohra, H. El Moll, L. M. Rodriguez Albelo, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, M. O'Keeffe, R. N. Biboum, J. Lemaire, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13363–13374 CrossRef CAS .
E. Slavcheva, I. Radev, S. Bliznakov, G. Topalov, P. Andreev and E. Budevski, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3889–3894 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, Y. Wang, X. Hu, Y. Zhou and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6010–6016 RSC .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Martinez, A. M. Fernandez, U. Cano and A. Sandoval, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8457–8462 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8394–8400 CAS .
X. Wu, J. Tayal, S. Basu and K. Scott, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 14796–14804 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko, C. Querner, A. Karpov, S. Huber and R. Oesten, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1642–1645 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Babu, M. A. Kulandainathan, I. Katsounaros, L. Rassaei, A. D. Burrows, P. R. Raithby and F. Marken, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 632–635 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238–1254 CAS .
F. Jaouen, E. Proietti, M. Lefèvre, R. Chenitz, J.-P. Dodelet, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 114–130 CAS .
M. Lefèvre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefèvre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J.-P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef .

          J. P. Dodelet, in N4-Macrocyclic Metal Complexes, ed. J. H. Zagal, F. Bedioui and J. P. Dodelet, Springer, New York,  2006, pp. 83–148 Search PubMed .
G. Dong, M. Huang and L. Guan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2557–2559 RSC .
A. Morozan, P. Jégou, M. Pinault, S. Campidelli, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 647–651 CrossRef CAS .
G. Goenaga, S. Ma, S. Yuan and D.-J. Liu, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 579–586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D.-J. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063–2067 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Lefèvre and J.-P. Dodelet, 221st ECS Meeting Seattle, Washington,  2012 Search PubMed .
M. Jahan, Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, L. Yang, P. Yu, X. Wei and L. Mao, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 19, 29–31 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, L. Chen, Y. Dong and D. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1979–1981 RSC .
O. K. Farha, A. M. Shultz, A. A. Sarjeant, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5652–5655 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohmura, A. Usuki, K. Fukumori, T. Ohta, M. Ito and K. Tatsumi, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7988–7990 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Kinoshita, T. Yamada, S. Kanda, H. Kitagawa, M. Tokunaga, T. Ishimoto, T. Ogura, R. Nagumo, A. Miyamoto and M. Koyama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5348–5351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitagawa, Y. Nagao, M. Fujishima, R. Ikeda and S. Kanda, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2003, 6, 346–348 CrossRef CAS .

          A. M. Fan, in Encyclopedia of Environmental Health, ed. J. O. Nriagu, Springer, Burlington,  2011, pp. 137–145 Search PubMed .
K. C. M. Campbell, Toxicology, 2006, 221, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, H. Zhao, H. Lin, G. Liu, J. Fang and B. Chen, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1055–1060 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, X. Wang, H. Hu, B. Chen and G. Liu, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 643–650 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, K. Yu, Z.-h. Su, Y. Yu, B.-b. Zhou and C.-c. Zhu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2012, 17, 21–25 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Liu, C. Li, S. Li, G. Ren, F. Wei and Q. Tang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2012, 17, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
L. Marleny Rodriguez-Albelo, A. Rabdel Ruiz-Salvador, A. Sampieri, D. W. Lewis, A. Gomez, B. Nohra, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, F. Secheresse, C. Mellot-Draznieks, R. N. Biboum, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16078–16087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lota, T. A. Centeno, E. Frackowiak and F. Stoeckli, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2210–2216 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, H. Ahn and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163–165 CrossRef CAS .
R. Diaz, M. Gisela Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Lokhande, D. P. Dubal and O.-S. Joo, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 255–270 CrossRef .
R. Das, P. Pachfule, R. Banerjee and P. Poddar, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 591–599 RSC .
C. Y. Su, A. M. Goforth, M. D. Smith, P. J. Pellechia and H. C. zur Loye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3576–3586 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3018–3021 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, Y. J. Xiong and Y. Xie, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2303–2308 CrossRef CAS .
H. Thakuria, B. M. Borah and G. Das, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 524–529 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Shi, B. Deng, S.-L. Zhong, L. Wang and A.-W. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12309–12315 RSC .
J. Zhao, M. Li, J. Sun, L. Liu, P. Su, Q. Yang and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cho, S. Park and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4138–4140 RSC .
W. Cho, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Lee and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4756–4758 RSC .
Y. J. Xiong, Y. Xie, Z. Q. Li and C. Z. Wu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 1645–1651 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mahata, T. Aarthi, G. Madras and S. Natarajan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1665–1674 CAS .
F. Zhang, L. Hao, L. Zhang and X. Zhang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 2943–2954 CAS .
J. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Gao and H. Guo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3599–3606 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yang, T. Kim, J. H. Im, Y. S. Kim, K. Lee, H. Jung and C. R. Park, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 464–470 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, J. Bai, C. Wang, Y. Pan, M. Scheer and X. You, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1581–1583 RSC .
W. Chaikittisilp, M. Hu, H. Wang, H.-S. Huang, T. Fujita, K. C. Wu, L.-C. Chen, Y. Yamauchi and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7259–7261 RSC .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS .
A. Almasoudi and R. Mokaya, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 146–152 RSC .
H.-K. Youn, J. Kim and W.-S. Ahn, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 3055–3057 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arora and Z. M. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419–4462 CrossRef CAS .
C. Monroe and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A396–A404 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Wiers, M.-L. Foo, N. P. Balsara and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14522–14525 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Chae, D. Y. Siberio-Perez, J. Kim, Y. Go, M. Eddaoudi, A. J. Matzger, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 2004, 427, 523–527 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demessence, D. M. D'Alessandro, M. L. Foo and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8784–8786 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Caskey, A. G. Wong-Foy and A. J. Matzger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10870–10871 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS .
B. Smitha, S. Sridhar and A. A. Khan, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 259, 10–26 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. O. Jensen, R. F. Savinell and N. J. Bjerrum, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rozière and D. J. Jones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 503–555 CrossRef .
Y. Nagao, M. Fujishima, R. Ikeda, S. Kanda and H. Kitagawa, Synth. Met., 2003, 133, 431–432 CrossRef .
T. Yamada, M. Sadakiyo and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3144–3145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shigematsu, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2034–2036 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sadakiyo, H. Okawa, A. Shigematsu, M. Ohba, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5472–5475 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Taylor, R. K. Mah, I. L. Moudrakovski, C. I. Ratcliffe, R. Vaidhyanathan and G. K. H. Shimizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14055–14057 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Sahoo, T. Kundu and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17950–17958 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Jeong, B. Samanta, C. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Hurd, R. Vaidhyanathan, V. Thangadurai, C. I. Ratcliffe, I. L. Moudrakovski and G. K. H. Shimizu, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 705–710 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Ponomareva, K. A. Kovalenko, A. P. Chupakhin, E. S. Shutova and V. P. Fedin, Solid State Ionics, 2012 DOI:10.1016/j.ssi.2012.01.044 .
M. Sadakiyo, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9906–9907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bureekaew, S. Horike, M. Higuchi, M. Mizuno, T. Kawamura, D. Tanaka, N. Yanai and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 831–836 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dey, T. Kundu and R. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 266–268 RSC .
M. G. Goesten, J. Juan-Alcaniz, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, K. B. S. S. Gupta, E. Stavitski, H. van Bekkum, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 177–187 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. L. Zhang, M. L. Liu and W. Li, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5884–5886 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitagawa, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 689–690 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elayyachy, B. Hammouti and A. El Idrissi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 249, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. E.-d. H. Etaiw, A. E.-A. S. Fouda, S. N. Abdou and M. M. El-bendary, Corros. Sci., 2011, 53, 3657–3665 CrossRef CAS .
Aa. A. Massoud, A. Hefnawy, V. Langer, M. A. Khatab, L. Ohrstrom and M. A. M. Abu-Youssef, Polyhedron, 2009, 28, 2794–2802 CrossRef CAS .
S. E.-d. H. Etaiw, A. E.-A. S. Fouda, S. A. Amer and M. M. El-bendary, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2011, 21, 327–335 CrossRef CAS .
K. Babic-Samardzija, K. F. Khaled and N. Hackerman, Anti-Corros. Methods Mater., 2005, 52, 11–21 CrossRef CAS .
G. Givaja, P. Amo-Ochoa, C. J. Gomez-Garcia and F. Zamora, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 115–147 RSC .
P. Lin, R. A. Henderson, R. W. Harrington, W. Clegg, C. D. Wu and X. T. Wu, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. D'Alessandro, J. R. R. Kanga and J. S. Caddy, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 718–722 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
	Adina Morozan received her PhD from the University of Bucharest in 2007 on the topic of novel functional materials for fuel cells. After a two-year postdoctoral project on “Enzymes and organometallic catalysts in hydrogen fuel cells” at the laboratory of Chemistry of Surfaces and Interfaces at CEA Saclay, she joined in 2012 the Charles Gerhardt Institute for Molecular Chemistry and Material Sciences in Montpellier. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher and her research activity focuses on synthesis, characterization and degradation studies of non-precious metal catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction in a fuel cell environment.
	Frédéric Jaouen is a CNRS scientist at the Charles Gerhardt Institute for Molecular Chemistry and Material Sciences in Montpellier (France) since 2011. He was awarded the same year by the French ANR a chair of excellence at the University of Montpellier II. He received his PhD in chemical engineering from the Royal Institute of Technology of Stockholm in 2003 under the supervision of Prof. Göran Lindbergh. He then moved to Canada to work with Prof. Jean-Pol Dodelet as a research associate at INRS. His current research focuses on non-precious metal catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells.

Broader context
The chemical and structural diversity offered by metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) presents unique opportunities for catalysis, gas separation, drug storage and delivery, imaging and sensing, optoelectronics or energy storage. Much on-going research in the field of electrochemistry is involved in efficient and clean energy conversion and storage. Breakthroughs with novel materials are required to improve the performance or lower the cost of electrochemical power sources. Compared to inorganic high-surface-area materials that are the working principle of many current industrial electrocatalysts or electrode materials, MOFs offer the theoretical advantage of 100% utilization and improved accessibility of the metal-cation centers due to their regular 3D dispersion in an open structure. Moreover, MOFs are an outstanding platform to create bio-inspired enzyme mimics with high electrocatalytic activity based on abundant transition metals.


 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the four crystallographic sites A to D for lithium insertion in the MOF FeIII(OH)0.8F0.2(bdc). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.]	 
MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM + yLi2O	(1)

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of samples of Zn4O(btb)2 obtained under different synthesis conditions: (a) 100 °C then natural cooling, (b) 100 °C then 0.5 °C min−1 cooling rate, (c) 120 °C then 0.1 °C min−1 cooling rate, (d) 90 °C then 0.1 °C min−1 cooling rate. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical evaluation of Zn3(HCOO)6 MOF. (a) First charge/discharge curve, (b) 2nd to 60th cycle, (c) capacity vs. cycle number. The constant current for charge/discharge was 60 mA g−1, corresponding to 0.11 C rate. [Reproduced from ref. 31.]	 
Zn3(HCOO)6 + 6Li+ + 6e− ↔ 3Zn + 6HCOOLi	(2)
3Zn + 3Li+ + 3e− ↔ 3LiZn	(3)
ZnMn2O4 + 9Li+ + 9e− → ZnLi + 2Mn + 4Li2O	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the ZnMn2–ptcda MOF precursor. (a) SEM image of ZnMn2–ptcda; (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of ZnMn2O4. [Reproduced from ref. 51.]	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical behavior during the first reduction of (a) MOF–S + 50% C composite, (b) mesoporous carbon–S, and (c) SBA-15–S + 55% C composite in 1 M Li organic electrolyte at a C/20 discharge rate. The right handside Y-axis in a, b and c is proportional to the amount of polysulfides released in the electrolyte. (d) Cycling performance of the composites in 1 M Li organic electrolyte at a C/10 discharge rate. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.]	 
E(V vs. RHE) = E(V vs. ref.) + E(V of ref. vs. NHE) + 0.06 × pH	(5)

 	Fig. 6  POM building blocks of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞, a view of their unit cell, and their schematic representation. Comparison of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞ at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, highlighting the electrocatalytic process of HER at pH 1 (1 M LiCl + HCl). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.]	 
POMOF + 2e− + 2H+ = H2POMOF	(6)
H2POMOF + 2e−+2(Li(H2O)n)+ = [Li2(H2O)2nPOMOF] + H2	(7)
[Li2(H2O)2nPOMOF] + 2H+ = H2POMOF + 2(Li(H2O)n)+	(8)
4Ce4+ + 2H2O → 4Ce3+ + O2 + 4H+	(9)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Cyclic voltammograms at 50 mV s−1 for the Fe(btc) MOF immobilised on a platinum-disk electrode immersed in aqueous 0.1 M KCl with (i) 2, (ii) 4, (iii) 6, (iv) 8, (v) 10, and (vi) 15 mM NaOH. The inset shows the peak current vs. hydroxide concentration. (b) Cyclic voltammograms at 50 mV s−1 with a start potential of (i) 0.5, (ii) 0.4, (iii) 0.3, (iv) 0.1, and (v) 0.0 V vs. SCE for the Fe(btc) MOF immobilised on the platinum disk electrode immersed in aqueous 0.1 M KCl + 5 mM NaOH. (c) Schematic drawing of MOF attached to the working electrode surface before and after reductive catalyst formation. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 8  H2/O2 PEM fuel cell polarisation curves for a state-of-the-art Pt-based cathode (green squares, 0.3 mgPt cm−2), a Fe-based cathode catalyst synthesized using the MOF ZIF-8 (blue stars) and a Fe-based cathode catalyst synthesized using a high surface area carbon black instead of ZIF-8. [Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Commun. (ref. 82), copyright 2011.]	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme of the chemical structures of (a) reduced graphene oxide (r-GO), (b) G-dye, (c) H2–porphyrin, (d) (Fe–P)n MOF, (e) (G-dye–FeP)n MOF, and (f) magnified view of layers inside the framework of (G-dye–FeP)n MOF showing how graphene sheets intercalated between porphyrin networks. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cu coordination in Cu–btc; (b) Cu coordination in Cu–bipy–btc; (c) typical CVs obtained at the Cu–bipy–btc-modified glassy carbon electrode in N2- (dotted curve) or O2-saturated electrolyte (solid curve); (d). typical rotating-ring disk electrode voltammograms obtained with bare (black curve) and Cu–bipy–btc-modified (red curve) glassy carbon electrode (solid curves) and platinum-ring current (dotted curves) under O2-saturated electrolyte. The electrolyte pH was 6. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammetry of [NBu4]3[PMoV8MoVI4O36(OH)4Zn4(bdc)2]·2H2O at 50 mV s−1 and pH 2 (1 M LiCl in HCl) in the absence of bromate and upon increasing concentrations of bromate (0.2–40 mM). [Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.]	 

 	Fig. 12  Cyclic voltammetry in various 1 M electrolytes of a Co-based MOF synthesized from cobalt nitrate and terephthalic acid. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images (a and b) and TEM images (c and d) of a Co3O4 material obtained by calcination of a Co(bdc)2 MOF. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2012 ESG.]	 

 	Fig. 14  Comparison of the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at the current density of 0.1 A g−1 for five carbon samples obtained after pyrolysis at different temperatures of a MOF-5–furfuryl alcohol composite. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 15  Structure of Mg2(dobdc) and its modification by a Li-alkoxide to form the solid electrolyte. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.]	 

8 × 10−3	25	65	Methyl–FeCr·3H2O	
149

7 × 10−4	70	95	Fe(OH)(bdc–(COOH)2)	
142

4 × 10−3	30	98	[Zn(l-LCl)(Cl)](H2O)2	
145

4 × 10−3	30	98	[Zn(d-LCl)(Cl)](H2O)2	

1.3 × 10−1	25	98	Ferrous oxalate dihydrate	
141

3 × 10−3	25	98	Zn3(L)(H2O)2·2H2O; L = [1,3,5-benzenetriphosphonate]6−	
144

3 × 10−2	150	0	Na3(2,4,6-trihydroxy-1,3,5-benzene-trisulfonate) loaded with 1,2,4-triazole	
147

2.2 × 10−3	120	0	[Al(μ2-OH)(1,4-ndc)]n loaded with imidazole	
150

0.8	25	98	(NH4)2[Zn2(ox)3]·3H2O loaded with adipic acid	
149

1	200	0	Cr-MIL-101 loaded with CsHSO4	
148

0.3	20	100	Sulphated MIL-53(Al)	
152


 	Fig. 16  The structure of the metal organic framework β-PCMOF2 including guest triazole molecules and the trisulfonated benzene-derivative ligand. [Reprinted by permission from ref. 154. Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Chem., copyright 2009.]	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic structure of Cr3O(H2O)Y(bdc)yHNO3·nH2O: Cr3O clusters are connected to each other through terephthalic linkers; the supertetrahedra formed are joined by vertexes and construct a zeotypic structure with two types of mesocages: small (yellow) and large (blue). Temperature dependencies of proton conductivity for (1 − x)CsHSO4−x [Cr3O(H2O)Y(bdc)yHNO3·nH2O] (x = 0.01–0.07) in comparison with CsHSO4. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.]	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) 2D-fused deformed six-membered rings in (AgCN)4·(qox)2, (b) potentiodynamic polarization curves for corrosion of C-steel in the absence and presence of different concentrations of the MOF (AgCN)4·(qox)2 at 25 °C. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2011 Elsevier.] (c) Extended structure of Ag(qox)(4-ab) showing the four parallel molecules surrounding the fifth one, (d) potentiodynamic polarization curves for corrosion of C-steel in the absence and presence of different concentrations of the inhibitor Ag(qox)(4-ab) at 25 °C. [Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011 Springer.]	 

 	Fig. 19  Scheme of a porous electrode comprising a MOF active material (1/3rd of volume) and a mixed electron and ion conductive phase (2/3rd of volume). In this example, a reduction reaction takes place.	 
dE = ρI(x)dx	(10)
I(x) = 3Ivx	(11)
ΔE = 3/8ρIvd2 = 3/8(1/ρ)Ivd2	(12)

“Battery electrode”	106	200	10−5	1.5
10−6	15
1000	10−4	3.75
10−6	375
“PEM fuel cell cathode with non-precious metal catalyst”	108	200	10−4	15
10−5	150
1000	10−2	3.75
10−4	375
“PEM fuel cell cathode with Pt-like activity”	109	200	10−3	15
10−4	150
1000	10−2	37.5
10−3	375
bdc	1,4-Benzenedicarboxylate
btb	1,3,5-Benzenetribenzoate
ndc	2,6-Naphthalene-dicarboxylate
dmf	
N,N′-Dimethyl-formamide
ptcda	Perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride
btc	Benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate
tba	Tetrabutylammonium
bpdc	
para-Biphenyldicarboxylate
dcppy	2-Phenylpyridine-5,4′-dicarboxylic acid
dcbpy	2,2′-Bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid
MeIm	2-Methylimidazolate
bipy	2,2′-Bipyridine
dtoa	
N,N′-Dithiooxamidato disubsituted
dpq	Dipyrido[3,2-d:2′,3′-f]quinoxaline
pci	Pyridine-4-carboxylic ion
bpy	4,4′-Bipyridine
ox	Oxalate
def	
N,N′-Diethylformamide
dobdc	1,4-Dioxido-2,5-benzenedicarboxylate
1,4-ndc	1,4-Naphthalenedicarboxylate
qox	Quinoxaline
4-ab	4-Amino-benzoic acid
ampyz	Aminopyrazine
2,3-pyzdic	2,3-Pyrazinedicarboxamide

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
