Multi-electron reaction materials for high energy density batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B916098A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B916098A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 174-189Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsMulti-electron reaction materials for high energy density batteries

        
          
            Xue-Ping 
            Gao
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Han-Xi 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *b
aInstitute of New Energy Chemistry Materials, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, China. E-mail: xpgao@nankai.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-22-23500876;   Tel: +86-22-23500876
bDepartment of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430072, China. E-mail: hxyang@whu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-27-87884476
Received 
      5th August 2009
    , Accepted 22nd September 2009First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      29th October 2009
    AbstractThe need for high energy density batteries becomes increasingly important for the development of new and clean energy technologies, such as electric vehicles and electrical storage from wind and solar power. The search for new energetic materials of primary and secondary batteries with higher energy density has been highlighted in recent years. This review surveys recent advances in the research field of high energy density electrode materials with focus on multi-electron reaction chemistry of light-weight elements and compounds. In the first section, we briefly introduce the basic strategies for enhancement of the energy density of primary batteries based on multi-electron reactions. The following sections present overviews of typical electrode materials with multi-electron chemistry and their secondary battery applications in aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes. Finally, the challenges and ongoing research strategies of these novel electrode materials and battery systems for high density energy storage and conversion are discussed.Xue-Ping GaoXue-Ping Gao is Professor at Nankai University of China, where he has served as the Director of the Institute of New Energy Materials Chemistry since 2004. He received his doctorate at the Department of Chemistry from Nankai University in 1995. He worked as a visiting research fellow at Kogakuin University in Japan from 1997 to 1999, and at the University of Queensland in Australia in 2001. Currently, his main research is focused on new materials for energy storage and conversion.Han-Xi YangHan-Xi Yang obtained his PhD in physical chemistry in 1987 at Southampton university, UK. In 1990, he joined the Department of Chemistry at Wuhan university, China, where he is currently Professor and Director of the Electrochemistry Laboratory. His primary research interests are in the areas of new electrochemical materials for high capacity and high rate storage and conversion of energy.

Broader context
Electrochemical batteries are the most efficient and simplest systems for electrical energy storage, which are extensively used to power today's mobile world. However, most of the existing battery systems are made of heavy metal oxides with single or less than one electron redox chemistry and are incapable of satisfying the increasing demand for future portable electronics, electric vehicles and power storage from renewable energy resources. Therefore, a real breakthrough in battery technology is urgently needed to greatly enhance the energy storage density and power capability of the batteries. In recent years, a number of novel battery materials and new concepts have emerged to demonstrate the potential ability to create future batteries with dramatically increased energy densities by a combination of light-weight electrode-active materials with multi-electron transfer reactions. Some selected examples of these battery systems are introduced herein to show possible approaches for breaking through the barriers in existing battery technology, and for building better batteries for future energy storage.

1. Introduction
The growing demand for new global supplies of clean, sustainable energy to power the world is perhaps the greatest challenge in today's modern society. Energy based on electricity that can be generated from renewable sources, such as solar or wind, offers the potential possibility to meet future energy demands. However, the electricity generated from these renewable natural sources requires efficient electrical energy storage. In various electrical storage technologies, electrochemical batteries are one of the most efficient, simplest and reliable systems, which convert electrical energy directly into chemical energy or vice versa by reversible electrochemical oxidation–reduction reactions. Due to their high efficiency in electrical storage, batteries are highlighted nowadays as a critical technology in future electrical energy storage applications.
According to the ‘three E’ criteria for the success of a battery system as proposed by Ruetschi:1Energy (high energy density with respect to unit weight and volume), Economics (low costs for manufacture and maintenance, long service life), Environment (freedom of toxic materials, safety, low energy consumption during manufacture and use, high reliability, easy to recycle), the high energy density is the primary concern for the most applications of energy storage, particularly for power sources in today's mobile society. In the past two decades, the battery chemistry has made spectacular achievements with the specific energy density upgraded triply from ∼50 Wh kg−1 of Cd–Ni battery to around 150 Wh kg−1 of Li-ion battery. However, battery technology is still frequently complained about due to its slow progress in energy density and power capability. Therefore, the breakthroughs in battery technology are urgently required for tomorrow's energy storage needs.
In recent years, a number of novel battery materials and new concepts have demonstrated the potential ability to create future batteries with dramatically increased energy densities. In the following sections, we will briefly review recent development of high capacity battery materials with focus on their multi-electron redox reactions and discuss the challenges and possible approaches to construct energetic future batteries.
2. How to develop new batteries with higher energy density?
In most cases, the energy density values of those so-called high energy rechargeable batteries, such as metal hydride–nickel (MH–Ni) and lithium ion batteries (LIBs), are no more than 200 Wh kg−1 (Fig. 1).2,3 Usually, the specific energy density for a battery can be calculated according to following equation: (1) Here ED could be expressed as either per unit of weight (Wh kg−1) or per unit of volume (Wh L−1). n refers to the number of electrons transferred per mole of reactants in a cell reaction. F is the Faraday constant. E0 is the electromotive force (emf) of the cell reaction and ΣMi is the sum of the formula weights of active materials being transformed in the cell reaction (redox drivers). Obviously, in order to achieve higher energy density, a battery must be built on the cathode- and anode-active materials with: (1) larger potential difference to produce a higher voltage, (2) lighter molecular or atomic weights, and (3) more electrons transferred per molecule of the active materials.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the different secondary batteries in terms of power density and energy density. 
In view of the possible redox couples from the known chemical elements and compounds, Li/F2 may give the highest theoretical voltage (∼6.0 V), possibly a limiting voltage that an electrochemical battery could reach. Presently commercialized Li-ion batteries have already reached a voltage of >4.0 V (such as Li–LiCoO2, Li–LiMn2O4 batteries), while some Li-ion batteries being developed (such as Li–LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4) may attain a >5V voltage. Thus, it seems very difficult to increase the energy density for batteries by further increase in cell's voltage.
Moreover, most of the battery systems currently explored use transition metal elements or their compounds as electrode-active materials. The heavy masses of these materials lead to low energy density of the batteries. Thus, to build higher energy density batteries, the electroactive materials should be chosen from light-weight elements and their compounds or composites.
As discussed above, the use of multi-electron redox materials may opens up a most effective way to develop new battery systems with higher energy density. For a majority of existing primary and secondary batteries, their redox reactions take place through a single electron or even less than one electron within the accessible potential range. In fact, many electroactive materials used in conventional batteries have a strong potential to undertake multi-electron redox. For example, Ni should have a potential ability to realize its two-electron redox reaction (Ni2+ + 2e ↔ Ni4+) if in a suitable electrochemical condition, but only one-electron redox capacity was utilized in traditional Ni–Cd batteries as well as in present Li–LiNiO2 batteries. It should be noted that the nature of the multi-electron reaction is an intrinsic chemical property of active elements with a variety of chemical valences within the accessible potential range in the electrolyte. How to promote the multi-electron reaction in battery systems is a challenge for materials chemists and battery chemists.
In view of the battery development in the past decades, it is clear that every advance in the battery technology was brought about by the development of new materials and battery concept, such as MH–Ni batteries in the 1970s,4 Li-ion or rocking-chair batteries at the late 1980s and early 1990s,5,6 and polymer lithium ion (PLION) batteries.2,7 Particularly, the appearance of novel electroactive materials based on the new concept of battery chemistry always makes a big push to improve the electrochemical performance of rechargeable batteries. For example, introducing two-dimensional layered LixMO2 (where M is Co, Ni or Mn),8 three-dimensional spinel LiMn2O4,9 and olivine LiFePO410 into intercalation cathode materials has demonstrated a great success for commercial lithium ion batteries. Future advanced battery materials and systems must be derived from novel battery chemistry.
3. Energy primary batteries based on multi-electron transfer reactions
For over a century, Zn/MnO2 redox system has dominated primary electrochemical storage. Though some higher energy density Li batteries such as primary Li/MnO2 cells had entered the consumer electronics since 1970s, they are still limited in special markets possibly due to safety concern. Therefore, to keep pace with rapid increase in the energy and power demands of portable electronics, it is necessary to search for new redox chemistry mechanisms with higher energy storage capacity and better safety behavior. In recent years, great success has been achieved in the development of aqueous multi-electron redox materials, among which ferrates and borides are representatives of such superior capacity cathode-active and anode-active materials, respectively.
3.1 “Super iron” oxides and high valence compounds
Hexavalent Fe(VI) ferrates or “super-iron” oxides, such as M2FeO4 and NFeO4 (where M = Li+, Na+, K+, Cs+, Ag+ and N = Sr2+, Ba2+), have been known as oxidation agents for organic synthesis, a water treatment agent due to its negligible impact on the environment, and as an alternative for environment-friendly primary battery cathodes.11,12 As cathode-active materials for aqueous primary batteries, ferrates offer a very high specific capacity due to three-electron reduction from Fe(VI) to Fe(III). The three-electron transfer process of Fe(VI) can be expressed viaeqn (2) or eqn (3):11 FeO42− + 3H2O + 3e− → FeOOH + 5OH−(2) FeO42− + (5/2)H2O + 3e− → (1/2)Fe2O3 + 5OH−(3)

E = 0.5–0.65 V vs. SHE
The calculated theoretical specific capacities of ferrates, including Li2FeO4 (601 mAh g−1), Na2FeO4 (485 mAh g−1), K2FeO4 (406 mAh g−1),13 are much higher than that of the MnO2 cathode (308 mAh g−1, one electron reduction) widely used for primary Zn/MnO2 battery. Also, the open circuit voltage of the ferrates cells coupled with Zn anode is higher than that of Zn/MnO2 battery. The electrochemical reduction mechanism of Fe(VI) in KOH solution can be inferred as an overall three-electron process with a one-electron transfer as the rate-controlling step, in which the intermediate state of Fe(V) is generated from ferrate.14
Usually, ferrates can be synthesized by chemical and electrochemical oxidation in alkaline solution or eutectic NaOH–KOH melts with subsequent purification.11,12,15 Most dry ferrates have good chemical stability in air, except for BaFeO4. However, the instability of ferrates is found in water or in different concentrated alkaline solutions, associated mainly with their individual solubility. In aqueous solution, the chemical instability of ferrates is more sensitive to impurities. For example, the bivalent transition metal ions can act as catalysts to speed up the decomposition of ferrates in alkaline solution, leading to self-discharge of ferrates. Especially, the soluble species as detrimental impurities in aqueous solution, oxidized or corroded from anode materials or current collectors, have to be eliminated in the battery system with ferrates as cathodes. It was reported that ferrate alkaline cathodes can be stabilized to a certain extent with a low-level zirconia protective coating, inhibiting the formation of Fe(III) passivation layer.13,16 Moreover, the charge storage of three electrons per Fe center of ferrate cathodes can be further enhanced in a nonaqueous primary battery system.17
Some high valence compounds, such as periodate and AgMnO4, can also be potentially used as cathode materials with multi-electron transfer in alkaline solution, offering high specific capacities.18,19 Most importantly, some of these high valence compounds (including ferrates) appear to have quasi-reversibility on the extended conductive matrices composed of high surface area Pt, Ti and Au, providing a chance to fabricate alkaline rechargeable batteries with a metal hydride anode after minimizing the interference with the anode.19,20 The reversible charge transfer of ferrate cathodes in nonaqueous electrolyte is mainly related to the electrochemical window and chemical composition of the electrolyte and solvent used.18,20,21 Both the lithiation/delithiation of the active mass and the reduction/oxidation of the Fe(VI/III) coexist in the charge and discharge process of ferrates in nonaqueous electrolyte.
High specific capacity originating mainly from multi-electron transfer reactions, is the most striking feature of high valence compounds. Coupling with metal hydride in aqueous or lithium anodes in nonaqueous electrolytes seems to underestimate the importance and impact of high valence compounds in energetic primary batteries. Coupling ferrates with multi-electron transfer anodes, such as metal borides, could create a new generation of primary batteries as discussed in the following section.
3.2 Superior high capacity borides
For over a century, metallic zinc has been used predominantly as anode material in almost all aqueous primary systems. Though Zn has a quite high two-electron oxidation capacity (theoretical specific capacity = 820 mAh g−1), it is difficult to achieve it in neutral or dilute alkaline electrolytes because of its surface passivation. For the same reason, many transition metals (TM), such as Ti, V and Mn, et al, have been excluded as available anode materials. From the viewpoint of electrochemical thermodynamics, a number of non-metal elements, such as B, C and Si etc., could be competitive high-energy anode materials for aqueous primary batteries. However, apparently due to their chemical instability or kinetic sluggishness, these elements were found incapable of delivering their electrochemical capacities in aqueous solution.
In recent years, a number of transition metal compounds were successfully explored to demonstrate multi-electron oxidation and deliver several folds more charge than a conventional high capacity zinc anode through multi-electron charge transfer. Yang et al. first reported the superior electrochemical capability of the representative metal diborides:22 TiB2 + 12OH− → 2BO33− + Ti + 6H2O + 6e−(4) VB2 + 20OH− → VO43− + 2BO33− + 10H2O + 11e−(5)
In accord with these equations, the TiB2 anode gave a discharge capacity in excess of 2000 mAh g−1, very close to an intrinsic six-electron anodic capacity of 2314 mAh g−1. Impressively, the VB2 anode even delivered an experimentally achieved capacity of 3800 mAh g−1,23 which approaches the a net eleven-electron anodic capacity (4060 mAh g−1) as expected from simultaneous three-electron oxidation of the boron and five-electron oxidation of vanadium. This multi-electron behavior also has be found in amorphous CoBx and FeBx,24 crystalline CoB2, NiB2, CrB2, TaB2 and other boride anodes.25 The discharge profiles of some borides are given in Fig. 2 and compared with that of conventional high capacity Zn anode.
 Fig. 2  Discharge curves of air cells with different anodes at a current rate of 100 mA g−1 in a 30% KOH solution. 
Based on the metal borides, Licht et al. constructed a series of novel high capacity primary battery systems employing high-energy Fe(VI) and Mn(IV) oxide23,25 and renewable boride–air batteries.26 As they pointed out, the intrinsic volumetric energy capacity of a VB2–air battery is substantially greater than that of a gasoline, a hydrogen, or a zinc air fuel cell, and is an order of magnitude greater than that of all rechargeable batteries.26 Attractively, these authors presented a Mg-assisted chemical regeneration of VB2 from its discharge products V2O5 and B2O3, and a solar thermal regeneration of Mg from the waste Mg salt.
Indeed, if the discharge products (metal oxides and boron oxides) for a metal boride air cell can be economically regenerated by using solar or other natural energy, the boride batteries may provide an environmentally benign and highest capacity electrochemical energy storage system, which may open an alternative pathway towards solar-recharged electric vehicles.
Judging from their chemical similarity to the metal borides, many metal phosphides, silicides and carbides should have a potential electrochemical activity for multi-electron oxidation, like the superior-energy borides. However, little is known up to date of the anodic behavior of these compounds. Undoubtedly, extended research of the multi-electron transfer behavior of metalloid compounds is needed for the development of higher capacity anode materials.
3.3 Borohydride–air batteries
Hydrogen-fueled fuel cells have been actively investigated for decades as an attractive alternative to conventional fossil fuel combustion engines for clean power generations. The lack of efficient and safe storage and supply of hydrogen has led to an extensive search for alternative fuels in the last decade. Among the various anodic fuels investigated, borohydride seems to be a good choice for these fuels because of its high energy density and fast anodic kinetics. Besides, borohydride is available as a stable solid compound, which is easy to store, safe to transport, and clean to use with no hazardous and pollutant emissions.
The high density energy storage of borohydrides comes from their realizable eight-electron oxidation process:27,28 BH4− + 8OH− → BO2− + 6H2O + 8e−(6)

E
o = −1.24 V (vs SHE)
According to a complete eight-electron oxidation reaction, the NaBH4 based anode has a high theoretical specific capacity of 5700 mAh g−1. Coupled with an oxygen cathode, the NaBH4/O2 fuel cell has an equilibrium voltage of ∼1.64 V and an energy density of 9.3 kWh kg−1 (excluding O2), which is attractive compared to the 6.2 kWh kg−1 of pure methanol fuel cell and the 5.5 kWh kg−1 of gaseous ammonia fuel cell.
In recent years, quite a large number of works have been devoted to direct borohydride fuel cells, in which a high concentration of BH4− and an alkaline solution serve as fuel and electrolyte, respectively. The critical problem for the direct borohydride fuel cells is to find a selective anodic electrocatalyst, on which BH4− ions can be completely electrooxidized via a quasi- or intrinsic eight-electron process without much hydrolytic decomposition of themselves. This problem is difficult to deal with, since the materials, active for the electrocatalytic oxidation of borohydride, are also the catalysts for the chemical hydrolysis of the fuel.
The interest in characterizing the electrocatalysts for BH4− oxidation can date back to the early 1960s and the earlier studies on this issue have been reviewed in literature.29 In the past decade, a number of metals (such as Ni, Au and Pt), alloys (such as hydrogen storage alloys) and their composites were reexamined as electrocatalysts for anodic oxidation of BH4− for fuel cell applications and the catalytic behavior of these materials was recently reviewed elsewhere.27,30 It is recognized that the electro-oxidation reaction of BH4− ions on different metal surface behaves very differently, depending on the relative activity of the catalyst surfaces for the anodic oxidation and the chemical hydrolysis of BH4−. In general, the anodic behavior can be divided into three types:31 on the electrocatalytic Pt (or Pd, etc) electrode, the electron number that a BH4− ion can deliver during its anodic process increases with the increased potential polarization and can attain complete eight-electron oxidation at large polarization. However, on the Ni (or Co, Ni-based alloys) surface the actual electron number of BH4− electro-oxidation could not exceed 4 at the most due to the poor electrocatalysis of the oxidized Ni surface at anodic polarization, as well as the strong catalytic activity of metallic Ni for the chemical hydrolysis of BH4−. On the hydrolytically inactive Au (or Ag and Hg) surface, the anodic reaction of BH4− can proceed predominantly through direct electrochemical oxidation, which gives a very high utilization of the eight-electron oxidation of BH4− ions but requires a high overpotential.
The reason for the different anodic behavior of BH4− may arise from the fact that it is determined by a pair of competitive reactions of the electro-oxidation of BH4− and the electro-reduction of H2O as follows: BH4− + 2OH− → BH3(OH)− + H2O + 2e−(7) 2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2(8)
These two reactions are potentially dependent, and the relative rates of which depend on the anodic materials, applied potentials, and chemical states of the anodic surfaces. Very complicatedly, the discharge process of BH4− anode is also coupled with its hydrolytic reaction and the detailed mechanism of BH4− electro-oxidation remains controversial. At present, the choice of anode catalysts is still based on either gold or nickel-based materials. As mentioned above, nickel gives the more negative potential and higher current capability of BH4− oxidation but a low electron utilization, while gold gives better efficiency of the fuel required but needs a very high potential polarization. An optimized integration of the two types of electrocatalysts is essential for the highly efficient BH4− anode.
An alternative way to realize an eight-electron oxidation of BH4− is to discharge the NaBH4/O2 fuel cells at sufficiently high current density, so as to make the evolved hydrogen reoxidized simultaneously once it has been produced from the hydrolysis of BH4− or electro-reduction of H2O. Of course, this requires accurate regulation of the fuel supply and optimum design of the anodic structure and flow channels.
The regeneration of the borate (discharge product of BH4−) is a critical issue for the commercial applications of NaBH4/O2 fuel cells. Several attempts have been made for recycling the borohydride recently by use of mechanochemical, thermochemical and electrochemical routes.30 The ideal solution is to regenerate the borate by solar, geothermic or other renewable energy, by which the NaBH4/O2 fuel cells can become truly an alternative energy power source.
4. Aqueous rechargeable batteries
Alkaline aqueous rechargeable batteries have been the heavy duty batteries in portable electronics and electric tools for a long time and have now been singled out to power electric vehicles (EV), and hybrid electric vehicles (HEV). Many alkaline rechargeable batteries are based on Ni-cathode, including cadmium-nickel (Cd–Ni), iron-nickel (Fe–Ni), zinc-nickel (Zn–Ni), and MH–Ni batteries. These batteries are usually designed to be cathode-limited, i.e. the capacity of these batteries is determined by the cathode. Because of only a single electron redox reaction utilized in these Ni-cathodes, half of the intrinsic two-electron transfer capacity of the Ni-cathodes is not used. From the point of view of structural chemistry, nickel hydroxides have a stable α-Ni(OH)2 polymorph that allows two-electron redox reversibly. Therefore, it is possible to double the capacity of Ni-based rechargeable batteries by use of a two-electron transfer Ni-cathode instead of the conventional one-electron redox β-Ni(OH)2.
4.1 Cathode-active α-Ni(OH)2 with two-electron reactivity
There exist two nickel hydroxide polymorphs: α-phase Ni(OH)2 and β-phase Ni(OH)2, which transform into γ-phase NiOOH and β-phase NiOOH, respectively, after full electrochemical charging.30 The β-Ni(OH)2 is widely used as cathode-active material in commercial Ni-based alkaline secondary batteries, because of its high volumetric electrochemical capacity and good cycle stability. However, the theoretical capacity of the β-Ni(OH)2 with a brucite-like structure is limited to 289 mAh g−1, corresponding to a single electron reaction in the β-Ni(OH)2/β-NiOOH redox couple. In contrast, α-Ni(OH)2 with a turbostratic-disordered structure has a larger interlayer distance of about 8 Å, which is capable of realizing a two-electron reaction via an electrochemical conversion between the α-Ni(OH)2/γ-NiOOH redox couple, and is therefore expected to have a much higher specific capacity.
Usually, α-Ni(OH)2 is unstable, and is easily transformed to β-phase Ni(OH)2 upon aging in a strong alkaline solution.32 The stability of α-phase nickel hydroxide can be achieved by element substitution with variable amounts of water molecules and anionic species, and aluminium is regarded to be the most effective element to enlarge the interlayer distance to form stabilized α-Ni(OH)2.33–37 The electrochemical advantages of the Al substituted pure α-Ni(OH)2 electrode are presented clearly in Fig. 3.36 Firstly, a much higher discharge plateau of the pure α-Ni(OH)2 electrode than that of the β-Ni(OH)2 electrode is due to the difference of the Fermi level between Ni3+ (β-phase) and Ni4+ (γ-phase) species in the charged state, which is confirmed in cyclic voltammograms.36 Obviously, there is only a single discharge potential plateau for the pure α-Ni(OH)2 electrode, indicating that the charge transfer occurs directly from Ni4+ to Ni2+ species without the multi-step charge transfer process through intermediate Ni3+ species. The fast kinetics can be accordingly obtained to ensure the high rate discharge capability for the pure α-Ni(OH)2 electrode. Secondly, a larger discharge capacity of 333 mAh g−1 is observed, corresponding to 1.46 electrons per Ni atom in the α-phase nickel hydroxides. The high specific capacity and discharge potential of the α-Ni(OH)2 make it suitable for battery applications.
 Fig. 3  Discharge curves of nickel hydroxides after the substitution with different Al content at 0.2 C after full activation. Reproduced with permission from ACS. 
It is noted that the substituted elements have a strong impact on the discharge potential plateau of α-Ni(OH)2 (Fig. 4). When the ionic radius of the substituted cations is larger than that of Ni3+ (0.56 Å) in a charged state, the α-Ni(OH)2 shows an increased discharge plateau, due to the change of Madelung energy relating to the position of the Fermi level for the nickel hydroxide electrode.38,39 Also, the trivalent Mn3+ ions can be incorporated in the nickel sites of α-Ni(OH)2, and the spontaneous oxidation of the Mn3+ to Mn4+ ions contributes to the increase of discharge capacity. It appears that the spontaneous oxidation of these cations in the interstratified phases leads to a poor cycle stability, because the proton deficiency within the structural slabs is unavoidable in the electrochemical reaction and the amount of the larger anions (such as CO32−, SO42−, and NO3−) inserted as charge compensating species is limited by steric effects.39
 Fig. 4  TEM images of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres coated with 7 wt% CoOOH nanoparticles. The corresponding EDS spectrum is inserted. TEM images (b)–(d) are recorded at different spots for α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres coated with 7 wt% CoOOH. (e) HRTEM image of an individual CoOOH nanorod on the surface of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ACS. 
In principle, the amount of substituted Al in α-Ni(OH)2 should be kept as low as possible because of the inefficiency of Al in the electrochemical redox reaction. Besides, the nickel hydroxide is a semiconductor with poor conductivity, which could be effectively improved by surface modification with metallic cobalt, Co(OH)2, and CoOOH, because metallic cobalt or cobalt hydroxide is converted to a highly conductive CoOOH network on the surface of Ni(OH)2 electrodes after a chemical oxidation or electrochemical oxidation in the alkaline media.40–42 Moreover, microspherical morphology for electroactive materials is favorable for battery application. Therefore, in order to obtain a high performance Ni-cathode, it is better to use 10% Al-substituted α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres, which can be easily synthesized by a homogeneous precipitation method with urea as precipitator, and then coated with CoOOH nanoparticles via chemical precipitation processes and oxidation treatments.42
7 wt% CoOOH-coated α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres exhibit a larger discharge capacity, excellent high rate capability, and improved cycle stability as compared with the pure α-Ni(OH)2 samples at the same discharge rate. The discharge capacity of the α-Ni(OH)2 with 7 wt% CoOOH nanoparticles is over 300 mAh g−1 after 500 cycles at 2 C rate, showing a commercially acceptable cycle stability (inset in Fig. 5). In particular, the maximum discharge capacity can reach 386 mAh g−1 at 0.2 C as shown in Fig. 5, indicating that 1.8 electrons per Ni atom in the α phase are involved in electrochemical reactions after coating CoOOH nanoparticles. The highly conductive CoOOH nanoparticles on the surface accelerate a multi-electron reaction of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres, resulting in larger discharge capacity.42
 Fig. 5  Discharge curves of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres before and after coating CoOOH nanoparticles at 0.2 C rate. Cycle curves of two samples at 2 C rate are inserted. Reproduced with permission from ACS. 
It should be pointed out that the tap density of the α-Ni(OH)2 sample is still somewhat low as compared to that of the commercial spherical β-Ni(OH)2. Future investigation should be focused on the sperical α-Ni(OH)2 with the high tap density to meet commercial requirements in alkaline rechargeable Ni-based batteries. Furthermore, a discharge capacity up to 491 mAh g−1 was also reported,33 suggesting that the specific capacity of the α-Ni(OH)2 may have a new target.
4.2 Anode-active material with multi-electron redox reaction
Various hydrogen storage alloys and their composites have been extensively investigated as anode-active materials of MH–Ni batteries, starting from AB5 alloy.43 Recently, numerous investigations have been conducted to search for a new light-weight alloy with the desire to have a high reversible capacity for the improvement of MH–Ni batteries. The lightweight Mg-based alloys with a metastable amorphous or nanocrystalline structure formed after being ball-milled, can be charged and discharged readily at room temperature and delivers high discharge capacity.44–46 In particular, the metastable MgX (X = Sc, Ti, V and Cr) thin films, prepared by electron beam deposition and magnetron co-sputter deposition, have a very high reversible electrochemical storage capacity of up to 1500 mAh g−1.47,48 However, the cycle stability of Mg-based alloys is unsatisfied despite long-term efforts owing to the serious corrosion in strong alkaline solution, and is still waiting for a breakthrough.
Among all the hydrogen storage alloys, electrochemical capacity comes from a single electron redox of hydrogen stored in the alloys, limited mainly by the gas–solid capacity, hydride stability, and electrocatalytic activity. It was reported recently that perovskite-type oxides can release a large discharge capacity of over 500 mAh g−1 at a higher temperature of 333 K.49 Such a large discharge capacity of heavy perovskite oxides can be partially attributed to the redox reaction of Fe3+/Fe2+ and Ce4+/Ce3+ in perovskite oxides,49,50 accompanied simultaneously by the electrochemical redox reaction of hydrogen stored in the grain boundaries of perovskite oxides. However, it is difficult to separate the oxidation processes of absorbed hydrogen and constituent metallic cations in oxides from simple discharge curves and cyclic voltammograms. More detailed exploration of such oxides should be conducted in the future.
Except for the lightweight alloys with the single electron reaction of hydrogen, anode-active materials with multi-electron reactions should also be explored. Actually, in some transition metals, metallic oxides or hydroxides, more than one electron are involved in the electrochemical reaction in an alkaline electrolyte, such as metallic cobalt or cobalt hydroxides.51–54 According to a two-electron reaction process between metallic Co and Co2+ ions, the theoretical electrochemical reversible capacity of Co(OH)2 is expected to be 576 mAh g−1. The discharge capacity of β-Co(OH)2 at 1 C discharge rate is 455 mAh g−1.54 Therefore, on average, 1.58 electrons are involved in the practical electrochemical process of the β-Co(OH)2 electrode, instead of the electrochemical oxidation of hydrogen atoms on the electrode surface. Similar to the electrochemical process of the α-Ni(OH)2 positive materials, a one step discharge rather than stepwise discharge is also seen for the Co(OH)2 anode material due to fast kinetics.
Although some new hydrogen storage materials or redox electrode materials appear continuously, there is no real breakthrough in the electrochemical performance of anode-active materials. Clearly, a multi-electron reaction chemistry of lightweight elements and compounds is fundamental for exploring new anode-active materials with a large specific capacity.
4.3 Alkaline rechargeable Co–Ni batteries
As described above, α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres with 1.8 exchanged electrons per Ni atom have a large discharge capacity, in contrast to the capacity limitation of commercial β-Ni(OH)2 with only one electron reaction. On the other hand, β-Co(OH)2 with 1.58 exchanged electrons in the practical electrochemical process has an excellent high-rate discharge ability and greatly improved discharge capacity. Herein a battery system, consisting of α-Ni(OH)2 as the cathode-active material and β-Co(OH)2 as the anode-active material, is described on the basis of multi-electron reactions (shown in Fig. 6).54
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the electrochemical reaction of Co/Ni batteries based on multi-electron reactions. 
Such a Co–Ni prototype cell exhibits a flat discharge plateau, high energy density and good cycle ability at 1 C rate. The output energy density reaches 165 Wh kg−1 (based on the weights of both α-Ni(OH)2 and β-Co(OH)2 active materials). In practice, a battery system with energy density of 120–130 Wh kg−1 would be presented for Co–Ni cell, if the weight percentage of 75–80% is considered. Of course, the cobalt is expensive as a constituent element in active materials for commercial applications. The importance of this is that the strategy adapted here could be helpful to explore and develop new alkaline rechargeable batteries with high energy density based on multi-electron reactions.
5. Multi-electron redox reactions in organic electrolyte
From a thermodynamic point of view, an aqueous electrolyte can offer the highest electrochemical window of 1.23 V, which limits the operating voltage of an aqueous battery up to 2 V. Thus, to build a higher voltage battery, and thereby to increase its energy storage density, non-aqueous electrolytes must be considered.
Organic liquid electrolytes for battery applications date back to the early 1970s. Earlier discovery of the stable and reversible electrochemical behavior of lithium in organic solvent electrolytes activated the commercial development of primary and rechargeable Li batteries. It is now well recognized that due to a huge extension of the electrochemical window into very negative and positive regions of 0 ∼ +5.0 V (vs Li+/Li) in organic electrolytes, a number of new electroactive materials and novel redox reactions with multi-electron transfer could be explored for the development of energy batteries. These materials and reactions include various intercalation compounds and lithium insertion reactions, lithium alloys and lithium alloying–dealloying reactions, lithium halides, reversible electrochemical conversion reactions, and so on. In this section, we will focus on a number of selected examples to demonstrate that the superior reversible capacity could be obtained by multi-electron redox reactions from different redox chemistry in different anode-active and cathode-active materials.
5.1 Capacity restraint in lithium intercalation reactions
The ever-increasing demand for lightweight, higher energy density batteries in today's mobile society has always put a challenge on battery chemists to search for new materials. As a representative of advanced battery technologies developed in the last two decades, Li-ion batteries have achieved a specific energy density of 150∼200 Wh kg−1, which is several times higher than those of conventional Pb-acid and Cd–Ni batteries. In fact, the great increase in energy density for lithium-ion batteries is benefited from their high operating voltage (3.5∼4.2 V) due to the use of very negative intercalation anodes, such as lithiated graphite (working potential = +0.05∼+0.35 V vs. Li+/Li). In comparison, the storage capacities of the cathode-active materials in Li-ion batteries are not evidently higher, or even considerably lower than those of the redox electrodes employed in conventional aqueous rechargeable batteries. For example, the reversible capacity of the LiCoO2 cathode extensively used for commercial Li-ion batteries is only ∼150 mAh g−1, about half of the discharge capacity of β-Ni(OH)2 cathode (∼280 mAh g−1) in alkaline solution.
To heighten the storage capacity of LIBs, a wide range of intercalation materials have been synthesized over the past decades, but no significant breakthrough was achieved in capacity, specially for intercalation cathodes, the capacity-determining electrode in the present LIB systems. This originates from the intrinsic chemistry of intercalation reaction occurring in the inserting electrode.
Firstly, secondary LIBs commercialized currently are based on lithium transition metal oxides, more specifically, the layered 3d metal oxides (LixMO2) such as LiCoO2. In general, these compounds have a molecular mass of ∼100 and can accommodate no more than one Li+ ion (corresponding to one electron) per 3d-metal. Thus, the theoretical storage capacity of these materials is merely ∼268 mAh g−1. Olivine LiFePO4 being actively developed has also a larger formula weight of 158 and therefore its theoretical lithium storage capacity is only limited to 170 mAh g−1.
Next, most of the 3d metal oxides cannot reversibly change their oxidation state by two units (Mn+2/Mn) without the destruction of their crystalline structures. This implies that these oxides can only be reduced to a certain extent during lithium insertion reaction, i.e. they cannot exert their full charge capability to support lithium intercalation/deintercalation. Though a few of the heavy 3d metal oxides can reversibly accommodate more than one lithium ion per metal, an overall gain in the energy density is not obvious because the increase in the intercalation capacity of the materials is compromised by the heavier elements.2,55
Some 3d metal oxides (such as vanadium oxides) could indeed accept more than one lithium ion with a reversible change in their host structure, but these cathodes gave stepwise changes in the working voltage due to their multiple phase transformations, which are difficult for practical applications.
Overall, the 3d metal oxide-based intercalation cathodes that have been extensively studied and are still now actively explored, are difficult to have their electrochemical capacity upgraded due to the large formula weight and the limited lithium intercalation stoichiometry. Therefore, a new strategy is required to design the anode and cathode materials with lightweight elements, and multi-electron redox reactions so as to increase largely the energy densities in electrochemical storage devices.
5.2 Lithium alloying reactions on lightweight anodes
Currently commercialized Li-ion batteries are mostly based on lithiated carbon anodes, with a maximum theoretical capacity of 372 mAh g−1, calculated from the lithium graphite intercalated (LiC6) with the highest Li intercalation stoichiometry. Despite this capacity exceeding considerably the lithium storage capacities of the cathodes presently developed, the search for higher capacity materials as alternatives to carbonaceous anodes has continued for over the past 20 years.
Many metals and intermetallic compounds can alloy with lithium to uptake more than one lithium per metal atom,56 and the alloying and de-alloying reactions of these materials occur reversibly in the potential range closely above the lithium metal. Some inexpensive, pollution-free lightweight elements, that can uptake several lithium atoms, seem to be the ideal candidates for the next generation of high energy density anode materials. In this section, we will take the LixSi alloy as an example to discuss the problems usually occurring in the lithium alloying reaction, together with the possible strategies for overcoming them.
Silicon is a naturally abundant, lightweight element, which can store up to 4.4 lithium atoms (Si + 4.4 Li ↔ Li4.4Si, 4.4 charges are spontaneously transferred) reversibly at the anodic potential below 0.5 V (vs Li+/Li), leading to a huge theoretical lithium storage capacity of 4200 mAh g−1.56,57 Apparently, silicon seems to be an attractive anode material for high energy density LIBs. However, there are two severe problems preventing the Si-based anodes from being commercial applications.
The first problem for the Si-based anodes is the large irreversible capacity during initial cycling, usually only a low coulombic efficiency of 30∼60% being observed in the first charge–discharge cycle. The poor efficiency requires the cathode material to be loaded in large excess in order to supply sufficient lithium ions for the irreversible anodic consumption. The second problem of the Si-based anodes is their rapid capacity fading during cycling and therefore only few examples of the Si anodes reported so far have a capacity retention of 85% over a hundred cycles.57
To overcome these problems, intensive research has been conducted to understand the underlying chemistry of the lithium alloying reaction on Si-based anodes. It is well accepted that during initial discharge, crystalline Si alloys continuously with lithium to convert into an amorphous LixSi phase and this amorphous phase develops in the crystalline Si to form a two-phase region until the potential is brought down to 0.05 V. At lower potential, a new crystalline phase is formed, corresponding to a composition of Li15Si4. During the lithium subsequent charge, crystalline Li15Si4 is converted to amorphous LixSi and Si successively, resulting in a two-phase formation. In the following cycling, the structure of the Si anode changes from an amorphous Si to an amorphous LixSi during Li insertion and vice versa during Li extraction.57,58 Because of the large volume expansion during Li insertion (a 400% volume expansion of the silicon lattice from Si to Li22Si5 alloy), the disintegration and pulverization of the Si anode occurs continuously, resulting in an active material loss in its electronic contact and therefore leading to a continuous capacity fade.
This mechanism seems to be able to account for the capacity fading during cycling, but difficult to explain the low initial coulombic efficiency of Si-based anodes. In general, a low initial efficiency in Li-ion cells could originate from several causes, such as solid electrolyte interface (SEI) film formation, surface oxide reduction, irreversible lithium ion trapping and so on. At present, there is not enough experimental evidence to clarify this issue, but the much smaller irreversible capacity reported for a nano-amorphous Si thin film anode than a nano-crystalline Si thin film anode,59 may imply that the irreversible capacity is mainly consumed by the irreversible trapping of lithium ions during initial conversion of crystalline Si to an amorphous phase.
To reduce the capacity fading rate and thus to obtain a better cycle life for Si-based anodes, various approaches have been employed for suppressing the volumetric expansion of Si and improving the electronic contact between Si particles and the conductive matrix. These approaches reported to date could be roughly divided into two types: reducing the volume expansion by downsizing the Si particles and buffuring the volume change by trapping the Si particles in conductive matrices.
Downsizing the Si particles is an earlier method to improve the Si anode performance. However, previous experiments demonstrated that the Si anodes made from micro-Si powder also showed a large irreversible capacity and poor capacity retention.57 Even the Si particle size was reduced to nano-scale, the Si anodes still gave an initial coulombic efficiency of only a ∼75 and 50% capacity decrease after 20 cycles.60 Although the initial irreversible capacity and the capacity retention of nano-Si anode were considerably lower than those of the bulk-Si anode, there is no substaintial gain in the cycle performances from an application point of view. This seems to indicate that a size reduction can only alleviate the volume change of Si to a certain extent, but cannot eliminate entirely the capacity fading for Si anodes.
Another widely used method for suppressing the volumetric change of Si is to create a composite structure in which silicon is dispersed in a conductive host matrix. The host matrices include inactive host materials such as inert intermetallic alloys and metallic compounds (such as borides, nitrides, carbides and alloys)61–66 as well as active metals (such as Sn, Al and Sb)57,67,68 and various carbonaceous materials (such as graphite, MCMB, carbon nanotubes, carbon fibers and porous carbon).69–76 Generally, the Si composite anodes with inactive metallic matrixes showed limitedly improved cycleability but much lowered reversible capability because a large portion of inactive mass was contributed to buffering the Si volume change or perhaps a poor lithium ion diffusivity in the inactive matrix limited the alloying reaction of lithium with Si.
When nano-Si particles are dispersed in an active ductile carbon and Sn matrix, a great improvement in capacity retention is observed for the Si-anode. Recently, it was reported that carbon-coated Si70Sn30 nanoalloys annealed at 900 °C showed first discharge and charge capacities of 2532 and 2032 mAh g−1, corresponding to an initial coulombic efficiency of 80% and also this Si-anode exhibited very strong cycleability with a capacity retention of 97% after 60 cycles.77 So far, the best cycle stability has been observed from a 500 Å thick amorphous n-Si thin film vacuum-deposited on a Ni foil, which showed a stable reversible capacity as high as 3600 mAh g−1 during 200 cycles.78
These results from amorphous, nano-Si film and Si–Sn–C nanocomposite seem to indicate that a combination of amorphous Si nanoparticles and a suitable buffering matrix may create a suitable Si anode, which exhibits not only high reversible capacity and strong capacity retention, but also high initial coulombic efficiency. Such an anodic structure may open the way to achieving multi-electron transfer capacity by lithium alloying reactions of Si and analogous metals.
5.3 Metal oxides as anode materials
As anode materials for lithium ion batteries, the metal oxides can release theoretically a capacity 2–3 times larger than that of graphite due to the multi-electron redox reaction.1,79,80 To achieve the large reversible capacities of the metal oxides, nanomaterials appear to be a good choice, especially for acquiring the full utilization and high electrochemical reactivity of the electroactive materials.79,81,82
The binary transition metal oxides (NiO, CoO, CuO, FeO, Co3O4, and Fe2O3) react reversibly with lithium to form Li2O and transition metal nanoparticles via displacive phase transition or conversion reaction (as shown in Fig. 7).79,82–85 The mechanism of the reaction of these binary metal oxides with lithium is obviously different from the reversible intercalation/deintercalation of lithium into host structures or lithium alloying reactions.79,82 These transition metal oxides do not contain any available empty sites for Li ion intercalation, and none of the metals can form alloys with Li. Clearly, multi-electron redox reactions are involved in transition metal oxides with a variety of chemical valences of active transition metals. In particular, compared with micro-sized materials, nanomaterials exhibit higher electrochemical reactivity owing to the large specific surface area and short lithium diffusion path. As a consequence, higher reversible capacity is achieved, depending on the oxidation state of the individual transition metal used. However, compared to the graphite anode, these materials have the problems of higher potentials and large potential hysteresis between charge and discharge processes inevitably exist, resulting in a lower battery voltage and poor energy efficiency. Surface carbon modification, surface embedding of metal oxides on carbon nanotubes or loading metal oxides into carbon nanotubes were demonstrated to have the advantage of both the good capacity retention of metal oxides and the low potential of carbon materials.86–90 Moreover, the existence of carbon materials in metal oxides can restrict to a certain extent the catalytic activity of the metallic nanoparticles on electrolyte reduction to form a thick solid electrolyte interface (SEI) layer.89
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the conversion reaction of the transition metal oxides (MO) with lithium. 
SnO2 has been widely investigated as a high capacity anode material since it was reported early in 1997.91 In the discharge process, SnO2 is irreversibly converted to Li2O and nanosized metallic tin. Subsequently, the nanosized metallic tin dispersed in the Li2O matrix can further reacted with lithium to form SnLi4.4 according to the Li–Sn alloying and de-alloying reactions. However, SnO2 with high reversible capacity usually suffers from lower coulombic efficiency in the first cycle and poor cycle stability, even if many SnO2-based anode materials were presented in the past, mostly based on dimension, morphology and carbon surface modification.92–95 There still hasn’t been any commercial use for SnO2 as anode material up to now.
The ternary Sn-based oxides, namely M2SnO4 (M = Mg, Mn, Co and Zn)96–98 and ASnO3 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba and Cd),99–101 have also been investigated as high capacity anode materials due to more electron numbers involved in the electrochemical reaction. In the case of Zn2SnO4, the conversion reaction and subsequent Li–Sn and Li–Zn alloying and de-alloying reactions coexist, offering higher capacity. Meanwhile, only Li–Sn alloying and de-alloying reactions after conversion reaction are presented for Co2SnO4. When the electrochemically inactive alkaline earth ions are incorporated into the ternary oxides, a negligible capacity fading is obtained because of their relatively small volume expansion despite its lower capacity.99,100
Finally, it is noted that the anomalous lithium storage, observed usually in the most cases of nanocrystalline binary and ternary transition metal oxides, is the occurrence of an extra electrochemical capacity at a low potential, depending on the electronegativity of the transition metal used. The interfacial lithium storage mechanism was proposed to explain such extra capacity, in which the interfacial cores of metallic nanoparticle/amorphous Li2O serve as hosts for lithium ions, and metallic nanoparticles serve as electron sinks.101,102 It appears that the cycle life of these metal oxides could be stabilized after making great efforts. In contrast, the low coulombic efficiency of these metal oxides in the first cycle has been inevitable so far as the big problem for commercial applications. Moreover, stepwise redox processes are inevitable as confirmed in cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and charge–discharge curves, implying slow kinetics for electrochemically lithium storage in the organic electrolyte. The inconsistency between the high electrochemical reactivity for achieving a multi-electron redox reaction and catalytic passivation of the transition metal nanoparticles formed in situ for decreasing the electrolyte reduction should also be considered. To overcome the above problems as, an inspired design for metal oxide active materials is indispensable.
5.4 Metal fluoride-based cathode materials
Earlier studies of metal fluorides as potential cathode materials for primary lithium batteries date from the early 1970s and the historic development has been thoroughly reviewed in a recent literature source.103 Up to the late 1990s, Arai et al. reported a high voltage charge–discharge behavior of FeF3 as a cathode material for Li-ion batteries, along with a voltage estimation of a number of 3d metal fluorides.104 In that work, they obtained a reversible capacity of 80 mAh g−1, far below the theoretical capacity of one-electron transfer reaction of the Fe3+/Fe2+ couple.
The ability of metal fluorides to go through multi-electron redox was first evidenced separately by Badway et al.105 and Li et al.106 Badway et al. demonstrated that a reversible specific capacity of ∼600 mAh g−1 of FeF3:C-based nanocomposites was realized at 70 °C. Approximately one-third of the capacity evolved in a reaction between 3.5 and 2.8 V related to the cathodic reduction reaction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ and the remainder of the specific capacity occurred in a two-phase conversion reaction at 2 V, resulting in the formation of a finer Fe:LiF nanocomposite.105 Almost at the same time, Li et al. reported reversible lithium storage capacities of TiF3 and VF3 being realized as high as 500–600 mAh g−1, due to a reversible formation and decomposition of LiF upon lithium insertion into the metal fluorides.106Table 1 compares the theoretical voltages and specific capacities of some metal fluorides with the observed values. Obviously, the general conclusion, drawn by inspection of the experimental data in Table 1, is that the metal fluorides can utilize all their possible oxidation states by way of a reversible electrochemical conversion reaction which proceeds as follows: xLi+ + xe− + MFx ↔ xLiF + M(9)
Table 1 A comparison of the theoretical cell voltage (E0) and specific capacities (C) of selected metal fluorides with their experimental values. The data were taken from the literature.103,105,106




 
Theoretical
Experimental



E
0/V

C/mAh g−1

V
dis


C/mAh g−1




NiF2
2.96
554
—
>400


FeF3
2.74
712
3.3
>600


VF3
1.86
745
2.0
∼500


TiF3
1.39
767
∼1.5
620




This multi-electron transfer reaction occurs unlikely through a one-step process, and most probably takes place in multiple steps as shown by stepwise charge and discharge profiles of the fluorides.105,106 For the metal trifluorides, the electrochemical conversion reaction was convinced to proceed through a one-electron lithium intercalation followed by a two-electron phase conversion reaction: Li+ + e− + MF3 ↔ LiMF3(10) 2Li+ + 2e− + LiMF3 ↔ 3LiF + M(11)
Since the trifluorides have a stable structure with abundant vacant sites and open channels, it is expected that these materials have an acceptable lithium intercalation rate, as demonstrated in previous works.103–106 However, the kinetic behavior of the following conversion reaction is not very clear and remains to be revealed.

Fig. 8 schematically displays the structural changes occurring on the metal trifluorides during the electrochemical phase conversion reaction. From a point of view of solid-state chemistry, the electrochemical conversion process is a two phase reaction, the rate of which depends primarily on the effective contact between the transition metal particles and lithium fluoride. To enhance the conversion rate, the particle size of the fluorides should be as small as possible, which leads to mixed LiF/M products on the scale of 2–5 nm. This extremely short diffusion distance between the reaction products is in favor of the reversible reconstruction for the crystalline MFx on the following charge. Possibly, this is the reason that the reversible conversion of the fluoride system was only found to occur in the nanosized LiF/MF2 and MF3/C composites.105,106
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of an electrochemical conversion reaction of iron trifluoride. 
Considering electrochemical requirements, the phase conversion reaction must involve electron transfer into or out from the fluorides. Since the metal fluorides are poor electronic conductors, it is critical to connect electrically the dispersed fluoride particles. This difficulty can be well solved by encapsulating the fluoride nanocrystallites into a carbon matrix in various ways.
One problem for the electrochemical conversion reaction of the metal fluorides is their stepwise charge and discharge behavior, particularly the output voltage of the conversion reaction of the lower oxidation state of the metal ions is much lower (about 1 V difference) than the intercalation voltage of the higher valence metal fluoride, leading to a large fluctuation in the power output.105 In view of the thermodynamic data, some high valence metal triflurides have very close potentials for their initial one-electron transfer and following two-electron reduction. For example, the equilibrium potential is 2.94 V for the initial one-electron transfer (Li+ + e− + FeF3 ↔ LiF + FeF2) and 2.44 V for the following two-electron reduction (2Li+ + 2e− + FeF2 ↔ 2LiF + Fe).105 This suggests that it is possible to design the materials that take part in a multi-electron redox reaction, storing or delivering capacity in a narrow potential range.
It should be pointed out that the research on the reversible electrochemical conversion reaction of metal fluorides is still in its initial stage, and no much data have been accumulated for understanding the general behavior of these materials. Nevertheless, the electrochemical research on the metal fluorides offers a promising route to develop the cathode materials with energy densities double of today's Li-ion battery technology.
5.5 Lithium–sulfur battery system
Sulfur is the lightweight element with a very small value of electrochemical equivalent of 0.6 g Ah−1 as a cathode-active material, which can react completely with metallic lithium to form Li2S with 2 exchanged electrons. Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries have attracted an increasing attention due to the high theoretical capacity of 1675 mAh g−1 and theoretical energy density of 2.6 kWh kg−1, in addition to its natural abundance, low cost, and environmental friendliness.107–109 Among all the redox couples tested for rechargeable batteries, Li–S couple has the potential to offer a practical energy density doubling the present Li-ion batteries.110,111 However, previous studies of Li–S batteries with organic electrolytes reveal some serious problems, including low utilization of active material and poor cycle life, because of the highly insulating nature of sulfur (5 × 10−30 S cm−1 at 25 °C) and the high solubility of lithium polysulfides as intermediate products generated during the electrochemical reduction reaction process.107,112 In particular, a shuttle mechanism is involved during sulfur discharge.113 The soluble lithium polysulfides as intermediate products can diffuse to the lithium anode and be reduced with the lithium metal in a parasitic reaction, leading to the serious lithium anode corrosion. Meanwhile, the reduced lithium polysulfides can also diffuse back to the cathode in the following oxidation process. As a result, the lower coulombic efficiency and poor cycle life are generally observed for Li–S batteries due to such redox shuttle mechanism.
In order to solve these problems, technological improvements are made from several contributions, including the optimization of the organic electrolyte to inhibit the dissolution of lithium polysulfides,114–116 and the fabrication of the sulfur-conductive polymer composites,117–120 or the sulfur–carbon (mesoporous carbon, acetylene black, activated carbon and carbon nanotubes) composites.116,119–126 Among all the contributions, porous carbon materials with a large surface area and narrow pore distribution as conductive additives and strong adsorbent agents are proved to be good candidates for enhancing the practical capacity and cycle stability of the sulfur cathode.
In general, sulfur as a highly dispersed amorphous state can be embedded in the nanopores of porous carbon due to the strong adsorbability of porous carbon during the thermal treatment process in the fabrication of the sulfur–carbon composites. Porous carbon acts not only as an excellent current collector with high electric conductivity, but also as a strong adsorbent agent. The charge–discharge process, restricted inside the nanopores of porous carbon, corresponds to the transformation between high-order polysulfides and low-order polysulfide/lithium sulfide, effectively prohibiting the dissolution of polysulfides in organic electrolytes, due to the strong physical adsorption. Therefore, such a restricted reaction inside nanopores as shown in Fig. 9 may be mainly responsible for the improvement of the electrochemical performance of the sulfur–carbon composite cathode.125,126
 Fig. 9  Proposed scheme of the restricted reaction inside nanopores for the electrochemical process of the sulfur–carbon composite cathode. 
Although the good cycle stability of the sulfur–carbon composite cathode is maintained for over 200 cycles as indicated in Fig. 10, depending on the charge–discharge rate, it is noted that the high loading of sulfur (over 75 wt%) on porous carbon is required for practical applications. Therefore, the large specific surface area and pore volume of porous carbon are necessary for the high loading, and the narrow pore distribution can restrict effectively the electrochemical reaction inside nanopores. Moreover, the highly conjugated or partial graphite structure is also important to ensure the high electrical conductivity for improving the high rate charge and discharge capability.
 Fig. 10  Cycle curves of the sulfur/HPC composite cathode with 57 wt% sulfur from the second cycle at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ACS. 
5.6 Cathode-active organic molecules or polymers
In the past, considerable efforts have mainly been focused on inorganic cathode materials for lithium ion batteries. Some organic conducting polymers, such as polyaniline, polythiophene and polypyrrole, were used previously as cathode electrode materials in rechargeable batteries.127 However, these conducting polymers with low specific capacity, arose from specific redox moieties with anion insertion, fade out gradually for a high energy density battery system.128 More recently, electroactive organic molecules have been actively investigated as high capacity cathode materials, based on multi-electron transfers.3,128–132 Importantly, these electroactive organic materials can eventually be synthesized from a biomass following some principles of green chemistry and can be easily recycled from disabled batteries.3,129
The reaction mechanism of organic cathode materials seems to be different from the intercalation/deintercalation mechanism for inorganic cathode materials. For example, the oxocarbon salt Li2C6O6, synthesized by using natural organic sources through potentially low-cost processes, can electrochemically react with four Li ions per formula unit with carbonyl groups as redox centers, implying the high theoretical capacities accompanied by four-electron transfers per C6O6 ring.129 The high reversible capacities of about 580 mAh g−1 of Li2C6O6 can be obtained in the potential range of 1.5∼3.5 V (vs Li+/Li). However, the high rate capability (above 1.5C) of Li2C6O6 needs to be further improved due to slow reaction kinetics, as confirmed from stepwise reversible plateaus in the discharge–charge curves. The highly lithiated oxocarbon salt (Li4C6O6), formed by the thermal disproportionation of Li2C6O6 under an inert atmosphere, showed a good cycle stability at an average potential of 1.8 V (vs Li+/Li). The specific capacity of 250 mAh g−1 at a low discharge rate was presented for Li4C6O6 cathode with a two-electron transfer per formula unit.131
As cathode materials, organic sulfur-containing polymers also demonstrate a high specific theoretical capacity.133–135 Similar to the sulfur cathode as mentioned above, the sulfur in organic sulfur-containing polymers is the redox center for electrochemical lithium storage. The high specific capacities of 370∼800 mAh g−1 can be achieved, depending on the sulfur content in the polymers, as well as the potential range measured. The high charge potential (∼4 V, vs. Li+/Li) with multi-plateaus may result in the formation of high valence sulfur to S4+ in the organic sulfur-containing polymers, different form the sulfur cathode. A thioether cation formation mechanism was then proposed to rationalize the high specific capacity with a multi-electron redox reaction.134,135 However, the large potential hysteresis between charge and discharge processes of these materials leads to a lower battery voltage and poor energy efficiency. This problem can be solved by introducing the quinonyl group into the polymers. Poly(anthraquinonyl sulfide) was reported to exhibit high utilization ratio, excellent cycleability, and good high-rate performance in LiTFSI/DOL + DME electrolyte at the expense of specific capacity.136
Cathode-active organic materials have some disadvantages of relatively low thermal stability, low packing density and appreciable solubility in organic electrolytes as compared to the inorganic cathode materials. Such disadvantages would be gradually overcome by grafting various functional groups for electroactive organic materials in the future. Meanwhile, the high energy density and high power might be compatible by tuning the electron density, the redox center and radical redox reaction as discussed in the following section. In addition, some new electrochemical couples could be explored using electroactive organic materials or hybrid materials.
6. New concepts for rechargeable batteries
Looking back on battery's historic developments, new concepts always play an essential role for creating new battery materials and systems. From a concept to a realization of a new battery system, there is a long journey to go with numerous technological barriers to overcome. In the following section, we introduce two types of novel battery systems (rechargeable Li–O2 and organic radical batteries), which emerged recently with the potential possibility to have an exceptional energy density or power capability, though either of them are still in a proof of concept study.
6.1 Rechargeable Li–O2 batteries
In principle, the lithium electrode is the most lightweight metal anode with the highest theoretical capacity of 3860 mAh g−1. Among all electrochemical couples, the lithium/oxygen primary battery has the highest theoretical specific energy of 11.14 kWh kg−1 (excluding O2) with an open-circuit voltage (OCV) of 2.91 V, according to the reaction 4Li + O2 → 2Li2O in organic electrolyte.137,138 Significantly, the lithium/oxygen battery can be reversibly charged and discharged in organic and aqueous electrolytes,138–144 offering a potential energy density several times higher than the conventional rechargeable batteries.
Theoretically, the specific capacity of a lithium/oxygen battery is 1170 mAh g−1 according to the reversible reaction 2Li + O2 ↔ Li2O2 (OCV, 3.10V) in organic electrolyte. If carbon is expressed as the active material, the specific capacity of the cathode could exceed 3000 mAg g−1. As reported in 1996, a rechargeable lithium–air cell showed a high specific energy density of 250–350 Wh kg−1, including the weight of the electrode and the polyacrylonitrile-based polymer electrolyte.138 More attractive results on the rechargeability of lithium–oxygen cell with a MnO2 catalyst were presented by Ogasawara et al.140 Recently, the highest capacity retention with a high discharge capacity of the O2 cathode was obtained using α-MnO2 nanowires or Fe3O4, Co3O4 and CoFe2O4 as catalysts.141,142 However, the electrochemical performance of rechargeable Li/O2 battery in organic electrolyte is more sensitive to anode passivation due to moisture contamination in the air.143 The absolute exclusion of water from air is difficult even though a conventional hydrophobic membrane is used. A trace of water could react with either Li2O2 or metal lithium anode to form LiOH, resulting in poor long-term stability of the Li–O2 battery.
Different from the organic electrolyte Li–O2 cell, aqueous lithium–air secondary batteries were recently proposed based on a water-stable multilayer lithium anode consisting of a lithium metal, a PEO-based composite polymer (PEO18LiTFSI-BaTiO3), and a lithium-conducting glass ceramic.144–146 The multilayer lithium anode showed a stable charge–discharge performance with a flat discharge voltage of 3.50 V at a current density of up to 1.0 mA cm−2 in aqueous solution (LiCl) at 60 °C. The calculated energy density of the lithium-air cell in aqueous electrolyte is 6.4 kWh kg−1 according to the cell reaction of 2Li + 1/2O2 + H2O ↔ 2LiOH (OCV, 3.7 V at 60 °C),144,146 showing the highest theoretical energy density for rechargeable battery systems (as shown in Fig. 11). However, the Li anode utilization was lower than 30% in an aqueous LiCl cell due to the instability of the water-stable glass ceramics under alkaline conditions produced in a deep discharge state. Undoubtedly, the rechargeable Li–O2 battery may bring fresh air into to the high energy battery system. If a lithium-conducting glass ceramic could be developed to stabilize in alkaline media, aqueous rechargeable Li batteries may be realized in coupling with a variety of high performance cathodes already developed.
 Fig. 11  A comparison of the theoretical energy densities of different battery systems based on anode and cathode active materials. The theoretical energy densities of MH–Ni and Li-ion batteries are calculated from the weight of LaNi5H6/β-Ni(OH)2 and LiCoO2/graphite active materials, respectively. Some data were taken from ref. 25 and 144. 
The intrinsic thermodynamic properties of magnesium make it a potential lightweight anode-active material for rechargeable batteries in organic electrolyte.147–149 The theoretical capacity of a magnesium anode is 2200 mAh g−1, according to the complete two-electron reaction of the Mg/Mg2+ couple. It is noted that the passivation on the magnesium metal surface seems inevitable, leading to poor reactivity and reversibility of the magnesium anode in a variety of polar aprotic electrolyte solutions. To solve this problem, new electrolyte systems are needed to activate the electrochemical activity of the magnesium surface and to help establish rechargeable Mg batteries. Moreover, the lightweight elements or compounds, instead of the heavy intercalation compounds mostly used, should be considered as cathode-active materials for increasing the energy density of the Mg/Mg2+ couple.
6.2 Organic radical batteries
In addition to high energy density, high power capability is becoming an increasingly critical issue for advanced batteries due to the urgent requirement of rapid discharge and recharge by various high rate applications such as hybrid electric vehicles and wind electricity storage. However, conventional rechargeable batteries are mostly based on electrochemical conversion reactions and intercalation chemistry of metal anodes and oxide cathodes. These reactions often involve kinetically sluggish processes such as ionic diffusion in the solid phase and structural reconstruction of oxides, limiting the high-rate capability of the batteries. Electrochemical supercapacitors store and release their charges by a charge rearrangement in the electrical double layer without chemical reactions involved, and are therefore capable of high-rate charge–discharge, but have a limited capacity storage because the surface layer used for charge storage is a small part of the electrode materials. Thus, the search for new battery materials and chemistry with high-power and high density energy storage is always an important topic for the development of advanced batteries.
Stable radical polymers are emerging as a promising choice of such new materials. Different from conventional electroactive polymers, the radical polymers contain organic robust radicals as redox centers pendant or embedded in a polymer chain,150 which allows rapid electron transfer via radical redox.
Recently, Nakahara et al. reported a 100-mAh organic radical battery with a poly(2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy-4-yl methacrylate) (PTMA) cathode. Although the energy density of this cell is somewhat low, the specific power density and cycle ability of the organic radical battery is considerably higher than that of a Li-ion battery with a transition metal oxide cathode.151 Soon after, Yang et al. reported a polytriphenylamine based radical polymer, which can deliver a capacity of 90 mAh g−1, about 82% of its theoretical capacity (109 mAh g−1), after 1000 cycles at a very high rate of 20 C.152 This superior high-rate cycleability was attributed to the structural specificity of the polymer where the radical redox centers were stabilized and protected by conductive polymeric backbone, making the electron transfer from radical redox and charge-transporting through the conductive polymer chain kinetically facile.
Except for the radical polymers used as cathode materials, some radical polymers were also found to function as anode materials. Nishide et al. recently reported an n-type radical polymer, the poly(nitroxylstyrene) ortho-substituted with a trifluoromethyl group (n-PNO), which produced a reversible redox behavior at −0.76 V (vs Ag/AgCl), suggesting its possible usage as an anode-active material.153

Fig. 12 shows the redox reaction schemes of a p-type and an n-type radical polymer along with their CV curves and ESR responses. As shown by the CV and ESR data in Fig. 10, the redox potential for a poly(nitroxylstyrene) derivative could change dramatically to form a p-type or n-type radicals by introducing electron-donating or electron-withdrawing substituent groups in the polymer, and both the resulting p-type or n-type radical polymers can go through electrochemical redox reactions reversibly, suggesting a possible usage of these polymers as cathode-active and anode-active materials to construct totally organic polymer-based rechargeable batteries.153 Recently, Nishide et al. reported such a totally radical polymer-based batteries using poly(galvinoxylstyrene) and poly(TEMPO-substituted norbornenes) as anode and cathode materials, respectively.154 Though such a cell did not exhibit high energy density, it displayed a strikingly high current capability, allowing rapid charging within 10 s and large current discharge at a rate of 360 C, without substantial loss of output voltages. In addition, an ultrafast full charging in as short as 3 s can be obtained by the combination of the hydrophilic radical polymer and the aqueous electrolyte with high conductivity.155
 Fig. 12  The redox reactions and the corresponding CV and ESR responses of a p-type (p-PNO) and an n-type radical polymer (n-PNO), the data were taken from ref. 149. 
In principle, there is no obvious reason why radical polymers could not have an electrochemical capacity higher than the conventional metal oxides. In fact, if a radical polymer is designed with higher density of robust radicals and/or a lightweight polymer chain, it would result in higher energy density of the polymer. Recently, Nishide et al. proposed a series of novel structured radical polymers, the theoretical capacities of which were expected to exceed 200 mAh g−1.156
At present, the development of radical polymers for energetic battery materials is still in its infant stage. Many questions regarding the reaction mechanisms and structural design of the radical polymers are not well understood. Nevertheless, it is believed that with increasing research in this area, a variety of new radical polymers will appear with high energy density and fast kinetics, acting as an important new entry to advanced electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.
Conclusions
As discussed above, battery chemists have actively responded to the challenge for the future energy storage demand by exploring novel redox materials chemistry and creating new battery systems. Though the present understanding of the multi-electron redox reactions and related battery materials are quite limited, further studies will no doubt increase our knowledge which is critically necessary for breaking through the barriers in the existing battery technology, as well as for providing new concepts for future batteries with the required energy density and high-rate capability. Presently, a number of advanced batteries are in the stage of industrial development, showing a promising prospect for future applications, such as next generations of communication devices (4G or 5G), electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and power storage from renewable energy resources. The energy density of 300 Wh kg−1 is expected to be reached in the next 3–5 year and much higher energy density would be possible to be achieved for rechargeable batteries in ten years. Of course, developing such batteries and the required new battery materials may also rely on new concepts from battery chemistry with the multi-electron redox reaction of lightweight elements/compounds, as well as interdisciplinary collaboration.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the 973 Program (2009CB220100) and 863 Program (2007AA03Z225) of China is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also wish to express their sincere thanks to the 973 team for fruitful discussions.
References
F. Beck and P. Ruetschi, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2467–2482 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ewe, E. W. Justi and K. Stephan, Energy Convers., 1973, 13, 109–113 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Murphy, F. J. Disalvo, J. N. Carides and J. V. Waszczak, Mater. Res. Bull., 1978, 13, 1395–1402 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lazzari and B. A. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 773–774 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Kelly, J. R. Owen and B. H. Steel, J. Power Sources, 1985, 14, 13–21 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 461–472 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy, C. Masquelier, S. Okada and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1609–1613 CAS .
S. Licht, B. H. Wang and S. Ghosh, Science, 1999, 285, 1039–1042 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Macova, K. Bouzek, J. Hives, V. K. Sharma, R. J. Terryn and J. C. Baum, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 2673–2683 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Yu and S. Licht, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 966–980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wang, S. H. Ye, J. K. Bo, Y. Y. Wang and F. Wu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A572–A576 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hives, Macova, M. Benova and K. Bouzek, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, E113–E119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, X. W. Yu and Y. F. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A1–A7 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Yu and S. Licht, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 1010–1022 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, S. Ghosh and V. Naschitz, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A209–A212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht and X. W. Yu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A36–A39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, Y. F. Wang and G. Gourdin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9884–9891 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wang, S. H. Ye, Y. Y. Wang, J. S. Cao and F. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4131–4135 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Yang, Y. D. Wang, X. P. Ai and C. S. Cha, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A212–A215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, X. W. Yu and D. Y. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2753–2755 RSC .
Y. D. Wang, X. P. Ai, Y. L. Cao and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 780–784 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Yu and S. Licht, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 8138–8143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, H. M. Wu, X. W. Yu and Y. F. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3257–3259 RSC .
C. Ponce de Leon, F. C. Walsh, D. Pletcher, D. J. Browning and J. B. Lakeman, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 172–181 CAS .
R. X. Feng, H. Dong, Y. D. Wang, X. P. Ai, Y. L. Cao and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 449–452 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Morris, H. J. Gysling and D. Reed, Chem. Rev., 1985, 85, 51–76 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Liu and Z. P. Li, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, R. X. Feng, X. P. Ai, Y. L. Cao, H. X. Yang and C. X. Cha, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10896–10901 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bode, K. Dehmelt and J. Witte, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1079–1087 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dixit, R. S. Jayashree, P. V. Kamath, A. K. Shukla, V. G. Kumar and N. Munichandraiah, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 170–171 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Hu and D. Noreus, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 974–978 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhao, J. M. Wang, H. Chen, T. Pan, J. Q. Zhang and C. N. Cao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 889–896 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Yang, X. P. Gao, Q. D. Wu, H. Y. Zhu and G. L. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4614–4619 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, X. R. Gao, L. X. Lei and Y. M. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7448–7455 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delmas, C. Faure and Y. Borthomieu, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1992, 13, 89–96 CrossRef .
M. Morishita, S. Ochiai, T. Kakeya, T. Ozaki, Y. Kawabe, M. Watada, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A936–A944 CrossRef CAS .
F. Barde, M. R. Palacin, B. Beaudoin, A. Delahaye-Vidal and J. M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 299–306 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Hu, X. P. Gao, M. M. Geng, Z. X. Gong and D. Noreus, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5392–5394 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Wu, X. P. Gao, G. R. Li, G. L. Pan, T. Y. Yan and H. Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17082–17087 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. G. Willems, Philips J. Res., 1984, 39, 1–94 .
Y. Q. Lei, Y. M. Wu, Q. M. Yang, J. Wu and Q. D. Wang, Z. Phys. Chem., 1994, 183, 379–384 CAS .
Y. Chen, C. Sequeira, C. P. Chen and Q. D. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2003, 354, 120–123 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Gao, Y. Wang, Z. W. Lu, W. K. Hu, F. Wu, D. Y. Song and P. W. Shen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2515–2517 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. H. Niessen and P. H. L. Notten, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A534–A538 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vermeulen, R. A. H. Niessen and P. H. L. Notten, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
G. Deng, Y. G. Chen, M. D. Tao, L. C. Wu, X. Q. Shen and H. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3910–3914 CrossRef CAS .
T. Esaka, H. Sakaguchi and S. Kobayashi, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 166, 351–357 CrossRef CAS .
P. Elumalai, H. N. Vasan and N. Munichandraiah, J. Power Sources, 2001, 93, 201–208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Lu, S. M. Yao, G. R. Li, T. Y. Yan and X. P. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2369–2375 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yao, K. Xi, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 657–662 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Gao, S. M. Yao, T. Y. Yan and Z. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 502–505 RSC .
R. J. Cava, D. W. Murphy and S. M. Zahurak, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 2345–2351 CAS .
R. Benedek and M. M. Thackeray, J. Power Sources, 2002, 110, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kasavajjula, C. Wang and A. J. Appleby, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1003–1039 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Obrovac and L. Christensen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2004, 7, A93–A96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Graetz, C. C. Ahn, R. Yazami and B. Fultz, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A194–A197 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Huang, L. Q. Chen, Z. G. Wu and Y. Liang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 547–549 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, G. E. Blomgren and P. N. Kumta, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2003, 6, A157–A161 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kim, P. N. Kumta and G. E. Blomgren, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 493–496 CrossRef .
Z. P. Guo, Z. W. Zhao, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 190–194 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 952–957 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Zhang, P. X. Huang, G. R. Li, T. Y. Yan, G. L. Pan and X. P. Gao, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 713–717 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Lu, G. Wang, X. P. Gao, X. J. Liu and J. Q. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 832–836 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, Z. Y. Wen, Y. Liu and X. W. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4662–4667 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Fleischauer, M. N. Obrovac and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A851–A854 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Ng, J. Y. Lee and Z. L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, G. S. Cao and X. B. Zhao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2004, 88, 295–299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uono, B. C. Kim, T. Fuse, M. Ue and J. I. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1708–A1713 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. G. Zhang, H. L. Zhang, Z. G. Zhao, F. Li, C. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4994–5000 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang and P. N. Kumta, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 650–658 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. D. Cress, R. A. DiLeo and R. P. Raffaelle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 638–654 RSC .
L. W. Ji and X. W. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1146–1149 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wolf, Z. Pajkic, T. Gerdes and M. Willert-Porada, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 157–161 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon and J. Cho, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1109–1111 RSC .
T. Takamura, S. Ohara, M. Uehara, J. Suzuki and K. Sekine, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 96–100 CrossRef CAS .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grugeon, S. Laruelle, R. Herrera-Urbina, L. Dupont, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascona, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A285–A292 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, A. V. Murugan, A. Sarkar and T. Muraliganth, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 621–638 RSC .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Gao, J. L. Bao, G. L. Pan, H. Y. Zhu, P. X. Huang, F. Wu and D. Y. Song, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5547–5551 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yuan, F. Huang, C. Q. Feng, J. T. Sun and Y. H. Zhou, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 79, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and S. B. Kim, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 184–186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. P. Gao, H. Hu, Z. Zhou, J. Yan, J. Q. Qu and F. Wu, Chin. J. Inorg. Chem., 2004, 20, 1013–1017 CAS .
S. A. Needham, G. X. Wang, K. Konstantinov, Y. Tournayre, Z. Lao and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A315–A319 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Hang, I. Watanabe, T. Doi, S. Okada and J. I. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1281–1287 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, J. P. Tu, C. Q. Zhang, X. T. Chen, Y. F. Yuan and H. M. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4177–4181 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Zheng, J. S. Hu, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3617–3622 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395–1397 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Li, C. R. Martin and B. Scrosati, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 3, 316–318 CrossRef .
T. Moon, C. Kim, S. T. Hwang and B. Park, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A408–A411 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Yang, J. F. Qian, Z. X. Chen, X. P. Ai and Y. L. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14067–14071 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818–837 RSC .
P. A. Connor and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 223–225 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rong, X. P. Gao, G. R. Li, T. Y. Yan, H. Y. Zhu, J. Q. Qu and D. Y. Song, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14754–14760 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, X. P. Gao and P. W. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 719–723 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sharma, K. M. Shaju, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 947–952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sharma, N. Sharma, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 627–635 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jamnik and J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 5215–5220 RSC .
P. Balaya, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 645–654 RSC .
G. G. Amatucci and N. Pereira, J. Fluorine Chem., 2007, 128, 243–262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Arai, S. Okada, Y. Sakurai and J. Yamaki, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 716–719 CrossRef CAS .
F. Badway, F. Cosandey, N. Pereira and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1318–A1327 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Richter and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 736–739 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Rauh, K. M. Abraham, G. F. Pearson, J. K. Surprenant and S. B. Brummer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 523–527 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, Y. Sternberg, A. Gorenstein and Y. Lavi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1621–1625 CAS .
D. Marmorstein, T. H. Yu, K. A. Striebel, F. R. McLarnon, J. Hou and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Akridge, Y. V. Mikhaylik and N. White, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175, 243–245 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. He, W. H. Pu, J. G. Ren, L. Wang, J. L. Wang, C. Y. Jiang and C. R. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 7372–7376 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shim, K. A. Striebel and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1321–A1325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Mikhaylik and J. R. Akridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1969–A1976 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Shin and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 537–545 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yuan, J. K. Feng, X. P. Ai, Y. L. Cao, S. L. Chen and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 610–614 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Y. Chew, Z. W. Zhao, S. Ashraf, D. Wexler, J. Chen, S. H. Ng, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2008, 46, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, J. Yang, C. R. Wan, K. Du, J. Y. Xie and N. X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Sun, S. C. Zhang, T. Jiang, L. Zhang and J. H. Yu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1819–1822 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Han, M. S. Song, H. Lee, H. S. Kim, H. J. Ahn and J. Y. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A889–A893 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zheng, Y. W. Liu, X. G. Hu and C. F. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 1330–1335 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Choi, Y. D. Chung, C. Y. Baek, K. W. Kim, H. J. Ahn and J. H. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yuan, H. P. Yuan, X. P. Qiu, L. Q. Chen and W. T. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1141–1146 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, C. Lai, Z. Zhou and X. P. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3708–3713 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, S. X. Wu, R. J. Chen, S. Chen and G. Q. Wang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2009, 20, 1255–1258 CrossRef .
C. Lai, X. P. Gao, B. Zhang, T. Y. Yan and Z. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4712–4716 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS .
P. Novak, K. Muller, K. S. V. Santhanam and O. Haas, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 207–281 CrossRef CAS .
T. Le Gall, K. H. Reiman, M. C. Grossel and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 316–320 CrossRef .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J. M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Han, C. X. Chang, L. J. Yuan, T. L. Sun and J. T. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1616–1621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, M. Armand, M. Courty, M. Jiang, C. P. Grey, F. Dolhem, J. M. Tarascon and P. Poizot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8984–8988 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, P. Poizot, F. Dolhem, N. I. Basir, O. Mentre and J. M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A102–A106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zhang, L. B. Kong, L. Z. Zhan, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 278–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z. P. Song, N. Shan, L. Z. Zhan, J. Y. Zhang, H. Zhan, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1434–1438 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhan, Z. P. Song, N. Shan, J. Y. Zhang, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. H. Zhou, Z. Y. Li and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 859–863 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Song, H. Zhan and Y. H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 448–450 RSC .
S. S. Sandhu, J. P. Fellner and G. W. Brutchen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 365–371 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1190–A1195 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogasawara, A. Debart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, J. L. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177–1182 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, A. J. Paterson, J. L. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521–4524 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Beattie, D. M. Manolescu and S. L. Blair, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A44–A47 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A132–A135 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hasegawa, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, J. Xie, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 371–377 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A965–A969 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Kumar and N. Munichandraiah, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 44, 2663–2666 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, I. Weissman, Y. Gofer and E. Levi, Chem. Rec., 2003, 3, 61–73 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2339–6 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakahara, J. Iriyama, S. Iwasa, M. Suguro, M. Satoh and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2007, 163, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Feng, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 199–204 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, Y. J. Pu, S. Kasatori and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3167–3173 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, H. Ohshiro, S. Sugita, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1627–1630 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koshika, N. Sano, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Chem. Commun., 2009, 836–838 RSC .
H. Nishide, S. Iwasa, Y. J. Pu, T. Suga, K. Nakahara and M. Satoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 827–831 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Xue-Ping Gao	Xue-Ping Gao is Professor at Nankai University of China, where he has served as the Director of the Institute of New Energy Materials Chemistry since 2004. He received his doctorate at the Department of Chemistry from Nankai University in 1995. He worked as a visiting research fellow at Kogakuin University in Japan from 1997 to 1999, and at the University of Queensland in Australia in 2001. Currently, his main research is focused on new materials for energy storage and conversion.
Han-Xi Yang	Han-Xi Yang obtained his PhD in physical chemistry in 1987 at Southampton university, UK. In 1990, he joined the Department of Chemistry at Wuhan university, China, where he is currently Professor and Director of the Electrochemistry Laboratory. His primary research interests are in the areas of new electrochemical materials for high capacity and high rate storage and conversion of energy.

Broader context
Electrochemical batteries are the most efficient and simplest systems for electrical energy storage, which are extensively used to power today's mobile world. However, most of the existing battery systems are made of heavy metal oxides with single or less than one electron redox chemistry and are incapable of satisfying the increasing demand for future portable electronics, electric vehicles and power storage from renewable energy resources. Therefore, a real breakthrough in battery technology is urgently needed to greatly enhance the energy storage density and power capability of the batteries. In recent years, a number of novel battery materials and new concepts have emerged to demonstrate the potential ability to create future batteries with dramatically increased energy densities by a combination of light-weight electrode-active materials with multi-electron transfer reactions. Some selected examples of these battery systems are introduced herein to show possible approaches for breaking through the barriers in existing battery technology, and for building better batteries for future energy storage.

	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the different secondary batteries in terms of power density and energy density.	 
FeO42− + 3H2O + 3e− → FeOOH + 5OH−	(2)
FeO42− + (5/2)H2O + 3e− → (1/2)Fe2O3 + 5OH−	(3)
TiB2 + 12OH− → 2BO33− + Ti + 6H2O + 6e−	(4)
VB2 + 20OH− → VO43− + 2BO33− + 10H2O + 11e−	(5)

 	Fig. 2  Discharge curves of air cells with different anodes at a current rate of 100 mA g−1 in a 30% KOH solution.	 
BH4− + 8OH− → BO2− + 6H2O + 8e−	(6)
BH4− + 2OH− → BH3(OH)− + H2O + 2e−	(7)
2H2O + 2e− → 2OH− + H2	(8)

 	Fig. 3  Discharge curves of nickel hydroxides after the substitution with different Al content at 0.2 C after full activation. Reproduced with permission from ACS.	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres coated with 7 wt% CoOOH nanoparticles. The corresponding EDS spectrum is inserted. TEM images (b)–(d) are recorded at different spots for α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres coated with 7 wt% CoOOH. (e) HRTEM image of an individual CoOOH nanorod on the surface of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ACS.	 

 	Fig. 5  Discharge curves of α-Ni(OH)2 microspheres before and after coating CoOOH nanoparticles at 0.2 C rate. Cycle curves of two samples at 2 C rate are inserted. Reproduced with permission from ACS.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the electrochemical reaction of Co/Ni batteries based on multi-electron reactions.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the conversion reaction of the transition metal oxides (MO) with lithium.	 
xLi+ + xe− + MFx ↔ xLiF + M	(9)


NiF2	2.96	554	—	>400
FeF3	2.74	712	3.3	>600
VF3	1.86	745	2.0	∼500
TiF3	1.39	767	∼1.5	620
Li+ + e− + MF3 ↔ LiMF3	(10)
2Li+ + 2e− + LiMF3 ↔ 3LiF + M	(11)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of an electrochemical conversion reaction of iron trifluoride.	 

 	Fig. 9  Proposed scheme of the restricted reaction inside nanopores for the electrochemical process of the sulfur–carbon composite cathode.	 

 	Fig. 10  Cycle curves of the sulfur/HPC composite cathode with 57 wt% sulfur from the second cycle at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ACS.	 

 	Fig. 11  A comparison of the theoretical energy densities of different battery systems based on anode and cathode active materials. The theoretical energy densities of MH–Ni and Li-ion batteries are calculated from the weight of LaNi5H6/β-Ni(OH)2 and LiCoO2/graphite active materials, respectively. Some data were taken from ref. 25 and 144.	 

 	Fig. 12  The redox reactions and the corresponding CV and ESR responses of a p-type (p-PNO) and an n-type radical polymer (n-PNO), the data were taken from ref. 149.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
