Elucidating the role of the heterojunction interface in the exciton harvest and charge collection of organic solar cells through a planar heterojuncti ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC04676D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC04676D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 598-606Elucidating the role of the heterojunction interface in the exciton harvest and charge collection of organic solar cells through a planar heterojunction structure†

        
          
            Quanbin 
            Liang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Xie
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Hongbin 
            Wu
          
        
      *
      Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510640, P. R. China. E-mail: xieyuan@scut.edu.cn; hbwu@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      30th September 2021
    , Accepted 26th November 2021First published on 29th November 2021AbstractThe rapid progress in the development of non-fullerene electron acceptors has led to key breakthroughs in the power conversion efficiency of organic solar cells (OSCs). Nevertheless, the development of non-fullerene OSCs is still hindered by a lack of deep understanding of the heterojunction interface, where charge generation and recombination occur. Here, we use a solution-based contact film transfer method to fabricate a planar heterojunction (PHJ) device, which serves as an excellent platform to investigate exciton harvest and charge collection owing to the clearly defined interface. By reconstructing the external quantum efficiency spectra and device modeling in PHJ cells based on a large bandgap polymer J52 and a low bandgap small molecule IEICO-4F, exciton diffusion lengths of 9.2 nm and 7.5 nm are extracted for J52 and IEICO-4F, respectively. The experimentally obtained values for the exciton diffusion length confirm that the BHJ structure is an important prerequisite for efficient organic solar cells. Nevertheless, as revealed by the carrier dynamic studies, BHJ devices could suffer from severe recombination losses as a result of energetic disorder and traps. By considering the recombination of free and trapped carriers and intermediates in the photocurrent generation processes, we show that the stronger recombination of the BHJ compared to the PHJ is also related to its shorter CT state lifetime and lower CT state density based on the reduced Langevin recombination analysis. The inherent limitation in BHJ devices is thus a major disadvantage that needs to be overcome for further improvement. Therefore, fine tuning of the D/A interface in non-fullerene OSCs plays a crucial role in controlling the device performance. Our work also demonstrated that the contact film transfer method holds great potential for detailed studies of the heterojunction interface in the future.
Introduction
Organic solar cells (OSCs) based on non-fullerene acceptors have recently reached power conversion efficiencies of over 18%,1–4 which is significantly higher than those of fullerene-based OSCs. Despite their superior performance in converting light into electricity, further efforts directed towards understanding the underlying processes affording this photovoltaic performance are still under way.
The operation of organic solar cells involves photon absorption, exciton formation, photo-induced charge transfer and charge collection, among which, photo-induced charge transfer is a theme under intense discussion. Upon photoexcitation of the donor and/or the acceptor, an electron–hole pair (exciton) is generated in the OSCs, and the efficiency of exciton-to-charge conversion (i.e., the internal quantum efficiency, IQE) is determined by the efficiency of three consecutive steps, exciton diffusion to the donor/acceptor interface, subsequent exciton dissociation and charge collection. The heterojunction interface connecting a donor and an acceptor plays an important role in these steps because it is the place where exciton dissociation and recombination can occur.5 To facilitate efficient exciton diffusion, it is important to ensure that the interface is omnipresent such that a large proportion of excitons can reach the interface within their diffusion length.6,7 Efficient dissociation of the diffusing excitons also requires appropriate energy level alignment8 and molecular orientation at the interface.9 On the other hand, a purer domain with a reduced interface is preferred for charge collection as it improves charge transport and minimizes the influence of non-geminate recombination. Due to the need for balancing exciton harvest and charge collection, investigating the properties of the donor/acceptor interface represents a fundamentally important step for explaining the charge generation mechanism of organic solar cells.
Unlike the thorough understanding of exciton harvest and charge collection in fullerene-based OSCs, there are only a handful of studies underlying exciton and charge carrier dynamics in non-fullerene OSCs. Recently, Firdaus and coworkers estimated the exciton diffusion length for several non-fullerene acceptors, including the state-of-the-art acceptor Y6, using two independent techniques.10 Their experiments reveal that the exciton diffusion lengths for these acceptors are in the range of 20 to 47 nm, which are significantly longer than those of fullerene derivatives (∼10 nm). Perdigón-Toro et al. demonstrated that regardless of the small interfacial driving energy, exciton dissociation in the PM6:Y6 system is highly efficient at the interface, thanks to the electrostatic bias potential generated by the large quadrupolar moments of Y6.11 In addition to the studies on exciton harvest, uncovering the non-geminate recombination pathways via the heterojunction interface during charge collection is another vital issue. Wu et al. investigated the recombination kinetics in a couple of non-fullerene OSCs by transient optoelectronic studies.12 They found that in these BHJ cells, the bimolecular recombination coefficients (ktr) become higher as the charge density increases (with only PM6:Y6 as an exception), suggesting a non-ideal bimolecular recombination with reaction orders greater than 2. Combining the evidence of pronounced sub-bandgap tail states in these systems, they attributed this non-ideal charge recombination to the trap-assisted recombination via tail states generally distributed near the interface. We also note that very recently Kim et al. investigated the competition between charge generation and charge recombination by comparing the bilayer device to the bulk-heterojunction device. On the basis of their findings, the bilayer architecture was proposed as a promising alternative to the BHJ structure, provided that the limitation of exciton diffusion could be overcome.13
Despite the above progress in research, an open question still remains about how exciton diffusion, dissociation and charge collection compete with each other through the heterojunction interface, with such an enhanced diffusion length, unique interfacial properties and distinct tail state distributions. In this study, we use a solution-based contact film transfer (CFT) method14,15 to construct planar heterojunction (PHJ) cells, where the donor and acceptor are separately spin-coated and then brought into contact. These solution-processed PHJ cells feature well-defined interfaces compared to BHJ cells, while the solution processing conditions are held constant in the meantime, as much as possible. Further experiments on the PHJ cells not only yield the diffusion length and diffusion efficiencies but also provide key insights into the recombination dynamics in the studied non-fullerene system.16 Moreover, the comparative analysis between the PHJ and BHJ configurations highlights the importance of interface distribution in mediating exciton diffusion, dissociation and charge collection.
Results and discussion
We choose a representative non-fullerene system composed of a wide-bandgap fluorobenzotriazole-based polymer, named J5217 and a low-bandgap non-fullerene acceptor named IEICO-4F,18 because of their complementary absorption and good overall device performance. The chemical structures, absorption spectrum, CFT film-forming procedures, and the final PHJ structure are shown in Fig. 1. Following the CFT method, IEICO-4F was spin-cast onto a precleaned indium tin oxide (ITO)/zinc oxide (ZnO) substrate to form a 30 nm thin film, while J52 was spin-coated onto a transfer medium, glass/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS), of the same thickness. A water droplet was introduced to selectively dissolve the PEDOT:PSS layer after the donor and acceptor films were brought into contact, leaving an intact PHJ film on the ITO/ZnO substrate; the remaining water was evacuated in a vacuum chamber afterwards. Finally, an inverted PHJ structure of ITO/ZnO/IEICO-4F//J52/MoO3/Ag was fabricated. BHJ cells with a similar configuration of ITO/ZnO/IEICO-4F:J52/MoO3/Ag were also fabricated. The device performance for both devices obtained under AM 1.5 G solar simulator illumination is summarized in Table 1 and Fig. S1 (ESI†). Surprisingly, the PHJ device exhibits a relatively high fill factor (FF) of over 60%, even higher than that of the BHJ device (∼56%), a signature of a low degree of non-geminate recombination and improved charge transport. This reduced recombination is further evidenced by the long carrier lifetime in the PHJ device, as measured by the transient photovoltage (TPV). Nevertheless, as compared to the BHJ device, the PHJ device shows a much lower short-circuit current density (Jsc), presumably limited by the relatively short exciton diffusion length. As a result, the PHJ device shows a Jsc of 2.9 mA cm−2, while the BHJ device shows a high Jsc value of 23.8 mA cm−2. Under AM 1.5 G solar illumination, the BHJ device delivers an overall power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 9.6%. Despite having a higher FF than the BHJ device and similar open-circuit voltages (Voc), the PHJ device has a low PCE of ∼1.2% due to its poor Jsc as mentioned above. The donor/acceptor interface of the BHJ is visualized by transmission electron microscopy as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), confirming that the interface is indeed omnipresent in the BHJ, which is in stark contrast to the PHJ with a defined donor/acceptor domain and clear interface.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of J52 and IEICO-4F. (b) Normalized absorption spectra for the pure J52 film and pure IEICO-4F film, and the PL spectrum of J52 when excited by a 520 nm laser pulse, together with the PL spectrum of pure J52 film. (c) Schematic diagram of Contact Film Transfer (CFT) processing. First, a film with the structure of glass/PEDOT:PSS/J52 is prepared by successive spin coating of an aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS and a chlorobenzene solution of J52. Similarly, a device of ITO/ZnO/IEICO-4F is prepared. Then this J52 film is lightly contacted onto the IEICO-4F one and 1 drop of water is placed on the edge of the stacked substrates. The water selectively penetrates into the PEDOT:PSS layer until it is completely dissolved, at this moment the J52 film is completely transferred onto the IEICO-4F film and the glass substrate is easily detached from the organic layer, resulting in a PHJ layer. At last, the MoO3 and Ag were deposited to form a metal electrode. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance and carrier lifetime of the PHJ and BHJ devices




Device structure

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Carrier lifetime (μs)




PHJ
0.68
2.91
60.45
1.20
3.5


BHJ
0.72
23.78
56.43
9.63
1.4




Exciton generation, diffusion and dissociation
In order to further understand the nature of the difference in Jsc, we measured and attempted to reconstruct the external quantum efficiency (EQE) curves through device modeling. The PHJ configuration simplifies device modeling and analysis of the heterojunction interface, since it neutralizes the complicated features related to the BHJ configuration such as phase segregation, exciton diffusion and charge collection. In such a PHJ device, the EQE at a given wavelength λ breaks down into the efficiency of four processes:19 (1)where tD,A is the thickness of the donor, acceptor layer, ηabs(λ,z) the absorption efficiency at position z (distance from the ITO side), ηED(z) the exciton diffusion efficiency, ηgen the charge generation efficiency at the interface (i.e., exciton dissociation efficiency) and ηcol the charge collection efficiency. The conversion of excitons into charge carriers and the corresponding efficiency of each step are visualized in Fig. 2a. Eqn (1) can be further rewritten as  when exciton harvesting efficiency (ηEH) is introduced, which represents the ratio of photo-generated carriers to excitons and can be described as ηEH = ηEDηgen.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrations of the charge generation process, where the D and A indicate that the process occurs in the donor and the acceptor, respectively. Upon light irradiation, the excitons are generated with efficiency ηabs(λ,z) and diffuse to reach the D/A interface with efficiency ηED(z). The excitons are converted into free charges with efficiency ηgen and collected in each electrode with efficiency ηcol. Inset exhibits the exciton profiles in the PHJ device. (b) Total absorption in the active layer (1-R-T) and the reflection spectra, together with the parasitic absorption of BHJ and PHJ films, which are based on the transfer matrix modeling. (c) Comparison of measured EQE, fitted EQE and IQE spectra between the PHJ and BHJ devices. 
Next, we turn to investigating all the steps towards the photocurrent using numerical simulations and experimental tests. The absorption efficiency ηabs (λ,z) and exciton generation rate profile G(λ,z) (Fig. S3, ESI†) can be calculated through an optical transfer matrix formalism following a well-established procedure based on the refractive index, extinction coefficients (see Fig. S4, ESI†) and device architecture.20,21 We first focus on the BHJ device. Fig. 2b shows the wavelength-dependent absorption efficiency ηabs(λ), together with the reflection spectra and the parasitic absorption profile for both devices. Then, photoluminescence quenching (PLQ) is employed to quantify the efficiency of exciton diffusion ηED,22 in which two excitation lasers with wavelengths of 520 nm and 850 nm are used to excite the donor and acceptor, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3a, the BHJ film shows strong PL quenching (>97%) for both the donor and acceptor singlet excitons, demonstrating that nearly all the excitons diffuse to the D/A interface, leading to an exciton diffusion efficiency approaching unity (ηDED = ηAED = 1) for the BHJ blend. Following the paper by Schopp et al. (ref. 23), the ηD,Agen value of the BHJ blend can be determined from the ratio between the experimentally determined saturated photocurrent Jph,sat and the theoretical maximum short-circuit current Jsc,theo, which is the integration of G(z) over the active layer thickness L (see Fig. 4b), namely , with G(z) being the wavelength integration of G(λ,z) (Fig. S3a and b, ESI†). According to Fig. 4a and b and the analysis in Note S1 (ESI†), ηD,Agen values for the donor and the acceptor are both estimated to be about 89%. Finally, we quantify the charge collection efficiency in the donor (ηDcol) and the acceptor (ηAcol), which are both 94%, by fitting to the measured EQE curve based on eqn (1). A good agreement between the calculated value and the experimentally measured EQE curves is obtained (Fig. 2c), confirming the accuracy of the calculated results. Such high ηgen (>85%) and ηcol (nearly unity) illustrate that the vast majority of excitons successfully reach the D/A interface and dissociate into free charges to form the external current.
 Fig. 3  Normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the neat film, PHJ and BHJ. (a) PL spectra of pure J52 film (blue line), and BHJ film (green line) which are excited by a 520 nm laser pulse, and pure IEICO-4F (red line) and BHJ film which are excited by a 850 nm laser pulse (magenta line). The green and gray pulses represent the 520 nm and 850 nm laser pulses, respectively. (b) The measured PL spectrum of PHJ film (green line) and the modeled PL spectrum (orange line) when excited by a 520 nm laser pulse, and the measured PL spectrum of PHJ film when excited by a 850 nm laser pulse (magenta line). 
 Fig. 4  The photocurrent–voltage (Jph–V) characteristics (a) and exciton generation rate G(x) distribution (b) for the BHJ under AM 1.5G illumination and when only the donor or acceptor is excited. Similarly, (c) and (d) depict the Jph–V curve and G(x) profile for the PHJ device. 
The calculations for the PHJ device are similar to those for the BHJ device except for the exciton diffusion process and the corresponding ηED. As shown in Fig. S3c and d (ESI†), owing to the complementary absorption, the donor/acceptor interface modifies the exciton generation profile G(λ,z) for the PHJ under different illumination. Firstly, it is worth noting that the absorption efficiency ηabs(λ) in the PHJ device (Fig. 2b) is profoundly lower than that of the BHJ device. But the shapes of their absorption profiles are nearly identical, implying a similar wavelength dependence in the EQE curve. Then, we noted that the EQE of the PHJ device is more imbalanced between the donor and the acceptor as compared to that of the BHJ device (Fig. S5, ESI†), indicating an imbalanced internal quantum efficiency (ηIQE) as is given by ηIQE = ηEQE/ηabs = ηEDηgenηcol. The values of ηD,AED were also measured by the PLQ experiment, as shown in Fig. 3b for the PHJ device, and the number of excitons in the donor quenched by 520 nm laser excitation is far more than the number of excitons in the acceptors quenched by 850 nm laser excitation. Based on the detailed analysis described in Note S2 (ESI†), we can obtain both ηDED and ηAED simultaneously, where ηDED = 39% and ηAED = 22% respectively, by modeling the PL spectrum of the PHJ film considering the FRET effect. Therefore, ηDED is almost twice as large as ηAED and it appears to be responsible for the observed imbalance of the PHJ's EQE spectra. In other words, the non-uniform exciton generation profile in each layer has rendered fewer excitons available near the interface in the IEICO-4F layer than in the J52 layer (see inset in Fig. 2a), hence resulting in a notable decrease at long wavelength in the IQE spectra of the PHJ device. In contrast, the IQE for the BHJ device is much more balanced between different wavelength regions, which is considered to arise from a sufficient, uniformly distributed D/A interface throughout the blend. With ηDED = 39% and ηAED = 22%, together with ηDED = 39% and G(z) shown in Fig. 4c and d and following the procedure mentioned above (Note S1, ESI†), we can obtain an estimated value of both ηDgen and ηAgen of about 83%, which is less than that of BHJ. This implies that the PHJ with a well-defined interface may not be conducive towards charge transfer like the BHJ since the frontier energy level could change with the transition from the BHJ to the PHJ, so as to change the driving force.
Following the procedure described in ref. 24 and combining the calculated exciton generation profile at different wavelengths (Fig. S3, ESI†), we further analyze the exciton diffusion length (d) and ηED in the PHJ device by numerically solving the exciton diffusion equation (see Note S3, ESI†). The d values are found to be (9.2 ± 0.3) nm for J52, and (7.5 ± 0.3) nm for IEICO-4F, respectively, which are surprisingly small and explain its inferior photovoltaic performance. Furthermore, if the proportion of excitons within the diffusion length to total excitons in the layer is set as the exciton diffusion efficiency, ηED in the J52 and IEICO-4F layers can be estimated to be (38 ± 1)% and (22 ± 1)%, respectively. Therefore, the excellent agreement between the calculated ηED from d and the determined ηED by fitting the EQE and PL spectra ascertains the validity of these methods.
In short, the lower Jsc in the PHJ device can be ascribed to an outcome of low exciton diffusion efficiency resulting from the short diffusion length, and inadequate photon absorption due to its thinner film.
Charge collection
Although the PHJ device shows a reduced exciton diffusion efficiency, it represents an ideal structure for charge collection, owing to the large domain size and minimized interface, which should be responsible for its improved FF with respect to the BHJ device. Comparing the recombination dynamics between the PHJ and BHJ configurations provides a refined approach to study the role of the heterojunction interface in charge transport and collection. Transient optoelectronic measurements, such as TPV and TPC, were then carried out to investigate the optoelectronic properties, including charge carrier density, carrier lifetime and corresponding recombination rate in these devices.25–27

Fig. 5a shows the open-circuit voltage dependence of average charge carrier density (nAL ∼ Voc) for the PHJ devices obtained under a 532 nm pulsed laser for J52 excitation or a 1064 nm pulsed laser for IEICO-4F excitation. All the carrier densities of the devices increase exponentially with increasing voltage, following nAL = n0eγVoc, where n0 is the average carrier density in the dark, and prefactor γ represents the dependence of density on voltage. Interestingly, the consistency of the outcome of the carrier densities for the PHJ device and BHJ device under donor or acceptor excitation clearly indicates that the same amount of charge carriers can be yielded regardless of which component is activated provided the excitation intensity is identical. The dependence of charge density on Voc for the PHJ device and the BHJ device is clearly different, although they both exhibit a clear exponential dependence. Importantly, as the prefactor γ also reflects the degree of distribution of tail states in the photoactive layers,28 we therefore can determine the characteristic tail energy (EU), a characteristic of decay energy in a disordered medium, following EU = 1/(2γ). Hence, the fittings to the data in Fig. 5a indicate an EU of 45 meV for the PHJ device and 65 meV for the BHJ device, respectively. As expected, the BHJ device has a larger tail energy, which corresponds to a wider distribution of density of states (DOS) that may result from a more energetic and structural disorder characteristic in the blend. This extended DOS into the bandgap can exchange charge carriers with conduction band states, and hence serve as shallow traps and lead to lower charge mobility, which greatly undermine charge collection. We believe that these shallow traps are distributed near the interface because recombination needs to occur at the interface. So this experiment reveals the role of interface distribution in recombination behavior.
 Fig. 5  (a) Dependence of average charge carrier densities on open circuit voltage. (b) The corresponding charge carrier lifetimes plotted against the charge densities, for the PHJ device and BHJ device for the cases with only donor excited or acceptor excited, respectively. (c) Comparison of transport and recombination kinetics for the PHJ and BHJ devices, including the Langevin recombination rate kL (dash-line) in contrast to the measured bimolecular recombination rate kbr (solid circles) obtained from charge densities and lifetime, where the color blue represents the BHJ and the color red represents the PHJ. The ratios of kbr and kL of both devices (i.e. ζ) close to Voc are also shown (stars). 
To identify the recombination pathways in the BHJ device, we hereafter dedicate our focus to the reaction order in the devices. The reaction order (δ) is a figure of merit that measures the composition of pathways through which the free charges recombine with free/trapped charge carriers. A δ greater than 2 is explained by the presence of band tail recombination pathways, which depends not only on the shape of the density of states, but also on the spatial distribution of carriers.29 The reaction order can be derived from EU using the relation δ = EU/kT + 1.27,30 Obviously, δ can be larger than 2 if the tail energy EU > kT. From this relationship, we deduce the reaction order to be 2.74 for the PHJ device and 3.50 for the BHJ device, both indicating the presence of higher order recombination via the tail states. Compared to the PHJ device with a large domain and minimized D/A interface, the BHJ device shows considerably larger δ due to its interpenetrating D/A distribution. These results clearly suggest that the isolated donor domains in BHJ could act as traps for electrons, and the acceptor domains become traps for holes during the extraction. Besides, the abundant interfaces between these domains provide a mass of interfacial states to work as traps to capture the free carriers, resulting in trap-assisted non-geminate recombination.
To verify that the analyzed devices exhibit different recombination characteristics, we compare the charge carrier lifetimes as a function of the carrier densities (τAL ∼ nAL), as shown in Fig. 5b. With increasing charge carrier density, all lifetimes are decreased following a power law dependence on charge density according to τΔn = τΔn0·n−λ, where (λ + 1) also represents the reaction order of non-geminate recombination.23,31 The steeper slope for the BHJ device compared to the PHJ one suggests that the PHJ device has a longer lifetime at a given charge density, especially under the standard working conditions of AM 1.5 G illumination, emphasizing the impact of domain size in charge recombination. It can be assumed that when electrons and holes are separated from the planar heterojunction interface beyond their capture radius, they are ideally free from the non-geminate recombination and thus exhibit a significantly longer lifetime. The reaction order can also be derived to be 2.78 for the PHJ device and 3.80 for the BHJ device by fitting the τΔn(nAL) curves, which are in excellent agreement with the results obtained from EU. This finding once again confirms that a lot more charges will be trapped in the complex morphology of the BHJ than in the simple PHJ architecture. Note that these non-geminate recombination behaviors are also consistent with the results obtained previously from fullerene-based (CuPc: C60) PHJ and BHJ devices.32
On the basis of the transient measurements shown in Fig. 5a and b, the experimental non-geminate recombination rate coefficient kbr(n), which can be expressed as ,33,34 where τAL is the total charge carrier lifetime, can further be determined accordingly, as shown in Fig. 5c. It can be clearly seen that kbr(n) of the PHJ device is nearly independent of charge density, while apparent dependence on charge density can be seen for the BHJ device, especially under high charge carrier density. The results can be understood in terms of the broader tail states and the higher reaction order in the BHJ device compared to the PHJ device as mentioned above. A non-ideal recombination such as trap-assisted recombination that occurs in the BHJ device, generates additional impact on the non-geminate recombination rate, and thus accounts for the deviation from an ideal second order bimolecular recombination.
Besides, the non-geminate recombination process in OSCs can be described by the Langevin model, where opposite charges meet each other at the D/A interface during a recombination event. Its recombination coefficient is limited by the slowest charge,35 given by , where μ is the slowest charge mobility and εεr is the dielectric constant. With an accurate determination of the experimental charge mobility at hand (Fig. S6, ESI†), we can determine the Langevin recombination coefficient kL to be 5.68 × 10−11 cm3 s−1, which is included in Fig. 5c for comparison. The availability of PHJ and BHJ device configurations, provides an opportunity to verify the validity of the Langevin theory for organic semiconductors, thereby enabling a direct comparison between the measured recombination coefficient kbr(n) and the apparent kL for each device.36
As depicted in Fig. 5c, kbr(n) values of both the PHJ and BHJ are smaller than the kL, consistent with the observations in the literature.37,38 We use a reduction factor ζ to quantify the discrepancy between theoretical expectation and experimental results following kbr = ζkL. Taking the value of kbr near open-circuit conditions as an example, the kbr values for the PHJ and BHJ devices are 4.3 × 10−12 cm3 s−1 and 2.5 × 10−11 cm3 s−1 respectively, which correspond to ζ values of 0.076 and 0.44, respectively. The smaller ζ in the PHJ device can be understood in terms of slower non-geminate recombination, because there is only limited interface area in which the opposite charges meet and recombine with each other. In the literature, it was shown that reduced Langevin recombination is ubiquitous in OSCs and its origin is related to “effective mobility”,39 domain purity,40 concentration gradients of charges35 and the charge transfer (CT) state.41 Herein, we focus on the role of the CT state in determining reduced Langevin recombination. The reduction factor ζ can be expressed based on the CT model (see Note S4, ESI†) as follows:42 (2)where f is the volume fraction, Eb is the binding energy of the CT state, σCT is the energetic disorder of CT state distribution, and N0 is the effective density of states. We consider that the following parameters for the PHJ and BHJ are equal since they share the same active layer materials,43 where Eb = 40 meV (Note S4, ESI†), N0 = 1020 cm−3, and σCT = 52 meV. With equal kL, the difference in ζ principally originates from the average CT state lifetime τCT and the volume fraction f which is related to the mixing ratio. We consider f = 0.9 for the BHJ due to the sufficient mixing, while f = 0.03 for the PHJ since only the D/A interface (about 2 nm) is mixed. The only unknown quantity τCT can be calculated according to eqn (2), and is τPHJCT = 3 ns and τBHJCT = 12 ns, respectively. We speculate that the difference of CT state lifetimes in the PHJ and BHJ devices is caused by the size of aggregation in the films, as a result of different extents of charge delocalization.44 Moreover, the density of CT states under open-circuit voltage conditions can be achieved using the equation41 (3)where ECT is the CT state energy. Interestingly, we find that the densities of CT states in the PHJ and BHJ devices are 5.15 × 1012 cm−3 and 4.22 × 1014 cm−3, respectively. Therefore, the lower ζ value observed in the PHJ device compared to that in the BHJ device is strongly related to the smaller D/A contact area, shorter CT state lifetime and lower density of CT states. It's interesting to note that the recombination process of free charge carriers is largely determined by the CT state, consistent with a model of recombination proposed by McGehee's group in which free carriers and charge transfer states are in equilibrium.41 Our result appears to validate this model and further quantitatively elucidates the origin of the reduced Langevin recombination in both PHJ and BHJ devices. Overall, all these results reveal that heterojunction interfaces and the concomitant mixing levels can play a crucial role in controlling kbr(n) and charge collection.
Conclusions
A PHJ device with a well-defined interface was introduced in this work to study the role of a heterojunction interface in exciton harvest and charge collection for non-fullerene OSCs. The exciton diffusion length was estimated to be 9.2 nm for J52 and 7.5 nm for the IEICO-4F domain by fitting the EQE spectra and device modeling. In addition to the short exciton diffusion lengths and large domain size, the discontinuous exciton generation profile due to the complementary absorption in the PHJ device has led to low and asymmetric exciton diffusion efficiencies of 39% and 22% for J52 and IEICO-4F, respectively. This is proved to be largely responsible for the low Jsc and unbalanced IQE in the PHJ device. On the other hand, optoelectronic studies revealed that the BHJ device with ubiquitous interface features pronounced energetic disorder and tail state distribution, which is highly unfavorable for charge transport. As a consequence, the BHJ device shows significantly higher reaction order and stronger non-geminate recombination, as compared to the PHJ device. Furthermore, we found that the PHJ device exhibits shorter CT state lifetime and lower CT state density compared to the BHJ device, thus leading to slower recombination compared to the BHJ device, which explains the differences in the Langevin recombination prefactor. In addition, the trade-off between exciton harvesting and charge collection highlights the essential role of interface distribution (i.e. domain size). As a result, balancing the exciton harvest and charge collection with delicate segregation of donor and acceptor domains in the BHJ should be a prerequisite for efficient non-fullerene OSCs. Our work also presents a model study of heterojunction interfaces by using the contact film transfer method, which enables fine tuning of the interfacial structure that minimizes interdiffusion between the layers. Such a method could be further extended to investigations regarding molecular orientation, energy alignment and the study of charge transfer states.
Author contributions
Quanbin Liang: literature investigation, conceptualization, methodology, device fabrication and writing – original draft. Yuan Xie: investigation, methodology and visualization, formal analysis, validation, and writing – review & editing. Hongbin Wu: conceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition, validation, project administration, supervision and writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51521002, 52003087 and 61775061) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M652874 and 2020T130206) for financial support.
References
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao and K. Sun, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Salim, R. Nekovei and R. Jeyakumar, Sol. Energy, 2020, 198, 160–166 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma and C. An, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Firdaus, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, F. Aniés, A.-H. Emwas, E. Yengel, X. Zheng, J. Liu and W. Wahyudi, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3663–3671 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Street, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3814–3830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, J. R. Tumbleston, M. Wang, E. Gann, F. Huang and H. Ade, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 864–872 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Gurney, D. G. Lidzey and T. Wang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2019, 82, 036601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, W. Wang, W. Huang, F. Lin, T. Li, S. Liu, X. Zhan, Y. Liang, C. Gao and H. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3556–3566 RSC .
N. A. Ran, S. Roland, J. A. Love, V. Savikhin, C. J. Takacs, Y.-T. Fu, H. Li, V. Coropceanu, X. Liu and J.-L. Brédas, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Firdaus, V. M. Le Corre, S. Karuthedath, W. Liu, A. Markina, W. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, M. M. Nahid, M. I. Nugraha and Y. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. Perdigón-Toro, H. Zhang, A. Markina, J. Yuan, S. M. Hosseini, C. M. Wolff, G. Zuo, M. Stolterfoht, Y. Zou, F. Gao, D. Andrienko, S. Shoaee and D. Neher, Barrierless Free Charge Generation in the High-Performance PM6:Y6 Bulk Heterojunction Non-Fullerene Solar Cell, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906763 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Lee, Y.-C. Chin, H. Yao, H. Cha, J. Luke, J. Hou, J.-S. Kim and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2422–2430 RSC .
T. H. Lee, S. Y. Park, X. Du, S. Park, K. Zhang, N. Li, S. Cho, C. J. Brabec and J. Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55945–55953 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1865–1868 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tada, Y. Geng, Q. Wei, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 450–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Izawa, K. Nakano, K. Suzuki, K. Hashimoto and K. Tajima, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3025–3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Chen, L. Zhong, L. Xue, C. Yang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4657–4664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, B. Gao, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakano, Y. Chen, B. Xiao, W. Han, J. Huang, H. Yoshida, E. Zhou and K. Tajima, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganäs, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3293–3297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ferron, M. Waldrip, M. Pope and B. A. Collins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4536–4548 RSC .
N. Schopp, V. V. Brus, J. Lee, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002760 CrossRef CAS .
B. Siegmund, M. T. Sajjad, J. Widmer, D. Ray, C. Koerner, M. Riede, K. Leo, I. D. Samuel and K. Vandewal, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604424 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Shuttle, B. O’regan, A. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. Bradley, J. De Mello and J. Durrant, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 80 CrossRef .
D. Credgington, R. Hamilton, P. Atienzar, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2744–2753 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Hawks, F. Deledalle, J. Yao, D. G. Rebois, G. Li, J. Nelson, Y. Yang, T. Kirchartz and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1201–1209 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, J. Kirkpatrick, U. Rau and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115209 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165201 CrossRef .
G. Adriaenssens, S. Baranovskii, W. Fuhs, J. Jansen and Ö. Öktü, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 9661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Credgington and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1465–1478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Foertig, A. Wagenpfahl, T. Gerbich, D. Cheyns, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1483–1489 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shuttle, R. Hamilton, B. O’Regan, J. a. Nelson and J. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 16448–16452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Shuttle, R. Hamilton, J. Nelson, B. C. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 698–702 CrossRef CAS .
L. Koster, V. Mihailetchi and P. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052104 CrossRef .
C. Groves and N. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 155205 CrossRef .
C. Deibel, A. Wagenpfahl and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 075203 CrossRef .
T. M. Clarke, D. B. Rodovsky, A. A. Herzing, J. Peet, G. Dennler, D. DeLongchamp, C. Lungenschmied and A. J. Mozer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1062–1067 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Heiber, C. Baumbach, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 136602 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Coropceanu and J. L. Brédas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24954 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Burke, S. Sweetnam, K. Vandewal and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500123 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, K. Zojer, B. Lassen, J. Kjelstrup-Hansen, H.-G. Rubahn and M. Madsen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 26588–26597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, N. R. Tummala, T. Wang, V. Coropceanu and J.-L. Brédas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803926 CrossRef .
X. K. Chen, M. K. Ravva, H. Li, S. M. Ryno and J. L. Brédas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601325 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc04676dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of J52 and IEICO-4F. (b) Normalized absorption spectra for the pure J52 film and pure IEICO-4F film, and the PL spectrum of J52 when excited by a 520 nm laser pulse, together with the PL spectrum of pure J52 film. (c) Schematic diagram of Contact Film Transfer (CFT) processing. First, a film with the structure of glass/PEDOT:PSS/J52 is prepared by successive spin coating of an aqueous solution of PEDOT:PSS and a chlorobenzene solution of J52. Similarly, a device of ITO/ZnO/IEICO-4F is prepared. Then this J52 film is lightly contacted onto the IEICO-4F one and 1 drop of water is placed on the edge of the stacked substrates. The water selectively penetrates into the PEDOT:PSS layer until it is completely dissolved, at this moment the J52 film is completely transferred onto the IEICO-4F film and the glass substrate is easily detached from the organic layer, resulting in a PHJ layer. At last, the MoO3 and Ag were deposited to form a metal electrode.	 

PHJ	0.68	2.91	60.45	1.20	3.5
BHJ	0.72	23.78	56.43	9.63	1.4
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustrations of the charge generation process, where the D and A indicate that the process occurs in the donor and the acceptor, respectively. Upon light irradiation, the excitons are generated with efficiency ηabs(λ,z) and diffuse to reach the D/A interface with efficiency ηED(z). The excitons are converted into free charges with efficiency ηgen and collected in each electrode with efficiency ηcol. Inset exhibits the exciton profiles in the PHJ device. (b) Total absorption in the active layer (1-R-T) and the reflection spectra, together with the parasitic absorption of BHJ and PHJ films, which are based on the transfer matrix modeling. (c) Comparison of measured EQE, fitted EQE and IQE spectra between the PHJ and BHJ devices.	 

 	Fig. 3  Normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the neat film, PHJ and BHJ. (a) PL spectra of pure J52 film (blue line), and BHJ film (green line) which are excited by a 520 nm laser pulse, and pure IEICO-4F (red line) and BHJ film which are excited by a 850 nm laser pulse (magenta line). The green and gray pulses represent the 520 nm and 850 nm laser pulses, respectively. (b) The measured PL spectrum of PHJ film (green line) and the modeled PL spectrum (orange line) when excited by a 520 nm laser pulse, and the measured PL spectrum of PHJ film when excited by a 850 nm laser pulse (magenta line).	 

 	Fig. 4  The photocurrent–voltage (Jph–V) characteristics (a) and exciton generation rate G(x) distribution (b) for the BHJ under AM 1.5G illumination and when only the donor or acceptor is excited. Similarly, (c) and (d) depict the Jph–V curve and G(x) profile for the PHJ device.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Dependence of average charge carrier densities on open circuit voltage. (b) The corresponding charge carrier lifetimes plotted against the charge densities, for the PHJ device and BHJ device for the cases with only donor excited or acceptor excited, respectively. (c) Comparison of transport and recombination kinetics for the PHJ and BHJ devices, including the Langevin recombination rate kL (dash-line) in contrast to the measured bimolecular recombination rate kbr (solid circles) obtained from charge densities and lifetime, where the color blue represents the BHJ and the color red represents the PHJ. The ratios of kbr and kL of both devices (i.e. ζ) close to Voc are also shown (stars).	 
	(2)
	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1tc04676d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
