Large enhancement in photocurrent by Mn doping in CdSe/ZTO quantum dot sensitized solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP04263E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP04263E
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 26771-26776Large enhancement in photocurrent by Mn doping in CdSe/ZTO quantum dot sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Artem 
            Pimachev
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Uma 
            Poudyal
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Vitaly 
            Proshchenko
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wenyong 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yuri 
            Dahnovsky
          
        
      *
      Department of Physics and Astronomy/3905, University of Wyoming, 1000 E. University Avenue, Laramie, WY 82071, USA. E-mail: yurid@uwyo.edu
Received 
      22nd June 2016
    , Accepted 23rd August 2016First published on 23rd August 2016AbstractWe find a large enhancement in the efficiency of CdSe quantum dot sensitized solar cells by doping with manganese. In the presence of Mn impurities in relatively small concentrations (2.3%) the photoelectric current increases by up to 190%. The average photocurrent enhancement is about 160%. This effect cannot be explained by a light absorption mechanism because the experimental and theoretical absorption spectra demonstrate that there is no change in the absorption coefficient in the presence of the Mn impurities. To explain such a large increase in the injection current we propose a tunneling mechanism of electron injection from the quantum dot LUMO state to the Zn2SnO4 (ZTO) semiconductor photoanode. The calculated enhancement is approximately equal to 150% which is very close to the experimental average value of 160%. The relative discrepancy between the calculated and experimentally measured ratios of the IPCE currents is only 6.25%. For other mechanisms (such as electron trapping, etc.) the remaining 6.25% cannot explain the large change in the experimental IPCE. Thus we have indirectly proved that electron tunneling is the major mechanism of photocurrent enhancement. This work proposes a new approach for a significant improvement in the efficiency of quantum dot sensitized solar cells.
The quest for higher efficiency solar cells leads to a search for new materials for both sensitizers and photoconductor (oxide) electrodes. We know that the efficiency of QDSSCs has increased slowly since QDs were first used as sensitizers in solar cells. Even though the power conversion efficiency has reached about 9%,1 the overall efficiency is relatively low compared to silicon based photovoltaics and the newer perovskite based solar cells.2 Carrier trapping and recombination, low charge transfer, and band misalignment are the major reasons for low efficiency in QDSSCs. Many of these issues have been studied to boost overall efficiencies but the results are still not encouraging. One of the possible methods to improve efficiency is to employ transition metals, e.g., Mn (with the oxidation state Mn2+), as dopants in sensitizers such as quantum dots (QDs) in QD sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs). The Mn impurities in QDs have the potential to change and introduce impurity states in the band gap.3–5 In CdSe, the presence of Mn dopants at low concentrations does not change the optical gap despite the strong sp–d hybridization and confinement effects.6–13 For this reason one would expect no change in the photocurrent in a QDSSC system made of CdSe QDs doped with Mn impurities with Zn2SnO4 (ZTO) as a photoconductor electrode. However, we have experimentally found a large enhancement in the photocurrent of up to 190% when doped with a low concentration of Mn, which was about 2.3%. From ab initio calculations we find that the charge injection from the quantum dot to the ZTO electrode due to the tunneling mechanism is significantly facilitated by the presence of the Mn atoms.
Experimental methods and characterization
The structural properties and dopant of the QDs are characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). In this study the photoanode is Zn2SnO4 nanowires, which have been synthesized by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. A 3 nm gold coated silicon wafer has been used as the substrate. The synthesis process has been reported previously.14,15 In these processes Zn foil and SnO2 powder are placed in the center of a tube furnace as a source material. Then the gold coated substrate is placed adjacent to the source downstream. The furnace is heated up to 900 °C and maintained at this temperature for two hours. Subsequently, N2 and O2 gases are supplied to the furnace where the pressure is maintained at 8 Torr throughout the synthesis process. After growth, the nanowires are transferred to an FTO glass substrate. The CdSe quantum dots are deposited on the Zn2SnO4 photoanode layer by a successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method.16–19 Here, 0.03 M of Cd(NO3)2 in ethanol is used as the cadmium ion source solution. The Se ion source solution is prepared from SeO2 and NaBH4 also dissolved in ethanol in an argon purged glovebox. The Zn2SnO4 photoanode is immersed in the Cd ionic solution, rinsed with pure ethanol, and allowed to dry for one minute. This is followed by immersion in the Se ionic solution, and the same rinsing and drying process. These six total steps comprised one cycle. Samples are coated with the two layers of ZnS using the SILAR method by immersing in the Zn2+ and S2− ionic solution to passivate the QD surface. The process of SILAR coating is carried out in an inert atmosphere within a glovebox. To incorporate manganese into a CdSe quantum dot layer, manganese acetate (Mn(CH3COOH)2) is added to the Cd ion solution.20 For this study, Zn2SnO4 photoanodes are sensitized by both CdSe and MnCdSe quantum dots. Solar cells are fabricated in a sandwich configuration by adhering platinum coated fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass to the QD sensitized Zn2SnO4 anode using a polymer electrolyte. The sensitized photoanode has been first coated with the electrolyte and then heated in a drying oven at 80 °C for several minutes until the electrolyte became viscous.21 The Pt–FTO glass is then pressed to the anode and baked at the same temperature for several hours to allow the electrolyte to dry completely and effectively glue the two electrodes together. The IPCE data are obtained using a monochromatic light source consisting of a 50 W tungsten halogen lamp and a monochromator. The light beam is modulated by a chopper and lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR830). The presence of Mn impurities in the CdSe quantum dots is confirmed using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy (see Fig. 1(a)). The Mn atoms exhibit resonance lines with a well-resolved hyperfine splitting of the central Mn2+ sextet in the EPR spectrum. The hyperfine constant obtained from the EPR spectrum, is 90 ± 1 G. The g factor is close to two. Moreover, we also observe the forbidden M = ±1 transitions, which are seen as shoulder peaks.22 These forbidden transitions have been attributed to a third order perturbation due to spin contribution to the total Hamiltonian resulting from the admixture of fine and hyperfine structure terms.23 The hyperfine splitting values indicate that there are more Mn ions residing on the surface than inside the QDs. Such Mn positioning on the QD surface could strongly affect the tunneling current to the ZTO electrode in the experiments as we discuss later in more detail. The dopant and structural properties of the QDs are characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and EPR spectroscopy. Fig. 1(b) shows the XRD pattern of a doped sample along with a CdSe reference, which verifies the formation of the CdSe zinc blende crystal structure. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) shows that the average Mn concentration is about 2.3%.
 Fig. 1  (a) Electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum of Mn doped CdSe. (b) X-ray diffraction pattern of Mn doped CdSe. 
IPCE measurements
The most striking result of this study appears in the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra. Fig. 2 demonstrates the comparison of the IPCE spectra between Mn doped and undoped CdSe QDs after six cycles. We have also measured the absorption spectra for the system with and without Mn dopants. We have found that there is no substantial influence from the Mn impurities on the absorption spectra. For the samples shown, the photoelectric injection current is increased by up to 190% at λ = 400 nm upon Mn doping.
 Fig. 2  IPCE after six cycles for Mn doped (the red curve) and undoped (the black curve) MnCdSe/ZTO and CdSe/ZTO QDSSCs, respectively. 
Computational details
The three software packages have been used for different purposes: (a) Gaussian24 is used for the geometry optimization of a slab that includes a QD/ZTO interface and absorption spectra for small quantum dots, (b) ADF25–27 is employed for the calculation of the electron transfer matrix elements between the QD and ZTO surface, and (c) VASP28 is implemented for the calculation of absorption spectra for large quantum dots (D > 5 nm), which are treated as a bulk.
To find the electric current or electron transfer rate through the QD/ZTO interface we consider the model as a slab schematically shown in Fig. 3 (the physical justification of the model will be discussed later). The initial geometry of a QD in the slab is adapted from the bulk structure by cutting out a fragment of a specified size. The doping is conducted by replacing certain surface Cd atoms with Mn atoms. The ZTO substrate is modeled from a slab of a ZTO crystal. The interface region between the ZTO and CdSe subsystems (Mn:CdSe) is then optimized within Gaussian. For the optimization we used DFT formalism with the B3LYP exchange–correlation functional. For the Zn, Sn, O, and Mn atoms we selected the 6-311+G* basis set and for the Cd and Se atoms we used the LANL2dz basis set.11 The Gaussian package provides the most reliable and fast results for geometric optimization. As soon as the geometry of the slab is optimized, we then calculate the electron tunneling matrix elements. Gaussian does not have a subroutine to perform such calculations. Thus we used an alternative piece of software, ADF, which can conduct such calculations. For the ADF calculations we employ the B3LYP exchange–correlation functional and the TZP basis set on all atoms to obtain the effective transfer integrals, V, between the ZTO and QD fragments. ADF provides an electron tunneling matrix element between two reactants and products. For the initial electronic state we choose the electron location to be in the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the CdSe quantum dot (with and without Mn atom). The final electronic state corresponds to when the electron is in the ZTO lowest unoccupied molecular orbital. For these calculations we assume the electron transfer is local, and therefore it is reasonable to consider only the QD atoms close to the interface and neglect the other QD atoms. For the same reason we choose only the ZTO atoms close to the QD/ZTO interface. Thus for the calculations of the transition matrix elements we consider a QD/ZTO slab as a model where there are 16 atoms of QD and 15 atoms of ZTO. The slab model with and without Mn atoms is schematically shown in Fig. 3. As we see from this figure the Mn atoms merely substitute the Cd atoms.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the interfaces with the overlapping wavefunctions for (a) undoped and (b) Mn doped QDs. 
To find the photocurrent we have to know whether the Mn doping resulted in changes in the absorption spectra. Thus calculations as well as experimental measurements of the absorption are necessary. For optical spectra calculations we use the Gaussian and Vienna Ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP)28 for small and large quantum dots, respectively. Gaussian software is employed to study the optical spectra for the Cd16Se16 and Cd15Mn1Se16 quantum dots. The CdSe quantum dot is cut out from the würtzite bulk structure and optimized using the DFT method described above. The absorption spectra for both QDs are calculated using a TDDFT method adopting the CAM-B3LYP exchange–correlation functional. For large quantum dots, D > 5 nm, where the size effect is small, we use the bulk absorption spectra. Thus we employ solid state programs for such calculations. To calculate absorption spectra for the CdSe zinc blende bulk structure we employ the VASP package. A DFT method with the PBE exchange–correlation functional29 and a projector augmented plane-wave (PAW) pseudopotential30 with a cutoff energy of 400 eV is employed for the electronic-structure calculations. The imaginary part of the dielectric function is calculated by the three different methods: (a) independent phase approximation (IPA) using the B3LYP exchange–correlation functional, (b) GW3, and (c) the Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE). The Γ-centered k-point meshes are generated by the Monkhorst–Pack scheme.31 For the optical spectra calculations we have checked 4 × 4 × 4, 8 × 8 × 8, and 11 × 11 × 11 k-point meshes and found out that there is no significant difference between 8 × 8 × 8, and 11 × 11 × 11 grids. Therefore we have chosen an 8 × 8 × 8 k-point mesh for the calculations.
Results and discussions
To understand the nature of the photocurrent enhancement we first verify the hypothesis wherein the increase in absorption is due to the presence of the Mn impurities in the quantum dot. The experimental absorption spectra show that there is no difference for the doped and undoped cases as demonstrated in Fig. 4(a). The second curve with the Mn dopants is not shown because it matches the absorption spectrum of the system with no Mn atoms. We have also computed the CdSe QD absorption spectra with and without Mn doping. The calculated data demonstrate no effect from Mn doping on the absorption spectra as shown in Fig. 4(b). The similar insensitivity of absorption to Mn doping was also reported in ref. 12, 13 and 18. Thus we conclude that the main reason for the IPCE enhancement is not because of light absorption. There must be another reason for the change in the photocurrent. We suggest that a large change in the electron injection takes place at the QD/ZTO interface. It is obvious that the inner Mn atoms in a CdSe QD do not affect the photocurrent due to the low concentration of the Mn impurities. A much higher effect is apparent when the Mn atoms are located at the interface with the ZTO electrode. Assuming that the computational results for the tunneling current quantitatively confirm the experimental measurements, we believe that a tunneling mechanism explains the large IPCE enhancement disregarding other possible physical reasons such as electron trapping, etc. In this work we do not provide the absolute value of the photocurrent, we only provide the ratio of the photocurrents with and without the Mn dopants.
 Fig. 4  (a) Experimental absorption spectra for Mn doped and undoped CdSe QDs. (b) Calculated absorption spectra for Mn doped and undoped CdSe QDs of 1.2 nm in diameter. 
To explain the difference between the experimental and calculated absorption spectra depicted in Fig. 4 we suggest that there is a broad size distribution of quantum dots. We have calculated the absorption spectrum for a small quantum dot (see Fig. 4(b)). To cover the whole range of QD sizes we have to calculate the absorption spectrum for a large quantum dot. For QDs with sizes of D > 5 nm the band gap is approximately equal to the band gap in the CdSe bulk (1.7–1.9 eV).32 Thus we assume that the optical spectra of large QDs are close to the bulk optical spectra as well. Therefore we calculate the optical absorption spectrum for a CdSe crystal (zinc blende) bulk using state-of-the-art computational methods such as IPA, GW3, and BSE, which include electron–hole (exciton) effect and e–e corrections. The GW3 and BSE methods are considered to be the most advanced methods for the description of electron correlation effects. The GW3 and BSE methods provide similar absorption spectra where the latter is redshifted by 0.2 eV due to the strong exciton effect as shown in Fig. 5. To explain the experimental absorption spectrum which exhibits monotonic behavior (no peaks) (see Fig. 4(a)) we have to suggest that this is due to the broad size distribution of the QDs. The larger QDs are perfectly described by the bulk spectra shown in Fig. 5. The absorption spectra for QDs with smaller diameters will lie in-between the spectra presented in Fig. 4(b) and 5.
 Fig. 5  Calculated absorption spectra for a CdSe zinc blende crystal structure for a bulk material using the following computational methods: IPA (the green curve), GW3 (the red curve), and BSE (the blue curve). 
The broad size distribution smears the peak structure and illustrates the experimental dependences upon QD size. The QD size distribution is unknown and includes small and the large QD sizes. For the qualitative understanding of the experimental absorption spectra we have calculated the absorption spectra for QDs of two different sizes, which are presented in Fig. 4(b) and in Fig. 5. The spectra in Fig. 5 have the following features such as peaks at 650 nm (1.9 eV) and 400 nm (3 eV) in the GW3 approximation. In the GW3 approximation the 650 nm peak corresponds to the first conduction band while the 400 nm peak represents the second conduction band. For a 1.2 nm quantum dot the absorption spectrum looks similar but it is shifted towards the blue region. The 550 nm peak in Fig. 4(b) corresponds to the 650 nm peak in Fig. 5. The QD size distribution function smears the first and second absorption bands resulting in the experimental spectrum depicted in Fig. 4(a).
The averaged spectrum injection current (IPCE) enhancement is 160% as shown in Table 1. One would expect, however, no change in the IPCE value because the absorption remains unchanged after doping. In reality we observe a large enhancement in the photocurrent. The photoelectric current is mainly determined by two factors: (a) light absorption and (b) electron tunneling injection from the quantum dot into the semiconductor. The experimental and computational absorption spectra (Fig. 4) lead us to believe that the mechanism of such a large increase in the photocurrent is not due to light absorption. Thus other mechanisms have to be considered to explain the IPCE enhancement. First we assume that the change in the injection current is due to electron tunneling.
Table 1 IPCE enhancements for (a) the maximum value at λ = 400 nm, (b) the average quantity, and (c) the calculated squared ratio of the tunneling matrix elements for the Mn doped and undoped CdSe/ZTO QDSSCs




(a) Experimental maximum
(b) Experimental average
(c) Calculated |VMnCdSe/VCdSe|2




190%
160%
150%




In this hypothesis the tunneling strongly depends on the nature of the QD metal atoms (Mn or Cd) that are very close to the semiconductor (ZTO) surface. The overlap of the Mn (or Cd) orbitals in the QD LUMO electronic state with the ZTO LUMO wavefunctions determines the injection current.33 A schematic picture of the overlapping electronic wavefunctions is shown in Fig. 3. Electron tunneling can be considered as a nonadiabatic electron transfer where the rate constant can be described in terms of time-dependent perturbation theory with the electron transfer rate (1)where V is the electron transition matrix element and ρ(E) is the electron density of states on the ZTO surface. In this model we assume that the electron transfer takes place from the bottom of the QD conduction band (LUMO). If the electron is excited to the higher conduction electronic states, a fast relaxation due to electron–photon interaction brings the electron down to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital.34 The injection electric current from the QD to the ZTO semiconductor can be described in terms of Bardeen's Hamiltonian33 and therefore, the expression for the current from the LUMO state can be written in terms of nonequilibrium Green's functions, which are again proportional to |V|2.33 Thus (2)In this estimation of the current ratio we have assumed that the density of states at the ZTO surface remains unchanged in both cases.
In this work we have found the electron transition matrix elements from quantum chemical calculations where the electron is initially located in the QD LUMO. The final electronic state corresponds to localization of the electron in the ZTO LUMO electronic state. From ADF calculations25–27 we have found that: (a) for the CdSe QD without Mn atoms |VCdSe/ZTO| = 0.026 eV and (b) for the CdSe QD with Mn atoms |VMnCdSe/ZTO| = 0.032 eV. The experimental and computational results for JMnCdSe/ZTO/JCdSe/ZTO are presented in Table 1. We see that the calculated |VMnCdSe/ZTO/VCdSe/ZTO|2 ratio is approximately equal to 1.5, which is very close to the experimental average value of 1.6. The relative discrepancy between the calculated and experimentally measured ratios of the IPCE currents is only 6.25%. For other mechanisms (such as electron trapping, etc.) the remaining 6.25% cannot explain the large change in the experimental IPCE. Thus we have indirectly proven that electron tunneling is the major mechanism of the photocurrent enhancement. Fig. 3 schematically demonstrates the interfaces with the spatial overlap of the wavefunctions for the (a) undoped and (b) Mn doped QDs. Due to the greater wavefunction overlap of the Mn doped QDs, which reduces the barrier height for electron injection, more electrons transfer to the ZTO nanowire photoanode.
Summary
Despite the unchanged QD absorption in the presence of a small amount of Mn dopants, we have experimentally found a large enhancement in the photocurrent by up to 190% or 160% for the photocurrent averaged over the spectrum (see Fig. 4(a)). The photoelectric current is determined by two major factors: (a) light absorption and (b) electron injection from the conduction band. As shown in Fig. 4(b) the absorption spectrum is not affected by Mn dopants at low concentrations. To explain the mechanism of such a large photocurrent enhancement we have proposed an electron tunneling mechanism for the photocurrent increase through the presence of Mn atoms located at the QD/ZTO interface. Ab initio quantum chemical calculations calculated a 150% enhancement in the injection current. The relative discrepancy between the calculated and experimentally measured ratios of the IPCE currents is only 6.25%. For other mechanisms (such as electron trapping, etc.) the remaining 6.25% cannot explain the large change in the experimental IPCE. Thus we conclude that electron tunneling is the main mechanism of the photocurrent enhancement. The results obtained in this work point to a new route for the significant improvement of QDSSC efficiency.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant (No. DEFG02-10ER46728) from the Department of Energy to the University of Wyoming and the University of Wyoming School of Energy Resources through its Graduate Assistantship program.
References
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dai, E. M. Sabio, W. Wang and J. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 183901 CrossRef .
P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Horoz, Q. Dai, F. S. Maloney, B. Yakami, J. M. Pikal, X. Zhang, X. J. Wang, W. Wang and J. Tang, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 3, 024011 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Wise, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Proshchenko and Yu. Dahnovsky, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7555 RSC .
V. Proshchenko and Yu. Dahnovsky, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28314 CAS .

          V. Proshchenko and Yu. Dahnovsky, in Photoinduced Processes at Surfaces and in Nanomaterials, ed. D. Kilin, ACS Symposium Series, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC,  2015 Search PubMed .
V. Proshchenko and Yu. Dahnovsky, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2015, 252, 2275 CrossRef CAS .
V. Proshchenko and Yu. Dahnovsky, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26828 RSC .
V. A. Vlaskin, N. Jansen, J. van Rijssel, R. Beaulac and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Beaulac, S. T. Ochsenbein, and D. R. Gamelin, in Nanocrystals Quantum Dots, ed. V. Klimov, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton,  2010, ch. 11, p. 397 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, L. Lu and W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10841 CAS .
J. Chen and W. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 213904 CrossRef .
L. Lu, J. Chen and W. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 123902 CrossRef .
M. A. Becker, J. G. Radich, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Lee, M. Wang, P. Chen, D. R. Gamelin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Nicolau, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1985, 22/23, 1061 CrossRef .
S.-K. Kim, C. V. Gopi, J.-C. Lee and H. J. Kim, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 163104 CrossRef .
Y. Yang and W. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 70 CrossRef CAS .
F. Moro, L. Turyanska, J. Wilman, A. J. Fielding, M. W. Fay, J. Granwehr and A. Patane, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. de Wijn and R. F. van Balderen, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 1381 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci and G. A. Petersson, et al., Gaussian 09 Revision E.01, Gaussian Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
ADF, SCM, Theoretical Chemistry, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2014.
G. te Velde, F. M. Bickelhaupt, E. J. Baerends, C. Fonseca Guerra, S. J. A. van Gisbergen, J. G. Snijders and T. Ziegler, J. Comput. Chem., 2001, 22, 931 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fonseca Guerra, G. J. Snijders, G. te Velde and J. E. Baerends, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1998, 99, 391 Search PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 558 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Blochl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953 CrossRef .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1976, 13, 5188 CrossRef .
G. Pellegrini, G. Mattei and P. Mazzoldi, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 073706 CrossRef .

          H. Haug and A.-P. Jauho, Quantum Kinetics in Transport and Optics of Semiconductors, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2008 Search PubMed .
A. Shabaev, Al. L. Efros and A. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Electron paramagnetic resonance spectrum of Mn doped CdSe. (b) X-ray diffraction pattern of Mn doped CdSe.	 

 	Fig. 2  IPCE after six cycles for Mn doped (the red curve) and undoped (the black curve) MnCdSe/ZTO and CdSe/ZTO QDSSCs, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the interfaces with the overlapping wavefunctions for (a) undoped and (b) Mn doped QDs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Experimental absorption spectra for Mn doped and undoped CdSe QDs. (b) Calculated absorption spectra for Mn doped and undoped CdSe QDs of 1.2 nm in diameter.	 

 	Fig. 5  Calculated absorption spectra for a CdSe zinc blende crystal structure for a bulk material using the following computational methods: IPA (the green curve), GW3 (the red curve), and BSE (the blue curve).	 

190%	160%	150%
	(1)
	(2)

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
