[PbX 6 ] 4− modulation and organic spacer construction for stable perovskite solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02218D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02218D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4470-4510[PbX6]4− modulation and organic spacer construction for stable perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Lian 
            Wang†
, 
      
        
          
            Bohong 
            Chang†
, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yutong 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lu 
            Pan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Longwei 
            Yin
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Liquid-Solid Structural Evolution and Processing of Materials, Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, P. R. China. E-mail: yinlw@sdu.edu.cn
Received 
      12th July 2022
    , Accepted 1st September 2022First published on 7th September 2022AbstractThe unique lattice structure and chemical bonding nature of perovskites endow them with illustrious photovoltaic properties, which have enabled perovskite solar cells (PSCs) to achieve a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.7%, approaching that of commercial silicon-based devices. However, the instability originating from the soft ionic lattice characteristics of perovskites makes the device lifespan much shorter than the industry demand of 20 years. Herein, the influence of the lattice structure on the stability of perovskites is thoroughly profiled from the perspectives of [PbX6]4− octahedra and organic spacers, which serve as a supporting skeleton and structural stabilizer, respectively. The crystal structure, corresponding photophysical properties and stability performance are first dissected, followed by a discussion on the essential roles of octahedra and organic spacers in the environmental degradation, ion migration, phase segregation behavior, lattice strain and phase transition. Furthermore, the typical strategies to enhance the intrinsic and extrinsic stability of perovskites are summarized with regard to octahedral modulation and organic spacer construction, including component engineering for octahedral reinforcement, management of lattice defects and stress, and dimensional design to stabilize the perovskite lattice. Based on this, several key scientific issues and promising future directions are presented to enhance the stability of PSCs and promote their commercialization.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have rapidly emerged as leading competitors in the photovoltaic field due to their easy and low-cost solution preparation and efficient photovoltaic conversion capability, which have attracted widespread attention in academia and industry. The typical three-dimensional (3D) perovskite crystal structure with the chemical formula of ABX3 is constructed by a metal halide [BX6]4− octahedral framework through corner sharing, with A-site cations filling the cuboctahedral cavities. The [PbX6]4− octahedral structure is the supporting skeleton of perovskites and serves as a channel for the transmission of photogenerated carriers. The Pb–X bond length and Pb–X–Pb bond angle determine the orbital hybridization between Pb and X, which further governs the energy level structure and photophysical properties of photogenerated carriers. In this review, we focus on the structural characteristics and fundamental properties of the inorganic octahedral and organic layers and dissect their decisive roles in the perovskite stability. We systematically examine the lattice structural features and bonding properties on the photovoltaic properties and stability of perovskites from the perspectives of inorganic octahedra and organic spacers, followed by a discussion of the environmental degradation mechanism, ion migration, phase segregation behavior, lattice strain and phase transition process of perovskites. We systematically discuss enhancing the mechanism of the intrinsic and environmental stability of perovskites from two directions of octahedron modulation and organic spacer construction, including component engineering for octahedral regulation, defect passivation and stress relief, and dimensional management to protect the perovskite structure. Finally, several key scientific challenges and promising future directions are presented for the stability enhancement of PSCs to promote their commercialization.

1. Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have rapidly emerged as leading competitors in the photovoltaic field due to their easy and low-cost solution preparation and efficient photovoltaic conversion capability, which have attracted widespread attention in academia and industry.1–6 Over the past decade, researchers have been devoted to developing perovskite materials and optimizing their preparation process to boost the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs. At present, the highest PCE achieved is 25.7%,7 which has surpassed the performance of traditional thin-film solar cells and is close to that of monocrystalline silicon photovoltaic cells. Also, most advanced lab-scale devices have achieved more than 20% efficiency.8,9 This is mainly attributed to the excellent photoelectric properties of perovskite materials, including their suitable direct bandgap, high light absorption coefficient (≈105 cm−1), high carrier mobility, and long carrier diffusion length (>1 μm).10–13
For PSCs to move from laboratory to commercialization, they must realize the reliable industry-standard stability; specifically, they need to ensure decades of stable power conversion under atmospheric humidity and oxygen, sunlight irradiation and operating temperature conditions.14 If the lifetime of PSCs can reach 15–20 years, combined with the solution process, perovskite devices can enable the production of low-cost electricity (0.05 USD kW h−1).15 In 2009, the first reported lifetime of a perovskite solar cell was only a few seconds.16 In contrast, currently, the optimal stability of perovskite devices under standard aging conditions has been extended to one year, but it is still far behind the 25 year lifetime of commercial silicon-based photovoltaic devices.17 Therefore, it is necessary to address the stability of PSCs to drive their commercialization.
Compared with crystalline silicon, which is composed of chemically stable atoms through strong covalent bonds, the typical metal halide perovskites exhibit soft ionic lattice characteristics, corresponding to weak chemical bonds and a low defect formation energy.18,19 Consequently, they are susceptible to degradation under the stimulation of moisture, oxygen, heat, light and bias voltage, resulting in device failure, where most of these factors are difficult to avoid during the device operation. Besides, the fragile lattice structure of metal halide perovskites leads to a low activation energy for ion migration, which is further facilitated by ion defects, especially A- and X-site-related defects.20–24 Consequently, this results in the formation of more point defects. In addition, a large amount of lattice strain exists in polycrystalline perovskite films, which makes them mechanically brittle and prone to undergo phase transformation in response to external stimuli.25–27 Overall, the stability of the A, B, and X components and the bonding properties between them play critical roles in the environmental degradation, ion migration, lattice strain, and phase transition of perovskites during the device operation. Consequently, to strengthen the stability of perovskites, it is necessary to have an in-depth and systematic understanding and effective management of their lattice structure and chemical bonding properties.
The typical three-dimensional (3D) perovskite crystal structure with the chemical formula of ABX3 is constructed by a metal halide [BX6]4− octahedral framework through corner sharing, with the A-site cations filling the cuboctahedral cavities. After more than a decade of intensive research in the field of halide perovskites, researchers have developed numerous ABX3 formulations. However, considering the requirements of appropriate bandgap, low non-radiative recombination and long-term stability, the range of available materials is greatly reduced. The A-site cations are mainly FA+, MA+, and Cs+.28 To achieve efficient photovoltaic conversion, the B-site ions are dominated by lead. Also, to achieve the ideal small bandgap, the X-site anions are mainly I with a small amount of Br or Cl doping to adjust the photoelectric properties.29 Among them, the [PbX6]4− octahedral structure is the supporting skeleton of perovskites and serves as the channel for the transmission of photogenerated carriers. The Pb–X bond length and Pb–X–Pb bond angle determine the orbital hybridization between Pb and X, which further governs the energy level structure and photophysical properties of photogenerated carriers.30–33 The soft ionic lattice nature of perovskite allows for easy polarization to generate polarons with excess carriers, resulting in superior carrier transport capabilities.34 However, the structural fragility associated with this feature directly leads to the intrinsic instability of perovskite materials. Alternatively, A-site cations are employed as structural stabilizers and charge balancers.35 Due to the poor self-stability or inappropriate size resulting in octahedral distortion, the common A-site cations of FA+, MA+ and Cs+ trigger the degradation of perovskite. Additionally, they also indirectly alter the physical properties of perovskites by influencing the structural parameters of the octahedra in their lattice. Therefore, strengthening the structural firmness of the octahedra, improving the self-stability of the A-site cations, and optimizing the bonding characteristics between the octahedra and A-site cations in metal halide perovskite are crucial approaches to reinforce their stability. In particular, bulky A-site cations with long-chain organic groups have made a great breakthrough by virtue of their exceptional hydrophobic properties. Furthermore, the construction of robust low-dimensional (LD) structures will be a reliable method to further elevate the stability of perovskites in the future.36,37
In this review, we focus on the structural characteristics and fundamental properties of the inorganic octahedral and organic layers and dissect their decisive roles in the stability of perovskites. Firstly, we systematically examine the mechanism of the lattice structural features and bonding properties on the photovoltaic properties and stability of perovskites from the perspectives of inorganic octahedra and organic spacers, followed by a discussion on the environmental degradation mechanism, ion migration, phase segregation behavior, lattice strain and phase transition process of perovskites (as illustrated in Fig. 1). Next, we summarize the research progress in enhancing the intrinsic and environmental stability of perovskites from two directions of octahedron modulation and organic spacer construction, including component engineering for octahedral regulation, defect passivation and stress relief, and dimensional management to protect the structure of perovskites. Finally, the current serious challenges and the future development direction are proposed to promote the commercialization of PSCs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of perovskite degradation behavior and modulation of octahedral and spacer layers. 
2. Crystal structure and fundamental properties
The unique crystal structure and chemical components of perovskites endow PSCs with glorious photovoltaic properties, while their corresponding soft ionic lattice characteristic is the origin of their instability. Among them, inorganic octahedra, as the backbone of perovskites, assume the function of carrier transport channels, while the organic layer is the structural stabilizer. Previous research demonstrated that strengthening the perovskite structure through structural design of the organic layer often comes at the expense of carrier transport. Therefore, recognizing the crystal structure features of perovskites and understanding their consequent properties is the basis for future material design. In this section, we elaborate the crystal structure, defects and carrier properties of perovskites and their structure-activity relationships from the perspectives of inorganic octahedra and organic spacers.
2.1 Crystal composition and structure
The typical 3D perovskite crystal structure with the chemical formula of ABX3 is based on an inorganic [BX6]4− octahedral framework with A+ filling the cuboctahedral cavities (Fig. 2a). In general, A, B, and X are monovalent organic or inorganic cations (methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), and Cs+), divalent metal cations (Pb2+ and Sn2+) and halide or pseudohalide anions, respectively. The [BX6]4− octahedra serve as the supporting skeleton of perovskites, which are connected in three dimensions through corner sharing, while the A cation acts as a structure stabilizer and charge balancer.
 Fig. 2  (a) Cubic perovskite crystal structure.38 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Calculated tolerance factors for perovskites with different A-site cations.41 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) Crystal structures of different phases for FAPbI3 and CsPbI3.42 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
It has been proven that the lattice structure of perovskites plays a decisive role in their photoelectrical properties and stability. An ideal crystal symmetry aids the formation of an adequate bandgap and strong direct bandgap p–p optical transitions for PSCs. The symmetry of the 3D perovskite structure is dominated by [BX6]4− octahedra, while the A-site cations or other doping ions indirectly affect the crystal symmetry through the B–X bond length and B–X–B bond angle. To create the perfect structure with a local octahedral symmetry (Oh symmetry), the ionic radius of A, B, and X needs to meet stringent requirements. On the one hand, the octahedral factor (μ) is an important empirical parameter to assess the structure stability of [BX6]4−, which is defined by the following formula:38,39 (1)where rB and rX represent the ionic radii of the B-site and X-site, respectively. The octahedral cavity produced in six closely spaced spheres of radius rX has a radius of 0.41rX. Therefore, B-site cations with a radius of less than 0.41rX cannot be coordinated octahedrally without overlapping of the X-site anions. In the case of halide perovskites, the value of μ must be limited to the range of 0.442 to 0.895 to build a stable octahedral structure.40 On the other hand, given that the [BX6]4− octahedra form a corner-sharing structure in the perovskite lattice, the volume of incorporated A-site cations is determined by the size of the given halide octahedron. When a large or tiny A-site cation in comparison to this volume is introduced into the lattice, the halide octahedra becomes distorted and tilted, reducing the crystal symmetry and even leading to phase transitions. In this regard, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t) is a useful tool for theoretically predicting the structural formability and the resulting crystal phase, which is presented in the following equation:38–40 (2)where rA is the ionic radius of the A-site cation. In principle, the perfect cubic perovskite crystal structure (α) is generated when the tolerance factor is 1. Empirically, the 3D perovskite structure is favored when the tolerance factor is in the range of 0.8–1.0 (Fig. 2b).41 For a smaller t close to 0.8, the tilted octahedra usually lead to less-symmetric perovskite structures, such as tetragonal phase (β) and orthorhombic phase (γ). As presented in Fig. 2c, the β phase is formed by the collective rotation of [BX6]4− octahedra around the c axis. The octahedra further tilt out of the ab plane, leading to the γ phase. The corresponding structures show relatively slight distortions from the ideal cubic phase without bond breaking. However, if the [BX6]4− octahedra undergo substantial distortions, causing some B–X bonds to break, the material becomes a non-perovskite structure (δ).42 The fracture of the B–X bond weakens the s–p coupling and results in an increased bandgap and heavier hole effective masses.31,43 When large A-site organic spacers make t larger than 1, this can shear the 3D perovskites along one axis into a two-dimensional (2D) layer structure (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  (a) From left to right, 2D perovskites produced by cutting along the 〈100〉, 〈110〉 and 〈111〉 directions.50 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Structures of Ruddlesden–Popper phase, Dion–Jacobson phase, and ACI phase in 〈100〉-oriented 2D perovskites.37 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
Chemical management of the compositional elements, especially the X-site anions and organic spacer cations, is a powerful tool to stabilize the structure of perovskites and optimize their properties. The component modulation of the X-site directly causes the distortion of the octahedra due to the different ionic radii, which determines the structural stability of perovskite crystals. Furthermore, the X-site anions with various electronegativity have a pronounced impact on the perovskite bandgap and energy level position via the overlap between the B s–X p and B p–X p orbitals. Compared with bromine and chloride ions, perovskite absorbers with iodide ion as the X-site have the smallest bandgap, and thus iodide ions are the most widely used element among the halides in PSCs.31 Besides, partial substitution of iodide with bromine or chloride can adjust the tolerance factor to alleviate the octahedral distortion, thus enhancing the robustness of the material. This modification simultaneously influences the perovskite phase, bandgap and charge transport property. In addition, the X-site anions in perovskite are not limited to halogens and can be more defined as monovalent anions. Pseudohalides are widely used in perovskite materials by virtue of their comparable ionic radii and chemical properties to halogen ions, such as cyanide (CN−), thiocyanate (SCN−), azide (N3−), formate (HCOO−), and superhalogens (BF4−, PF6−, and BH4−).44–49 Among them, the stable SCN− is frequently used as a partial replacement of iodide due to its similar ionic radius to I− and its ability to form strong interaction with Pb2+, resulting in enhanced environmental stability and inhibited iodide-induced photodegradation.44 Additionally, SCN− can contribute to the formation of LD perovskites to enhance their structure stability.
The bulky organic spacer cations employed in the perovskite lattice cleave the 3D perovskite into a 2D structure. Owing to the hydrophobicity and steric hindrance of bulky spacer cations, they endow LD perovskites with much better stability than 3D structures by locking the [BX6]4− octahedral framework and blocking the penetration of moisture and oxygen. In the 2D structure, two adjacent layers of octahedral slabs are separated by an organic spacer layer rather than connected by corner sharing. Specifically, the octahedra can be separated along various planes of the 3D perovskite, leading to 〈100〉-, 〈110〉-, and 〈111〉-oriented 2D structures (Fig. 3a).50 The 〈100〉-oriented 2D perovskites are most commonly reported, which can be further divided into Ruddlesden–Popper (RP), Dion–Jacobson (DJ) and alternating cations in the interlayer space (ACI) phases (Fig. 3b).37,51,52 Their corresponding general formulas are R2An−1BnX3n+1, RAn−1BnX3n+1 and RAnBnX3n+1, respectively, where R denotes the bulky organic cation, and n stands for the number of inorganic layers between the spacer layers. The organic layer is linked to the inorganic slabs by hydrogen bonds between the ammonium groups and octahedra. Also, weak van der Waals interaction is established between the spacer layers in the RP phase. According to the valence state of the organic cations, they can be classified as monoammonium cations and diammonium cations, which form RP and DJ phases, respectively. In terms of chemical structure, the spacer cation contains an amino head and an organic tail, and the corresponding geometry influences the bond angle of B–X–B. The organic tail can be further divided into linear, branched and cyclic (including aliphatic and aromatic) based on its shape. In the case of the amino head, the presence of large substituent groups on N makes the two-dimensional structure unstable. Thus, primary ammonium cations are the most favorable for the formation of 2D perovskites (RNH3+ > R2NH2+ > R3NH+ > R4N+) owing to their suitable size to fit in the inorganic pocket.53 For bulky cations that cannot penetrate the [BX6]4− framework, the interaction between the organic layers and inorganic octahedra is weaker with small inclination of the [BX6]4− octahedra. It is worth noting that the formation of 2D perovskite is not limited by the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, and thus a wider range of spacer cations can be utilized to prepare perovskite materials with diverse functions.
2.2 Relationship to the defects
Numerous defects are inevitably present in polycrystalline perovskite films due to the low-temperature solution process, which are the primary reason for the degradation of perovskites.18 The individual electronic structure of the inorganic octahedra determines the physical properties of the defects in perovskites. In addition, as the supporting skeleton of the perovskite lattice, the fragility of the octahedral structure leads to the formation of pernicious defects in 3D perovskites. Alternatively, bulky organic cations with a unique molecular configuration can effectively reinforce the octahedral skeleton and block the erosion from moisture and impurities, thus inhibiting the generation of defects.
Due to the inverted band structure of metal halide perovskites, the state contributed by the A-site cations is far from the band edges.35 Thus, the [BX6]4− octahedra dominate the electronic structure of perovskites. Also, the effect of cations on their band structure is indirectly caused by changing the tilt of the octahedra or the lattice volume. Taking MAPbI3 as an example, Fig. 4a shows the formation of energy level for PbI64− octahedra. The orbital overlap between I 5p and Pb 6s produces antibonding (σ*) and bonding (σ) orbitals, where the antibonding is responsible for the valence band maximum (VBM) of perovskites with a major contribution from I. The conduction band minimum (CBM) is determined by the antibonding of the Pb 6p–I 5p orbital coupling. Because of the ionic nature of metal halide perovskites, the overlap between the Pb 6p and I 5p orbitals is relatively weak. Consequently, the Pb 6p orbitals contribute 70–90% to the formation of CBM. The 6s2 electronic configuration of Pb indicates a strong antibonding hybridization between the Pb 6s and I 5p orbitals, which produces a dispersed valence band and elevates the energy of the VBM. The spin orbit coupling (SOC) of the heavy lead atom increases the splitting of the Pb 6p orbital, pushing the CBM energy downwards.32,33
 Fig. 4  (a) Energy band formation for MAPbI3. (b) Calculated energy levels of point defects in MAPbI3. The values in parentheses are the formation energies of neutral defects.54 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of surface passivation by 2D perovskites.36 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
This unique electronic structure endows perovskites with shallow defect properties and a defect level located within the band or near the band edges.54,55 For example, the defect state of I vacancies (VI) is composed of Pb dangling bonds. Therefore, the VI defect level is located between the Pb p orbital and CBM. Given that the CBM is not far from the Pb p orbital, the energy level of VI is close to the CBM. Similarly, the energy level of the Pb vacancies (VPb) lies between the VBM and I p orbital. The energetic distance between these two levels is also narrow, and thus the VPb level is adjacent to the VBM. A systematic theoretical study was carried out to explore the transition energy levels of the possible intrinsic point defects. As presented in Fig. 4b, defects with a low formation energy such as I interstitials (Ii), I vacancies (VI), and Pb vacancies (VPb) show a shallow transition energy level. Alternatively, IPb, IMA and PbI anti-site substitutions, etc. with deep transition levels have a comparatively high formation energy.30,54 Consequently, metal halide perovskites have relatively high defect tolerance compared to conventional semiconductors (GaAs).
However, in terms of defect density, the low formation energy of defects leads to a much higher trap state density in perovskite polycrystalline films (1016–1018 cm−3 for MAPbI3) than typical monocrystalline silicon (108 cm−3). Moreover, under a built-in electric field, the soft ionic solid nature of perovskites results in a low activation energy for the migration of charged point defects.56 This phenomenon further leads to stability issues such as phase separation and material degradation. The fragile octahedra are primarily responsible for the deterioration of perovskites. For instance, iodide is oxidized by photogenerated holes, resulting in the formation of VI or even I2.57 Also, the volatilization of I2 causes irreversible degradation of perovskites. Besides, halide vacancies produce uncoordinated lead, while excessive halide also induces negative defects, such as PbI3−. A-site vacancies also trigger the agglomeration of lead on the perovskite surface. The different binding force between lead ions and halide anions with various electronegativity gives rise to phase separation. In addition, the mobile iodide ions not only accumulate at the interface, thus altering the regional band bending scenario, but also react with spiro-OMeTAD and silver electrodes.58,59 Accordingly, together with point defects, the abundant imperfections at the grain boundaries and interfaces are the starting point and accelerant for material degradation in the environment.60
Bulky organic spacer cations provide a reliable strategy to strengthen and protect the 3D perovskite lattice by forming LD perovskites. In particular, 2D/3D perovskites have recently received significant attention as a promising strategy to advance the commercialization of PSCs (Fig. 4c). Specifically, three types of materials are utilized to introduce 2D structures in 3D perovskites, including ammonium salt, bulky amines, and integrated 2D perovskites.61–63 Among them, ammonium salt can occupy the A and X vacancies and react with the excess lead halide. However, there are also some reports demonstrating that bulky amines are superior to produce 2D perovskites without introducing uncoordinated halides. In addition, by virtue of the larger bandgap of 2D perovskites, the rational design of their structure enables effective charge transport. When bulky cations replace a number of organic cations in the precursor solution, LD structures are incorporated in 3D absorbers to strengthen the perovskite robustness by constructing mixed-dimensional perovskites. They can also be placed at the interface between the perovskite and carrier transport layer. On the one hand, bulky spacers can neutralize the surface defects of 3D perovskites, while on the other hand, they can protect against moisture ingression and block impurities from other layers within the device to inhibit defect generation.
The spacer cation is composed of an amino head and an organic tail. Also, their size and geometry are crucial to suppress defect formation and passivate defects through fixation of the [BX6]4− framework and steric hindrance (Fig. 4c).36 Adjusting the shape of the amino head and organic tail can tune the steric hindrance and the interaction between the spacers and inorganic octahedral layers. Also, extending the alkyl chain length and decorating amine spacers with a water-resistive group can effectively improve the hydrophobicity.64 In the case of cyclic organic spacer cations, especially aromatic rings, they have less freedom of movement, and thus greater steric hindrance.65,66 Consequently, the appropriate molecular configuration can build barriers for the formation of defects in the perovskite lattice, thereby reducing the defect density from the root. It is worth noting that too bulky organic cations cannot form LD perovskites. Additionally, due to the strong quantum/dielectric confinement effect (discussed in detail in Section 2.3), the bulky organic layer is detrimental to carrier transport. Therefore, the rational selection and design of organic cations and balancing the hydrophobicity and conductivity are essential for the construction of 2D/3D perovskites. It is also indispensable to explore the chemical interactions between adjacent bulky spacers, organic spacers and the inorganic sub-lattice.
2.3 Relationship with the carrier transport
The [BX6]4− octahedra are connected in three dimensions through corner sharing to form the perovskite structure, which act as transport channels for photogenerated carriers. This distinct electronic structure endows perovskites with exceptional photoelectric properties, including high absorption coefficient (105 cm−1), suitable direct bandgap, long electron-hole diffusion length, and bipolar carrier transport. Robust organic spacers separate adjacent inorganic layers to construct LD perovskite structures, and thus their molecular configuration and properties play an essential role in charge transport.
Under illumination, the optical transition in perovskites from the VBM to the CBM occurs as soon as photons are absorbed. The VBM is determined by the overlap between the I 5p and Pb 6s orbitals with a major contribution from I. Also, the CBM is formed by the antibonding of the Pb 6p–I 5p orbital coupling with a major contribution from Pb. Compared with GaAs, the perovskite CBM with p character enables a higher density of states (DOS), leading to a higher joint density of states (JDOS) (Fig. 5a and b). The JDOS represents the total number of possible photoelectric transitions, which is proportional to the absorption coefficient.54,67 Consequently, benefiting from the direct bandgap and efficient p → p transition, perovskites possess a high absorption coefficient (Fig. 5c).31,54,68
 Fig. 5  (a) DOS of MAPbI3, CsSnI3 and GaAs. (b) JDOS of MAPbI3, CsSnI3 and GaAs. (c) Optical absorption coefficient of MAPbI3, CsSnI3 and GaAs.54 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Bonding diagram for 2D and 3D perovskites.77 Copyright 2003, the American Physical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of carrier transport in the crystal structure of a general 2D perovskite.78 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the alternation of organic layers (blue and black) and corner-sharing inorganic layers (red) in an n = 1 perovskite, where the thickness of the inorganic layer is d and the thickness of the organic layer is L. (g) Energy diagram of the 2D structure in (f). The dielectric constant ε2 of the organic framework (gray region) is smaller than that of the inorganic framework (red region) ε1.80 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
The carrier transport process is closely related to the effective mass of charge carrier, non-radiative recombination and scattering process. Also, the carrier effective mass is determined by the electronic configuration of the [BX6]4− octahedra. As a heavy atom, the 6s2 electronic configuration of lead induces a larger dispersion in the lower part of the conduction band than the VBM in p–s semiconductors. The higher dispersion makes it easier for electrons to hop from one atomic site to another, implying a lighter effective mass. Due to the strong antibonding hybridization between the Pb 6s and I 5p orbitals, the upper part of the valence band is dispersed. Consequently, the small hole effective mass is comparable to the electron effective mass, resulting in ambipolar conductivity.
Non-radiative recombination and scattering processes are usually caused by harmful defects in perovskites. The unavoidable defects induce additional transition levels, especially deep-level defects near the middle of the bandgap, which can trap electrons or holes and become Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) non-radiative recombination centers. As described in Section 2.2, by virtue of the unique electronic structure of octahedra, most of the point defects in perovskites exhibit shallow energy levels. Therefore, de-trapping is easier. Furthermore, the energy barrier of shallow defects to capture opposite charge carriers is comparable to the bandgap, resulting in a lower SRH non-radiative recombination rate.
In addition, the cross-bandgap hybridization caused by the interactions between the unoccupied Pb 6p state and occupied I 5p state results in lattice polarization, thereby increasing the dielectric constant markedly.54 A high dielectric constant can reduce the capture cross-section of trap states and screen charged defects and impurities. These effects effectively diminish the carrier scattering and capture and prolong the carrier lifetime. Alternatively, this dielectric environment decreases the exciton binding energy by weakening the Coulombic interactions between electrons and holes,69,70 consequently promoting the separation of charge carrier.
Strangely, compared to conventional covalent semiconductors, halide perovskite materials exhibit low carrier mobility, which possibly is caused by their ion-crystal property inducing electron–phonon interactions and the formation of a localized polaron state, accompanied by the distortion of the surrounding lattice.71,72 Polaron formation will increase the carrier effective mass and make the carrier move more slowly due to the cover of the phonon cloud.73 Surprisingly, slow-moving carriers present desirable diffusion lengths in solution-processed perovskite films with high defect densities. One reason for this is that the dielectric screen effect induced by a high dielectric constant offsets the carrier trapping by the defect field.74 The other hypothesis is that the formation of special large polarons can protect the charge carriers from being trapped and scattered, which are formed by the deformation of the octahedral skeleton.34,75
However, it has been demonstrated that 2D perovskites exhibit localized narrow bands caused by the zero dispersion along the vertical axis and Jahn–Teller effect (Fig. 5d).76,77 Consequently, compared with their 3D analogues, LD perovskites possess a larger bandgap. Bulky organic spacer layers with hydrophobicity separate the electrically-active inorganic sheets to establish a multiple-quantum-well structure, where the inorganic and organic layers function as a potential well and barrier, respectively.78 The insulating organic spacers disrupt the orbital hybridization between neighboring inorganic slabs, causing the photo-generated carriers to be confined within the inorganic layers with high exciton binding energy and hindering charge transport. Alternatively, the dielectric constant of the bulky spacers is much smaller than that of the inorganic octahedra, giving rise to a dielectric confinement effect.68 The organic spacers supply inferior charge screening to excitons, intensifying the coulombic interactions between photo-generated electrons and holes, and thereby increasing the exciton binding energy.
Consequently, the octahedral stacking situation and the structure and properties of the organic spacers play a vital role in the carrier transport process of LD perovskites. The charge transfer mechanism between the inorganic octahedral layers is considered to be mediated by a tunneling process, in which the organic spacers act as barriers (Fig. 5e). The tunneling distance and barrier height are two key factors affecting the carrier transport (Fig. 5f and g), where the former depends on the spacing of the organic layers, and thus reducing the cation size is the most effective solution to decrease the barrier width.79,80 The barrier height is related to the energy level alignment between the inorganic slabs and organic spacers as well as the intermolecular interactions between adjacent organic cations. Specifically, the influence mechanism of the organic cation structure and properties on the carrier transport is mainly reflected in the following aspects. Firstly, the modification of the cation configuration such as fluorine substitution can adjust the organic layer spacing, and thus enhance the orbital interaction between octahedral layers.65,66 Secondly, the functional organic cations with a large conjugated structure allows the orbitals of the spacers to greatly overlap with the VBM or CBM of the inorganic layer.81 Thirdly, the molecular interactions between the organic cations, such as sulfur–sulfur and π-stacking interactions, are established to promote charge transport.82 In addition, organic cations with high dielectric constants reduce the coulomb interaction and increase the Bohr radius between electrons and holes.83 To improve the conductivity, researchers also introduced charge-transfer complexes and conductive polymers into the organic layers.84,85 Finally, considering the anisotropic charge transport of 2D structures, the crystal orientation perpendicular to the substrate can facilitate the transfer of photo-generated carriers to the charge transport layer.86
3. Influences on the stability of perovskites
The chemical composition, structure and bonding properties of the inorganic octahedra and organic layers determine the stability of the perovskite layers. In this section, we explore the instability mechanisms of lead-based perovskites involved in environmental deterioration, ion migration, phase separation behavior, lattice strain and phase transition. Also, the essential roles played by inorganic octahedra and organic spacers in the above-mentioned instability behaviors are analyzed to gain insight into the origin of the limited material stability in lead-based perovskites.
3.1 Environmental stability
The ionic nature of metal halide perovskite makes it easy for them to dissolve in polar solvents, while also allowing them to adsorb and react with ambient moisture.87 Water molecules can easily disrupt the bonds between the lead halide octahedra and A-site cations and form hydrated compounds with perovskite via hydrogen bonding. Upon extended exposure, the octahedra gradually transform from a 3D network of shared corners to an octahedral chain for the monohydrate and an isolated 0D structure for the dihydrate. This structural deformation further makes the A-site cations susceptible to deprotonation. Taking MAPbI3 as an example, the hydrolysis reaction process follows the following equations: 4MAPbI3 + 4H2O ↔ 4[MAPbI3·H2O] ↔ MA4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2 + 2H2O(3) MA4PbI6·2H2O + 4MAI → PbI2 + 2H2O(4)
Given that MA+ is acidic, it can give water molecules a proton to evolve into the volatile product CH3NH2 (Fig. 6a).88 In addition, the adsorbed water will serve as a catalyst, speeding up the transition of the perovskite from a photoactive phase to a non-perovskite phase.89 It has been demonstrated that hydrophobic large organic cations can effectively prevent water molecules from invading the perovskite lattice.36,90 As shown in Fig. 6b, the 2,5-thiophenedimethylammonium (ThDMA) molecule and thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,5-diyldimethanaminium (TTDMA) molecule were employed to fabricate 2D DJ perovskite films, (ThDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13 (ThDMA-Pb) and (TTDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13 (TTDMA-Pb), respectively. Both of them exhibited much higher moisture stability than MAPbI3, especially TTDMA-Pb with extended π-conjugation ring. In addition, adjusting the octahedral lattice parameters via the X-site component has been proven to enhance the hydrogen bonding between the octahedra and A-site cations.
 Fig. 6  (a) Structure of MAPbI3 in its cubic phase, monohydrate phase CH3NH3PbI3·H2O and the dihydrate (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O.88 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) XRD results of MAPbI3, ThDMA-Pb and TTDMA-Pb perovskite films stored in ambient air at 45 ± 5% RH under natural light.90 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of possible O2 binding and reduction sites in MAPbI3([001] plane) and corresponding formation energy of superoxide.91 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Equilibrium value of the chemical potential of iodine in the dark (where μI,dark = μI,out) effectively increases in the presence of light.111 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Summary of cation rotational kinetics in MAPbI3. The figure below illustrates the relative likelihood that the methylammonium CN axis will orient itself to a given lattice plane, with longer (shorter) arrows indicating increasing (decreasing) likelihood.96,97 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (f) PTAI intercalation induces the formation of PTA-MAPbI4 perovskite capping layer as MA+ locking agents to stabilize the MAPbI3 perovskite.98 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Perovskites are also vulnerable to oxygen due to their fragile octahedral structure, especially under light illumination. The iodide vacancies in the PbI6 octahedra provide a convenient channel for oxygen intrusion.91 The oxygen molecules occupying iodine vacancies will capture photogenerated electrons in the conduction band of perovskites to generate the highly reactive superoxide O2− (Fig. 6c). Subsequently, the superoxide anions deprotonate the acidic A-site cations to destroy the perovskite structure. Besides, it has been shown that oxygen can also degrade perovskites by promoting the formation of Pb–O bonds.92
External protection can partially address the issue of water and oxygen erosion but cannot prevent photodegradation. Also, metal halides have been shown to undergo photodegradation. In the case of lead iodide, photogenerated carriers oxidize iodide to iodine and reduce the lead ion to Pb0.93 Similarly, a photochemical process occurs in lead halide perovskites. Under illumination, the effective chemical potential of iodine rises and the iodide in the octahedra is oxidized to a smaller radius neutral iodine by photogenerated holes, leaving a vacancy and an interstitial in the perovskite lattice (Fig. 6d).111 This process can be illustrated by the following equation: I×I + h+ → I×i + V+I(5)
Furthermore, if the generated neutral iodine sublimates, it causes irreversible degradation of perovskites to metallic Pb and AI. In addition, researchers found that the illumination of high-energy photons can excite electrons to the antibonding states of NH3, thereby dissociating the N–H bond in MA+ to produce gaseous CH3NH2 and H2.94 These photochemical reactions are the basis for the photodegradation of perovskites and further lead to ion migration and phase separation, which are described in detail in the following section. It is worth noting that although the bulky organic spacer layer can effectively enhance the perovskite stability by reinforcing the octahedral skeleton and blocking water molecules, 2D perovskites also suffer from light-induced degradation.95 In (PEA)2PbI4, the fragile dangling Pb–I bonds perpendicular to the plane direction of the inorganic octahedral layer induce photodegradation.
The thermal annealing step is necessary for the preparation of most perovskite thin films, and thus it is essential to pay attention to the thermal stability of perovskites given that the temperature will reach 60–80 °C during the operation of solar cells. Among the components, the A-site cations play an important role owing to their noticeable volatility. Simultaneously, they have a significant influence on the octahedral structure. Due to the soft crystal nature of perovskites, the interaction between [PbX6]4− and the organic cations is relatively weak. Also, the A-site cations are freely rotatable with rotational correlation times of 1–15 ps (Fig. 6e).96,97 The rotation phenomenon is more distinct as the temperature increases, which further weakens the hydrogen bonding between the organic cations and octahedral cages. In particular, MA+ undergoes changes in its orientation during heat treatment. Thus, the hydrogen bonding is broken at a relatively low temperature, degrading the perovskite thermally. In this respect, the bulky organic cations slow down the rate of thermal decomposition because they are heavier (Fig. 6f).98 Besides, given that the organic sublimation process begins with the formation of HI,99,100 the rate of thermal degradation is proportional to the possibility of HI generation. The potential of being deprotonated to create HI and organic bases increases as the organic cations become more acidic. This phenomenon also provides guidance for the design of organic spacer layers. Moreover, the actual operating temperature of PSCs fluctuates between −15 °C and 85 °C, where temperature changes result in the distortion of the octahedra, resulting in the alteration of the perovskite phase. For example, MAPbI3 undergoes a phase transition from tetragonal to cubic phase at a relatively low temperature of 60 °C. Although both phases are photoactive, the effect of repeated phase transitions on stability is yet to be clarified.
3.2 Ion migration and phase segregation
Due to the soft ionic solid nature and ionic conductivity of perovskite materials, the ion migration progress is inevitable in PSCs and the ions in the lattice have low activation potential barriers and high diffusion coefficients.101–104 Ion migration leads to atomic rearrangement or triggers redox chemistry between the migrating ions and other species, or even causes the collapse of the local lattice structure, which seriously undermine the stability of devices. In addition, it is also responsible for the phase segregation and hysteresis phenomena.102,105
At absolute zero, the ideal single crystal is composed of static atoms. As the temperature increases, the atomic vibrations increase the free energy of the system, and thus crystal defects are formed, which diminish the free energy by raising the entropy of the system. These defects are ionic in nature and are susceptible to activation under the influence of external factors, allowing ions to move from one position to another (Fig. 7a).106,107 The minimum free energy barrier that needs to be overcome for an ion to move from its initial position to an adjacent position is defined as the activation energy (Ea), which can be estimated by the Nernst–Einstein relationship, as follows: (6)where σ denotes the conductivity, σ0 is a constant, T is the temperature, and k represents the Boltzmann constant. In addition, several studies have calculated the Ea of various ions in MAPbI3 by first principle calculations to theoretically explore the possibility of migrating ions.108 Among them, the iodide in the fragile octahedral structure has the smallest activation energy of 0.58 eV and migrates on a timescale of a few microseconds to a few seconds, thus making it the most likely to migrate.106,107,109 Due to its poor interaction with octahedra, MA+ has the second smallest value at 0.84 eV. Thus, perovskites are easily activated by light, electric field, heat, etc. to overcome the free energy potential barrier for migration.
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of the ion migration pathways.106 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (b) Cross-sectional STEM-HAADF micrographs for the fresh device (upper panel) and after 12 h in the dark at 1.2 V bias (lower panel). Colored pictures are NMF loadings (maps) for selected components, with the fresh sample at the top of each pair and biased sample at the bottom.24 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Microscopic events that allowed the halide to separate and the associated time scales. (d) Schematic diagram of selective iodide photo-oxidation following events 1–4 in (c), where the oxidized iodide transports as a vapor to accumulate in regions with lower oxidation rates.57 Copyright 2021, Cell Press. (e) Schematic of the degradation processes for MAPbI3 perovskite induced by I2.114 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic of the vacancy path for ion migration in 3D and quasi-2D perovskites and the formation energy of vacancy defects in 3D and quasi-2D perovskites.124 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
In PSCs, the built-in electric field extends over a considerable area of the absorber layer, providing a driving force for charged ion migration. Thus, the halogen anions and organic cations migrate in opposite directions and accumulate at the interfaces between the selective contact layer and perovskite layer. The resulting formation of a Debye layer shields the built-in electric field and hinders the extraction of photogenerated carriers. Abate's group applied a bias voltage to PSCs to simulate the electrical load experienced by a photovoltaic device in operation. Also, the results showed that when sufficient charge is injected into the device, the accumulation of defects driven by ion migration leads to the amorphization of perovskite films (Fig. 7b).24 Besides, the migrating ions may also react with the carrier transport materials, which can further aggravate the ion migration.110
In addition to electric field factors, light also affects ion migration behavior. During the device operation, the excess photogenerated carriers neutralize the charged vacancies left behind by the migrating ions, thus reducing the energy barrier of ion migration. The increase in light intensity significantly reduces the activation energy of ion migration.111 It has been demonstrated that the oxidation of halides in the octahedra plays an essential role in this process, and subsequently triggers the separation of halides in mixed halide perovskites, especially when the halide doping exceeds 40% (Fig. 7c and d).57,112 Taking the Br:I system as an example, iodide ions are more easily oxidized by photogenerated holes to form neutral iodine with a smaller radius, which occupies the interstitial sites readily and creates iodine vacancies in the perovskite lattice.106,107 Due to polarizability and covalency of the interstitial iodine, it may be stabilized by structural relaxation to form iodine radicals, I3−, or I2, etc. (Fig. 7e).111,113,114 Some regions are more susceptible to oxidation owing to the film inhomogeneity and experimental asymmetry. The natural variation in composition produces I-rich regions with a lower bandgap. The accumulation of photogenerated carriers in these low bandgap regions deforms the surrounding perovskite lattice through electron–phonon coupling.115 This increased strain eventually leads to I-rich and Br-rich phases. When the light is removed, the increase in entropy promotes the re-homogeneous distribution of halides, and thus the light-induced halide phase separation is a reversible process.101
Considering the important role played by X- and A-site ions, the introduction of pseudohalides and alkali metal cations blocks the ion migration by enhancing the chemical bonding to fixed ions or providing a steric hindrance.22,45,116–120 In addition to the internal defects in perovskites, the grain boundaries are also significant channels for ion migration.105,121 Also, ions migrate faster along the grain boundaries than the perovskite bulk.122,123 Bulky and rigid conjugated organic spacers are more effective inhibitors of ion migration by constructing LD structures at the grain boundaries or interfaces. They can prevent ions from leaving the plane by forming spatial barriers through van der Waals interactions (Fig. 7f).108,124–129
3.3 Strain
The mechanical soft lattice characteristics of perovskites mean that they are highly susceptible to lattice deformation under stress and the resulting strain will induce material degradation. Therefore, strain management is of greater importance to enhance the perovskite stability than the optimization of morphology.
The thermal annealing process is an essential step in the preparation of most high-quality perovskite films. The difference in the thermal expansion coefficient between the substrate and the perovskite layer generates external stress on the perovskite lattice, which causes residual strain and is a serious intrinsic instability factor for perovskites (Fig. 8a–c).27,130 The thermal expansion coefficient of the perovskite material is usually higher than that of the substrate material, and during the cooling process after annealing, the substrate limits the shrinkage of the perovskite lattice in the in-plane direction, resulting in an in-plane tensile strain (Fig. 8c). This strain affects the entire perovskite film, causing an increase in the interplanar d spacing relative to the original perovskite lattice. This will be reflected in the position of the XRD diffraction peak associated with this plane. Under tensile strain, the expansion of the perovskite lattice directly alters the Pb–X bond length and Pb–X–Pb bond angle in the octahedral structure. This weakens the bonding strength of the corner-sharing octahedral skeleton, leading to defect formation, lower activation energy for ion migration and collapse of the lattice structure. Besides, the lattice mismatch generated by the different crystal plane spacings between the substrate and perovskite can also give rise to compressive or tensile strain.131
 Fig. 8  (a) Thermal expansion coefficients of functional layers widely used in PSCs, including substrates, ETLs, HTLs, and perovskites. (b) Annealing temperatures of different perovskite films. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of compressive and tensile strains.130 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustrating the local strain, which is decreased by forming point defects or by doping with small ions.133 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Relationship between defect formation energy (DFE) and lattice strain.134 Copyright 2022, Tsinghua University Press. (f) Crystalline structures and polymorphic phase transitions of (f) FAPbI3 and (g) CsPbI3 perovskites. The deformation of [PbI6]4− octahedra after temperature reduction promotes the formation of lowered-symmetry β- and γ-black phases.144 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
In addition to external stress, the polycrystalline nature of perovskite films is also a source of stress.132 For a given octahedron, the size of the octahedral cavity that can be occupied by the A-site cations is determined, and a large or small cation relative to the cavity volume will distort the octahedral structure and produce internal strain (Fig. 8d). Thus, to relax the local strain, internal structural defects are generated in the perovskite lattice (Fig. 8e).128–135 This microstrain causes local deviations in the interplanar spacing from its average value, which is represented in changes in the Bragg peak width.136 Atomic size mismatch, ion migration, light/thermal/bias stimulation, and point defects are all relevant to local strain in the perovskite lattice. For example, larger size FA cations lead to local tilting of the [PbX6]4− octahedron, which makes the Pb–X–Pb bond angle deviate from the ideal 180° and produces local lattice distortion. In polycrystalline perovskite films prepared by the solution method, orientation mismatch at the grain boundaries is inevitable and structural distortions may result from the formation of defects to relieve the strain. The intragrain strain-induced octahedral distortion also causes the occurrence of phase transitions, which is an important source of intrinsic instability. Taking FAPbI3 as an example, the perovskite under anisotropic lattice strain undergoes structural rearrangement, and moisture in the environment triggers and accelerates the transition from the α phase to the yellow phase. The corner-sharing octahedra are transformed into s face-sharing structure to accommodate the relatively large FA+ to relieve the strain.25
The enormous amount of strain in perovskite films makes them one of the most mechanically vulnerable photovoltaic materials. Therefore, reasonable regulation of the lattice strain is required to enhance the intrinsic stability of perovskite polycrystalline films. In the case of internal stresses, adjusting the tolerance factor of perovskites to within the stable cubic phase range is a straightforward and effective strategy, which can be achieved by alloying with different sizes of A- and X-site ions.26,128,137 Alternatively, the incorporation of bulky organic cations to form LD structures or 2D–3D mixed-dimension perovskites has been demonstrated to be an effective method to relieve the lattice strain.138–140 They can promote the optimal orientation crystallization of perovskite films. Additionally, given that 2D perovskites exhibit a lower Young's modulus, 2D perovskite layers constructed at 3D interfaces can release the residual strain in perovskite polycrystalline films.141 The organic cations with long chain groups provide additional structural support and increase the plasticity of the films.142
3.4 Phase transition
For a given octahedral structure, the size and electronegativity of the B- and X-site ions determine the volume of the octahedral cavity that can be occupied by the A-site cation. The octahedra will suffer lattice deformation and tilting to fit the A-site ions when the cation size is too big or too small relative to the cavity. Various perovskite phase structures result from the different tilting and stacking of the octahedra. The Goldschmidt tolerance factor is a reliable empirical predictor of preferential phase formation and structural stability.143 In general, a tolerance factor between 0.9 and 1 allows perovskites to form an ideal symmetric cubic phase. A tolerance factor between 0.8 and 0.9 corresponds to an octahedral tilt with the B–X–B bond angle deviating from the ideal 180°, which usually produces a tetragonal and orthorhombic phase with decreased symmetry.144 Although the tetragonal and orthorhombic phases still exhibit a corner-sharing octahedral structure, which are also photo-active, the distortion of the [PbX6]4− octahedra makes them phase-unstable. Alternatively, A-site cations that are too large (t > 1) or too small (t < 0.7) can only form the non-photoactive yellow delta phase, where the corner-sharing octahedral structure transforms into face-sharing 1D pillars.
In the case of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 perovskites, their tolerance factors are approximately 0.8 and 1, respectively, which are close to or exceed the critical value of the ideal tolerance factor range. Both the larger FA+ and the smaller Cs+ induce the distortion of the [PbX6]4− octahedra, causing the lattice structure to deviate from the symmetric cubic phase, which is an essential determinant for their phase instability. Consequently, the strain-free yellow delta phase has the lowest free energy of generation at room temperature (Fig. 8f and g).144,145 To obtain cubic-phase perovskites, FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 need to be annealed at temperatures above 150 °C and 250 °C, respectively. Unfortunately, thermodynamic analysis proves that α-FAPbI3 and α-CsPbI3 have high vibrational entropy and high formation energy at room temperature, which are thermodynamically unstable compared to the delta phase.146–148 Therefore, the anisotropic stain of the preferential plane causes the rapid transformation of the black α-phase to the yellow δ-phase at room temperature. Moreover, the temperature plays a key role in the phase-transition process. In the case of MA-based perovskites, they exist as photoactive phases over the device operating temperature range (−15 to 65 °C), although the phase transition process still occurs. As the temperature decreases, the MAPbI3 perovskite will transform from the tetragonal phase at room temperature to the orthorhombic phase with worse symmetry. However, at higher temperatures, it will enter the ideal cubic phase.14,42
Consequently, the most reliable approach to achieve perovskite phase stabilization is alloying with different sizes of A- and X-site ions, which can adjust the tolerance factor within the appropriate range. The use of smaller MA+ or Cs+ ions to partially replace the A-site and compensate for the large ionic radius of FA+ in FA-based perovskites can relieve the lattice stress, preventing the production of defects and stabilizing the photoactive phase.149,150 Among them, the asymmetric MA+ has a larger dipole moment, increasing the Madelung energy, and establishes stronger hydrogen bonds with the PbI6 cages, thus stabilizing the cubic phase of FAPbI3.151 Similarly, X-site anion mixing is a typical technique for improving the phase stability of perovskite, in particular the use of smaller bromine ions rather than iodine ions can likewise tune the t to a suitable value. In addition, the lattice is strongly reinforced due to the stronger interaction of Br with the surrounding A/B-sites ions than I. As previously noted, it is critical to remember that mixing halogen ions frequently causes the phase separation issue.
Furthermore, dimensional engineering with bulky organic cations is a vital method to enhance the perovskite phase stability.152,153 In the LD perovskite structure, organic spacers with a long chain group separate adjacent octahedral layers, improving the activation energy barrier for the phase transition.154 2D perovskites spontaneously distributed at the grain boundaries of perovskite films can protect 3D domains from moisture attack and inhibit lattice deformation and ion migration, thus suppressing the transition of perovskites to the yellow phase.155 In addition, the construction of LD perovskite layers on the 3D film surface can also deplete the non-perovskite phases at the interface.156 In the case of diammonium organic spacer cations, they can stabilize the 3D perovskite structure by establishing stronger hydrogen bonding with the X-site ions in the octahedra.157
4. Strategies to enhance stability
Based on the analysis of the relationship between the perovskite structural properties and intrinsic and extrinsic stability, aiming at the issues of ion migration and halide segregation, phase transition and degradation under light, heat and moisture, we proposed the strategies of [PbX6]4− octahedron modulation and organic spacer construction in LD perovskites to enhance their intrinsic and environmental stability. In this section, we mainly introduce the following stabilization strategies: (1) component engineering, inducing octahedron regulation; (2) defect passivation and stress relaxation to stabilize perovskite lattice; and (3) dimensional management through organic spacer design to reinforce/protect octahedral framework.
4.1 Components inducing octahedron regulation
The octahedral structure determines the phase stability, electronic structure and defect characteristics. Perovskite component regulation to optimize the [PbI6]4− octahedral structure plays an important role in adjusting the optical properties and energy band structure, inhibiting the unwanted phase transition, enhancing the ion migration energy barrier and elevating the environmental stability of perovskites. The main strategies include A-site cation adjustment, alkali metal cation doping and regulation of halogen and pseudo-halide.

4.1.1 A-site cation adjustment. 
A-site cations as the fillers for inorganic frameworks play a significant role in the intrinsic properties of perovskites. Their sizes determine the distortion and tilting of the [PbX6]4− octahedra (Fig. 9a), thus influencing the phase and environmental stabilities and photovoltaic properties.158 Single A-site-component perovskites were evidenced to have low-barrier ionic pathways.159 Knight et al. found that the rearrangement of halide ions in localized volumes occurred in MAPb(Br0.5I0.5)3 perovskite without obvious compositional changes for bulk perovskite.159 In contrast, the mixed A-site perovskites do not have the aforementioned routes and are more resistant to halide segregation. However, under prolonged light exposure, the ionic rearrangement occurs throughout the bulk material, which is probably triggered by the initial unevenly distributed A-site cations. This is also supported by the research by Schelhas et al.,160 in which the mixed A-site APbI3 perovskite segregated into more pure phases during the device operation. Surprisingly, Pavlovetc et al. reported that the triple-cation FAxMAyCs1−x−yPbI3 perovskite with mixed orthorhombic (δ) and cubic (α) perovskite phases showed improved cation stability compared to the single α-phase structure, resulting from the δ-CsPbI3 acting as barriers to inhibit A-site cation migration.161 Thus, the reasonable regulation of the A-site components is significant to achieve long-term stability for halide perovskites.
 Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of ABX3 perovskites, where smaller or larger A-site cations will make the octahedra slightly tilted.158 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) Iodine ion migration energy barrier in MAPbI3 and Ace0.25MA0.75PbI3 perovskites obtained by DFT calculation, showing the crystal structure with hydrogen bond state for the transition states with maximum energy value.117 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Roles of Cs+ and GA+ in the crystallization process, where Cs+ promotes the transition from PbI2 to perovskite, and GA+ decreases the x-phase extinction time of energy to improve perovskite growth rate.164 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of halide-vacancy management in film cross-section, using surplus halide to complex with potassium at the grain boundaries and surfaces.116 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Long-term stability tests for CsxMA0.15–xFA0.85PbI3 (x = 0, 5%, 10%, and 15%) perovskite devices under white LED illumination with 100 mW cm−2.174 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 
To enhance the intrinsic stability of perovskites, organic cations or alkali metal ions with a suitable size can dope the A-site partially. For example, partial A-site substitution increases the activation energy for iodide ion diffusion. It was demonstrated by Ferdani et al. that only 5% GA+ substitution could strongly inhibit halogen ion transport in the MAPbI3 perovskite, possibly owing to the largest size mismatch between GA+ and MA+.162 Tan et al. investigated the influence of lattice distortion caused by size mismatch on the ion migration activation energy and device operational stability, where the suitable acetamidinium (Ace) cation was chosen to systematically decouple both the hydrogen bonding and size effects.117 Theories and experiments confirmed that the resulting steric effect could retard the ion migration pathways and increase the corresponding activation energy (Fig. 9b). Consequently, the Ace0.03MA0.97PbI3 devices not only exhibited outstanding thermal stability, maintaining 92% of their initial PCE under continuous heating (85 °C) for 450 h, but also excellent operation stability (extrapolated T80 of 2011 h) in ambient conditions. To date, GA+ is the only discovered organic cation to form the ACI LD perovskite, but in some cases, it can act as an A-site cation to enter the 3D lattice. The partial substitution of small-size ions (Cs+ and Br−) is necessary to create sufficient space to assist the incorporation of the large GA+ in the 3D FAPbI3 perovskite.163 Actually, there are strong hydrogen bond interactions between GA+ and the halogen ions around it in the 3D lattice to restrain the formation of halide vacancies and enhance the structure stability. The GA0.05Cs0.15FA0.8Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3 perovskite device achieved an optimal PCE of 21.3% with a VOC of 1.229 V. Similarly, Qin et al. further studied the synergistic A-site doping effects of Cs+ and GA+ upon FA-based perovskite crystallization (Fig. 9c).164 The Cs+ doping in the first step triggers the formation of the δ-CsPbI3 phase and suppresses PbI2 crystallization, resulting in fewer and favorable nucleation sites but causing unexpected pinholes. The GA+ doping in the second step helps to increase the crystal growth speed by promoting the grain boundary migration and Ostwald ripening. Density functional theory (DFT) calculation certified that Cs+ doping caused bonding stress, which was balanced by GA+ doping to enhance the bonding strength with the [PbI6]4− octahedral frameworks. The secondary dimethylamine (DMA) cation is another widely studied ion that can enter the A-site of perovskites. Regarding the issue that the lattice mismatch at the perovskite/NiOx interface causes structural disorder and interface defects, Chen et al. introduced DMA+ to partly substitute MA+ and prepared MA1−xDMAxPbI3 perovskite films with increased rigidity, hydrophobicity and stability.165 The resulting device retained 80% of its original PCE after continuous maximum power point (MPP) measurement for 800 h. For special diamine cations, Min et al. adopted methylenediammonium dichloride (MDACl2) doping to stabilize the α-FAPbI3 phase, where the divalent MDA2+ could partly replace FA+ and induce the formation of FA+ vacancies as charge compensation.166 Compared to FA+, MDA2+ with more H atoms can form more hydrogen bonds with [PbI6]4− octahedral structures, which is considered to better stabilize the perovskite lattice. Besides, the FA+ vacancies, not acting as deep electron traps, can increase the electron density in the perovskite conduction band and reduce the lattice strain to enable the smaller Cl− to be easily incorporated in the interstitial spaces rather than substituting iodine. The resulting device achieved a certified PCE of 23.7%, maintaining over 90% of its initial PCE after heating for 20 h at 150 °C in air and more than 90% after operating for 600 h under MPP tracking in ambient conditions. To compensate for the strain caused by MDA2+ replacing FA+, the incorporation of Cs+ with a smaller radius in the perovskite lattice could reduce the local lattice tensile, contributing to decreasing the defect density and suppressing the nonradiative recombination.167 The resulting device achieved a champion PCE of 24.4% (certified) and excellent thermal stability, retaining >80% PCE after being stored at 85 °C and a relative humidity (RH) of 15–25% for 1300 h.


4.1.2 Alkali metal cation doping. 
Alkali metal cations with a positive charge and smaller size can be incorporated in the lattice of halide perovskites to tune their intrinsic properties, such as phase separation, ion migration and thermal stability. Abdi-Jalebi et al. reported that the introduction of potassium iodide (KI) could effectively compensate for halide vacancy defects to suppress non-radiative recombination pathways and the excess halides formed potassium halide layers around the film surfaces and grain boundaries to inhibit halide migration and additional non-radiative decay caused by interstitial halides (Fig. 9d).116 Furthermore, illumination could induce the formation of KBr-like compounds to passivate the interface trapping defects and suppress ion migration, which resulted in enhanced photovoltaic performance with negligible current–voltage hysteresis.168 Rubidium cation (Rb+) with a larger size than K+ was also proven to partly enter the perovskite lattice to strengthen the intrinsic and thermal stabilities of the α-phase FA-based perovskite.169 By in situ tracking the precursor solidification and the phase structure evolution, Dang et al. found that adding Cs+ and Rb+ significantly suppressed the phase segregation and encouraged the spontaneous formation of the required α phase without thermal annealing.170 By contrast, the pristine film exhibited inherent instability and segregated into MA–Br- and FA–I-rich phases. Similarly, Correa-Baena et al. reported that the addition of CsI, either alone or with RbI, could make the halide distribution more homogeneous in perovskite films, resulting in spatially homogeneous carrier dynamics and long-lived charge carrier decays, as well as enhanced device photovoltaic performances.171 However, due to the smaller size of Rb+ and K+, secondary phases rich in alkali metals appear as clusters, when the amount added exceeded 1%, leading to undesirable charge recombination. Thus, it is essential to control the uniform distribution of alkali metal cations to avoid phase separation or the formation of harmful clusters.172 Matsui et al. revealed that introducing Rb+ could inhibit the growth of PbI2 even in PbI2-rich conditions and the RbBr-based aggregations were suppressed by reducing the Br− ratio in precursors. The optimized device presented excellent thermal stability, maintaining 92% of the initial PCE after testing for 1000 h under 85 °C/85% RH. In the study by Zheng et al.,173 by in situ characterization using glow discharge-optical emission spectroscopy, they discovered that K+ at low concentration was always homogeneously distributed across the film thickness, while Cs+ was more concentrated on the film surface and Rb+ tended to be distributed deep in the film. Adopting NH4Cl additive could slow down the movement of Rb+ and Cs+ and change the film growth direction, to make component distribution more uniform and crystallization quality better. High-throughput experimentation with machine learning was coupled to investigate the influence of the ratio of organic and inorganic A-site cations on the perovskite stability. Surprisingly, when the aging temperature was below 100 °C, the organic cation (MA) was certified to be a stability enhancer, while the inorganic cation (Cs/Rb) acted as stability-killer.174 Incorporating up to 5% Cs/Rb and at least 10% MA in the perovskite lattice was found to maximize the device operation stability at a temperature below 100 °C. The device with 10% MA exhibited negligible PCE loss after operating under MPP tracking at 30 °C for 1800 h (Fig. 9e).


4.1.3 Regulation of halogen and pseudo-halide. 
The unevenly distributed halides and phase segregation of mixed halide perovskites are the main factors for perovskite intrinsic instability. Reasonable halide component regulation is favorable for enhancing the inherent and environmental stability, optimizing the electronic structure and eliminating lattice defects in perovskites.175 The introduction of small size Cl− anions in the perovskite lattice has been proven to increase the perovskite decomposition energy and improve the material stability.176 Xu et al. further replaced some of iodine with bromine to change the octahedral configuration and shrink the lattice parameter to enhance the solubility of chlorine in perovskite crystal cells, leading to the impactful suppression of light-induced phase segregation (Fig. 10a).177 The semitransparent top cells only underwent less than 4% degradation after MPP was operated for 1000 h and 60 °C. In addition to halide anions, pseudo-halide anions (SCN−, Ac−, BF4−, etc.) with similar sizes to halides can be partly incorporated into the X-site to change the [PbX6]4− octahedral structures and modify the inherent properties of perovskites. The Pb(SCN)2 precursor was adopted to fabricate CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x perovskite solar cells in ambient air with over 70% RH.178 The incorporation of SCN− in the crystal lattice effectively passivated [PbX6]-related defects and enhanced the humidity and intrinsic stability of the perovskite films (Fig. 10b). Regarding the issue that the intrinsically unstable α-FAPbI3 perovskite changes to the photo-inactive δ-phase below 150 °C, by a simple MASCN vapor treatment process, Lu et al. successfully converted δ-FAPbI3 to the desirable α-phase below the thermodynamic phase-transition temperature (Fig. 10c).179 Meanwhile, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations confirmed that the SCN− anions tended to adsorb on the surface of the top-layer δ-FAPbI3 and replace the iodide anions in the face-sharing [PbI6] octahedron to induce the formation of corner-sharing architecture. Subsequently, the top-layer templates further induced the bulk phase transition from δ- to α-FAPbI3 to form a pure α-phase. The obtained α-FAPbI3 possessed a high energy barrier against back conversion to the δ-phase and still persisted after 500 h at 85 °C in an N2 atmosphere. After being stored in a dry box for 2500 h, the device maintained 97.8% of its initial PCE. Halide vacancies are the predominant perovskite lattice defects to accelerate the carrier non-radiative recombination and iodide vacancies are regarded as the principal reason for the harmful ionic conductivity. To address the issue of the anion-vacancy defects distributing at the grain boundaries and surface of FAPbI3 films, Jeong et al. used the pseudo-halide anion formate (HCOO−) to eliminate the vacancy defects, and meanwhile enhance the film crystallinity and enlarge the grain size (Fig. 10d).44 The resulting devices attained an inspired PCE of 25.6% (certified 25.2%) and the unencapsulated devices maintained 85% of their initial PCE under MPP tracking after 450 h in an N2 atmosphere. Similarly, acetate anion (Ac−) was employed to partly replace I− in the CsPbI2Br perovskite to achieve the optimization of intrinsic semiconductor properties (electronic properties, band structure and charge transport).180 The CsPbI2−xBr(Ac)x devices exhibited a maximum PCE of 15.56% and an ultrahigh VOC of 1.30 V without sacrificing the photocurrent. Wang et al. reported the fabrication of high-quality MAPbI3 perovskite films by using dual lead pseudo-halide (Pb(Ac)2 and Pb(SCN)2) in ambient air, which induced uniform crystal growth along the (110) direction to form highly crystalline and homogeneous perovskite films.181 The unencapsulated devices retained 85% of their initial efficiency after 3600 h in air, i.e., five-fold enhanced air stability compared to the PbI2-based devices. In addition, tetrafluoroborate (BF4−) anions were proven to enter the (FAPbI3)0.83(MAPbBr3)0.17 perovskite, resulting in lattice relaxation and lower defect density for the films and higher recombination resistance for devices.47 Lin et al. introduced a small amount of piperidinium tetrafluoroborate ([BMP]+[BF4]−) ionic compound in the FACs-based trihalide perovskite to effectively inhibit the segregation of components into impurity phases and the formation of pin-holes in films under aging testing in the ambient atmosphere, in which the resulting devices without encapsulation retained 80% of their original PCE for 1010 h at 60 °C.182
 Fig. 10  (a) Change in PL spectra with time for control and triple-halide perovskite films under different light intensity (1 sun, 10 sun and 100 sun) for 20 min, indicating that photo-induced phase segregation in triple-halide perovskites is effectively restrained.177 Copyright 2020, Science Press. (b) Crystal structures of MAPbI3 (left) and MA4Pb4I11SCN (right) based on DFT calculation.178 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic diagram of the MASCN or FASCN vapor treatment process for pure α-phase FAPbI3 films.179 Copyright 2020, Science Press. (d) Illustration of HCOO− anion passivating I− vacancy at the FAPbI3 surface, and the binding affinity of different anions towards I− vacancy at the surface (top). The heat stability and long-term operational stability of the reference and target devices (bottom).44 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 

4.2 Modulation of defect and stress
The ubiquitous defects and stresses are two dominant culprits in destabilizing perovskites, which are associated with their soft ionic lattice characteristic. In particular, due to the low ion migration barrier for the X-site anions and A-site cations, the perovskite degradation reactions more easily to occur under external stimuli such as light and heat, resulting in a low defect formation energy for the A- and X-site-related defects, respectively. In addition, the point defects and grain boundaries caused by solution processing, the difference in thermal expansion coefficient between the perovskite and substrate, and stimuli from light/bias under operation conditions possibly result in the undesirable deformation and distortion of the octahedral structure. Thus, stresses are widespread in the perovskite lattice, where unreasonable release of stress usually induces defect generation. Therefore, appropriately modulating the defects and stresses is a reliable way to stabilize the perovskite lattice and enhance the long-term stability of PSCs.

4.2.1 Stress modulation for lattice and interface. 
Stress modulation contributes to eliminating film defects, enhancing the photo-thermal stability of films and devices.183 Suitable lattice stress can regulate the inorganic octahedral distortion and enhance the structure stability. The release of surface/interface stress can reduce surface lattice defects and inhibit ion migration to enhance the device performance and stability. In addition, thermal stress management under operating conditions plays a decisive role in the service lifetime of perovskite photovoltaic devices.
Compressive stress can enhance the phase stability of all-inorganic perovskites. The competing perovskite phases can be pushed into a relative state of thermodynamic imbalance by strain, which is favorable for obtaining a required phase structure. Regarding the black-phase CsPbI3 perovskite, which is metastable compared to its yellow δ-phase at normal temperature, Steele et al. reported a stress modulation strategy with substrate clamping and biaxial strain.145 Substrate clamping prompted the preferential alignment of the inner domains of the polycrystalline system to form texture and generate large biaxial strain. The strain-induced crystal distortion and texture formation effectively enhanced the thermodynamic stability of the black CsPbI3 thin films. In the research by Ke et al., metastable γ-CsPbI3 perovskite was synthesized by applying a pressure in the range of 0.1 and 0.6 GPa to δ-CsPbI3 together with heating and rapid quenching (Fig. 11a).184 The pressure-induced [PbI6]4− octahedral tilt could be preserved after releasing the pressure to ambient conditions. DFT calculations indicated that compression guided the in-phase and out-of-phase tilt between the [PbI6]4− octahedra to regulate the energy difference between the competing δ- and γ-CsPbI3 in turn, resulting in the stable presence of γ-CsPbI3 under ambient conditions. Surprisingly, the preserved CsPbI3 phase exhibited strong humidity stability in air with 35% RT for more than 10 days. Wang et al. further elucidated the relationship between the phase transition and octahedral distortion of CsPbI3 perovskite and proposed a facile modification strategy using 4-aminobenzoic acid (ABA) incorporation assisted with neostigmine bromide (NGBr) surface mediation.185 The ABA and NG cations adsorbed on the grain boundaries/surface of the CsPbI3 films to anchor the [PbI6]4− octahedra, resulting in an enhancement in the energy barrier of octahedral rotation to guarantee the array continuity of the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− octahedra. The resulting film showed suppressed defects density and enhanced phase stability, together with improved interface energy-level alignment, leading to a champion NGBr-CsPbI3(ABA)-based device with a PCE of 18.27% and excellent stability. Moreover, moisture could trigger a phase transition and lead to the deformation of the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− framework. By controlling the steric hindrance of the terminal groups in the organic ligand, the [PbI6]4− octahedral tilting in the cubic CsPbI3 was effectively prevented to improve the energy barrier for the phase transition. This is ascribed to the fact that the organic terminal groups acted as an anchor to bond with the [PbI6]4− framework (Fig. 11b), which obviously increased the phase transition tolerance to polar solvents or moisture.186 The optimized devices retained 85% of their initial efficiency after aging for 30 days under ambient conditions. Recently, a study on stress release at full-dimensional grain boundaries in flexible perovskite devices further emphasized the importance of film stress release on the mechanical and phase stabilities.187 Thus, for different types of perovskites, appropriate stress modulation (applying or releasing stress) is an effective means to enhance their inherent stability.
 Fig. 11  (a) Experimental schematic diagram of the high-pressure and high-temperature setup and schematic diagram of metastable γ-CsPbI3 perovskite preserved under ambient conditions by temperature quenching at high pressure.184 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Mechanism of organic terminal groups enhancing the phase stabilization of the CsPbI3 perovskite.186 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Distribution diagram of crystal structures, strains, and energy levels, and surface potentials for strain and strain-free films under dark or illumination (top). Operation mechanism of perovskite device with strain and the relevance between light intensity and device VOC (bottom).188 Copyright 2022, Cell Press. (d) Schematic of the interface situation under bias voltage for the standard device and the target device modified by fullerene derivative monolayer.190 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Surface and interfacial stresses are considered to be important inducers for the generation of defects and degradation of perovskites. Interface stress is regarded as the fundamental cause of the increased interface defects under working conditions, which is caused by bias-driven ion migration and accumulation, resulting in lattice distortion or atomic bond breakage. Meng et al. researched the influence of the strain and stress at the buried interfaces on the film properties and found that interfacial strain caused a graded band gap (60 meV) over a 300 nm-thick perovskite layer, generating a built-in field to boost the carrier extraction (Fig. 11c).188 However, during the operation conditions, the strained devices presented accelerated degradation behavior and hysteresis phenomenon, which was caused by the strained interfaces inducing higher defect densities and ionic conductivities. Regarding the buried interface stress and defect, Chen et al. adopted adamantane-derivative molecules with CO functional groups to tune the steric hindrance of chemical interaction at the SnO2/perovskite interface, which effectively passivated the interfacial defect and mitigated the interfacial strain.189 In addition, the ionic motion induced by an electric field resulted in increased interfacial lattice strain and even collapse of the structure, which was directly related to the stability.190 Adopting a fullerene derivative to release the interface strain could effectively inhibit the formation of interface defects and enhance the structure stability (Fig. 11d). Moreover, Wang et al. investigated the relationship between perovskite lattice distortion and residual stress in polycrystalline films and revealed that residual stress was concentrated on the surface of the as-prepared film.141 A post treatment process, i.e., A-site cation alloying to form LD components, was carried out to release interfacial residual stress, leading to surface lattice reconstruction and lower elastic modulus. The efficiency of the unencapsulated device only showed a slight drop after aging for 1000 h in the ambient atmosphere.
Due to the difference in thermal expansion coefficient between the perovskite layer and the substrate, thermally-induced tensile strain residual in perovskite films will lead to increased ion migration and material instability. Given that substrates with high thermal expansion coefficients increase the material cost of devices, Xue et al. proposed a strain-compensation strategy, where external compressive strain was produced by increasing the temperature for the preparation of the top functional layer to compensate the residual tensile strain.130 In this way, the activation energy for ion migration was elevated to effectively improve the intrinsic stability of the perovskite films and the light and thermal stability of the corresponding devices. The resulting compressively-strained devices retained 95% of their initial PCE under MPP tracking for 60 h, and 96% after heating for 1000 h at 85 °C. Besides, an interlayer of protonated amine silane coupling agent between the perovskite and TiO2 layers was reported to offer well-matched growth sites and passivate Pb- and halogen-related defects, resulting in lattice distortion mitigation and interface strain relaxation.191 Obviously, the preparation process has a decisive influence on the film stress. Dewi et al. reported that almost strain–stress-free MAPbI3 films with inspiring thermal stability were prepared by the co-evaporation and low-temperature growth process.192 Compared with the films prepared by the solution method, the co-evaporation process minimized film stress and produced more compact films with outstanding surface robustness, leading to ultra-high thermal and humidity stabilities. Importantly, under actual operation conditions, thermal stress will cause the unwanted loss of volatile component or ion migration to deteriorate the steady power output of the device. Pei et al. proposed an impactful thermal management strategy, introducing alkyl-group-decorated SiO2 particles with high thermal conductivity at the interface of the perovskite and hole transport layers, to increase the device thermal transport ability.193 In addition, the interaction between SiO2 and Pb2+ passivated the surface defects of films to promote the PCE to 22.29%. Under an N2 atmosphere, the unencapsulated devices maintained 91% of their initial PCE after aging at 85 °C for 1126 h and 95% after steady power output operation for 1235 h.


4.2.2 Regulation and elimination of defects. 
Due to the nature of the flexible lattice in halide perovskites, detrimental defects will be generated during the process of film deposition and device operation. Given that the electronic structure of perovskite is contributed by the [PbI6]4− octahedra with soft Pb–I bonding, the deep-level trap states are mainly caused by octahedral defects, especially the anti-site and interstitial defects, acting as Shockley–Read–Hall recombination centers to deteriorate the device performance and stability.194 Yao et al. characterized the defect energy levels and defect concentrations in all-inorganic CsPbI3−xBrx perovskite by deep level transient spectroscopy and DFT calculation. They found that resting the films overnight resulted in a reduction in defects by approximately one or two orders of magnitude, which is ascribed to the self-regulation of strain relaxation to eliminate the Pb–I anti-site defect pairs.195 Under various excitation stresses, the easy oxidation of I− to I0 results in the formation of carrier recombination centers and chemical chain reactions, accelerating the degradation of perovskites. Specially, Pb2+ is reduced to metallic Pb0, acting as deep defects to deteriorate the device performance. The europium ion pair Eu3+–Eu2+ can serve as a “redox shuttle” to selectively reduce I0 and oxidize Pb0 simultaneously by cyclic redox transition, where Pb0 was oxidized by Eu3+ (2Eu3+ + Pb0 → 2Eu2+ + Pb2+) and I0 was reduced by Eu2+ simultaneously (Eu2+ + I0 → Eu3+ + I−) (Fig. 12a).196 The resulting MAPbI3(Cl) device exhibited an excellent operation lifetime under thermal and light stresses. In addition, the incorporation of the slightly smaller Eu ions into the perovskite lattice could increase the tolerance factor to obtain thermodynamically stable α-CsPbI2Br at room temperature (RT) and reduce the defects to suppress non-radiative recombination.197 Likewise, gadolinium (Gd) ions were discovered to play a similar redox role to Eu ions to suppress the internal defects and acted as a growth assistant to restrain the external environment strain.198
 Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism diagram of cyclical elimination of I0 and Pb0 defects and regeneration of Eu3+–Eu2+ ion pair.196 Copyright 2019, Science Press. (b) Schematic illustration of the effective management by intrinsically stable MT-Im LD perovskite for the Pb-related defects at the interface.200 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the chemical polishing process.207 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (d) Ion migration characterization as a function of temperature for perovskite films (before and after aging) annealed for 3 and 20 min. Schematic illustration of the ion transition during aging in perovskite materials annealed for 3 and 20 min.208 Copyright 2020, Cell Press. (e) Mechanisms supporting the enhancement of VOC and PCE. Integrated temperature-dependent PL spectra and corresponding calibrated PL intensity and calculated ΔVOC (top). Time-resolved PL spectra and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at different temperatures (bottom).209 Copyright 2020, Cell Press. 
Defects tend to occur on the surface of fragile perovskite films, leading to serious nonradiative recombination and a deterioration in the device performance. Wang et al. proposed a molecular ‘‘positively charged defect indicator’’ strategy to uncover the longitudinal nonuniform distribution of MA and FA cations in MAFA-mixed perovskite films, where FA+ tends to appear at the top and MA+ is close to the bottom of the film. The FAI anti-site defect is the dominant deep trap state located on the film surface, originating from the spatial segregation of FA+.199 They found that a fluorinated organic molecule could anchor these FAI anti-site defects by hydrogen bonding and carbonyl groups could passivate the PbI anti-site defects via Lewis acid–base interactions. Liu et al. designed a mixed-phase LD perovskite surface layer by using amphoteric MT-Im (2-methylthio-2-imidazoline) cations with multiple effects to deal with different surface terminal defects, resulting in an increase in the formation energy of Pb–I anti-site defects and the inhibition of Pb0 production (Fig. 12b).200 The defects located at the buried interface also deteriorated photovoltaic performance and stability. Accordingly, suitable reagent pretreatment can effectively reduce the bottom interface defects and improve the interface energy matching. Zuo et al. reported a buried interface passivation strategy, in which a sulfonium salt ((2-carboxyethyl) dimethyl sulfonium chloride, CDSC) was adopted to modify the interface and bridge the ETL and perovskite layer by chemical interactions to strengthen the interface stability.201 In particular, the perovskite precursor containing special components that can strongly bind to the substrate will spontaneously form a passivation layer at the interface of the perovskite and transport layer. Chen et al. used organic spacer cations rich in –NH2 groups to induce the formation of a thin LD perovskite layer with higher environmental stability at the buried interface to suppress interfacial non-radiative recombination.202 Moreover, as the area where the sunlight passes first, the buried interface is more vulnerable to ultraviolet (UV) light and is considered a possible starting position for light-induced decomposition. The CsI–SnO2 complex as an ETL was discovered to enhance the UV resistance ability in normal PSCs.203 Meanwhile, the modified ETL substrate facilitated the crystallization and growth of the perovskite films, decreased the interfacial defects and promoted band alignment. Consequently, the device achieved a champion PCE of 23.3% and maintained 88% of its original PCE with negligible perovskite degradation after UV soaking for 500 h. The passivation strategies for surface and buried interfaces have been certified to passivate the lattice defects such as vacancies and dangling bonds, but cannot meet the needs of long-term operation of devices. Thus, the instability under working condition stems from other causes. Ni et al. revealed the distributions of the trap states in space and energy in normal perovskite PSCs, where the charge trap densities of all the interface depths were one to two orders of magnitude larger than that inside the film.204 After surface passivation treatment, most of the deep traps were observed near the interface of the hole transport layers and perovskite layers, in which plenty of nanocrystals existed. Besides, Chen et al. discovered that the top surfaces of perovskite presented many nanocrystals surrounded by an amorphous phase, leading to more dangling chemical bonds and vacancy defects, inducing the accelerated decomposition of perovskites.205 Given that the defective surface layers were mechanically softer and had weak bonding to the bottom crystalline regions, low-cost adhesive tapes were used to peel-off the top defective layers and the bottom crystalline regions were well preserved. The tape-treated devices maintained 97.1% of their initial PCE after MPP operation at 65 °C for 1440 h. They further developed a mechanical polishing method to make the mechanical hardness of polycrystalline films comparable to that of single crystals, which contributed to reducing the ion migration.206 Regarding the issue of excess PbI2 inducing film photo-instability, different from the in situ reaction of ammonium salts with PbI2 to form an extra layer, a simple chemical polishing strategy was adopted to get rid of the PbI2 at the interface (Fig. 12c), resulting in enhanced carrier separation and transport, better energy level alignment and suppressed ion migration.207
Moreover, the intrinsic defects of perovskites are affected by their preparation and working conditions. Deng et al. proposed a reduced post-annealing process in ambient conditions to maintain the stoichiometric composition of perovskites as constant as possible, which promoted the spontaneous de-doping of the films during aging and maintained their intrinsic properties (Fig. 12d), leading to less carrier recombination and enhanced module PCE.208 Low-temperature induced phase transitions and lattice distortions of the perovskite films were revealed by Chen et al., which contributed to the self-elimination of intrinsic defects to suppress carrier recombination and enhance the device VOC and efficiency (Fig. 12e).209 Consequently, the device achieved a stabilized PCE of 24.2% at 220 K, boosted from a stabilized 22.8% (certified) at 300 K. This work highlights the bright application prospect of halide perovskites in the field of low-temperature photovoltaics.

4.3 Dimension management
LD perovskites constructed using bulky organic cations generally present superior structure stability against thermal stress and ambient moisture than 3D perovskites, and thus have received much attention as an effective solution to tackle the instability of perovskites. Although the organic spacer layers can stabilize the [PbI6]4− framework, block the erosion of moisture and oxygen, and inhibit ion migration, the carrier transport is hindered due to the quantum confinement effects and insulation feature. According to the difference in content and location of LD perovskites in films, we summarize three types of perovskites including LD/3D mixed perovskites, quasi-2D perovskites and LD/3D layered perovskites and describe their advantages and impact on device stability, respectively. Moreover, configuration modulation for organic spacers is introduced in detail, as a core solution to overcome the compromise between performance and stability in perovskites containing LD components.

4.3.1 LD/3D mixed perovskites. 
The introduction of 2D perovskite components into 3D perovskite systems has been certified to address the issue of phase stability and ion migration, which effectively enhances the intrinsic stability of perovskite films and the operational stability of devices. Regarding the issue that the black-phase CsPbI3 with thermodynamic instability rapidly transforms to the yellow phase in ambient conditions, Jiang et al. adopted CsAc and hydrogen lead trihalide (HPbX3) as precursors to increase the solubility of Cs+ and used an appropriate amount of PEAI to induce the formation of LD perovskite, which significantly inhibited the undesirable phase transition, decreased the trap density and enhanced the device performance and longevity.210 Similarly, Wang et al. introduced PEAI to reduce the dimensionality and stabilize γ-CsPbI3 films.211 The mixed-dimensional γ-CsPbI3 (n = 40) devices delivered outstanding environmental stability, maintaining about 89% of their initial PCE after 12 days in air with 25–30% RH. The crystallization and phase stability of α-FAPbI3 are also essential scientific issues with widespread concern. By constructing a Johnson–Mehl–Avrami–Kolmogorov model, Song et al. demonstrated the influence of the [PbI6] arrangement in the LD perovskite on the formation of α-FAPbI3.212 LD perovskite with a coherent interface (angle-sharing [PbI6] octahedra) could trigger the nucleation of α-FAPbI3 and further promote the epitaxial δ-to-α phase transformation (Fig. 13a), while the face-sharing PbI6 octahedra in the LD perovskite impeded the formation of α-FAPbI3, leading to structural disorder and a high defect concentration. By comparing different LD perovskites, phenylmethylammonium (PMA, alternative name benzylammonium) lead iodide stood out to effectively promote the nucleation of α-FAPbI3 at the LD/FAPbI3 interface, thereby reducing the microstrain and minimizing the structural disorder to prolong the carrier lifetimes. The device with the optimized PMA2PbI4 perovskite achieved an optimal PCE of 21.25%, retaining 80% of its initial PCE after aging for 20 days in air (60% RH). Differently, adopting PMAI as an additive, Alanazi et al. proved that the microscopic impact on stabilizing the α-FAPbI3 phase is the modulation effect of PMA moieties on the film surface and grain boundary, rather than forming LD perovskites.213 The PCE of the corresponding device remained at 80% of the initial value after one year under ambient conditions. In addition, the PMABr passivation treatment was also certified to enhance the device thermal aging stability.214 The different results caused by the difference in the additive components strongly confirmed the importance of the pre-synthesis of the LD perovskite precursors. Luo et al. utilized a 2D-seed template to optimize the growth kinetics of 3D perovskite and achieve the desired facet orientation and stacking mode for better carrier transport, which allowed the crystallization process to dominate over the nucleation stage and assisted the heteroepitaxial growth of 3D perovskite.215 Finally, the 2D phase located at the grain boundaries (GBs) forms type-I band alignment with the 3D perovskite, which is beneficial for passivating the GB defects, leading to restrained ion migration and enhanced environmental stability. With (BDA)PbI4 perovskites as seeds, the unencapsulated device maintained 93% of its initial PCE (23.95%) after storage for 1056 h and 91% after operating at the MPP conditions for 500 h. Regarding the two-step deposition method for the fabrication of 2D/3D perovskite films, Zhou et al. compared the effects of adding 1-naphthalenemethylammonium iodide (NpMAI) and (NpMA)2PbI4 perovskite to the PbI2 precursor in the first step on the film quality and device performance.216 The (NpMA)2PbI4-modulated perovskite film exhibited better film quality with reduced defects and improved carrier lifetime and the unencapsulated device maintained over 98% of its initial PCE after 1500 h under MPP tracking conditions.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the PMA2PbI4/δ-FAPbI3 interface inducing the epitaxial phase transition from δ-FAPbI3 to α-FAPbI3, in which FA cations are omitted.212 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the template growth process of the 1D@3D perovskite films with tensile strain relaxation, which is proven by the GIXRD spectra at different tilt angles and the corresponding linear fit of 2θ − sin2(ψ).218 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Long-term stability tests of 3D and 1D/3D devices under illumination in N2 atmosphere (45–55 °C). (d) Photographs of the fresh and 500 h-aged 1D/3D devices, and cross-section morphology and element distribution in the 1D/3D device after operating for 500 h, showing that the Ag+ diffusion and I− migration are effectively inhibited.219 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
The exploration of novel large organic cations to achieve dimension regulation is a significant means to obtain intrinsic stable perovskite, especially for suppressing ion migration. Huang et al. confirmed that iodide migration occurred in bulk n–i–p perovskite devices under the operating conditions, where iodine ions migrated from the perovskite active layer, across the spiro layer, to the spiro/Au interface, leading to the oxidation and degradation of the metal electrodes.129 The 2.5D perovskites (n = 40) with allylammonium (ALA) ligands exhibited significantly suppressed ion migration and the corresponding device showed a PCE loss of less than 1% under the MPP operating condition for over 80 h. Compared with the 2D perovskite, the 1D perovskite with a face-sharing connectivity of [PbI6]4− octahedral structure showed lower 6s2 (Pb2+) orbital energies, resulting in better environmental stability. Liu et al. reported that 1D PbI2-bipyridine (BPy)(II) perovskite could be incorporated inside the 3D perovskite to form a lattice-matching interfacial heterojunction structure, which effectively blocked the ion migration pathways.217 The as-prepared 1D@3D perovskite device showed remarkably high long-term stability in the presence of humidity, illumination, and external electric fields. Kong et al. employed 2-diethylaminoethylchloride hydrochloride (DEAECCl) to produce a 1D perovskitoid (DEAECPbI3) with good charge transport property and form stability-enhanced 1D@3D perovskite films with higher crystallinity, alleviating the residual tensile strain (Fig. 13b).218 The corresponding device achieved a champion PCE of 22.9% and retained more than 90% of its initial PCE after aging at 85 °C under illumination in ambient air for over 2000 h. Based on special benzimidazole (Bn) cations, the reasons for the suppressed ion migration behavior under the operational conditions were illustrated by observing the electro-strictive strain in the polycrystalline perovskite.219 The doped 1D BnPbI3 perovskite could increase the Young's modulus of the films and bridge with the 3D perovskite by bonding interaction to compensate the dangling bonds, which decreased the intrinsic electro-strictive strain and attenuated lattice deformation, resulting in an increase in the activation energy of ion migration and suppressed unbalanced charge carrier extraction. Consequently, the corresponding device presented ultra-long-term stability, retaining 95.3% of its initial PCE under the operational conditions for 3072 h due to the effective suppression of Ag+ diffusion and I− migration (Fig. 13c and d).


4.3.2 Quasi-2D perovskites. 
Quasi-2D (n ≤ 5) perovskites are regarded as ideal perovskite materials to achieve highly durable photovoltaic devices with satisfactory environmental stability. However, the high exciton binding energy caused by the quantum well structure leads to a considerable loss in photovoltaic performance. Moreover, phase purity control and crystal orientation regulation are the two major obstacles to prepare high-quality quasi-2D perovskite films. Thus far, only a few articles have reported effective methods to successfully manage the uniform phase distribution in quasi-2D perovskite films made from precursor solutions with specific stoichiometric mixtures. Inspired by the ligand-assisted reprecipitation approach to synthesize perovskite nanocrystals, Qin et al. proposed an effective coordination engineering, using a single crystal-derived precursor with a mixed nonpolar DMAc:TOL (HI) cosolvent to tune the colloidal properties and successfully managed the phase purity and arrangement in high-quality (TEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (TEA = 2-thiophene ethylamine) films (Fig. 14a).220 Using this method, the derived colloidal template induced preferential crystal growth and vertically order arrangement, presenting a narrow phase distribution. The unencapsulated devices achieved a stabilized PCE of 14.5% and maintained over 93% of its initial PCE after aging in ambient air for 500 h. Similarly, Sidhik et al. dissolved pre-synthesized quasi-2D perovskite single-crystalline powders in optimized solvents to form sub-micrometer-sized memory seeds with a homogeneous n-value, which resulted in high-phase purity 2D perovskite films with the desirable out-of-plane orientation and enhanced crystallinity.221 Besides the pre-synthetic crystal method, precursor composition control is also impactful to optimize the phase purity of quasi-2D perovskite films. For example, the replacement of the conventional halide spacers (BAI) by a molten salt spacer, i.e., n-butylamine acetate (BAAc), resulted in high-quality pure-phase quantum well films (Fig. 14b), where the strong ionic coordination between BAAc and the perovskite framework induced a uniformly distributed intermediate phase in gel form to produce vertically aligned grains on the microscale.48 The unencapsulated devices exhibited no significant degradation (<10%) after storage in 65% ± 10% humidity conditions for 4680 h, under continuous illumination for 1100 h, or under working at 85 °C for 558 h. In addition, additive post-treatment is also an approach to achieve high-purity films. Zhang et al. reported a simple post-treatment method with amphoteric imidazolium iodide (ImI) to improve the phase purity and crystallinity of quasi-2D GA(MA)nPbnI3n+1 (n = 5) perovskite films, which resulted in reduced trap density and enhanced charge mobility.222
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the transformation from colloidal phase into either random or highly oriented RP perovskite films base on the single-crystal starting material in various solvents.220 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic structure of the phase-pure quantum well perovskite film (left) and chirp-corrected photo-induced changes in absorption (ΔA) spectra of the phase-pure quantum well films with varied average well width 〈n〉 (right).48 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Structural models of the (111) and (202) surfaces without absorption (left) and with NH4I adsorption (middle) or NH4Cl adsorption (right).225 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Thermal stability characterization of RP perovskites and solar cells, including the comparison of images and XRD patterns for perovskite films aging at 150 °C in the dark, and device thermal stability tests at 85 °C in the dark.231 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of the microscopic growth mechanism for the 2D perovskite film assisted with FACl.232 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Although quasi-2D perovskites exhibit exceptional intrinsic and environmental stability, the out-of-plane carrier transport in their films is significantly hampered by the random orientation of layered crystals. The orientation regulation strategy is the key to obtaining high-performance quasi-2D perovskite photovoltaic devices. Accordingly, additive-assisted growth and preparation process control are effective and proven methods to achieve that. Lai et al. adopted an organic salt, 4-(trifluoromethyl)benzylammonium iodide (tFM-PMAI), to assist the crystal growth of (ThMA)2(FA)4Pb5I16, thereby suppressing the nonradiative recombination losses and improving the carrier mobility.223 Dong et al. synthesized 2-thiopheneformamidinium (ThFA) as an organic spacer to prepare high-quality (ThFA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 perovskite films by a precursor organic salt-assisted crystal growth technique, resulting in preferential vertical growth orientations to elevate the charge carrier mobilities and reduce the trap density.224 Dramatically stable devices were achieved, showing less than 1% degradation after 3000 h storage in N2. Yang et al. reported that the selective adsorption of ammonium halide additive on distinct perovskite crystal planes could be regulated by incorporating iodide (Fig. 14c).225 Accordingly, the minority (202) planes developed as secondary nucleation sites to accelerate the production of large grains, and the dynamic-favored growth of the (111) plane was designedly restricted. The (111) crystal plane progressively regained its growth dominance together with the process of halogen-regulated deprotonation of ammonium, leading to a vertically oriented 2D perovskite film with excellent homogeneity, decreased trap density states, and desirable carrier kinetics. Surprisingly, a water-assisted crystallization method to prepare quasi-2D (BA)2MA4Pb5I16 perovskite films was proposed, in which the formed hydration (MAI·H2O)-assisted synchronous growth of the 2D and 3D phase components occurred during the hot-casting procedure, resulting in the phase distribution regulation from small to large n-values and vertical crystal orientation.226 In addition, vacuum poling treatment was shown to enforce nucleation during crystallization, contributing to the uniform alignment of nanoplates with different n values in PEA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite films for superior isotropic carrier transport and extraction.227 Isopropanol solvent–vapor annealing (SVA) has also been used as a general post-deposition strategy to induce surface reorientation and grain growth for preferential vertical orientation across broad classes of 2D perovskite films.228 Liu et al. reported that the driving force of the vertical phase distribution is closely related to the colloid property of the precursors, following the sedimentation equilibrium theory.229 Surprisingly, acid addition converted the colloid precursors to solution and further led to the damage of the vertical distribution. Considering the destructive acid components present in the PEDOT:PSS layer, a self-assembly layer of 4-bromobenzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate was deposited to modify the acidic surface property to mitigate the influence of the precursor colloid properties and achieve the desired vertical distribution.
The impressive operational stability of quasi-2D perovskite devices has aroused interest from researchers, with the reports of ultra-stable large-area, low-dimensional devices proliferating. Zuo et al. proposed a scalable drop-cast method to self-assemble uniform and highly oriented (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films in ambient air.230 Inspiringly, no obvious degradation occurred after in an N2 glovebox for over 5 months. Although layered RP perovskites exhibit fantastic humidity and light stability, their thermal stability is still an issue. An interlayer A-site compositional engineering strategy was reported by Jiang et al. to increase the decomposition energy. The prepared triple-A-site-cation BA2(MA0.76FA0.19Cs0.05)3Pb4I13 films exhibited improved film quality with more compact and larger micrometer grains and lower trap densities,231 which resulted in enhanced intrinsic structural stability. The corresponding devices retained 80% of their original efficiency under thermal aging at 85 °C in the dark for 1400 h (Fig. 14d). By contrast, DJ-phase perovskites exhibited higher structural stability than their RP-phase counterparts. By comparing the 2D perovskites made from the propylamine (PA) and 1,3-propanediamine (PDA) cations, Ahmad et al. proved that the eliminated van der Waals gap endowed the DJ-phase (PDA) (MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskite with stronger stability.157 Between the organic layers and perovskite layers, there is strong hydrogen bonding on both sides, which leads to the formation of a less-distorted crystal structure. The tightly stacked perovskite layers induced higher phase purity, crystallinity and enhanced charge mobility. In addition, considering the thermal instability of MA+, Cheng et al. fabricated pure FA-based (PDA)(FA)3Pb4I13 films with well-oriented crystal grains and enhanced stability by adding FACl as an additive (Fig. 14e), in which the I/Cl ion exchange caused the Cl-containing intermediates to transform into LD perovskites, followed by FACl evaporation.232 Similarly, the mixed-cation (3AMP)(MA0.75FA0.25)3Pb4I13 perovskite showed mitigated distortion of the inorganic framework and greater Pb–I–Pb angles than that of its single-cation (3AMP)(MA)3Pb4I13 counterpart.233


4.3.3 LD/3D layered perovskites. 
The passivation effect of LD perovskites on the surface and interface of 3D perovskite films plays a key role in improving the fill factor and reducing the open-circuit voltage loss of devices, where ammonium ions can passivate anionic defects by electrostatic interaction (ionic and hydrogen bonding). In the investigation by Yang et al., the formation of a 2D interlayer between 3D perovskite and HTM layers by cyclohexylethylammonium iodide (CEAI) treatment greatly decreased the surface nonradiative recombination loss.234 The passivated devices maintained over 96% of their initial PCE after 1500 h of MPP tracking in an N2 atmosphere. Besides, surface treatment with BABr and subsequent thermal driving could form self-passivated 2D/3D perovskites with a graded LD perovskite top layer (Fig. 15a), which successfully suppressed the defect-induced nonradiative recombination in the bulk and interface of films in favor of reducing the VOC deficit.235 Similarly, Gharibzadeh et al. created a 2D/3D perovskite heterostructure, where the ultra-thin 2D perovskite layer guaranteed fast hole carrier extraction to enhance the VOC of PSCs.236 In addition to surface passivation, LD components at the surface and grain boundary could increase the activation energy for ion migration to enhance the stability under light, heat and humidity.237 Gao et al. reported that 1D TAPbI3 (TA = thiazole ammonium) acted as a passivator film to prevent iodide ion migration in a 3D (MA,FA)PbI3 film and further improved the device environmental stability, allowing the PSC to maintain 92% of its initial PCE under ambient conditions for 2 months.238 For the MA-based perovskite, the surface PTAMAPbI4 capping layer (PTA = phenyltrimethylammonium) was prepared by controllable PTAI intercalation to lock the unstable MA+ and passivate surface defects, which enhanced the thermal and moisture stability of PSCs.98
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of film formation process and the film cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy image, where the change in the position of the components was characterized by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry.235 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of lattice matching for 3D/1D (up) and 3D/0D (middle) perovskites. Schematic illustration of the 3D surface and 0D/1D surface (down).239 Copyright 2022, Science Press. (c) Schematic diagram of in situ cross-linking process for 1D ‘‘perovskitoids (from PA+ to poly PA+).241 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF)/energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy elemental maps of the cross-sectional image for the 2D-RT perovskite film. (e) Damp-heat tests for encapsulated devices and (f) MPP tracking for the encapsulated control and 2D-RT devices in ambient air.243 Copyright 2022, Science Press. 
Despite the advantages of surface LD structures in improving the stability, the corresponding quantum confinement effect is detrimental to the carrier separation and transport. Accordingly, the construction of LD/3D heterojunctions is an effective way to balance the performance and stability. For instance, Chen et al. developed extended lattice-matched 1D or 0D perovskitoid capping layers to passivate the metallic Pb and undercoordinated Pb2+ defects on the 3D perovskite surface and to enhance the moisture resistance (Fig. 15b).239 The device exhibited a PCE of 24.18%, retaining 90% of its initial value under the MPP operating conditions for 800 h. In addition, type-II 2D/3D perovskite heterojunctions were constructed by a solution process to enhance the interface charge extraction, in which the 2D layers of CHA2PbI4 (CHA = cyclohexylammonium) or CHMA2PbI4 (CHMA= cyclohexylmethylammonium) could decrease the interface transport resistance and the enhance hole extraction, benefiting from the valence band alignment.240 Yang et al. first in situ constructed cross-linked ultrathin 1D perovskitoid at the surface and grain boundaries of 3D perovskite films to form 1D/3D perovskite heterostructures by cross-linking the polymerizable propargylammonium (PA+) (Fig. 15c).241 Consequently, the conductive species generated surrounding the 1D perovskitoid allowed carriers to be transported along the 1D chains. In addition, the residual tensile strain in the heterojunctions was released to stabilize the perovskite films. Finally, a champion PCE of 21.19% was obtained and 93% retained after 3055 h under MPP operating conditions.
From the perspective of quantum well structure regulation, Chen et al. proposed that the electron blocking at the 2D/3D interface in inverted devices could be solved by decreasing the confinement effect in the 2D layer.242 By slightly modifying bulkier organic cations, the formation rate of 2D heterostructures was slowed down, inducing the preferential growth of wider-layer LD perovskite. The inverted device achieved a certified PCE of 23.91% and no PCE loss occurred for the unencapsulated devices after over 1000 h under RT and 50% RH. The process for the synthesis of surface the LD perovskite play an important role in the final film structure. Recently, given the lower formation energy for higher-n layers, Azmi et al. found that the n value of the 2D-perovskite fragments could be tailored by adjusting the annealing conditions.243 Based on oleylammonium iodide (OLAI) molecules, thermal annealing resulted in the generation of an n = 1 LD perovskite, while post-treatment at RT induced the formation of higher-dimensionality LD layers (n ≥ 2) (Fig. 15d). Using the latter method, inverted damp heat-stable devices were achieved with a PCE of 24.3%, maintaining over 95% of their initial PCE after more than 1000 h under damp-heat test conditions and retaining ∼95% after over 500 h in air (encapsulated) (Fig. 15e and f), respectively.
Regarding the preparation process, the post-treatment technique is the most common method for constructing LD/3D structures. In addition, researchers have explored other routes to adjust the structure and optimize the performance. For instance, the one-step blade-coating process, assisted with special S-benzyl-cysteine cations, was applied to achieve the assembly of 2D/3D heterojunctions.244 Due to the LD protective barrier and the passivation effect of organo-functional groups, the 2D/3D device delivered an increase in VOC of about 100 mV, retaining 88.4% and 80.9% of its original values after 30 d in an N2 glove box and ambient air, respectively. The formation of metastable quasi-2D perovskites during the solution process makes it difficult to achieve thermal stability and design an appropriate local electric field for efficient carrier collection. Jang et al. proposed a strategy of solvent-free solid-phase in-plane growth to prepare an intact 2D/3D heterojunction by applying pressure and heat, which induced the formation of a thickness-controllable highly crystalline (BA)2PbI4 layer and avoided any quasi-2D phases.61 The resulting 2D/3D heterojunction improved the built-in potential and increased the carrier lifetime, leading to an improvement in VOC. A certified PCE of 24.35% was obtained, maintaining 94% of the initial PCE for the encapsulated device after 1056 h under the damp heat test at 85 °C and 85% RH.


4.3.4 Configuration modulation for organic cations. 
The configuration and arrangement of large organic cations crucially influence the properties of quantum well structures in LD perovskites. The high quantum well depth and low dielectric constant induce a strong quantum confined effect, resulting in high exciton binding energy and unwanted carrier recombination loss. Molecular configuration regulation of organic cations to achieve intrinsic stability improvement and optimize the carrier transport is considered the current development direction of LD perovskite photovoltaic materials. Wu et al. systematically studied the effect of alkyl chain length in monoamine cations (from ethylamine to hexylamine) on the photoelectric properties of the corresponding LD RP perovskites (Fig. 16a).79 The longer-chain spacers contribute to strengthening the van der Waals forces to promote the aggregation of the precursor, leading to a modified film crystallization and phase distribution, as well as optimized quantum-confined behaviors. Based on the best amylamine (AA) spacer, the high-quality (AA)2MA3Pb4I13 perovskites exhibited reduced exciton binding energy and appropriate phase alignments and the device PCE only degraded by 0.66% under N2 atmosphere after around 1850 h. Differently, Zheng et al. compared the top LD perovskite layers with different alkylammoniums of diverse alkyl chain lengths, proving that the electron-blocking capacity and humidity resistance obviously increased with an increase in the chain length.245 The device with OAI post-treatment presented slightly higher efficiency than that treated with DAI and BAI, obtaining a certified PCE of 22.9%.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of 2DRP perovskites integrated by organic spacers with different chain lengths.79 Copyright 2021, Cell Press. (b) Schematic crystal structures of (ThDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13 and (TTDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13.90 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Molecular structure and electron-density distribution of ODA, TETA and EDOEA, and structure models of FAPbI3-ODA, FAPbI3-TETA and FAPbI3-EDOEA obtained by DFT calculation.253 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic crystal structures of the 3D MAPbI3 and the 2DRP (MTEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 and (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites.82 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Illustration of band mismatch between [PbI6] planes and organic spacer layers with a weaker and stronger H-bonding strength.254 Copyright 2022, Science Press. 
Organic functional groups play a significant role in modulating the interlayer molecular interactions in LD perovskites. Regarding the issue of organic spacer layers inducing a high exciton binding energy, it is necessary to select or design appropriate organic spacer cations to weaken the quantum confinement effect. The fluorine atom, with small size, is an ideal substitute for hydrogen, whose high electronegativity gives the C–F bond significantly directivity and hydrophobicity. By comparing three analogous cations including PEA, 4-fluorophenethylammonium (4-F-PEA) and 4-methoxyphenethylammonium (4-MeO-PEA), Fu et al. found that the 4-MeO-PEAI- and 4-F-PEAI-based quasi-2D perovskites exhibited better humidity stability due to the electron repulsion and steric effect of hydrophobic functional groups.66 The 4-F-PEAI-based device achieved the highest PCE of 14.5% and excellent stability, maintaining 90% of its initial PCE after 40 d in air (40–50% RH), proving that organic cation fluorination is an important approach to achieve efficient and stable perovskite devices. Based on the selective mono-fluorination of the benzene ring in PEA+, Hu et al. demonstrated that a slight change in the position of the fluorine atom would significantly influence the photovoltaic properties, which were affected by the cooperative and weak interactions between the organic cations in the perovskite crystal lattice.246 Fundamentally, the property difference can be explained by the fact that the stacking arrangement and orientation disorder of the organic spacer layer will result in orientation degeneracy and formation of an energy difference. Finally, the devices based on 4-F-PEA+ exhibited the optimal photoelectric performance. In addition, Zhou et al. fabricated a (4-F-PEA)2PbI4 perovskite capping layer by introducing 4-FPEAI to grow in situ with excess PbI2.247 The thin protective layer not only enhanced the moisture stability of the films, but also optimized the interfacial charge transfer and decreased the nonradiative recombination. Based on the ultra-hydrophobic pentafluorophenylethylammonium cations (FPEA+), Liu et al. deposited an ultrathin 2D (FPEA)2PbI4 perovskite layer between the hydrophilic 3D perovskite layer and the hydrophobic spiro-OMeTAD layer, which not only endowed the device with outstanding moisture stability and suppressed the ion migration, but also alleviated the intrinsic incompatibility between the perovskite and spiro-OMeTAD to decrease the charge carrier loss.248 For cations with fluorinated alkyl chains, Tan et al. demonstrated that the high dipole moment of the 2,2,2-trifluoroethylamine (F3EAI) ligand with highly electronegative fluorine atoms enhanced the localized polarization of the [(BA)1−x(F3EA)x]2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite to reduce the dielectric confinement effect and exciton binding energy, leading to enhanced carrier separation/transport and suppressed nonradiative recombination.249 Surprisingly, Wang et al. found that directly introducing 2-(2,3,4,5,6-pentafluorophenyl)ethylammonium iodide (FEAI) in the MAPbI3 perovskite did not induce the generation of detectable LD components, even when the addition was up to 5 mol%, and the highly hydrophobic fluorine-contenting material was finally located at the film–air interface.250 By contrast, adding 0.3% molar fraction of the (FEA)2PbI4 perovskite, the majority of (FEA)2PbI4 existed within the first 50 nm of the film surface and the MAPbI3 phase transition temperature was obviously depressed. Li et al. reported a reasonable explanation for the phenomenon that the fluorinated LD perovskites distributed on the film surface. Due to the presence of fluorinated molecules with low surface energy, during the crystallization process, the different surface energy induced an upward molecular driving force, resulting in the spontaneous formation of an upper gradient LD structure.251
In addition to normal benzene-based organic cations, it is crucial to design novel conjugated counterparts to enhance the structure stability and reduce the dielectric mismatch between the adjacent organic and inorganic layers. Lu et al. synthesized the electron-rich 2,5-thiophenedimethylammonium (ThDMA) molecule and fabricated high-quality (ThDMA)(MA)4Pb5I16 DJ-phase perovskites with enhanced crystallinity, reduced defects and optimized vertical orientation.252 Xu et al. designed and developed the thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,5-diyldimethanaminium (TTDMA) molecule with a longer π-conjugation length than ThDMA to enlarge the crystal nuclei in the precursor solution by strong intermolecular interaction, inducing template formation, which led to the formation of high-quality films with a lower defect density, decreased exciton binding energy and directional charge transport (Fig. 16b).90 Importantly, the unencapsulated target devices sustained an average 99% of their initial PCE after being kept in N2 for over 6 months. The design of functional groups and molecular configuration on alkyl chains is an effective method to regulate the crystal structure and electronic structure. Based on octane-1,8-diamine (ODA), 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)bis(ethylamine) (EDOEA), and triethylenetetramine (TETA) diammonium molecules (Fig. 16c), Zhong et al. demonstrated that the molecular configuration affected the [PbI6]4− framework and the EDOEA-based 2D/3D perovskite possessed the minimum average Pb–I–Pb angle, causing the smallest tilting of the [PbX6]4− octahedral skeleton.253 The EDOEA cations induced suitable hydrogen bonding and binding energy between the organic spacers and inorganic layers, which were beneficial for crystal-oriented growth and lattice distortion mitigation to promote the carrier transport. The resulting devices without encapsulation exhibited excellent moisture stability, maintaining 82% of their initial PCE after aging for 1560 h in air with 50% RH. Ren et al. reported a sulfur–sulfur interaction in (MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 perovskite using 2-(methylthio)ethylamine (MTEA) as an organic spacer, resulting in dense, smooth and low-defective films with strong out-of-plane preferred growth to boost the charge transport and enhance the stabilization (Fig. 16d).82 DFT calculation further proved that the S–S interaction among the tails of the back-to-back MTEA cations significantly improved the interlayer binding energy and increased the charge density overlap. Regarding the poor and anisotropic charge transport in 2D perovskites, Zhang et al. proposed a rational strategy, where asymmetric diammonium cations induced the desired metastable H-bonding motifs in 2D DJ perovskites (Fig. 16e), which decreased the energy barrier for maximizing the out-of-plane hole transport.254 Compared with the common 1,4-butane diammonium (BDA2+), the asymmetric N,N-dimethyl-1,3-propane diammonium (DMePDA2+) possesses “head or tail” H-bonding choices, leading to diverse possible relative orientations between adjacent cations and largely compensating for overall structural relaxation. Both metastable and stable 2D polymorphic structures were generated due to the different H-bonding interactions between the organic layers and the [PbI6] planes. The resulting device with the metastable DJ 2D surface layer delivered a PCE of 24.7% and retained 90% of its initial PCE after 1000 h of MPP operation at 40 °C in N2.

5. Summary and Outlook
Halide PSCs are developing rapidly, exhibiting excellent prospects for commercial application with a laboratory certified PCE exceeding 25%, although they still struggle with the instability issue under operation conditions. Halide perovskites are composed of IA and VIIA elements and organic components, most of which are chemically active and transformable. Coupled with the fragile chemical interactions among the components, perovskites exhibit inherent instability and inferior resistance to environmental factors. The soft ionic crystal property of perovskites inevitably triggers deleterious processes under external stimuli, such as ion migration, phase separation, phase transition, and environmental degradation. Therefore, reinforcing the perovskite lattice to upgrade the operational stability of PSCs will be an ambitious research direction to promote the commercial application of perovskite photovoltaic technology in the future.
In this review, we summarized the influence of composition properties and structure characteristics of halide perovskites on their defect nature and carrier photophysical behavior, and further discussed the typical degradation behavior and destabilization mechanism, including environmental degradation (humidity, heat, photodegradation and oxidation), ion migration, phase segregation behavior, lattice strain, and phase transition. Based on the relationship between structural properties and perovskite stability, it was highlighted that [PbX6]4− modulation and organic spacer construction serve as reliable approaches to enhance the intrinsic and external stability of perovskites by reinforcing their lattice, eliminating defects and stresses, and blocking water and oxygen. Also, the typical strategies to achieve efficient and stable PSCs in recent years were outlined from the perspectives of octahedral structure modulation, regulation of defect and stress, and dimension management.
Thus far, researchers have devoted significant efforts to upgrade the stability of perovskites, but the current lifetime of perovskite photovoltaic devices is still lagging far behind the 25 year duration of commercial silicon-based photovoltaic devices. Based on the summary of the research progress, we propose some scientific challenges and future development directions for the commercialization of PSCs.
Firstly, the chemical components of perovskites is the cornerstone of their stability, where the [PbI6]4− structure acts as the skeleton of perovskites, and its interaction with the A-site ions and its own distortion influence their intrinsic properties and stability. Therefore, composition modulation is the most fundamental and crucial strategy to deal with the instability of perovskites, such as reducing the content of volatile MA+ to enhance the thermal stability, optimizing the Goldschmidt tolerance factor to stabilize the phase structure, and adjusting the interactions between components to improve the ion migration energy barrier. However, the components of the A- and X-site entering the 3D lattice are very limited, mainly including organic cations with small sizes, alkali metal cations, halogen and pseudo-halogen anions, and thus the discovery or synthesis of new ions is difficult but necessary. Accordingly, machine learning is an essential way to rationally develop new materials and design new structures in the future. Besides, it is worth mentioning that the synergistic effect and interaction mechanism of simultaneously introducing special cations and anions needs to be further researched, where the composition and ratio of the A- and X-site ions are properly optimized and [PbI6]4− octahedral deformation is adjusted to obtain ideal photovoltaic devices with both high efficiency and excellent stability. Also, the doping trends and synergistic passivation ability of several different ions can be investigated by machine learning.
Next, the soft ionic property of the perovskite lattice easily breeds defects and stresses, which are regarded as two dominant culprits to induce instability in the [PbI6]4− skeleton and promote the degradation of perovskites. These two factors are interrelated and influence each other, where the presence of defects will lead to local strain and stresses will reduce the defect formation energy. The defects and stresses in perovskite films seem to be unavoidable in the solution process and how to minimize them is always an important and tricky issue. Adopting LD structures with low elastic modulus and introducing an interfacial buffer layer can effectively enhance the crystal fracture energy and relieve the lattice stress. Moreover, mild preparation processes can minimize the generation and influence of defects and stresses. Hence, thermal evaporation processes and low-temperature solution technology need to be further explored to prepare low-stress and low-defect perovskite films. It is also necessary to broaden the application of PSCs at low temperatures to avoid defects and stresses resulting from thermally activated ionic vibrations. More importantly, the analysis of the generation and activity behavior of defects and stress in perovskite films contributes to our thorough understanding of the operational stability of perovskite materials, enabling interventions at the source. This urgently requires more advanced in situ techniques to monitor the dynamics of the component and phase structure of perovskites during operation, as well as to analyze the distribution and microscopic characterization of defects and stresses.
LD perovskites have emerged as an effective solution to address the perovskite stability issues by stabilizing the [PbI6]4− octahedral framework and blocking the intrusion of moisture and oxygen, highlighting the significance of constructing organic spacers. However, the quantum confinement effect induced by the insulating organic layers hinders the carrier transport. Therefore, it is urgent to solve the issue of the out-of-plane carrier transport in films containing LD perovskites and overcome the trade-off between efficiency and stability. For quasi-2D and LD/3D mixed perovskites, inducing crystal vertical orientation and introducing more 3D components (higher n values) are universal methods to ensure ideal carrier transport, but failed to resolve the issue of poor interlayer charge transmission. For LD/3D layered perovskites, the thickness of the LD layer with protection and passivation roles needs to be more finely tuned to balance the conductivity and hydrophobicity by adjusting the solvent composition, developing and optimizing preparation processes, etc. Especially, the design of organic layers is the core solution to weaken the quantum confinement effect and reduce the exciton binding energy, which together with the modulation of the phase purity and crystal orientation distribution, can minimize the defect density and energy disturbances and optimize the out-of-plane charge transport. In addition, the A-site cations in LD perovskites are no longer limited by size, thus allowing extensive exploration based on the following design criteria. Exploring novel organic spacer cations with high dielectric constant to reduce the dielectric difference with the inorganic skeleton for better energy alignment. Designing short-chain organic cations to enhance the coupling effect between adjacent inorganic layers. Regulating the molecule configuration and steric hindrance effects to suppress structural distortion. Optimizing the type and position of functional groups and tuning the electronic and chemical interactions of organic/inorganic layers to enhance the electronic and phonon coupling and promote charge transport. In particular, understanding the structural origin of the fundamental photophysical properties of LD structures at the atomic level can provide new insights into the design of materials and structures. Also, DFT calculation is a powerful tool for identifying the interactions between organic spacers and inorganic frameworks as well as the composition of LD structures.
Moreover, the development of efficient and stable PSCs should integrate various factors, and thus there is still a long way full of difficulties to go. In addition to facing the instability issue of perovskites, it is urgent to solve the diffusion problem of metal electrodes (Ag or Au), the catalytic activity of the conventional metal oxide transport layer (TiO2 or SnO2) inducing the decomposition of perovskites, and the thermal and humidity instability of organic charge transport materials. Thus, researchers are also expected to develop more suitable electrode and transport layer materials, optimize the contact interface for adjacent layers and reasonably design device structure and encapsulation to fabricate PSCs with better stability. Specially, device encapsulation technology can well prevent the invasion of water and oxygen in PSCs, but the damage by light and heat during device operation is serious and inevitable. Therefore, we suggest that more studies focus on exploring the robust internal materials that are resistant to light and heat in PSCs and reveal the degradation mechanism of devices under working conditions by advanced characterization techniques. In brief, the development of efficient and stable perovskite devices needs the joint efforts of scientists in various fields and the cross-integration of multiple disciplines (Tables 1–3).
Table 1 Component modulation strategies to enhance the intrinsic and operating stabilities of perovskite devices




Strategy
Composition
PCE (%)
Stability of devices
Year/ref.


Temperature/light/humidity
Operation




Ace+ doping
Ace0.03MA0.97PbI3
20.3
92% after 450 h at 85 °C
80% after 2011 h in ambient
2020/117


MDACl2 doping
FAPbI3:3.8MDACl2
23.7
>90% after 20 h at 150 °C in air; >90% after aging for 70 h (85% RH, 25 °C)
>90% after working for 600 h
2019/166


MDA2+ and Cl− (MC) doping
(FAPbI3)0.097(MC)0.03
24.4
>80% after 1300 h at 85 °C (15–25% RH)
>90% after operating for 400 h
2020/167


Rb+ doping
Rb0.05Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.75Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3
20.6
92% after 1000 h at 85 °C/85% RH


2019/172


Cs+ and MA+ doping
Cs0.05MA0.1FA0.85PbI3
19.1
Less than 5% degradation after 1400 h under 85 °C/85% RH
Negligible PCE loss after working for 1800 h at 30 °C
2021/174


Cl− doping
FA0.75Cs0.25Pb(I0.8Br0.15Cl0.05)3
20.32
>97% after 500 h at 85 °C in N2
Less than 4% degradation after 1000 h at 60 °C; 90% after 250 h in air (25 to 30% RH)
2020/177


MASCN vapor
FAPbI3(MASCN)
23.1
97.8% after aging for 2500 h in a dry box
∼90% after working for 500 h
2020/179


HCOO− doping
FAPbI3(2% FAHCOO)
25.59
10% degradation after 1000 h (25 °C and 20% RH); ∼80% after 1000 h aging (60 °C and 20% RH)
15% loss after 450 h at 35 °C
2021/44


Ac− doping
CsPbI2−xBr(Ac)x
15.56
98% after aging in air for 14 days


2019/180


Ac− and SCN− co-doping
Air-processed MAPbI3 (50–60% RT)
20.55
85% after 3600 h in air (∼25 °C and ∼30% RH)


2021/181


[BMP]+[BF4]−
Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 with 0.25% [BMP]+[BF4]−
20.1


80% after 2630 h in air (60 °C ∼50% RT; unencapsulated)
2020/182




Table 2 Strategies of defect and stress regulation to enhance the intrinsic and operating stabilities of perovskite devices




Strategy
Composition
PCE (%)
Stability for devices
Year/ref.


Temperature/light/humidity
Operation




Stress release at buried interface
FA0.83MA0.17Pb1.1I2.72Br0.48
21.7
93% after 1000 h in the dark in N2; 82% under illumination in N2 for 1000 h


2022/188


A site cation alloying
FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
21.48
Only slight decline exceeding 1000 h under ambient exposure


2019/141


Strain compensation
CsPbI2Br
16.4
96% after heating at 85 °C for 1000 h
95% after 60 h
2020/130


Co-evaporation process
MAPbI3
17
over ≈95% and ≈80% after 1000 and 3600 h at 85 °C, respectively; over 95% after kept at RT and 30% RH for over 15 months


2021/192


Thermal management
Cs0.1(FA0.92MA0.08)0.9Pb(I0.9Br0.04Cl0.06)3
22.29
91% after thermal aging at 85 °C for 1126 h in N2
95% after 1235 h in N2
2021/193


Redox shuttle (Eu3+–Eu2+)
MAPbI3(Cl)
21.52
89% under illumination after 1500 h; 91% after heating at 85 °C for 1500 h
91% after 500 h
2019/196


Passivation by positively charged defect indicator
FA0.92MA0.08Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3
23.19


Over 90% after 1000 h at 30–40% RH and 40 °C
2021/199


Surface defect removal
Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.05PbI2.85Br0.15
22.00


97.1% after 1440 h at 65 °C
2020/205


Surface impurity removal
FA0.81MA0.14Cs0.05PbI2.45Br0.55
20.40


93% after 2180 h at 65 °C
2021/206


Surface chemical polishing
FAPbI3 (MACl + excess PbI2)
24.50


At ∼60 °C for more than 500 h, and storage in dark for 24 h, PCE recovered to 92.83 ± 2.32%
2022/207




Table 3 Dimension management strategies to enhance the intrinsic and operating stabilities of perovskite devices




Strategy
Perovskites
PCE (%)
Stability for devices
Year/ref.


Temperature/light/humidity
Operation




2D-seed-induced growth
FA0.75MA0.25PbI3 ((BDA)PbI4)
23.95
93% after 1056 h in ambient condition (about 45% RH)
91% after 500 h at 60 °C
2022/215


Crystal growth regulation by 2D perovskite
FAMAPbI3(Cl) ((NpMA)2PbI4)
24.37
85.8% after 2158 h (30% ± 5% RH); 94.4% under 60 °C in N2 for 2328 h
98% after 1500 h in N2
2022/216


1D perovskitoid template
(Cs0.04FA0.86MA0.1)Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 (DEAECPbI3)
22.9
94.7%, 92.4%, and 90.0% after 2100, 2200, and 2200 h under ambient air with 5–10% RH, 85 °C and illumination, respectively


2021/218


1D BnPbI3
Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45(BnPbI3)
21.17


95.3% after 3072 h at 45 °C in N2
2021/219


Single-crystal precursor
(TEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10
14.68


93% after 500 h in air
2020/220


Memory seeds
BA2MA3Pb4I13
17.1
97.5% after 800 h under illumination


2021/221


Molten salt spacer (BAAc)
BA2MA3Pb4I13
16.25
93.8% after 4680 h in air (65 ± 10% RH); 96.2% after illumination for 1100 h; 95.7% at 85 °C for 558 h in N2


2021/48


ImI post-treatment
GA(MA)5Pb5I16 ((Im)2PbI4)
22.26
94% after over 1200 h under light soaking


2022/222


Thiophene-based cations
(ThFA)2MA2Pb3I10
16.72
Less than 1% degradation after 3000 h in N2; 90% after light soaking for 216 h


2020/224


Ammonium halide additive
(PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (NH4IxCl1−x)
18.48
≈90% under ambient of 40% RH for 1200 h
≈95% after 500 h of light irradiation
2020/225


Water-assisted crystal growth
(BA)2(MA0.8FA0.15Cs0.05)4Pb5I16
18.04
Degradation <15% after aging over 500 h at 60 °C


2020/226


Solvent–vapor annealing
(BDA)(Cs0.1FA0.9)4Pb5I16
18.2
Negligible degradation under 80% RH for 800 h; more than 80% PCE after 800 h at 85 °C
Over 90% after 800 h in air ambient conditions (about 30 °C, 35% RH)
2020/228


FA+ replacing MA+
(PDA)(FA)3Pb4I13
13.8
86% after 1000 h at 85 °C in N2 in the dark; 85% after 540 h in air (25 °C, 30–40% RH)


2021/232


Interfacial 2D passivation layer
Cs0.05MA0.1FA0.85PbI2.9Br0.1·0.05PbI2 (CEA2PbI4)
23.57
98% after aging for 600 h in air (40% ± 20% RH) under dark
96% after 1500 h in N2
2021/234


Surface LD perovskitoids
0D(m-PBA)2PbI6)/CsFAMA-based perovskite
24.18
90% of after 2000 h in ambient air; 80% after 150 h at 85 °C and 85% RT
90% after 800 h in air
2022/239


Cross-linked 1D/3D heterostructure
Poly-PA-based 1D/CsFAMA-based trihalide perovskite
21.19
97% after aging for 1500 h in air (40–70% RH, 25–40 °C); 95.9% after 840 h under illumination in N2
93% after 3055 h in N2
2020/241


Quantum-size-tuned heterostructures
3F-PEA-based quai-2D/Cs0.05MA0.1FA0.85PbI3
23.91


No loss at RT and 50% RH for over 1000 h; 8% loss at 65 °C and 50% RH for 500 h
2022/242


Surface LD fragments tailoring
LD(n ≥ 2, OLA+)/Cs0.03(FA0.90MA0.10)0.97PbI3
24.3
>95% after >1000 h in air (85 °C and 85% RH)
∼95% after >500 h in air (encapsulated)
2022/243


Solid-phase in-plane growth
2D(BA2PbI4)/FAMAPb(IBr)3
24.35
95% after 1056 h (85% RH and RT, unencapsulated); 94% after 1056 h (85 °C and 85% RH, encapsulated)
>98% for 1620 h (encapsulated)
2021/61


π-Conjugation of organic spacer
(TTDMA)MA3Pb4I13
18.82
99% after 4400 h in N2; 94% after 740 h under illumination in N2; 98% after 960 h in air (30 ± 5% RH)
87% after 310 h in N2
2021/90


Diammonium molecular configuration
2D(EDOEA+)/Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3
22.68
82% after aging in air (50 ± 5% RH) for 1560 h


2022/253


Interlayer molecular interaction tailoring
(MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16
18.06


87.1% after 1000 h in N2
2020/82


Surface metastable DJ 2D layer
DMePDAPbI4/FA0.97MA0.03PbI2.91Br0.09
24.7
81% after aging for 1008 h at 85 °C and 5% RH in dark
90% after 1000 h of at ∼40 °C in N2
2022/254




Author contributions
Lian Wang: writing – original draft, writing – review & editing. Bohong Chang: writing – original draft, writing – review & editing. Hui Li: writing – review & editing. Yutong Wu: writing – review & editing. Zhen Liu: writing – review & editing. Lu Pan: writing – review & editing. Longwei Yin: supervision, funding acquisition, writing – review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the funding support from the State Key Program of National Natural Science of China (No. U1906227) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51872171), Taishan Pandeng Project of Shandong Province.
References
Y. Li, Z. Chen, B. Yu, S. Tan, Y. Cui, H. Wu, Y. Luo, J. Shi, D. Li and Q. Meng, Joule, 2022, 6, 676–689 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, P. Guo, J. Su, Z. Fang, N. Jia, C. Liu, L. Ye, Q. Ye, J. Chang and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2200534 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lin, J. Xu, M. Wei, Y. Wang, Z. Qin, Z. Liu, J. Wu, K. Xiao, B. Chen, S. M. Park, G. Chen, H. R. Atapattu, K. R. Graham, J. Xu, J. Zhu, L. Li, C. Zhang, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nature, 2022, 603, 73–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Zhu, J. Xiu, G. Chen, H. Liang, S. Liu, H. Xue, E. Birgersson, J. W. Ho, X. Qin, J. Lin, R. Ma, T. Liu, Y. He, A. M.-C. Ng, X. Guo, Z. He, H. Yan, A. B. Djurišić and Y. Hou, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Avila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, T. Huang, J. Xue, J. Tong, K. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 411–425 CrossRef CAS .
NREL Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
Q. Liang, K. Liu, M. Sun, Z. Ren, P. W. K. Fong, J. Huang, M. Qin, Z. Wu, D. Shen, C. S. Lee, J. Hao, X. Lu, B. Huang and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. Qian, Z. Li, O. Y. Gong, Z. An, Q. Liu, J. H. Choi, H. Guo, P. J. Yoo, D. H. Kim, T. K. Ahn, G. S. Han and H. S. Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200632 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y. K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J. P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulovic, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Boyd, R. Cheacharoen, T. Leijtens and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3418–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Zhao, Y. Li, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1559–1572 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldan-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, S. Tao, Y. Chen, X. Niu, C. K. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z. Qiu, Z. Xu, G. Zheng, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H. Liu, Y. Lun, J. Hong, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Gao, Y. Bai, S. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, S. Wang, X. Zhang, A. Wang, C. Wu and F. Hao, Small, 2022, 18, 2105783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lin, T. Shi, H. Xie, F. Wan, X. Ren, K. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. Ke, Y. Lin, Y. Gao, X. Xu, W. Xie, P. Liu and Y. Yuan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002552 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, S. X. Tao, P. A. Bobbert, C. P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707350 CrossRef .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Di Girolamo, N. Phung, F. U. Kosasih, F. Di Giacomo, F. Matteocci, J. A. Smith, M. A. Flatken, H. Köbler, S. H. Turren Cruz, A. Mattoni, L. Cinà, B. Rech, A. Latini, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, A. Di Carlo, D. Dini and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000310 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, C. Wu, S. K. Jha, Z. Li, K. Zhu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1014–1020 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, K. Chen, D. Y. Guo, S. L. Wang and P. G. Li, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 2900–2905 RSC .
N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, A. D. Printz, A. Gold-Parker, Y. Ding, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802139 CrossRef .
L. K. Ono, E. J. Juarez-Perez and Y. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30197–30246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom and M. Mcgehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, R. Comin, J. Xu, A. H. Ip and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4405–4412 CrossRef CAS .
R. Prasanna, A. Gold-Parker, T. Leijtens, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H. G. Boyen, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11117–11124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger and L. Kronik, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2728–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, A. J. Neukirch, D. J. Vogel, D. S. Kilin, L. Pedesseau, M. A. Carignano, A. D. Mohite, J. Even, C. Katan and S. Tretiak, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 787–793 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, D. Meggiolaro, M. T. Trinh, P. P. Joshi, E. Mosconi, S. C. Jones, F. De Angelis and X. Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701217 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, S. Tan, S. I. Seok, Y. Yang and N. G. Park, Science, 2022, 375, 835 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Wu, R. Liang, M. Ge, G. Sun, Y. Zhang and G. Xing, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2105635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. M. Hoffman and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 2230–2291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun and W. J. Yin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14905–14908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548–4556 RSC .
G. Han, H. D. Hadi, A. Bruno, S. A. Kulkarni, T. M. Koh, L. H. Wong, C. Soci, N. Mathews, S. Zhang and S. G. Mhaisalkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 13884–13893 CrossRef CAS .
Y. An, J. Hidalgo, C. A. R. Perini, A.-F. Castro-Méndez, J. N. Vagott, K. Bairley, S. Wang, X. Li and J.-P. Correa-Baena, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1942–1969 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Gratzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, S. G. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801948 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kim, H. J. Jung, I. J. Park, B. W. Larson, S. P. Dunfield, C. Xiao, J. Kim, J. Tong, P. Boonmongkolras, S. G. Ji, F. Zhang, S. R. Pae, M. Kim, S. B. Kang, V. Dravid, J. J. Berry, J. Y. Kim, K. Zhu, D. H. Kim and B. Shin, Science, 2020, 368, 155–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Wu, T. Liu, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808833 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, H. Gu, Y. Xia, Z. Wang, X. Liu, J. Xia, S. Zuo, Y. Hu, X. Gao, W. Hui, L. Chao, T. Niu, M. Fang, H. Lu, H. Dong, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Ran, L. Song, B. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Peng, G. Shao, J. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Xing and W. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Horantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ortiz-Cervantes, P. Carmona-Monroy and D. Solis-Ibarra, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1560–1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Hoffman, W. Ke, M. Chen, H. Tsai, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite, M. Kepenekian, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12226–12238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 4, 4–22 CrossRef .
L. Mao, P. Guo, M. Kepenekian, I. Hadar, C. Katan, J. Even, R. D. Schaller, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 13078–13088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, J. Xu, W. Gao, C. Huang and S. Dou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581–4610 RSC .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
R. A. Kerner, Z. Xu, B. W. Larson and B. P. Rand, Joule, 2021, 5, 2273–2295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Carrillo, A. Guerrero, S. Rahimnejad, O. Almora, I. Zarazua, E. Mas-Marza, J. Bisquert and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502246 CrossRef .
C. Besleaga, L. E. Abramiuc, V. Stancu, A. G. Tomulescu, M. Sima, L. Trinca, N. Plugaru, L. Pintilie, G. A. Nemnes, M. Iliescu, H. G. Svavarsson, A. Manolescu and I. Pintilie, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5168–5175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Jang, S. Lee, K. M. Yeom, K. Jeong, K. Choi, M. Choi and J. H. Noh, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Alharbi, A. Y. Alyamani, D. J. Kubicki, A. R. Uhl, B. J. Walder, A. Q. Alanazi, J. Luo, A. Burgos-Caminal, A. Albadri, H. Albrithen, M. H. Alotaibi, J. E. Moser, S. M. Zakeeruddin, F. Giordano, L. Emsley and M. Gratzel, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3008 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923 CrossRef .
X. Zhengtao, D. B. Mitzi and D. R. Medeiros, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 1400 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. Lu, J. S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. Gao, C. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, H. Liu, X. Shi, L. Zuo, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900221 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5253–5264 CrossRef CAS .
C. Katan, N. Mercier and J. Even, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3140–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Anusca, S. Balčiūnas, P. Gemeiner, Š. Svirskas, M. Sanlialp, G. Lackner, C. Fettkenhauer, J. Belovickis, V. Samulionis, M. Ivanov, B. Dkhil, J. Banys, V. V. Shvartsman and D. C. Lupascu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700600 CrossRef .
C. C. S. Chan, K. Fan, H. Wang, Z. Huang, D. Novko, K. Yan, J. Xu, W. C. H. Choy, I. Lončarić and K. S. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003071 CrossRef CAS .
C. Franchini, M. Reticcioli, M. Setvin and U. Diebold, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6, 560–586 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, K. Frohna, D. Emin, T. Kirchartz, V. Bulovic, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11007–11019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada and Y. Kanemitsu, NPG Asia Mater., 2022, 14, 48 CrossRef CAS .
R. Su, Z. Xu, J. Wu, D. Luo, Q. Hu, W. Yang, X. Yang, R. Zhang, H. Yu, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, W. Zhang and R. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ghosh, S. Aharon, L. Etgar and S. Ruhman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18262–18270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gui, L. Ji, A. Muhammad, W. Li, W. Cai, Y. Li, X. Li, X. Wu and P. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 751–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Umebayashi, K. Asai, T. Kondo and A. Nakao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155405 CrossRef .
N. Marchal, E. Mosconi, G. Garcia-Espejo, T. M. Almutairi, C. Quarti, D. Beljonne and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2528–2535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, T. Yang, X. Li, N. Ahmad, X. Zhang, S. Yue, J. Zhou, Y. Li, H. Wang, X. Shi, S. Liu, K. Zhao, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Matter, 2021, 4, 582–599 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Straus and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1434–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, R. Wang, X. Chen, C. Yao, X. Jin, K. L. Wang, W. Huang, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhai, D. Meng, S. Tan, R. Liu, Z. K. Wang, C. Zhu, K. Zhu, M. C. Beard, Y. Yan and Y. Yang, Science, 2021, 371, 636–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, S. Yu, L. Chao, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, S. Zuo, F. Li, T. Niu, Y. Yang, H. Ju, B. Li, H. Du, X. Gao, J. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, P. Maity, R. Naphade, B. Cheng, J. H. He, O. M. Bakr, J. L. Bredas and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12621–12629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Gelvez-Rueda, W. T. M. Van Gompel, R. Herckens, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and F. C. Grozema, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 824–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Passarelli, C. M. Mauck, S. W. Winslow, C. F. Perkinson, J. C. Bard, H. Sai, K. W. Williams, A. Narayanan, D. J. Fairfield, M. P. Hendricks, W. A. Tisdale and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 672–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, S. Yang, W. Fu, Z. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Liu, J. Yan, W. Yang and H. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1700611 CrossRef PubMed .
T. D. Siegler, W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, Y. Meng, Y. Yang, W. F. Kau, P. P. Sunkari, C. E. Tsai, Z. J. Armstrong, Y. C. Chen, D. A. C. Beck, M. Meila and H. W. Hillhouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 5552–5561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, D. Lu, X. Dong, M. Chen, Q. Fu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef .
W. Kong, A. Rahimi-Iman, G. Bi, X. Dai and H. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7606–7611 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Albrecht and M. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1977, 38, 297–306 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Nickel, F. Lang, V. V. Brus, O. Shargaieva and J. Rappich, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700158 CrossRef .
H.-H. Fang, J. Yang, S. Tao, S. Adjokatse, M. E. Kamminga, J. Ye, G. R. Blake, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800305 CrossRef .
N. P. Gallop, O. Selig, G. Giubertoni, H. J. Bakker, Y. L. A. Rezus, J. M. Frost, T. L. C. Jansen, R. Lovrincic and A. A. Bakulin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5987–5997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Bernard, R. E. Wasylishen, C. I. Ratcliffe, V. Terskikh, Q. Wu, J. M. Buriak and T. Hauger, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2018, 122, 1560–1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1469–1473 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dualeh, P. Gao, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6160–6164 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7905–7910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, R. Pathak, K. Chen, G. Wang, B. Bahrami, W.-H. Zhang and Q. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2457–2460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tammireddy, S. Reichert, Q. An, A. D. Taylor, R. Ji, F. Paulus, Y. Vaynzof and C. Deibel, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 7, 310–319 CrossRef .
E. Shi, S. B. Shiring, J. Yang, C. L. Atencio-Martinez, B. Yuan, X. Hu, Y. Gao, B. P. Finkenauer, A. J. Pistone, Y. Yu, P. Liao, B. M. Savoie and L. Dou, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 584–591 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S.-G. Kim, J.-M. Yang, Y. Yang and N.-G. Park, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 041111 CrossRef .
Q. Jeangros, M. Duchamp, J. Werner, M. Kruth, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, B. Niesen, C. Ballif and A. Hessler-Wyser, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7013–7018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T. Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Gratzel and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, H. Jiao, C. Fei, H. Gu, S. Xu, Z. Yu, G. Yang, Y. Deng, Q. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Yan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 7, 65–73 CrossRef .
G. Abdelmageed, L. Jewell, K. Hellier, L. Seymour, B. Luo, F. Bridges, J. Z. Zhang and S. Carter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 233905 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16195 CrossRef .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, I. Yavuz, N. De Marco, T. Huang, S. J. Lee, C. S. Choi, M. Wang, S. Nuryyeva, R. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. C. Wang, T. H. Han, B. Dunn, Y. Huang, J. W. Lee and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Son, S. G. Kim, J. Y. Seo, S. H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Lim, M. Sohail and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200013,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202200013 .
J. Chen and N. G. Park, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2100311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
B. Yang, C. C. Brown, J. Huang, L. Collins, X. Sang, R. R. Unocic, S. Jesse, S. V. Kalinin, A. Belianinov, J. Jakowski, D. B. Geohegan, B. G. Sumpter, K. Xiao and O. S. Ovchinnikova, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700749 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Cheng, X. Xu, M. Li, C. Zhang, S. H. Cheung, Z. Zeng, D. Shen, Y. M. Xie, K. L. Chiu, F. Lin, S. K. So, C. S. Lee and S. W. Tsang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2006802 CrossRef .
X. Xiao, J. Dai, Y. Fang, J. Zhao, X. Zheng, S. Tang, P. N. Rudd, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 684–688 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, D. Lee and N. G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36338–36349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiang, J. Pothoof, F. Muckel, R. Giridharagopal, J. Wang and D. S. Ginger, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 6, 100–108 CrossRef .
Q. Dong, J. Mendes, L. Lei, D. Seyitliyev, L. Zhu, S. He, K. Gundogdu and F. So, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 48845–48853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho, J. T. DuBose, A. N. T. Le and P. V. Kamat, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 565–570 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, A. H. Proppe, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, F. Tan, A. Mei, C.-S. Tan, M. Wei, Y. Hou, H. Han, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1521–1527 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Xue, Y. Hou, S. C. Liu, M. Wei, B. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Li, B. Sun, A. H. Proppe, Y. Dong, M. I. Saidaminov, S. O. Kelley, J. S. Hu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Lei, Y. Li, Y. Yu, J. Cai, M. H. Chiu, R. Rao, Y. Gu, C. Wang, W. Choi, H. Hu, C. Wang, Y. Li, J. Song, J. Zhang, B. Qi, M. Lin, Z. Zhang, A. E. Islam, B. Maruyama, S. Dayeh, L. J. Li, K. Yang, Y. H. Lo and S. Xu, Nature, 2020, 577, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Fu, N. Li, C. Hu, Y. Chen, X. He, G. Na, P. Liu, H. Zai, Y. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Ke, Y. Bai, S. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Sui, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deger, S. Tan, K. N. Houk, Y. Yang and I. Yavuz, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 5746–5751 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Jones, A. Osherov, M. Alsari, M. Sponseller, B. C. Duck, Y.-K. Jung, C. Settens, F. Niroui, R. Brenes, C. V. Stan, Y. Li, M. Abdi-Jalebi, N. Tamura, J. E. Macdonald, M. Burghammer, R. H. Friend, V. Bulović, A. Walsh, G. J. Wilson, S. Lilliu and S. D. Stranks, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 596–606 RSC .
K. Nishimura, D. Hirotani, M. A. Kamarudin, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, S. Iikubo, T. Minemoto, K. Yoshino and S. Hayase, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31105–31110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T.-W. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Pathak, W. Zhang, D. W. deQuilettes, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, J. Huang, P. K. Nayak, J. B. Patel, H. A. Mohd Yusof, Y. Vaynzof, R. Zhu, I. Ramirez, J. Zhang, C. Ducati, C. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, D. S. Ginger, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2892–2901 RSC .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442–1446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, C. Zhu, L. Liu, S. Ma, P. Liu, J. Wu, C. Shi, Q. Du, Y. Hao, S. Xiang, H. Chen, P. Chen, Y. Bai, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rolston, A. D. Printz, J. M. Tracy, H. C. Weerasinghe, D. Vak, L. J. Haur, A. Priyadarshi, N. Mathews, D. J. Slotcavage, M. D. McGehee, R. E. Kalan, K. Zielinski, R. L. Grimm, H. Tsai, W. Nie, A. D. Mohite, S. Gholipour, M. Saliba, M. Grätzel and R. H. Dauskardt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 8, 1702116 CrossRef .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 284–292 CrossRef .
S. Masi, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1974–1985 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Steele, H. Jin, I. Dovgaliuk, R. F. Berger, T. Braeckevelt, H. Yuan, C. Martin, E. Solano, K. Lejaeghere, S. M. J. Rogge, C. Notebaert, W. Vandezande, K. P. F. Janssen, B. Goderis, E. Debroye, Y. K. Wang, Y. Dong, D. Ma, M. Saidaminov, H. Tan, Z. Lu, V. Dyadkin, D. Chernyshov, V. Van Speybroeck, E. H. Sargent, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Science, 2019, 365, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, N. Novendra and A. Navrotsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14501–14504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, B. J. Foley, C. Park, C. M. Brown, L. W. Harriger, J. Lee, J. Ruff, M. Yoon, J. J. Choi and S. H. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1601650 CrossRef PubMed .
R. J. Sutton, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1787–1794 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Horantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lee, Z. Dai, T. H. Han, C. Choi, S. Y. Chang, S. J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, T. Zhang, X. Meng, H. Lin, Y. Yang and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701038 CrossRef .
F. Wang, W. Geng, Y. Zhou, H. H. Fang, C. J. Tong, M. A. Loi, L. M. Liu and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9986–9992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, B. Peng, A. Petrone, X. Li, L. Wang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida and M. Grtzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3386–3389 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Knight, J. Borchert, R. D. J. Oliver, J. B. Patel, P. G. Radaelli, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 799–808 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Schelhas, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, A. Goyal, P. Kairys, S. P. Harvey, D. H. Kim, K. H. Stone, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, V. Stevanovic and J. J. Berry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1341–1348 RSC .
I. M. Pavlovetc, M. C. Brennan, S. Draguta, A. Ruth, T. Moot, J. A. Christians, K. Aleshire, S. P. Harvey, S. Toso, S. U. Nanayakkara, J. Messinger, J. M. Luther and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2802–2810 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Ferdani, S. R. Pering, D. Ghosh, P. Kubiak, A. B. Walker, S. E. Lewis, A. L. Johnson, P. J. Baker, M. S. Islam and P. J. Cameron, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2264–2272 RSC .
Y. Zhou, H. Xue, Y. H. Jia, G. Brocks, S. Tao and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905739 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, H. Xue, H. Zhang, H. Hu, K. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Qin, J. Ma, H. Zhu, K. Yan, G. Fang, G. Li, U. S. Jeng, G. Brocks, S. Tao and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Q. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, F. Wang, A. Johnston, Y. Hou, Z. Peng, K. Xu, W. Zhou, Z. Liu, L. Qiao, X. Wang, S. Xu, J. Li, R. Long, Y. Ke, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, M. Kim, S. U. Lee, H. Kim, G. Kim, K. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. I. Seok, Science, 2019, 366, 749–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kim, H. Min, K. S. Lee, D. Y. Lee, S. M. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Science, 2020, 370, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, W. Chen, T. Bu, K. P. Ghiggino, F. Huang, Y. Cheng, P. Tapping, T. W. Kee, B. Jia and X. Wen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901016 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Dang, K. Wang, M. Ghasemi, M.-C. Tang, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, E. Dauzon, D. Barrit, J. Peng, D.-M. Smilgies, S. De Wolf and A. Amassian, Joule, 2019, 3, 1746–1764 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Correa-Baena, Y. Luo, T. M. Brenner, J. Snaider, S. Sun, X. Li, M. A. Jensen, N. T. P. Hartono, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, J. R. Poindexter, S. Wang, Y. S. Meng, T. Wang, B. Lai, M. V. Holt, Z. Cai, M. G. Bawendi, L. Huang, T. Buonassisi and D. P. Fenning, Science, 2019, 363, 627–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsui, T. Yamamoto, T. Nishihara, R. Morisawa, T. Yokoyama, T. Sekiguchi and T. Negami, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806823 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zheng, T. Zhu, Y. Yan and T. Pauporté, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103618 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, S. Sun, S. Langner, N. T. P. Hartono, T. Heumueller, Y. Hou, J. Elia, N. Li, G. J. Matt, X. Du, W. Meng, A. Osvet, K. Zhang, T. Stubhan, Y. Feng, J. Hauch, E. H. Sargent, T. Buonassisi and C. J. Brabec, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Lin, A. Loganathan, I. Raifuku, M. H. Li, Y. Y. Chiu, S. T. Chang, A. Fakharuddin, C. F. Lin, T. F. Guo, L. Schmidt-Mende and P. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100818 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hieulle, X. Wang, C. Stecker, D. Y. Son, L. Qiu, R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono, A. Mugarza, Y. Yan and Y. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, W. R. Tress, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Yang, F. Fu, Z. Wang, C. E. Avalos, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhan, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, L. Zheng, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2020, 370, 74 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhao, Y. Han, Z. Xu, C. Duan, S. Yang, S. Yuan, Z. Yang, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902279 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Jin, Y. Zheng, X. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Y. Zhou, X. Cui, J. Li, M. Shang, X. Zhao, S. Liu and Q. Tai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lin, N. Sakai, P. Da, J. Wu, H. C. Sansom, A. J. Ramadan, S. Mahesh, J. Liu, R. D. J. Oliver, J. Lim, L. Aspitarte, K. Sharma, P. K. Madhu, A. B. Morales-Vilches, P. K. Nayak, S. Bai, F. Gao, C. R. M. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, J. G. Labram, J. R. Durrant, J. M. Ball, B. Wenger, B. Stannowski and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2020, 369, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tu, D. Kim, M. Shyikh and M. G. Kanatzidis, Matter, 2021, 4, 2765–2809 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ke, C. Wang, C. Jia, N. R. Wolf, J. Yan, S. Niu, T. P. Devereaux, H. I. Karunadasa, W. L. Mao and Y. Lin, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, G. Chen, D. Ouyang, X. He, C. Li, R. Ma, W. J. Yin and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Dai, D. Cui, T. Wang, X. Meng, E. Bi, X. Yang and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900605 CrossRef .
C. H. Chen, Z. H. Su, Y. H. Lou, Y. J. Yu, K. L. Wang, G. L. Liu, Y. R. Shi, J. Chen, J. J. Cao, L. Zhang, X. Y. Gao and Z. K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Meng, K. Zhang, A. Osvet, J. Zhang, W. Gruber, K. Forberich, B. Meyer, W. Heiss, T. Unruh, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, Joule, 2022, 6, 458–475 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, D. He, Q. Zhuang, B. Liu, R. Li, H. Li, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, P. Zhao, Y. He, Z. Zang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2205507 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, J. Shi, Y. Li, H. Li, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901352 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Zhang, S. Yuan, Y. H. Lou, Q. W. Liu, M. Li, H. Okada and Z. K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Dewi, J. Li, H. Wang, B. Chaudhary, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and A. Bruno, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100557 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pei, N. Li, Y. Chen, X. Niu, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Huang, H. Zai, G. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Bai, X. Zhang, C. Zhu, Q. Chen, Y. Li and H. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3029–3036 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, M. Qin, P. Li, L. Han, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 413–438 RSC .
Z. Yao, Z. Xu, W. Zhao, J. Zhang, H. Bian, Y. Fang, Y. Yang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100403 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Zhou, J. Hu, B. Huang, M. Sun, B. Dong, G. Zheng, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Li, Z. Xu, N. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Science, 2019, 363, 265–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiang, Z. Wang, D. J. Kubicki, W. Tress, J. Luo, D. Prochowicz, S. Akin, L. Emsley, J. Zhou, G. Dietler, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Joule, 2019, 3, 205–214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Guo, X. Liu, W. Sun, Y. Wei, Y. Huang, Z. Lan, M. Huang, J. Lin, H. Chen and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, J. Xue, X. Chen, C. Yao, Z.-K. Wang, M. H. Weber, A. H. Rose, S. Nuryyeva, J. Zhu, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, S. Tan, M. C. Beard, Y. Yan, K. Zhu and Y. Yang, Matter, 2021, 4, 2417–2428 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, H. Zheng, J. Ye, S. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Xu, Z. Liang, X. Chen and X. Pan, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4395–4404 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zuo, B. Kim, B. B. Liu, D. M. He, L. Bai, W. Q. Wang, C. Y. Xu, Q. L. Song, C. Y. Jia, Z. G. Zang, D. H. Lee, X. Li and J. Z. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 431, 133209 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Hou, J. Xu, S. Teale, K. Bertens, H. Chen, A. Proppe, Q. Zhou, D. Yu, K. Xu, M. Vafaie, Y. Liu, Y. Dong, E. H. Jung, C. Zheng, T. Zhu, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103394 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Y. F. Miao, W. Ning, H. R. Chen, Z. X. Qin, X. M. Liu, X. T. Wang, Y. B. Qi, T. Y. Zhang and Y. X. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2103151 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W. Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Xiao, Z. Yu, Y. Deng, X. Dai, Z. Ni and J. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2661–2674 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Liu, S. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Ni, C. H. Van Brackle, S. Yang, J. Zhao, Z. Yu, X. Dai, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1563–1572 RSC .
L. Zhao, Q. Li, C. H. Hou, S. Li, X. Yang, J. Wu, S. Zhang, Q. Hu, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Jiang, S. Jia, J. J. Shyue, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, X. Hu and R. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 1700–1708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Ni, A. F. Palmstrom, J. Zhao, S. Xu, C. H. Van Brackle, X. Xiao, K. Zhu and J. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 1949–1960 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Tan, N. Li, B. Huang, X. Niu, L. Li, M. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Zhu, N. Yang, H. Zai, Y. Wu, S. Ma, Y. Bai, Q. Chen, F. Xiao, K. Sun and H. Zhou, Joule, 2020, 4, 1961–1976 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Jiu, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Bian, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Ding and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902529 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, S. J. Yang, W. Choi, H. Lee, W. Sung, C. Park and K. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001759 CrossRef CAS .
A. Q. Alanazi, M. H. Almalki, A. Mishra, D. J. Kubicki, Z. Wang, L. Merten, F. T. Eickemeyer, H. Zhang, D. Ren, A. Y. Alyamani, H. Albrithen, A. Albadri, M. H. Alotaibi, A. Hinderhofer, S. M. Zakeeruddin, F. Schreiber, A. Hagfeldt, L. Emsley, J. V. Milić and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101163 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. J. Oliver, Y.-H. Lin, A. J. Horn, C. Q. Xia, J. H. Warby, M. B. Johnston, A. J. Ramadan and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3336–3343 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, G. Zheng, F. Gao, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Gao and Q. Zhao, Joule, 2022, 6, 240–257 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhou, Z. Xu, R. Wang, X. Dong, Q. Fu and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2200705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Xian, W. Yuan, Y. Long, K. Liu, N. U. Rahman, W. Li and J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903654 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kong, H. Xie, Y. Zhang, J. Song, Y. Li, E. L. Lim, A. Hagfeldt and D. Bi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101018 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, F. Yang, W. Chen, H. Chen, Y. Shen, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, H. Zhong, J. J. Intemann, S. Leng, M. Cui, C. Qin, M. Xiong, F. Liu, A. K. Y. Jen and K. Yao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904050 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sidhik, W. Li, M. H. K. Samani, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Hoffman, A. K. Fehr, M. S. Wong, C. Katan, J. Even, A. B. Marciel, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. C. Blancon and A. D. Mohite, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and N.-G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 757–765 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lai, D. Lu, Z. Xu, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001470 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, D. Lu, Z. Xu, H. Lai and Y. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000694 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, O. A. Syzgantseva, M. A. Syzgantseva, S. Ma, Y. Ding, M. Cai, X. Liu, S. Dai and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002966 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Wu, M. Wang, B. Yu, J. Zhou, B. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Xia, S. Yue, K. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001832 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Qin, M. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Zou, J. K. Keum, R. Tao, H. Xu, H. Yu, S. Haacke and B. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 3061–3071 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, T. Liu, A. B. Kaplan, C. Yao and Y. L. Loo, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8880–8889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, Y. Jiang, M. Qin, J. Liu, L. Sun, F. Qin, L. Hu, S. Xiong, X. Jiang, F. Jiang, P. Peng, S. Jin, X. Lu and Y. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 878 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zuo, A. D. Scully, D. Vak, W. Tan, X. Jiao, C. R. McNeill, D. Angmo, L. Ding and M. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803258 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, X. He, T. Liu, N. Zhao, M. Qin, J. Liu, F. Jiang, F. Qin, L. Sun, X. Lu, S. Jin, Z. Xiao, T. Kamiya and Y. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1216–1224 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, Z. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zhai, X. Wang, Z. Qiao, Q. Xu, K. Meng, Z. Zhu and G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 856–864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803384 CrossRef .
B. Yang, J. Suo, F. Di Giacomo, S. Olthof, D. Bogachuk, Y. Kim, X. Sun, L. Wagner, F. Fu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hinsch, M. Gratzel, A. Di Carlo and A. Hagfeldt, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3916–3923 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Z. Ren, K. Liu, M. Qin, W. Deng, H. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Liang, F. Ye, Q. Liang, H. Yin, Y. Chen, Y. Zhuang, S. Li, B. Gao, J. Wang, T. Shi, X. Wang, X. Lu, H. Wu, J. Hou, D. Lei, S. K. So, Y. Yang, G. Fang and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 681–689 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gharibzadeh, B. Abdollahi Nejand, M. Jakoby, T. Abzieher, D. Hauschild, S. Moghadamzadeh, J. A. Schwenzer, P. Brenner, R. Schmager, A. A. Haghighirad, L. Weinhardt, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803699 CrossRef .
S. Gharibzadeh, P. Fassl, I. M. Hossain, P. Rohrbeck, M. Frericks, M. Schmidt, T. Duong, M. R. Khan, T. Abzieher, B. A. Nejand, F. Schackmar, O. Almora, T. Feeney, R. Singh, D. Fuchs, U. Lemmer, J. P. Hofmann, S. A. L. Weber and U. W. Paetzold, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5875–5893 RSC .
L. Gao, I. Spanopoulos, W. Ke, S. Huang, I. Hadar, L. Chen, X. Li, G. Yang and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1763–1769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Yang, H. Dong, J. Li, X. Zhu, J. Xu, F. Pan, F. Yuan, J. Dai, B. Jiao, X. Hou, A. K. Jen and Z. Wu, Sci. Adv., 2022, 8, eabk2722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, S. Seo, H. Yang, H. Park, S. Shin, H. Ahn, D. Lee, J. H. Park, N. G. Park and H. Shin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102236 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, H. Zai, C. Wang, X. Wang, H. Wang, S. Ma, Z. Gao, X. Wang, J. Hong, Y. Bai, H. Zhou, B.-B. Cui and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4344–4352 RSC .
H. Chen, S. Teale, B. Chen, Y. Hou, L. Grater, T. Zhu, K. Bertens, S. M. Park, H. R. Atapattu, Y. Gao, M. Wei, A. K. Johnston, Q. Zhou, K. Xu, D. Yu, C. Han, T. Cui, E. H. Jung, C. Zhou, W. Zhou, A. H. Proppe, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, T. Filleter, K. R. Graham, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2022, 16, 352–358 CrossRef CAS .
R. Azmi, E. Ugur, A. Seitkhan, F. Aljamaan, A. S. Subbiah, J. Liu, G. T. Harrison, M. I. Nugraha, M. K. Eswaran, M. Babics, Y. Chen, F. Z. Xu, T. G. Allen, A. U. Rehman, C. L. Wang, T. D. Anthopoulos, U. Schwingenschlogl, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin and S. De Wolf, Science, 2022, 376, 73–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, C. Wang, S. Qiu, Y. Zhao, E. Gu, L. Zeng, Y. Yang, C. Li, X. Liu, K. Forberich, C. J. Brabec, M. K. Nazeeruddin, Y. Mai and F. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. U. Lee, D. Y. Lee, M. J. Paik, H. Na, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902740 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, I. W. H. Oswald, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, N. Zhou, O. F. Williams, Z. Guo, L. Yan, H. Hu, Z. Chen, X. Xiao, Y. Lin, Z. Yang, J. Huang, A. M. Moran, H. Ade, J. R. Neilson and W. You, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1276 CrossRef .
Q. Zhou, L. Liang, J. Hu, B. Cao, L. Yang, T. Wu, X. Li, B. Zhang and P. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802595 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, L. Pan, R. Uchida, N. Arora, J. V. Milic, A. Hinderhofer, F. Schreiber, A. R. Uhl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Gratzel, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw2543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, N. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. Li, G. Liu, P. Liu, C. Zhu, J. Lu, W. Sun, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 9, 1803024 CrossRef .
X. Wang, K. Rakstys, K. Jack, H. Jin, J. Lai, H. Li, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, J. Saghaei, G. Zhang, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle and P. E. Shaw, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Z. Xing, L. Huang, X. Meng, X. Hu, T. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lu, G. Lv, Z. Xu, Y. Dong, X. Ji and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11114–11122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhong, G. Liu, Y. Su, W. Sheng, L. Gong, J. Zhang, L. Tan and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114588 CAS .
F. Zhang, S. Y. Park, C. Yao, H. Lu, S. P. Dunfield, C. Xiao, S. Ulicna, X. Zhao, L. Du Hill, X. Chen, X. Wang, L. E. Mundt, K. H. Stone, L. T. Schelhas, G. Teeter, S. Parkin, E. L. Ratcliff, Y. L. Loo, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard, Y. Yan, B. W. Larson and K. Zhu, Science, 2022, 375, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Lian Wang and Bohong Chang contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have rapidly emerged as leading competitors in the photovoltaic field due to their easy and low-cost solution preparation and efficient photovoltaic conversion capability, which have attracted widespread attention in academia and industry. The typical three-dimensional (3D) perovskite crystal structure with the chemical formula of ABX3 is constructed by a metal halide [BX6]4− octahedral framework through corner sharing, with A-site cations filling the cuboctahedral cavities. The [PbX6]4− octahedral structure is the supporting skeleton of perovskites and serves as a channel for the transmission of photogenerated carriers. The Pb–X bond length and Pb–X–Pb bond angle determine the orbital hybridization between Pb and X, which further governs the energy level structure and photophysical properties of photogenerated carriers. In this review, we focus on the structural characteristics and fundamental properties of the inorganic octahedral and organic layers and dissect their decisive roles in the perovskite stability. We systematically examine the lattice structural features and bonding properties on the photovoltaic properties and stability of perovskites from the perspectives of inorganic octahedra and organic spacers, followed by a discussion of the environmental degradation mechanism, ion migration, phase segregation behavior, lattice strain and phase transition process of perovskites. We systematically discuss enhancing the mechanism of the intrinsic and environmental stability of perovskites from two directions of octahedron modulation and organic spacer construction, including component engineering for octahedral regulation, defect passivation and stress relief, and dimensional management to protect the perovskite structure. Finally, several key scientific challenges and promising future directions are presented for the stability enhancement of PSCs to promote their commercialization.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of perovskite degradation behavior and modulation of octahedral and spacer layers.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cubic perovskite crystal structure.38 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Calculated tolerance factors for perovskites with different A-site cations.41 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) Crystal structures of different phases for FAPbI3 and CsPbI3.42 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) From left to right, 2D perovskites produced by cutting along the 〈100〉, 〈110〉 and 〈111〉 directions.50 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Structures of Ruddlesden–Popper phase, Dion–Jacobson phase, and ACI phase in 〈100〉-oriented 2D perovskites.37 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Energy band formation for MAPbI3. (b) Calculated energy levels of point defects in MAPbI3. The values in parentheses are the formation energies of neutral defects.54 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of surface passivation by 2D perovskites.36 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) DOS of MAPbI3, CsSnI3 and GaAs. (b) JDOS of MAPbI3, CsSnI3 and GaAs. (c) Optical absorption coefficient of MAPbI3, CsSnI3 and GaAs.54 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Bonding diagram for 2D and 3D perovskites.77 Copyright 2003, the American Physical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of carrier transport in the crystal structure of a general 2D perovskite.78 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the alternation of organic layers (blue and black) and corner-sharing inorganic layers (red) in an n = 1 perovskite, where the thickness of the inorganic layer is d and the thickness of the organic layer is L. (g) Energy diagram of the 2D structure in (f). The dielectric constant ε2 of the organic framework (gray region) is smaller than that of the inorganic framework (red region) ε1.80 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 
4MAPbI3 + 4H2O ↔ 4[MAPbI3·H2O] ↔ MA4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2 + 2H2O	(3)
MA4PbI6·2H2O + 4MAI → PbI2 + 2H2O	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Structure of MAPbI3 in its cubic phase, monohydrate phase CH3NH3PbI3·H2O and the dihydrate (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O.88 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) XRD results of MAPbI3, ThDMA-Pb and TTDMA-Pb perovskite films stored in ambient air at 45 ± 5% RH under natural light.90 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of possible O2 binding and reduction sites in MAPbI3([001] plane) and corresponding formation energy of superoxide.91 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Equilibrium value of the chemical potential of iodine in the dark (where μI,dark = μI,out) effectively increases in the presence of light.111 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Summary of cation rotational kinetics in MAPbI3. The figure below illustrates the relative likelihood that the methylammonium CN axis will orient itself to a given lattice plane, with longer (shorter) arrows indicating increasing (decreasing) likelihood.96,97 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (f) PTAI intercalation induces the formation of PTA-MAPbI4 perovskite capping layer as MA+ locking agents to stabilize the MAPbI3 perovskite.98 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 
I×I + h+ → I×i + V+I	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of the ion migration pathways.106 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (b) Cross-sectional STEM-HAADF micrographs for the fresh device (upper panel) and after 12 h in the dark at 1.2 V bias (lower panel). Colored pictures are NMF loadings (maps) for selected components, with the fresh sample at the top of each pair and biased sample at the bottom.24 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Microscopic events that allowed the halide to separate and the associated time scales. (d) Schematic diagram of selective iodide photo-oxidation following events 1–4 in (c), where the oxidized iodide transports as a vapor to accumulate in regions with lower oxidation rates.57 Copyright 2021, Cell Press. (e) Schematic of the degradation processes for MAPbI3 perovskite induced by I2.114 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic of the vacancy path for ion migration in 3D and quasi-2D perovskites and the formation energy of vacancy defects in 3D and quasi-2D perovskites.124 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Thermal expansion coefficients of functional layers widely used in PSCs, including substrates, ETLs, HTLs, and perovskites. (b) Annealing temperatures of different perovskite films. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of compressive and tensile strains.130 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustrating the local strain, which is decreased by forming point defects or by doping with small ions.133 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Relationship between defect formation energy (DFE) and lattice strain.134 Copyright 2022, Tsinghua University Press. (f) Crystalline structures and polymorphic phase transitions of (f) FAPbI3 and (g) CsPbI3 perovskites. The deformation of [PbI6]4− octahedra after temperature reduction promotes the formation of lowered-symmetry β- and γ-black phases.144 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of ABX3 perovskites, where smaller or larger A-site cations will make the octahedra slightly tilted.158 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) Iodine ion migration energy barrier in MAPbI3 and Ace0.25MA0.75PbI3 perovskites obtained by DFT calculation, showing the crystal structure with hydrogen bond state for the transition states with maximum energy value.117 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Roles of Cs+ and GA+ in the crystallization process, where Cs+ promotes the transition from PbI2 to perovskite, and GA+ decreases the x-phase extinction time of energy to improve perovskite growth rate.164 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of halide-vacancy management in film cross-section, using surplus halide to complex with potassium at the grain boundaries and surfaces.116 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Long-term stability tests for CsxMA0.15–xFA0.85PbI3 (x = 0, 5%, 10%, and 15%) perovskite devices under white LED illumination with 100 mW cm−2.174 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Change in PL spectra with time for control and triple-halide perovskite films under different light intensity (1 sun, 10 sun and 100 sun) for 20 min, indicating that photo-induced phase segregation in triple-halide perovskites is effectively restrained.177 Copyright 2020, Science Press. (b) Crystal structures of MAPbI3 (left) and MA4Pb4I11SCN (right) based on DFT calculation.178 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic diagram of the MASCN or FASCN vapor treatment process for pure α-phase FAPbI3 films.179 Copyright 2020, Science Press. (d) Illustration of HCOO− anion passivating I− vacancy at the FAPbI3 surface, and the binding affinity of different anions towards I− vacancy at the surface (top). The heat stability and long-term operational stability of the reference and target devices (bottom).44 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Experimental schematic diagram of the high-pressure and high-temperature setup and schematic diagram of metastable γ-CsPbI3 perovskite preserved under ambient conditions by temperature quenching at high pressure.184 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Mechanism of organic terminal groups enhancing the phase stabilization of the CsPbI3 perovskite.186 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Distribution diagram of crystal structures, strains, and energy levels, and surface potentials for strain and strain-free films under dark or illumination (top). Operation mechanism of perovskite device with strain and the relevance between light intensity and device VOC (bottom).188 Copyright 2022, Cell Press. (d) Schematic of the interface situation under bias voltage for the standard device and the target device modified by fullerene derivative monolayer.190 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Mechanism diagram of cyclical elimination of I0 and Pb0 defects and regeneration of Eu3+–Eu2+ ion pair.196 Copyright 2019, Science Press. (b) Schematic illustration of the effective management by intrinsically stable MT-Im LD perovskite for the Pb-related defects at the interface.200 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the chemical polishing process.207 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (d) Ion migration characterization as a function of temperature for perovskite films (before and after aging) annealed for 3 and 20 min. Schematic illustration of the ion transition during aging in perovskite materials annealed for 3 and 20 min.208 Copyright 2020, Cell Press. (e) Mechanisms supporting the enhancement of VOC and PCE. Integrated temperature-dependent PL spectra and corresponding calibrated PL intensity and calculated ΔVOC (top). Time-resolved PL spectra and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at different temperatures (bottom).209 Copyright 2020, Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the PMA2PbI4/δ-FAPbI3 interface inducing the epitaxial phase transition from δ-FAPbI3 to α-FAPbI3, in which FA cations are omitted.212 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic illustration of the template growth process of the 1D@3D perovskite films with tensile strain relaxation, which is proven by the GIXRD spectra at different tilt angles and the corresponding linear fit of 2θ − sin2(ψ).218 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Long-term stability tests of 3D and 1D/3D devices under illumination in N2 atmosphere (45–55 °C). (d) Photographs of the fresh and 500 h-aged 1D/3D devices, and cross-section morphology and element distribution in the 1D/3D device after operating for 500 h, showing that the Ag+ diffusion and I− migration are effectively inhibited.219 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of the transformation from colloidal phase into either random or highly oriented RP perovskite films base on the single-crystal starting material in various solvents.220 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic structure of the phase-pure quantum well perovskite film (left) and chirp-corrected photo-induced changes in absorption (ΔA) spectra of the phase-pure quantum well films with varied average well width 〈n〉 (right).48 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Structural models of the (111) and (202) surfaces without absorption (left) and with NH4I adsorption (middle) or NH4Cl adsorption (right).225 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Thermal stability characterization of RP perovskites and solar cells, including the comparison of images and XRD patterns for perovskite films aging at 150 °C in the dark, and device thermal stability tests at 85 °C in the dark.231 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic diagram of the microscopic growth mechanism for the 2D perovskite film assisted with FACl.232 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic diagram of film formation process and the film cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy image, where the change in the position of the components was characterized by time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry.235 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic of lattice matching for 3D/1D (up) and 3D/0D (middle) perovskites. Schematic illustration of the 3D surface and 0D/1D surface (down).239 Copyright 2022, Science Press. (c) Schematic diagram of in situ cross-linking process for 1D ‘‘perovskitoids (from PA+ to poly PA+).241 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) High-angle annular dark-field (HAADF)/energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy elemental maps of the cross-sectional image for the 2D-RT perovskite film. (e) Damp-heat tests for encapsulated devices and (f) MPP tracking for the encapsulated control and 2D-RT devices in ambient air.243 Copyright 2022, Science Press.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of 2DRP perovskites integrated by organic spacers with different chain lengths.79 Copyright 2021, Cell Press. (b) Schematic crystal structures of (ThDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13 and (TTDMA)(MA)3Pb4I13.90 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Molecular structure and electron-density distribution of ODA, TETA and EDOEA, and structure models of FAPbI3-ODA, FAPbI3-TETA and FAPbI3-EDOEA obtained by DFT calculation.253 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic crystal structures of the 3D MAPbI3 and the 2DRP (MTEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 and (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites.82 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Illustration of band mismatch between [PbI6] planes and organic spacer layers with a weaker and stronger H-bonding strength.254 Copyright 2022, Science Press.	 


Ace+ doping	Ace0.03MA0.97PbI3	20.3	92% after 450 h at 85 °C	80% after 2011 h in ambient	2020/117
MDACl2 doping	FAPbI3:3.8MDACl2	23.7	>90% after 20 h at 150 °C in air; >90% after aging for 70 h (85% RH, 25 °C)	>90% after working for 600 h	2019/166
MDA2+ and Cl− (MC) doping	(FAPbI3)0.097(MC)0.03	24.4	>80% after 1300 h at 85 °C (15–25% RH)	>90% after operating for 400 h	2020/167
Rb+ doping	Rb0.05Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.75Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3	20.6	92% after 1000 h at 85 °C/85% RH	
	2019/172
Cs+ and MA+ doping	Cs0.05MA0.1FA0.85PbI3	19.1	Less than 5% degradation after 1400 h under 85 °C/85% RH	Negligible PCE loss after working for 1800 h at 30 °C	2021/174
Cl− doping	FA0.75Cs0.25Pb(I0.8Br0.15Cl0.05)3	20.32	>97% after 500 h at 85 °C in N2	Less than 4% degradation after 1000 h at 60 °C; 90% after 250 h in air (25 to 30% RH)	2020/177
MASCN vapor	FAPbI3(MASCN)	23.1	97.8% after aging for 2500 h in a dry box	∼90% after working for 500 h	2020/179
HCOO− doping	FAPbI3(2% FAHCOO)	25.59	10% degradation after 1000 h (25 °C and 20% RH); ∼80% after 1000 h aging (60 °C and 20% RH)	15% loss after 450 h at 35 °C	2021/44
Ac− doping	CsPbI2−xBr(Ac)x	15.56	98% after aging in air for 14 days	
	2019/180
Ac− and SCN− co-doping	Air-processed MAPbI3 (50–60% RT)	20.55	85% after 3600 h in air (∼25 °C and ∼30% RH)	
	2021/181
[BMP]+[BF4]−	Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 with 0.25% [BMP]+[BF4]−	20.1	
	80% after 2630 h in air (60 °C ∼50% RT; unencapsulated)	2020/182


Stress release at buried interface	FA0.83MA0.17Pb1.1I2.72Br0.48	21.7	93% after 1000 h in the dark in N2; 82% under illumination in N2 for 1000 h	
	2022/188
A site cation alloying	FA0.85MA0.15Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	21.48	Only slight decline exceeding 1000 h under ambient exposure	
	2019/141
Strain compensation	CsPbI2Br	16.4	96% after heating at 85 °C for 1000 h	95% after 60 h	2020/130
Co-evaporation process	MAPbI3	17	over ≈95% and ≈80% after 1000 and 3600 h at 85 °C, respectively; over 95% after kept at RT and 30% RH for over 15 months	
	2021/192
Thermal management	Cs0.1(FA0.92MA0.08)0.9Pb(I0.9Br0.04Cl0.06)3	22.29	91% after thermal aging at 85 °C for 1126 h in N2	95% after 1235 h in N2	2021/193
Redox shuttle (Eu3+–Eu2+)	MAPbI3(Cl)	21.52	89% under illumination after 1500 h; 91% after heating at 85 °C for 1500 h	91% after 500 h	2019/196
Passivation by positively charged defect indicator	FA0.92MA0.08Pb(I0.92Br0.08)3	23.19	
	Over 90% after 1000 h at 30–40% RH and 40 °C	2021/199
Surface defect removal	Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.05PbI2.85Br0.15	22.00	
	97.1% after 1440 h at 65 °C	2020/205
Surface impurity removal	FA0.81MA0.14Cs0.05PbI2.45Br0.55	20.40	
	93% after 2180 h at 65 °C	2021/206
Surface chemical polishing	FAPbI3 (MACl + excess PbI2)	24.50	
	At ∼60 °C for more than 500 h, and storage in dark for 24 h, PCE recovered to 92.83 ± 2.32%	2022/207


2D-seed-induced growth	FA0.75MA0.25PbI3 ((BDA)PbI4)	23.95	93% after 1056 h in ambient condition (about 45% RH)	91% after 500 h at 60 °C	2022/215
Crystal growth regulation by 2D perovskite	FAMAPbI3(Cl) ((NpMA)2PbI4)	24.37	85.8% after 2158 h (30% ± 5% RH); 94.4% under 60 °C in N2 for 2328 h	98% after 1500 h in N2	2022/216
1D perovskitoid template	(Cs0.04FA0.86MA0.1)Pb(I0.9Br0.1)3 (DEAECPbI3)	22.9	94.7%, 92.4%, and 90.0% after 2100, 2200, and 2200 h under ambient air with 5–10% RH, 85 °C and illumination, respectively	
	2021/218
1D BnPbI3	Cs0.05FA0.81MA0.14PbI2.55Br0.45(BnPbI3)	21.17	
	95.3% after 3072 h at 45 °C in N2	2021/219
Single-crystal precursor	(TEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10	14.68	
	93% after 500 h in air	2020/220
Memory seeds	BA2MA3Pb4I13	17.1	97.5% after 800 h under illumination	
	2021/221
Molten salt spacer (BAAc)	BA2MA3Pb4I13	16.25	93.8% after 4680 h in air (65 ± 10% RH); 96.2% after illumination for 1100 h; 95.7% at 85 °C for 558 h in N2	
	2021/48
ImI post-treatment	GA(MA)5Pb5I16 ((Im)2PbI4)	22.26	94% after over 1200 h under light soaking	
	2022/222
Thiophene-based cations	(ThFA)2MA2Pb3I10	16.72	Less than 1% degradation after 3000 h in N2; 90% after light soaking for 216 h	
	2020/224
Ammonium halide additive	(PEA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (NH4IxCl1−x)	18.48	≈90% under ambient of 40% RH for 1200 h	≈95% after 500 h of light irradiation	2020/225
Water-assisted crystal growth	(BA)2(MA0.8FA0.15Cs0.05)4Pb5I16	18.04	Degradation <15% after aging over 500 h at 60 °C	
	2020/226
Solvent–vapor annealing	(BDA)(Cs0.1FA0.9)4Pb5I16	18.2	Negligible degradation under 80% RH for 800 h; more than 80% PCE after 800 h at 85 °C	Over 90% after 800 h in air ambient conditions (about 30 °C, 35% RH)	2020/228
FA+ replacing MA+	(PDA)(FA)3Pb4I13	13.8	86% after 1000 h at 85 °C in N2 in the dark; 85% after 540 h in air (25 °C, 30–40% RH)	
	2021/232
Interfacial 2D passivation layer	Cs0.05MA0.1FA0.85PbI2.9Br0.1·0.05PbI2 (CEA2PbI4)	23.57	98% after aging for 600 h in air (40% ± 20% RH) under dark	96% after 1500 h in N2	2021/234
Surface LD perovskitoids	0D(m-PBA)2PbI6)/CsFAMA-based perovskite	24.18	90% of after 2000 h in ambient air; 80% after 150 h at 85 °C and 85% RT	90% after 800 h in air	2022/239
Cross-linked 1D/3D heterostructure	Poly-PA-based 1D/CsFAMA-based trihalide perovskite	21.19	97% after aging for 1500 h in air (40–70% RH, 25–40 °C); 95.9% after 840 h under illumination in N2	93% after 3055 h in N2	2020/241
Quantum-size-tuned heterostructures	3F-PEA-based quai-2D/Cs0.05MA0.1FA0.85PbI3	23.91	
	No loss at RT and 50% RH for over 1000 h; 8% loss at 65 °C and 50% RH for 500 h	2022/242
Surface LD fragments tailoring	LD(n ≥ 2, OLA+)/Cs0.03(FA0.90MA0.10)0.97PbI3	24.3	>95% after >1000 h in air (85 °C and 85% RH)	∼95% after >500 h in air (encapsulated)	2022/243
Solid-phase in-plane growth	2D(BA2PbI4)/FAMAPb(IBr)3	24.35	95% after 1056 h (85% RH and RT, unencapsulated); 94% after 1056 h (85 °C and 85% RH, encapsulated)	>98% for 1620 h (encapsulated)	2021/61
π-Conjugation of organic spacer	(TTDMA)MA3Pb4I13	18.82	99% after 4400 h in N2; 94% after 740 h under illumination in N2; 98% after 960 h in air (30 ± 5% RH)	87% after 310 h in N2	2021/90
Diammonium molecular configuration	2D(EDOEA+)/Cs0.05FA0.85MA0.10Pb(I0.97Br0.03)3	22.68	82% after aging in air (50 ± 5% RH) for 1560 h	
	2022/253
Interlayer molecular interaction tailoring	(MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16	18.06	
	87.1% after 1000 h in N2	2020/82
Surface metastable DJ 2D layer	DMePDAPbI4/FA0.97MA0.03PbI2.91Br0.09	24.7	81% after aging for 1008 h at 85 °C and 5% RH in dark	90% after 1000 h of at ∼40 °C in N2	2022/254
Footnote
† Lian Wang and Bohong Chang contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
