Layer-by-layer assembly as a versatile bottom-up nanofabrication technique for exploratory research and realistic application  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B700410A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B700410A
(Invited Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2319-2340Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLayer-by-layer assembly as a versatile bottom-up nanofabrication technique for exploratory research and realistic application

        
          
            Katsuhiko 
            Ariga
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Jonathan P. 
            Hill
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Qingmin 
            Ji
          
        
      
Supermolecules Group, National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, 305-0044, Japan. E-mail: ARIGA.Katsuhiko@nims.go.jp;  Fax: +81-29-860-4832;   Tel: +81-29-860-4597
Received 
      10th January 2007
    , Accepted 7th February 2007First published on 1st March 2007AbstractThe layer-by-layer (LbL) adsorption technique offers an easy and inexpensive process for multilayer formation and allows a variety of materials to be incorporated within the film structures. Therefore, the LbL assembly method can be regarded as a versatile bottom-up nanofabrication technique. Research fields concerned with LbL assembly have developed rapidly but some important physicochemical aspects remain uninvestigated. In this review, we will introduce several examples from physicochemical investigations regarding the basics of this method to advanced research aimed at practical applications. These are selected mostly from recent reports and should stimulate many physical chemists and chemical physicists in the further development of LbL assembly. In order to further understand the mechanism of the LbL assembly process, theoretical work, including thermodynamics calculations, has been conducted. Additionally, the use of molecular dynamics simulation has been proposed. Recently, many kinds of physicochemical molecular interactions, including hydrogen bonding, charge transfer interactions, and stereo-complex formation, have been used. The combination of the LbL method with other fabrication techniques such as spin-coating, spraying, and photolithography has also been extensively researched. These improvements have enabled preparation of LbL films composed of various materials contained in well-designed nanostructures. The resulting structures can be used to investigate basic physicochemical phenomena where relative distances between interacting groups is of great importance. Similarly, LbL structures prepared by such advanced techniques are used widely for development of functional systems for physical applications from photovoltaic devices and field effect transistors to biochemical applications including nano-sized reactors and drug delivery systems.
I. Introduction: basics of LbL
A revolution in our daily lifestyles has been brought about by the widespread introduction of miniaturized devices such as cellular phones and mobile computers, which are reliant on silicon-based nanotechnology and sophisticated ‘top-down’ type fabrication techniques. However, this solid state technology is expected to encounter fabrication size limitations so that the more novel ‘bottom-up’ type nanofabrication has been recently paid attention as an alternative manufacturing strategy. Bottom-up nanofabrication is driven by the self-assembling processes of component molecules, where various examples based on supramolecular chemistry have been intensively investigated.1–15 Several of these are related to fabrication of ultrathin films16–27 because thin film preparation on certain surfaces is an important subject in connection with functional nanomaterials and artificial devices such as electrodes and transistors.
Various strategies for ultrathin film preparation have been employed widely such as the Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) technique28–35 and the self-assembled monolayer (SAM) method.36–40 Unfortunately, these approaches are not always useful for practical application. The LB method is an elegant way to build-up multilayer structures, although it suffers from the requirement for rather expensive instruments and it is not applicable for many kinds of non-amphiphilic material. The SAM technique can be applied to a wider range of substances, but it is not a useful method for multilayer fabrication. Compared to these traditional strategies, the layer-by-layer (LbL) adsorption technique is an easy and inexpensive process for multilayer formation and allows different types of materials to be incorporated in the film structures.40–45 Therefore, the LbL assembly can be regarded as a versatile bottom-up nanofabrication technique.
Some time after the suggestive report by Iler,46 the LbL assembly was first realized and established by Decher and coworkers.47–50 Subsequently, a great number of reports concerning LbL films preparation using various techniques have been published. As an outline of the technique, LbL assembly is mainly conducted through electrostatic interaction, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Relatively high concentrations of the substances in solution lead to excess adsorption of the substances, i.e., charge neutralization and resaturation lead to charge reversal, which was proved by Bernt et al. through a direct surface force measurement.51 Alternation of the surface charge results in a continuous assembly between positively and negatively charged materials affording a great freedom in the number of layers and layering sequence.
 Fig. 1  Outline of LbL assembly through electrostatic interaction. 
One of the most prominent advantages of the LbL assembly is its simplicity and low cost—beakers and tweezers are the only apparatus required. The variability of the applicable materials is another of the most pronounced advantages of this method. In addition to conventional polyelectrolytes52–57 such as poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
				(PAH), poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride)
				(PDDA), and poly(ethyleneimine)
				(PEI), poly(sodium styrenesulfonate)
				(PSS), poly(sodium vinylsulfonate)
				(PVS), and poly(acrylic acid)
				(PAA) as anionic species, various functional polyelectrolytes have been assembled including, poly(p-phenylenevinylene)
				(PPV) for light-emitting diodes,58,59 azobenzene-containing polycation and polyanion for non-linear optics,60 and poly(amidoamine)dendrimer (PAMAM) and its metal composites.61,62 Because most biomaterials, especially water-soluble proteins, have charged sites on their surface, they are generally assembled by electrostatic LbL adsorption as demonstrated when assembling films of proteins,63–74 DNA,75–83 and charged polysaccharides.84–90 As a remarkable example, alternate assembly between charged virus and polyelectrolyte was demonstrated by Lvov et al.91 Charged inorganic substances, including colloidal nanoparticles,92–105 clay,106–108 nanosheets,109–117 modified zeolite crystals,118 two-dimensional perovskite,119 and polyoxometalates120–122 have also been used for LbL assembly. Not limited to polymeric materials, charged supramolecular assemblies such as bolaamphiphile monolayers,122–124 lipid bilayers,125,126 LB films,127 and stacked dye molecules128–141 have been demonstrated to be converted into LbL films.
A broad freedom in the LbL films’ structure allows us to fabricate higher dimensional structures from functional components. One of the most outstanding strategy modifications for LbL assembly preparation involves invisible particles and subsequent hollow capsule formation, and was amongst pioneering work reported by Möhwald, Caruso, and coworkers (Fig. 2A).142,143 In this strategy, the LbL films were assembled sequentially, similarly to the conventional assemblies, on a colloidal core. Dissolution of the central particle core upon exposure of the particles to appropriate solvents results in hollow capsules. The hollow capsules obtained can be used for various purposes144–160 including encapsulation of guest substances and controlled release because permeability through the sphere skin is controllable using several factors. Functional nano-sized systems can be constructed upon discerning selection of core materials. For example, polyelectrolyte wrapping by the LbL assembly can be conducted on enzyme crystals.161 Dissolution of the enzyme crystals giving dissolved enzymes ultimately leads to an extremely high enzyme loading in a nano-sized capsule. A similar template synthesis was applied to nanotube synthesis as illustrated in Fig. 2B.162–166 For example, Martin and coworkers reported fabrication of nanotubes using LbL assembly between 1,10-decanediyl-bis(phosphonic acid) and zirconium ion on porous alumina template.167 Dissolution of the alumina template results in formation of nanotube structures with outside diameters equivalent to the pore diameter of the template.
 Fig. 2  Modified LbL methods for preparation of three-dimensional micro- and nanostructures: (A) LbL assembly on particle template and hollow capsule formation; (B) nanotube synthesis through LbL assembly using porous templates. 
The preliminary explanation of the LbL technique illustrates the great flexibility inherent in this method of film construction. Although the LbL technology remains under development, the method already assures fabrication of nanostructures with positioning of target materials in desired geometries. The ease of this method stimulates researchers in various fundamental fields including chemistry, physics, and biology and attracts those working in practical applications including nanotechnology, materials technology, and biomedical fields. The research fields concerned with LbL assembly have developed rapidly but may have left some important physicochemical aspects unresolved. In this review, we will introduce various examples, from physicochemical investigations on the basics of this method to advanced research aimed at practical application. With this review, we would like to stimulate many physical chemists and chemical physicists to further the development of LbL assembly methods.
II. Advances in understanding of the assembly process
Although the LbL strategy requires only simple procedures, its assembling mechanism is still not fully understood. Experienced LbL researchers know that film structures and qualities depend substantially on experimental conditions. For example, Lvov et al. reported systematic in situ analyses on LbL film quality using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) as a sensitive mass-detection device,168 where adsorption kinetics, drying processes, and intermediate washing were investigated systematically. Drying at each step increased the thickness of adsorbed films due to enhanced surface roughness of the films so that frequent drying is not advantageous for preparation of films of good quality. In contrast, water washing between the consecutive adsorptions was effective for successful alternate adsorption. About 10% of an adsorbed polyelectrolyte layer was removed by 5-min water washing probably due to removal of the loosely-attached materials. Shiratori and Rubner also investigated minutely film structures including the thicknesses and interpenetration depths of LbL films composed of weak polyelectrolytes, PAA and PAH, pointing out the crucial importance of pH control.169,170 Dramatically different polymer adsorption behavior was observed as one systematically increases (or decreases) the charge density of a weak polyelectrolyte including transitions from very thick adsorbed layers (ca. 8 nm) to very thin adsorbed layers (ca. 0.4 nm) over a very narrow pH range.
In addition to these well-known features, further analyses and considerations have been made for understanding the LbL assembly mechanism. Sukhishvili et al. reviewed existing knowledge and summarized the relationship between polyelectrolyte multilayer growth and phase behavior of polyelectrolyte complexes in solution for rational prediction and control of deposition of a wide range of charged polyelectrolytes at surfaces.171 Effects of a number of parameters, such as the type of interacting polyelectrolyte chains, the ratio of their lengths, and ionic strength and pH of deposition solutions, on the multilayer stability or erosion were considered, indicating that the trends observed for multilayers directly reflect the properties of polyelectrolyte complexes in solution. Several researchers have made thermodynamic considerations on the LbL assembly processes. Polyelectrolyte association is fundamentally an ion exchange process, where polymer-counterion associations are replaced by polymer–polymer ion pairs. The pairing of oppositely charged polyelectrolyte segments could appear to be driven by strongly exothermic mixing, through multiple, cooperative, and specific electrostatic interactions. However, Schlenoff and coworkers revealed, by using highly sensitive analyses such as isothermal calorimetry titration, that the polyelectrolyte association was driven largely by entropy, that is, by the release of counterions and waters of hydration from the dissolved polyelectrolyte chains.172 The association constant for complex formation showed little temperature dependence, confirming the ideal nature of complexation. Haynie and coworkers investigated polyelectrolyte complex formation between PSS and PAH over a range of ionic strengths using isothermal titration calorimetry and similarly proved an entropy-driven nature of complex formation.173 The thermodynamic parameters suggest the formation of different types of complexes and aggregates due to salt-induced conformational changes in the polyelectrolyte conformation, as described in terms of changes in the Debye screening length of the polyelectrolytes. Although salt-free conditions induced formation of insoluble, charge-compensated complexes with defined stoichiometry, the formation of a soluble nonstoichiometric complex is favored. Remaining charges make the polyelectrolyte complexes soluble, limiting the extent of polyelectrolyte assembly on a substrate in the LbL process. Increases in salt concentration force the polyelectrolytes to contract and form compact globules of reduced net charge, resulting in enhanced LbL assembly. Caruso and coworkers investigated the influence of the linear charge density of a polyelectrolyte chain on the formation of multilayers, using random copolymers of varying charge density, and revealed that synergistic nonelectrostatic interactions allow the growth of multilayers with polyelectrolytes of a very low charge density.174 The significant differences in the surface roughness and packing density of the films with copolymers of different charge densities would be of interest for permeability and elasticity studies.
Effects of external factors on the LbL assemblies are also topics for physicochemical consideration. The amount of flexible polyelectrolyte deposited onto a surface depends to a great extent not only on the ionic strength but also on co-existing electrolyte species. Salomäki et al. found out that the thickness of thin dry LbL films of PSS and PDDA follows reasonably well the position of the counteranion in the Hofmeister series.175 The Hofmeister series176,177 goes as follows: ClO4− > SCN− > I− > NO−3 > Br− > Cl− > CH3COO− > HCOO− > F− > OH− > HPO42− > SO42−. The anions on the left of chloride in the abovementioned series are chaotropic and exhibit weaker interactions with water than water itself. On the other hand, the ions on the right of chloride are cosmotropic exhibiting strong interactions with water. The hydration entropy and viscosity parameter of the anions have a strong relation to the thickness of the dry multilayer. The chaotropic anions apparently screen strongly the polyelectrolyte charges inducing the deposition of polyelectrolyte in a loopy conformation onto a surface, resulting in a thick layer. Strong binding of these anions with limited hydration also leads to the lowest viscosity as a result of shrinking of the polyelectrolyte, yielding a thick polyelectrolyte layer. In contrast, the cosmotropic anions do not screen charges, allowing the polyelectrolyte to deposit in a more planar form. The same research group reported studies on the effect of temperature in LbL assemblies of PDDA/PSS and PAH/PSS.178 The increase of temperature in the LbL deposition process was shown to have a considerable effect on the rate of the LbL assembly, which is different for the cases of PDDA/PSS and PAH/PSS assemblies. Increasing temperature generally leads to extension of the exponential growth regime as compared with the linear one.
Deposition of materials in the LbL assembly is not always uniform. Kotov and coworkers reported detailed observations of the surface structures of assembled films of yttrium iron garnet nanoparticles (YIG) with PDDA.179 The growth of YIG films prepared by the LbL assembly can occur via two deposition modes, i.e., sequential adsorption of densely packed adsorption layers (normal growth mode) and in-plane growth of isolated particle domains (lateral expansion mode). The origin of the lateral growth is in the interplay of particle/particle and particle/polyelectrolyte interactions rather than in a substrate effect, which can be observed for various aqueous colloids. The latter mode should be avoided for preparation of a sophisticated layered structure. Grafting of the charged polymer on the nanoparticles significantly increases particle/polyelectrolyte and particle/particle interaction, resulting in formation of a densely packed particle layer and avoidance of the unfavorable lateral growth deposition. Deposition processes of such LbL assemblies were also theoretically simulated. Dobrynin and coworkers used molecular dynamics to simulate the LbL assemblies from flexible polyelectrolytes and rigid charged nanoparticles.180 A better layer separation can be attained through incorporation of the nanoparticles into multilayered films, but a higher film roughness was also expected. Molecular dynamics approach was similarly conducted in polypeptide multilayers. Haynie and coworkers reported a molecular dynamics study of the physical basis of interaction between poly(L-lysine)
				(PLL) and poly(L-glutamic acid)
				(PLGA) in LbL films,181 which could be used in a range of applications such as artificial cells, drug delivery systems, cell/tissue scaffolds, artificial viruses, and implantable device coatings. The results obtained suggest that hydrophobic interactions as well as electrostatic interactions play a significant role in PLL/PLGA LbL assemblies and that the preferred orientation of peptides in the β-sheet structures is antiparallel within sheets and parallel between sheets. Such approaches supply useful information to understand better how various types of noncovalent interactions contribute to the structure and stability of polypeptide multilayer films.
III. Development of assembly 1: novel mechanisms
The driving force of the LbL assembly is not limited to electrostatic interactions. Many kinds of physicochemical interactions have been used in the modified LbL techniques. LbL assembly based on metal–ligand interaction and/or metal coordination has a long research history comparable with that of electrostatic LbL methods. Mallouk and co-workers initiated the LbL assembly based on metal–phosphate interaction.182–185 Hatzor et al. similarly developed a metal-coordination assembly for hybrid multilayer formation using bishydroxamate and phosphonate.186 van der Boom and coworkers reported the LbL assemblies consisting of rigid-rod chromophores connected by terminal pyridine moieties to palladium centers.187 Rubinstein and coworkers synthesized a C3-symmetric tridentate hexahydroxamate ligand molecule that was used for coordination self-assembly of branched multi-layers on Au surfaces pre-coated with a self-assembled monolayer of ligand anchors,188 where the branched multi-layer films display improved stiffness, as well as a unique defect self-repair capability, attributed to cross-linking in the layers and lateral expansion over defects during multilayer growth. The LbL assembly through hydrogen bonding between hydrogen-donor and hydrogen-acceptor is also possible. Hydrogen-bonded LBL films were first demonstrated by Rubner et al.189,190 and later investigated by Sukhishvili et al.191,192 Marks and coworkers prepared out-of-plane non-centrosymmetric microstructures by the layer-by-layer deposition from air phase (Fig. 3A).193,194 In their design, the non-centrosymmetric layered structure was obtained through intermolecular longitudinal triple hydrogen bonding interactions, which align chromophore molecules head-to-tail and preferentially perpendicular to the substrate. Angle dependent second harmonic generation (SHG) response was detected from the obtained films. Wang and coworkers proposed a new hydrogen-bonding-based LbL method that allows the fabrication of all-conjugated polymer multilayer thin films in common organic solvents.195 Xu, Chen and coworkers reported fabrication of composite LbL multilayer films fabricated from a spherical polymer brush with a poly(methylsilsesquioxane) core and PAA hair chains through hydrogen bonding with poly(vinylpyrrolidone) as partner components (Fig. 3B).196 Selective dissolution (for removal of poly(methylsilsesquioxane) parts) and calcination (for removal of organic moieties) were imposed on the film to adjust its composition and optical properties. LbL assembling of dye molecules without use of polyelectrolyte components was realized by Webber and coworkers,197 who assembled perylene diimides carrying four positive or negative charges with the aid of strong π–π interaction. The strongly quenched fluorescence is evidence for π stacking, and the dependence of the fluorescence intensity on the outermost layer suggests efficient energy transfer between perylene diimide moieties.
 Fig. 3  LbL assembly through hydrogen bonding; (A) formation of non-centrosymmetric layers; (B) hydrogen bonded assembly between polymer brush and linear chain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194, S. Keinan et al., Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1848. ©2004, American Chemical Society and from ref. 196, S. Yang et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 338. ©2006, American Chemical Society. 
Introduction of covalent bonding to the LbL technique would significantly strengthen the assembly structure, which is highly advantageous for practical application. Cao and coworkers reported fabrication of LbL films using a nitro-containing diazoresin (NDR) formed from 2-nitro-N-methyldiphenylamine-4-diazonium salt (NMDS) with formaldehyde as polycation and PSS as polyanion.198 Upon UV-irradiation and following the decomposition of the diazonium group, a covalent bond forms between the layers, the multilayer films become more stable and more resistant to etching by organic solvents or solutions. Kohli and Blanchard reported on the covalent layer-by-layer growth of multilayers of diphenylmethane derivatives where interlayer bonding is through a urea moiety.199 Caruso and coworkers introduced click chemistry for LbL assembly (Fig. 4A).200 The LbL assembly was performed by sequentially exposing the substrates to poly(acrylic acid) with either azide and alkyne functionality solutions containing copper sulfate, finally providing covalently linked ultrathin films with designed structures. Li and coworkers presented a method to fabricate complex nanotubes of PEI and 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxyldianhydride through alternate deposition and covalent bond formation (Fig. 4B).201 The electrooptical properties of the small molecule are retained after the wall assembly, rendering the nanotubes fluorescent. The obtained nanotubes may have potential applications in catalysis or drug delivery and the design of optical devices and sensors.
 Fig. 4  LbL assembly through covalent bond formation; (A) LbL assembly based on Click chemistry; (B) nanotube synthesis through covalent-bond-based LbL assembly. Reprint with permission from ref. 200, G. K. Such et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9318. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 201, Y. Tian et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 360. ©2006, American Chemical Society. 
Various interactions including biochemical and physicochemical forces have been used widely for the LbL method. Some biomaterials are capable of recognizing and binding their substrates with incredibly high efficiency and selectivity, and this can be utilized as a driving force for LbL assembly.202–207 Kunitake and coworkers reported assemblies of rectin, concanavalin A with polysaccharides, glycogen (branched polyglucose).208 Recently, Anzai and coworkers demonstrated that the LbL films of concanavalin A and glycogen can be disintegrated upon exposure to sugars in aqueous solution at neutral pH upon addition of free sugars as competitors to the binding sites of concanavalin-A.209 A well-investigated biospecific interaction, the biotin-avidin system, can also be applied to the LbL assembly.210,211 As use of physical interaction in the LbL assembly, Ito and coworkers introduced use of charge transfer interactions for LbL assembly by demonstrating assemblies between an electron-accepting polymer [poly(2-((3,5-dinitrobenzoyl)oxy)ethylene methacrylate] and an electron-donating polymer [poly(2-(9-carbazoyl)ethyl methacrylate].212,213 They also reported nonlinear optical properties of similarly assembled films by copolymerization of a nonlinear optical dye with donor polymer.214 Akashi, Serizawa, and co-workers reported alternate LbL assembly of syndiotactic hydrophobic poly(methyl methacrylate)
				(PMMA) and its isotactic counterpart through alternate repetition of physical adsorption and stereocomplexation.215–218 The same research group extended this technique to prepare artificial enzymes.219,220 LbL films of a stereo-complex between isotactic-PMMA and syndiotactic-poly(methacrylic acid)
				(PMAA) with a 1∶1 unit-molar stoichiometry was first prepared, followed by selective dissolution of one of them, resulting in porous syndiotactic-PMAA or isotactic-PMMA films. The macromolecular nanospaces in the resulting films could be used in stereoregular template polymerization of isotactic-PMMA and syndiotactic-PMAA, respectively. Ikeda, Shinkai, and coworkers reported preparation of multilayer films comprised of C60 fullerene and porphyrin layers using the LbL method based on a homohexacalix[3]arene-[60] fullerene 2∶1 supramolecular complex formation.221 Photocurrent measurements were carried out of these layers deposited on the modified ITO electrode in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution containing 50 mM of ascorbic acid as a sacrificial electron donor, demonstrating a photocurrent flow from porphyrin units through C60 units to electrode. Huskens and coworkers reported LbL multilayers based on multivalent supramolecular interactions between guest-functionalized dendrimers and cyclodextrin-modified gold nanoparticles.222 Step-wise sol-gel reaction at the surface of a solid support was also used for LbL assembly of metal oxide layer as reported by Kunitake and co-workers.223–225 This surface sol-gel method with titanium butoxide was conducted in the presence of an azobenzene derivative guest, and the resulting film after the guest removal was used for molecular imprinting type recognition.
IV. Development of assembly 2: technical advances
Procedures for LbL assembly are relatively simple, so that there is plenty of scope for technical improvement. For example, the procedure can be automated.226 Shiratori and coworkers developed an automated LbL film assembler by combining with a mass-controlled mechanism.227–229 A solid plate was attached to the arm of a robot together with QCM as sensitive mass detector, which provided frequency shifts during adsorption of the materials. Feeding back the data acquired by the QCM from the deposition to the dipping time allowed preparation of a high quality self-assembly film. As a result, the layer thickness of the films can be controlled with nm-order accuracy. The cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) observation of the films formed by the conventional time controlled dipping method and the newly established mass-controlled dipping method revealed that the interface of the hetero structure of the latter was much smoother than the former. The remarkable advantage of the mass-controlled dipping method was also proved by in situ observation of the adsorption process of the polyelectrolytes in solution using an atomic force microscopy (AFM).
Combination of the LbL methods with other techniques for thin film preparation has been also conducted resulting in technical improvements. In the LbL adsorption process, charged polyelectrolyte chains are adsorbed onto an oppositely charged surface due to the electrostatic attraction. This can be regarded as a self-diffusion process. Therefore, the process needs extra time inducing significant adsorption of the weakly-attached polyelectrolyte chains giving increased surface roughand poor film quality. The spin-coating technique has also been combined with LbL assembly.230–232 For example, Char and coworkers reported a spin-coating LbL assembly method as an alternative for making well-organized multilayer films in a very short process time (Fig. 5A).233 This method has several technical advantages when compared with conventional dipping procedure. In the case of the conventional dipping process, polyelectrolyte chains are allowed to diffuse toward the substrate according to the self-diffusion process. In contrast, for the spin-coating process the adsorption and rearrangement of adsorbed chains on the surface and the elimination of weakly bound polymer chains from the substrate are achieved almost simultaneously at a high rate of rotation over a short time period. The molar concentration of the polyelectrolyte solution during the short deposition time is significantly increased upon rapid elimination of water during the spinning process, yielding thick layers, despite the thin film formation typically provided by the centrifugal force and air shear force. This spin-coating LbL process yields a highly ordered internal structure far superior to the structure obtained with the conventional dipping method probably due to a mechanical effect upon the air shear force caused by the spinning process. Johal, Wang, and coworkers reported the application of spin-coating LbL assembly to a variety of polyelectrolytes, including polymers and dendrimers.234,235 Preparation of single-species thin films through multiple deposition cycles of the same polyelectrolyte was also demonstrated. They proposed that the use of alternating charges is not an absolute requirement when building polyelectrolyte multi-layered films by spin-coating LbL assembly.
 Fig. 5  Advanced techniques for LbL assembly; (A) spin-coating LbL assembly; (B) spraying LbL assembly. Reprint with permission from ref. 237, A. Izquierdo et al., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7558. ©2005, American Chemical Society. 
Combination of the LbL method and the spraying technique has been reported.236,237 For example, Decher and coworkers proposed preparation of polyelectrolyte film by successive spraying of polycation and polyanion solutions (Fig. 5B),238 and the films prepared according to this concept, from PSS and PAH, were compared with those prepared by the classic dipping LbL assembly. The influences of various parameters such as spraying time, polyelectrolyte concentration, and effect of film drying during multilayer construction were examined. The thickness of the multilayers increased linearly with the number of deposition cycles. The LbL assembly of films is very fast and leads to films with low surface roughness as estimated by AFM and X-ray reflectometry. Spray deposition allows regular multilayer growth even under conditions for which dipping fails to produce homogeneous films, such as extremely short contact times. Drainage constantly removes a certain quantity of the excess material arriving at the surface, and the rinsing step can be eliminated, resulting even further improvements in preparation times for the whole film construction process. Fery and coworkers also used the spray LbL technique for assembly of inorganic/organic nanocomposite multilayered films consisting of Au nanoparticles and photosensitive polycation nitrodiazoresin.239 UV irradiation of the films leads to the formation of covalently cross-linked composites with an improved chemical stability, greatly broadening the flexible processing and the application field of the resultant functional films. The buckling test shows that the nanostructures of the composite films such as the identity of the organic matrix and the amount of inorganic nanoparticles are essential for variation of the mechanical properties.
Applying etching processes to the LbL techniques are useful in the preparation of nano-sized object with sophisticated structures. For example, Caruso and coworkers reported fabrication of nanoporous polymer films with controlled pore size upon partial etching of nanoparticle/polyelectrolyte composite precursor films (Fig. 6A).240 The nanoparticle-polyelectrolyte hybrid multilayers ((SiO2 nanoparticle/PAA)/PAH) can be assembled by the alternate LbL adsorption from a blend of colloidal silica particles and PAA, with PAH. After cross-linking of the films, the SiO2 nanoparticles were removed by dissolution with ammonium fluoride-buffered hydrofluoric acid (HF/NH4F). The permeability of the films after silica particle removal increased, as demonstrated by an increased amount of protein (BSA) adsorbed with increasing bilayer number. The proposed method provides a general approach for fabricating polymer thin films with controlled pore sizes. Preparation of free-standing LbL film was achieved by elective etching of the substrate surface, as reported by Mamedov and Kotov.241 They prepared LbL films on a cellulose acetate layer, which was selectively dissolved providing self-standing LbL films. Tsukruk and coworkers used this strategy for fabrication of freely suspended, multi-layered nanocomposite membranes containing gold nanoparticles (Fig. 6B).242–245 The gold nanoparticles were deposited alternately with oppositely charged polyelectrolytes on solid supports covered with a sacrificial layer of cellulose acetate, followed by coverage with additional assemblies of conventional polyelectrolytes. The multi-layered polymer films with gold nanoparticles were released from the supporting silicon wafer by dissolving the sacrificial cellulose acetate layer in acetone. The obtained films possess very stable micromechanical characteristics and a sensitivity far surpassing any existing pressure sensors. Hammond and coworkers similarly demonstrated preparation of free-standing films of poly(ethylene oxide)
				(PEO) and PAA which interact with each other through hydrogen bonding.246 The crystallization of PEO is fully suppressed in these composite assemblies, which proves advantageous for applications such as ultrathin hydrogels, membranes, and solid-state polymer electrolytes.
 Fig. 6  Etching processes on the LbL films; (A) formation of nanoporous structure; (B) preparation of free-standing film. Reprint with permission from ref. 240, Q. Li et al., Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5480. ©2006, American Chemical Society. 
V. Development of assembly 3: new components
The simplicity of LbL assembly also permits utilization of an enormous library of molecular or polymeric components and this library is being expanded continuously. In particular, assemblies of functional elements such as supramolecular objects and nanomaterials have been investigated. For example, LbL assemblies of micelles were reported by several research groups.247–249 Zhao and coworkers realized the LbL assembly of two different polymer micelles through alternating deposition of micelles with a polyanion and a polycation corona, poly(4-vinylpyridine)-b-poly(tert-butyl acrylate) and poly(acrylic acid)-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine), without the use of intermediate polyelectrolyte layers.250 Because the micelles are capable of including hydrophobic functional molecules, this approach offers a more robust and versatile way to incorporate and organize different hydrophobic species into thin films of layered structures.
Vesicles, liposomes and their related structures were also reported as components applicable to the LbL technique. Katagiri et al. realized LbL assembly using a superstable organic-inorganic vesicle “cerasome”.251,252 The cerasome was prepared from the silane-bearing amphiphile [3-((N,N-dihexadecylaminosuccinyl) aminopropyl)triethoxysilane under mildly acidic conditions. Formation of a silica network at the polar headgroup upon sol-gel reaction together with spontaneous formation of a bilayer structure resulted in cell-like vesicle structures with silica network at the inner and outer surfaces.253–256 LBL assemblies between cationic polyelectrolyte and anionic vesicles257 as well as the LBL assemblies between the anionic cerasome and the cationic cerasome258 were demonstrated without rupture of the vesicular structures. The latter assemblies are expected to be used as multi-cellular mimics. Schaaf and coworkers demonstrated incorporation of phospholipid vesicles in the LbL films composed of poly(glutamic-acid)
				(PGA) and PAH.259 AFM imaging, QCM evaluation, and ellipsometry suggested that the vesicles remain intact when adhering on the surface. Very recently, they applied the spray LbL method to this system and again demonstrated the absence of vesicle rupture based on cyclic voltammetry evaluation on guest release.260 They also embedded vesicle reactors in the PGA/PAH multilayers for controlled mineralization.261 The reactors contained calcium ions as active ions in the mineralization process, spermine as an activator of crystal growth, and alkaline phosphatase as a catalyst. Exposure of the prepared films with paranitrophenyl phosphate induced the formation of calcium phosphate crystals. This research should lead to reactor multilayers with the goal of performing localized chemical reactions within confined layers. Abbott, Caruso, and coworkers prepared PSS/PAH polyelectrolyte LbL multilayers on thermotropic liquid crystalline oil-in-water emulsions and investigated the effect of the LbL formation on the orientation of the liquid crystals using polarized light microscopy.262 A bipolar-to-radial ordering transition triggered by exposure of the LbL film-coated droplets to surfactant was observed to be slowed by 2 orders of magnitude relative to naked liquid crystalline droplets. Their successful demonstration on the LbL assembly at the mobile interfaces between liquid droplets and aqueous phases could be extended as a general method for LbL assembly on liquid templates, allowing a versatile route for producing hollow polymeric capsules.
Nanostructures including nanotubes and nanosheets have been paid much attention as functional units, and fabrication of these motifs within desired assemblies is one of the big targets in current technology. LbL assembly of these nanostructures has been conducted. In order to subject carbon nanotubes to the electrostatic LbL assembly, charged sites have to be attached to the carbon nanotube structures. Noy and coworkers introduced cationic charges to the carbon nanotube through strong interaction between nanotube surface and an aromatic pyrene derivative (Fig. 7A).263 The modified nanotubes were sequentially wrapped using LbL methods with appropriate polyelectrolytes, providing a conductive nanowire inside an insulative coat. Wrapping carbon nanotubes with chemically active polymers is also advantageous for immobilization of functional organic elements, including proteins, in the vicinity of the nanotube. Kotov and coworkers partially oxidized the nanotube surface to introduce carboxylic groups as anionic sites, which were assembled with PEI and PSS in a layer-by-layer manner.264 Cross-linking of the obtained LbL films significantly strengthened the film structure, yielding mechanically strong self-standing films. The same research group reported LbL assembly between PSS-modified carbon nanotube and diazoresin (Fig. 7B).265 All covalently conjugated films were obtained after the cross-linking process. Sasaki and coworkers have extensively researched the LbL assembly of inorganic nanosheets and nanotubes to explore novel photoelectronic properties in nanosized structures. They reported preparation of the LbL films of titanate nanotubes, Ag- or Au-loaded nanotubes, and nanotube/nanosheet heterocomposites, with PDDA as counterionic partner.266 This process may be explored for custom synthesis of titanate nanotube-based multi-component and multifunction ultrathin films for various applications in photocatalysis, solar energy conversion, and electrochromic and self-cleaning devices.
 Fig. 7  Modification of carbon nanotube with LbL assembly; (A) wrapping of carbon nanotube upon LbL assembly through interaction with pyrene derivative; (B) components for covalently linked LbL assembly between carbon nanotube and polymer. Reprint with permission from ref. 263, A. B. Artyukhini et al., Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1442. ©2004, American Chemical Society. 
VI. Advanced analyses and novel properties
Analytical methods that are applicable to other thin films can generally be used for evaluation of the LbL assembled films. Regular film growth can be detected by UV-Vis and FT-IR spectroscopies if the adsorbed materials have specific absorption bands. More generally, the thickness of the adsorbed layers can be evaluated by X-ray reflectivity, surface plasmon resonance (SPR), and scanning angle reflectometry (SAR) and film mass can be quantified by QCM with precision at the nanogram-level. The morphology of the films can also be analyzed by various microscopies including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy, and scanning probe microscopies (SPMs). Not limited to these fundamental analyses, various analytical tools have been used in LbL science and technology. Because the LbL method provides ideal layered films from various functional molecules, the LbL structures provide media appropriate for investigation of physicochemical phenomena using sophisticated analytical techniques, which is also useful for a better understanding of the mechanism of formation of LbL films.
LbL thin films incorporating metallic nanoparticles have been examined for their use as substrates for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), which is a phenomenon involving large increases in Raman scattering cross sections of molecules adsorbed at the surfaces of nanometer-scale metallic particles. Aroca and coworkers reported that LbL films prepared from dendrimer and colloidal Ag particles could be excellent substrates for SERS measurements, demonstrating significant enhancement capability.267 Large electromagnetic enhancement of Raman scattering signals was found to be strongly dependent on interparticle coupling between neighboring metallic nanoparticles. Electromagnetic enhancement was still possible at distances within LbL structures although its intensity decreased as film thickness increased. Therefore these films would be useful for developing sensors with external layers that are chemically selective for specific analytes. Other optical properties of metallic nanoparticle can be tuned through modification of LbL structures incorporating the target nanoparticles. For example, the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peak can be tuned over a wide range of wavelengths upon changing the environment and the level of the nanoparticle aggregation. Tsukruk and coworkers prepared multilayered films containing gold nanoparticles and PAH by spin-coating LbL assembly and examined the relationship between their microstructure and the corresponding SPR optical response.268 All the films prepared showed a strong extinction peak in the region of 510–550 nm, which is due to the plasmon resonance of the individual gold nanoparticles red-shifted because of a local dielectric environment. The second strong peak was consistently observed between 620 and 660 nm, which is the collective plasmon resonance from intralayer interparticle coupling in sufficiently dense-packed films. They also proposed film designs for interlayer interparticle resonance at 800 nm. Such control of SPR signals of independent and concurrent individual, intralayer, and interlayer resonances could be critical for sensing applications.
Because the soft and flexible nature of the LbL films is compatible with biological components, incorporation of biomaterials in LbL films and their resulting functions have been researched widely. In order to use the LbL materials in practical biological applications, the preparation of LbL structures with rather complicated compositions is often required. Ferreyra, Teijelo, and coworkers prepared bioelectrodes composed of LbL films from an anionic alkaline phosphatase (AP)-polyphenol oxidase (PPO) mixture and the polycation PDDA on top of a glassy carbon electrode modified with an immunological layer.269 They analyzed structural data obtained from these complex structures, including film thickness, the film optical properties, and the ellipsometric mass values assessed from the two models, three-layer film and reorganization layer. Combination of several analytical methods is sometimes necessary to characterize biological LbL films. Elofsson, and coworkers analyzed structures of PGA/PLL LbL films immobilized with matrix derivate protein using the combined analyses of in situ ellipsometry, quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D), and dual-polarization interferometry (DPI).270 The latter is a relatively new technique used to measure changes in both the thickness and the refractive index of adsorbed layers in situ. The process of adsorption to the surface affects the evanescent field emitted from the sensing waveguide in the index of refraction resulting in changes of the light propagating through the sensing waveguide relative to the light traveling through the reference. The resulting difference is reflected as a shift in the fringe pattern in the far field, which is alternately and continuously recorded for both horizontally and vertically polarized light. By combining the results from both polarizations, a unique solution for the thickness and the refractive index can be obtained. Upon systematic comparison, an excellent agreement was found between the masses detected by ellipsometry and DPI. In contrast, the QCM-D registers a significantly larger mass, probably because of incorporation of contributions from the solvent oscillating within the LbL films. Analyses of the intrinsic activity of biological components are a valuable approach. Lu and Hu prepared bioactive LbL films from natural polysaccharides chitosan (CS) and hyaluronic acid (HA) and loaded electroactive myoglobin (Mb) in the films.271 The cyclic voltammetric (CV) peak pair of Mb FeIII/FeII redox couple for these LbL films on pyrolytic graphite (PG) electrodes was used to investigate the loading behavior of the CS/HA films toward Mb. The CS/HA LbL films with relatively low charge density are packed loosely and easily swelled in water, leading to greater loading volumes and shorter loading time for Mb. The importance of film structure to performance with regard to biological activities was indicated.
Versatility of film construction using the LbL assembly technique is also advantageous for introduction of new physicochemical properties. Hammond and coworkers plasticized PEO/PAA films through hydrogen bonding LbL assembly, whose films exhibited ionic conductivity exceeding those of electrostatically assembled LBL films.272 Their results suggest research routes for the evolution of these promising solid polymer electrolytes into elements appropriate for electrochemical power storage and generation applications. Katagiri et al. investigated the influence of UV irradiation on polyelectrolyte LbL capsules and realized structural shrinkage upon UV irradiation of the capsules formed from polyelectrolytes with UV absorbing aromatic groups.273 UV irradiation of capsules could be used as a viable route to alter the chemical and physical properties of polyelectrolyte capsules after their formation. This strategy may be useful in environmental applications, where it could be used to modulate the release of encapsulated substances upon exposure to sunlight. Decher and coworkers used the superiority of LbL assembly for structural design to understand some fundamental photophysical phenomena.274 They prepared the LbL films on 13-nm-diameter gold colloids to fabricate metal core-polymer shell capsules in which the fluorescent organic dyes fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and lissamine rhodamine B (LISS) are situated at various distances from the gold core (Fig. 8A). The gold nanocore quenches the fluorescence of the fluorescein and lissamine dyes situated in the outer polymer layers of the core-shell nanoparticles. By systematic control of the distance between dye and metal core in the LbL structures, the fluorescence measurements give a direct method to assess the effect of the metal core on the radiative rates. Systematic photophysical investigations revealed strongly distance-dependent fluorescence quenching and that the gold nanoparticles decrease the transition probability for radiative transitions.
 Fig. 8  Evaluation of physicochemical properties using LbL assemblies; (A) distance-dependent fluorescence quenching LbL assemblies on gold particle; (B) measurement of mechanical properties using cantilever technique. Reprint with permission from ref. 274, G. Schneider and G. Decher, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 530. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 276, B.-S. Kim et al., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7200. ©2005, American Chemical Society. 
Study of the mechanical characteristics of LbL objects also attracts active researchers. Jaber and Schlenoff reported on the time-dependent viscoelastic response of nanoblended films of a polyelectrolyte complex.275 A section of the polyelectrolyte LbL film was peeled off from solid support and was mounted on a moving iron galvanometer motor and a capacitance-type force transducer. The mechanical characteristics of the LbL films were measured by applying a dynamic load with a sinusoidal rate change. The polyelectrolyte LbL films provided enhancement in damping properties over the frequency range of 0.3–10 Hz, when compared with other hydrogel damping materials. Vinogradova and coworkers investigated the mechanical properties of dendrimer-based LbL microcapsules by measuring force-deformation curves with AFM (Fig. 8B).276 V-shaped cantilevers attached with glass spheres were used for the force measurement, where the glass sphere was centered above the apex of a chosen capsule and deflection was dynamically imposed. Changes in the diameter of the capsule were determined optically. The dendrimer-type LbL capsules were confirmed as much softer objects than PSS/PAH microcapsules, probably because of an enhanced permeability of the polyelectrolyte/dendrimer multilayer and a resulting rapid drainage of water from the compressed microcapsules. Theoretical approaches on mechanical properties on the LbL capsules were also reported. Biesheuvel et al. proposed a micromechanical theory for the LbL microcapsules.277 The model explains the essential experimental features such as a wide pH plateau in which the size remains close to the unperturbed (initial) value, the sharp increase in size at the edges of the plateau, and the fact that at the edges of the pH plateau the size increases with increasing ionic strength.
VII. Development in application 1: physical and device usages
The LbL method does not require expensive and complicated experimental apparatus or special skills and can be applied to various materials. Therefore, many kinds of applications based on the LbL technology have been proposed continuously. In the next two sections, recent application-oriented examples are introduced and are classified as (i) physical and device uses and (ii) chemical biological uses.
This LBL method offers a useful approach for fabrication of photonic devices with great accuracy in control over thickness, which is difficult to achieve by the conventional spin-coating process. It is also possible to fabricate devices with alternating layers of hole transport polymer, photosensitizer, and electron transport polymer. Kotov and coworkers fabricated photoactive LbL films from tellurium nanowires and polyelectrolyte that were found to be sensitive to light exposure.278 A light-induced increase conductivity switched the LbL thin films between “off” and “on” states giving an optical gating phenomenon. This “light-on–light-off” cycle was demonstrated to be very stable under ambient conditions for more than 100 repetitions, with no sign of photodegradation. Kurth and coworkers developed an electrochromic device based on LbL films of polyoxometalates,279,280 which were fabricated by the LbL deposition of Eu-polyoxometalates, PAH, and PSS on ITO-coated glass slides, and demonstrated an optical memory effect. The film was colored blue by applying a potential of ±1.8 V versus a reference Pt electrode, while bleaching was observed by a decrease in absorbance at 700 nm after removal of the electrical potential. It was demonstrated that this device operated reversibly with suitable response cycles. The same research group also reported that both electro- and photochromism can be combined in a single device by using the LbL film of polyoxometalate.281 Schanze, Reynolds, and coworkers reported fabrication of photovoltaic cells using LbL films of poly(p-phenylene ethynylene)
				(PPE)-based polyelectrolyte and a fullerene derivative,282 which exhibited moderately efficient incident monochromic photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) response under low-intensity monochromatic light illumination (Fig. 9A). The LbL technique permits preparation of donor–acceptor films with relatively precise (molecular level) control over the structure and energies of the active layers of photovoltaic cells. Therefore, it is possible to study the effects of features such as energy gradient driven exciton and/or charge transfer on photoconversion efficiency in organic photovoltaic cells. Chan and coworkers prepared the LbL multilayer films composed of a ruthenium terpyridine complex containing poly(p-phenylenevinylene)
				(Ru-PPV) and sulfonated polyaniline (SPAN) for photovoltaic cells that were fabricated by sandwiching the multilayer films between indium-tin-oxide and aluminum electrodes.283 The maximum IPCE of the devices was found to be approximately 2% at 510 nm, which is consistent with the absorption maximum of the ruthenium complex. This indicates that the photosensitization process is due to the electronic excitation of the ruthenium complex. Wang and coworkers reported preparation of LbL hybrid films of conjugated polymers PPV and CdSe nanoparticles.284 Their approach includes facile covalent crosslinking of the polymer/nanoparticle interlayers, which provides a general route for preparing robust and uniform functional thin films. A preliminary application of the hybrid films in the development of organic photovoltaics was presented. The self-assembled multilayer films exhibit steady photocurrent responses with an overall optical-to-electrical power conversion efficiency of 0.71% upon illumination with white light at 10 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 9  Device structures based on LbL films; (A) photovoltaic cell composed of PPE and fullerene derivative; (B) FET composed of inorganic nanoparticles and polyelectrolytes. Reprint with permission from ref. 282, J. K. Mwaura et al., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10119. ©2005, American Chemical Society. 
Solar cells and fuel cells are important targets in current research, and various materials useful for these cell applications have been investigated using the LbL technique. Agrios et al. fabricated dye-sensitized solar cells using the LbL method.285 A solar cell was prepared from 50-cycle layers of TiO2 large particle on 50-cycle layers of TiO2 nanoparticle including photo-sensitive dye N719. The upper scattering layer produced a current density of 1.8 mA cm−2, accounting for 38% of the improvement due to the scattering layer over nanoparticle TiO2. The capability to design desired film structures using the LbL techniques was emphasized in this demonstration. LbL assembly of composite polyelectrolyte multi-layer thin films offers a very effective technique for minimization of the methanol-crossover problem in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) as demonstrated by Jiang et al.286 They proposed preparation of methanol-blocking multi-layer thin film on a Nafion membrane using LbL assembly of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes, PDDA and PSS. This LbL film on Nafion membrane showed a significant reduction in methanol crossover and on the enhancement of the performance of DMFCs. Most importantly, the LbL assembly approach appears to have a much smaller detrimental effect on the proton conductivity and chemical and thermal stabilities of the Nafion membrane, a significant advantage compared to other modification approaches.
Devices constructed with well-defined layer structures, such as field effect transistors (FET), would be appropriate targets that can benefit from LbL technology. By aiming to construct all-solid-state electrochromic device, Kim and Jung fabricated the LbL films that were constructed using poly(aniline-N-butylsulfonate)s (PANBS) as an electrochromic anionic polymer, and acid-doped polyaniline (PAN) and vinylbenzyldimethyl-n-octadecylammonium salts (VBOD) as a polycation.287 An all-solid-state electrochromic device based on an optimized LBL composition showed an electrochromic response at 3 V within 1 s, with a stable memory effect. Lvov and coworkers demonstrated this possibility by preparation of metal-oxide-semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET) arrays using the LbL process on a silicon wafer.288 The on-off threshold voltage was 3 V and this work represents a new approach by which to fabricate low-cost MOSFETs and integrated circuits. Cui et al. reported fabrication of an LbL multilayer of In2O3 and SiO2 nanoparticles, patterned by photolithography and lift-off methods, as channels and insulating layers, respectively, as an inorganic FET (Fig. 9B).289 This FET worked in an accumulation mode, with a threshold voltage of −1.25 V, a carrier mobility of 4.24 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, and an on/off current ratio of 102. These approaches provide a new strategy for fabrication of low-cost micro/nanoelectronic devices and integrated circuits.
Nolte et al. demonstrated the use of LbL assembly and in situ nanoreactor chemistry for creating multilayer nanocomposites, where the concentration of a nanoparticle species can be modulated throughout the depth of the film in a desired way.290 They produced a digitized rugate filter, a special type of dielectric mirror possessing many thin layers that approximate a continuous, periodic refractive index profile, through in situ growth of silver nanoparticles to selectively increase the refractive index of precisely defined regions of the LbL film. Spectroscopic results obtained from the assembled device confirm the presence of a reflection band that grows in amplitude with increasing silver incorporation, reaching a peak reflectance of 75% after five silver loading and exchange cycles. The rugate structure suppresses reflection side bands, features common to Bragg reflectors and simpler dielectric mirror designs. Murase and coworkers proposed a novel and facile preparation method for the LbL films incorporating quantum dots showing intense photoluminescence from blue to red.291 The photoluminescence efficiencies of the quantum dots (CdTe or ZnSe, both are thioglycolic acid-stabilized) dispersed in the films were roughly half that of the initial colloidal solutions but reached 24%. The intense photoluminescence from the high quantum dot concentration with greater stability demonstrates the potential application of these multilayer quantum dot films to optical devices with full color emission. DeLongchamp and Hammond presented fabrication of a multicolored electrochromic electrode using LbL films from polycationic poly(aniline)
				(PANI) and a negatively ionized Prussian Blue (PB) nanoparticle.292 Electrochemical and spectrophotometric characterization confirms the distinct and non-interacting contributions from PANI and PB and reveals that both are fully electrochemically accessible even in thick, high contrast films. Switching speed is accelerated due to the incorporation of electronically conducting PANI and the prepared nanocomposite underwent an uncolored to green to blue transition over the potential range from −0.2 to 0.6 V vs. K-SCE. Winnik and coworkers proposed preparation of photoluminescent oxygen sensors based upon phosphorescent platinum and palladium porphyrins and ruthenium complexes adsorbed into the pores of mesoporous silica particles at submonolayer coverage on LbL films.293
In one unique physical application, Cho and coworkers prepared stable superhydrophobic surfaces using LbL assembly.294 Because the LbL method is very suitable for surface modifications, such an application would be one of the most practical ones. They prepared organic-inorganic hybrid films by LbL deposition of PAH and ZrO2 nanoparticles coated with PAA with facile control of surface roughness and hydrophobicity. The structure of films was controlled by the number of deposition cycles using PAA-coated 100 nm ZrO2 nanoparticles and the prelayer with PAH and PAA, yielding superhydrophobic surfaces were then successfully developed by the deposition of hydrophilic silica nanoparticles on a 10 bilayer surface of PAH/PAA-coated ZrO2, and a simple fluorination. Moreover, the chemical stability of the film was greatly increased by heat-induced cross-linking of the film. Rubner, Cohen, and coworkers prepared hydrophilic patterns on superhydrophobic surfaces. These were created using water/2-propanol solutions of a polyelectrolyte to produce surfaces with extreme hydrophobic contrast.295 Selective deposition of multilayer films onto the hydrophilic patterns introduces different properties to the area including superhydrophilicity. This structural design was inspired by the water harvesting wing surface of the Namib Desert beetle. Potential applications of such surfaces include water harvesting surfaces, controlled drug release coatings, open-air microchannel devices, and lab-on-chip devices. The same research group recently reported preparation of all-nanoparticle thin-film coatings that exhibit antireflective, antifogging (superhydrophilicity), and self-cleaning properties by layer-by-layer deposition of TiO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles.296 The presence of nanopores in the TiO2/SiO2 nanoparticle coatings results in superhydrophilicity as well as antireflective properties. The superhydrophilicity of contaminated coatings could also be readily recovered and retained after ultraviolet irradiation.
VIII. Development in application 2: chemical and biological usages
The LbL films have been used in diverse areas of the chemical and biological fields including materials separation, controlled permeation and release of target materials, reactor usages, and sensing. In particular, the soft, flexible nature of the LbL films is suitable for fabrication of stimuli-responsive systems.
Selective permeation and permeation blocking are fundamental properties of membranes. A sophisticated design of the LbL films should lead to advanced properties in the corresponding fields. Hollman and Bhattacharyya prepared nonstoichiometric immobilization of charged LbL multilayers within a confined pore geometry, resulting in an enhanced volume density of ionizable groups in the membrane phase.297 Such high density of the effective charge density permits permeation control upon Donnan exclusion of ionic species. Shiratori and coworkers fabricated LbL films from PAH and PAA, which have amino groups and carboxyl groups, respectively, on a glass filter.298 After appropriate thermal treatment, the assembled films were subjected to filter experiments for removal of environmentally-unfriendly gasses. Basic odorants such as ammonia gas can be effectively trapped through electrostatic interaction with carboxyl groups, and aldehyde species can be trapped by amino groups in the film through Schiff’s base formation. Suppression of aldehyde release is important for prevention of sick building syndrome. The proposed films should contribute significantly where environmental considerations are of importance. Shutava et al. prepared an LbL film containing tannic acid, a polyphenol of natural origin, which has ability as an antioxidant to scavenge free radicals.299 Deposited as an outermost layer on the surface of devices, layers of polyphenol can significantly inhibit their damage by trapping free radicals before they can reach the inner layers. Their experimental results demonstrate that the polyphenol multilayers positioned as an organized protective shell on the surface of biodevices or compacted drug forms may inhibit or diminish free-radical damage of encapsulated compounds. Simple variation of the number of deposited layers changes the antioxidant properties of the assemblies. Apart from that, several research groups have reported the applications of polyelectrolyte membranes including gas separations,300–303 pervaporation from water/organic solvent mixtures,304–307 ion separations for nano-filtration,308,309 and reverse osmosis membranes.310
The LbL films in both flat membrane form and capsule structures have been used for controlled release. Lynn and coworkers used a degradable polymer as a component of the LbL films to realize controlled DNA delivery.311 As illustrated in Fig. 10, multi-layered films up to 100 nm thick containing a synthetic degradable cationic polymer and plasmid DNA coded with green fluorescent protein were fabricated in layer-by-layer fashion onto the surfaces of planar silicon and quartz substrates. Degradation of the former components induced release of the plasmid, which was confirmed by high levels of enhanced green fluorescent protein in the cell. Advincula and coworkers developed pH-sensitive bipolar ion-permselective films of polyelectrolyte multilayers, prepared by LbL assembly and photocrosslinking of benzophenone-modified poly(acrylic acid)
				(PAA-BP) and poly(allylamine hydrochloride)
				(PAH-BP) with the aim of bipolar pH-switching of permselectivity for both cationic and anionic molecular probes.312 Under basic condition, the LbL film is permeable to the cationic probe but impermeable to the anionic probe because deprotonation of free carboxylic acid at high pH promotes and suppresses permeability of cationic and anionic probes, respectively. At lower pH, the same LbL film is permeable to an anionic probe but less permeable to a cationic probe due to the protonation of free amine. Rubner, Cohen, and coworkers also reported permeability control using LbL films,313i.e., they proposed pH-induced hysteretic gating of track-etched polycarbonate membranes that were filled with the LbL assembled polyelectrolyte multi-layers comprising PAH and PSS at high pH. Swelling/deswelling properties of the multilayers leads to gating properties of material transport through the membrane. Such stimuli responsive mechano-chemical valves can be used to gate the flow of water in microfluidic channels allowing either an open or closed state to exist at a single pH condition.
 Fig. 10  DNA release from LbL film made of degradable polyamine. Reprint with permission from ref. 311, J. Zhang et al., Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8015. ©2004, American Chemical Society. 
Mauser et al. fabricated hollow microcapsules composed of PAH and poly(methacrylic acid)
				(PMA) and investigated changes of the morphology and the thickness of the resulting capsules.314 If the molecular weight of the PMA is high enough, a reversible swelling of the capsules at low or high pH can be achieved due to the enhanced entanglement of the polymers. When calcium ions were present in the solution at high pH, deprotonated carboxylic groups can complex Ca2+
				(Fig. 11A). Only a small amount of calcium is sufficient to form a precipitate. Wang and Caruso synthesized nanoporous polymer-based spheres via sequential assembly of polyelectrolytes in mesoporous silica particles, followed by removal of the templates.315 The resulting PAA/PAH nanoporous polymer spheres exhibited a high capacity for enzyme loading, with stimuli-responsive reversible loading and release of the protein triggered by changes in solution pH. The proposed systems, with nanoscale porosity and designed functionality, are envisaged to offer new opportunities for their application in biosensing, catalysis, and drug delivery. De Smedt and coworkers developed glucose-sensitive polyelectrolyte capsules through LbL assembly of cationic polymer bearing phenylboronic acid moieties and PSS.316 Upon addition of glucose, the phenylboronic acid moieties become negatively charged and start to interfere strongly with the polyelectrolyte multilayers (Fig. 11B). An intermolecular repulsion between the sulfonate groups of the PSS and the glucose/phenylboronic acid complex is thought to be partly responsible for the disassembly of the capsules. Vancso and coworkers prepared polyelectrolyte multilayer capsules composed of polyanions and polycations of poly(ferrocenylsilane).317 The permeability of these capsules could be sensitively tuned via chemical oxidation, resulting in a fast capsule expansion accompanied by a drastic permeability increase in response to a very small trigger. The redox-controlled permeability and swellability have a high application potential in materials as well as in bioscience. Lvov and coworkers developed a versatile approach for DNA encapsulation inside a biocompatible polyelectrolyte microshell, retaining the natural double-helix structure of DNA.318 In their method, MnCO3 particles as template core materials were suspended in DNA solution, and the addition of spermidine solution into stirred MnCO3/DNA solution caused precipitation of a water-insoluble DNA/spermidine complex onto the MnCO3 particle. The obtained mixed-component cores were covered by LbL assembly comprising biocompatible polyarginine and chondroitin sulfate. The MnCO3 template particles were first dissolved, resulting in biocompatible capsules containing DNA/spermidine complex. Further decomposition of the DNA/spermidine complex led to selective release of low molecular weight spermidine to complete DNA entrapment.
 Fig. 11  Stimuli-responsive LbL capsules; (A) with stimuli of pH and Ca ion; (B) with stimulus of sugar. Reprint with permission from ref. 314, T. Mauser et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5888. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 316, B. G. De Geest et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5070. ©2006, American Chemical Society. 
The ready adaptability of LbL assembly is a great advantage in the design of chemical reactors.319,320 Kunitake and coworkers developed the multi-enzyme reactors containing glucose oxidase (GOD) and glucoamylase (GA) prepared on an ultrafilter through which a substrate solution was passed (Fig. 12).321 Hydrolysis of the glycoside bond in starch by GA produced glucose that was converted to gluconolactone by GOD with H2O2 as a co-product. Reactor ability can be optimized by adjusting the number of layers, layering sequence, and layer separation. Polyelectrolyte layers seem to be more permeable to a reaction substrate than to a condensed lipid membrane such as LB films. Bruening and coworkers immobilized gold nanoparticles within alumina porous supports through LbL assembly to form catalytic membranes (Fig. 13A).322 These colloid-modified membranes showed remarkable conversions of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol at high flow rates in the presence of the reducing reagent, NaBH4. This system reduced >99% of 0.4 mM 4-nitrophenol at linear flow rates of 0.98 cm s−1. Their results indicate a turnover number >1000 mol of 4-nitrophenol per mol of gold contained within the membrane. Shchukin and Möhwald prepared PSS/PAH LbL microcapsules containing TiO2 nanoparticles that catalyze photosynthesis of urea from inorganic precursors (CO2 and NO3−) in aqueous solution (Fig. 13B).323 In their strategy, nanosized TiO2 was taken as a model semiconductor encapsulated inside the LbL capsules, together with poly(vinyl alcohol)
				(PVA) as electron donor. The TiO2-mediated urea photosynthesis in water can be described by the equations shown in Fig. 13B. The highest yield of urea photosynthesis (37%) was achieved for Cu-modified TiO2 nanoparticles encapsulated inside the 2.2 μm PVA-PAH/PSS capsules.
 Fig. 12  Multi-enzyme reactor of LbL film on ultrafilter. 
 Fig. 13  LbL-type catalysts; (A) gold nanoparticle catalysts immobilized within porous support; (B) titania photocatalyst confined in LbL capsule. Reprint with permission from ref. 322, D. N. Dotzauer et al., Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2268. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 323, D. G. Shchukin and H. Möhwald., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5582. ©2005, American Chemical Society. 
LbL structures are often immobilized on the surface of a solid device such as an electrode for material sensing and conversion. For detection and digestion of paraoxon, Leblanc and co-workers prepared the LbL films with organophosphorus hydrolase (OPH).324 In order to minimize activity loss and maintain enzyme performance, they assembled a polyelectrolyte cushion composed of five layers of positively charged chitosan and negatively charged poly(thiophene-3-acetic acid), on which OPH was adsorbed. Detecting the presence of paraoxon compounds with speed and sensitivity can be performed using the absorption and fluorescence detection methodologies. Forster, Rusling, and co-workers proposed direct electrochemical luminescence measurement for 8-oxoguanine detection, which was based on catalytic oxidation of guanine in DNA with [Os(bpy)2-(PVP)10]2+ leading to photo-excited OsII* sites and subsequently electrochemical luminescence signals (PVP represents poly(vinylpyridine)).325 Rusling and co-workers also reported a DNA damage detection system using DNA-enzyme LbL films containing myoglobin or cytochrome P450 on electrodes.326 The DNA damage was detected by square wave voltammetry (SWV) using catalytic oxidation with Ru(bpy)32+ and monitoring the binding of Co(bpy)33+. In such systems electric contact between the LbL films and electrode is undoubtedly important. Calvo et al. reported LbL films containing glucose oxidase (GOD) and an Os-complex-derivatised PAH on an electrode.327 The latter redox-active component can work as an electric wire to mediate electron transfer between the enzyme and the electrode. Schmidtke and coworkers integrated carbon nanotubes in GOD-containing LbL films.328 In their approach, gold electrodes were initially functionalized with negatively charged 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid followed by alternate immersion in solutions of a positively charged redox polymer, poly[(vinylpyridine)Os(bipyridyl)2Cl2+/3+], and negatively charged GOD single-walled carbon nanotubes. Incorporation of single-walled carbon nanotubes into the LbL films did not appear to affect the redox potential of the films or the reversibility of electron transfer but did induce a 2–4-fold increase in the electrochemical response, resulting in an increase of enzymatic response to response to glucose. Such an improvement in sensor performance can be achieved easily using LbL technology because of its good versatility in film construction.
Coating with LbL films has also been used for bioprotective purposes. Krol et al. wrapped human pancreatic islets with polyelectrolyte LbL films.329 While there was only a minor influence on the release of insulin, antibody recognition was significantly suppressed. Suppression of antibody recognition may be caused by exclusion of the antibody due to the small cutoff of the multilayer structure and/or masking of the corresponding epitope on the cell surface. It was suggested that the latter factor is more probable. Kotov and coworkers demonstrated antimicrobial coating using LbL assembly of silver nanoparticles.330 Silver and silver ions are known to show effective antimicrobial activity. They prepared a nanostructured, hybrid, multifunctional composite containing clay layers implanted with starch-stabilized silver nanoparticles. The resulting composite showed excellent structural stability with no detectable levels of silver lost over a 1 month period. In addition, almost complete growth inhibition of E. coli over an 18 h period was observed. The amount of silver eluted from the LbL composite over a 1 month period was determined to be only 0.5–3.0 μg L−1, which did not prevent growth of mammalian tissue cultures. This LbL composite was proved to show biocompatibility with a human osteoblast cell line. Not limited to these examples, LbL coating techniques have been used in several practical applications. For example, in USA and Europe, there are at least three real applications of LbL coating: (i) drug nano-encapsulation; (ii) biocompatible coating (eye lenses); and (iii) cellulose microfiber coating.331–335
IX. Future perspectives
In this review, various aspects of the LbL assembly, from physicochemical fundamentals to possibilities of practical applications, have been described comprehensively. Basically, the LbL method is simple, versatile, and flexible in its implementation, which permits various use based on the requirements of research projects or practical applications. Of the various features of development of LbL assembly, we would like to point out one unique aspect as a potential fruitful direction for this research area. That is the combination of the LbL technique with current-existing top-down microfabrication and nanofabrication strategies. Several pioneering examples have already appeared and are described below. Hammond and coworkers proposed the use of chemically patterned surfaces as templates for ionic multilayer assembly based on techniques using poly(dimethylsiloxane)
				(PDMS) stamps that had been prepared on a photolithographically prepared silicon master.336,337 This patterning concept was realized in the preparation of photovoltaic devices consisting of TiO2, porphyrin dyes, and polyelectrolytes. Combining the LbL technique with ink-jet printing and photolithography was demonstrated by Yang and Rubner.338 In their method, exposure of the film to water with an appropriate pH through the ink-jet printing method lead to micro-patterning with a desirable structure. An excellent example of microfabrication of LbL films into a free-standing micro-object was performed by Lvov and coworkers who demonstrated the synthesis of an LbL self-assembled ultrathin micro-cantilever consisting of clay/polymer nanocomposites.339 They used sequenced procedures including patterning, photo-treatment, etching, and LbL assembly (Fig. 14). Lvov and coworkers also proposed a microfluidic approach for the complex formation of polyelectrolytes and polyelectrolyte/protein microstrips on a glass surface.340 Forry et al. recently demonstrated the rapid, controllable immobilization of suspended mammalian cells within microfabricated environments using combination with dielectrophoresis on a surface modified with the LbL films.341 All these examples can be regarded as a clever fusion between top-down (microfabrication) and bottom-up approaches (LbL assembly).
 Fig. 14  Preparation of free-standing cantilever using LbL method and microfabrication techniques. Reprint with permission from ref. 339, F. Hua et al., Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 823. ©2004, American Chemical Society. 
Generally, limitations of the top-down approach are well appreciated, while the bottom-up approach has yet to mature. Therefore, a combination of both approaches is likely to be of importance in practical solution of nanotechnology. However, currently most bottom-up research is solely of academic interest with many advanced examples such as molecular machines available, while at the same time having no practical uses. Additionally, LbL assembly methods are amenable to a wide range of adaptations because of its simple concept. Therefore, the LbL method could be the most prominent bottom-up methodology for realization of nanotechnologies originating from purely scientific ideas. Although not limited to nanotechnology, the versatility and simplicity of the LbL method is of substantial use in the advanced nanosciences where fundamental physicochemical phenomena can be examined within well-defined nanostructures, as seen in Decher’s example in Fig. 8.
Acknowledgements
This research was partly supported by “Ground-based Research program for Space Utilization” promoted by Japan Space Forum.
References
C. M. Niemeyer, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2000, 4, 609 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Pease, J. O. Jeppesen, J. F. Stoddart, Y. Luo, C. P. Collier and J. R. Heath, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 433 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shimomura and T. Sawadaishi, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 6, 11 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shimizu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2002, 23, 311 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. C. van Bommel, A. Friggeri and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 980 CrossRef .
N. C. Seeman, Nature, 2003, 421, 427 CrossRef .
K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2004, 4, 23 Search PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, W. Schmitt, T. Michinobu, D. G. Kurth and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5982 RSC .
K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1377 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vinu, K. Z. Hossain and K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 347 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruben, J.-M. Lehn and P. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1056 RSC .
A. Vinu, M. Miyahara and K. Ariga, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1510 CrossRef CAS .
T. Michinobu, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, M. Funahashi and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10384 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 1304 CrossRef .
T. Kunitake, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1992, 31, 709 CrossRef .
N. Nakashima, T. Tokunaga, Y. Nonaka, T. Nakanishi, H. Murakami and T. Sagara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kikuchi, K. Ariga and K. Ikeda, Chem. Commun., 1999, 547 Search PubMed .
J. Kikuchi, K. Ariga, T. Miyazaki and K. Ikeda, Chem. Lett., 1999, 253 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Shipway and I. Willner, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 421 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and P. R. L. Malenfant, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 99 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakanishi, N. Miyashita, T. Michinobu, Y. Wakayama, T. Tsuruoka, K. Ariga and D. G. Kurth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6328 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, T. Nakanishi, S. Kawanami, T. Kosaka and J. Kikuchi, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1718 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, T. Nakanishi and T. Michinobu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 2278 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Hill, Y. Wakayama, W. Schmitt, T. Tsuruoka, T. Nakanishi, M. L. Zandler, A. L. McCarty, F. D’Souza, L. R. Milgrom and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2320 RSC .
J. P. Hill, Y. Wakayama and K. Ariga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5034 RSC .
J. A. Zasadzinski, R. Viswanathan, L. Madsen, J. Garnaes and D. K. Schwartz, Science, 1994, 263, 1726 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 371 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Terasaka, D. Sakai, H. Tsuji and J. Kikuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 7835 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. McCullough and S. L. Regen, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2787 RSC .
H. Song, F. KIm, S. Connor, G. A. Somorjai and P. D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 188 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, T. Nakanishi, Y. Terasaka, H. Tsuji, D. Sakai and J. Kikuchi, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 976 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, T. Nakanishi and J. P. Hill, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 465 RSC .
T. Michinobu, S. Shinoda, T. Nakanishi, J. P. Hill, K. Fujii, T. N. Player, H. Tsukube and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14478 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Dubois and R. G. Nuzzo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1992, 43, 437 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maoz, E. Frydman, S. R. Cohen and J. Sagiv, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 424 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ginger, H. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 30 CrossRef .
J. C. Love, L. A. Estroff, J. K. Kriebel, R. G. Nuzzo and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1103 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Fendler, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1616 CrossRef CAS .
W. Knoll, Curr. Opin. Colloids Interfaces, 1996, 1, 137 Search PubMed .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bertrand, A. Jonas, A. Laschewsky and R. Legras, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2000, 21, 319 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1271 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Iler, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1966, 21, 569 CAS .
G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Macromol. Chem. Macromol. Symp., 1991, 46, 321 Search PubMed .
G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 1430 CAS .
G. Decher, J. D. Hong and J. Schmitt, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 210, 831 CrossRef .
Y. Lvov, G. Decher and H. Möhwald, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 481 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bernt, K. Kurihara and T. Kunitake, Langmuir, 1992, 8, 2486 CrossRef .
G. Decher, J. D. Hong and J. Schmitt, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 210, 831 CrossRef .
Y. Lvov, G. Decher and H. Möhwald, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 481 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, Y. Lvov and J. Schmitt, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 244, 772 CrossRef CAS .
D. Korneev, Y. Lvov, G. Decher, J. Schmitt and S. Yaradaikin, Physica B (Amsterdam), 1995, 213, 954 CrossRef .
N. G. Hoogeveen, M. A. C. Stuart, G. J. Fleer and M. R. Bohmer, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3675 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen and T. J. McCarthy, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 78 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fou, O. Onitsuka, M. Ferreira, M. Rubner and B. R. Hsieh, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7501 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, S. Yamada and T. Kunitake, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 300, 107 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. He, R. Valluzzi, K. Yang, T. Dolukhanyan, C. Sung, J. Kumar, S. K. Tripathy, L. Samuelson, L. Balogh and D. A. Tomalia, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3268 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Khopade and F. Caruso, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Chem. Lett., 1994, 2323 CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 6117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 285, 797 CrossRef .
M. Onda, Y. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1997, 36, L1608 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, M. Onda, Y. Lvov and T. Kunitake, Chem. Lett., 1997, 25 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, D. N. Furlong, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 4559 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lvov, Z. Lu, J. B. Schenkman, X. Zu and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 4073 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Beissenhirtz, F. W. Scheller and F. Lisdat, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 4665 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, N. Hu and J. F. Rusling, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 722 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sultana, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13460 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Shutava, D. S. Kommireddy and Y. M. Lvov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9926 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, I. Honma, M. Ichihara and H. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 377 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, G. Decher and G. Sukhorukov, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 5396 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, B. Lehr, K. Lowack, Y. Lvov and J. Schmitt, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1994, 9, 677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lang and M. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 11393 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, R. J. Sanedrin and F. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1173 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Ling and M. Liu, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 409, 227 CAS .
L. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Yang, S. Dong and E. Wang, Biophys. Chem., 2001, 94, 11 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. R. Johnston, H. Mitomo, E. S. Read and F. Caruso, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3251 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yamauchi, Y. Koyamatsu, K. Kato and H. Iwata, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 3497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishibashi, Y. Yamaguchi, H. Murakami and N. Nakashima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 419, 574 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, M. Onda, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 1998, 9, 345 CAS .
A. Voigt, H. Lichtenfeld, G. B. Sukhorukov, H. Zastrow, E. Donath, H. Baumler and H. Möhwald, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1999, 38, 4037 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, S. Leporatti, E. Donath and H. Möhwald, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5375 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa, M. Yamaguchi and M. Akashi, Biomacromolecules, 2002, 3, 724 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Constantine, S. V. Mello, A. Dupont, X. H. Cao, D. Santos, O. N. Oliveira, F. T. Strixino, E. C. Pereira, T. C. Cheng, J. J. Defrank and R. M. Leblanc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1805 CrossRef CAS .
B. Thierry, F. M. Winnik, Y. Merhi, J. Silver and M. Tabrizian, Biomacromolecules, 2003, 4, 1564 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Shutava and Y. M. Lvov, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, H. Haas, G. Decher, H. Möhwald, A. Mikhailov, B. Mtchedlishvily, E. Morgunova and B. Vainstein, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 4232 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kotov, I. Dekany and J. H. Fendler, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 13065 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Lvov, M. Onda, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Chem. Lett., 1997, 125 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, M. Onda, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lvov, J. F. Rusling, D. L. Thomsen, F. Papadimitrakopoulos, T. Kawakami and T. Kunitake, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1229 RSC .
T. Cassagneau, J. H. Fendler and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 7848 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Ostrander, A. A. Mamedov and N. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Zhou, B. Yang and M. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Koo, D. K. Yi, S. J. Yoo and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tian, J. Liu, T. Zhu and W. Knoll, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4103 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Han, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ko, C. Jiang and V. V. Tsukruk, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5489 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, M. Zheludkevich, K. Yasakau, S. Lamaka, M. G. S. Ferreira and H. Möhwald, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1672 CrossRef CAS .
V. Salgueirino-Maceira, M. A. Correa-Duarte, M. Spasova, L. M. Liz-Marzan and M. Farle, Adv. Mater., 2006, 16, 509 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, K. L. Dzienis, J. Xu and Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 542 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 3038 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mamedov, J. Ostrander, F. Aliev and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 3941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, N. Hu, Y. Zeng and J. F. Rusling, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 211 CrossRef .
T. Sasaki, Y. Ebina, M. Watanabe and G. Decher, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2163 RSC .
T. Sasaki, Y. Ebina, T. Tanaka, M. Harada, M. Watanabe and G. Decher, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4661 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, T. Sasaki, Y. Ebina, K. Kurashima and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4827 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, T. Sasaki, M. Muramatsu, Y. Ebina, T. Tanaka, L. Wang and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 807 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Omomo, N. Sakai, K. i. Fukuda, I. Nakai, Y. Ebina, K. Takada, M. Watanabe and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 2873 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1235 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osada, Y. Ebina, H. Funakubo, S. Yokoyama, T. Kiguchi, K. Takada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 10238 .
L. Li, R. Ma, Y. Ebina, N. Iyi and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4386 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Lee, Y.-J. Lee and K. B. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9769 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mitsui, K. Yamaguchi, Y. Takeoka, M. Rikukawa and K. Sanui, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1094 Search PubMed .
I. Ichinose, H. Tagawa, S. Mizuki, Y. Lvov and T. Kunitake, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 187 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Lvov, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Appl. Clay Sci., 1999, 15, 137 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Ramsden, Y. M. Lvov and G. Decher, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 254, 246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Toutianoush and B. Tieke, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1998, 19, 591 CrossRef CAS .
J. Locklin, J. H. Youk, C. Xia, M.-K. Park, X. Fan and R. C. Advincula, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 877 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ichinose, K. Fujiyoshi, S. Mizuki, Y. Lvov and T. Kunitake, Chem. Lett., 1996, 257 Search PubMed .

          K. Ariga, Y. Sasaki, H. Horiguchi, N. Horiuchi and J. Kikuchi, in Soft Chemistry Leading to Novel Materials Defect and Diffusion Forum, ed. R. P. Agarwala, Trans Tech Publication, Zürich,  2001, vol. 191, p. 35 Search PubMed .
Y. Lvov, F. Essler and G. Decher, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 13773 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cooper, A. Campbell and R. Crane, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 2713 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Y. Lvov and T. Kunitake, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2224 CrossRef CAS .
K. Araki, M. J. Wagner and M. S. Wrigton, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 5393 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kometani, H. Nakajima, K. Asami, Y. Yonezawa and O. Kajimoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 294, 619 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Clark, E. S. Handy, M. F. Rubner and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1031 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Kaschak, J. T. Lean, C. C. Waraksa, G. B. Saupe, H. Usami and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3435 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tedeschi, F. Caruso, H. Möhwald and S. Kristein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5841 CrossRef CAS .
E. Rousseau, M. Van der Auweraer and F. De Schryver, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8865 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tedeschi, H. Möhwald and S. Kirstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 954 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das and A. J. Pal, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 458 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Van Cott, M. Guzy, P. Neyman, C. Brands, J. R. Heflin, H. W. Gibson and R. M. Davis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 3236 CrossRef CAS .
D.-C. Lee, G. M. Morales, Y. Lee and L. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2006, 100 RSC .
H. Chen, G. Zeng, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, M.-L. Peng, L.-Z. Wu and C.-H. Tung, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6679 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tang, J. Qu, K. Müllen and S. E. Webber, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 26 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso and H. Möhwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 121, 6039 .
F. Caruso, H. Lichtenfeld, M. Giersig and H. Möhwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 8523 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3309 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso and C. Schüler, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9595 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, A. A. Antipov, A. Mamedov, H. Möhwald and G. B. Sukhorukov, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 125 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Caruso, A. Susha and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 400 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, M. Spasova, A. Susha, M. Giersig and R. A. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ai, M. Fang, S. A. Jones and Y. M. Lvov, Biomacromolecules, 2002, 3, 560 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, Top. Curr. Chem., 2003, 227, 145 CAS .
Z. Liang, A. Susha and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3176 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schneider and G. Decher, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1833 CrossRef CAS .
B.-S. Kim and O. I. Vinogradova, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8161 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Volodkin, A. I. Petrov, M. Prevot and G. B. Sukhorukov, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3398 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Lu, T. Shutava, N. Sahiner, V. John and Y. Lvov, Chem. Mater., 2005, 34, 1536 CAS .
J. Heuvingh, M. Zappa and A. Fery, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3165 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Zhi and D. T. Haynie, Chem. Commun., 2006, 147 Search PubMed .
M.-K. Park, S. Deng and R. C. Advincula, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5272 CrossRef CAS .
F. Caruso, D. Trau, H. Möhwald and R. Renneberg, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 1485 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Mayya, D. I. Gittins, A. M. Dibaj and F. Caruso, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 727 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, A. S. Susha, A. Yu and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1849 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hou, J. Wang and C. R. Martin, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 231 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and Y. Cui, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 1552 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Q. He, Y. Cui and J. Li, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 2539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hou, C. C. Harrell, L. Trofin, P. Kohli and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5674 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, M. Onda, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Colloids Surf., A, 1999, 146, 337 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yoo, S. S. Shiratori and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 4309 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shiratori and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4213 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Sukhishvilli, E. Kharlampiva and V. Izumrudov, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8873 CrossRef .
C. B. Bucur, Z. Sui and J. B. Schlenoff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13690 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bharadwaj, R. Montazeri and D. T. Haynie, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6093 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schoeler, S. Sharpe, T. A. Hatton and F. Caruso, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 2730 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salomäki, P. Tervasmäki, S. Areva and J. Kankare, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3679 CrossRef .
F. Hofmeister, Arch. Exp. Pathol. Phamakol., 1888, 24, 247 Search PubMed .
E. Leontidis, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 7, 81 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salomäki, I. A. Vinokurov and J. Kankare, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11232 CrossRef .
J. W. Ostrander, A. A. Mamedov and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1101 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jeon, V. Panchagnula, J. Pan and A. V. Dobrynin, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4629 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, B. Zheng and D. T. Haynie, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 6668 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, L. J. Kepley, H. G. Hong and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 618 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, L. J. Kepley, H. G. Hong, S. Akhter and T. E. Mollouk, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 2597 CrossRef CAS .
H.-G. Hong and T. E. Mallouk, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 2362 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Keller, H. N. Kim and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 8817 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hatzor, T. Moav, H. Cohen, S. Matlis, J. Libman, A. Vaskevich, A. Shanzer and I. Rubinstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 13469 CrossRef CAS .
M. Altman, A. D. Shukla, T. Zubkov, G. Evmeneko, P. Dutta and M. E. van der Boom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wanunu, A. Vaskevich, S. R. Cohen, H. Cohen, R. Arad-Yellin, A. Shanzer and I. Rubinstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17877 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stockton and M. F. Rubner, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2717 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang and M. F. Rubner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2100 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sukhishvili and S. Granick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9550 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sukhishvili and S. Granick, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 301 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhu, H. Kang, A. Facchetti, G. Evmenenko, P. Dutta and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11496 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keinan, M. A. Ratner and T. J. Marks, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1848 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, O. M. Cabarcos, D. L. Allara and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 823 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Hong, J. Xu, Y. Chen and C. Li, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 338 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tang, J. Qu, K. Müllen and S. E. Webber, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 26 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Huang, L. Ying, G. Luo, X. Zhao and W. Cao, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7208 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kohli and G. J. Blanchard, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 4655 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Such, J. F. Quinn, A. Ouinn, E. Tjipto and F. Caruso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9318 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Q. He, C. Tao and J. Li, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Anzai and Y. Kobayashi, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2851 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kobayashi and J. Anzai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 507, 250 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hoshi, S. Akase and J. Anzai, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7024 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sato, Y. Imoto, J. Sugama, S. Seki, H. Inoue, T. Odagiri and J. Anzai, Anal. Sci., 2004, 20, 1247 CAS .
H. Inoue and J. Anzai, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8354 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sato, D. Kodama and J. Anzai, Anal. Sci., 2005, 21, 1375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lvov, K. Ariga, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 2313 RSC .
K. Sato, Y. Imoto, J. Sugama, S. Seki, H. Inoue, T. Odagiri, T. Hoshi and J. Anzai, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 797 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Hong, K. Lowack, J. Scmitt and G. Decher, Prog. Colloid Polym. Sci., 1993, 93, 98 CAS .
S. Rauf, D. J. Zhou, C. Abell, D. Klenerman and D. J. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1721 RSC .
Y. Shimazaki, M. Mitsuishi, S. Ito and M. Yamamoto, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 2768 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimazaki, R. Nakamura, S. Ito and M. Yamamoto, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 953 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimazaki, S. Ito and N. Tsutsumi, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9478 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa, K. Hamada, T. Kitayama, N. Fujimoto, K. Hatada and M. Akashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 1891 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa, K. Hamada, T. Kitayama, K. Katsukawa, K. Hatada and M. Akashi, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7112 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hamada, T. Serizawa, T. Kitayama, N. Fujimoto, K. Hatada and M. Akashi, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5513 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa, K. Hamada, T. Kitayama and M. Akashi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1118 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa, K. Hamada and M. Akashi, Nature, 2004, 429, 52 CrossRef CAS .
T. Serizawa and M. Akashi, Polymer, 2006, 38, 311 CAS .
A. Ikeda, T. Hatano, S. Shinkai, T. Akiyama and S. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4855 CrossRef CAS .
O. Crespo-Biel, B. Dordi, D. N. Reinhoudt and J. Huskens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7594 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ichinose, H. Senzu and T. Kunitake, Chem. Lett., 1996, 831 Search PubMed .
I. Ichinose, H. Senzu and T. Kunitake, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Lee, I. Ichinose and T. Kunitake, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 2857 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Clark and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1515 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shiratori and M. Yamada, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2000, 11, 810 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shiratori, T. Ito and T. Yamada, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 198–200, 415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada and S. S. Shiratori, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 64, 124 CrossRef .
S.-S. Lee, J.-D. Hong, C. H. Kim, K. Kim, J. P. Koo and K.-B. Lee, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5358 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Lefaux, J. A. Zimberlin, A. V. Dobrynin and P. T. Mather, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 3654 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Lee, W. J. Chung, S. K. Park, M. Kim, H. S. Seo and J. J. Ju, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, K. Char, J.-D. Hong and K.-B. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2003, 13, 1076 .
P. A. Chiarelli, M. S. Johal, D. J. Holms, J. L. Casson, J. M. Robinson and H.-L. Wang, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 168 CrossRef CAS .
V. E. Campbell, P. A. Chiarelli, S. Kaur and M. S. Johal, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 186 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Schlenoff, S. T. Dubas and T. Farhat, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 9968 CrossRef CAS .
A. Izquierdo, S. S. Ono, J.-C. Voegel, P. Schaaf and G. Decher, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7558 CrossRef CAS .
A. Izquierdo, S. S. Ono, J.-C. Schaaf and G. Decher, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7558 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, I. Dönch, M. Nolte and A. Fery, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6204 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, J. F. Quinn, Y. Wang and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5480 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mamedov and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5530 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. Markutsya and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. Markutsya, Y. Pikus and V. V. Tsukruk, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 721 CrossRef CAS .
S. Markutsya, C. Jiang, Y. Pikus and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 771 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 828 .
J. L. Lutkenhaus, K. D. Hrabak, K. McEnnis and P. T. Hammond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17228 CrossRef CAS .
K. Emoto, M. Iijima, Y. Nakasaki and K. Kataoka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 2653 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ma, H. Zhang, B. Song, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5065 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ma, Y. Wang, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3906 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qi, X. Tong and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 5714 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, Chem. Rec., 2004, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, A. Vinu and M. Miyahara, Curr. Nanosci., 2006, 2, 197 Search PubMed .
K. Katagiri, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Chem. Lett., 1999, 661 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ariga, K. Katagiri and J. Kikuchi, Kobunshi Ronbunshu, 2000, 57, 251 Search PubMed .
K. Katagiri, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2001, 132, 599 CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 393 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 6709 CrossRef CAS .
K. Katagiri, R. Hamasaki, K. Ariga and J. Kikuchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7892 CrossRef CAS .
M. Michel, D. Vautier, J.-C. Voegel, P. Schaaf and V. Ball, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 4835 CrossRef CAS .
M. Michel, A. Izquierdo, G. Decher, C.-G. Voegel, P. Schaaf and V. Ball, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7854 CrossRef CAS .
M. Michel, Y. Arntz, G. Fleith, J. Toquant, Y. Haikel, J.-C. Voegel, P. Schaaf and V. Ball, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2358 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tjipto, K. D. Cadwell, J. F. Quinn, A. P. R. Johnston, N. L. Abbott and F. Caruso, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2243 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Artyukhin, O. Bakajin, P. Stroeve and A. Noy, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1442 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mamedov, N. A. Kotov, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, J. P. Wicksted and A. Hirsch, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qin, D. Qin, W. T. Ford, Y. Zhang and N. A. Kotov, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2131 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ma, T. Sasaki and Y. Bando, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10382 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. G. Goulrt, D. S. dos Santos, Jr, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, O. N. Oliveira, Jr and R. F. Aroca, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5576 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. Markutsya and V. V. Tsukruk, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 882 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Ferreyra, E. S. Forzani, M. L. Teijelo, L. Coche-Guérente and P. Labbé, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 8931 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Halthur, P. M. Claesson and U. M. Elofsson, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 11065 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu and N. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23710 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5403 CrossRef CAS .
K. Karagiri, A. Matsuda and F. Caruso, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8067 CrossRef .
G. Schneider, G. Decher, N. Nerambourg, R. Praho, M. H. V. Werts and M. Blanchard-Desce, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 530 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Jaber and J. B. Schlenoff, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5768 CrossRef CAS .
B.-S. Kim, O. V. Lebedeva, D. H. Kim, A.-M. Caminade, J.-P. Majoral, W. Knoll and O. I. Vinogradova, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7200 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Biesheuvel, T. Mauser, G. B. Sukhorukov and H. Möhwald, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8480 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Tang, P. Podsiadlo, Y. Elkasabi, J. Lahann and N. A. Kotov, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. G. Kurth, H. Mohwald and D. Volkmer, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 225 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, H. Zhang, E. Wang, D. G. Kurth and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 654 RSC .
S. Liu, H. Möhwald, D. Volkmer and D. G. Kurth, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1949 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Mwaura, M. R. Pinto, D. Witker, N. Ananthakrishnan, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10119 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. K. Man, H. L. Wong and W. K. Chan, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 3368 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, K. L. Dzienis, J. Xu and Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 542 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Agrios, I. Cesar, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5395 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang, Z. Liu and Z. Q. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1068 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim and S. Jung, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6381 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cui, F. Hua and Y. Lvov, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2004, 51, 503 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cui, Y. Liu and M. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 183105 CrossRef .
A. J. Nolte, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3304 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, C. L. Li and N. Murase, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8913 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. DeLongchamp and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4799 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Han, I. Manners and M. A. Winnik, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3160 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, Y. Zheng, J. H. Cho, X. Xu and K. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20773 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhai, M. C. Berg, F. Ç. Cebeci, Y. Kim, J. M. Milwid, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1213 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2305 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Hollman and D. Bhattacharyya, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5418 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shiratori, Y. Inami and M. Kikuchi, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 393, 243 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Shutava, M. D. Prouty, V. E. Agabekov and Y. M. Lvov, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 1144 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Leväsalmi and T. J. McCarthy, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 1752 CrossRef .
F. van Ackern, L. Krasemann and B. Tieke, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 327–329, 762 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Kotov, S. Magonov and E. Tropsha, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 886 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sullivan and M. L. Bruening, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 281 CrossRef CAS .
L. Krasemann and B. Tieke, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 150, 23 CrossRef CAS .
J. Meier-Haack, W. Lenk, D. Lehmann and K. Lunkwitz, J. Membr. Sci., 2003, 184, 233 .
B. Tieke, F. van Ackern, L. Krasemann and A. Toutianoush, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2001, 5, 29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Toutianoush, L. Krasemann and B. Tieke, Colloids Surf., A, 2002, 198–200, 881 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Stanton, J. J. Harris, M. D. Miller and M. L. Bruening, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 7038 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and M. L. Bruening, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 351 CrossRef .
W. Jin, A. Toutianoush and B. Tieke, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 2550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. S. Chua and D. M. Lynn, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8015 CrossRef .
M.-K. Park, S. Deng and R. C. Advincula, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13723 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, A. J. Nolte, A. L. Kunz, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8521 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mauser, C. Déjugnat, H. Möhwald and G. B. Sukhorukov, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5888 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and F. Caruso, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4089 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. DeGeest, A. M. Jonas, J. Demeester and S. C. De Smedt, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5070 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, W.-F. Dong, M. A. Hempenius, H. Möhwald and G. J. Vansco, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 724 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, A. A. Patel, G. B. Sukhorukov and Y. M. Lvov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onda, Y. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1996, 51, 163 CrossRef .
M. Onda, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 1999, 87, 69 Search PubMed .
M. Onda, Y. Lvov, K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, J. Ferment. Bioeng., 1996, 82, 502 Search PubMed .
D. M. Dotzauer, J. Dai, L. Sun and M. L. Bruening, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2268 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin and H. Möhwald, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5582 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Constantine, S. V. Mello, A. Dupont, X. Cao, D. Santos Jr, O. N. Oliveira Jr, F. T. Strixino, E. C. Pereira, T.-C. Cheng, J. J. Defrank and R. M. Leblanc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1805 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dennany, R. J. Forster, B. White, M. Smyth and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8835 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, J. Yang, C. Estavillo, J. D. Stuart, J. B. Schenkman and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 1431 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Calvo, C. B. danilowicz and A. Wolosiuk, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 1800 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. P. Joshi, K. L. Hobbs, M. B. Johnson and D. W. Schmidtke, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9776 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krol, S. del Guerra, M. Grupillo, A. Diaspo, A. Gliozzi and P. Marchetti, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1933 CrossRef CAS .
P. Podsiadlo, S. Paternel, J.-M. Rouillard, Z. Zhang, J. Lee, J.-W. Lee, E. Gulari and N. A. Kotov, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11915 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ai, S. A. JonesA, M. M. de Villiers and Y. M. Lvov, J. Controlled Release, 2003, 86, 59 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shutava, Z. Zheng, V. John and Y. Lvov, Biomacromolecules, 2004, 5, 914 CrossRef CAS .
G. Krishna, T. Shutava and Y. Lvov, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2796 RSC .
N. Pargaonkar, Y. M. Lvov, N. Li, J. H. Steenekamp and M. M. de Villiers, Pharm. Res., 2005, 22, 826 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, D. S. Kommrieddy, Y. Lvov, W. Liebenberg, L. R. Tiedt and M. de Villers, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 3252 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8501 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tokuhisa and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 831 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Yang and M. F. Rubner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2100 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hua, T. Cui and Y. M. Lvov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 823 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Shchukin, D. S. Kommireddy, Y. Zhao, T. Cui, G. B. Sukhorukov and Y. M. Lvov, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 389 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Forry, D. R. Reyes, M. Gaitan and L. Locascio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 13678 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2007
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Outline of LbL assembly through electrostatic interaction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Modified LbL methods for preparation of three-dimensional micro- and nanostructures: (A) LbL assembly on particle template and hollow capsule formation; (B) nanotube synthesis through LbL assembly using porous templates.	 

 	Fig. 3  LbL assembly through hydrogen bonding; (A) formation of non-centrosymmetric layers; (B) hydrogen bonded assembly between polymer brush and linear chain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 194, S. Keinan et al., Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1848. ©2004, American Chemical Society and from ref. 196, S. Yang et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 338. ©2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  LbL assembly through covalent bond formation; (A) LbL assembly based on Click chemistry; (B) nanotube synthesis through covalent-bond-based LbL assembly. Reprint with permission from ref. 200, G. K. Such et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9318. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 201, Y. Tian et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 360. ©2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Advanced techniques for LbL assembly; (A) spin-coating LbL assembly; (B) spraying LbL assembly. Reprint with permission from ref. 237, A. Izquierdo et al., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7558. ©2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Etching processes on the LbL films; (A) formation of nanoporous structure; (B) preparation of free-standing film. Reprint with permission from ref. 240, Q. Li et al., Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5480. ©2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Modification of carbon nanotube with LbL assembly; (A) wrapping of carbon nanotube upon LbL assembly through interaction with pyrene derivative; (B) components for covalently linked LbL assembly between carbon nanotube and polymer. Reprint with permission from ref. 263, A. B. Artyukhini et al., Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1442. ©2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Evaluation of physicochemical properties using LbL assemblies; (A) distance-dependent fluorescence quenching LbL assemblies on gold particle; (B) measurement of mechanical properties using cantilever technique. Reprint with permission from ref. 274, G. Schneider and G. Decher, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 530. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 276, B.-S. Kim et al., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7200. ©2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Device structures based on LbL films; (A) photovoltaic cell composed of PPE and fullerene derivative; (B) FET composed of inorganic nanoparticles and polyelectrolytes. Reprint with permission from ref. 282, J. K. Mwaura et al., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10119. ©2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  DNA release from LbL film made of degradable polyamine. Reprint with permission from ref. 311, J. Zhang et al., Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8015. ©2004, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Stimuli-responsive LbL capsules; (A) with stimuli of pH and Ca ion; (B) with stimulus of sugar. Reprint with permission from ref. 314, T. Mauser et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5888. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 316, B. G. De Geest et al., Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5070. ©2006, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Multi-enzyme reactor of LbL film on ultrafilter.	 

 	Fig. 13  LbL-type catalysts; (A) gold nanoparticle catalysts immobilized within porous support; (B) titania photocatalyst confined in LbL capsule. Reprint with permission from ref. 322, D. N. Dotzauer et al., Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2268. ©2006, American Chemical Society and from ref. 323, D. G. Shchukin and H. Möhwald., Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5582. ©2005, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Preparation of free-standing cantilever using LbL method and microfabrication techniques. Reprint with permission from ref. 339, F. Hua et al., Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 823. ©2004, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2007
