High and stable photoelectrochemical activity of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/Cu x S core–shell nanowire arrays: nanoporous surface with Cu x S as a hole mediator   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP01421B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP01421B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 14827-14835High and stable photoelectrochemical activity of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell nanowire arrays: nanoporous surface with CuxS as a hole mediator†

        
          
            Wei-Xin 
            Ouyang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yu-Xiang 
            Yu
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Wei-De 
            Zhang
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, South China University of Technology, 381 Wushan Road, Guangzhou 510640, People’s Republic of China. E-mail: yuyx@scut.edu.cn; zhangwd@scut.edu.cn;  Fax: 86-20-8711-4099;   Tel: 86-20-8711-4099
Received 
      11th March 2015
    , Accepted 1st May 2015First published on 1st May 2015AbstractAdvanced materials for electrocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting are key for taking advantage of renewable energy. In this study, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell nanowire arrays with a nanoporous surface were fabricated via ion exchange and successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) processes. The ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample displays a high photocurrent density of 12.0 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5G illumination, achieves the highest IPCE value of 89.5% at 500 nm at a bias potential of 0.2 V versus Ag/AgCl, and exhibits greatly improved photostability. The functions of the ZnSe, CdSe, and CuxS layers in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS heterostructure were clarified. ZnSe is used as a passivation layer to reduce the trapping and recombination of charge carriers at the interfaces of the semiconductors. CdSe functions as a highly efficient visible light absorber and builds heterojunctions with the other components to improve the separation and transportation of the photoinduced electrons and holes. CuxS serves as a passivation layer and an effective p-type hole mediator, which passivates the defects and surface states of the semiconductors and forms p–n junctions with CdSe to promote the hole transportation at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. The nanoporous surface of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell nanowire arrays, together with the tunnel transportation of the charge carriers in the thin films of ZnSe and CdSe, also facilitates the kinetics of photoelectrochemical reactions and improves the optical absorption as well.
1. Introduction
Making full use of the enormous solar energy on the Earth is a promising solution to resolve the energy crisis and energy-related environmental problems.1–3 Nowadays, there are still a number of obstacles to achieve efficient capture, conversion, and storage of solar energy.4 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting offers an ideal route to realize the conversion of solar energy to renewable and clean hydrogen fuel.5–8 At present, the crux of this energy conversion process lies in finding highly efficient and stable photoelectrodes.9–13 Though a variety of semiconductor materials have been investigated as photoanodes or photocathodes, the intrinsic properties of a single semiconductor often restrict its efficiency of photoelectrochemical water splitting. For example, wide bandgap semiconductors such as TiO2 and ZnO usually demonstrate poor photocatalytic properties under sunlight irradiation, because they can only take advantage of UV light, which makes up less than 5% of solar energy,14–16 whereas narrow band gap semiconductors, such as CdSe and CdS, often suffer from severe recombination of charge carriers and photocorrosion though they can capture most of the sunlight.17 An effective way to cope with these issues is to build heterojunctions, which can take advantage of not only the excellent visible light absorption of narrow band gap semiconductors, but also the high electron mobility and stability of wide band gap semiconductors. Moreover, the modulation of crystalline structures and the modification of semiconductor surfaces by chemical and physical treatments provide additional routes to adjust their photocatalytic properties.18–20
ZnO nanowire arrays possess improved light scattering characteristics, high surface-to-volume ratio and effective electron transport pathways along the longitudinal direction and thus are considered to be excellent candidates for constructing photoelectrochemical systems with high performance.21–25 ZnO nanowire arrays sheathed with narrow band gap semiconductor shells with favorable band alignments, which achieve enhanced light absorption and improved photocatalytic properties, have emerged as novel photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical systems or solar cells.26–30 CdSe is an n-type semiconductor with a narrow band gap of 1.74 eV. Owing to its large extinction coefficient and appropriate band gap, its light absorption is well matched with the solar spectrum. Chouhan and his colleagues fabricated CdSe QD-sensitized ZnO nanorod arrays for photoelectrochemical water splitting. A 6-fold increase in photocurrent density was observed for CdSe QD-sensitized nanorod arrays over pristine ZnO samples and the highest photocurrent density of 2.48 mA cm−2 was registered at an applied voltage of 0 V and a power density of 100 mW cm−2.31 Nevertheless, the defect and surface states of ZnO and CdSe will inevitably cause trapping and recombination of the charge carriers at the semiconductor interfaces, which limits their photoelectrochemical activity. To reduce the depletion and leakage of photoinduced electrons and holes, a buffer or passivation layer positioned between the selenide and the oxide is necessary. ZnSe is an environmentally friendly n-type semiconductor with a band gap of 2.67 eV. Due to its higher conduction band edge compared to ZnO, it can cooperate with ZnO to construct type-II heterojunctions32 and function as a buffer or passivation layer in ZnO-based photovoltaic applications to contribute to their superior photovoltaic performance.33 Furthermore, analogous to CdS, CdSe suffers from photocorrosion in aqueous solutions and exhibits poor hole transfer between the semiconductors and electrolytes.34 Polysulfide electrolytes are adopted to prolong the stability of cadmium chalcogenide sensitizers, but the results are not satisfactory to date.35 In solar cells, CuI, CuSCN and CuxS usually act as effective and cheap inorganic p-type hole-transporting materials to improve the interfacial charge transfer kinetics.36–38 When CuxS, which is a group of narrow band gap semiconductors with p-type behavior, is deposited onto CdSe, it serves as a surface passivation layer and an effective p-type hole mediator to reduce the photocorrosion of CdSe. In addition, p–n junctions may form between CuxS and the selenides, which facilitate the separation and transportation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs.
In addition, the surface structure also plays a critical role on the photoelectrochemical properties of an electrode. When compared with a flat surface, a nanoporous surface provides larger surface area and more reactive sites, which improve the kinetics of the photoelectrochemical processes. Moreover, light scattering within the nanoporous structure enhances the absorption of light. When the particle size is smaller than the hole diffusion length of the semiconductor, bulk carrier recombination can be effectively suppressed.20,39,43,44
Based on the aforementioned points, we have constructed ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell nanowire arrays with nanoporous surfaces via a facile ion exchange and successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) methods. In situ ion exchange ensures the formation of close and uniform layers on ZnO nanowires. The proportion of the different components, which influences the optical absorption and photoelectrochemical properties of the heterostructure, was optimized by adjusting the preparation conditions. The ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell heterostructure revealed a high and stable photocurrent density under AM 1.5G illumination. The absence of CdSe, ZnSe or CuxS layer decreases the photoelectrochemical activity and stability, which proves the indispensable contribution of the shell layers to its high photoelectrochemical performance. Therefore, it can be concluded that constructing core–shell heterostructures with nanoporous surfaces and taking advantage of the specific functional layers holds great promise for building highly efficient and stable photocatalysts for solar cells and photoelectrochemical devices.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Preparation of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanowire arrays
All chemicals were used without further purification. Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and Na2S·9H2O were purchased from Guangzhou Chemical Reagent Factory, China. Hexamethylenetetramine (C6H12N4) and CuSO4 were purchased from Chengdu Union Chemical Industry Reagent Institute, China. Cd(NO3)2·4H2O and Na2S2O3 were obtained from Kermel Chemical Reagent Company, Tianjin, China, and Tianjin FuChen Chemical Reagents Factory, respectively. The above-mentioned reagents were all of analytical grade. Se powder (99.9%) and NaBH4 (96%) were purchased from Chengdu KeLong Chemical Reagent Company and Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company, respectively. Deionized water (resistivity >18.4 MΩ cm) was obtained from a pure water system (GWA-UN). FTO coated glass substrates (30 mm × 10 mm) were purchased from Nippon Sheet Glass Company. The preparation process used for the samples is illustrated in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  The preparation process for the core–shell nanowire arrays. 
The preparation of ZnO nanowire arrays was depicted as follows.25 Typically, a clean FTO (Fluorine-doped tin oxide) substrate was soaked in a 5 mmol L−1 Zn(CH3COO)2 ethanol solution, and then calcined at 350 °C for 30 min to form ZnO nanocrystals as seeds for the growth of ZnO nanowire arrays. The seeded FTO substrate was then immersed into a precursor solution containing 25 mmol L−1 Zn(CH3COO)2, 25 mmol L−1 hexamethylenetetramine and 6 mmol L−1 polyethylenimine (branched, low molecular weight, Aldrich) at 95 °C for 3 h. To prolong the length of the ZnO nanowires, this hydrothermal process was repeated twice with the replacement of new precursor solution each time. After being washed and dried, the as-synthesized sample was annealed at 400 °C for 1 h to improve the crystallinity of the nanowires and decrease the interfacial defects.
ZnO nanowire arrays were converted to ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe core–shell nanowire arrays via sequential ion-exchange processes, which were driven by the difference in the solubility product constants of ZnO (Ksp = 6.8 × 10−17), ZnSe (3.6 × 10−26), and CdSe (6.3 × 10−36). A solution containing Se2− was first prepared by mixing 0.030 g Se powder with 0.20 g NaBH4 in 50 mL of deionized water. Then, the solution was stirred and heated at 55 °C until the Se powder was totally dissolved. Under these conditions, the ZnO nanowires arrays were immersed into this solution for 1 h to fabricate the ZnO/ZnSe nanowire arrays. After that, the ZnO/ZnSe sample was placed into a Teflon-lined stainless autoclave, which contained a 25 mmol L−1 Cd(NO3)2 aqueous solution, at 95 °C for 6 h to prepare the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanowire arrays. By increasing the concentration of the Cd(NO3)2 aqueous solution and prolonging the reaction time, the ZnSe layer can be totally depleted, and thus ZnO/CdSe nanowire arrays were obtained.
2.2 Deposition of CuxS onto the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanowire arrays
CuxS was deposited onto the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe nanowire arrays via a SILAR process. To achieve this, 0.16 g of anhydrous CuSO4 was dissolved in 8 mL of deionized water to form solution A, and 1.0 g of Na2S2O3 was dissolved in 40 mL of deionized water to form solution B. An aqueous solution of Cu+ was prepared by mixing solution A and B. Once mixed, the solution turned transient greenish quickly, and then became colorless and clear. The ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe samples were immersed into the solution for 20 s, followed by a 1 minute immersion in a 0.10 mol L−1 aqueous solution of Na2S. After being washed and dried, the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS nanowire arrays were prepared.
2.3 Characterization of the samples
The crystal structures of the samples were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using an X’ Pert MPD Pro X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The morphology of the as-prepared samples was examined by scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, Merlin Compact, Carl Zeiss) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G220, FEI). UV-vis spectroscopy was conducted with a Hitachi U3010 spectrophotometer using BaSO4 as a reference. Information on the elemental composition and valencies of the elements on the surface of the samples were acquired using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250XI, Thermo).
2.4 Electrochemical measurements
All electrochemical measurements were conducted using a Chenghua electrochemical workstation (CHI660C, Shanghai). A three-electrode configuration in a quartz cell was assembled. The prepared sample, a Pt plate and a commercial saturated Ag/AgCl electrode served as the working electrode, counter electrode, and reference electrode, respectively. The effective surface area of the working electrode was set at 0.65 × 0.65 cm2. All the potentials were referenced to the saturated Ag/AgCl electrode. The electrolyte was a mixed aqueous solution containing 0.50 mol L−1 Na2S and 0.50 mol L−1 Na2SO3. AM 1.5G solar simulator (Oriel model 91192) was used as an irradiation source with an output intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The linear sweep voltammograms were scanned at 20 mV s−1 in a potential range from −1.33 to 0.6 V versus Ag/AgCl both in the dark and under irradiation. The chronoamperometry curves were recorded at a bias potential of −0.2 V versus Ag/AgCl. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) were conducted in a frequency range of 1–105 Hz with instant open circuit voltages as the initial potentials and an AC potential amplitude of 5 mV.
A 500 W Xe lamp (CHF-XM-500, Changtuo Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China) and a monochromator (monochromator 300, Changtuo Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China) were used together as the light source for measuring the wavelength-dependent photoresponses of the samples. A radiometer (PM120VA, Thorlabs) was employed to measure the monochromatic light intensity. By recording the wavelength-dependent photocurrent densities (I) generated at specific wavelengths (λ) and the monochromatic light intensities (Jlight) of the light source, the incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) can be calculated using the following formula:IPCE = 1240I (mA cm−2)/[λ (nm) Jlight (mW cm−2)]
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Preparation and characterization of ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS nanowire arrays
ZnO nanowire arrays were grown on FTO substrates by a hydrothermal process, and then the ZnO/ZnSe and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe samples were prepared from ZnO nanowires via sequential ion-exchange reactions. The XRD patterns for these samples are presented in Fig. 1. The diffraction peaks of the ZnO sample match well with hexagonal phase ZnO (JPCDS 65-3411). After ZnO reacted with Se2−, a ZnSe layer formed on the surface of the ZnO nanowires. Correspondingly, new peaks appear at 2θ of 27.2° and 45.2°, which are indexed to cubic ZnSe (JPCDS 37-1463). Further ion exchange process in the Cd2+ solution resulted in a CdSe layer being generated on the surface of ZnO/ZnSe nanowires. The diffraction peaks emerging at 2θ of 25.5° and 42.2° correspond to cubic CdSe (JPCDS 65-2891). It is worth noting that the diffraction peaks from CdSe and ZnSe become broadened, which indicates that the CdSe and ZnSe layers are composed of nanocrystals. It is noted that the characteristic diffraction peaks of CuxS are barely observed upon the deposition of CuxS (Fig. S1, ESI†). This is probably because the amount of CuxS is too small or the deposited CuxS is amorphous.
 Fig. 1  XRD patterns for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, and (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe samples. Peaks from FTO are indicated with #. 

Fig. 2 displays the top-view SEM images of the sequentially grown nanowire arrays. From Fig. 2A, it is seen that the perpendicularly aligned ZnO nanowires are regular hexagonal prisms with diameters of 60–150 nm. These straight and angular nanowires comprise smooth and even lateral surfaces, as well as flat top surfaces. As shown in Fig. 2B, the ZnO/ZnSe sample is composed of nanowires and small particles with narrow size distribution, which are evenly attached on the surfaces of the nanowires. After ion exchange with Cd2+ and subsequent deposition of the CuxS layer, the particles grow larger and denser step by step, forming a tight and conformal coverage of the nanowires (Fig. 2C and D). The EDX analysis of the final products shows that Zn, Cd, Cu, Se, S and O co-exist (Fig. 2E). The atomic ratio of Cu(I) to Cu(II) in CuxS is about 0.41. Through the series of ion exchange and SILAR processes, the morphology of the nanowire arrays was retained, whereas the edges and corners of the nanowires gradually turned indistinct and rough, which indicates that the new phases were formed and the conversion reactions were realized.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, and (D) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. The insets are the corresponding high resolution images. (E) EDS analysis for ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS. 
To probe the microstructures of the final product, the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample was further examined using TEM (Fig. 3A, C and D), STEM mapping (inset Fig. 3A) and high-resolution SEM (Fig. 3B). From Fig. 3A, it is observed that a single nanowire consists of a cylinder-like inner core and an intimately attached outer layer, which looks like an overused roller brush. The thickness of each layer is uneven (STEM mapping). The ZnO core layer is about 30–50 nm, the ZnSe layer is about 1–10 nm and the CdSe layer is about 1–15 nm. The CuxS layer cannot be recognized (less than 1 nm). Fig. 3B and D clearly show that a lot of irregular antenna-like nanoparticles have grown on the nanowire and formed a nanoporous shell. Because of the different crystallographic lattice constants of ZnO, ZnSe and CdSe, the smooth facets of ZnO were gradually etched into a nanoporous shell during the ion-exchange process. It provides the nanowire with a large surface area and considerable reaction sites, which can improve the kinetics of the photoelectrochemical processes and enhance the optical absorption of the nanowire arrays. Moreover, the nanoporous structure can effectively suppress bulk carrier recombination because the particles (particle size 5–15 nm) are smaller than the hole diffusion length of CdSe (60–110 nm).20,39 As verified by the unitary and clear lattice fringes shown in Fig. 3C, the whole core is constituted of a monocrystal and its fringe spacing of 0.26 nm matches with the (002) planes of the hexagonal ZnO. In addition, the outer layer is formed by a large amount of closely packed but randomly oriented nanoparticles. It is found that the fringe spacings of 0.35 and 0.32 nm correspond well with the interplanar spacings of the (111) planes of the cubic CdSe and the (111) planes of the cubic ZnSe. The TEM observation is in accordance with the XRD results. However, the lattice fringes related to CuxS were not observed. It is believed that the deposited CuxS is amorphous.
 Fig. 3  TEM (A), HRSEM (B) and HRTEM (C, D) images of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample. 
The XPS spectra of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample are depicted in Fig. S2 (ESI†) and Fig. 4. As expected, six elements are detected on the sample surface, i.e., Zn, O, Se, Cd, Cu, and S. According to the centered binding energy values of peaks from different elements, the valence states of Zn, O, Se, and Cd presented on the surface are determined to be +2, −2, −2, and +2, respectively. This confirms the existence of ZnO, ZnSe and CdSe, supporting both the XRD and TEM results. The Cu 2p peaks centered at 932.3 and 952.0 eV are assigned to the binding energy of Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2, respectively. In addition, there are several weak satellite peaks, which are the evidence of divalent Cu-species. The S 2p band consists of three peaks, 162.0 eV for S2− (Cu2S and CuS) and 164.2 eV for S22−. The higher energy peak position (167.8 eV) is assigned to the oxidized S species such as SO42− in the case of the oxidized surface for S2− or the absorption of SO42−. This phenomenon is in accordance with the literature.45,46 In addition to the considerably lower relative intensities of Cu and S peaks, it is believed that a small quantity of CuxS is deposited on the surface of the nanowires.
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra for Cu and S in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample. 

Fig. 5 shows the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of ZnO, ZnO/ZnSe, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. The absorption edge of the ZnO sample is 398 nm, which is related to its wide band gap and shows that its optical absorption is limited to the UV region. Upon anion exchange with Se2−, the optical absorption range of the ZnO/ZnSe sample extends to 490 nm and includes a small portion of visible light absorption. After cation exchange with Cd2+, the absorption edge of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe sample shifts to 730 nm and it can absorb most of the visible light due to the narrow band gap of CdSe. When CdSe was completely replaced by ZnSe, the absorption edge shifts to 750 nm. In addition, the deposition of CuxS also extends the absorption edge towards a longer wavelength and shows a small proportion of absorption in near infrared region simultaneously. These results reveal that ZnSe, CdSe and CuxS can increase the visible light absorption of the heterostructures.
 Fig. 5  UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. 
3.2 Photoelectrochemical properties
Electrochemical measurements such as the current–potential characteristic and the potentiostatic current–time transient response testing were adopted to evaluate the photoelectrochemical properties of the prepared samples. Fig. 6 displays the results of linear sweep voltammograms conducted both in the dark and under AM 1.5G illumination. Because there is no significant distinction among the current curves recorded in the dark, only the dark current curve of the ZnO sample is displayed as a representative. As illustrated in Fig. 6A, the ZnO sample yields considerably low photocurrent under illumination. The incorporation of ZnSe increases the photocurrent insignificantly. However, the sequential combination of CdSe and CuxS causes a stepwise and significant enhancement in the photocurrent. When compared to ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, the ZnO/CdSe sample demonstrates a certain degree of decay in the photocurrent. The measured current densities of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS, and ZnO/CdSe samples reach 11.3, 16.7, and 9.3 mA cm−2 at 0.25 V versus Ag/AgCl, respectively. As far as we known, 16.7 mA cm−2 is the highest value ever reported for II–VI group semiconductor sensitized ZnO nanowire/nanorod array photoelectrodes (Table S1, ESI†). In addition, the estimated onset potentials of the ZnO, ZnO/ZnSe, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples are −0.72, −0.77, −1.13, and −1.17 V, respectively. The stepwise negative shift in the onset potentials demonstrates the passivation of surface states and the improvement of the interfacial charge transportation in the heterostructures.40 The onset potential of the ZnO/CdSe sample is about −1.09 V, which lies between those of the ZnO/ZnSe and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe samples. It is supposed that the excessive consumption of the ZnSe layer results in the trapping and recombination of charge carriers at the semiconductor interfaces.47
 Fig. 6  
J–V curves for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. Scan rate: 20 mV s−1. 

Fig. 7 displays the photocurrent responses of the ZnO, ZnO/ZnSe, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, ZnO/CdSe, and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples at an applied potential of −0.2 V versus Ag/AgCl. The current densities of all the samples in the dark approach zero and are nearly coincidental. Once the simulated solar illumination is on, the photocurrents immediately peak and then decay to achieve steady states. The photocurrent density of the ZnO sample is 0.86 mA cm−2 and the partial conversion of ZnO to ZnSe slightly increases the current density to 1.1 mA cm−2. The loading of CdSe causes a significant increase in the photocurrent density to 9.5 mA cm−2 during the first cycle. However, the photocurrent density of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe sample gradually decays in the following cycles, which demonstrates its relatively poor stability. The ZnO/CdSe sample yields a lower photocurrent density of 7.2 mA cm−2 and suffers from even more serious photocorrosion, and its photocurrent density becomes even lower after another two cycles of tests. In addition, the deposition of CuxS not only improves the photocurrent density to 12.0 mA cm−2, but also preserves a good reproducibility in all cycles, which reveals an increased photoelectrochemical activity and enhanced stability. When exposed to the 1800 second light irradiation, the photocurrent of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample retains 85% of its initial value, whereas the photocurrents of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe and ZnO/CdSe samples decay to 56.8% and 29.2%, respectively. In addition, from ZnO/CdSe to ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe and then to ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS, the time intervals for the photocurrents to decay from the peaks to the steady states gradually increase, which is related to the competition between electron–hole recombination and charge collection. The longer decay time corresponds to a longer lifetime of photoinduced charge carriers,41 which contributes to the higher performance found for the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample.
 Fig. 7  
I–t curves for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. 
3.3 Mechanism

Fig. 8 shows the electrochemical impedance spectra (Nyquist plots) of the samples scanned from 105 to 1 Hz both in the dark and under visible light. The Nyquist plots can help interpret the separation efficiency of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs, as well as the charge transfer resistance. A smaller circular radius corresponds to more efficient separation and transportation of the charge carriers.42 As depicted in Fig. 8, the circular radius of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample is the smallest among the samples both in dark and under visible light. The fact helps interpret the improvement of photoelectrochemical properties via the deposition of CuxS, which benefits from the enhanced charge separation and transportation efficiency. In addition, the circular radius of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe sample is smaller than that of ZnO, ZnO/ZnSe, and ZnO/CdSe. Thus, it can be inferred that the attachment of ZnSe and CdSe facilitates the separation and transportation of electrons and holes in the heterostructure, while the depletion of the ZnSe layer increases the charge transfer resistance at the interfaces.
 Fig. 8  Electrochemical impedance spectra for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples under visible light (solid lines) and in the dark (dash lines). 
To evaluate the photoelectrochemical efficiency of the samples as a function of illumination wavelength, the IPCE measurements were conducted at a bias potential of −0.2 V versus Ag/AgCl. Fig. 9 displays the IPCE curves for the ZnO, ZnO/ZnSe, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, ZnO/CdSe, and ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. The photoresponse of the ZnO sample is limited in the UV region; the ZnO/ZnSe sample extends its photoresponse to the visible region. The photoresponse range of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe sample is radically enlarged to 730 nm, which is in good agreement with the results obtained from the UV-vis spectrum. In addition, the IPCE under visible light is significantly amplified. This is related to the narrow band gap and multiple exciton generation effect of CdSe, which results in the enhancement of light absorption and an increase in the number of electron–hole pairs generated per incident photon flux. The depletion of the ZnSe layer reduces the entire IPCE values of the ZnO/CdSe sample in the whole region. This is because the absence of ZnSe increases the trapping and recombination of electrons and holes at the semiconductor interfaces, which decreases the utilization efficiency of the photoinduced charge carriers. The ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample has a slightly extended wavelength range of photoresponse compared with the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe sample; in addition, the IPCE in both the UV and visible regions increases and a highest IPCE of 89.5% is achieved at 500 nm. It is worth-noting that the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample clearly shows infrared absorption according to the UV-vis DRS results, whereas the IPCE values in the near infrared region is negligible. This might result from the competitive infrared absorption of the electrolyte. The CuxS layer directly passivates the defect states on the CdSe surface and functions as an effective p-type hole mediator layer to promote the transportation of holes toward the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. The p–n junctions formed between CuxS and CdSe improves the efficiency of interfacial separation and the transportation of charge carriers, all of which favor the increase of the IPCE.
 Fig. 9  IPCE curves for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. 
According to the results described above, ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell nanowire arrays present ultra-high visible light photoelectrochemical activity and high stability. As both the starting material and the core of the samples, ZnO nanowire arrays endow them nanoforest-like characteristics and offer direct pathways for efficient electron transportation. The ZnSe layer can block the surface states of ZnO and decrease the recombination possibility of the photoinduced charge carriers between ZnO and CdSe. The CdSe layer is adopted as a highly efficient visible light captor to produce the photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Moreover, the nanoporous CdSe layer is composed of nanocrystals, which suppress bulk carrier recombination and provide a high specific surface area and appreciable reactive sites to improve the kinetics of the photoelectrochemical reactions, as well as a rough surface to increase the harvest and utilization of incident light. The core–shell heterostructures also facilitate the separation and transportation of the photoinduced electrons and holes. Further deposition of CuxS passivates the defect and surface states in the semiconductors and promotes hole transportation at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface, which decreases the photocorrosion of CdSe and improves the stability of the heterostructure. The p–n junctions formed between CdSe and CuxS further enhance the photoelectrochemical performance of the nanowire arrays. Scheme 2 illustrates the behaviors of the photoinduced charge carriers in the photoelectrochemical water splitting process over the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample. The ion exchange on the walls of the nanowires may result in an uneven coating. In some domains of the core–shell nanowires, the intermediate ZnSe layer between ZnO and CdSe is so thin (1–0 nm) that the tunnel transportation of the charge carriers is realized. The tunneling could also happen in the CdSe layer. So upon visible light illumination, the photoinduced electron–hole pairs emerge in CuxS, CdSe, and ZnSe. The photoinduced electrons are excited to the conduction bands of the semiconductors and the holes are left at the corresponding valence bands. Due to the potential gradients originating from the relative positions of their energy levels, the excited electrons in CuxS flow to the conduction band of CdSe and then, together with the electrons from CdSe and ZnSe, cascade to the conduction band of ZnO. The electrons are collected, transferred through the ZnO nanowires to the FTO substrate, and then go through the external circuit to the counter electrode to produce hydrogen. In addition, the holes in the valence bands of ZnSe and CdSe flow to those of CuxS and then react with the hole scavengers in the polysulfide electrolyte. The nanoporous surface, core–shell heterostructure, appropriate bandgap alignment, and specific functions of the different layers in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample contribute to its high photoelectrochemical performance.
 Scheme 2  Separation and transportation processes for the photoinduced charge carriers in ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS. 
4. Conclusions
ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS core–shell nanowire arrays perpendicularly aligned on FTO glass substrates were constructed using sequential ion exchange and SILAR processes. A single nanowire in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample is composed of a ZnO core, which is covered tightly by conformal ZnSe, CdSe and CuxS multiple layers as the shells. The ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample demonstrates a high photocurrent density of 12.0 mA cm−2, very high incident photon to electron conversion efficiency, and greatly improved photostability. In such a core–shell heterostructure, the ZnO core serves as the pathway for efficient electron collection and transportation. ZnSe is used as a passivation layer to block the surface states of ZnO and reduce the trapping and recombination of the charge carriers at the semiconductor interfaces. CdSe functions as a highly efficient absorber to capture a great quantity of visible light and build core–shell heterostructures of favorable band gap alignment with other semiconductors to improve the separation and transportation of the photoinduced electron–hole pairs. The ZnSe and CdSe layers are composed of nanoparticles with small size, which form a nanoporous surface to improve the optical absorption and facilitate the kinetics of photoelectrochemical processes. The CuxS serves as a passivation layer and a hole mediator, which passivates the defect and surface states of the semiconductors and reduces the photocorrosion of CdSe. Thus, the photostability of the sample is greatly improved. In addition, the p–n junction formed between CuxS and CdSe promotes hole transportation at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. All these contribute to the enhancement of the photoelectrochemical performance of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe core–shell nanowire arrays. This study demonstrates that the construction of core–shell heterostructures and the utilization of specific functional layers hold great promise for massively fabricating highly efficient and stable photocatalysts for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production or other optoelectronic devices.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21003051 and 21273080) and Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (No. 2014A030311039) for financial support.
Notes and references
N. Serpone and A. V. Emeline, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 673–677 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Ma and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206–4219 RSC .
Y. Horiuchi, T. Toyao, M. Takeuchi, M. Matsuoka and M. Anpo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13243–13253 RSC .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 20142 CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y.-X. Yu and W.-D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12949–12957 CAS .
Y. Q. Liang and J. Messinger, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12014–12020 RSC .
A. Ziani, E. Nurlaela, D. S. Dhawale, D. A. Silva, E. Alarousu, O. F. Mohammed and K. Takanabe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 2670–2677 RSC .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6167–6174 RSC .
R. M. Navarro, M. Consuelo Alvarez-Galvan, J. A. de la Mano, S. M. Villoria Al-Zahrani and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1865–1882 CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhiyong and J. G. Lu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 1561–1573 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang and W.-D. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 71, 10–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Xie, X. D. Fu, L. Q. Jing, P. Luan, Y. J. Feng and H. G. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 130995 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
L. Q. Jing, B. Q. Wang, B. F. Xin, S. D. Li, K. Y. Shi, W. M. Cai and H. G. Fu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 4221–4227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, G. Wang, S. Xie, J. Shi, W. Li, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7717–7719 RSC .
Y. f. Gao, M. Nagai, T.-C. Chang and J.-J. Shyue, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2467–2471 CAS .
Y.-X. Yu, W.-X. Ouyang, Z.-T. Liao, B.-B. Du and W.-D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8467–8474 CAS .
C. X. Guo, Y. Q. Dong, H. B. Yang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, P. Shin, L. Cao and D. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 125–129 CAS .
Y. Myung, D. M. Jang, T. K. Sung, Y. J. Sohn, G. B. Jung, Y. J. Cho, H. S. Kim and J. Park, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3789–3800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Yang, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1088–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Seol, J.-W. Jang, S. Cho, J. S. Lee and K. Yong, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 184–187 CrossRef CAS .
L.-C. Jiang, W.-D. Zhang, Y.-X. Yu and J. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 627–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, H. B. Yang, S. Y. Khoo and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11118–11124 RSC .
N. Chouhan, C. L. Yeh, S. F. Hu, J. H. Huang, C. W. Tsai, R. S. Liu, W. S. Chang and K. H. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1430–B1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zheng, Z. M. Wu, W. H. Yang, S. P. Li and J. Y. Kang, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 1272–1277 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, X. Yang, Q.-D. Yang, T.-L. Wong, S.-T. Lee, W.-J. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13374–13379 RSC .
W. Lee, H. J. Son, D.-K. Lee, B. S. Kim, H. Kim, K. Kim and M. J. Ko, Synth. Met., 2013, 165, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1467–1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Radich, N. R. Peeples, P. K. Santra and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(30), 16463–16471 CAS .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CAS .
R. K. Pandeyt, R. B. Goret and A. J. N. RoozS, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1987, 20, 1059–1062 CrossRef .
H. S. Hilal and J. A. Turner, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 6487–6497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, H. Yu, X. Li and S. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 1630–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dai, J. Yu and G. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7339–7346 CAS .
J. Oh, T. G. Deutsch, H.-C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1690–1694 CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Zhou, J. Bai, J. Li, J. Zhang, Q. Zheng, X. Zhu and W. Cai, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 142–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Kim, S. H. Choi and J. H. Bang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22078–22087 CAS .
Y. Xie, A. Riedinger, M. Prato, A. Casu, A. Genovese, P. Guardia, S. Sottini, C. Sangregorio, K. Miszta, S. Ghosh, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17630–17637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, H. Yoshihara, K. Takebayashi and T. Yao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 1678–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp01421bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  The preparation process for the core–shell nanowire arrays.	 
IPCE = 1240I (mA cm−2)/[λ (nm) Jlight (mW cm−2)]

 	Fig. 1  XRD patterns for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, and (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe samples. Peaks from FTO are indicated with #.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, and (D) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. The insets are the corresponding high resolution images. (E) EDS analysis for ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM (A), HRSEM (B) and HRTEM (C, D) images of the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra for Cu and S in the ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS sample.	 

 	Fig. 5  UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples.	 

 	Fig. 6  
J–V curves for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples. Scan rate: 20 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 7  
I–t curves for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrochemical impedance spectra for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples under visible light (solid lines) and in the dark (dash lines).	 

 	Fig. 9  IPCE curves for the (A) ZnO, (B) ZnO/ZnSe, (C) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe, (D) ZnO/CdSe, and (E) ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS samples.	 

 	Scheme 2  Separation and transportation processes for the photoinduced charge carriers in ZnO/ZnSe/CdSe/CuxS.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5cp01421b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
