Metal–air batteries: from oxygen  reduction electrochemistry to cathode catalysts  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CS15228A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CS15228A
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172-2192Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsMetal–air batteries: from oxygen reduction electrochemistry to cathode catalysts

        
          
            Fangyi 
            Cheng
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Chemistry College, Nankai University, Tianjin, 300071, People's Republic of China. E-mail: chenabc@nankai.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-22-23506808;   Tel: +86-22-23506808
Received 
      27th August 2011
    First published on 17th January 2012AbstractBecause of the remarkably high theoretical energy output, metal–air batteries represent one class of promising power sources for applications in next-generation electronics, electrified transportation and energy storage of smart grids. The most prominent feature of a metal–air battery is the combination of a metal anode with high energy density and an air electrode with open structure to draw cathode active materials (i.e., oxygen) from air. In this critical review, we present the fundamentals and recent advances related to the fields of metal–air batteries, with a focus on the electrochemistry and materials chemistry of air electrodes. The battery electrochemistry and catalytic mechanism of oxygen reduction reactions are discussed on the basis of aqueous and organic electrolytes. Four groups of extensively studied catalysts for the cathode oxygen reduction/evolution are selectively surveyed from materials chemistry to electrode properties and battery application: Pt and Pt-based alloys (e.g., PtAu nanoparticles), carbonaceous materials (e.g., graphene nanosheets), transition-metal oxides (e.g., Mn-based spinels and perovskites), and inorganic–organic composites (e.g., metal macrocycle derivatives). The design and optimization of air-electrode structure are also outlined. Furthermore, remarks on the challenges and perspectives of research directions are proposed for further development of metal–air batteries (219 references).
Fangyi Cheng
Fangyi Cheng received his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2003 and a PhD (with Prof. Jun Chen) in Materials Physics and Chemistry in 2009. At present, Dr Cheng is a lecturer at Nankai University. Since 2003, he has mainly studied the preparation of Mn-based oxides with controllable structures and their applications as battery materials or electrocatalysts. His current research interest is focused on functional materials for efficient energy storage and conversion.
Jun Chen
Jun Chen is a Cheung Kong Scholar Professor at Nankai University. He is the director of the Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education). He obtained his BSc and MSc degrees from Nankai University in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and his PhD from Wollongong University (Australia) in 1999. He held the NEDO fellowship at National Institute of AIST Kansai Center (Japan) from 1999 to 2002. His research expertise is nanomaterials for energy storage & conversion with batteries, fuel cells, and solar cells.
1. Introduction
Modern society depends on the widespread use of reliable devices for electrochemical energy storage and conversion. Nowadays, the worldwide consciousness of the low-carbon economy and sustainable concept greatly promote the progress of chemical power sources such as batteries and fuel cells.1 Current prevailing battery chemistries, rechargeable Li batteries in particular, have gained commercial success in powering portable consumer devices.2 However, they are still insufficient to keep pace with the rapid development of electronics implementing 3-Generation (3G) or 4G multimedia and communication technologies. In addition, the emerging applications of batteries in electrified transportation (such as plug-in hybrid electric vehicles and electric vehicles) and energy storage (for integrating renewable energy in the so-called smart/intelligent grids) demand high energy density, low cost, increased safety, and environmental compatibility.3,4 Thus, an innovation in battery science and technology is required to build better power sources for our modern lifestyle needs.5 One of the main fields being explored for the possible breakthrough refers to metal–air batteries.
Metal–air batteries generate electricity through a redox reaction between metal and oxygen in air. They are featured with open cell structure, which admits the supply of the cathode active material—oxygen—continuously and almost infinitely from an external source (air). This feature makes them akin to a fuel cell, with the “fuel” being a metal. Compared with other ubiquitous batteries such as the primary Zn–MnO2 (Zn–Mn) and the rechargeable lead–acid, nickel–metal hydride (Ni–MH) and lithium-ion batteries,6 the metal–air family has notably higher theoretical energy density (Fig. 1). Such high energy content is due to the fact that the cathode oxygen is not stored in the cell and meanwhile the anode metal possesses a high ratio of valence electrons to atomic nuclei.7 Especially, the Li–air system releases an extremely high theoretical specific energy of nearly 11700 W h kg−1, which is close to the value for one of the most energy-dense liquids—gasoline.8,9
 Fig. 1  Comparison of the gravimetric energy density of some representative types of primary/rechargeable batteries, metal–air batteries, H2–air fuel cell and gasoline. The theoretical values are calculated on the basis of thermodynamics of active materials. 
In terms of theoretical gravimetric energy density, metal–air batteries and fuel cells are possible contenders that could bring electric propulsion on par with the current gasoline-engine system. Fuel cells are viewed as a future solution to energy issues due to advantages of environmental friendliness, high energy conversion efficiency, rapid start-up and shut-down, etc. However, fuel cell technologies are currently confronted with formidable challenges ranging from difficult hydrogen production/storage/transportation to complicated cell design, low stability of the electrodes, and high cost of the materials.10–13 In comparison, light elements such as Zn, Al and Mg are well known for their high abundance (e.g., Al is the most abundant metal in the earth's crust), low cost and environmental compatibility. It is estimated that 21 months of global zinc production would sustain the production of 1 billion 10 kW h zinc–air batteries to power all worldwide vehicles.14 In addition, the anode design and the cathode catalyst in metal–air batteries are less demanding as compared to fuel cells. Therefore, metal–air chemistries hold promise for large-scale development and applications and have attracted increasing research interest because of their prominent advantages.15
Of different types of metal–air chemistries, the primary Zn–air cell has been commercialized as a hearing-aid battery; Al–air and Mg–air cells have also found military applications (e.g., underwater propulsion) and are under development as saline systems.6 Although not fully electrically rechargeable at present, Zn–air, Al–air and Mg–air batteries may be recharged mechanically by quickly and simply replacing the discharged anode and spent electrolyte slurry with fresh metal electrode and electrolyte, making them “refuellable”. In addition, the spent electrolyte slurry containing metal oxides and oxide hydroxides can be recycled and regenerated to the metallic form using electrolysis or even solar thermal decomposition.14,16,17 Accordingly, these batteries can be indirectly rechargeable. Electrically rechargeable metal–air batteries currently remain at research and development level.9,15,18 Particularly, in 1996 Abraham and Jiang first reported a successful rechargeable Li–O2 battery fabricated with a Li metal anode, a carbon composite cathode, and a Li+ conductive organic polymer electrolyte membrane.8 Later, Read investigated the effect of electrolyte and air cathode formulation on the battery performance of an aprotic Li–O2 cell.19 In 2006, Bruce and co-workers demonstrated sustainable cycling of a Li–O2 battery for tens of cycles.20 Recently, new research interest in Li–air batteries has grown rapidly, aiming at taking the advantage of such a fascinating system to substitute rechargeable Li–ion batteries that are based on Li-intercalation electrodes.5,9,15,21
Like other battery technologies, metal–air batteries also suffer from a series of scientific and technological problems. The main issues include low utilization efficiency of the anode and sluggish kinetics of the cathode, resulting in limited practical energy density. For the anode, severe passivation and corrosion of anode exist in electrolytes. The accumulation of metal oxides, hydroxides or other species on the anode surface retards further electrolyte access and thus prevents discharging the remaining active material. The self-discharge and corrosion of the metal anode degrades the coulombic efficiency of the anode and shortens the battery shelf life. An efficient strategy to address the deterioration issue is operating the metal–air cells with reserve structure, in which one of the key components of the cell is separated from a remainder until activation.6 For the cathode (i.e., air electrode), the major obstacles are the intrinsic slow reactions, high overpotentials, and poor reversibility of oxygen chemistry.22 Reactions at the cathode may involve complex processes and the underlying mechanism remains elusive in many cases. Not surprisingly, the air electrode is by far the dominating factor affecting the performance of state-of-the-art metal–air batteries. While using oxygen from surrounding air is generally considered as the most intriguing aspect, the air electrode, unfortunately appears to be the most complicated, expensive and sometimes bulky component of a metal–air battery. As a result, if metal–air batteries are to realize their full potential, the most important tasks should include first elucidating the basic oxygen chemistry and then exploiting highly efficient air electrodes for accelerating the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and/or oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In this context, much effort has been dedicated to the investigation of the cathode reaction mechanism, the development of efficient bifunctional catalytic materials for ORR/OER, and the rationalization of electrode structures for facilitating mass/charge transport and interface interaction.9,15,23–32
In this article, we intend to review the fundamentals and the most recent and significant scientific progresses made in the fields relevant to metal–air batteries, with emphasis placed on air electrodes. The brief introduction of the operation principles, the illustration of cathode electrochemical reactions, the survey of intensively investigated catalyst materials, and the discussion of the design and optimization of cathode structure will be sequentially presented in the following sections, while the final conclusion remarks on future challenges and perspectives. The aim is to provide a better understanding of the promising metal–air battery technologies.
2. Electrochemical cathode reactions
The metal–air battery is composed of a metal anode, an air-electrode and a separator soaked in metal-ion conducting electrolyte, as schematically shown in Fig. 2. In a basic chemistry, the metal anode is oxidized and releases electrons to the external circuit when the cell is discharged. At the same time, oxygen diffuses into the cathode, accepts the electrons from the anode and is reduced to oxygen-containing species. The dissociated metal ions and oxygen-reduced species migrate across the electrolyte and combine to form metal oxides. When the cell is charged (for rechargeable metal–air batteries), the process is reversed, with metal plating at the anode and oxygen evolving at the cathode. Because the solubility of oxygen is generally low in liquid electrolyte and a catalyst is required to facilitate its reduction, the cathode electrochemical reactions mainly take place at the liquid–gas–solid interface (i.e., the so-called three-phase zone) in the air electrode. Consequently, oxygen transportation properties of the electrolyte play important roles in determining the battery performance.26,27 Furthermore, it should be noted that the involved electrochemical reactions and the overall product may differ from each other among various types of metal–air batteries, depending on the specific metal, the electrolyte and the catalytic materials adopted.24,25 In this section, the basic electrochemical cathode reactions of metal–air batteries are discussed separately on the basis of aqueous and organic electrolytes.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the structure and operation principle of a metal–air battery and the liquid-gas-solid (catalyst) interface in the air electrode. 
2.1 Aqueous electrolyte configuration
Metals such as Li, Mg, Al and Zn can react violently to generate hydrogen in acidic media with a great deal of released heat. The resulting severe anode corrosion and complicated thermal management make the acidic electrolyte inappropriate for practical application. In addition, there are few electrocatalytic materials that are stable under the strongly acidic circumstances and the aggressive oxidizing environments at oxygen cathode. Thus, alkaline solutions are commonly used for aqueous electrolyte-based metal–air batteries. Table 1 lists the anode reactions and overall reactions of different metal–air systems with alkaline aqueous electrolytes. It should be noted that the actual cell potentials are generally much lower than the given theoretical values due to overpotentials derived from both anode and cathode polarization.
Table 1 Electrochemical reactions and the theoretical standard potential of selected metal–air batteries with aqueous alkaline electrolytes




Metal air cells
Anode (a) and overall (o) reactions

E
0/Va





a The standard potentials (E0) are given by assuming a potential of 0.40 V for the cathode reaction. All potentials are reported vs. the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).





Zn–air
(a) Zn + 2OH− → ZnO + H2O + 2e
−1.25




(o) 2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO
1.65


Mg–air
(a) 2Mg + 4OH− → 2Mg(OH)2 + 4e
−2.69




(o) 2Mg + O2 + 2H2O → 2Mg(OH)2
3.09


Al–air
(a) Al + 3OH− → Al(OH)3 + 3e
−2.31




(o) 4Al + 3O2 + 6H2O → Al(OH)3
2.71


Li–air
(a) Li + OH− → LiOH + e
−2.95




(o) 4Li + O2 + 2H2O → 4LiOH
3.35




The ORR in alkaline environments at ambient temperature is more favourable than in acidic environments because of better kinetics and lower overpotentials.22 The exchange current density is higher by approximately an order of magnitude, rendering feasible the use of non-noble metal electrocatalysts. Additionally, based on the Nernst equation, the electrode potential will nominally shift by −0.83 V (−59 mV multiplied by 14) if the pH value of electrolyte changes from 0 to 14. This negative potential shift affects the electric field at electrode–electrolyte interface, resulting in significant weakening of binding strengths for adsorbates, especially for charged species.30 Accordingly, adsorption of spectator ions in alkaline media should be decreased to a great extent, giving rise to more facile electrocatalytic processes than that in acidic media.28 A notable disadvantage of using alkaline electrolytes includes carbonate precipitation due to the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydroxide (CO2 + 2OH− → CO32− + H2O), similar to that in the case of alkaline fuel cells.31 The poor solubility of carbonates in alkaline media may cause clogging of electrode pores and thereby blocking of electrolyte channels. To circumvent this drawback of CO2 sensitivity, it is helpful to feed purified air or employ a selective membrane that is permeable to O2. Moreover, the use of a circulating electrolyte is beneficial as the saturation of carbonate is attained much more slowly than that in immobilized electrolyte.
The cathode oxygen reduction is a series of complex electrochemical reactions, which are proposed to involve multistep electron-transfer processes and complicated oxygen-containing species such as O, OH, O2− and HO2−.28,29,31,32 In alkaline electrolytes, the related cathode reactions can be briefly given as: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− (E0 = 0.40 V)(1) O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH− (E0 = −0.07 V)(2) HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH− (E0 = 0.87 V)(3) 2HO2− → 2OH− + O2(4)
As has been well documented, oxygen reduction may proceed via a four-electron (4e) pathway or a two-electron (2e) pathway on surfaces of metals.28,29,31,32 The ORR pathways and mechanisms may vary with the catalytic materials applied. Even for the same catalyst, the ORR behaves as a structure-sensitive reaction. Different configurations of oxygen adsorption exist on active sites of catalyst (Fig. 3a), depending on the crystallographic structure (surface geometry) and the binding energy. The O2 adsorption configurations and the O2-surface interactions affect the ORR pathways.29,33 For the end-on manner, only one O atom is coordinated perpendicularly to the surface and one electron transfer is favored, contributing mainly to the 2e pathway (Fig. 3b and eqn (2)) with peroxide generation. In contrast, the parallel coordination with two O atoms adsorbed on the surface favors O2 dissociation and more likely leads to the direct 4e ORR pathway (Fig. 3c and eqn (1)) without peroxide formation. The 2e oxygen reduction may be followed by either another further 2e reduction of peroxide (eqn (3)) or a chemical disproportionation of peroxide (eqn (4)). This process can be described as a serial 2 × 2e pathway.
 Fig. 3  (a) Different configurations of O2 adsorption on catalyst surfaces: on top end-on, bridge end-on, bridge side-on one site, and bridge side-on two sites, from left to right. Simplified electrochemical catalysis process of the ORR on metal surfaces in the case of (b) end-on O2 adsorption, and (c) bidentate O2 adsorption, corresponding to the 2e reduction (with generated peroxide species) and the direct 4e reduction, respectively. (d) One of the proposed catalytic ORR pathways at a metal oxide/alkaline electrolyte interface. 
In the case of metal oxides, the surface charge distribution is different from that of a metal. The surface cations of stoichiometric oxides are not fully coordinated with oxygen. Anion coordination is completed by the oxygen of H2O in aqueous solution. Reduction of a surface cation is charge-compensated by protonation of a surface oxygen ligand. Accordingly, a four-step catalytic mechanism has been proposed for the ORR pathway on the surfaces of transition-metal oxides (Fig. 3d).31 This proposal includes steps of surface hydroxide displacement, surface peroxide formation, surface oxide formation, and surface hydroxide regeneration. The competition between the O22−/OH− displacement and OH− regeneration is found to be rate-limiting for the ORR kinetics in alkaline electrolyte.34
Both the above mentioned 4e and 2e reaction schemes may occur concomitantly and compete with each other. Recent experimental study and mathematical modelling have shown that dual-path ORR mechanisms comprising both direct 4e and series 2 × 2e pathways exist on carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles.35 In high potential intervals, the direct path is dominating, while at low potential the reduction switches to the peroxide-mediated path. In addition, transport effects such as desorption and re-adsorption of intermediates play an important role in the kinetics and pathway-selectivity of the ORR.36 Non-covalent interactions between hydrated alkali-metal cations and adsorbed species on active sites also exert significant effect on the ORR characteristics.37 The real surface reactions may be masked due to limitation of analysis techniques, and hence there are possibly more underlying pathways. Furthermore, if the serial reduction or chemical decomposition of intermediate species proceeds extremely quickly, the generated peroxide would be simultaneously reduced to hydroxide and thus the overall process could be also viewed as an apparent 4e reduction reaction. For example, previous studies have shown that manganese oxides are highly catalytically active toward the peroxide decomposition and/or reduction, and results in a detected ORR with apparent quasi-4e transfer.38–42 Therefore, the determination of an explicit ORR mechanism may be a challenging task in many cases.
The direct 4e oxygen reduction is desirable due to its high energy efficiency, while the 2e pathway is unfavorable since the produced peroxide species are corrosive and can cause premature degradation of the electrochemical cell.22,31 It is now generally recognized that the 4e reduction predominates on noble metals whereas the 2e reduction primarily participates on carbonaceous materials.24,43 For transition-metal oxides and metal macrocycles, various ORR pathways exist, relying on the specific crystal structure, molecular composition, or experimental parameters.43,44 The electrochemical characteristics of different catalytic materials will be discussed in detail in section 3.
2.2 Organic electrolyte configuration
The aqueous electrolyte configuration is featured with prominent virtues of low cost, wide availability and high ionic conductivity. However, for electrochemical processes occurring in aqueous media, the working potential window is limited to the potential range within which H2O is stable against evolution of hydrogen or oxygen. Consequently, although metal–air batteries such as the Al and Mg-based cells have high theoretical voltages (Table 1) of approaching or exceeding 3 V, the practical voltages are far below such values when aqueous electrolytes are applied. Particularly, the reaction between lithium and water is dangerous, making metallic lithium unsafe to operate directly at an aqueous environment. As a result, the aqueous Li-system requires a specially designed water-stable layer or membrane (e.g., film composed of solid-state Li+ conducting glass-ceramic materials) to protect the Li anode.26,45–49 Even so, there has been little evidence that the electrochemical cathode and anode reactions are reversible within an aqueous system. Instead, successful demonstration of electrically rechargeable metal–air batteries is on the basis of organic electrolytes. Herein, the aprotic configuration is discussed, with focus laid on the rechargeable Li–air system since it has triggered intensive current interest.
The profile of a non-aqueous Li–air battery is similar to a conventional lithium battery using electrolyte of lithium salt dissolved in aprotic solvents. The most notable difference lies in the cathode. For a classic Li battery, the cathode is a lithium intercalation-material undergoing cathode reactions of Li+ uptake/removal. The cathode active material of a Li–air battery is O2, which is not stored in the cathode but is drawn from outside the cell. The cathode reactions of an aprotic Li–air cell differ from the Li-intercalation process. The possible net reactions of a Li–air battery are envisioned as follows, with four or two electrons transferred per molecular O2.8,9,15,19,20,26 4Li + O2 → 2Li2O (E0 = 2.91 V vs. Li+/Li)(5) 2Li + O2 → Li2O2 (E0 = 2.96 or 3.10 V vs. Li+/Li)(6)The reported standard cell potential of eqn (6) is not uniform, which may be derived from different Gibbs free energies. Because of the close E0 values of the above two reactions, either lithium oxide or lithium peroxide is highly thermodynamically feasible to be the discharge product. Despite the apparent simplicity of eqn (5) and (6), the detailed mechanism of the cathode reaction is far from having been definitively and quantitatively clarified. Like the oxygen reduction in aqueous media, the cathode reaction in aprotic electrolytes is a complex process involving stepwise reactions and several oxygen-containing species. Different mechanisms have been suggested to interpret the cathode reactions of the aprotic Li–air cells.
According to electrochemical analysis, Laoire et al. proposed the following scheme for the possible cathode reactions.50,51 O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2(7) 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2(8) LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2(9) Li2O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2Li2O(10)This mechanism states a first one-electron reduction of oxygen to superoxide followed by a further reduction of superoxide to peroxide via another one-electron reaction. Interestingly, the reduction mechanism is strongly influenced by the solvent and the supporting electrolyte. In solutions containing large cations, the cathode reaction proceeds through a one-electron reversible process with the O2/O2− redox couple, whereas in the Li+-containing electrolyte, the oxygen reduction reactions are irreversible or quasi-reversible processes, to form different products including O2−, O22− and O2−.51 The cation effect on mechanism and product can be interpreted using Pearson's hard–soft acid–base theory coupled with the different relative stabilities of the Li+–(solvent)n complexes. Lithium ion, superoxide and peroxide behave as a hard Lewis acid, a moderately soft base and a strong Lewis base, respectively. The formation of Li+–(solvent)n complexes would lower the acidity of Li+, in rough proportion to the donor number of the solvent. Solvents with high donor number provide increased stability of the Li+(solvent)n–O2− and thus result in reversible O2/O2−. In solvents with low donor number, O2− quickly decomposes to O22− or may be fully electrochemically reduced to O2−.
Using density functional theory (DFT), Hummelshøj et al. described an alternative cathode reaction mechanism involving the following two steps:52 Li+ + e− + O2 + * → LiO2*(11) Li+ + e− + LiO2* → Li2O2(12)where * denotes a surface site on Li2O2 where the growth takes place. Given this mechanism, the free energy diagram of surface-bound species and intermediates estimated from DFT qualitatively explains the large asymmetry observed experimentally between the discharge and the charge overpotentials (see for example, in Fig. 6). The DFT calculation also indicates that during charge, the formation of Li vacancies is thermodynamically favoured and the vacancies are mobile from surface to bulk, which will pin the Fermi level at the top of the antibonding peroxide π*(2px) and π*(2py) levels in the Li2O2 valance band.52,53 Thus, the existence of neutral Li vacancies in the Li2O2 surface is essential to generate electrical conductivity for the operation of a Li–air battery since Li2O2 is an insulator. Questions remain how the initial nucleation of Li2O2 proceeds at the cathode and whether the surface conductivity can maintain fast electrochemical growth of Li2O2 on Li2O2 deposits.
Experimental evidences such as ex situ Raman spectra and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) data have demonstrated that Li2O2 predominates the discharge product of the cathode of an aprotic Li–air cell.8,20 Recently, in situ spectroscopic studies have further proved that LiO2 is an intermediate on O2 reduction in non-aqueous solvent.54In situ surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) and in situ differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS) provide direct evidence that oxygen is first reduced to intermediate superoxide, which then disproportionates to peroxide (see eqn (7) and (8)). However, on reverse charging the cathode, Li2O2 decomposes directly in a one-step reaction to evolve O2, without a LiO2 intermediate pathway.54 Although being presented as the intermediates, the superoxide species are highly oxidizing and reactive and can induce several additional side reactions.55,56
Nonaqueous electrolytes used up to date for Li-based battery chemistries include alkyl carbonates (e.g., ethylene carbonate, propylene carbonate, dimethyl carbonate or their combination), ethers (e.g., dioxolane, tetrahydrofuran), and esters (butyrolactone), which have high oxidation stability and solvate lithium salts such as LiPF6, LiN(SO2CF3)2 and LiSO3CF3.57 In the widely employed aprotic organic carbonate-based electrolytes, the discharge products of the air electrode contain a series of carbonate species but with almost no Li2O2, as a result of electrolyte decomposition.58 Very recently, detailed investigations of the Li–O2 battery with carbonate electrolyte have shown that discharging the cathode forms C3H6(OCO2Li)2, Li2CO3, HCO2Li, CH3CO2Li, CO2 and H2O (Fig. 4), which have been specifically identified by the combination of XRD, SERS, DEMS, NMR and FTIR analyzing techniques.59 On recharging, oxidation of these carbonate species occurs with evolution of H2O and CO2. The charge/discharge pathway in the absence of reversible Li2O2 formation is inconsistent with most of previously proposed mechanisms but on the other hand, could explain the discharge/charge voltage gap and the gradual capacity fade widely observed in Li–O2 cells. The formation of carbonate species may consume electrolyte and accumulate in the air electrode, thus degrading the electrode performance and causing poor rechargeability of the batteries. The stability of the electrolyte could be further reduced in the presence of catalysts, which can accelerate parasitic reactions. Recognition of electrolyte decomposition thereby implies that compatible electrolytes need to be developed for Li–air batteries with sustainable cycling performance. In this regard, alternative electrolytes such as boron esters, ethers, ionic liquids and solid-state electrolytes (e.g., Li+-conducting polymer or ceramic) may have some advantages and deserve further research.60–64
 Fig. 4  Proposed reaction scheme of the formation of discharge products in a Li–O2 battery with alkyl carbonate electrolytes. The discharged compounds include Li propyl dicarbonate, Li formate, Li acetate, Li2CO3, CO2 and H2O, as marked in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with the above mentioned catalyst-indispensable cathode reactions in aqueous electrolytes, oxygen reduction can possibly proceed without catalysts in nonaqueous electrolytes containing Li+. In addition, the cathode reactions in an aprotic Li–air battery generate intermediates and products (either Li2O2 or carbonate species) that are drastically less dissolvable in the organic electrolyte. The accumulation of insoluble solids may clog the pores of the air electrode, block the catalyst surface, and electrically passivate the battery. The charge transfer and mass transport at the interface of the cathode are hence limiting factors that affect battery performance.24 Thus, the specific capacity of a Li–air battery correlates intimately with the character of the cathode. As carbonaceous materials often serve and dominate inside the air electrode, the specific capacity is generally reported relative to the weight of carbon.
Apart from the mechanisms outlined above, the nature of catalyst surface may also exert a great effect on the cathode reaction pathways. By comparing the voltammetry and intrinsic ORR activity for well defined surfaces of glass carbon as well as polycrystalline Au and Pt electrodes in aprotic organic electrolytes, Lu et al. have shown that the reduction mechanism and the discharge product likely depend on the catalysts.65 The proposed first ORR step is the formation of superoxide radicals, which are weakly adsorbed species and might be solvated by cations or solvents to diffuse into the bulk of electrolyte. The superoxide radicals then react with Li+ to form surface-adsorbed LiO2, which undergo alternative subsequent pathways. For catalysts with relatively weak oxygen chemisorptions (e.g., carbon), LiO2 can be reduced to Li2O2. For catalysts forming a strong bond with O2 (e.g., Pt), LiO2 is probably reduced with preferential formation of Li2O. The catalyst-dependent ORR activity66–68 and pathway indicate that mechanistic study on electrode with composite catalytic materials (e.g., including components of carbon and metals or metal oxides) may be not straightforward and the catalyst screening should be performed with more caution.
In view of the inconsistency among various proposed mechanisms,8,20,50–54,58,59,65 explicit unraveling the cathode reactions of metal–air batteries is far from a settled issue to date. Despite the complexity of cathode reductions, establishing the detailed pathway and the correlation between the mechanism/activity and the catalyst is a key first step to understand the origin of the charge and the discharge behaviours of metal–air batteries and, is also important and sometimes prerequisite to guide the development of highly active air electrodes.
3. Catalytic materials for air electrodes
As the cathode reaction of a metal–air battery is generally a catalytic electrochemical process, the electrocatalyst in the air electrode plays a vital role in determining the electrode performance. ORR catalysts have been the subject of extensive studies for many years in fuel cells technologies, which involve invariably cathode oxygen reduction. The cathode catalyst to a large extent determines the energy conversion efficiency and is responsible for the high cost of a fuel cell.10–13,31 In principle, most of the catalytic materials applicable to fuel cells could also serve in metal–air batteries and so could be the strategies and techniques to enhance the cathode efficiency. A variety of materials have been employed as the cathode catalysts, ranging from noble metals and metal alloys to carbons, transition-metal oxides/chalcogenides and metal macrocyclic compounds. Review on the cathode electrocatalysts can be found in different literatures.22,28,29,31,32,43,44,69,70 In this section, only selected catalytic materials and examples are presented, focusing on the most recently reported progress and those of direct relevance to metal–air batteries.
3.1 Noble metals and alloys
Noble metals such as the Pt-group metals, in particular Pt itself, have been intensively studied as ORR catalysts for many decades and continue to spur ongoing interest, because of their known high stability and superior electrocatalytic activity. As a result of the relevant well-established knowledge, Pt is often chosen as a benchmark material in current studies of alternative catalysts. Platinum nanoparticles well dispersed on high-surface-area support (e.g., carbon) are the state-of-the-art ORR electrocatalysts. However, the scarcity and cost of Pt make it necessity to further increase the catalytic activity and stability yet reduce the noble metal loading of Pt-based catalysts. Along this line, tuning the size and morphology of Pt-based nanostructures to achieve small/dispersive size, high surface areas and desired highly active facets has proven as efficient route to improve the ORR properties on a mass basis.71–74 An interesting method to decrease Pt loading to a fractional amount is supporting Pt monolayers on suitable metal substrates with specific surfaces, which facilitates kinetics of O–O bond breaking and hydrogenation of reactive intermediates and results in activity surpassing pure Pt.75 Besides, the most viable strategy to simultaneously enhance performance and lower cost is alloying Pt with other appropriate noble metals or early transition metals that are less expensive.
Recently, substantial progress has been made in fundamental understanding the electrocatalytic properties of Pt-based alloys (or intermetallic compounds).76–82 Study on the Pt3Ni(111) surface has indicated an unusual electronic structure (the d-band centre position) and highly structured compositional oscillation in the near surface region, where the outermost and third layers are Pt-rich and the second layer is Ni-rich.76 As the weak interaction between the Pt surface atoms and nonreactive oxygenated species increases the active sites for O2 adsorption, the Pt3Ni(111) surface is 10-fold more active than the Pt(111) surface for the ORR. Electrocatalytic trends in the ORR has been established in terms of a relationship between the surface composition, specific activity and the electronic structure of Pt3M (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Ti, V) surfaces.77 The relationship shows volcano-type behaviour, where a balance between adsorption energies of reactive intermediates and surface coverage by spectator species governs the maximum catalytic activity.
Computational and experimental results have further indicated the volcano relationship for a series of different catalysts with Pt overlayers (Fig. 5a).78 The oxygen adsorption energy is thus a good descriptor for the ORR activity. A surface that binds oxygen 0–0.4 eV more weakly than Pt(111) should exhibit an activity higher than Pt, with the optimum value at roughly 0.2 eV. The oxygen adsorption energy on the skins in turn correlates with the heat of formation of the bulk alloy (ΔEalloy, defined as the difference between the total energy of the alloy and the constituents in metallic form), for a range of Pt and Pd alloys (Fig. 5b). Based on these findings, Pt3Sc and Pt3Y binary alloys stand out as the most stable. Notably, Pt3Y exhibits significant activity improvement over Pt, with a ∼60 mV positive shift of half-wave potential and a factor of 6–10 higher kinetic current density in the range of 0.9–0.87 V.78 Recent experimental investigation has confirmed the superb stability and activity of Pt–Y alloy.81 The kinetic current density of Pt–Y electrode depends on the alloy composition, showing a volcano curve trend with the maximum at Pt70Y30. The ORR stability is associated with the number of d-band vacancies of Pt, which correlates with the degree of alloying and the lattice stain.81 In regard to the screening of Pt-based alloy catalysts, the surface stability at high electrochemical potentials is demonstrated to be a sensitive measure according to a recent theoretical study on a group of Pt2M skin alloys.82 Maintaining a zero O coverage is required to attain high stability as the dissolution of surface atoms in alloys is significantly facilitated with increasing O coverage. Furthermore, the surface corrosion energy and the free energy barrier to OOH dissociation are identified as quantitative descriptors for tuning catalyst composition. Accordingly, Pt2Mo achieves considerable stability and activity because of low overall kinetic barrier for the ORR.82
 Fig. 5  Pt-alloys for electrocatalysis of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR): (a) Volcano plots of the oxygen reduction kinetic current density (jk) as a function of the calculated oxygen adsorption energy (ΔEo); (b) computational results showing the relationship between the oxygen binding energy on Pt/Pd skin surfaces and alloying energy. Data are shown relative to Pt while circles and squares in (b) represent 50 and 25% of the alloying element in the second layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
In addition to the influence of composition, the structure of Pt-alloys also exerts a prominent effect on the catalytic activity and durability. For example, dealloyed Pt–Cu core–shell structure shows exceptionally high catalytic reactivity for the ORR.79 Strains are found to form in Pt-enriched shell, which are supported on a Cu core with a smaller lattice parameter. The compressive strain in the shell tunes the electronic band structure of Pt and weakens the chemisorption of reactive intermediates, resulting in increased reactivity. Moreover, recent investigation on FePt nanoparticles has revealed the structure-dependent catalytic stability by comparing the performance between face centered cubic (fcc) and face centered tetragonal (fct) structures.80 In the chemically disordered fcc structure, Fe and Pt atoms are positioned randomly in the fcc lattice, while in the chemically ordered fct structure, Fe and Pt atoms are intermetallically stacked. The fct-FePt exhibits better catalytic activity and durability towards the ORR, due to the well ordered intermetallic structure, which preserves compositional and structural stability and offers catalytically active facets with Pt lying on the top and Fe locating in the underlayer.80 The FePt nanoparticles, however, still suffer from problems of particle aggregation and activity decay during prolonged operation due to Fe loss in aggressive electrolytes. In this respect, we note that modifying Pt nanoparticles with Au clusters can greatly stabilize the Pt-based ORR electrocatalysts by raising the Pt oxidation potential.83
In depth understanding of the effect of composition, structure, size and shape on the ORR catalytic characteristics of Pt-based alloys will doubtlessly enlighten our efforts in exploiting, designing and fabricating more efficient yet economic catalysts. Concerning the practical application of noble metal-based catalysts in metal–air batteries, their repeated or recyclable use should be imperative. One can easily conceive that rechargeable metal–air batteries, owing to the materials-saving character, seem to be suitable to accept the noble metal catalysts. However, satisfactory rechargeability of metal–air cells remains a formidable challenge requiring rechargeable air electrodes. The cathode oxygen reactions are generally irreversible with slow kinetics, as discussed in section 2. To realize the cycling of an air electrode, we need to find a catalyst capable of accelerating the ORR upon discharging and mediating the OER on charging. Fortunately, noble metals can serve as electrocatalysts for both the ORR and the OER.22 Furthermore, gaining a synergistic effect is possible by combing one metal that is highly active for the ORR and another metal that is highly active for the OER to form a bifunctional catalyst. Indeed, recent application of PtAu nanoparticles in Li–O2 cells has showed much promise.84 As shown in Fig. 6, PtAu/C delivers discharge voltages comparable to that of Au/C and charge voltage comparable to that of Pt/C. Surface Au and Pt atoms contribute to the ORR and OER kinetics, respectively. Consequently, the overall voltage gap between discharge and charge is significantly reduced in PtAu, conferring a round-trip efficiency (defined as the ratio of discharge to charge voltages) of about 77% for the as-assembled Li–O2 cell. Whether this bifunctional catalyst can lead to better cycling performance, however, still remains to be seen.
 Fig. 6  Li–O2 battery operated with different catalyst: (a) initial galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of Au/C, Pt/C and PtAu/C at 100 mA g−1carbon; (b) discharge/charge curves at different current densities. The horizontal dashed line marks the nominal equilibrium potential of O2/Li2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
Cheaper precious metals such as palladium and silver and their alloys have also been the subject of many investigations because of their modest activity and relatively higher abundance.85–97 In particular, Ag exhibits reasonably activity and stability with the price only about 1% that of Pt, rendering it as an attractive ORR catalyst.28 Compared to Pt, Ag is relatively less stable and less electrocatalytically active in acidic media. The electrocatalytic ORR on Ag(111) single crystal surface shows pH-dependent behaviour.87 The ORR in 0.1 M HClO4 occurs as a 2e, a mixed 2e and 4e, and a 4e reduction process sequentially from low to high overpotentials. Additionally, the onset potential is shifted negatively to ∼0.4 mV in acidic environment. In contrast, in 0.1 M KOH the ORR proceeds through almost entirely a 4e pathway in the whole potential range.87 Carbon-supported Ag nanoparticles (Ag/C) also promote a 4e ORR pathway over a wide potential range in 0.1 M NaOH solution.94 Furthermore, recent studies have shown that porous Ag membranes provide electrocatalytic function (with high exchange current density), mechanical support and a means of current collection in alkaline cathodes.93,95 Thus, silver-based catalysts are more adaptive to be used in alkaline electrolytes and are promising cathode materials with good balance between cost and performance.
3.2 Carbonaceous materials
The exclusive use of platinum is not feasible for the future widespread deployment of electrochemical devices based on oxygen electrodes.98,99 Development of well-performing noble metal-free cathode catalysts is the ultimate solution to the obstacle of Pt cost and scarcity.43,44,69,70,98,99 One of the most inexpensive alternatives is carbonaceous materials, which have attracted extensive attention either as catalyst supports or as metal-free catalysts in electrocatalytic chemistry of oxygen.100–138 Carbons generally provide notable merits including low cost, wide availability, wettability, large surface areas, high electrical conductivity and good stability under harsh environments.101 The most developed cathode catalysts are usually supported on finely divided carbon with nanoscale particle size and good dispersion.
Carbon materials exist in a variety of forms with different electronic, optical, spectroscopic and electrochemical properties.102 Carbon atoms can be sp3 hybridised or sp2 hybridised and arranged in a diamond or graphite structure. The completely sp3 hybridised carbon with tetrahedral bonding is featured with hardness and low electrical conductivity and thus is uninteresting as an electrode material without intentional introduction of functional dopants. The sp2 hybridised carbon materials have abundant allotropes including different polymorphisms of graphites (e.g., glass carbon, carbon fibers, highly oriented pyrolytic and natural crystalline graphite, etc.), fullerene, graphene, carbon nanotubes, and so on. The graphitic materials are suited to electrode applications because of favourable electrical conducting properties.102
It is worth noting that the electrochemical performance of graphitic electrodes varies with the interior structure, morphology, and surface effects such as termination and surface modification. Electrode kinetics may differ significantly between the basal plane (parallel to the graphite layer) and edge plane (perpendicular to the graphite layer) within a graphitic structure. A graphitic structure with a large number of edge-plane sites (e.g., edge-plane pyrolytic graphite and multiwalled carbon nanotubes) exhibits higher activity toward the ORR.103 In addition, the pore size, wall thickness and wall crystallinity of carbon materials affect their catalytic performance. As substrate to support metal nanoparticles, mesoporous carbon with large pore size and thicker crystalline walls is more conductive and oxidant resistant and facilitates mass transport.104 Furthermore, functionalization of the carbon support such as by surface modification or doping, exerts a prominent effect on enhancing the durability of ORR catalysts. Heteroatom (such as S, P and N) doped carbons have been extensively investigated.105,106 In particular, nitrogen has proven to be a very efficient functional component or dopant to mitigate activity degradation.107–111 Nitrogen can be incorporated into the graphitic network in the graphitic, pyridinic and pyrrolic form.109 Doping of nitrogen increases the degree of defectiveness and edge plane sites in graphitic carbon materials. The type and content of the nitrogen functional group affects the following aspects of the catalyst system: the size and dispersion of the supported metal particles, support/catalyst chemical bonding, and the electronic structure of supported catalyst nanoparticles.108,109 These are influential factors in the catalytic activity and durability toward the ORR. Taking into consideration the effect of both carbon forms and nitrogen doping, highly stable and active ORR catalysts have been obtained by loading Pt nanoparticles on nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbons.111 Carbons can be also modified with other materials to improve electrode performance. For example, carbon nanotubes combined with tungsten carbide can be used as highly efficient hybrid supports for Pt electrocatalysts that impart a more positive onset potential and increased current density.112 In addition, carbon black shows a two-fold increase of corrosion resistance through surface modification of tungsten carbide nanoparticles.113
While carbon black materials (e.g., Vulcan XC-72) have been the most conventional catalyst support in literatures, increasing interest has been emphasized on carbon materials with novel texture and morphologies, especially porous carbons and nanostructured carbons.101,114,115 Carbon nanostructures can serve not only as catalyst supports but also as catalytically active components themselves because of different electrochemical properties from that of traditional bulk carbon forms. The peculiar carbon nanostructures include one-dimensional (1D) nanotubes and nanofibers, 2D graphite and graphene nanosheets, and nanoporous architectures. Carbon nanotubes are an efficient substrate for dispersing a catalyst component (especially Pt nanoparticles) due to facile electronic conductivity and structural integrity and open structure that facilitates diffusion of reactants, products and intermediates in and out of the catalytic layer.116–119 Carbon nanotube-based hybrid materials generally show remarkably enhanced electrocatalytic performance due to synergistic effects.120,121 Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes can act as noble-metal free catalysts.122,123 Carbon nanofibers are also potential oxygen electrode materials.124 Graphene and functionalized graphene materials have recently attracted increasing interest as metal-free electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction.125,126 These abundant carbon nanostructures and their doping or surface modification with functionalities may enable researchers to well tailor the catalytic properties.
As one of the typical examples illustrating the viable application of carbon nanostructures, vertically aligned nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (VA-NCNTs) can act as a metal-free electrode to catalyze the 4e ORR in alkaline electrolyte.127 The VA-NCNTs even outperform their Pt/C counterparts in ORR activity and durability. Such superb performance and the unexpected 4e pathway are believed to arise from the incorporation of electron-accepting nitrogen atoms in the conjugated nanotube carbon plane, which impart a high positive charge density on adjacent carbon atoms, favouring parallel diatomic adsorption.127 Improved electrocatalytic activity could be achieved after heat treatment of the nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes.128 Moreover, nitrogen-doped porous carbons and graphenes have also exhibited remarkable ORR activity and durability comparable to or better than the commercial Pt/C catalysts.129–132 For instance, 1D nitrogen-doped carbon nanocapsules, which are synthesized from a single-component precursor template route, outperform the benchmark Pt/C catalyst in electrocatalytic activities in alkaline electrolytes (as shown in Fig. 7).132 The prominent catalytic performances suggest that carbonaceous materials with nitrogen doping are promising metal-free ORR electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 7  Nitrogen-doped carbon nanocapsules (NCNC) as non-noble electrocatalysts for the ORR in alkaline media: (a) schematic presentation of their fabrication, (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the capsules, and (d) linear sweep voltammograms of the NCNC (the subscript denotes the synthesized temperature) and the benchmark Pt/C (E-TEK). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
However, it should be noted that the nature of the active sites and the ORR mechanism in the intensively investigated nitrogen-containing carbon materials have not been clearly elucidated.133 The generally accepted opinion is that the doped nitrogen atoms play a crucial role in the ORR. The exposure of edge planes and the creation of impurity band/surface states near the Fermi level are also viewed as causes behind the catalytic activity.134 Functional groups on carbon surfaces are suggested to modify the electronic band structure and thus tune the ORR properties.134 Recent DFT calculations imply that the edge structure of carbon is involved in ORR activity by lowering the oxygen adsorption barrier and electron transfer barrier, and meanwhile, the type of doped-N determines the ORR pathway selectivity.126 Computational study, together with more direct experimental techniques, will provide much insight in understanding the carbon-based catalysts.
Application of carbon materials is ubiquitous in air electrodes for practical metal–air batteries. While carbon itself is catalytically active toward the ORR (mainly through a 2e pathway), it serves mainly as a catalyst support and electrical conducting additive in the air electrode of aqueous Zn–air, Mg–air, and Al–air batteries.6 In Li–air cells that are relatively less dependent on catalyst, active carbons in the cathode is capable to sustain considerable cell performance.8 Recent examples have demonstrated that carbon nanostructures such as carbon nanofibers and graphene nanosheets (GNSs) can be used as the cathode for Li–O2 batteries with both nonaqueous electrolyte and aqueous–organic hybrid electrolyte.124,135–137 Carbon nanofibers grown on a porous alumina substrate can be used as binder-free electrodes that provide gravimetric energies of about 2500 W h kgelectrode−1 at power of about 100 W kg−1.124 In the nonaqueous Li–O2 cell, GNSs (Fig. 8a) result in high discharge capacity exceeding 8000 mA h g−1 (Fig. 8c).135 For the hybrid-electrolyte cell, heat-treated GNSs give rise to excellent cyclability of up to 50 charge–discharge cycles.136 The performance of GNSs is significantly better than the comparative BP-2000 and Vulcan XC-72 carbons. The superiority of GNSs derives from the large surface areas, high electronic conductivity, and the unique structure that provides 3D diffusion channels and numerous active sites/defects at the edges (as shown in Fig. 8b). Interestingly, pencil-trace (multi-layered graphene nanosheets) on the surface of a ceramic Li–ion conducting film can serve as a novel catalytic electrode for rechargeable Li–air batteries.137 Furthermore, comparing discharge characteristics of Li–air cells with different carbon cathodes has revealed that the mesopore volume of carbon materials has a large contribution to the capacity.138 Therefore, the employment of carbon nanostructures with optimized morphologies and textures may offer great opportunity to attain high-performance metal–air batteries.
 Fig. 8  Application of carbonaceous materials in Li–O2 batteries: TEM image of the graphene nanosheets electrode (a) before and (b) after discharge (the square marks thicker product deposit, indicating high activity at the edges); (c) Discharge/charge profiles of Li–O2 batteries with different carbon cathodes at a current density of 75 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.3 Transition-metal oxides
Transition-metal oxides and in some cases transition-metal chalcogenides, carbides, nitrides, oxynitrides and carbonitrides represent another family of cathode electrocatalysts as an alternative to traditional noble metals.99 Their prominent advantages generally include high abundance, low cost, and environmental friendliness. Although some of them lack sufficient stability in acidic media, generally they are reasonably stable in alkaline electrolytes, making these compounds applicable to electrochemical catalysis. For example, titanium oxides are demonstrated to be good functionalized cocatalytic supports for both non-precious metals and noble metals.139–141 Nanostructured titanium oxide supports can modify the surface electronic structure of Pt and provide high structural and chemical stability due to strong metal/support interaction.141 Titanium nitrides can be used as efficient cathode electrocatalysts.142 Transition-metal carbides, especially in nano-size, can also act as promising supports to promote the activity and stability of Pt or Pd-based ORR electrocatalysts.143,144
Early transition metals of group VII and VIII elements (e.g., Mn, Fe, Co and Ni) possess multiple valences, resulting in a variety of oxides and chalcogenides/carbides. For example, manganese may exist in different valence states of Mn(II), Mn(III) and Mn(IV), corresponding to abundant and ubiquitous manganese oxides ranging from MnO, Mn3O4 to Mn2O3 and MnO2.145 The combination of two or three transition metals with oxygen will lead to a series of ternary or quaternary composite metal oxides. Even for manganese oxides with the same nominal elemental composition and valence, they are possibly featured with different crystallographic structures (Fig. 9). The variable valences and abundant structures of transition-metal oxides give rise to rich redox electrochemistry and materials chemistry, providing a vast opportunity for the search and development of valuable noble metal-free catalysts. Important progress in transition-metal chalcogenides (especially the Chevrel-phase compounds and cobalt sulfides/selenides) can be found in the review presented by Alonso-Vante and co-workers and the references cited therein.44 We focus herein on metal oxides (especially Mn-based oxides), which have been extensively studied as electrocatalysts for air electrodes. Manganese oxides are of special interest in oxygen electrochemistry. One possible reason of the motivation is that Mn–Ca–O complex cluster is the catalytic active centre of oxygen evolution in photosystem II in nature.146–148 However, the complex redox chemistry and different crystallographic structures of manganese oxides make it rather difficult to explicitly understand the oxygen reduction and evolution mechanisms and to clarify the materials properties that govern the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 9  Presentations of the structures of some binary and ternary manganese oxides. c- and t-AMn2O4 denote cubic and tetragonal Mn-based spinels, respectively, with the A-site cations being tetragonally coordinated with oxygen. BMnO3 represents the Mn-based perovskite with the B-site ions being marked in green. Metal cations in A, B and Mn sites can be substituted by other metal ions. 
Electrochemically active manganese oxides such as Mn5O8, Mn3O4, Mn2O3, MnO2 and MnOOH all exhibit catalytic activities towards the ORR in alkaline media.38–43,149,150 The catalytic ORR mechanism, however, is still in debate. Both a direct 4e pathway and series 2 × 2e pathway have been suggested to interpret the observed apparent overall 4e ORR process. For MnO2, the direct 4e oxygen reduction proceeds through the first proton insertion process to form MnOOH, the second O2 adsorption onto two neighboring MnOOH surface sties (via the bridge adsorption-manner), the third rate-determining electron-transfer step involving electrosplitting of the adsorbed O2 species to Oads, and the final electrochemical reduction of Oads to OH−.40 In this scenario, the Mn(III)/Mn(IV) redox couple acts as the oxygen acceptor/donor mediator and assists the electron transfer. The series pathway undergoes a first 2e reduction process to intermediate HO2− and the sequent disproportionation of HO2−.149 The major difference between the two reaction schemes can be attributed to the manner of oxygen adsorption on active surface sites (Fig. 3a). The end-on O2 adsorption does not favour the breaking of O–O bonds and hence tends to yield HO2− rather than OH−. More study is thus required to clarify the oxygen adsorption behaviours on the surface of manganese oxides. Regardless of this uncertainty, the redox reaction between Mn species with different valence synergistically contributes to mediate the reduction process in both pathways. The involvement of Mn(IV)/Mn(III) in the ORR electrocatalysis has been confirmed by in situ X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) study.38
In addition to the ORR mechanism, promoting the development of highly active manganese oxide catalysts necessitates a systematic study on the influential physical and chemical parameters. It has been demonstrated that factors exerting an important effect on the catalytic performance may include composition, structure, phases, valence, morphology, size, surface area, electrical conductivity, etc.38–42 The influence of composition on the properties has been scarcely investigated. One trend is that the ORR catalytic activity correlates with the Mn valence,149 but a clear relationship remains to be established. However, it is obvious that the crystallographic structures and morphologies greatly affect the performance of manganese oxides.42 For MnO2-based catalysts, the activity follows an order of α- > β- > γ-MnO2, which is attributed to a combinative effect of their intrinsic tunnel size and electrical conductivity. For MnO2 catalysts with the same phase, the nanostructures apparently outperform the micro-sized particles due to smaller size and higher specific surface areas. Moreover, the nature of preferentially exposed facets of manganese oxides would be another influential factor,41 which requires further investigation. Furthermore, combining manganese oxide with another electrocatalytic component seems to be an efficient strategy in enhancing the ORR activity. The obtained composite catalysts such as manganese oxide nanoparticles electrodeposited on platinum substrate150 and palladium nanoparticles deposited on MnO2 nanorods151 are superior to both pristine noble metals and undecorated manganese oxides.
Like binary manganese oxides, composite manganese oxides incorporating mixed-valence transition metals have also attracted extensive interest.24,34,152–158 Extra merits of composite oxides generally include increased structural stability and the ability to combine one type of active sites favourable for the ORR and the other type of sites beneficial to the OER, rendering them possible bifunctional catalysts for air electrodes that can serve in rechargeable metal–air batteries.159,160 Composite oxides adopting the spinel or perovskite structure are particularly attractive. The spinel and perovskite structures allow partial cation substitution (see for example in Fig. 9) to form a large number of oxides,161,162 enabling researchers to tune their catalytic properties.
Recent study has shown that the ORR activity of perovskite family correlates primarily to σ*-orbital (eg) occupation and secondarily to the extent of transition metal–oxygen covalency, which serve as activity descriptors.34 The design principle for improving the ORR activity of perovskites is an eg-filling having a value of ∼1 for maximum activity, which can be further enhanced by increasing the covalency between the metal 3d and oxygen 2p orbitals. Applying such a principle, LaMnO3+δ and LaNiO3 exhibit intrinsic ORR activity comparable to state-of-the-art Pt/C in alkaline media.34 Nanosized composites of perovskite-type La1−xSrxMnO3 and carbon nanotubes also show remarkable electrocatalytic performance.157 Furthermore, a recent example indicates that a composite electrode consisting of LaMnO3 and LaNiO3 displays excellent bifunctional ORR/OER activity.158 As shown in Fig. 10, LaNiO3 has high electrical conductivity and high OER activity while LaMnO3 is highly active for the ORR; their combination offers a beneficial balance between the ORR/OER electrocatalytic activity and the stability against anodic polarization.158 The prominent bifunctional electrochemical performances of perovskite composites suggest their promising use in rechargeable metal–air batteries.
 Fig. 10  Polarization curves of different electrodes in KOH aqueous electrolyte: (a) carbon-supported LaMnO3, (b) LaMnO3/LaNiO3 (10 wt% LaMnO3), (c) LaMnO3/LaNiO3 (30 wt% LaMnO3), (d) neat LaNiO3. The anodic and cathodic polarization corresponds to the electrocatalytic OER and ORR process, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 158 by permission of The Electrochemical Society. 
Cobalt and manganese spinels are also highly potential candidates as electrocatalysts for bifunctional air electrodes because of high catalytic activity and good corrosion stability in alkaline solutions.153–155 It should be noted that the preparation method of a spinel oxide greatly influences its physiochemical properties and electrochemical characteristics.154 Conventional synthesis of crystalline ternary spinels normally follows the ceramic route and requires a high heating temperature. Although having a good crystallinity, the resulting product often exhibits limited electrochemical activity due to large particle size and low surface areas. Recently, a facile and rapid room-temperature synthetic methodology has been developed for highly active spinels.156 The preparation is based on a reduction of amorphous MnO2 precursors in aqueous solution containing divalent metal ions such as Co2+. With preserved morphology resembling the parent precursor, the prepared Co–Mn–O nanocrystalline spinels possess high surface areas, numerous defects and abundant vacancies, and manifest remarkably higher activity towards the ORR/OER as compared to their counterparts synthesized at high temperature (shown in Fig. 11). Interestingly, the Co–Mn–O spinels show phase-dependent electrolytic characteristics, that is, the cubic phase outperforms the tetragonal phase in catalyzing the ORR while the trend is in reverse for the OER. Such phase-dependent character is attributed to the different oxygen binding ability on the surface of the two phases, as evidenced from both experimental and computational analysis.156 Following a similar synthetic strategy, hollow ZnMn2O4 spinel nanospheres and nanocubes have also been selectively prepared and show respectable electrocatalytic performance.163 This demonstrated example proves the feasibility of rational design and controllable synthesis of spinel-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for air electrodes.
 Fig. 11  Cobalt–manganese spinel oxides as electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER. SEM images of (a) tetragonal-phase spinel nanostructures (RT-t-spinel) and (b) cubic-phase spinel nanostructures (RT-c-spinel) synthesized at room temperature. Voltammograms of the (c) ORR and (d) OER recorded on different catalysts. Comparisons are also given to the counterpart cubic-phase (HT-c-spinel) and tetragonal-phase (HT-t-spinel) bulk spinels synthesized using high-temperature ceramic method. Reproduced from ref. 156. Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The above examples indicate that manganese-based oxides, especially in the composite form incorporated with another multivalence transition-metal, should be promising alternative to Pt-based catalysts in alkaline media. Not surprisingly, they have already found wide practical applications in alkaline metal–air batteries (see illustrated examples in ref. 24 and references cited therein). Very recently, Lee et al. have reported that Mn3O4 nanoparticles anchored on ionic liquid modified graphene nanosheets exhibit high ORR catalytic activity and their use in an Zn–air battery lead to a maximum peak power density of 120 mW cm−2.164 Applications of manganese oxides in aprotic Li–air cells can be also found in different literatures.20,165–168 When used as catalysts in the oxygen cathode, manganese oxide nanoparticles supported on carbon and MnO2 nanowires mixed with carbon can deliver high capacities with capacity retention for a few charge and discharge cycles.166,167 Likewise, the combination of Pd and MnO2 results in stable capacity for 20 cycles and is highly effective in decreasing the charge potential to nearly its theoretical value and improving the energy efficiency from 60 to 89%.168 It can be predicted that composite manganese oxides such as Mn-based spinels and perovskites are also useful cathode catalysts in rechargeable Li–air batteries.
It should be noted that most of the transition-metal oxides, owing to their semiconducting character, can not provide as high a electrical conductivity as in the cases of metal and carbon-based catalyts. Thus, oxide materials are generally mixed mechanically with a large amount of carbon powders to fabricate air electrodes with low resistance. However, the addition of electrical conducting agent may not only hinder the interface contact but also lower the loading level of the active component. An alternative strategy is using hybrid materials that firmly combine an oxide with a highly conducting substrate such as carbon nanostructures.120,169,170 The synergistic coupling of nanomaterials also enables bifunctional electrochemical catalysis that can be hardly achieved within a single component. For example, binary Co3O4 spinel, a material with considerable OER activity but little ORR activity, when grown on nitrogen-doped graphene to form a hybrid nanomaterial, exhibits high performance for both ORR and OER in alkaline electrolyte according to a latest report.170
Finally, it is relevant to mention here that various classes of oxide-ion conducting compounds (including some classic perovskite-based oxides) have been widely used in solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs).162 If we take into consideration the flexible structural networks, the rich defect properties and the ionic transport mechanism of these materials, it is possible that some of them can be adapted as catalysts in metal–air batteries as well. Meanwhile, the design concept of cathodes for SOFCs may be also applicable to air electrodes. Accordingly, transition-metal oxides along this line are worthy of further studies.
3.4 Inorganic–organic composites
Tremendous effort has been directed to the development of inorganic–organic composite (this oversimplified term is used here to intentionally denote the integration of inorganic metal centre and organic matrix) materials as noble metal-free catalysts for oxygen electrochemistry.43,98,99,171–192 This promising family of alternative electrocatalysts include transition-metal macrocyclic complexes, metal–polymer composites, and the relevant heat-treated derivatives.
Transition-metal macrocycles (e.g., TMPP, PC, TPP and TAA, molecular structure shown in Fig. 12a–d) have been extensively investigated from the synthesis methodology to the catalysis mechanism, as reviewed in detail in several recent publications.43,99,133,172,173,181 The primary motivation possibly arises from the intention to mimic the photosynthesis process in nature that involves metalloporphyrins. Although having undergone several decades of studies, the catalytic nature of the metal-macrocyclic family remains elusive. It is generally believed that C, N and transition-metal (Fe or Co) are involved in the catalytically active sites, which can be simply labelled as M–Nx/C (x is normally 2 or 4) species.99,185 However, it is difficult to reach a consensus as to what plays the predominant role. At least, the functionality of metal is unclear and in debate.
 Fig. 12  Structures of some representative transition-metal macrocycles (a–d) and proposed active sites of some transition-metal macrocycle composite catalysts (e–g): (a) tetramethoxy tetraphenyl porphyrin (TMPP), (b) phthalocyanine (PC), (c) tetraphenyl porphyrins (TPP), (d) tetraazaanulene (TAA), (e) metal-aromatic cycles attached to the edges of graphitic sheets,177 (f) presumed catalytic moiety derived from heat treatment of a metal-polyaniline complex in N2,179 and (g) supposed configuration of metal-polypyrrole composite catalyst.171 M represents a transition-metal such as Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, etc. 
Recently, the mechanisms of the ORR on carbon-supported Fe-phthalocyanine (FePc/C) and Co-phthalocyanine (CoPc/C) catalysts in alkaline media have been elucidated by combining electrochemical techniques and density functional theory (DFT) computational study.178 The FePc/C catalyst exhibits a more positive onset potential and higher current density than that of CoPc/C. Remarkably, the ORR proceeds via a 4e pathway on FePc/C while it is through a 2e pathway on CoPc/C (Fig. 13a). The DFT results indicate that the structure of H2O2 adsorption is essentially different on the surfaces of the two catalysts (Fig. 13b). During H2O2 adsorption, the breaking of the O–O bond enables the 4e ORR on FePc while the absence of O–O bond cleavage accounts for the 2e reduction. These investigations thus imply that the metal centers exert a vital effect on determining the activities and mechanisms of electrocatalytic ORR on metal macrocyclic compounds.
 Fig. 13  Carbon-supported Fe-phthalocyanine (FePc/C) and Co-phthalocyanine (CoPc/C) as the ORR catalysts in alkaline solutions. (a) Voltammetry profiles of FePc/C, CoPc/C, and the comparative Pt/C recorded on a rotating ring-disk electrode. The disk and ring current densities are represented by Id and Ir, respectively. The inset curves display the H2O2 yields on the three catalysts. (b) Density functional theory (DFT) calculation results showing the optimized structural configurations for HOOH adsorbed on FePc (left) and H2OO adsorbed on CoFc. The central yellow ball, the two red balls, blue balls and light white balls correspond to the Fe/Co, O, N, C and H atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, since some metal-free macrocyclic compounds (pyridine-like, pyridone-like and graphite-like species with N/C and without metal such as nitrogen-doped carbon materials discussed in section 3.2) are highly catalytically active, metals may be not a necessary part in the active sites but only participate in creating the active centres consisting of C and N. Recent study on the role of residual metal in ORR in CoPc-based carbon catalysts has verified that Co hardly contributes to the catalytic activity.186 Even if the metal is indispensable, the coordination character of transition metals to N and its effect on the catalytic properties have not been fully understood. In addition, recent study on a CuFe–N/C catalyst has provided new insight into the functionality of bicore metals: Fe(III)Nx serves as the active site for ORR and the Cu(II)/Cu(I) redox mediator functions as the electron shuttle.180 Furthermore, for homogenous catalysts such as cobalt tetraphenylporphyrin, multiple functional groups may participate in the multi-centred catalytic process to create a concerted action.187 Anyway, the nitrogen presence appears to be an utmost requirement for attaining activity. There is also possibility that the catalytically active sites vary with the composition and structure of this diverse class of materials. For example, homogeneous oxygen reduction on metal-free porphyrin involves binding of molecular oxygen to the protonated free porphyrin base.188 The different modes of binding and activation of oxygen molecules on non-metal sites would permit alternative catalytic routes for metal macrocycles for heterogeneous redox processes. More fundamental studies are clearly required to identify the nature of real active sites and elucidate the catalysis mechanism.
Because of the normally insufficient long-term stability of metal-macrocyclic compounds in strong acidic or alkali environments, inorganic–organic composite electrocatalysts are generally prepared by the pyrolysis of a variety of precursors containing metal, nitrogen and carbon. Their catalytic activities are found to depend on a series of parameters, such as the type and content of central metal, the precursors, the supporting substrate, the heat treatment condition, and the synthesis method.173 The metal-ion centre exerts a significant effect on the redox and charge-transfer properties of the metal macrocycles and the most active metals are Fe and Co. Logically, a combination of the two would perform even better. In regard to heat treatment, the temperature, duration, atmosphere, and treatment method are important parameters. There is often a trade-off between catalytic activity and stability, and rationalizing the pyrolysis condition is an interesting research subject. Dahn and co-workers have investigated the activity of sputtered M–C–N (M is transition-metal such as V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, and Ni) films for the ORR in acid and alkaline electrolytes.174–176 The choice of M, the N doping, and the heat-treatment temperature play important roles in the activity and stability of the heat-treated MxC1−x−yNy catalyst libraries. The optimum heat-treatment temperature is in the range of 700–900 °C. In alkaline solutions, the activities of the catalysts follow Co > Ni > Mn > V > Cr, while in acid solutions, the order is Fe > Co > Cr > Ni. The N doping increases the activity. Although Cr is less active, the CrxC1−x−yNy libraries show good passivation against corrosion.175 These results suggest that the ORR catalytic performance could be rationalized by carefully adjusting the influential factors.
The structure of the macrocycles influences the ligand–metal interaction and the character of the pyrolyzed species, which however, is not easy to be directly correlated as the pyrolysis destroys the structure of the precursor. Since nitrogen appears to be a necessary part in the catalytic centre, increasing surface nitrogen content is of vital importance in enhancing the activity. Strategies to increase nitrogen incorporation include tailoring the nitrogen-containing precursors, utilizing gaseous (NH3 or CH3CN) etching in the pyrolysis process, and employing new impregnation approaches.99 With respect to the carbon support, the identified influential factors are disordered carbon degree/content and microporosity. According to previous insights into the catalyst design, Dodelet and co-workers reported in 2009 the best iron-based catalysts with ORR catalytic activity comparable to Pt.177 They selected highly microporous Black Pearl 2000 as the carbon support and used planetary ball-milling to fill the support pores with pore filler (1,10-phenanthroline) and iron precursor (ferrous acetate). The best-performing Fe-based catalyst with the greatest increase in active site density was obtained by pyrolyzing the mixture first in argon and then in ammonia. The active sites were believed to contain iron cations coordinated by pyridinic nitrogen functionalities that were anchored in the interstices of graphitic sheets within the micropores of the support (illustrated in Fig. 12e).177 While the initial activity of this catalyst was a factor of >35 relative to previously reported Fe-based catalysts, its stability should be improved to meet the requirement of practical application.
In addition to the relatively expensive and complex macrocyclic compounds, heterocyclic conjugated polymers such as polypyrrole, polyaniline and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) are also attractive materials in oxygen electrocatalysis.171,179,189,190 These polymers are characterized by low cost, high electrical conductivity, abundant functionalities and distinct redox properties. They can be utilized as direct electrocatalysts,189 as bridges between substrate and catalyst to promote physical and electrical contact,190 as matrices for incorporating metal ion to create active sites,171 and as nitrogen/carbon precursors for pyrolyzed M–Nx/C materials.179 For example, polypyrrole is used as a matrix for entrapping cobalt to generate Co–N active sites (Fig. 12g) for the ORR.171 Such transition metal–polymer composite materials prepared via a pyrolysis-free process can deliver considerable ORR activity with respectable stability over a long operating time. Compared to this non-pyrolyzed composite, the high-temperature system synthesized using mixture of precursors of metal and heteroatom polymer exhibits better activity.
Polyaniline has been proven as a suitable template compounds for C and N due to its structural similarity to graphite. The heat treatment of polyaniline could not only facilitate the integration of N-containing active sites into the partially graphitized carbon matrix but also benefit uniform distribution and increased density of N sites on the surface. Consequently, polyaniline derived formulations (Fig. 12f) combine high ORR activity with performance durability and 4e reduction selectivity.179 Polypyrrole is also good precursor for pyrolyzed metal-containing composite ORR catalysts.191,192 Pyrolyzed iron-polypyrrole mesoporous spheres with honeycomb-like structure and large volumetric surface area, which increase the active site density and favour mass transport, can be used as a highly efficient non-noble ORR catalyst.191 As for other inorganic–organic composite series, improving these promising catalysts requires further in-depth mechanistic study on the origin of the intrinsic activity and stability.
Inorganic–organic composite catalyst materials have been employed in the air electrodes of laboratory metal–air batteries. For example, carbon-supported FeCo-EDA catalysts prepared by pyrolysis of a mixture of iron sulfate, cobalt nitrates and ethylenediamine (EDA) show outstanding ORR activity and stability in alkaline electrolyte.182 Compared with the commercial Pt/C catalyst, the FeCo-EDA catalyst exhibits a nearly 3 times higher mass activity and 2.5 times better activity retention after accelerated degradation testing. The superior performance is attributed to its good structural stability and morphological preservation (shown in Fig. 14a and b), in contrast to severe agglomeration of Pt particles. Single cell performance testing on the assembled aqueous Zn–air batteries demonstrates higher polarization current density and higher peak power density (Fig. 14c and d).182 These results indicate great potential of FeCo-EDA materials as cathode catalyst for aqueous metal–air batteries. Catalytic application of metal macrocycles in non-aqueous Li–air cells has also been reported.183 Pyrolyzed FeCu-phthalocyanine supported on high surface area carbon black can simultaneously accelerate the 2e oxygen reduction and catalyze the chemical disproportionation of Li2O2, resulting in decreased polarization of the cells, increased recovery rate of open-circuit voltage, and reduced apparent activation energy for the discharge of the cells.183 Therefore, inorganic–organic composites are highly valuable candidate cathode catalysts for practical metal–air batteries, despite relatively fewer application to date.
 Fig. 14  Application of FeCo-EDA (ethylenediamine) catalyst in Zn–air batteries: TEM images of FeCo-EDA (a) before and (b) (b) accelerated degradation test; single cell performance of (c) polarization curve and (c) power density for the Zn–air cells made with FeCo-EDA and Pt/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
4. Air electrode structures
One of the key features of an efficient air electrode is the formation of a high-surface area boundary between the active phases involved in the oxygen reduction: air, the electrolyte, the catalyst and the conductor.22 In metal–air cells with aqueous electrolytes, oxygen is reduced to OH−, which is dissolved into the electrolyte. The electrocatalytic oxygen reaction occurs at a three-phase contact zone between air, liquid electrolyte and solid catalyst (except to the extent that the oxygen may dissolve in the electrolyte), as schematically shown in Fig. 15a. It is necessary to arrange such a three-phase interface in the air electrode, where air can diffuse throughout and electrolyte can be adsorbed in the catalyst surface but must not flood it to the exclusion of gas. This requires careful construction of the catalyst layer. The catalyst layer is made hydrophilic on the electrolyte side but hydrophobic on the gas side.24 Thus, the surface exposed to air is generally treated with a water-repellent substance (e.g., paraffin wax or Teflon) while the side facing electrolyte employs hydrophilic additives.6 The balance between hydrophobic and hydrophilic properties is significantly important for air electrodes used in aqueous metal–air batteries.
 Fig. 15  Illustrated interfaces of air electrodes and proposed electrode structures. (a) Gas–solid–liquid three-phase interface model in aqueous electrolyte. (b) Liquid–solid two-phase interface model in non-aqueous electrolyte; (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 193 with significant modification, copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Model structure of air electrode with metal mesh/foam-supported oxygen permeable membrane (OPM, for filtering out H2O or CO2), gas diffusion layer (GDL) and catalyst layer (CL). (d) Suggested porous structure of the catalyst layer with hierarchical macro-/meso-/inter-particle pores for both efficient electrolyte wetting and gas transportation. 
Oxygen electrochemistry in non-aqueous electrolytes differs from aqueous electrolytes. In a Li–air cell based on organic electrolyte, the discharge products (Li2O2 and/or Li2O) are insoluble in the electrolyte and will precipitate on the surface of the catalyst, preventing continuous air diffusion and access. As a result, only the oxygen dissolved in the electrolyte participates in the oxygen reduction. The cathode reaction takes place at the electrolyte–catalyst two-phase interface.193 Based on this model, the catalyst layer should be completely wetted with liquid electrolyte to maximize the reaction areas for high capacity. In addition, the liquid electrolyte layer on the catalyst surface should remain as thin as possible to minimize the transport distance of the dissolved oxygen for fast kinetics. Meanwhile, the implementation of electrolytes with high oxygen solubility and fast oxygen diffusivity should also greatly benefit the improvement of the cathode performance. In this context, both electrode design and electrolyte adjustment (e.g., tuning parameters such as composition, solubility, polarity, viscosity and conductivity) are desirable direction for the development of advanced Li–air batteries.26,194
In view of the above demonstrated importance of the interface, the design rationale of the cathode structure should focus on increasing the interface areas and enhancing air diffusion and transportation. High specific surface area of catalyst support is of course a prerequisite. The pore structure also plays a key role in determining the charge and mass transport properties of the air electrode. Both experimental results and modelling have shown the influential role of pore size and distribution in electrode performance.195–199 For an aqueous Zn–air battery, the use of activated carbon with high surface area occupied by macropores and mesopores could lead to remarkable performance.195 In addition, carbons with ordered and interconnected mesopores can be used as an efficient catalyst support that provides inner pores for gas diffusion and outer surfaces for electrolyte access.200 For a Li–air cell, an interconnected dual pore system (one catalyzed and one non-catalyzed) with multiple time-release catalyst is proposed to increase materials utilization, decrease diffusion limitation, and supply high power for long term.197 The area-specific cell capacity can be optimized by use of carbon microstructure and loading as well as electrode porosity/thickness and electrolyte amount.198
In practical air electrodes, the detrimental effect of carbon dioxide and moisture should also be taken into consideration for aqueous alkaline electrolytes and non-aqueous aprotic electrolytes, respectively. The presence of CO2 will incur neutralization of the alkaline electrolyte and precipitation of carbonate that blocks the diffusion/transport channels. The inclusion of H2O will cause severe Li anode corrosion and electrolyte degradation. To address these problems, it is very helpful to use a membrane that is O2 permeable but can block the incorporation of CO2 or H2O from air.201,202 The current collector and electrode support are also influential factors on the performance. Metal mesh is usually used as the current collector and the substrate to support the gas diffusion layer and the catalyst layer. Metal foam is an interesting alternative because of its highly interconnected open porous network, which provides electrical conductivity, mass transport pathway and mechanical flexibility.203Fig. 15c shows a proposed model structure of an air electrode, which consists of an oxygen selective membrane, a gas diffusion layer, and a catalyst layer supported on metal mesh/foam. The catalyst layer should take advantage of macro-/mesopores and inter-particle pores for electrolyte wetting (but not flooding) and oxygen diffusion, as schematically shown in Fig. 15d. It should be noted that multilayer structures with different catalyst compositions may be beneficial to bifunctional air electrodes for rechargeable metal–air batteries.32 Furthermore, since the air electrodes function mainly as electrocatalyst, ideally they should be constructed to be as thin and light as possible in order to allow space to accommodate more anode materials in the cells. Examples of thin air cathodes based on composite microstructures have shown superior battery performance compared to conventional cathode structures.204
5. Conclusions and outlook
This review has highlighted recent progress in electrochemistry and materials chemistry of air electrodes for metal–air batteries. The electrochemical reaction pathways of oxygen reduction have been discussed in both aqueous media and aprotic electrolytes. Four categories of catalytic materials ranging from traditional noble metals/alloys to alternative carbons, metal oxides, and inorganic–organic composites have been selectively surveyed as catalysts for air electrodes, with demonstration of electrocatalytic mechanism, influential factors to catalytic properties, and electrode performance. Some basic design rationales of air electrode structure have also been presented with proposed models. To sum up the research advances and efforts, great potential and huge challenges coexist in this field.
While the metal–air systems (particularly rechargeable Li–air cells) appear to be very promising contenders as future power sources for electrified transportation and energy storage, a series of scientific and technological issues remain to be settled before they can be found practical applications with widespread deployment. First, many relevant fundamental aspects are not fully understood. For example, it is necessary to clearly unravel the elusive oxygen reaction mechanisms (e.g., 2e vs. 4e pathways and presence or absence of Li2O2) and nature of electrocatalyts (e.g., the real active sites), which is prerequisite to guide the design of high-efficiency air electrodes. Good predictive power arises from in-depth insights into the catalytic mechanism and the correlation between materials properties and performance. To gain such insights, a combination of in situ experimental analysis,54,59 theoretical investigation,34,52,77,78,156,178 nanoscale probing,205 and atomic-scale modelling206 would be valuable.
In addition to the requirement of fundamental mechanistic study, it is of paramount importance to develop highly efficient, inexpensive, environmental benign catalytic materials for enhancing the kinetics of the sluggish oxygen reduction reactions. Similar to the case of fuel cells,10,43,70,74,99,181 the large polarization (overpotential) and slow kinetics at the cathode appear to be the major challenge that limits the practical electrochemical performances. Solution to this issue should resort to highly active catalysts for oxygen reduction and/or evolution reactions. Functional materials determine essentially the characteristics of any type of electrochemical devices including batteries.207 Concerning the air electrodes, there are a rich variety of candidate materials for the oxygen electrochemistry, providing great opportunity for us to screen suitable catalysts for a specific application.
Of the four categories of catalytic materials mentioned in this review, the Pt-based noble metal family generally possesses virtues of both high activity and favourable stability but disadvantages of cost and scarcity. Alloying with cheap transition-metals and using Pt-skin overlayered structure are effective routes to simultaneously lower the noble metal loading and further enhance the activity.75–80 The compromise between cost and performance makes the Pt-based catalysts more adaptive to material-saving rechargeable metal–air batteries. Carbonaceous materials, transition-metal oxides, and composite materials derived from macrocycles or polymers (M–N/C) are promising abundant and cheap catalysts applicable to air electrodes. Carbons in nanostructured form such as graphene nanosheets and N-doped carbon nanotubes are attractive due to respectable activity, high electrical conductivity and chemical stability.132–138 Transition-metal oxides such as Mn-based spinels and perovskites exhibit considerably high activity and durability in alkaline electrolytes, and can serve as bifunctional catalysts for both the ORR and OER.152–158 The composite M–N/C catalysts enable properties tuning through adjusting the metal centres and tailoring the organic functionality.171–190
Proposed future research directions in these non-precious metal catalytic materials would include: (1) exploiting the effect of physiochemical parameters (e.g., composition, valence state, phase, structure, defects, morphology, size, surface area, conductivity, etc.) on the intrinsic catalytic activity, (2) increasing the density of active sites and their utilization through innovative design of materials and structures, and (3) optimizing catalyst synthesis strategies and conditions (e.g., precursor, temperature, duration, atmosphere, procedures) to achieve better activity and stability. In addition, nanotechnologies may open new avenues in catalyst development; nanostructured electrode materials are proven as a valuable option. Furthermore, Nature could help in exploiting new electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER processes. For example, some enzymes can efficiently catalyze electrochemical reactions by providing both redox active sites and intramolecular/interfacial electron transfer pathways.208 Active sites in biological enzymes generally have a larger flexibility of redox sites and geometry as compared to the rigid surface of inorganic solid catalysts.209 Mimicking natural oxygen catalytic processes would aid in searching for better catalysts.
Rational design of the structure also contributes significantly to the performance of an air electrode. The basic principle is to ensure the formation of high interfacial contact to facilitate oxygen electrocatalysis. Manipulation the hydrophobic/hydrophilic properties, the porosity and the catalyst distribution within the air electrode is required to permit rapid diffusion and transport of oxygen and allow for efficient contact between electrolytes and catalysts. Bearing in mind the similarity between fuel cells and metal–air batteries, concepts/techniques of cathode design/fabrication adapted in the former (e.g., bipolar structure) could possibly be applied to the latter. Likewise, multifunctional architectures (e.g., 3D structure), which have been employed to elaborately arrange the components (electrode, current collector, separator, and electrolyte) in lithium-ion batteries,210,211 would possibly aid in the design of metal–air batteries.
Metal anode, separator and electrolyte, although not emphasized in this article, are also critical factors affecting the performance of metal–air batteries.15 Lightweight metals such as Al and Mg are prone to be eroded in aqueous electrolyte, leading to a serious self-discharge problem. The anodic product (e.g., Al(OH)3 or Mg(OH)2) may block the electrode and cause premature degradation of battery performance. Optimization of electrolyte composition together with the addition of corrosion inhibitors and buffering agents help to reduce the anodic polarization and increase the Faradaic efficiency of the anode reaction; anode fabrication with porous and micro/nano structures favours fast sedimentation of metal hydroxides in the electrolyte and contributes to improved anode utilization efficiency.212–215 In Li–air cells with organic electrolytes, dendrite formation of metallic lithium and environmental contamination would induce poor cycle performance and short-circuit risk, as in the case of other types of lithium-based batteries.216 This problematic issue could be addressed by using a robust lithium composite electrode, a stable protective layer on the electrode surface, and alternative electrolytes.9,48,64,217–219 Regarding the separator, its clogging by undissolvable species (e.g., hydroxides or carbonates) has a detrimental effect on the capacity and lifetime of metal–air cells. Optimizing the pore size and ionic selectivity of separator and introducing a CO2 scrubber can be beneficial. With respect to the electrolytes, especially organic-based systems for lithium–air batteries, the stability against the highly oxidizing cathode environment and the low oxygen solubility/diffusivity limit the battery performance.26 This limitation requires the development of alternative stable electrolytes (e.g., ionic liquids) and new strategies (e.g., solvent combination and flow electrolyte design) to enhance oxygen transport properties.
Besides, it should be noted that metal–air batteries are plagued by intrinsic limited power capability and rechargeability (although the Li–air cells can sustain several cycles of repeated charge and discharge) mainly due to the slow kinetics and irreversibility of oxygen electrochemistry. A current possible technological solution to the power limitation is using a hybrid battery system with supercapacitors or other devices that can deliver high power on demand. The inability to be electrically recharged can be circumvented by the application of mechanically rechargeable systems. On the other hand, attempts to increase the cyclability of metal–air batteries may rely on the development of innovative catalysts (feasibly in composite form) that facilitate both oxygen reduction and evolution. Doubtlessly, realizing the intriguing promise held by metal–air batteries will require ongoing research efforts from different disciplines to address the formidable remaining challenges.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the National 973 (MOST Grant No. 2011CB935902), 863 (MOST Grant No. 2011AA050704), National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC Grant No. 20873071), Cheung Kong Scholar Innovation Team (MOE Grant No. IRT0927), and Tianjin High-Tech (10SYSYJC27600).
Notes and references

          R. M. Dell and D. A. J. Rand, Clean Energy, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. R. Owen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1997, 26, 259 RSC .
M. R. Palacín, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565 RSC .
Z. G. Yang, J. L. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. C. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries, McGraw-Hill, New York, 3rd edn,  2002 Search PubMed .
B. Peng and J. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 2805 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 345 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, A. Sudik, C. Wolverton and D. J. Siegel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 656 RSC .
E. Fabbri, D. Pergolesi and E. Traversa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4355 RSC .
Y. Wang, K. S. Chen, J. Mishler, S. C. Cho and X. C. Adroher, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 981 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Tahil, The zinc air battery and the zinc economy: a virtuous circle, Meridian International Research,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yang and H. Knickle, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wen, J. Cheng, S. Q. Ning and Y. S. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Müller, F. Holzer and O. Haas, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1998, 28, 895 CrossRef .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1190 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogasawara, A. Débart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390 CrossRef CAS .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kinoshita, Electrochemical Oxygen Technology, Wiley, New York,  1992 Search PubMed .
P. Sapkota and H. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2009, 15, 445 CrossRef CAS .
V. Neburchilov, H. J. Wang, J. J. Martin and W. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1271 CrossRef CAS .
R. Padbury and X. W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4436 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kowalczk, J. Read and M. Salomon, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 851 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1161 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Spendelow and A. Wieckowshi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2654 RSC .
P. A. Christensen, A. Hamnett and D. Linares-Moya, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5206 RSC .
S. A. Wasileski, M. T. M. Koper and M. J. Weaver, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 8193 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Vielstich, A. Lamm and H. A. Gasteiger, Handbook of Fuel Cells – Fundamentals, Technology and Applications, Wiley, Chichester,  2003 Search PubMed .
L. Jörisen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 23 CrossRef .
C. F. Zinola, A. J. Arvia, G. L. Estiu and E. A. Castro, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 7566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Ruvinskiy, A. Bonnefont, C. Pham-Huu and E. R. Savinova, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9018 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schneider, L. Colmenares, Y. E. Seidel, Z. Jusys, B. Wickman, B. Kasemo and R. J. Behm, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1931 RSC .
D. Strmcnik, K. Kodama, D. van der Vliet, J. Greeley, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Marković, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 466 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. B. Lima, M. L. Calegaro and E. A. Ticianelli, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Mao, K. Arihara, T. Sotomura and T. Ohsaka, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2818 RSC .
I. Roche, E. Chaînet, M. Chatenet and J. Vondrák, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1434 CAS .
F. Y. Cheng, J. Shen, W. Q. Ji, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 460 CAS .
F. Y. Cheng, Y. Su, J. Liang, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 898 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1238 CAS .
Y. J. Feng and N. Alonso-Vante, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2008, 245, 1792 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Visco, B. D. Katz, Y. S. Nimon and L. C. D. Jonghe, US Pat., 7282295,  2007 Search PubMed .

          S. J. Visco and Y. S. Nimon, US Pat., 7645543,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. Hasegawa, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, J. Xie, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 371 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Shimonishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1661 RSC .
Y. G. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6305 RSC .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20127 CAS .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178 CAS .
J. S. Hummelshøj, J. Blomqvist, S. Datta, T. Vegge, J. Rossmeisl, K. S. Thygesen, A. C. Luntz, K. W. Jacobsen and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 071101 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. S. Hummelshøj, K. S. Thygesen, J. S. G. Myrdal, J. K. Nørskov and T. Vegge, Catal. Today, 2011, 165, 2 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, Y. H. Chen, V. Giordani, F. Bardé, P. Novák, D. Graham, J. M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6351 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani, S. Yokoishi and H. Iba, Electrochemistry, 2010, 78, 403 CAS .
N. Yabuuchi, K. Yoshii, S. T. Myung, I. Nakai and S. Komaba, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4404 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, V. V. Viswanathan, D. Wang, S. A. Towne, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, D. Hu and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3894 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. H. Chen, Z. Q. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shanmukaraj, S. Grugeon, G. Gachot, S. laruelle, D. Mathiron, J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3055 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Buzzeo, O. V. Klymenko, J. D. Wadhawan, C. Hardacre, K. R. Seddon and R. G. Compton, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 8872 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuboki, T. Okuyama, T. Ohsaki and N. Takami, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 766 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A96 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, J. Kumar, R. Leese, J. P. Fellner, S. J. Rodrigues and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, E. Crumlin, R. McGuire and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1016 CrossRef CAS .
A. Débart, J. L. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177 CrossRef .
Y. C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, M. C. Parent, V. Chiloyan and Y. Shao-Horn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A69 CrossRef CAS .
V. Giordani, S. A. Freunberger, P. G. Bruce, J. M. Tarascon and D. Larcher, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A180 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 152, 1 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, J. J. Zhang, D. P. Wilinson and H. J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, T. Imaoka, W. J. Chun, O. Enoki, H. Katoh, M. Takenaga and A. Sonoi, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 397 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. N. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhou, N. Tian, J. T. Li, I. Broadwell and S. G. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4167 RSC .
Y. H. Bing, H. S. Liu, L. Zhang, D. Ghosh and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2184 RSC .
J. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirovic, Y. Xu, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2132 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2007, 315, 493 CrossRef CAS .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552 CrossRef CAS .
P. Strasser, S. Koh, T. Anniyev, J. Greeley, K. More, C. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Kaya, D. Nordlund, H. Ogasawara, M. F. Toney and A. Nilsson, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, Y. Lee and S. H. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4996 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoo, S. K. Kim, T. Y. Jeon, S. J. Hwang, J. G. Lee, S. C. Lee, K. S. Lee, Y. H. Cho, Y. E. Sung and T. H. Lim, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11414 RSC .
G. F. Wei and Z. P. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1268 CAS .
J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, E. Sutter and R. R. Adzic, Science, 2007, 315, 220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Li, Z. C. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170 CrossRef .
F. B. H. Lima, C. D. Sanches and E. A. Ticianelli, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1466 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Varcoe, R. C. T. Slade, G. L. Wright and Y. L. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21041 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Blizanac, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2264 CrossRef CAS .
F. H. B. Lima, J. Zhang, M. H. Shao, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirovic, E. A. Ticianelli and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 404 CAS .
A. E. S. Sleightholme, J. R. Varcoe and A. R. Kucernak, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarkar, A. V. Murugan and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 159 RSC .
J. J. Han, N. Li and T. Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 885 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Kariuki, X. Wang, J. R. Mawdsley, M. S. Ferrandon, S. G. Niyogi, J. T. Vaughey and D. J. Myers, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4144 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bidault and A. Kucernak, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2549 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Guo, A. Hus, D. Chu and R. R. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4324 CAS .
W. Tang, L. Zhang and G. Henkelman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1328 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, T. Yu, J. H. Odell, M. Jin and Y. N. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6566 RSC .
F. Bidault and A. Kucernak, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4950 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jaouen, E. Proietti, M. Lefèvre, R. Chenitz, J. P. Dodelet, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 114 CAS .
Z. W. Chen, D. Higgins, A. P. Yu, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3167 CAS .
B. Šljukić, C. E. Banks, S. Mentus and R. G. Compton, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 992 RSC .
Y. Y. Shao, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 46 RSC .
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gara and R. G. Compton, New J. Chem., 2011, 35, 2647 RSC .
D. Banham, F. Feng, T. Fürstenhaupt, K. Pei, S. Ye and V. Birss, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5438 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 406 RSC .
X. G. Bao, D. von Deak, E. J. Biddinger, U. S. Ozkan and C. M. Hadad, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8621 RSC .
D. von Deak, E. J. Biddinger and U. S. Ozkan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 757 CrossRef .
Y. K. Zhou, K. Neyerlin, T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, J. Bult, H. N. Dinh, T. Gennett, Z. P. Shao and P. O'Hayre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1437 CAS .
S. Pylypenko, A. Queen, T. S. Olson, A. Dameron, K. O'Neill, K. C. Neyerlin, B. Pivovar, H. N. Dinh, D. S. Ginley, T. Gennett and R. O'Hayre, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13667 CAS .
H. S. Oh, J. G. Oh, W. H. Lee, H. J. Kim and H. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 8181 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Liu, M. T. Wu, Y. H. Lai, C. C. Chiang, N. Yu and S. B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12489 RSC .
C. H. Liang, L. Ding, C. Li, M. Pang, D. S. Su, W. Z. Li and Y. M. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1121 CAS .
M. H. Shao, B. Merzougui, K. Shoemaker, L. Stolar, L. Protsailo, Z. J. Mellinger, I. J. Hsu and J. G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7426 CrossRef CAS .
I. Dumitrescu, P. R. Unwin and J. M. Macpherson, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6886 RSC .
W. M. Zhang, P. Sherrell, A. I. Minett, J. M. Razal and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1286 CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Y. Shao, G. P. Yin and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2826 RSC .
Y. Yuan, J. A. Smith, G. Goenaga, D. J. Liu, Z. P. Luo and J. B. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6160 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, M. Pasta, L. B. Hu, Y. Yang, J. McDonough, J. Cha, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1293 CAS .
R. J. Liu, S. W. Li, X. L. Xu, G. J. Zhang, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14917 RSC .
L. Wei, C. Q. Li, H. B. Chu and Y. Li, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 2332 RSC .
Y. P. Zhang, Y. Y. Hu, S. Z. Li, J. Sun and B. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9284 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujigaya, T. Uchinoumi, K. Kaneko and N. Nakashima, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6843 RSC .
L. Y. Feng, Y. Y. Yan, Y. G. Chen and L. J. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1892 CAS .
R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2952 CAS .
S. Y. Wang, D. S. Yu, L. M. Dai, D. W. Chang and J. B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6202 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, K. Lee, S. I. Woo and Y. S. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17505 RSC .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Nagaiah, S. Kundu, M. Bron, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Wang, J. S. Lee, Q. Zhu, J. Liu, Y. Wang and S. Dai, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2178 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, T. P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 206 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. G. Chen, Y. L. Li, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, S. Y. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760 CAS .
S. Shanmugam and T. Osaka, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4463 RSC .
G. Liu, X. Li, J. W. Lee and B. N. Popov, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 207 CAS .
R. Kannan, U. Bipinlal, S. Kurungot and V. K. Pillai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10312 RSC .
Y. L. Li, J. J. Wang, X. F. Li, D. S. Geng, R. Y. Li and X. L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9438 RSC .
E. Yoo and H. S. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang and H. S. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1704 CAS .
X. M. Ren, S. S. Zhang, D. T. Tran and J. Read, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10118 RSC .
B. E. Hayden, D. Pletcher, J. P. Suchsland and L. J. Williams, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 9141 RSC .
G. Wu, M. A. Nelson, N. H. Mack, S. Ma, P. Sekhar, F. H. Garzon and P. Zelenay, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7489 RSC .
V. T. T. Ho, C. J. Pan, J. Rick, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11716 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, K. Takanabe, R. Ohnishi, D. Lu, S. Okada, H. Hatasawa, H. Morioka, M. Antonietti, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7492 RSC .
Z. F. Hu, C. Chen, H. Meng, R. H. Wang, P. K. Shen and H. G. Fu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 763 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yin, M. Cai, C. X. Wang and P. K. Shen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 558 CAS .
J. E. Post, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 3447 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Viechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zaharieva, M. M. Najafpour, M. Wiechen, M. Humann, P. Kurz and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2400 CAS .
L. Q. Mao, D. Zhang, T. Sotomura, K. Nakatsu, N. Koshiba and T. Ohsaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. El-Deab and T. Ohsaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5963 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, A. Hsu and R. R. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4491 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sugawara, M. Ohno and K. Matsuki, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 833 RSC .
E. Ríos, H. Reyes, J. Ortiz and J. L. Gautier, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 2705 CrossRef .
M. D. Koninck, S. C. Poirier and B. Marsan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2103 CrossRef .
V. Nikolova, P. Iliev, K. Petrov, T. Vitanov, E. Zhecheva, R. Stoyanova, I. Valov and D. Stoychev, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 727 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Cheng, J. Shen, B. Peng, Y. D. Pan, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2010, 3, 79 CrossRef .
K. Miyazaki, K. Kawakita, T. Abe, T. Fukutsuka, K. Kojima and Z. Ogumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1913 RSC .
M. Yuasa, M. Nishida, T. Kida, N. Yamazoe and K. Shimanoe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A605 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lippert, M. J. Montenegro, M. Döbeli, A. Weidenkaff, S. Müller, P. R. Willmott and A. Wokaun, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2007, 35, 221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko, C. Querner, A. Karpov, S. Huber and R. Oesten, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1642 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, J. Sunarso, Z. G. Chen, L. Ge, J. Motuzas, J. Zou, G. X. Wang, A. Julbe and Z. H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 872 CAS .
L. Malavasi, C. A. J. Fisher and M. S. Islam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4370 RSC .
H. B. Wang, F. Y. Cheng, Z. L. Tao, J. Liang and J. Chen, Chem. J. Chinese. Univ., 2011, 32, 595 CAS .
J. S. Lee, T. Lee, H. K. Song, J. Cho and B. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4148 CAS .
A. Débart, J. L. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177 CrossRef .
A. Débart, A. J. Paterson, J. L. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521 CrossRef .
H. Cheng and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1370 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Thapa, K. Saimen and T. Ishihara, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 13, A165 CAS .
F. P. Hu, X. G. Zhang, F. Xiao and J. L. Zhang, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2931 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bashyam and P. Zelenay, Nature, 2006, 443, 63 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsch, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2302 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. B. Bezerra, L. Zhang, K. Lee, H. S. Liu, A. L. B. Marques, E. P. Marques, H. J. Wang and J. J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4937 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Easton, R. Yang, A. Bonakdarpour and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, B6 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Yang, K. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B79 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Easton, A. Bonakdarpour, R. Z. yang, D. A. Stevens and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B547 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefèvre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J. P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71 CrossRef .
R. R. Chen, H. X. Li, D. Chu and G. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20689 CAS .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443 CrossRef CAS .
Q. G. He, X. F. Yang, X. M. Ren, B. E. Koel, N. Ramaswamy, S. Mukerjee and R. Kostecki, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7404 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jaouen, E. Proietti, M. Lefèvre, R. Chenitz, J. P. Dodelet, G. Wu, H. T. Chung, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelanay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 114 CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Y. Choi, H. J. Wang, H. Li and Z. W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3673 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, X. M. Ren and J. Read, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4544 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Guo, H. X. Li, H. He, D. Chu and R. R. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8491 Search PubMed .
M. Lefèvre, J. P. Dodelet and P. Bertrand, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16718 CrossRef .
M. Kobayashi, H. Niwa, Y. Harada, K. Horiba, M. Oshima, H. Ofuchi, K. Terakura, T. Ikeda, Y. Koshigoe, J. I. Ozaki, S. Miyata, S. Ueda, Y. Yamashita, H. Yoshikawa and K. Kobayashi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8346 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, W. M. Zhang, D. Officer, G. F. Swiegers and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Commun., 2007, 3353 RSC .
A. Trojánek, J. langmaier, J. Šebera, S. Záliš, J. M. Barbe, H. H. Girault and Z. Samec, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5446 RSC .
B. Winther-Jensen, O. Winther-Jensen, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Science, 2008, 321, 671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, S. Zhu, C. C. Milleville, C. Y. Lee, P. Chen, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi and A. C. Marschilok, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A162 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Liu, Z. Shi, J. L. Zhang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 468 RSC .
H. S. Oh, J. G. Oh, B. Roh, I. Hwang and H. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 879 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, D. Foster and J. Read, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 886 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Eom, C. W. Lee, M. S. Yun and Y. K. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1592 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Sandhu, J. P. Fellner and G. W. Brutchen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 365 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Williford and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1164 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Wang, W. Xu, D. Wang, R. E. Williford, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A487 CrossRef CAS .
P. Albertus, G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, R. S. Sánchez-Carrera, B. Kozinsky, J. Christensen and A. C. Luntz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, L. Cheng, F. Li, H. M. Xiong and Y. Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2095 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fujiwara, M. Yao, Z. Siroma, H. Senoh, T. Ioroi and K. Yasuda, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 808 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Xu and W. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7438 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Beattie, D. M. Manolescu and S. L. Blair, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A44 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Zhu, B. A. Poole, D. R. Cahela and B. J. Tatarchuk, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2003, 33, 29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, F. Ciucci, A. N. Morozovska, S. V. Kalinin and S. Jesse, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 707 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Islam and P. R. Slater, MRS Bull., 2011, 34, 935 CrossRef .
F. Y. Cheng, J. Liang, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1695 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Armstrong and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 14049 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, K. Dimitrievski, P. Siegbahn and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18821 CAS .
D. R. Rolison, J. W. Long, J. C. Lytle, A. E. Fischer, C. P. Phodes, T. M. McEvoy, M. E. Bourg and A. M. Lubers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 226 RSC .
M. Roberts, P. Johns, J. Owen, D. Brandell, K. Edstrom, G. E. Enany, C. Guery, D. Golodnitsky, M. Lacey, C. Lecoeur, H. Mazor, E. Peled, E. Perre, M. M. Shaijumon, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9876 RSC .
W. Y. Li, C. S. Li, C. Y. Zhou, H. Ma and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6009 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, C. S. Li, Y. Su and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 684 RSC .
C. S. Li, W. Q. Ji, J. Chen and Z. L. Tao, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5812 CrossRef CAS .
M. Minakshi, D. Appadoo and D. E. Martin, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A77 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206 CrossRef .
N. S. Choi, Y. M. Lee, K. Y. Cho, D. H. Ko and J. K. Park, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 1238 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, R. S. Li, T. Huang and A. S. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimonishi, T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, D. Im, D. J. Lee, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5128 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Fangyi Cheng
	Fangyi Cheng received his BSc degree in Chemistry in 2003 and a PhD (with Prof. Jun Chen) in Materials Physics and Chemistry in 2009. At present, Dr Cheng is a lecturer at Nankai University. Since 2003, he has mainly studied the preparation of Mn-based oxides with controllable structures and their applications as battery materials or electrocatalysts. His current research interest is focused on functional materials for efficient energy storage and conversion.

Jun Chen
	Jun Chen is a Cheung Kong Scholar Professor at Nankai University. He is the director of the Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education). He obtained his BSc and MSc degrees from Nankai University in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and his PhD from Wollongong University (Australia) in 1999. He held the NEDO fellowship at National Institute of AIST Kansai Center (Japan) from 1999 to 2002. His research expertise is nanomaterials for energy storage & conversion with batteries, fuel cells, and solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of the gravimetric energy density of some representative types of primary/rechargeable batteries, metal–air batteries, H2–air fuel cell and gasoline. The theoretical values are calculated on the basis of thermodynamics of active materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the structure and operation principle of a metal–air battery and the liquid-gas-solid (catalyst) interface in the air electrode.	 


Zn–air	(a) Zn + 2OH− → ZnO + H2O + 2e	−1.25

	(o) 2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO	1.65
Mg–air	(a) 2Mg + 4OH− → 2Mg(OH)2 + 4e	−2.69

	(o) 2Mg + O2 + 2H2O → 2Mg(OH)2	3.09
Al–air	(a) Al + 3OH− → Al(OH)3 + 3e	−2.31

	(o) 4Al + 3O2 + 6H2O → Al(OH)3	2.71
Li–air	(a) Li + OH− → LiOH + e	−2.95

	(o) 4Li + O2 + 2H2O → 4LiOH	3.35
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH− (E0 = 0.40 V)	(1)
O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH− (E0 = −0.07 V)	(2)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH− (E0 = 0.87 V)	(3)
2HO2− → 2OH− + O2	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Different configurations of O2 adsorption on catalyst surfaces: on top end-on, bridge end-on, bridge side-on one site, and bridge side-on two sites, from left to right. Simplified electrochemical catalysis process of the ORR on metal surfaces in the case of (b) end-on O2 adsorption, and (c) bidentate O2 adsorption, corresponding to the 2e reduction (with generated peroxide species) and the direct 4e reduction, respectively. (d) One of the proposed catalytic ORR pathways at a metal oxide/alkaline electrolyte interface.	 
4Li + O2 → 2Li2O (E0 = 2.91 V vs. Li+/Li)	(5)
2Li + O2 → Li2O2 (E0 = 2.96 or 3.10 V vs. Li+/Li)	(6)
O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2	(7)
2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2	(8)
LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2	(9)
Li2O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2Li2O	(10)
Li+ + e− + O2 + * → LiO2*	(11)
Li+ + e− + LiO2* → Li2O2	(12)

 	Fig. 4  Proposed reaction scheme of the formation of discharge products in a Li–O2 battery with alkyl carbonate electrolytes. The discharged compounds include Li propyl dicarbonate, Li formate, Li acetate, Li2CO3, CO2 and H2O, as marked in red. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Pt-alloys for electrocatalysis of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR): (a) Volcano plots of the oxygen reduction kinetic current density (jk) as a function of the calculated oxygen adsorption energy (ΔEo); (b) computational results showing the relationship between the oxygen binding energy on Pt/Pd skin surfaces and alloying energy. Data are shown relative to Pt while circles and squares in (b) represent 50 and 25% of the alloying element in the second layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2009, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 6  Li–O2 battery operated with different catalyst: (a) initial galvanostatic discharge/charge profiles of Au/C, Pt/C and PtAu/C at 100 mA g−1carbon; (b) discharge/charge curves at different current densities. The horizontal dashed line marks the nominal equilibrium potential of O2/Li2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Nitrogen-doped carbon nanocapsules (NCNC) as non-noble electrocatalysts for the ORR in alkaline media: (a) schematic presentation of their fabrication, (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of the capsules, and (d) linear sweep voltammograms of the NCNC (the subscript denotes the synthesized temperature) and the benchmark Pt/C (E-TEK). Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Application of carbonaceous materials in Li–O2 batteries: TEM image of the graphene nanosheets electrode (a) before and (b) after discharge (the square marks thicker product deposit, indicating high activity at the edges); (c) Discharge/charge profiles of Li–O2 batteries with different carbon cathodes at a current density of 75 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Presentations of the structures of some binary and ternary manganese oxides. c- and t-AMn2O4 denote cubic and tetragonal Mn-based spinels, respectively, with the A-site cations being tetragonally coordinated with oxygen. BMnO3 represents the Mn-based perovskite with the B-site ions being marked in green. Metal cations in A, B and Mn sites can be substituted by other metal ions.	 

 	Fig. 10  Polarization curves of different electrodes in KOH aqueous electrolyte: (a) carbon-supported LaMnO3, (b) LaMnO3/LaNiO3 (10 wt% LaMnO3), (c) LaMnO3/LaNiO3 (30 wt% LaMnO3), (d) neat LaNiO3. The anodic and cathodic polarization corresponds to the electrocatalytic OER and ORR process, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 158 by permission of The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cobalt–manganese spinel oxides as electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER. SEM images of (a) tetragonal-phase spinel nanostructures (RT-t-spinel) and (b) cubic-phase spinel nanostructures (RT-c-spinel) synthesized at room temperature. Voltammograms of the (c) ORR and (d) OER recorded on different catalysts. Comparisons are also given to the counterpart cubic-phase (HT-c-spinel) and tetragonal-phase (HT-t-spinel) bulk spinels synthesized using high-temperature ceramic method. Reproduced from ref. 156. Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 12  Structures of some representative transition-metal macrocycles (a–d) and proposed active sites of some transition-metal macrocycle composite catalysts (e–g): (a) tetramethoxy tetraphenyl porphyrin (TMPP), (b) phthalocyanine (PC), (c) tetraphenyl porphyrins (TPP), (d) tetraazaanulene (TAA), (e) metal-aromatic cycles attached to the edges of graphitic sheets,177 (f) presumed catalytic moiety derived from heat treatment of a metal-polyaniline complex in N2,179 and (g) supposed configuration of metal-polypyrrole composite catalyst.171 M represents a transition-metal such as Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, etc.	 

 	Fig. 13  Carbon-supported Fe-phthalocyanine (FePc/C) and Co-phthalocyanine (CoPc/C) as the ORR catalysts in alkaline solutions. (a) Voltammetry profiles of FePc/C, CoPc/C, and the comparative Pt/C recorded on a rotating ring-disk electrode. The disk and ring current densities are represented by Id and Ir, respectively. The inset curves display the H2O2 yields on the three catalysts. (b) Density functional theory (DFT) calculation results showing the optimized structural configurations for HOOH adsorbed on FePc (left) and H2OO adsorbed on CoFc. The central yellow ball, the two red balls, blue balls and light white balls correspond to the Fe/Co, O, N, C and H atoms, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Application of FeCo-EDA (ethylenediamine) catalyst in Zn–air batteries: TEM images of FeCo-EDA (a) before and (b) (b) accelerated degradation test; single cell performance of (c) polarization curve and (c) power density for the Zn–air cells made with FeCo-EDA and Pt/C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustrated interfaces of air electrodes and proposed electrode structures. (a) Gas–solid–liquid three-phase interface model in aqueous electrolyte. (b) Liquid–solid two-phase interface model in non-aqueous electrolyte; (a) and (b) are adapted from ref. 193 with significant modification, copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Model structure of air electrode with metal mesh/foam-supported oxygen permeable membrane (OPM, for filtering out H2O or CO2), gas diffusion layer (GDL) and catalyst layer (CL). (d) Suggested porous structure of the catalyst layer with hierarchical macro-/meso-/inter-particle pores for both efficient electrolyte wetting and gas transportation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
