Rational chemical doping of metal halide perovskites  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00563J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00563J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 517-539Rational chemical doping of metal halide perovskites

        
          
            Xinyuan 
            Zhang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Lina 
            Li†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Zhihua 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Junhua 
            Luo
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Structural Chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou 350002, China. E-mail: jhluo@fjirsm.ac.cn; lilina@fjirsm.ac.cn; sunzhihua@fjirsm.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
Received 
      30th August 2018
    First published on 17th December 2018AbstractMetal halide perovskites benefit from the combination of wide absorption, high carrier mobility, defect tolerance, moderate exciton binding energies, and versatility of solution processes, showing great promise in photovoltaics and optoelectronics. However, the issues of long-term instability and toxicity of lead are supposed to limit their further practical applications. Chemical doping of an impurity into metal halide perovskites was reported to be a relatively effective approach to solving these issues while providing additional tunable physical and chemical properties. In an attempt to boost the research field further, it is imperative to summarize the recent significant work on metal halide doped perovskites, disclosing the underlying structure–property relationships to provide useful insights into applications of these perovskites with high performance. In this review, we highlight the rational design of doped perovskites by both theoretical and experimental efforts as well as their potential application spanning various fields.
Xinyuan Zhang
Xinyuan Zhang received her bachelor's degree in chemistry from Qingdao University in 2017. She is currently a PhD candidate in organic chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under the supervision of Prof. Junhua Luo. Her research interests are the synthesis and characterization of doped metal halide perovskites and their optoelectronic properties.
Lina Li
Lina Li is currently an associate research professor in Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science. She obtained her PhD degree from Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science in 2014. Her current research interests include the rational design of organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials and their applications in optoelectronics.
Zhihua Sun
Zhihua Sun received his PhD degree from Shangdong University in 2010, and then joined Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is a professor of inorganic chemistry at present, and his current research interests focus on the development of organic–inorganic hybrid ferroelectrics for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications.
Junhua Luo
Junhua Luo received his PhD (2003) from Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science, followed by postdoctoral research at North Carolina State University (2003), and University of Florida (2005), as well as Los Alamos National Laboratory (2006). He became a Professor at Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science in 2009. His current research interests focus on the development of photoelectric functional materials based on organic–inorganic hybrids.
1. Introduction
Perovskite, originating from the mineral calcium titanium oxide (CaTiO3), now refers to a broad class of materials which possess the same structure.1 Recently, three dimensional (3D) metal halide perovskites ABX3 (A = CH3NH3+, NH2CHNH2+, or Cs+; B = Pb2+ or Sn2+; X = Cl−, Br−, or I−) have fueled enormous interest owing to their significant features. Benefitting from their long carrier recombination lifetime, wide absorption of light, and high carrier mobility, they present desirable optoelectronic and photovoltaic properties.2–17 Particularly, lead halide perovskite solar cells exhibit prominent power conversion efficiencies (PCE) exceeding 22%.18–22 Moreover, lead halide perovskites have shown great promise in other optoelectronic applications, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers and optoelectronic detectors.2,23–33
In spite of various virtues, the issues of long-term stability and toxicity of lead are still the achilles heel limiting further practical applications of most metal halide perovskites.34–43 In this context, doped metal halide perovskites are emerging. Doping of an impurity into metal halide perovskites was found to be an effective approach to solving these issues.20,44–47 Furthermore, rational incorporation of impurity can favorably tune and modulate the electronic and optical properties.48–53 Different from the dopants which create deep energy levels and act as electron traps in conventional inorganic semiconductors (e.g. Si, GaAs), dopants in metal halide perovskites generally do not give rise to mid-gap trap states.54–59 The defect tolerance nature of halide perovskites not only endows the doped perovskites with expected electronic and optical properties, but also provides an additional handle to adjust the structure and resulting performance. For instance, organic cation doping in various proportions can efficiently tune the band gap (the number of inorganic perovskite layers) and enhance the stability of the host perovskite.60,61 In addition, ferroelectric and multiferroic properties can be realized induced by the order–disorder transformation of organic cations.25,62–65 Partial substitution of X-site halogen ions with another ion has been proven to generate an obvious shift in the absorption band and an enhancement of carrier transport.66–72 Moreover, the incorporation of metal ions evidently reduces the toxicity of lead-based perovskites, and at the same time, introduces another channel of energy transfer in the host which can lead to unique optical and electrical properties.73–79 Therefore, these doped perovskites could span a more diverse range of potential applications compared with original metal halide perovskites, including solar cells, LEDs, laser diodes, field effect transistors, detectors and ferroelectric memories.
Reviews on hybrid perovskites have been extensively reported; for instance, multifunctional hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites including hybrid metal halide perovskites, hybrid formate perovskites, and other hybrid perovskites were summarized by Cheetham and co-workers; they reasonably elaborated the chemical variability, structural diversity, and the correspondingly distinct physical properties of these hybrid perovskites.80 Mitzi's group highlighted the distinct chemical flexibility, and distinct electronic and optical related applications of different dimensional organic-based perovskites.81 Zhu and Zhao cooperatively reported optoelectronic and electronic applications of hybrid lead halide perovskites. They systematically discussed the basic crystal structure, chemical synthesis, device fabrication, and optoelectronic applications of recently reported hybrid lead halide perovskites.30 As far as we know, hybrid metal halide perovskites with dopants are not systematically presented. In view of the significant effect of dopants on the physical and chemical performance, it is imperative to shape a comprehensive review to summarize the recent advancements in doped metal halide perovskites. In this review, we systematically discuss different kinds of doping behaviors including A-site cation doping, X-site halogen doping, B-site metal doping and double perovskites, and give a perspective on both achievements and challenges remaining in these doped metal halide perovskites. These contents provide an in-depth insight into the structure–property relationships in hybrid perovskites, which is crucial for further improvement of performance.
2. Cation doping
Generally, 3D metal halide perovskites suffer from moisture sensitivity during the fabrication of devices.38,82–84 A mixed-cation method has been reported that is an effective approach to enhance the stability of functional devices. Moreover, the structurally two dimensional (2D) perovskites are readily more resistant to humidity than the 3D analogues.60,85–88 Furthermore, compared to the 3D parent structure, whose structural constraints are fairly rigid, lower-dimensional perovskite allows for a remarkable structural tunability.81 Such structural flexibility provides a platform for the preparation of new perovskites featuring distinct structure and novel physical properties.48,62,89–92 In this part, we mainly focus on 2D metal halide perovskites induced by mixed cations.
The crystallographically characterized n = 3 lead perovskite (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (PEA = C6H5(CH2)2NH3+) was obtained by Karunadasa's group (Fig. 1A).60 Such a multi-layered perovskite based solar cell achieved a PCE beyond 4%. Though the device exhibits relatively lower efficiency compared to current 3D perovskite based solar cells, these layered structures are more resistant to moisture (Fig. 1B). More importantly, such a distinct layered structure features greater tenability to readily provide promising routes for material optimization. Meanwhile, Kanatzidis and co-workers reported a series of 2D Ruddlesden–Popper type perovskites via the incorporation of CH3(CH2)3NH2 (BA) into MAPbI3.61 The thickness of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ∞) could be rationally controlled by adjusting the ratio of BA/MA organic cations (Fig. 2A) with a tunable band gap from 2.43 eV, 2.17 eV, 2.03 eV, 1.91 eV to 1.50 eV for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ∞, respectively (Fig. 2B). Notably, these compounds naturally feature multiple-quantum-well structures generating stable excitons at room temperature, defining a promising class of desirable semiconductors with potential applications in light emitting diodes. Kanatzidis et al. then successfully obtained a (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 based solar cell with an initial PCE of 4.02%.47 The long-chain organic cation promotes moisture resistance of (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10, and its humidity stability is greatly enhanced compared with that of the 3D MAPbI3 analogue. This merit makes (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 more attractive for large-scale industrial implementation. However, the power conversion efficiency is relatively poor resulting from the inhibition of out-of-layer charge transport induced by the BA cations which act as insulating spacing layers between the conducting inorganic layers. Later, Mohite et al. overcome this disadvantage by preparing thin films of near-single-crystalline quality.93 Consequently, an increased PCE of up to 12.52 per cent was obtained for (BA)2(MA)4Pb4I13 thin films (Fig. 2C–F). Such prominent efficiency is attributable to the enhanced charge transport and mobility benefited from the near-perfect vertical orientation of inorganic layers (Fig. 2E). This distinct orientation capacitates the photo-generated carriers to move along the inorganic layers across the device electrode, avoiding the inhibition of insulating organic layers. Importantly, the devices also exhibited greatly improved stability compared to MAPbI3 when exposed to light, humidity and heat. The incorporation of large ammonium cations effectively passivates the surface of the perovskite layers or grain boundaries, hence producing highly stable devices. We can draw a conclusion that these merits render these 2D halide perovskites a promising class of stable and efficient light-absorbing materials for photovoltaics; nevertheless, the efficiency still needs to be improved.
 Fig. 1  (A) Crystal structures of (MA)[PbI3] and (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10]. (B) PXRD patterns of films of (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (1), (MA)[PbI3] formed from PbI2 (2a), and PbCl2 (2b), which were exposed to 52% relative humidity. Adapted from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2014. 
 Fig. 2  (A) The structure of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1, extending from n = 1 to n = ∞. The L-value denotes the thickness of the inorganic layer in each compound. (B) Tunable band gap of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1. Adapted from ref. 61 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (C) The crystal structure of (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 and (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 layered perovskites. (D) GIWAXS maps for polycrystalline hot-cast near-single-crystalline (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films. (E) Schematic representation of the (101) orientation, along with the (111) and (202) planes of a 2D perovskite crystal. (F) Histogram of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 device PCE over 50 devices, fitted with a Gaussian distribution (red line). Adapted from ref. 93 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. 
Besides the enhanced stability of solar performance compared with 3D parent perovskites, high-performance optoelectronic detectors based on homologous doped 2D hybrid perovskites have been successfully achieved. For example, a tunable photoresponse with a short response time in milliseconds based on (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3) layered perovskites has been reported by Huang's group (Fig. 3).48 The distinct optical band gaps for different layered perovskites give rise to the potential for detecting and the response to light at various wavelengths. Furthermore, our group has reported a single-crystal ferroelectric photodetector based on (BA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10 (Fig. 4A).62 This ferroelectric presented a phase transition at 315 K, arising from the distortion of inorganic moieties and synergistic ordering of organic moieties, which is unprecedented for the reported 2D multilayered hybrid perovskites. An ultrahigh built-in electric field inside ferroelectric devices induced by such electric polarization effectively reduced dark currents to 10−12 A, and greatly favoured device optoelectronic performances (Fig. 4B). As a result, they exhibited prominent optoelectronic parameters including large on/off current ratios (∼2.5 × 103) (Fig. 4C) and very fast response rates (∼150 μs), which are comparable with those of the most active CH3NH3PbI3 (Fig. 4D). Significantly, such a 2D perovskite is environmentally stable under ambient conditions and exhibits high thermal stability up to 230 °C. These results highlight the promise of 2D layered perovskite ferroelectrics for high performance optoelectronic application.
 Fig. 3  Tunable photoresponse based on different 2D layer-structured perovskites. Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 4  (A) Scheme for the formation of a 2D multilayered perovskite structure. (B) Variation of photoresponse at different incident wavelengths with a fixed powder of ∼2.13 mW cm−2. (C) Recyclable switchable operation of photoresponse, showing highly stable detection after long-time illumination. (D) The rise and decay times during on–off light switching. Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2017. 
In order to understand the key factors determining the optoelectronic properties of these layered materials, Herz and colleagues investigated their charge-carrier dynamics in detail.94 They found that the exciton binding energy became large with decreased lead iodide layer thickness. The exciton binding energy of 3D bulk MAPbI3 is reported to be in the range of 2–25 meV, comparable to or less than the thermal energy at room temperature, thus charge carriers in 3D bulk MAPbI3 are likely to be free electrons and holes. Differently, the exciton binding energy is in the 200–500 meV range for 2D layered perovskites. This is due to the dielectric mismatch between organic and inorganic components and the reduced screening of the Coulombic attraction between the electron and hole. At the same time, they observed that the increasing PEA content generally increased the overall charge-carrier recombination rate of such 2D layered perovskites. This phenomenon confirms the idea that the moderate addition of long-chain cations may be an efficient strategy to enhance charge-carrier recombination rates to improve the quantum efficiency of perovskite LEDs.
The effects of exciton and quantum confinement were also explored in a series of doped halide perovskites. By adjusting the ratio of the organic cations, Urban et al. successfully controlled the thickness and band gap of octylammonium (OA) cation based OA2MAn−1PbnBr3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ∞) perovskite nanoplatelets.95 Notably, a blue shift of photoluminescence (PL) was observed with a gradual change in color from green (0% OA) to blue (90% OA) and violet (100% OA) (Fig. 5). The reason is that OA content readily adjusts the thickness of the produced nanoplatelets, resulting in a quantum size effect. Understanding the nature of the quantum size effects in perovskite nanostructures will provide a new strategy to acquire nanostructures with desirable optical and electrical properties. Scholes's group also synthesized a colloidally stable suspension of 2D organo-lead iodide perovskite NCs (C18H35NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1[PbnI3n+1] (n = 1, 2, and 3).96 Such NCs were prepared in a distinct two-step process: monodisperse PbI2 NCs were prepared first, and then reacted with an alkyl ammonium iodide to give rise to the corresponding perovskite NCs. As shown in Fig. 6A, different layered structures can be obtained via tuning the ratio of the organic cations, leading to distinct PL emissions (Fig. 6B). These NCs feature a strong “band-edge exciton” absorption, as disclosed by the absorption and PL spectra (Fig. 6C), and the excitonic gap is tuned stepwise via the change of layer (Fig. 6D). These studies on exciton and quantum confinement are beneficial for investigating the intrinsic photophysics and spectroscopy of hybrid perovskites. In this context, Tisdale and co-workers presented a review of colloidal perovskite nanoplatelets. Benefitting from the merits including strong quantum confinement, facile synthesis, flexible tunability, and narrow exciton absorption/emission, the colloidal perovskite nanoplatelets are promising candidates in LEDs, photodetectors, and lasers.97
 Fig. 5  Nanostructures of OA/MA perovskite suspensions with tuable PL under UV light. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic structures of the colloidal 2D organo-lead iodide perovskite NCs (C18H35NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1[PbnI3n+1]. (B) Photograph of colloidal 2D organo-lead iodide perovskite NC solutions under ambient light. (C) Absorption spectrum of colloidal PbI2 NCs compared to the absorption and emission spectra of the resultant 2D lead iodide perovskite (n = 3) colloidal NC solution in a toluene/chloroform mixture. (D) Absorption spectra and steady-state PL of the three 2D organo-lead iodide perovskites. Absorbance is plotted as optical density normalized to the exciton peak. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2016. 
Considering the environmentally friendly aspects, cation-doping was further extended to Sn-based hybrid perovskites. Conducting properties have been revealed in the (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1SnnI3n+1 series.98 With n increasing, a marked drop in resistivity could be observed, which resulted in a transition from semiconducting (n < 3) to metallic (n > 3) character. The incorporation of long-chain cations provides great possibility and flexibility for tuning the electrical properties of perovskite sheets. Ning and co-workers recently obtained 2D (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1 by employing PEA as an organic separating interlayer.99 The dimensional reduction significantly improved air stability and effectively suppressed oxidation disproportionation. Additionally, the perpendicular growth of the perovskite domains benefits charge carrier transport, leading to a PCE of 5.94%. These results promote the prospects of pure Sn perovskites for solar cell application. Although the PCEs of Sn-based perovskite solar cells are relatively low compared with those of Pb-based perovskites, lead-free solar cell devices with long-term stability can be realized via a rational doping strategy.
3. Doping of halides
Benefiting from the ionic nature, semiconductors in the metal halide perovskite family perform flexible chemical management via substitution of halide ions, which enables versatile optical and electrical properties, such as band gap tunability, photoluminescence diversity, carrier transport enhancement and so on.100–106
The tunable band gap of MAPbX3 has been realized via substitution of halide ions, arising from the intense dependence of electronic energies on the effective exciton mass. Song's group synthesized MAPbBr3−xClx and MAPbBr3−xIx (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) NCs by the halide exchange reaction of MAPbBr3 with MACl and MAI, respectively (Fig. 7). These NCs exhibited full-range tunable band gaps over a wide range of 1.6–3.0 eV.107 First-principles density-functional theory calculations were further carried out to understand the composition-dependent photo conversion efficiency. Noh and co-workers demonstrated highly efficient solar cells fabricated from MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1). The absorption band of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 varies from 786 nm wavelength to 544 nm wavelength with increasing Br content (Fig. 8A and B), and the energy band is tuned from 1.58 to 2.28 eV (Fig. 8C).108 They found that the band gap engineering induced by chemical tunability enabled the realization of colorful solar cells with a PCE of 12.3% for the most efficient device (Fig. 8D). Besides, the stability to humidity was enhanced at x = 0.2 (Fig. 8E), which might be associated with the lattice reduction. Gradual substitution of I atoms with Br atoms in the above perovskite resulted in lattice constant reduction with a transition to a cubic phase from a tetragonal phase, and this enhanced the stability. Zettl et al. then reported graded band gap double-layer perovskite solar cells (layer 1: CH3NH3SnI3 and layer 2: CH3NH3PbI3−xBrx) with a high PCE of 21.7%.109 These findings disclose that the stability of perovskite MAPbX3 cells can be greatly improved by chemical management while maintaining the efficiency.
 Fig. 7  Photograph of MAPbBr3−xClx and MAPbBr3−xIx colloidal solutions, where x = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 3. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 8  (A) UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3. (B) Photographs of TiO2/MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 bilayer nanocomposites on FTO glass substrates. (C) A quadratic relationship of the band-gaps of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 as a function of Br composition (x). (D) Power conversion efficiencies of the heterojunction solar cells as a function of Br composition (x). (E) Stability of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 based solar cells exposed to humidity. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
Unlike MAPbI3−xBrx perovskites, the MAPbI3−xClx composition cannot be widely tuned by simply varying the Cl:I molar ratio in the precursor solution,110,111 and the Cl incorporation with a limited concentration below 3–4%.46 Mosca's group found that Cl doping can dramatically improve the carrier mobility, which is essential for obtaining emulative photovoltaic efficiency. Further, Madjet et al. carried out ab initio nonadiabatic molecular dynamics simulations and found that low amounts of Cl− in I−-based perovskites had a strong impact on extending the carrier's thermalization time caused by the structural distortion induced by Cl− doping.70 Consequently, the lifetime of the initially generated exciton increased, benefiting better chances of charge separation and enhancement of carrier mobility. Moreover, the asymmetry in electron and hole relaxation dynamics may also contribute to the reduction of electron–hole recombination rates. Snaith and co-workers studied recombination kinetics in detail. They predicted that there was a distribution of sub-gap trap states; at low fluences the charge-trapping pathways limited the photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQY), whereas at high fluences and low temperatures the traps were predominantly filled and photo-generated species underwent a radiative bimolecular recombination process, thus a high PLQY approaching 100% could be gained.67 This approach helps in designing and upgrading the material for highly efficient light-emitting devices. In spite of great efforts being made, the reliable values of the Cl− concentration and the direct effect of the Cl− ions on charge transport are still under debate, which need more compelling experimental evidence and further theoretical studies.
The improvement in carrier mobility by Cl− doping was also observed in CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx; Huang's group successfully obtained mixed-halide hybrid perovskite single crystals of CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06. These crystals presented high-resolution γ-ray energy spectrum detection at room temperature under a small electric field, which is superior to high-purity germanium that performs under the condition of liquid nitrogen cooling due to the small band gap.112 In addition, compared with cost-restricted crystal manufacturing at a high level of Cd1−xZnxTe, high-quality single crystals of CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 can be obtained by low-cost solution processes with highly enhanced mobility of up to 560 cm2 V−1 s−1. They found that moderate Cl− doping of CH3NH3PbBr3 can reduce the charge carrier density of the bulk crystal resulting in a smaller dark current density than that of the CH3NH3PbBr3 based device (Fig. 9A). Excitingly, large responsivity was observed for CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06, revealing highly efficient collection of photo-generated carriers (Fig. 9B). These advantages endow CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 with desired good-resolution γ-ray spectrum detection (Fig. 9C). CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx was also applied in photovoltaic devices combining a more conductive p-doped 4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl hole transport material by Cahen et al.102 With the synergistic effect of the high carrier mobility MAPbBr3−xClx layer and the conductive hole transport material, the solar cell showed a higher open-circuit voltage, fill factor, and, especially, current density.
 Fig. 9  (A) Dark current density of CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx single-crystal devices with a thickness of ∼2 mm. (B) Photocurrent of the above devices. (C) Side view of a CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 single-crystal device. (D) Enlarged detection of the 137Cs spectra obtained by CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 and MAPbBr3 single-crystal detectors. Adapted from ref. 112 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
Anion doping is widely used to tune the chemical composition and optical properties of more stable CsPbX3−xYx (X, Y = Cl, Br, I; 0 ≤ x ≤ 3) nanocrystals. Manna et al. employed a facile postsynthetic method to prepare colloidal CsPbX3−xYx NCs.113 These NCs exhibited excellent optical performance in terms of tunable light emitting region. Notably, highly soluble precursors could lead to anion exchange in a few seconds without deteriorating the initial structure or forming any remarkable lattice/surface defects, which promised good stability of the as-synthesized NCs. Kovalenko's group obtained desirable highly luminescent (QY = 50–90%), perovskite-based colloidal quantum dots with emission spectra tuned over the entire visible spectral region via compositional modulation, as shown in Fig. 10A and B.114 Particularly, CsPbX3−xYx QDs with highly stable blue and green emissions (410–530 nm) are more attractive, because the corresponding metal chalcogenide QDs suffer from chemical and photo instability. These QDs were further embedded in poly(methylmethacrylate), giving rise to composites with bright emission and excellent optical clarity (Fig. 10C). Such merits of these novel materials make them suitable for optoelectronic applications such as lasing, light-emitting diodes, and photon detection. As in previous reports, the application of MAPbX3−xYx in lasers was achieved by Zhu's group.115,116 Widely tunable lasers were acquired from doped perovskite nanowires at room temperature. Intriguingly, due to low non-radiative recombination rates and the long carrier lifetimes, lasers from single-crystal NWs of MAPbX3−xYx showed the lowest lasing threshold (220 nJ cm−2) and highest Q factors (∼3600) among the reported NW lasers. Tunable lasers from CsPbX3−xYx were also realized by Xiong's and Fu's group via halide doping (Fig. 11A).117,118 The peak of one lasing was fitted by a Lorentz function with a full-width at half-maximum of 0.14 nm (Fig. 11B). Such a laser linewidth is almost the smallest among those of inorganic semiconductors and other perovskite microcavities in this spectral range. In this context, the tunability of emission over the entire visible region with doped halides and the prominent lasing performance render them promising materials for various applications, such as optical computing, nanophotonics, and chemical/biological sensing. Though extensive results on CsPbX3−xYx have been reported, the basic structural and electronic properties of these doped compounds have not been deeply investigated. Wei et al. performed first-principles calculations combined with Monte Carlo simulations based on cluster expansion methods to systematically study the structural, electronic, and optical properties of CsPbX3−xYx.119 They simultaneously found that the miscibility gap temperature (temperature at which alloys could be fully mixed) of CsPbI3−xClx, CsPbI3−xBrx, and CsPbBr3−xClx were 625, 223 and 116 K, respectively (Fig. 12), indicating that CsPbI3−xBrx and CsPbBr3−xClx could be easily formed, but CsPbI3−xClx is difficult to obtain. These findings are in good agreement with experimental results and help understand the enhanced stability of doped halide perovskites. Interestingly, stable CsPbI3−xBrx solar cells featuring fully reversible performance for smart photovoltaic window applications were realized by Yang and co-workers via controlling the transitions between the high-temperature and low-temperature phases (Fig. 13A).120 As is well-known, CsPbI3 in the high-temperature phase suffers from high phase instability at room temperature to give rise to a low PCE. For CsPbBr3, the high-temperature phase is thermodynamically more stable under ambient conditions so that the reversible phase transition can’t be acquired under moisture treatment at room temperature. With Br incorporation into CsPbI3, the corresponding solar cell devices are thermally and environmentally stable and show the peak PCEs of above 7%. Most significantly, these devices undergo a phase transition upon sunlight heating to generate the photovoltaically active high-temperature phase, and the resulting high-temperature phase can transform into the transparent low-temperature phase in the presence of moisture (Fig. 13B), resulting in a distinctly photovoltaic switching between the different phases (Fig. 13C). These results highlight the potential application of doped halide perovskites in switchable optoelectronics.
 Fig. 10  (A) Colloidal solutions in toluene under a UV lamp of CsPbX3 NCs. (B) Representative tunable PL spectra of CsPbX3 NCs. (C) Photograph of highly luminescent CsPbX3 NCs-PMMA polymer monoliths. Adapted from ref. 114 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
 Fig. 11  (A) Lasing spectra and images of CsPbX3−xYx perovskite nanoplatelets. The emission images above the lasing threshold are coincident with lasing spectra. (B) The spectrum of a lasing mode of CsPbBrxI3−x with a full-width at half-maximum of 0.14 nm. Adapted from ref. 117 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 12  Formation energies (per halogen atom) of the mixed halide alloys CsPb(X1−xX'x)3 (X, Y = I, Br, Cl). Adapted from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematics of phase transition between the low-temperature and the high-temperature phase with photographs of CsPbI3−xBrx thin films at different phases. (B) Variation of the high-temperature to low-temperature phase transition time of CsPbI3−xBrx films measured under different humidity conditions. (C) PCEs of the device over 10 transition cycles among the high-temperature and low-temperature phases. Adapted from ref. 120 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
Halide doping in low-dimensional perovskites has also been exploited. Particularly, 2D perovskites featuring structural distortion have been reported displaying fascinating white-light emission arising from self-trapped excitons. Hence, tunable white-light emission was realized in these 2D perovskites via halide doping, affording both “warm” and “cold’’ white light to adapt to the indoor and outdoor lighting applications, respectively. Karunadasa's group successfully achieved tunable white-light emission in (NMEDA)PbBr4−xClx (NMEDA = N1-methylethane-1,2-diammonium) and (EDBE)PbBr4−xClx (EDBE = 2,2′-(ethylenedioxy)bis(ethylammonium)) layered perovskites.121,122 Cyclohexylamine-based (C6H5C2H4NH3)2PbBrxCl4−x 2D perovskites also displayed tunable white electroluminescent emission with a high quantum yield of up to 16.9%.123 Recently, tunable white-light emission was reported for the first time in multi-layered perovskites, EA4Pb3Br10−xClx (x = 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 9.5, and 10; EA = ethylammonium).50 The structures were highly distorted owing to the large size of EA+, and appeared more distorted in the chloride analog compared to that of the bromide. Thus a broadband white-light emission was observed for EA4Pb3Cl10, while EA4Pb3Br10 featured a narrow bandwidth of blue emission. With gradual incorporation of Br− into EA4Pb3Cl10, the effect of self-trapped excitons for broad emission could be maximized, and optimized white-light emissions were obtained (Fig. 14). These results provide a deep understanding of the underlying structure–property relationship, and further promote the rational design of desirable white-light emissive materials.
 Fig. 14  White-light emissions from EA4Pb3Br10−xClx and blue-light emission from EA4Pb3Br10 (λ = 315 nm). Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Halide doping was utilized in layered perovskite ferroelectric (CHA)2PbBr4−4xI4x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (CHA = cyclohexylammonium) by Xiong and co-workers to adjust the band gap.124 Generally, it is of great challenge to tune the band gap of a ferroelectric material because conventional band gap engineering methods can easily induce structural modifications, thus leading to a change in symmetry and loss of ferroelectricity. In (CHA)2PbBr4−4xI4x layered perovskites, the organic/inorganic layers play relatively independent role in ferroelectricity/band gap, respectively. (CHA)2PbBr4 was proved to be a ferroelectric and (CHA)2PbI4 has no ferroelectricity. Interestingly, via partially replacing Br atoms with I (x ≤ 0.175), these compounds maintain the ferroelectricity (Fig. 15A) while the band gap can be tuned from 3.05 to 2.74 eV (Fig. 15B). Such a value is as low as that of BiFeO3, which is the first report on hybrid ferroelectric materials. Subsequently, Luo's group demonstrated a family of lead-free hybrid ferroelectrics, (N-methylpyrrolidinium)3Sb2Cl9−9xBr9x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1), featuring a unique zero-dimensional perovskite structure.125 These compounds showed large ferroelectric polarizations (5.2–7.6 μC cm−2) and a wide band gap spanning from 3.31 to 2.76 eV which enabled superior visible-light-responsive photoconductivity (∼10 nA cm−2). These doped halide perovskites combining ferroelectric spontaneous polarization and tunable band gaps are promising candidates for the next-generation optoelectronic application.
 Fig. 15  (A) Current density-field (J–V) curves and polarization-electric field hysteresis loops of (CHA)2PbBr4−4xI4x. (B) Tunable absorption spectra of (CHA)2PbBr4–4xI4x (x = 0, 0.175, 1). Adapted from ref. 124 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2016. 
4. Doping of cations and halides
Despite the various merits mentioned above, mixed-halide perovskites usually suffer from halide segregation during long-term operation.20,126–128 Hopefully, researchers have found that the doping of cations into mixed-halide perovskites could greatly enhance the stability and further optimize their photoelectric properties.20,129–131
Snaith et al. eliminated the structural instability in mixed Br/I perovskites via partially substituting FA+ with Cs+.20 During the incorporation, FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I1−xBrx)3 exhibited phase stability over the entire I-to-Br range, as evidenced by PXRD patterns, accompanied by a tunable band gap. For FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3, the band gap was determined to be 1.74 eV, and the Eu was calculated to be 16.5 meV, much lower than that of MAPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 (49.5 meV). This result indicated that the incorporation of Cs+ lowered the level of electronic disorder in the mixed-halide system and improved the photostability. Finally, the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 based cells achieved a power conversion efficiency of over 17% and an open-circuit voltage of 1.2 V. Thus, a combined tandem solar cell with 25.2% efficiency can be achieved. In this context, they precisely investigated the effect of colloidal precursor solution on film crystallization which further determined the final optoelectronic performance. Additives such as hydrohalic acids initiated the dissolution of the lead polyhalide colloids which appeared to act as nucleation sites in thin films.131 Moreover, by controlling the solution aging time, a distinct increase in the grain size and crystallinity could be observed, which led to a reduction in microstrain and enhancement of charge carrier mobilities. With an optimized colloidal concentration, the solar cell devices gained a PCE of 18.8%. To further enhance the stability and crystallinity of this system, they further incorporated BA into the 3D [HC(NH2)2]0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3, fabricating BAx(FA0.83Cs0.17)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3 compounds (Fig. 16A).127 As a result, 2D perovskite platelets were observed interspersed among highly orientated 3D perovskite grains. The presence of the distinct 2D–3D “heterostructure” successfully improved the overall crystallinity and stability. Notably, the non-radiative recombination in the films was significantly reduced owing to the interfacial grain boundary passivation. In BAx(FA0.83Cs0.17)1−xPb(I0.6Br0.4)3, the electronic configuration of the 2D–3D “heterostructure” was similar to classical type-I heterojunctions. Therefore, the charges generated from within the 3D grain would be reflected, remaining in the 3D perovskite, when they reached the interface, so they didn’t suffer from trapping and recombination at the grain boundaries (Fig. 16B). Such a reduction in charge recombination contributed greatly to reduce hysteresis in solar cells, and the as-fabricated solar cell consequently achieved an optimal stabilized efficiency of up to 19.5% with a 1.61 eV band gap. Cs-Doped perovskites were also studied by Kovalenko and further applied to the detection of gamma radiation.132 They found that single crystals of CsxFA1−xPbI3−yBry (x = 0–0.1, y = 0–0.6) displayed enhanced phase stability compared with the undoped α-FAPbI3. These highly stable single crystals featured high-carrier mobility lifetime, low dark carrier density, and high absorptivity of high-energy photons, resulting in a sensitive detection of gamma radiation. Another monovalent ion, Rb+, was employed to efficiently enhance the photovoltaic device performance. Zhang et al. successfully fabricated Rb-incorporated mesoporous perovskite solar cells via the gas-quenching method (Fig. 17A) and achieved a remarkable PCE of 19.6% for the FA0.80MA0.15Rb0.05PbI2.55Br0.45 cell device (Fig. 17B).130 This enhanced performance might be attributed to the Rb-rich impurity phase, similar to the positive effect on device performance of excess PbI2. Besides the enhanced device performance, Rb-doped films and devices also showed significantly improved stability which is associated with the Rb-incorporation induced tightened lattice and the stabilized black phase of FAPbI3.
 Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the proposed self-assembled 2D–3D perovskite film structure. (B) Proposed electronic band off sets of the 2D–3D heterojunction. Adapted from ref. 127 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 17  (A) External quantum efficiency spectra of the FAMA-Rb devices with and without a MgF2 antireflection layer. (B) J–V curves and electrical parameters under different scan conditions of the MgF2 coated FAMA-Rb perovskite devices. Adapted from ref. 130 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Long organic cations were also introduced into mixed-halide perovskites for optical application. Considering the advantage of confined perovskite nanostructures, nanorods of (C8H17NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3(IxBr1−x)10 (0 > x > 1) were prepared by Etgar's group.106 These nanorods exhibited a blue shift in the absorbance and photoluminescence compared to the bulk material. Furthermore, tunable optical properties of the nanorods were obtained by alternating the halide composition. In these 2D perovskite structures, the Br (4p) orbitals and Pb (6s) orbitals determined the energy of the absorption peak, thus, with the increase in bromide concentration, the absorption peak was observed to shift to a lower wavelength, also resulting in blue-shift photoluminescence. The widely tunable photoluminescence with high PLQY makes these nanorods promising candidates for LED applications.
These achievements would deliver an important direction for fundamental investigations of mixed-cation metal mixed-halide perovskites and promote ongoing developments in perovskite solar cells and optoelectronic devices.
5. Doping of metal ions
5.1 Isovalent doping
Considering the toxicity of lead, metal doping (including Mn2+, Zn2+, Cd2+, Sn2+, etc.) into lead halide perovskites is supposed to be an effective strategy to reduce toxicity and further obtain distinct optical properties, which has drawn extensive attention very recently.
Among divalent metal ion dopants, Mn2+ is one of the most attractive candidates.80,133 Resembling the Mn-doped II–VI semiconductor, Mn-doped CsPbX3 NCs are expected to give rise to strong sensitized luminescence of Mn2+ ions.133–135 Son et al. successfully obtained Mn-doped CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Cl/Br) NCs which displayed strong sensitized Mn luminescence.136 The moderate Mn-doping in these nanocrystals didn’t change the original lattice structure, and had a small effect on the electronic structure of the host nanocrystals as indicated by the absorption spectra shown in Fig. 18A. Interestingly, strong sensitized Mn luminescence from d–d transitions was detected in these Mn-doped CsPbX3 NCs (Fig. 18B). Comparison of luminescence between the undoped and Mn-doped nanocrystals upon the same excitation at 365 nm revealed that the characteristic Mn luminescence at ∼600 nm is attributable to the efficient energy transfer from the exciton of the host. Moreover, Mn-doping in such nanocrystals in turn increased the exciton luminescence. Thus, enhanced luminescence quantum yields of up to 30–60% were achieved for these Mn-doped CsPbX3 NCs. It should be noted that the reason for the improvement of exciton luminescence after Mn doping is unclear and requires further studies. Furthermore, tunable emission in Mn-doped perovskites was investigated by Klimov et al. They first acquired Mn:CsPbCl3 NCs, and then indirectly prepared Mn:CsPbBr3, Mn:CsPbI3, and mixed anion NCs via anion exchange.49 It was found that the exciton luminescence peak presented a red shift with the increase of Br− in Mn:CsPbCl3 NCs, accompanied by a decrease of the Mn-based luminescence peak. Tunable emissions were observed during the doping process. In addition, as indicated in Fig. 19A, the amount of bromide generates a significant effect on the luminescence intensity of both emissions. Similar to the results reported by others, the CsPbBr3 NCs generally exhibit more intense emission than the CsPbCl3 NCs, thus the band-edge emission increased with the increase of Br−.113,137 However, the characteristic Mn-based emission decreased gradually. They deduced that this phenomenon was associated with band-edge transition energy, which finally impacted the energy transfer from the exciton of the host to the d–d transition of the dopant (Fig. 19B). Consequently, the characteristic Mn-based emission in Mn:CsPbBr3 was very weak and could hardly be detected in Mn:CsPbI3. Yang and co-workers obtained the tunable emission of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs via regulating the ratio of Pb/Mn relatively at the reaction temperature.76 As proven, Mn substitution in CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs is a thermodynamics-controlled process. High temperature can enhance the activity of Mn2+ ions, and further promote the diffusion of Mn into the CsPbCl3 lattice. Consequently, a Mn substitution ratio of up to 46% was acquired in CsPb0.54Mn0.46Cl3 QDs at 210 °C, and a high PLQY of up to 54% was achieved for the CsPb0.73Mn0.27Cl3 QDs synthesized at 170 °C (Fig. 20A and B). Additionally, the Mn-based emissions were tunable from 569 to 587 nm with increasing Mn substitution ratio (Fig. 20C and D). The reason was that the increased Mn2+ enhanced the Mn–Mn interaction which further caused the energy decrease of Mn-based emissions, resulting in red-shifted emissions. Moreover, excess Mn substitution was found to diminish the dopant emission owing to the destruction of the crystallinity of the perovskite host. Conclusively, the appropriate incorporation of Mn reduces the toxicity of lead-based perovskites and benefits the emission of the perovskite QDs, which would promote the practical applications of perovskite QDs in the fields of display and illumination. In addition, Pradhan et al. tailored the dopant emission of Mn-doped CsPbCl3 NCs via a chemical method using RNH3Cl as a promoting reagent (Fig. 21A).133 The presence of Mn ions endowed these doped NCs with a broad PL with a peak at ∼580 nm (lifetime: 1.439 ms, Fig. 21I) along with a host excitonic PL with a peak at ∼400 nm (Fig. 21B). Interestingly, as presented in Fig. 22C–H, the amount of RNH3Cl regulated the excitonic and Mn d–d emission intensity. Here, RNH3Cl played a significant role in reducing the dimension of Mn-doped CsPbCl3 NCs, which provided more opportunity for Mn2+ to dope into the lattice of the host. Consequently, the intense characteristic Mn d–d emission was observed even with 5% of Mn2+ precursor in the presence of RNH3Cl, in contrast to no Mn d–d emission with the same amount of Mn2+ precursor without RNH3Cl. As a result, a breakthrough of 1.3% Mn doping was achieved with only an initial 5% Mn precursor, and the PLQY reached its maximum of 27% with minimal host excitonic emission. This work indicates that in addition to the adjustment of the dopant–host precursor concentrations, the doping activating reagent provides another strategy to efficiently tailor the emissions in doped perovskite nanocrystals.
 Fig. 18  (A) Absorption spectra of Mn-doped and undoped CsPbClx nanocrystals. (B) Photoluminescence of Mn-doped and undoped CsPbClx nanocrystals. Adapted from ref. 136 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 19  (A) PL spectra of NC samples taken during progressive Br− anion exchange. (B) The evolution of the energy level diagram of Mn:CsPbX3 NCs. Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
 Fig. 20  (A) PL spectra of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs prepared at various temperatures. (B) PL spectra of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs prepared with different Pb-to-Mn molar feed ratios at 170 °C. (C) TEM and PL images of the CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs prepared at different temperatures of 150 °C (a), 170 °C (b), 190 °C (c), and 210 °C (d). (D) Illustration of the PL tunability of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs by adjusting the Mn-to-Pb molar feed ratio and reaction temperature. Adapted from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 21  (A) The schema of synthetic process of Mn-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals with RNH3Cl as the activating reagent. (B) PL image of Mn-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals under illumination. (C) Characteristic UV/vis and PL spectra of CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. (D) PL spectra obtained with variable RNH3Cl concentration normalized at the excitonic emission. (E–H) Changing trend of dual emissions with increasing amount of RNH3Cl in the reaction system. (I) Excited state decay lifetime of Mn d–d emission. Adapted from ref. 133 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 22  (A) Absorption (dashed line) and emission (solid line) spectra of Mn-doped 1D lead halide perovskites. (B) CIE coordinates of the emissions of Mn-doped 1D lead halide perovskites. (C) The schema of energy relaxation and transfer transitions in Mn-doped 1D lead halide perovskites. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
Besides optimizing optical properties, Hong et al. precisely reported for the first time that Mn2+ doping improved the stability of perovskite lattices of CsPbX3 NCs which suffered from poor air and thermal stability due to their intrinsic low formation energies.78 They found that with Mn2+ substitution, the absolute value of formation energy per Pb2+ (or Mn2+) increased slightly. Consequently, CsPbCl3:Mn QDs displayed the characteristic emissions from the 4T1 → 6A1 transition of Mn2+ and the exciton of the perovskite host with enhanced stability. Though characteristic emissions of the 4T1 → 6A1 transition of Mn2+ were not observed in Mn2+-doped CsPbBr3 and CsPbI3 QDs owing to the prohibition of energy transfer, Mn2+ ions played a significant role in their excitonic photoluminescence performances. The stability of CsPbBr3:Mn QDs was enhanced significantly which could retain their luminescence intensity of ∼60% up to 4 months, and the luminescence was prolonged to 4–5 days for CsPbI3:Mn QDs, in contrast to the complete degradation of perovskite host QDs within 2 days.
Mn2+-Doping in 1D hybrid perovskites was also studied by Ma and co-workers. The emissions in Mn doped 1D hybrid perovskites are distinctly different from those in 3D Mn doped perovskites mentioned above.138 There are three emissions in Mn doped 1D hybrid perovskites arising from the free exciton, self-trapped exciton, and d–d transition of Mn2+ ions, respectively. As shown in Fig. 22C, under UV illumination, the direct free exciton excited states are generated first, which then readily transfer energy to both the indirect self-trapped excited states and Mn2+ ions simultaneously. But there is no energy transfer from Mn2+ ions back to the free exciton excited states. Thus, the host excitonic emission is significantly quenched in Mn doped 1D hybrid perovskites. In addition, the energy transfer from the self-trapped excited states of the host to the Mn2+ ions is forbidden. Benefitting from these features, bright white emission was achieved in the above Mn-doped 1D perovskites (Fig. 22A and B). Notably, an enhanced CRI of 87 and PLQY of up to 28% were obtained for these Mn-doped 1D perovskites, compared with those of original 1D perovskites of 66 and 12%, respectively.139 These results imply that Mn2+-doping provides a new strategy to develop highly efficient white-light emissive materials as promising candidates for solid-state lighting and displays. Moreover, Mn2+-doping in 2D layered perovskites was also explored by Kundu’group.140 As elucidated in previous literature, the unique quantum-well structure of 2D perovskites generates a quantum confinement effect resulting in strongly bound excitons with high binding energy.141,142 Consequently, a strong orange-yellow emission was observed for Mn2+-doped (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 owing to efficient energy transfer from the strongly bound excitons of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 to Mn2+ ions. Besides, the Mn2+-doped (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 powder showed higher stability against ambient moisture than the corresponding Mn-doped CsPbCl3 nanoplates.75
Mn-Doping has been proven to efficiently enhance the optoelectronic performance of halide perovskites.36,143–145 However, the energy transfer behavior is not ideal to apply in the photovoltaic field. Researchers selected Sn to mix into the pristine lattice to achieve high-performance photovoltaic devices with less toxicity.146 Kanatzidis et al. fabricated a series of CH3NH3Sn1−xPbxI3 alloys with anomalous band gap behaviors, and a band gap of 1.17 eV could be obtained,73 extending the light absorption into the near infrared region (∼1050 nm). Therefore, the CH3NH3Sn1−xPbxI3 alloys exhibited prominent photovoltaic performances, achieving a PCE of 7.37%, and an optimal short-circuit photocurrent density of 20.64 mA cm−2 was obtained for CH3NH3Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 under simulated full sunlight of 100 mW cm−2. In order to improve the PCE of mixed Sn/Pb photovoltaic devices, the facile oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ should be overcome. Yan and co-workers developed a new strategy by combining a FASnI3 precursor with a MAPbI3 precursor.147 The as-fabricated devices showed improved stability and the best-performing cell fabricated using an absorber with an absorption edge of ∼1.2 eV achieved a PCE of 15.08% with negligible hysteresis.
This work represents one significant step toward the realization of efficient, low toxic Sn/Pb-perovskite solar cells. Other divalent ions, such as Cd2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, and Zn2+, can also substitute Pb2+ and form compositionally diverse perovskite alloys.148–150 Conclusively, doping of metal ions opens up a library of possible compositions attainable for lead halide perovskites, which might be more environmentally friendly while possessing unparalleled beneficial properties.
5.2 Heterovalent doping
Metal doping has been found to generate significant effects on the electronic levels to further modify the photoelectric performance of semiconductors. In addition to the isovalent doping described above, heterovalent doping in halide perovskites was also explored by researchers.74,130,151–153
Bakr's group successfully incorporated trivalent Bi3+, Au3+, or In3+ into MAPbX3, and the incorporation induced band gap tuning and considerable enhancement of electrical conductivity of 104 fold for Bi-doped bulk crystals.152 With Bi3+ increase, the Bi-doped bulk crystals underwent a significant band gap narrowing and the color correspondingly changed from orange to deep red. The band gap narrowing in doped semiconductors is attributed to the interaction of the electrons with positive impurities. Zhang's group reported for the first time that the doping of Bi3+ in CsPbI3 could increase the structural stability of the black α-phase at room temperature.153 Moreover, the Bi-doped α-CsPb1−xBixI3 exhibited a lower absorption edge and superior photoelectric properties compared to undoped CsPbI3, including increased PL efficiency and photovoltaic solar energy conversion efficiency. These merits promise the application of Bi-doped perovskites in diverse optoelectronic devices. However, Snaith et al. subsequently claimed that the incorporation of Bi3+ could not lead to band gap narrowing in MAPbBr3 crystals.45 The previously observed band gap change is just a misinterpretation from light transmission measurements resulting from the significant increase in the sub-band gap density of states. The apparent effect of color change was ascribed to the increased sub-band gap density of states as well as defect states (Fig. 23). This inconsistency in results indicates the challenges in heterovalent doping, which still need to be experimentally verified in the future. Yu et al. incorporated heterovalent Ce3+ ions into CsPbBr3 NCs via a facile hot-injection method.53 There was no additional trap state upon Ce3+ ion doping because of its similar ionic radius and energy of conduction band to bromine compared with the Pb2+ cation. More importantly, the incorporation of Ce3+ ions induced the improvement of PL (Fig. 24A) with the PLQY reaching up to 89%, in contrast to 41% of the undoped CsPbBr3 NCs. (Fig. 24B). This outstanding PL in Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs was accordingly associated with the doping-induced state modification. Meanwhile, Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3 NC based LEDs exhibited a prominent enhancement of electroluminescence (Fig. 24C) with an EQE of up to 4.4%, far above the initial 1.6% (Fig. 24D). This work provides a new approach for lanthanide ion doping into perovskite NCs, which widens the performance regulation for heterovalent metal ion doped perovskites.
 Fig. 23  (A) Pictures of doped MAPbBr3 single crystals: (i) 0% Bi3+ doped, (ii) 1% Bi3+ doped, (iii) 5% Bi3+ doped, and (iv) 10% Bi3+ doped. (B) Absorbance spectra of these crystals. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
 Fig. 24  (A) The PL spectra of undoped and Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs. (B) The PLQY of Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs with different dopant concentrations of CeBr3 (0–50%). (C) Electroluminescence spectra and the corresponding PL emission spectra for CsPbBr3 and Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3. (D) EQE of these devices as a function of driving voltage (V). Adapted from ref. 53 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
6. Double perovskites
On the basis of the evolution of binary ZnSe to ternary CuGaSe2 and then to quaternary Cu2ZnSnSe4,154,155 researchers are enlightened to design A2IMIMIIIX6 (typically, MI = Ag+ or Cu+ and MIII = In3+, Sb3+, or Bi3+) double perovskites which can be obtained by heterovalent replacement of the B-site cation with paired monovalent and trivalent metal cations. This evolution enriches the electronic structure of the AIMIIX3 perovskite; further, lightens the task of the realization of environmentally friendly lead-free halide perovskites for optoelectronic applications.156,157
Hybrid halide double perovskites Cs2AgBiBr6 (Fig. 25A) and Cs2AgBiCl6 were synthesized by Woodward's group.158 They were stable upon exposure to air and exhibited band gaps of 2.19 eV and 2.77 eV, respectively. Such results indicate that these halide double perovskites are desirable alternatives to the previous lead-based perovskite semiconductors. Karunadasa et al. demonstrated the behaviors of photogenerated carriers for Cs2AgBiBr6.159 Notably, it showed a long carrier recombination lifetime of 660 ns, which was very promising for photovoltaic applications. Further studies showed that the lifetimes of single-crystal and power samples were similar, indicating an inherently high defect tolerance nature. These prominent optical and physical properties motivated further exploration of halide double perovskites for photovoltaics and other optoelectronics. For further investigations of the photophysical properties of hybrid halide double perovskites, they subsequently synthesized (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 and (BA)4AgBiBr8, which featured a metal-halide bilayer and a monolayer structure, respectively (Fig. 25B and C).160 They found that the band gap of these double perovskites became direct when the inorganic 3D framework was reduced to a monolayer via BA incorporation (Fig. 25D–F). In Cs2AgBiBr6, the source of the indirect band gap is ascribed to the different electronic structure of both the VB and the CB. Different from CsPbBr3 whose valence band is an antibonding coupling between the upper Pb(6s) orbital and the deeper Br(p) orbital resulting in a direct band gap, the valence band of Cs2AgBiBr6 is coupled with Ag(d) + Bi(6s) orbitals and the anionic Br(p) orbital. Bi s states interact with the directional Ag d states pushing the valence band top to the X point, which leads to an indirect band gap in Cs2BiAgBr6 (Fig. 25D).158,161–163 Differently, such hybridization could be avoided in monolayer BA4AgBiBr8. Driven by dimensional confinement, there is very little contribution from Bi s states, and the VBM of this monolayer BA4AgBiBr8 is composed almost entirely of Ag d and Br p orbitals, leading to a direct band gap (Fig. 25F). Additionally, this 2D compound did not show any typical optical characteristics as presented in 2D lead halide perovskites, including extremely narrow linewidths of ∼100 meV at 298 K and ∼50 meV at 5 K,164 and a low-temperature step-like excitonic absorption feature expected for 2D density of states.165 These phenomena were consistent with the different energy transition process between double perovskites and their analogous lead perovskites. In Cs2AgBiBr6, the lowest-energy transition displays Ag-to-Bi charge-transfer character, in contrast to CsPbBr3 whose charge transfer occurs within the same metal. Such very distinct photophysical properties of double perovskites stimulate successive research on these unexplored candidates.
 Fig. 25  Structure of the double perovskite (A) Cs2AgBiBr6, (B) (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 and (C) (BA)4AgBiBr8, and band structure of (D) Cs2AgBiBr6, (E) (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 and (F) (BA)4AgBiBr8. Adapted from ref. 160 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
Moreover, Cs2AgBiBr6 was successfully applied for X-ray detection. Sensitive X-ray detection is of great significance for industrial inspection, medical diagnosis and scientific research. Tang and co-authors acquired a single crystal of Cs2AgBiBr6 with high crystallinity as indicated by X-ray diffraction (Fig. 26A). The crystal presented high thermal stability up to 430 °C (Fig. 26B), as well as environmental stability (relative humidity of ∼60%) for three months. They optimized the single-crystal detector through thermal annealing and surface treatment, and obtained a low detection limit of 59.7 nGyair s−1 under an external bias of 5 V, comparable to the latest record of 0.036 μGyair s−1 using CH3NH3PbBr3 single crystals (Fig. 26C–F).52 This prominent detection can be attributable to the distinct characteristics of Cs2AgBiBr6, such as the high average atomic number, adequate μτ product, low ionization energy and high resistivity. This work provides an inspiring example of double perovskites to achieve prominent device performances comparable with those of their lead counterparts, which would hopefully motivate further exploration of double perovskites for more practical applications.
 Fig. 26  (A) X-ray diffraction patterns of a Cs2AgBiBr6 single crystal (SC). (B) Thermogravimetric analysis of Cs2AgBiBr6 SC. (C) Detection sensitivity versus bias of the annealed device. (D) Switching response to X-rays (5.2 μGyair s−1 dose rate). (E) Signal-to-noise ratio of the device derived by calculating the standard deviation of the X-ray photocurrent, indicating the detection limit to be 59.7 nGyair s−1 at 5 V bias. (F) Comparison between MAPbBr3 and Cs2AgBiBr6 SC detector performance under the same condition. Adapted from ref. 52 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
In contrast to Cs2AgBiBr6 and Cs2AgBiCl6, Cs2AgBiI6 had been experimentally unknown for a long time. Recently, Gamelin et al. successfully obtained nanocrystals of Cs2AgBiI6 for the first time via a novel anion-exchange method using trimethylsilyl iodide.166 A broad, low-energy emission (1.3 eV at 20 K) was observed for Cs2AgBiI6 at cryogenic temperatures. It has a band gap of about 1.75 eV and presents strong absorption throughout the visible region, which renders this material a promising photovoltaic absorber. Equally, this work also demonstrated that materials which might be difficult or impossible to access through direct synthesis could be accessible via new synthetic methodologies.
As elucidated above, Cs2BiAgX6 (X = Cl, Br, I) halide double perovskites have been considered as promising environmentally friendly alternatives to lead-based hybrid perovskites for optoelectronic applications. However, their indirect band gaps are not ideal for applications in photovoltaics. Besides the tunability of halides in double perovskites, their distinct structure enables a more compatible platform for substitutions. For instance, various combinations of metals of different valencies can be incorporated into the B/B′ sites; both organic and inorganic cations can be assembled into the A site. By replacing Bi3+ with In3+, Giustino and co-workers discovered a hitherto unknown halide double perovskite, Cs2InAgCl6.167 Different from Cs2AgBiX6, it displayed a direct band gap. Electronic structure analysis showed that there was no occupied In-s orbital in the valence band top of Cs2InAgCl6, which definitively contributed to the direct character of its band gap. They carried out an empirical analysis of mixed halides based on Goldschmidt's rules, and found that Cs2InAgX6 with X = Cl, Br, and I was feasible. Thus, prominent optical absorbers with direct and tunable band gaps could be obtained. Overall, the exploration of new-type double perovskites will provide opportunities for developing environmentally friendly perovskites with beneficial performance. Then, Tang's group further explored the fundamental application of Cs2AgInCl6. A high-quality single crystal of Cs2AgInCl6 was prepared, achieving an ultralow trap density of 8.6 × 108 cm−3. Such a value was even lower than those of the best lead halide perovskite single crystals.168 Significantly, sensitive (ON–OFF ratio of ∼500, measured detectivity of ∼1012 Jones), fast (3 dB cut-off frequency of 1035 Hz), nontoxic, and stable UV detectors were fabricated based on Cs2AgInCl6 SCs, which compared favourably to most reported UV detectors and showcased their advantages for optoelectronic applications. By choosing Cu/Sb as B/B’, Solis-Ibarra's group rationally designed and synthesized a Cu-based double perovskite, Cs4CuSb2Cl12, which featured a 〈111〉-oriented triple-layered perovskite structure and showed a direct band gap of 1.0 eV.169 Its conductivity is comparable to that of notable MAPbI3, making it attractive for single-absorber and tandem solar cells. Furthermore, it was stable toward heat, moisture and light. These advantages render Cs4CuSb2Cl12 a hopeful candidate for photovoltaic applications. Such work significantly widens the combinations of metals to substitute lead in perovskite solar cells.44,163
Recently, a lead-free organic–inorganic hybrid double perovskite, (MA)2AgBiBr6, was demonstrated by Cheetham’ group.170 It displayed good thermal stability and a smaller band gap (∼2.02 eV) than that of (MA)PbBr3. This discovery highlights the significance of the double perovskite approach in the pursuit of stable lead-free optoelectronic materials. In addition, another two inorganic–organic hybrid double perovskites (MA)2KBiCl6 and (MA)2TlBiBr6 were also reported.170,171 Disappointingly, (MA)2KBiCl6 suffered from unfavourable electronic properties, originating from the ionic character of Cl− bonds; despite (MA)2TlBiBr6 having promising electronic properties, the strong toxicity of Tl precluded it from being a practical alternative to the Pb counterpart. Likewise, the presence of organic cations decreases the stiffness of these materials and damages their thermal stability compared with their pure inorganic counterparts. Moreover, hybrid double perovskites containing rare-earth element metals have also drawn attention. For instance, (MA)2KYCl6 and (MA)2KGdCl6 were synthesized by Cheetham's group via a solution evaporation method.173 Both compounds were found to exhibit large direct band gaps with 5.04 eV for (MA)2KYCl6 and 4.91 eV for (MA)2KGdCl6, respectively. Although such large band gaps are not feasible in solar cells, other applications such as solid-state lighting may be acquired by doping other rare-earth elements (e.g., Tb3+, Ce3+, or Eu3+).
The discovery of these materials demonstrates the importance of double perovskites for exploring lead-free materials. Up to now, a number of other promising candidates have been identified; however, only a few of them have been experimentally characterized, and the properties of these synthesized compounds are far from ideal.80,172 Therefore, there is an urgent need both for new synthetic approaches and enhancement of the application performance.
7. Conclusions and perspectives
In this review, we have provided an integrated discussion about the structural diversities of metal halide perovskites with dopants and tried to correlate these structures with their unique electro- and optoelectronic properties. Similar to inorganic semiconductors, the dopant can drastically modify their original properties or even generate new properties. Nevertheless, doping in inorganic semiconductors and metal halide perovskites is fundamentally different. The dopant generally introduces a dopant-related deep energy level within the mid-gap region of inorganic semiconductors, and the introduced mid-gap states dominantly determine their properties. In metal halide perovskites, no mid-gap state is formed during doping (exception of Mn2+ doping) owing to the distinct perovskite structure featuring considerable defect tolerance.54–59 In consequence, the expected performance can be desirably acquired in doped metal halide perovskites benefitting from the benign nature of the perovskite structure.
As discussed above, doping in metal halide perovskites presents various beneficial features, such as enhanced stability, improved charge transport, prolonged carrier lifetime, increased luminescence, and a tunable band gap.61,66–78 Nevertheless, some shortcomings are also brought about during doping. In particular, the multi-layered quantum-well structure induced by organic cation doping limits the migration of charge carriers with increasing recombination; thus these layered perovskites are less competitive in the fields of photovoltaics and photodetection theoretically.29 In the process of halide substitution, a crystal phase transition usually occurs. The material near the transition is hard to crystallize, resulting in an “amorphous” phase with high levels of energetic disorder and unexpectedly low absorption.20,174 As for double perovskites, which have emerged as a new class of promising nontoxic stable halide perovskites, some of them suffer from indirect band gaps (Cs2AgBiBr6) or low-dimensional electronic structures (Cs2AgInCl6).175,176 These disadvantages make them undesirable for solar cell applications. Thus, in the development of doped metal halide perovskites, some controversies are inescapable but can be compatible rationally.
Looking into the future, there is still great space to design and develop doped metal halide perovskites. At present, halide double perovskites obtained in experiments are still relatively not enough, considering the large combinatorial space consisting of the A-site cation and the B-site cation pair. Thus, more experimental and theoretical efforts are needed to explore the undiscovered candidates with desired performance. Moreover, multifunctionality is expected for doped metal halide perovskites. Mn-Doped perovskite nanocrystals exhibit strong quantum confinement of charge carriers. Such quantum-confined charge carriers will result in sp–d exchange interactions between the host and the dopant ion, which will provide interesting magneto-optic properties. Similarly, nanocrystals doped with free carriers and magnetic ions might exhibit magneto-plasmonic and magneto-electric properties. Additionally, as mentioned above, organic cations in layered halide perovskites resulted in poor charge transport in the vertical direction. Nevertheless, such transport can be promisingly enhanced by shortening the interlayer distance or incorporating a conductive organic amine between the perovskite layers. Most importantly, introducing flexible organic amine into doped perovskites is an effective approach to the design of perovskite ferroelectrics which enable potentially anomalous photovoltaic effects. In perovskite ferroelectrics, the asymmetric electric field inducing spontaneous electric polarization promotes the desirable separation of photo-excited carriers, which readily benefits their optoelectronic and photovoltaic applications. In summary, we are convinced that exciting and new properties will continue to be discovered in these doped metal halide perovskites, leading to a bright future for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications. Our understanding of the unique properties and potential applications of this system may open up a new path toward rational design and synthesis of novel doped perovskites with desirable properties.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21601188, 21833010, 21525104, 21875251, 21622108, 21571178, 51802304, 51502290, and 51502288) and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDB20010200). L. L. thanks the support from Youth Innovation Promotion of CAS (2015240).
Notes and references
M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1981 CrossRef .
B. Yang, F. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Yang, X. Xia, T. Pullerits, W. Deng and K. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703758 CrossRef PubMed .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Shen, Y. Ogomi, J. Chang, T. Toyoda, K. Fujiwara, K. Yoshino, K. Sato, K. Yamazaki, M. Akimoto, Y. Kuga, K. Katayama and S. Hayase, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9308 RSC .
D. Ma, Y. Fu, L. Dang, J. Zhai, I. A. Guzei and S. Jin, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2117 CrossRef .
H. Y. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Yu, J. Han, Z. X. Guo, X. C. Ai, J. P. Zhang and Y. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12128 RSC .
Y. Yang, D. P. Ostrowski, R. M. France, K. Zhu, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 10, 53 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, T. Qiu, F. Bai, W. Ruan and S. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703620 CrossRef .
G. Hodes, Science, 2013, 342, 317 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Pering, W. Deng, J. R. Troughton, P. S. Kubiak, D. Ghosh, R. G. Niemann, F. Brivio, F. E. Jeffrey, A. B. Walker, M. S. Islam, T. M. Watson, P. R. Raithby, A. L. Johnson, S. E. Lewis and P. J. Cameron, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20658 RSC .
J. V. Passarelli, D. J. Fairfield, N. A. Sather, M. P. Hendricks, H. Sai, C. L. Stern and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7313 CrossRef PubMed .
J. De Roo, M. Ibanez, P. Geiregat, G. Nedelcu, W. Walravens, J. Maes, J. C. Martins, I. Van Driessche, M. V. Kovalenko and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2071 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
Y. Kanemitsu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 3427 RSC .
X. Guo and C. Burda, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 320–321, 53 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, S. Shaker, F. Brivio, R. Murugavel, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16999 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Yang, N. J. Jeon, Y.-C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xing, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T.-C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef .
Z. Tan, Y. Wu, H. Hong, J. Yin, J. Zhang, L. Lin, M. Wang, X. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16612 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Reyes-Martinez, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, D. Y. Chung, O. M. Bakr, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. O. Soboyejo and Y. L. Loo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606556 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Xu, P. F. Li, Y. Y. Tang, W. X. Zhang, R. G. Xiong and X. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6369 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Tian, M. Wang, A. Rose, T. Besara, N. K. Doyle, Z. Yuan, J. C. Wang, R. Clark, Y. Hu, T. Siegrist, S. Lin and B. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9018 CrossRef .
S. Han, P. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Sun, X. Huang, L. Li, C. Ji, W. Zhang, B. Teng, W. Hu, M. Hong and J. Luo, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 1800060 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 679 CrossRef .
H. Wang and D. H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5204 RSC .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655 RSC .
H. Kim, J. S. Han, J. Choi, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700310 CrossRef .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho and T. W. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11694 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, T. Wu, J. Liu, W. Q. Deng and K. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926 RSC .
Z. Shi, J. Guo, Y. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, Y. Xia and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605005 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ji, P. Wang, Z. Wu, Z. Sun, L. Li, J. Zhang, W. Hu, M. Hong and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705467 CrossRef .
F. Bai, Y. Hu, Y. Hu, T. Qiu, X. Miao and S. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 184, 15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Deng, U. Farooq, X. Yang, J. Khan, J. Tang and H. Song, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9294 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, D. P. McMeekin, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 091503 CrossRef .
X. G. Zhao, D. Yang, Y. Sun, T. Li, L. Zhang, L. Yu and A. Zunger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Nayak, M. Sendner, B. Wenger, Z. Wang, K. Sharma, A. J. Ramadan, R. Lovrincic, A. Pucci, P. K. Madhu and H. J. Snaith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Colella, E. Mosconi, P. Fedeli, A. Listorti, F. Gazza, F. Orlandi, P. Ferro, T. Besagni, A. Rizzo, G. Calestani, G. Gigli, F. De Angelis and R. Mosca, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4613 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Chu and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Q. Lin, H. Li, K. Wu, I. Robel, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, Y. Wu, C. C. Stoumpos, B. Traore, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Parobek, Y. Dong, T. Qiao, D. Rossi and D. H. Son, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Pan, H. Wu, J. Luo, Z. Deng, C. Ge, C. Chen, X. Jiang, W.-J. Yin, G. Niu, L. Zhu, L. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Xie, X. Ke, M. Sui and J. Tang, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 726 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yao, J. Ge, B. N. Han, K. H. Wang, H. B. Yao, H. L. Yu, J. H. Li, B. S. Zhu, J. Z. Song, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. B. Zeng, Y. Luo and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Queisser and E. E. Haller, Science, 1998, 281, 945 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Houtepen, Z. Hens, J. S. Owen and I. Infante, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Nelson, S. O. M. Hinterding, R. Fainblat, S. E. Creutz, X. Li and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pradhan, S. Das Adhikari, A. Nag and D. D. Sarma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kovalenko and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Sun, P. Wang, W. Hu, S. Wang, C. Ji, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Shang, S. Wang, N. Dong, C. Ji, X. Chen, S. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Sun, M. Hong and J. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, C. Ji, L. Li, J. Kong, Z. Sun, S. Zhao, S. Wang, M. Hong and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hang, W. Zhang, H. Y. Ye and R. G. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3577 RSC .
M. Imran, V. Caligiuri, M. Wang, L. Goldoni, M. Prato, R. Krahne, L. De Trizio and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, C. Shi and X.-B. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23039 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Liang, C. Y. Liao, C. C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X. K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Mel, A. V. Akimov, F. El-Mellouhi, G. R. Berdiyorov, S. Ashhab, N. Tabet and S. Kais, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5219 RSC .
C. Liu, W. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. Fan and Y. Mai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Suarez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, T. S. Ripolles, R. S. Sanchez, L. Otero and I. Mora-Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Balakrishnan and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 2, 88 CrossRef .
W. J. Mir, M. Jagadeeswararao, S. Das and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 537 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Shao, D. Yao, H. Gao, Y. Liu, W. Yu, H. Zhang and B. Yang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, M. Chen, J. Li, M. Wang, X. Zeng, T. Besara, J. Lu, Y. Xin, X. Shan, B. Pan, C. Wang, S. Lin, T. Siegrist, Q. Xiao and Z. Yu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zou, Y. Liu, J. Li, C. Liu, R. Feng, F. Jiang, Y. Li, J. Song, H. Zeng, M. Hong and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, J. Xu, S. B. Jo and A. K. Y. Jen, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 392 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R. H. Friend and A. K. Cheetham, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16099 CrossRef .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970 RSC .
A. H. Proppe, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, O. Voznyy, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nasilowski, B. Mahler, E. Lhuillier, S. Ithurria and B. Dubertret, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T. Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Xue, Q. Ou, L. Polavarapu, J. Zheng, X. Qi and Q. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13637 RSC .
A. Mei, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. O. Saouma, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Wong, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. I. Jang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Gao, Y. Xiong and H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800248 CrossRef .
J. Jagielski, S. Kumar, W.-Y. Yu and C.-J. Shih, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5610 RSC .
C. Huo, B. Cai, Z. Yuan, B. Ma and H. Zeng, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1600018 CrossRef .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, N. Mutz, M. Vollmer, S. Fischer, K. Z. Milowska, R. Garcia Cortadella, B. Nickel, C. Cardenas-Daw, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hassan, Y. Song, R. D. Pensack, A. I. Abdelrahman, Y. Kobayashi, M. A. Winnik and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Weidman, A. J. Goodman and W. A. Tisdale, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5019 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, C. A. Field, W. T. A. Harrieon and A. M. Guloy, Nature, 1994, 369, 467 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. R. Sutherland, Q. Mi, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kitazawa, Y. Watanabe and Y. Nakamura, J. Mater. Sci., 2002, 37, 3585 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, H. Yu, M. Lyu, Q. Wang, J. H. Yun and L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11727 RSC .
E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, M. Kulbak, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, J. Fan, X. Zhang, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Mai, T. Xu, J. Wang and H. J. Snaith, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 371 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Li, W. Deng and R. He, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8431 RSC .
V. A. Hintermayr, A. F. Richter, F. Ehrat, M. Doblinger, W. Vanderlinden, J. A. Sichert, Y. Tong, L. Polavarapu, J. Feldmann and A. S. Urban, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Aharon and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Jang, K. Park, D. H. Kim, J. Park, F. Shojaei, H. S. Kang, J. P. Ahn, J. W. Lee and J. K. Song, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, S. J. Turner, M. T. Z. Tan, M. A. Worsley and A. Zettl, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Philippe, B.-W. Park, R. Lindblad, J. Oscarsson, S. Ahmadi, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1720 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, B. Zhang, Y. Chen, A. Zhang and X. Ke, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, D. DeSantis, W. Wei, Y. Deng, D. Guo, T. J. Savenije, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, V. D'Innocenzo, S. Accornero, A. Scarpellini, A. Petrozza, M. Prato and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, Y. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Zhu, C. C. Stoumpos, Q. Ding, J. Wang, M. G. Kanatzidis, X. Zhu and S. Jin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, R. Su, X. Liu, J. Xing, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6238 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liao, K. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Yao and H. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, Y. Yan and S. H. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, M. Lai, L. Dou, C. S. Kley, H. Chen, F. Peng, J. Sun, D. Lu, S. A. Hawks, C. Xie, F. Cui, A. P. Alivisatos, D. T. Limmer and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Dohner, A. Jaffe, L. R. Bradshaw and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Dohner, E. T. Hoke and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Z. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, E. Yang, J. Zhang and Q. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Ye, W. Q. Liao, C. L. Hu, Y. Zhang, Y. M. You, J. G. Mao, P. F. Li and R. G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ji, Z. Sun, A. Zeb, S. Liu, J. Zhang, M. Hong and J. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. C. Baena, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. S. Yun, Q. Ma, J. Zheng, C. F. J. Lau, X. Deng, J. Kim, D. Kim, J. Seidel, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 438 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, N. Sakai, S. van Reenen, K. Wojciechowski, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607039 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Nazarenko, S. Yakunin, V. Morad, I. Cherniukh and M. V. Kovalenko, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das Adhikari, S. K. Dutta, A. Dutta, A. K. Guria and N. Pradhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Vlaskin, C. J. Barrows, C. S. Erickson and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Pradhan, D. Goorskey, J. Thessing and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Parobek, B. J. Roman, Y. Dong, H. Jin, E. Lee, M. Sheldon and D. H. Son, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Makarov, S. Guo, O. Isaienko, W. Liu, I. Robel and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Tian, O. Khabou, M. Worku, Y. Zhou, J. Hurley, H. Lin and B. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, C. Zhou, Y. Tian, Y. Shu, J. Messier, J. C. Wang, L. J. van de Burgt, K. Kountouriotis, Y. Xin, E. Holt, K. Schanze, R. Clark, T. Siegrist and B. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Biswas, R. Bakthavatsalam and J. Kundu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yan, Science, 2015, 349, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Guria, S. K. Dutta, S. D. Adhikari and N. Pradhan, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1014 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shi, X.-B. Han and W. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 561 CrossRef CAS .
R. Babu, L. Giribabu and S. P. Singh, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 2645 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, L. Mao, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liao, D. Zhao, Y. Yu, N. Shrestha, K. Ghimire, C. R. Grice, C. Wang, Y. Xiao, A. J. Cimaroli, R. J. Ellingson, N. J. Podraza, K. Zhu, R. G. Xiong and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Swarnkar, V. K. Ravi and A. Nag, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1089 CrossRef .
J. Navas, A. S. Coronilla, J. J. Gallardo, N. C. Hernandez, J. C. Pinero, R. Alcantara, C. F. Lorenzo, D. M. De los Santos, T. Aguilar and J. M. Calleja, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6216 RSC .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. van den Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Tang, Z. F. Xu, D. Y. Zhang, S. X. Hu, W. M. Lau and L. M. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 7843 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, B. Murali, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy, K. Katsiev, E. Alarousu, R. Comin, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, E. H. Sargent, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Miao, T. Qiu, S. Zhang, H. Ma, Y. Hu, F. Bai and Z. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4931 RSC .
X. G. Zhao, J. H. Yang, Y. Fu, D. Yang, Q. Xu, L. Yu, S. H. Wei and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S.-H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 041903 CrossRef .
G. Volonakis, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Meng, X. Wang, Z. Xiao, J. Wang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. McClure, M. R. Ball, W. Windl and P. M. Woodward, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1348 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Slavney, T. Hu, A. M. Lindenberg and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Connor, L. Leppert, M. D. Smith, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Slavney, L. Leppert, D. Bartesaghi, A. Gold-Parker, M. F. Toney, T. J. Savenije, J. B. Neaton and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Filip, S. Hillman, A. A. Haghighirad, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Savory, A. Walsh and D. O. Scanlon, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kitazawa, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 1997, 49, 233 CrossRef .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V. Nurmikko, Solid State Commun., 1992, 84, 657 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Creutz, E. N. Crites, M. C. De Siena and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Volonakis, A. A. Haghighirad, R. L. Milot, W. H. Sio, M. R. Filip, B. Wenger, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, S. Li, H. Wu, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Li, K. Li, F. Yi, G. Niu and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 5, 398 CrossRef .
B. Vargas, E. Ramos, E. Perez-Gutierrez, J. C. Alonso and D. Solis-Ibarra, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wei, Z. Deng, S. Sun, F. Zhang, D. M. Evans, G. Kieslich, S. Tominaka, M. A. Carpenter, J. Zhang, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1089 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, F. Wei, S. Sun, G. Kieslich, A. K. Cheetham and P. D. Bristowe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12025 RSC .
J. Huang, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao and Y. Yan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17042 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, F. Wei, F. Brivio, Y. Wu, S. Sun, P. D. Bristowe and A. K. Cheetham, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Rehman, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, C. Wehrenfennig, J. L. Boland, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-G. Zhao, D. Yang, J.-C. Ren, Y. Sun, Z. Xiao and L. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1662 CrossRef CAS .
M.-G. Ju, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Dai, L. Ma, N. P. Padture and X. C. Zeng, Joule, 2018, 2, 1231 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Xinyuan Zhang
	Xinyuan Zhang received her bachelor's degree in chemistry from Qingdao University in 2017. She is currently a PhD candidate in organic chemistry, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under the supervision of Prof. Junhua Luo. Her research interests are the synthesis and characterization of doped metal halide perovskites and their optoelectronic properties.

Lina Li
	Lina Li is currently an associate research professor in Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science. She obtained her PhD degree from Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science in 2014. Her current research interests include the rational design of organic–inorganic halide perovskite materials and their applications in optoelectronics.

Zhihua Sun
	Zhihua Sun received his PhD degree from Shangdong University in 2010, and then joined Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He is a professor of inorganic chemistry at present, and his current research interests focus on the development of organic–inorganic hybrid ferroelectrics for photovoltaic and optoelectronic applications.

Junhua Luo
	Junhua Luo received his PhD (2003) from Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science, followed by postdoctoral research at North Carolina State University (2003), and University of Florida (2005), as well as Los Alamos National Laboratory (2006). He became a Professor at Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Science in 2009. His current research interests focus on the development of photoelectric functional materials based on organic–inorganic hybrids.

 	Fig. 1  (A) Crystal structures of (MA)[PbI3] and (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10]. (B) PXRD patterns of films of (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (1), (MA)[PbI3] formed from PbI2 (2a), and PbCl2 (2b), which were exposed to 52% relative humidity. Adapted from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) The structure of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1, extending from n = 1 to n = ∞. The L-value denotes the thickness of the inorganic layer in each compound. (B) Tunable band gap of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1. Adapted from ref. 61 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (C) The crystal structure of (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 and (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 layered perovskites. (D) GIWAXS maps for polycrystalline hot-cast near-single-crystalline (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite films. (E) Schematic representation of the (101) orientation, along with the (111) and (202) planes of a 2D perovskite crystal. (F) Histogram of (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 device PCE over 50 devices, fitted with a Gaussian distribution (red line). Adapted from ref. 93 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 3  Tunable photoresponse based on different 2D layer-structured perovskites. Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Scheme for the formation of a 2D multilayered perovskite structure. (B) Variation of photoresponse at different incident wavelengths with a fixed powder of ∼2.13 mW cm−2. (C) Recyclable switchable operation of photoresponse, showing highly stable detection after long-time illumination. (D) The rise and decay times during on–off light switching. Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 5  Nanostructures of OA/MA perovskite suspensions with tuable PL under UV light. Adapted from ref. 95 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic structures of the colloidal 2D organo-lead iodide perovskite NCs (C18H35NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1[PbnI3n+1]. (B) Photograph of colloidal 2D organo-lead iodide perovskite NC solutions under ambient light. (C) Absorption spectrum of colloidal PbI2 NCs compared to the absorption and emission spectra of the resultant 2D lead iodide perovskite (n = 3) colloidal NC solution in a toluene/chloroform mixture. (D) Absorption spectra and steady-state PL of the three 2D organo-lead iodide perovskites. Absorbance is plotted as optical density normalized to the exciton peak. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photograph of MAPbBr3−xClx and MAPbBr3−xIx colloidal solutions, where x = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 3. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) UV-vis absorption spectra of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3. (B) Photographs of TiO2/MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 bilayer nanocomposites on FTO glass substrates. (C) A quadratic relationship of the band-gaps of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 as a function of Br composition (x). (D) Power conversion efficiencies of the heterojunction solar cells as a function of Br composition (x). (E) Stability of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 based solar cells exposed to humidity. Adapted from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Dark current density of CH3NH3PbBr3−xClx single-crystal devices with a thickness of ∼2 mm. (B) Photocurrent of the above devices. (C) Side view of a CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 single-crystal device. (D) Enlarged detection of the 137Cs spectra obtained by CH3NH3PbBr2.94Cl0.06 and MAPbBr3 single-crystal detectors. Adapted from ref. 112 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Colloidal solutions in toluene under a UV lamp of CsPbX3 NCs. (B) Representative tunable PL spectra of CsPbX3 NCs. (C) Photograph of highly luminescent CsPbX3 NCs-PMMA polymer monoliths. Adapted from ref. 114 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Lasing spectra and images of CsPbX3−xYx perovskite nanoplatelets. The emission images above the lasing threshold are coincident with lasing spectra. (B) The spectrum of a lasing mode of CsPbBrxI3−x with a full-width at half-maximum of 0.14 nm. Adapted from ref. 117 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 12  Formation energies (per halogen atom) of the mixed halide alloys CsPb(X1−xX'x)3 (X, Y = I, Br, Cl). Adapted from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematics of phase transition between the low-temperature and the high-temperature phase with photographs of CsPbI3−xBrx thin films at different phases. (B) Variation of the high-temperature to low-temperature phase transition time of CsPbI3−xBrx films measured under different humidity conditions. (C) PCEs of the device over 10 transition cycles among the high-temperature and low-temperature phases. Adapted from ref. 120 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 14  White-light emissions from EA4Pb3Br10−xClx and blue-light emission from EA4Pb3Br10 (λ = 315 nm). Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Current density-field (J–V) curves and polarization-electric field hysteresis loops of (CHA)2PbBr4−4xI4x. (B) Tunable absorption spectra of (CHA)2PbBr4–4xI4x (x = 0, 0.175, 1). Adapted from ref. 124 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Schematic illustration of the proposed self-assembled 2D–3D perovskite film structure. (B) Proposed electronic band off sets of the 2D–3D heterojunction. Adapted from ref. 127 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) External quantum efficiency spectra of the FAMA-Rb devices with and without a MgF2 antireflection layer. (B) J–V curves and electrical parameters under different scan conditions of the MgF2 coated FAMA-Rb perovskite devices. Adapted from ref. 130 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Absorption spectra of Mn-doped and undoped CsPbClx nanocrystals. (B) Photoluminescence of Mn-doped and undoped CsPbClx nanocrystals. Adapted from ref. 136 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) PL spectra of NC samples taken during progressive Br− anion exchange. (B) The evolution of the energy level diagram of Mn:CsPbX3 NCs. Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) PL spectra of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs prepared at various temperatures. (B) PL spectra of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs prepared with different Pb-to-Mn molar feed ratios at 170 °C. (C) TEM and PL images of the CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs prepared at different temperatures of 150 °C (a), 170 °C (b), 190 °C (c), and 210 °C (d). (D) Illustration of the PL tunability of CsPbxMn1−xCl3 QDs by adjusting the Mn-to-Pb molar feed ratio and reaction temperature. Adapted from ref. 76 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) The schema of synthetic process of Mn-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals with RNH3Cl as the activating reagent. (B) PL image of Mn-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals under illumination. (C) Characteristic UV/vis and PL spectra of CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. (D) PL spectra obtained with variable RNH3Cl concentration normalized at the excitonic emission. (E–H) Changing trend of dual emissions with increasing amount of RNH3Cl in the reaction system. (I) Excited state decay lifetime of Mn d–d emission. Adapted from ref. 133 with permission from Wiley-VCH copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Absorption (dashed line) and emission (solid line) spectra of Mn-doped 1D lead halide perovskites. (B) CIE coordinates of the emissions of Mn-doped 1D lead halide perovskites. (C) The schema of energy relaxation and transfer transitions in Mn-doped 1D lead halide perovskites. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Pictures of doped MAPbBr3 single crystals: (i) 0% Bi3+ doped, (ii) 1% Bi3+ doped, (iii) 5% Bi3+ doped, and (iv) 10% Bi3+ doped. (B) Absorbance spectra of these crystals. Adapted from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) The PL spectra of undoped and Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs. (B) The PLQY of Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3 NCs with different dopant concentrations of CeBr3 (0–50%). (C) Electroluminescence spectra and the corresponding PL emission spectra for CsPbBr3 and Ce3+-doped CsPbBr3. (D) EQE of these devices as a function of driving voltage (V). Adapted from ref. 53 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 25  Structure of the double perovskite (A) Cs2AgBiBr6, (B) (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 and (C) (BA)4AgBiBr8, and band structure of (D) Cs2AgBiBr6, (E) (BA)2CsAgBiBr7 and (F) (BA)4AgBiBr8. Adapted from ref. 160 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 26  (A) X-ray diffraction patterns of a Cs2AgBiBr6 single crystal (SC). (B) Thermogravimetric analysis of Cs2AgBiBr6 SC. (C) Detection sensitivity versus bias of the annealed device. (D) Switching response to X-rays (5.2 μGyair s−1 dose rate). (E) Signal-to-noise ratio of the device derived by calculating the standard deviation of the X-ray photocurrent, indicating the detection limit to be 59.7 nGyair s−1 at 5 V bias. (F) Comparison between MAPbBr3 and Cs2AgBiBr6 SC detector performance under the same condition. Adapted from ref. 52 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
