ZnO nanostructures : growth, properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM15548F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM15548F
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6526-6535Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsZnO nanostructures: growth, properties and applications

        
          
            Aleksandra B. 
            Djurišić
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xinyi 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu Hang 
            Leung
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Alan 
            Man Ching Ng
          
        
      ab
aDept. of Physics, the University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong. E-mail: dalek@hku.hk;  Fax: +852 2559 9152
bNanostructure Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, Division of Physical Sciences, South University of Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China
Received 
      30th October 2011
    , Accepted 17th January 2012First published on 10th February 2012AbstractZnO is a material which is of great interest for a variety of applications due to its unique properties and the availability of a variety of growth methods resulting in a number of different morphologies and a wide range of material properties of synthesized nanostructures. In this review, we will discuss recent advances in important and/or controversial issues concerning ZnO properties and its applications. We will also discuss areas where further improvements are needed, and in particular discuss the issues related to the environmental stability of ZnO and its implications on reproducibility of measurements and the toxicity of ZnO nanomaterials.From left to right: Y. H. Leung, A. B. Djurišić, X. Y. Chen, and A. M. C. Ng.A. B. Djurišić obtained her PhD degree in electrical engineering from the School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Belgrade (now Serbia) in 1997. She joined the Dept. of Physics at the University of Hong Kong (HKU) in 2003. Her research interests include nanomaterials, wide-bandgap semiconductors, photocatalysis, and optoelectronic devices.X. Chen obtained his MSc degree from Department of Physics, Sun Yat-Sen University in 2008. He is currently a PhD student at the Dept. of Physics, HKU. His research interests include metal oxide nanostructure growth and their applications in optoelectronic devices.Y. H. Leung obtained his PhD degree from Dept. of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong in 2011. He is currently a post-doctoral fellow at Dept. of Physics, HKU. His current research interests include applications of nanostructured materials (solar cells, anti-bacterial applications, and photocatalysis).Alan Man Ching Ng completed his PhD degree in 2010 at HKU. He joined the South University of Science and Technology of China (SUSTC) in Aug 2011. His research interests include the fabrication and characterization of metal oxide nanostructures, and their applications in the field of energy and environment.
1. Introduction
ZnO is a wide band gap semiconductor (∼3.3 eV) with a high exciton binding energy of ∼60 meV, wurtzite crystal structure, and piezoelectric properties.1,2 ZnO in bulk forms (single crystal, thin films) has been studied for decades.1 In spite of that, there are still unresolved issues concerning this material, and the research interest in ZnO has been rising and falling over the years, with revival of interest following reports on promising properties or applications achievements.1 In particular, ZnO nanostructures are of intense interest since they can be prepared by a variety of methods and in a range of different morphologies.2–4 The variety of growth methods includes solution-based methods which are low-temperature, scalable, simple and inexpensive,2,5 which further contributes to the intense interest in ZnO. However, the primary motivator of ZnO research is its great potential for a variety of practical applications, such as in optoelectronic devices (light emitting diodes (LEDs), laser diodes, solar cells, photodetectors), energy harvesting devices (nanogenerators), electronic devices (transistors), sensors, catalysts, active compounds in sunscreens, etc.
Due to increased interest in ZnO in recent years, in addition to numerous research papers, there have also been several reviews of its properties, focusing on different aspects of ZnO.1–9 In spite of numerous research papers and several recent reviews on this material, there are still unresolved issues on which there is no consensus, as well as differing views on the future outlook of ZnO applications. More importantly, in spite of some promising reports and basic properties which should result in improved device performances, ZnO nanostructures in many cases fail to deliver consistent and reliable improved performance compared to established technologies. Questions why this is so and what can be done to resolve these problems are of huge importance for further progress. Thus, here we are going to discuss the significant and/or controversial issues concerning this material, and we aim to provide a concise discussion of those issues. Detailed overviews of ZnO properties,1,3 growth,2,4,5 defects,3,9 and optoelectronic,2,5,6 piezoelectric,2,4 and other applications2 have been given in other reviews in the literature. The focus of the review is on nanostructures, but where appropriate works on thin films and/or single crystals will be referenced to discuss relevant phenomena. First, we will briefly discuss the growth and properties of ZnO nanostructures. Next, different applications of ZnO will be discussed, followed by the discussion of the toxicity of ZnO nanomaterials to different organisms. ZnO is often regarded as non-toxic and biocompatible, in spite of the rising evidence of significant ecotoxicity. Therefore, it is important to consider its possible effects on the environment. Finally, a summary and a discussion of the future outlook will be given.
2. Growth methods, post-growth treatments and stability
ZnO nanostructures can be grown by a variety of different methods, from vacuum-based techniques to simple, low cost, low temperature methods. Due to its rich defect chemistry, a large variety of electronic and optical properties can be obtained for different ZnO nanostructures. While the relationship between the growth conditions, native defect concentrations and measured properties is often not entirely clear, there are very few controversial topics when it comes to the growth of undoped ZnO nanostructures. Various aspects of the growth, such as the use of seed layers,10 metal catalysts,11,12 and the effect of growth conditions13–15 have been studied by many research groups and have been extensively discussed in review papers.2,5,7,8 There is one issue that should be highlighted concerning vapor-phase growth, related to the growth mechanism. It is frequently assumed that the nanostructure growth which proceeds in the presence of a metal catalyst is due to vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism. However, it has been shown that this is not necessarily the case, and that vapor–solid (VS) or vapor–solid–solid (VSS) growth can still occur.11,12
The most critical yet unresolved problem in the growth of ZnO nanostructures is the control of the size and lateral position of the nanostructures on the substrate. While photolithography can be used for patterning the areas containing multiple nanorods,16 the feature size is too large for controlling the position of individual nanorods. Patterning methods based on self-assembly have the advantage of being fast and simple. Patterning using self-assembled monolayer of polystyrene spheres has been successfully applied for the growth of ZnO nanorod arrays.17 However, methods based on self-assembly inevitably contain defects when applied to large areas. Alternative patterning methods which offer better control are those based on atomic force microscopy18 and electron beam lithography.19,20 Disadvantage of such techniques is the slow speed of patterning, since they are based on a serial method of writing the pattern. Nevertheless, e-beam lithography enables superior control over the pattern size and position. Among alternative patterning techniques, laser interference based patterning techniques21–23 at present appear to be the most promising for fast patterning of relatively large areas. An example of the use of this technique is shown in Fig. 1. A range of different ordered morphologies of ZnO has been demonstrated for polymer-templated growth, with polymer patterning achieved by laser interference lithography.23
 Fig. 1  SEM images of vertically aligned ZnO nanowire arrays. (a) Top and (b) 45° tilted views of aligned individual ZnO nanowire arrays with uniform diameter, height and 2 μm period spanning a centimeter-scale area. Insets are the enlarged images, scale bars are 1 μm; (c) and (d) are ZnO nanowires grown on patterned GaN substrates with periods of 1 μm and 3 μm, respectively. Samples are tilted by 45°. Insets are enlarged SEM top views, scale bars are 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ©2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another problem related to the growth of ZnO nanostructures is the controlled growth of doped ZnO nanostructures. Even in the case of undoped nanostructures, there can be a significant variation of properties from one nanostructure to another. It is expected that the introduction of dopant would increase such variations. This difficulty in nanostructure doping is in addition to other relevant issues concerning doping, such as control over native defects and compensation, which are independent on the morphology. Some important dopants will be discussed in the next section.
Furthermore, the ambient exposure should be strictly controlled and characterization should preferably be performed on freshly prepared samples to avoid artifacts and erroneous conclusions due to the change of properties with time. ZnO has been shown to be sensitive to ambient exposure. Growth of nano-mounds on ZnO polar surfaces in air, resulting in zinc vacancy formation in the regions surrounding the nano-mounds, has been reported.24 Humidity in ambient air was also shown to affect the growth of ZnO nanocrystals and their crystallinity.25 ZnO is also sensitive to the exposure to ambient gases such as dry oxygen, and exposure to light due to the persistent photoconductivity phenomenon.26 It was proposed that passivation layers may be necessary to prevent instability of the film properties, especially in the case of p-type ZnO.26 Therefore, it should not be assumed that the properties of ZnO nanostructures are going to be unaffected by aging, especially if stored in ambient conditions at moderate to high humidity. Ambient humidity, storage time, and light exposure thus need to be taken into account when characterizing ZnO nanostructures.
While the properties of ZnO nanostructures are largely determined by the growth conditions, they can be further adjusted by post-growth treatments. Common treatments include annealing at different temperatures and in different environments27,28 and hydrothermal treatment.29 Both types of treatments are capable of inducing significant changes in the optical properties. However, it should be noted that a reduction in the defect emission in the room temperature photoluminescence (PL) is not a sufficient proof of the reduction in native defect concentration.28 Also, it has been proposed that hydrothermal treatment is superior to conventional annealing performed for the same time and at the same temperature.29 In hydrothermal treatment, the ZnO sample is placed at a distance above water level in an autoclave, which is then sealed and heated to 150 °C for a specified time.29,30 The improvements in ZnO properties are expected to occur due to the reactions between native defects and water during the treatment resulting in healing of the defects.29 However, due to sensitivity of ZnO to water vapor it may be necessary to carefully adjust the water vapor pressure and the time of treatment for optimal results. Significant changes in the morphology can occur after the treatment despite mild conditions (water vapor, 150 °C),30 as illustrated in Fig. 2. The results may also be substrate dependent, so that for example an out-diffusion of Si can occur for ZnO nanostructures grown on Si during hydrothermal treatment.30
 Fig. 2  (a) and (b) SEM images of ZnO nanorods grown by vapor deposition before and after hydrothermal treatment; (c) TEM image of ZnO nanorod after hydrothermal treatment. 
To summarize, the most critical issues related to growth, post-growth treatment and stability of ZnO are the achievement of reliable, reproducible, fast and inexpensive patterning techniques, improvements in the uniformity of nanostructure properties for individual nanostructures grown in the same deposition procedure (especially in the case of doping), and an improvement in the ZnO stability, possibly by surface passivation. Although ZnO is an oxide, it should never be assumed to be stable in ambient conditions due to its sensitivity to water and the adsorption of ambient gases on the surface which can result in a large change in properties due to the large surface-to-volume area of the nanostructures.
3. Optical and electronic properties
There are several controversial issues concerning the optical and electronic properties of ZnO, the most significant ones being the green emission and p-type doping. Concerning the origin of defect emission, there is still no consensus in the literature, and for each of the common defect emission bands in ZnO there has been more than one hypothesis proposed.1,3,6 Different defects could result in energy levels within the ZnO gap, as illustrated in Fig. 3. The origin of different emission bands has been extensively studied and discussed,1,3,6,9 especially in the case of the most common and the most controversial green emission.3,6,9,27,28,31–34 Therefore, we will not discuss it in detail, other than emphasizing that: (a) the origin of the emission band should not be assigned simply by citing one of the many hypotheses in the literature without supporting evidence; (b) one should never automatically assume that green emission originates from oxygen vacancies,9 since single ionized oxygen vacancy hypothesis31 was based on erroneous assumptions (although this does not necessarily mean that the hypothesis itself is wrong).
 Fig. 3  Calculated energy levels of different defects in ZnO from different studies in the literature. All the levels are referred to the conduction-band minimum (CBM). VZn, V−Zn and V2−Zn denote neutral, singly charged, and doubly charged zinc vacancy respectively. Znoi and Znti indicate neutral octahedral zinc interstitial and neutral tetrahedral zinc interstitial while Zn+i and Zn2+i indicate singly charged and doubly charged zinc interstitial. V0o and Vo denote neutral oxygen vacancy while V+o and V2+o denote singly charged and doubly charged oxygen vacancy. Hi and Oi represent oxygen and hydrogen interstitial respectively while OZn indicates antisite oxygen and VoZni denotes a complex of oxygen vacancy and zinc interstitial. For exact energy level positions, see ref. 6. Reprinted from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright ©2010. 
Two important issues concerning the electronic properties of ZnO are the origin of its n-type conductivity and the possibility of p-type doping. While oxygen vacancy used to be considered as a shallow donor and a possible candidate to explain the n-type conductivity, it is now reasonably conclusively established that oxygen vacancies are deep donors.9 Hydrogen is a shallow donor in ZnO, and it is also capable of defect passivation.9 Theoretical calculations predicted that hydrogen acts as a shallow donor in ZnO,35 and the presence of hydrogen shallow donors has been confirmed experimentally.36,37 Hydrogen in ZnO can be incorporated as bulk hydrogen and subsurface hydrogen, which is less strongly bound,38 and it can form complexes with other defects,39,40 as well as compensate nitrogen acceptors.41 Although the evidence in favor of hydrogen as a relevant shallow donor which is present at significant concentrations in ZnO is convincing, it should also be mentioned that other donor candidates have been proposed, such as complexes between the interstitial zinc and substitutional nitrogen (at oxygen position).42
P-type doping in ZnO is generally considered controversial.9 In particular, nitrogen doping is controversial and there have been theoretical calculations claiming that p-type conductivity by nitrogen doping is not possible.43 Nevertheless, p-type doping of ZnO nanostructures with different elements, such as nitrogen,44 arsenic,45,46etc. has been reported. It was proposed that large-size dopants such as As and Sb are incorporated at zinc rather than oxygen sites, and form complexes with zinc vacancies which are shallow acceptors and can have low formation energies.47 This makes such elements promising candidates for p-type doping of ZnO. P-type conductivity was also reported in undoped samples.48 However, the main concerns related to experimental determination of p-type conductivity for thin films of ZnO,9 are even more relevant for nanostructures due to various measurement difficulties. Furthermore, stability issues and the change of properties due to light and/or ambient exposure are also a concern for nanomaterials, which are expected to be even less environmentally stable compared to thin films due to their high surface area. It has been shown that the p-type ZnO thin films exhibited stable p-type conductivity in the dark for over a 1 year period, but reverted to n-type upon illumination which persisted for 24 h in the dark before reverting to p-type.49 Such phenomena were attributed to the band bending by surface donor trap states.50 Consequently, the possibility of sample passivation for ambient protection should be considered in general, and especially so when studying the p-type conductivity in ZnO. Passivation can also be used to improve the material properties. It was proposed that surface passivation may improve optical properties of ZnO nanostructures.51 Electrical properties and charge transport can also benefit from passivation, and significant improvements in the performance of ZnO nanowire transistors have been reported for passivated devices (two orders of magnitude improvement in electron mobility).52 The improvement occurred due to the passivation of surface defects (which can act as scattering centers and traps and thus reduce the mobility) and the reduction of chemisorption of ambient molecules.52 Passivation also resulted in stable performance of ZnO nanowire field effect transistors in different environments (oxygen, ambient, vacuum), while the performance of transistors without passivation was environment dependent.53
The need to achieve reproducible material properties highlights another issue in addition to improved control during material fabrication, and that is material characterization. For details on different characterization methods, see ref. 6. In general, accurate characterization of ZnO is difficult.6,9 In particular, for single ZnO nanowire characterization a wide range of properties can be obtained. The factors affecting the measurement are contact resistances, properties of the nanowire itself (crystallinity, defects, surface morphology), and ambient conditions, and consequently accurate electrical characterization of single nanowires is very difficult.54 In particular, the influence of atmosphere in which the measurement is conducted and/or illumination conditions has been shown to have significant effect,54 and the response was shown to be related to the oxygen pressure.55
To summarize, there is still no consensus on the origin of various defect emissions, including the commonly observed green emission. In spite of some promising reports, the reliable and stable p-type doping remains elusive, and further efforts are needed to address this issue. A main contribution towards the progress in the area of controlling the defects and material properties to achieve stable and reliable performance is expected to be the development of suitable surface passivation to improve stability and charge transport, and reduce losses at surface defects and traps.
4. Optoelectronic device applications
In recent years, there have been numerous reports of ZnO nanostructure-based LEDs (for comprehensive reviews, see refs. 5 and 6). LEDs have been reported both for homojunctions48,56 and heterojunctions with different materials.48,57–67 Very wide ranges of device performances have been reported in the literature, in terms of the turn-on voltages, I–V curves, and emission colors.6 A representative device diagram and the examples of different emission spectra and emission colors is shown in Fig. 4. Frequently for the same device architecture, different performance is reported in different papers. It has also been shown that in n-ZnO/p-GaN heterojunctions, the obtained emission color is strongly dependent on the properties of both p-GaN and n-ZnO.61 Also, light emission from n-ZnO/p-GaN heterojunctions has been reported under forward bias only,62,63 both forward and reverse bias,60,61,65 and reverse bias only.59,65 The origin of the light emission can also be controversial. The origin of the emissions in electroluminescence (EL) spectra is commonly attributed to different materials in the device by comparing the PL and EL spectra.59 However, it has recently been shown that EL spectra containing peaks absent in the PL spectrum of p-GaN can be obtained from p-GaN-based Schottky diodes in the absence of ZnO.65 Consequently, the assignment of the peak origin needs to be carefully evaluated and should not be performed only on the basis of comparison of EL and PL spectra.
 Fig. 4  Emission spectra and corresponding photos of p-GaN/ZnO NRs LEDs. Violet emission corresponds to p-GaN/Ce:ZnO LEDs,66 using zinc nitrate as precursor. Blue and yellow emission comes from p-GaN/ZnO LEDs under reverse bias,67 and white emission corresponds to p-GaN (on InGaN multiple quantum wells layer)/ZnO LEDs.65 The inset shows the device diagram. 
Finally, the last and the most important controversy concerns the efficiency of the devices. ZnO/GaN LEDs are commonly described as “high brightness”62 or “high performance”.63 Yet, typically only EL spectra in arbitrary units are reported, and no information on actual brightness and/or efficiency is given. In those papers which do report brightness or efficiency, the numbers are typically low (efficiency of 0.00005% for ZnO films on p-GaN64). For devices with ZnO nanorods in a simple n-ZnO nanorods/p-GaN heterojunction, brightness of the order of tens of cd m−2 could be obtained under reverse bias, while an unusual device architecture involving InGaN multiple-quantum well structures enabled the improvement of the brightness to over 10000 cd m−2 for 30 mA bias while maximum efficiency was over 0.5%.65 Devices with quantum efficiency of 2.5% have also been reported, but in this case emission spectra were noisy in spite of reported emission power of 0.283 mW at 10 V bias.68 Although the achieved efficiencies to date are not very impressive, for further improvements of these devices it is essential to start reporting the absolute brightness and/or efficiency instead of just EL spectra in arbitrary units so that meaningful comparisons of device performance can be made to optimize the material properties and device architectures to achieve improved performance.
Intense interest in the study of lasing in ZnO nanostructures has started with the report of optically excited room temperature UV lasing from ZnO nanowires.69 Optically pumped lasing has since been reported in a number of different morphologies of ZnO. There have been significant efforts to achieve electrically pumped lasing in ZnO, which has been reported by several groups.70–74 In some cases, extremely low thresholds have been reported, as low as 0.8 mA.72 However, several of these reports also showed noisy spectra, leaky I–V curves, very few data points below threshold, and/or weak emission below the threshold, in addition to insufficient characterization of the reported devices.71,72 On the other hand, there have also been several studies which included more detailed optical characterization and/or simulations,70,73,74 and provided a considerably more convincing demonstration of electrically pumped lasing in ZnO. Further research, in particular in improving the material quality and device design, may result in improvements in the device performance since leaky I–V curves were still observed.74
ZnO is also of interest for solar cell applications, such as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells. Efficient charge transport has been demonstrated in DSSCs based on ZnO nanowires, but overall power conversion efficiency of the cells was 1.5%.75 Efficiency was improved to ∼2.3% with the use of core-shell structures.76 Other ZnO morphologies and variations in experimental procedures (shorter dye immersion time, etc.) have been proposed to improve the performance. Lots of work has been devoted to optimizing the ZnO nanostructure morphology to improve DSSC efficiency (schematic diagrams of some examples are shown in Fig. 5). For example, branched nanowires represent a compromise between high surface area (nanoparticles) and efficient charge transport (nanowires). Relatively high efficiency (5.4%) was reported recently for DSSC based on densely packed ZnO nanosheets, which was attributed to an increased electron lifetime.77 Nevertheless, this efficiency is still below the values achieved for titania-based DSSCs. It was found that there are differences in the carrier dynamics between ZnO and TiO2 (slower electron injection into ZnO, possibly slower dye regeneration, longer electron lifetime, similar transport times).78 However, other studies found efficient injection of electrons into ZnO, while it was mentioned that the lower photocurrent for ZnO can occur due to the formation of complexes between the dye and Zn2+ ions.79 Furthermore, native defects in ZnO have a significant effect not only on charge transport and photovoltaic performance, but also on the dye adsorption.80 In addition to dyes, inorganic quantum dots can be used as sensitizers in DSSCs.81 Thus, one possible way to further improve the performance of ZnO-based DSSCs is to develop dyes/sensitizers and electrolytes specifically tailored for ZnO in order to achieve fast electron injection, fast electron transport, and low recombination losses at the same time.
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagrams of different ZnO nanostructure DSSC architectures: nanoparticles (upper left), nanowires (upper right), branched nanowires (lower left), and nanosheets (lower right). 
ZnO has also been used in polymer-based solar cells.82–85 These include cells with different ZnO morphologies (nanoparticles or nanorods) and different cell preparation procedures. Although some promising results have been achieved, if we compare the best achieved performance for a hybrid cell and the best achieved performance for purely organic cells, purely organic cells at present have higher efficiencies compared to their hybrid counterparts. The possible reasons include incomplete filling of the pores/gaps in the inorganic part with the polymer/polymer blend, unfavorable band bending at the organic/inorganic interface, and unfavorable organic/inorganic composite film phase separation and morphology. It should be possible to optimize these factors via surface modifications of nanomaterials and/or use of novel organic materials specifically designed for hybrid device applications.
ZnO nanostructures can also be used in ultraviolet (UV) photodetectors. There have been several reports of ZnO nanostructure based photodetectors with high responsivity and/or internal gain.86,87 High gain in ZnO nanowires compared to thin films was attributed to longer carrier lifetime.88 Field effect transistors (FETs) sensitive to UV light due to contributions of photogenerated carriers and UV-induced surface desorption have also been reported.89 While in some cases reasonably fast response times have been reported (less than 0.1 s and ∼1 s rise and fall times of the photocurrent, respectively86), it should be noted that ZnO often exhibits persistent photoconductivity.90–93 In addition to persistent photoconductivity under UV illumination, persistent photoconductivity under visible illumination was also reported.92 Surface passivation resulted in reduction of persistent photoconductivity, indicating that it originates from surface defects.92 Persistent photoconductivity was also shown to be dependent on ambient atmosphere,90 and it was attributed to the presence of oxygen vacancies,93 the change of a neutral oxygen vacancy to charged oxygen vacancy,94 and photoinduced oxygen desorption.90 A model involving built-in surface potential and oxygen-assisted surface recombination was also proposed.91
There are other possible uses of ZnO in optoelectronic devices, such as roughening of the LED surface or substrate to increase the light extraction from the devices and thus improve overall external quantum efficiency by minimizing the losses due to light trapped within the device due to total internal reflections. Improvements in the light extraction from GaN-based devices using ZnO nanorod arrays have been demonstrated.95 Similarly, ZnO nanostructures could be employed as antireflection layers in solar cells.96 Finally, possible application of ZnO nanostructures in field emission displays should also be mentioned.97 There have been numerous reports of field emission from various ZnO nanostructures. In addition, doped ZnO films, such as aluminum-doped ZnO (AZO), indium-doped ZnO (IZO) and gallium-doped ZnO (GZO) are of potential interest as transparent conducting electrodes to replace the more commonly used indium tin oxide (ITO).
To summarize, material quality improvements, surface/interface engineering and device architecture changes are needed for optoelectronic applications of ZnO to address the problems of leaky I–V curves, short carrier lifetimes, surface defects, and unfavorable energy level alignments at interfaces. Resolution of these problems is expected to result in significant improvements in the device performance for both light emitting devices and solar cells. Furthermore, improved characterization of light emitting devices is needed, while for DSSC applications development of dyes and electrolytes optimized for the use with ZnO is desirable.
5. Other applications
ZnO is of interest for applications in different types of sensors, including gas sensors and sensors for biomedical applications. In the latter category, both optical sensing98 and electrical sensing99 has been reported. However, sensing mechanisms and sensing applications have been studied more thoroughly for gas sensors. Gas sensing for different gases (oxygen, NO2, etc.) has been reported.100–102 Sensor architectures could be FETs100 or simple two metal contacts across the nanostructure network.101 Sensing is based on the change of conductivity upon gas adsorption/desorption. It is well known that the charge transport in ZnO nanowires is strongly dependent on the environment, in particular the oxygen content.55,103 However, it should be noted that the theoretical calculations predict that oxygen interacts weakly with the stoichiometric (100) surface, while it adsorbs on the oxygen vacancies.104,105 On the other hand, water can adsorb dissociatively, molecularly or in a mixed form on a stoichiometric (100) surface, while it does not interact with oxygen vacancies.105 This indicates that point defects have a potentially critical role in sensing applications of ZnO. For example, the sensitivity of ZnO gas sensors was proposed to be proportional to the concentration of oxygen vacancies, which were speculated to play a role in NO2 gas adsorption.101 Other defects, such as interstitial zinc, and surface oxygen species were also proposed to be involved in NO2 gas detection, in addition to oxygen vacancies.102 Consequently, the control of defects during material synthesis as well as the study of the role of the native defects in the sensing mechanism and surface adsorption of different molecules, including considering coexistence of different molecules on the surface (for example water and oxygen for air environment) are essential for sensing applications of ZnO.
Voltage generation upon bending of ZnO nanowires attributed to the piezoelectric effect has been reported.106–108 A theoretical model for a nanogenerator has been proposed.109 However, questions have been raised over the mechanism of this effect, and whether the reports represent an artifact in atomic force microscopy (AFM) characterization.110 While artifacts are indeed possible in some AFM systems,111 the fact that the effect has been observed in the absence of the use of AFM107,112,113 clearly indicates that the observed electricity generation is not an artifact. Nevertheless, one of the objections raised concerning the proposed mechanism of nanogenerators was not fully clarified, namely that due to high conductivity of ZnO, the time to cancel the piezoelectrically generated charges by the flow of free electrons is very short.110 While the estimates of carrier concentration and conductivity in ZnO nanowires differed in the comment and the response,110,111 the fact remains that the carrier concentration in ZnO is not really small (at best it is as low as 1016 cm−3).111 Further work into studying the dynamics of charge transfer across the Schottky contact may help to clarify the mechanism of electricity generation using these devices.
Another application of ZnO is in photocatalysis. Although not as extensively studied as TiO2,114,115 ZnO can actually exhibit higher photocatalytic efficiency for dye degradation.116 However, it is less environmentally stable and it can be susceptible to photocorrosion.116 Nevertheless, its potentially high efficiency makes it interesting for photocatalytic studies. Photocatalytic efficiency of ZnO is strongly dependent on its morphology and properties. For example, different crystal facets have different photocatalytic activity, so that morphology optimization can result in increased activity for increased proportion of polar zinc-terminated (0001) facets.117 The dependence of the activity on material properties (surface properties and native defects) is more complex. It was proposed that there is a complicated dependence between photoluminescence and photocatalysis, since both high separation rate of photogenerated charges and higher surface vacancies and defects content would result in higher photocatalytic activity.118 However, the highest photocatalytic activity among different ZnO samples was observed for ZnO tetrapods which had the lowest defect concentrations, in spite of having the lowest surface area and the highest aggregation size in aqueous solutions.119 This is likely due to the fact that lower defect concentration can result in lower recombination losses and consequently higher photocatalytic efficiency. However, the role of surface defects in dye adsorption and photocatalytic activity still requires further study. Another method to improve photocatalytic activity is to deposit metal on the ZnO nanostructure surface. For example, improved photocatalytic activity, as well as high performance as an anode for Li-ion batteries, was reported for ZnO nanoflowers functionalized with Au nanoparticles.120
Concerning the improvements of photocatalytic activity, one topic of significant interest is the extension of the activity into the visible spectral range to achieve better overlap with the solar spectrum. Different approaches have been tried for both TiO2 and ZnO (although TiO2 has been more extensively studied), including surface sensitization and doping with different elements.121 Solid solutions with other materials, such as GaN:ZnO solid solution were also reported to exhibit a visible light photocatalysis (for water splitting).122 While extension of the activity into the visible spectral range to achieve efficient photocatalysis under solar illumination is highly desirable from the point of view of environmental remediation and pollutant degradation with minimal energy input, there are possible serious implications if this goal were to be achieved. Release of an efficient photocatalyst active under solar illumination into the environment may result in serious consequences in terms of ecotoxicity, so that catalyst recovery and environmental protection measures preventing uncontrolled release would be essential.
The last issue which should be mentioned is that the actual photocatalysis mechanism may require clarification and further study. It is commonly assumed that the photocatalytic dye degradation occurs due to the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under illumination.123 However, direct charge transfer of the photogenerated carriers can also contribute to photocatalytic reactions, and it was shown that it actually represents the dominant mechanism, although ROS species such as OH˙ radicals also contribute to the degradation.123 Furthermore, the actual mechanism of ROS generation requires clarification. As it has been pointed out for TiO2, although the valence band edge is located below the redox potential of OH˙/OH− and OH˙/H2O, the actual energy levels of adsorbed water and hydroxyl groups are located (both experimentally and theoretically) by more than 1 eV below the top of the valence band.124 Consequently, this excludes the charge transfer to the adsorbed water species, although charge transfer to solvated OH− is possible.124 Thermal fluctuations could result in sufficient shifts of the energy level alignment of a hydrated OH− to accept a hole transfer, after which it would migrate from the surface as a hydroxyl radical, while hole transfer to molecular water remains unfavorable under all conditions.124 This is illustrated in Fig. 6. Similar problems with unfavorable energy level alignment would apply to ZnO, and detailed calculations instead of just comparing the redox potentials to the valence band edge would be beneficial.
 Fig. 6  (a) Common schematic diagram of charge transfer in photocatalysis after refs. 114 and 115; (b) Schematic diagram of charge transfer in photocatalysis taking into account actual energy levels of adsorbed water and hydroxyl groups as proposed by Cheng and Selloni.124 
In addition to photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation, another photocatalytic application of interest is photocatalytic disinfection, due to increasing antibiotic resistance and the need for water treatment. Antibacterial activity of ZnO has been demonstrated by different research groups,125–130 and it was shown that ZnO has higher antibacterial activity compared to more commonly used TiO2.130 Antibacterial activity of ZnO has been demonstrated under ambient/visible illumination, and the activity occurred due to bacterial membrane damage.125,128 In some studies, significant accumulation of ZnO nanoparticles in the cell membrane, as well as cellular internalization was reported,127 while for ZnO nanorods cellular internalization was rarely observed in spite of the membrane damage.128 Antibacterial activity of ZnO was attributed to ROS production, cell membrane damage and Zn2+ ion toxicity.126 It was also reported that lower ZnO concentration was required for the loss of cell viability for prokaryotic compared to eukaryotic cells.129 Finally, preferential killing of cancer cells, attributed to ROS production, was also demonstrated for ZnO nanoparticles.131 Thus, ZnO nanomaterials appear to be very promising for biomedical applications. Nevertheless, there are significant concerns about their stability, toxicity and ecotoxicity which need to be adequately addressed, as will be discussed in detail in the next section.
To summarize, control over native defects and surface properties is again crucial for various applications of ZnO, including sensors and photocatalysts. In photocatalysis, the development of visible light active catalysts is of significant interest, but in this case it is also necessary to consider possible undesirable effects in case of unintentional and uncontrolled release of such catalyst into the environment.
6. ZnO safety and toxicity
As already discussed, mechanisms of ZnO toxicity have been attributed to ROS production, cell membrane damage and Zn2+ ion toxicity.126 Poor stability of ZnO at different pH values was proposed to be favorable in terms of its biocompatibility.132 It was shown that ZnO nanowires can dissolve in horse blood serum within several hours, and the argument in favor of its biodegradability and biocompatibility was that after dissolution Zn ions can be absorbed by the body.132 However, while it is correct that human beings need zinc intake, it is unclear what would be the effect of high local concentrations of zinc ions as a result of dissolution of ZnO based biomedical sensors and devices.
It should be noted that ZnO nanomaterials/nanoparticles are already widely used in sunscreens and cosmetics.133 It is generally accepted that they are non-toxic and pose no risk to human skin and human health.133 However, although the majority of the studies agree that nanoparticles do not penetrate deep into the skin,133 there have been studies demonstrating genotoxicity of ZnO nanoparticles to human skin cells.134 More importantly, regardless of the safety of ZnO nanoparticles to human skin, one other key aspect needs to be considered concerning their application in sunscreen and cosmetics. When used in these products, ZnO nanomaterials will inevitably end up in the environment, where they can have detrimental effects on aquatic organisms. Due to the increased production and the use of various nanomaterials in general, studying ecotoxicology of nanomaterials is becoming increasingly important.135 ZnO nanoparticles, in addition to silver nanoparticles, were classified extremely toxic and these two nanomaterials were the most harmful out of all materials considered.135 Solubility of ZnO nanoparticles and consequent release of Zn2+ ions, contributed to their toxicity to different organisms.135–137 In addition to aquatic organisms, toxicity of ZnO to different soil organisms was also demonstrated.138,139 If the toxicity is a consequence of ZnO dissolution and zinc ion release, one possible way to moderate the toxicity is to use surface functionalization and/or core shell structures. Another possible way is to alter the zinc ion release by doping.140 Finally, it should be noted that the presence of natural organic matter in the environment will affect the aggregation of metal oxide nanoparticles,141 and it may affect the toxicity as well. For example, it was demonstrated that addition of humic acid reduced toxicity of ZnO nanoparticles to earthworm Eisenia fetida.138
Therefore, it is essential to study further the ecotoxicity of ZnO, preferably under conditions which closely match the actual environmental conditions, in terms of the presence of natural organic matter, illumination level, pH, etc. Furthermore, although it is obvious that ZnO used in cosmetics and sunscreen will end up in the environment, actual concentrations and distributions (not only for ZnO but also for other engineered nanomaterials) are largely unknown. Finally, the presence of nanomaterials in the environment requires toxicity studies considering exposures by a larger variety of routes (in addition to the common inhalation exposure), including dietary exposures. Such studies have been scarce, but there have been indications of toxicity of ZnO nanoparticles in fresh water snails upon ingestion with food,142 and in the case of dietary exposure of juvenile rainbow trout to titania nanoparticles, titanium accumulation was found in the gill, gut, liver, brain and spleen.143 Thus, it is obvious that further studies are urgently needed to critically evaluate ecological risks of engineered nanomaterials, including ZnO. To summarize, there is an essential need for information on the levels of ZnO already present in the environment, better understanding of its mechanisms of toxicity, its ecotoxicity in presence of natural organic matter, and effects of surface modifications on toxicity.
7. Summary and outlook
ZnO continues to be intensely studied due to its unique and complex properties, as well as great potential for a variety of practical applications. In spite of numerous studies in the literature, several important issues remain unresolved, as summarized in Fig. 7. There has been lots of progress in growth of ZnO nanostructures and their use for a variety of practical applications. Nevertheless, the reproducibility and reliability of the obtained results (especially in the case of doping of ZnO) remains a significant concern. A major problem which needs to be overcome to solve this issue is the elucidation of the relationship between growth conditions, types and concentrations of defect formed, and properties measured. Thus, for further progress in our understanding of the properties of ZnO and its practical applications, it is essential to improve our control over the native defects and to conclusively identify which macroscopic features observed in common characterization methods correspond to which defects. Also, there is considerable interest in the development of surface modification or passivation agents which could result in the reduction of defect emission, reliable and stable electronic properties, improved charge transport, and improved device performance. Due to large surface-to-volume ratios of the nanostructures, surface quality of the material plays a crucial role in determining its overall behavior and a significant change in the material properties can be achieved with suitably designed surface modifications.
 Fig. 7  Illustration of unresolved problems concerning properties and applications of ZnO. 
It is also necessary to improve the reporting of the measurement conditions and performance parameters of various ZnO devices, in particular LEDs where absolute numbers are rarely given. Improvement in the material quality as well as the interface between the p- and n-type materials is needed to improve the device performance and reduce the common problems of leaky I–V curves. For DSSC applications, there is a great potential for improvement in the performance by designing the dye and electrolyte to be optimized for ZnO rather than TiO2.
Finally, highly important issues of toxicity and ecotoxicity of ZnO should be more extensively studied, and findings should be more widely promoted across different research fields related to ZnO. For example, in reports concerned with the optical or electronic properties of ZnO and its applications in electronic or optoelectronic devices, ZnO is frequently described as a non-toxic or even biocompatible material. Yet, a number of studies indicate that ZnO exhibits significant ecotoxicity to a variety of different organisms. This needs to be taken into account in the applications of this material, so that regulations concerning its disposal to prevent uncontrolled release into the environment could be established. Furthermore, the majority of ecotoxicity studies have been performed on bare nanomaterials. In existing applications, such as sunscreens, nanoparticles usually have modified surfaces. Surface modifications as discussed above will also be desirable for optoelectronic and electronic device applications. Thus, there is an obvious and urgent need for studying the effect of surface modifications on the toxicity of ZnO nanostructures.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Strategic Research Theme, University Development Fund, Seed Funding Grant (administrated by The University of Hong Kong) and RGC CRF CityU6/CRF/08 grant is acknowledged.
References
U. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, V. Avrutin, S. J. Cho and H. Morkoç, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef .
S. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1013–1098 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić and Y. H. Leung, Small, 2006, 2, 944–961 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 64, 33–71 CrossRef .
M. Willander, O. Nur, Q. X. Zhao, L. L. Yang, M. Lorenz, B. Q. Cao, J. Z. Pérez, C. Czekalla, G. Zimmermann, M. Grundmann, A. Bakin, A. Behrends, M. Al-Suleiman, A. El-Shaer, A. C. Mofor, B. Postels, A. Waag, N. Boukos, A. Travlos, H. S. Kwack, J. Guinard and D. L. S. Dang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 332001 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, A. M. C. Ng and X. Y. Chen, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2010, 34, 191–259 CrossRef .
X. D. Wang, J. H. Song and Z. L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 711–720 RSC .
M. Ahmad and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 599–614 RSC .
M. D. McCluskey and S. J. Jokela, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 071101 CrossRef .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kirkham, X. D. Wang, Z. L. Wang and R. L. Snyder, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 365304 CrossRef .
R. T. R. Kumar, E. McGlynn, M. Biswas, R. Saunders, G. Trolliard, B. Soulestin, J. R. Duclere, J. P. Mosnier and M. O. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 084309 CrossRef .
Z. R. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. McKenzie, M. J. McDermott, M. A. Rodriguez, H. Konishi and H. F. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 821–826 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tena-Zaera, J. Elias, G. Wang and C. Lévy-Clément, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16706–16711 CAS .
Y. Zhong, A. B. Djurišić, Y. F. Hsu, K. S. Wong, G. Brauer, C. C. Ling and W. K. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16286–16295 CAS .
Y. Tak and K. J. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19263–19269 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, C. J. Summers and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. He, J. H. Hsu, C. W. Wang, H. N. Lin, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Ding, Y. G. Wei, H. Fang, Y. Shen, A. K. Sood, D. L. Polla and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6670–6671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. G. Wei, M. Kirkham, J. Liu, W. J. Mai, D. Davidovic, R. L. Snyder and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14958–14959 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Yuan, R. Guo, Y. G. Wei, W. Z. Wu, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang and S. M. Das, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3484–3489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wei, W. Z. Wu, R. Guo, D. J. Yuan, S. M. Das and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3414–3419 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, H. Jeong, M. S. Jeong and G. Y. Jung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3055–3063 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Merz, D. R. Doutt, T. Bolton, Y. Dong and L. J. Brillson, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, L20–L23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali and M. Winterer, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
B. Claflin, D. C. Look and D. R. Norton, J. Electron. Mater., 2007, 36, 442–445 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, Y. H. Leung, K. H. Tam, Y. F. Hsu, L. Ding, W. K. Ge, Y. C. Zhong, K. S. Wong, W. K. Chan, H. L. Tam, K. W. Cheah, W. M. Kwok and D. L. Phillips, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 095702 CrossRef .
K. H. Tam, C. K. Cheung, Y. H. Leung, A. B. Djurišić, C. C. Ling, C. D. Beling, S. Fung, W. M. Kwok, W. K. Chan, D. L. Phillips, L. Ding and W. K. Ge, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20865–20871 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lupan and T. Pauporté, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 2454–2458 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chen, A. M. C. Ng, A. B. Djurišić, C. C. Ling and W. K. Chan, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 2656–2662 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vanheusden, C. H. Seager, W. L. Warren, D. R. Tallant and J. A. Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 403–405 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Garces, L. Wang, L. Bai, N. C. Giles, L. E. Halliburton and G. Cantwell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 622–624 CrossRef CAS .
I. Shalish, H. Temkin and V. Narayanamurti, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 245401 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. W. Sun, B. K. Tay, P. H. T. Cao, J. X. Wang and X. H. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 064307 CrossRef .
A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 44–47 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Hofmann, A. Hofstaetter, F. Leiter, H. J. Zhou, F. Henecker, B. K. Meyer, S. B. Orlinskii, J. Schmidt and P. G. Baranov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 045504 CrossRef .
S. F. J. Cox, E. A. Davis, S. P. Cottrell, P. J. C. King, J. S. Lord, J. M. Gil, H. V. Alberto, R. C. Vilão, J. P. Duarte, N. A. de Campos, A. Weidinger, R. L. Lichti and S. J. C. Irvine, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 2601–2604 CrossRef CAS .
F. Traeger, M. Kauer, C. Wöll, D. Rogalla and H. W. Becker, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 84, 075462 CrossRef .
D. Bastin, E. V. Lavrov and J. Weber, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 83, 195210 CrossRef .
M.-H. Du and K. Biswas, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 115502 CrossRef .
X. N. Li, B. Keyes, S. Asher, S. B. Zhang, S. H. Wei, T. J. Coutts, S. Limpijumnong and C. G. Van de Walle, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 122107 CrossRef .
D. C. Look, G. C. Farlow, P. Reunchan, S. Limpijumnong, S. B. Zhang and K. Nordlund, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 225502 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lyons, A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 252105 CrossRef .
B. Xiang, P. W. Wang, X. Z. Zhang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, C. Soci, D. P. Yu and D. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, M. C. Jeong, S. W. Joo and J. M. Myoung, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 764–768 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Sun, Q.-F. Zhang and J.-L. Wu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 3798–3802 CrossRef CAS .
S. Limpijumnong, S. B. Zhang, S. H. Wei and C. H. Park, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 155504 CrossRef .
Y. F. Hsu, Y. Y. Xi, K. H. Tam, A. B. Djurišić, J. Luo, C. C. Ling, C. K. Cheung, A. M. C. Ng, W. K. Chan, X. Deng, C. D. Beling, S. Fung, K. W. Cheah, P. W. K. Fong and C. C. Surya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1020–1030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Xiao, Y. C. Liu, R. Mu, D. X. Zhao and J. Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 052106 CrossRef .
B. Claflin, D. C. Look, S. J. Park and G. Cantwell, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 287, 16–22 CrossRef CAS .
J. Grabowska, A. Meaney, K. K. Nanda, J. P. Mosnier, M. O. Henry, J. R. Duclère and E. McGlynn, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71, 115439 CrossRef .
P.-C. Chang, Z. Y. Fan, C.-J. Chien, D. Stichtenoth, C. Ronning and J. G. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 133113 CrossRef .
S. Song, W.-K. Hong, S.-S. Kwon and T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 263109 CrossRef .
E. Schlenker, A. Bakin, T. Weimann, P. Hinze, D. H. Weber, A. Gölzhäuser, H.-H. Wehmann and A. Waag, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 365707 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Li, Q. Wan, Y. X. Liang and T. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4556–4558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. W. Sun, B. K. Tay, G. F. You, S. T. Tan and K. L. Teo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 253107 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Xi, Y. F. Hsu, A. B. Djurišić, A. M. C. Ng, W. K. Chan, H. L. Tam and K. W. Cheah, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 113505 CrossRef .
M. Willander, O. Nur, S. Zaman, A. Zainelabdin, N. Bano and I. Hussain, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 224017 CrossRef .
W. I. Park and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Sadaf, M. Q. Israr, S. Kishwar, O. Nur and M. Willander, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2011, 26, 075003 CrossRef .
A. M. C. Ng, Y. Y. Xi, Y. F. Hsu, A. B. Djurišić, W. K. Chan, S. Gwo, H. L. Tam, K. W. Cheah, P. W. K. Fong, H. F. Lui and C. Surya, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 445201 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Zhang, M.-Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, L.-J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2767–2770 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lupan, T. Pauporté and B. Viana, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3298–3302 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Rogers, F. H. Teherani, A. Yasan, K. Minder, P. Kung and M. Razeghi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 141918 CrossRef .
X. Y. Chen, A. M. C. Ng, F. Fang, Y. H. Ng, A. B. Djurišić, H. L. Tam, K. W. Cheah, S. Gwo, W. K. Chan, H. F. Lui, P. W. K. Fong and C. Surya, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 094513 CrossRef .
X. Y. Chen, F. Fang, A. M. C. Ng, A. B. Djurišić, W. K. Chan, H. F. Lui, P. W. K. Fong, C. Surya and K. W. Cheah, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520, 1125–1130 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. C. Ng, X. Y. Chen, F. Fang, Y. F. Hsu, A. B. Djurišić, C. C. Ling, H. L. Tam, K. W. Cheah, P. W. K. Fong, H. F. Lui, C. Surya and W. K. Chan, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2010, 100, 851–858 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, C. Xu, Y. Liu, Y. Hu, R. Yang, Q. Yang, J.-H. Ryou, H. J. Kim, Z. Lochner, S. Choi, R. Dupuis and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4749–4753 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Q. Yan, Y. Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef .
H. K. Liang, S. F. Yu and H. Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 241107 CrossRef .
X. Y. Ma, J. W. Pan, P. L. Chen, D. S. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Yang and D. R. Yang, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 14426–14433 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, C.-X. Shan, B. Yao, B.-H. Li, J.-Y. Zhang, Z.-Z. Zhang, D.-X. Zhao, D.-Z. Shen, X.-W. Fan, Y.-M. Lu and Z.-K. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1613–1617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dai, C. X. Xu and X. W. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4115–4119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chu, G. P. Wang, W. H. Zhou, Y. Q. Lin, L. Chernyak, J. Z. Zhao, J. Y. Kong, L. Li, J. J. Ren and J. L. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 506–510 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, A. Radenovic, T. Kuykendall, J. Liphardt and P. D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22652–22663 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Lai, C.-Y. Lin, H.-W. Chen, J.-G. Chen, C.-W. Kung, R. Vittal and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9379–9385 RSC .
M. Quintana, T. Edvinsson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1035–1041 CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, K. Hara, G. Fujihashi, S. Takano, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4818–4822 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Hsu, Y. Y. Xi, A. B. Djurišić and W. K. Chan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 133507 CrossRef .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiró, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635–7639 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1112–1116 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. D. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CAS .
K. Takanezawa, K. Hirota, Q.-S. Wei, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7218–7223 CAS .
Y. Z. Jin, J. P. Wang, B. Q. Sun, J. C. Blakesley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1649–1653 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soci, A. Zhang, B. Xiang, S. A. Dayeh, D. P. R. Aplin, J. Park, X. Y. Bao, Y. H. Lo and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Prades, R. Jimenez-Diaz, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, L. Fernandez-Romero, T. Andreu, A. Cirera, A. Romano-Rodriguez, A. Cornet, J. R. Morante, S. Barth and S. Mathur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14639–14644 CAS .
M. S. Arnold, P. Avouris, Z. W. Pan and Z. L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 659–663 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Bao, I. Shalish, Z. H. Su, R. Gurwitz, F. Capasso, X. W. Wang and Z. F. Ren, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 404 CrossRef .
J. D. Prades, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, R. Jimenez-Diaz, M. Manzanares, T. Andreu, A. Cirera, A. Romano-Rodriguez and J. R. Morante, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 465501 CrossRef CAS .
K. Moazzami, T. E. Murphy, J. D. Phillips, M. C. K. Cheung and A. N. Cartwright, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2006, 21, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nayak, J. Kasuya, A. Watanabe and S. Nozaki, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 195222 CrossRef .
S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 035215 CrossRef .
H. K. Lee, M. S. Kim and J. S. Yu, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2011, 23, 1204–1206 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Lee, D. S. Ruby, D. W. Peters, B. B. McKenzie and J. W. P. Hsu, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Tseng, C. J. Huang, H. M. Cheng, I. N. Lin, K. S. Liu and I. C. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 811–814 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Shih, Y.-T. Chen, C.-M. Wei, M.-H. Chan, J.-K. Lian, Y.-F. Chen and T.-Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14664–14667 CAS .
K. Yang, G.-W. She, H. Wang, X.-M. Ou, X.-H. Zhang, C.-S. Lee and S.-T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20169–20172 CAS .
Z. Y. Fan, D. W. Wang, P. C. Chang, W. Y. Tseng and J. G. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5923–5925 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Ahn, K. S. Park, J. H. Heo, J. G. Park, D. W. Kim, K. J. Choi, J. H. Lee and S. H. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 263103 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Z. H. Wang, D. M. Han, F. B. Gu and G. S. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12763–12773 CAS .
J. Maeng, G. Jo, S.-S. Kwon, S. Song, J. Seo, S.-J. Kang, D.-Y. Kim and T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 233120 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, M. M. Al-Jassim and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 72, 161307 CrossRef .
H. Xu, R. Q. Zhang and S. Y. Tong, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 82, 155326 CrossRef .
P. X. Gao, J. H. Song, J. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Wang, J. H. Song, J. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 102–105 CrossRef CAS .
M.-P. Lu, J. Song, M.-Y. Lu, M.-T. Chen, Y. Gao, L.-J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1223–1227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2499–2505 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alexe, S. Senz, M. A. Schubert, D. Hesse and U. Goesele, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4021–4026 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1311–1315 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Cha, J.-S. Seo, S. M. Kim, H. J. Kim, Y. J. Park, S.-W. Kim and J. M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4726–4730 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 873–877 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, T. N. Rao and D. A. Tryk, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2000, 1, 1–21 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. T. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hariharan, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 304, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Jang, J.-H. Won, S.-J. Hwang and J.-H. Choy, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3309–3312 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Jing, Y. C. Qu, B. Q. Wang, S. D. Li, B. J. Jiang, L. B. Yang, W. Fu, H. G. Fu and J. Z. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1773–1787 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Guo, A. M. C. Ng, F. Liu, A. B. Djurišić, W. K. Chan, H. Su and K. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11095–11101 CAS .
M. Ahmad, S. Y. Ying, A. Nisar, H. Sun, W. Shen, M. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723–7729 RSC .
S. Rehman, R. Ullah, A. M. Butt and N. D. Gohar, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 170, 560–569 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Guo, A. M. C. Ng, F. Liu, A. B. Djurišić and W. K. Chan, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 107, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng and A. Selloni, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11518–11525 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jones, B. Ray, K. T. Ranjit and A. C. Manna, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 2008, 279, 71–76 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Li, S. Mahendra, D. Y. Lyon, L. Brunet, M. V. Liga, D. Li and P. J. J. Alvarez, Water Res., 2008, 42, 4591–4602 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brayner, R. Ferrari-Iliou, N. Brivois, S. Djediat, M. F. Benedetti and F. Fiévet, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 866–870 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Tam, A. B. Djurišić, C. M. N. Chan, Y. Y. Xi, C. W. Tse, Y. H. Leung, W. K. Chan, F. C. C. Leung and D. W. T. Au, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 6167–6174 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Reddy, K. Feris, J. Bell, D. G. Wingett, C. Hanley and A. Punnoose, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213902 CrossRef .
L. K. Adams, D. Y. Lyon and P. J. J. Alvarez, Water Res., 2006, 40, 3527–3532 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hanley, J. Layne, A. Punnoose, K. M. Reddy, I. Coombs, A. Coombs, K. Feris and D. Wingett, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 295103 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, N. S. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2432–2435 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Nohynek, J. Lademann, C. Ribaud and M. S. Roberts, Crit. Rev. Toxicol., 2007, 37, 251–277 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, R. K. Shukla, N. Saxena, D. Parmar, M. Das and A. Dhawan, Toxicol. Lett., 2009, 185, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kahru and H.-C. Dubourguier, Toxicology, 2010, 269, 105–119 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Y. Wong, P. T. Y. Leung, A. B. Djurišić and K. M. Y. Leung, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 396, 609–618 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Franklin, N. J. Rogers, S. C. Apte, G. E. Batley, G. E. Gadd and P. S. Casey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 8484–8490 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Z. Li, D.-M. Zhou, W. J. G. M. Peijnenburg, C. A. M. van Gestel, S.-Y. Jin, Y.-J. Wang and P. Wang, Environ. Int., 2011, 37, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Manzo, A. Rocco, R. Carotenuto, F. D. L. Picione, M. L. Miglietta, G. Rametta and G. Di Francia, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2011, 18, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
S. George, S. Pokhrel, T. Xia, B. Gilbert, Z. Ji, M. Schowalter, A. Rosenauer, R. Damoiseaux, K. A. Bradley, L. Maedler and A. E. Nel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 15–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Keller, H. T. Wang, D. X. Zhou, H. S. Lenihan, G. Cherr, B. J. Cardinale, R. Miller and Z. X. Ji, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1962–1967 CrossRef CAS .
M.-N. Croteau, A. D. Dybowska, S. N. Luoma and E. Valsami-Jones, Nanotoxicology, 2011, 5, 79–90 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ramsden, T. J. Smith, B. J. Shaw and R. D. Handy, Ecotoxicology, 2009, 18, 939–951 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
From left to right: Y. H. Leung, A. B. Djurišić, X. Y. Chen, and A. M. C. Ng.	A. B. Djurišić obtained her PhD degree in electrical engineering from the School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Belgrade (now Serbia) in 1997. She joined the Dept. of Physics at the University of Hong Kong (HKU) in 2003. Her research interests include nanomaterials, wide-bandgap semiconductors, photocatalysis, and optoelectronic devices.X. Chen obtained his MSc degree from Department of Physics, Sun Yat-Sen University in 2008. He is currently a PhD student at the Dept. of Physics, HKU. His research interests include metal oxide nanostructure growth and their applications in optoelectronic devices.Y. H. Leung obtained his PhD degree from Dept. of Physics and Materials Science, City University of Hong Kong in 2011. He is currently a post-doctoral fellow at Dept. of Physics, HKU. His current research interests include applications of nanostructured materials (solar cells, anti-bacterial applications, and photocatalysis).Alan Man Ching Ng completed his PhD degree in 2010 at HKU. He joined the South University of Science and Technology of China (SUSTC) in Aug 2011. His research interests include the fabrication and characterization of metal oxide nanostructures, and their applications in the field of energy and environment.

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of vertically aligned ZnO nanowire arrays. (a) Top and (b) 45° tilted views of aligned individual ZnO nanowire arrays with uniform diameter, height and 2 μm period spanning a centimeter-scale area. Insets are the enlarged images, scale bars are 1 μm; (c) and (d) are ZnO nanowires grown on patterned GaN substrates with periods of 1 μm and 3 μm, respectively. Samples are tilted by 45°. Insets are enlarged SEM top views, scale bars are 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ©2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) and (b) SEM images of ZnO nanorods grown by vapor deposition before and after hydrothermal treatment; (c) TEM image of ZnO nanorod after hydrothermal treatment.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calculated energy levels of different defects in ZnO from different studies in the literature. All the levels are referred to the conduction-band minimum (CBM). VZn, V−Zn and V2−Zn denote neutral, singly charged, and doubly charged zinc vacancy respectively. Znoi and Znti indicate neutral octahedral zinc interstitial and neutral tetrahedral zinc interstitial while Zn+i and Zn2+i indicate singly charged and doubly charged zinc interstitial. V0o and Vo denote neutral oxygen vacancy while V+o and V2+o denote singly charged and doubly charged oxygen vacancy. Hi and Oi represent oxygen and hydrogen interstitial respectively while OZn indicates antisite oxygen and VoZni denotes a complex of oxygen vacancy and zinc interstitial. For exact energy level positions, see ref. 6. Reprinted from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright ©2010.	 

 	Fig. 4  Emission spectra and corresponding photos of p-GaN/ZnO NRs LEDs. Violet emission corresponds to p-GaN/Ce:ZnO LEDs,66 using zinc nitrate as precursor. Blue and yellow emission comes from p-GaN/ZnO LEDs under reverse bias,67 and white emission corresponds to p-GaN (on InGaN multiple quantum wells layer)/ZnO LEDs.65 The inset shows the device diagram.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagrams of different ZnO nanostructure DSSC architectures: nanoparticles (upper left), nanowires (upper right), branched nanowires (lower left), and nanosheets (lower right).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Common schematic diagram of charge transfer in photocatalysis after refs. 114 and 115; (b) Schematic diagram of charge transfer in photocatalysis taking into account actual energy levels of adsorbed water and hydroxyl groups as proposed by Cheng and Selloni.124	 

 	Fig. 7  Illustration of unresolved problems concerning properties and applications of ZnO.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
