Environmentally responsible fabrication of efficient perovskite solar cells from recycled car batteries   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE00965G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE00965G
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3659-3665Environmentally responsible fabrication of efficient perovskite solar cells from recycled car batteries†

        
          
            Po-Yen 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jifa 
            Qi
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Matthew T. 
            Klug
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Xiangnan 
            Dang
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Paula T. 
            Hammond
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Angela M. 
            Belcher
          
        
      *bce
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: hammond@mit.edu
bThe David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: belcher@mit.edu
dDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
eDepartment of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Received 
      26th March 2014
    , Accepted 23rd July 2014First published on 23rd July 2014AbstractOrganolead halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) show great promise as a new large-scale and cost-competitive photovoltaic technology. Power conversion efficiencies over 15% to 19% have been achieved within 18 to 24 months of development, and thus perovskite materials have attracted great attention in photovoltaic research. However, the manufacture of PSCs raises environmental concerns regarding the over-production of raw lead ore, which has harmful health and ecological effects. Herein, we report an environmentally responsible process to fabricate efficient PSCs by reusing car batteries to simultaneously avoid the disposal of toxic battery materials and provide alternative, readily available lead sources for PSCs. Perovskite films, assembled using materials sourced from either recycled battery materials or high-purity commercial reagents, show the same material characteristics (i.e., crystallinity, morphology, optical absorption, and photoluminescence properties) and identical photovoltaic performance (i.e., photovoltaic parameters and resistances of electron recombination), indicating the practical feasibility of recycling car batteries for lead-based PSCs.
Introduction
Organolead halide perovskite materials have recently attracted significant attention as efficient light harvesters and electron transporters for solid-state solar cells.1,2 Having achieved power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over 15% to 19% with relatively simple and inexpensive fabrication methods, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) show great promise as a new large-scale and cost-competitive photovoltaic technology.3–8 However, there are health and environmental concerns regarding the current procedures used to mine and refine the lead necessary for synthesizing the organolead halide perovskite materials. The extraction from the raw lead ore, galena, requires a high-temperature process over 1400 °C and generates greenhouse gases and dangerous fumes as byproducts.9 It is challenging to fully enclose the lead vapor/dust released from processing facilities, and the toxic materials pose significant hazards to the environment and human health.10–13 Therefore, alternative lead sources that are abundant, inexpensive, and allow safer extraction and processing procedures are imperative for future manufacture of lead-based PSCs in an environmentally responsible fashion.
An alternative, readily available lead source for synthesizing lead halide perovskite materials is the common lead-acid battery, the most widely used automotive battery.14,15 The spent materials from lead-acid battery electrodes are currently harvested and reprocessed by manufacturers to produce over half of the new car batteries. On the other hand, rapid development of next-generation energy-storage technology has enabled lithium-based batteries, such as lithium–sulfur and lithium–air devices with higher energy densities, longer lifespans, lighter specific weights, and improved safety compared to the traditional lead-acid design.16–18 As a result, when the next generation technologies inevitably replace the lead-acid batteries in automobiles, the lead recycling process will be disrupted. The environmentally hazardous materials from over 250 million retired lead-acid batteries (estimated on the number of registered passenger vehicles in the United States alone)19 will need to be disposed or reprocessed in an environmentally responsible manner. The benefits of reprocessing these materials to manufacture PSCs are two-fold: the disposal of a large quantity of lead-acid batteries can be managed in an inexpensive way, which provides readily available lead sources and facilitates the synthesis of perovskite materials for renewable energy production.
Herein, we demonstrate the environmentally responsible synthetic pathways to reuse car batteries for the fabrication of efficient PSCs. The anodes and cathodes of car batteries are both reused to synthesize lead iodide perovskite materials. In contrast to the traditional lead extraction process, the production of lead components from car batteries involves neither the high-temperature pyrometallurgical process nor the emission of lead vapor/dusts and greenhouse gases to the environment. The lead iodide perovskite films synthesized from car batteries and high-purity reagents demonstrate the same material characteristics (i.e., crystallinity, morphology, optical absorption, and photoluminescence properties). The photovoltaic performance of the PSCs fabricated from either material source are the same, indicating that the device quality is not contingent on the source if proper processing procedures are followed. In addition, the resulting PSCs are measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and the similarity between the resistances of electron recombination indicates that the electron-transport properties of the lead iodide perovskite from two different sources are identical. Moreover, an economic analysis shows that the lead from one car battery will enable the fabrication of ∼709.0 m2 perovskite-based solar panels, which can support the electricity usage of ∼30.2 US residential units in Las Vegas, Nevada (average daily electricity consumption for a United States residential unit is 29.1 kW h per day).20–22 With this technique, the time required to find a lead replacement for PSCs can be further increased.
Experimental
Materials synthesis
Lead, lead dioxide (PbO2), lead iodide (PbI2), potassium iodide (KI), 2-propanol (IPA), nitric acid (HNO3), acetic acid, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydroiodic acid (HI), methylamine (CH3NH2), zinc powder, titanium isopropoxide (TTIP), and titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Lead oxide (PbO) was purchased from Alfa-Aesar. Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass (TEC 15, thickness = 2.2 mm) was purchased from Pilkington. 2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis(N,N-p-dimethoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-MeOTAD) was purchased from SunaTech Incorporation (China). Gold target was purchased from R. D. Mathis Company. All reagents were used as received and without further purification. All water was deionized (18.2 MΩ, mill-Q pore). CH3NH3I was synthesized according to a reported procedure.3 HI solution (30 mL, 57 wt% in water) and CH3NH2 solution (27.8 mL 40 wt% in methanol) were mixed and stirred in an ice bath for 2 hours. CH3NH3I was then crystallized by removing the solvent in an evaporator, washing three times in diethyl ether for 30 minutes, and filtering the precipitate. The material, in the form of white crystals, was then dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 24 hours. It was then kept in a dark, dry environment until further use.
Harvesting material from the anodes and cathodes of car batteries
The recycling process of anodes and cathodes of car batteries was conducted by an automobile maintenance station (Hung-Fu Incorporation, Taiwan). A car battery (Yuasa Batteries, standard type, 12 V) was disconnected from a Japanese automobile (Nissan Cefiro). The acid electrolyte was poured out and carefully collected, and the electrodes as well as the inner wall of the car battery were rinsed several times by clean water. Caution: the electrolyte contains concentrated sulfuric acid (∼4.2 M), and gloves, safety glasses, and a lab coat are highly required during this process. The as-obtained car battery was dried under ambient conditions for 3 days. The dry car battery was disassembled from the top lid and then sawed from the sides to extract the electrode panels. After disassembling, the lead-derived materials (i.e., lead and PbO2) were scratched off from the current collectors separately, and washed with dilute HCl (0.1 M) and clean water sequentially. The collected materials were ground into powders for further synthesis.
Synthesizing PbI2 from the collected materials of car batteries
Generating PbI2 in high yield required performing different synthesis procedures on material collected separately from the anodes (lead) and cathodes (PbO2). PbO2 powder was first roasted at 600 °C for 5 hours to decompose it into PbO, and the color of the powder changed from dark-brown to yellow. After roasting, the PbO powder was easily dissolved in dilute acetic acid (1.9 M) to release lead(II) ions (Pb2+) in the solution. The Pb powder from anodes was reduced in dilute HNO3 (0.8 M) and Pb2+ was released completely into the solution (Caution: this reaction generated a reddish and toxic nitrogen dioxide gas and must be conducted in the fume hood). After Pb2+ was formed in the solutions, the solutions were mixed with KI solution. The yellow precipitate of PbI2 was collected, further washed with cold water and dried in a vacuum chamber overnight. The as-synthesized PbI2 was further ground into fine powder for further synthesis.
Synthesizing lead iodide perovskite materials
PbI2 was dissolved in DMF at a concentration of 462 mg mL−1 (∼1 M) under stirring at 80 °C. The solution was kept at 80 °C during the whole procedure. The FTO substrates were then infiltrated with PbI2 by spin-coating the solution at 6500 rpm for 60 seconds and dried at 80 °C for 1 hour. After cooling to room temperature, the films were dipped in a solution of CH3NH3I in IPA (10 mg mL−1) for 1 minute, rinsed with IPA and dried at 90 °C for 30 minutes. The optical absorption spectroscopy measurements were performed using a Beckman Coulter DU800 UV-vis spectrophotometer. The surface morphology of the perovskite nanocrystals was investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Helios Nanolab 600 Dual Beam Focused Ion Beam System) operating at 10.0 kV for medium and high resolution imaging. Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected (PANanalytical Multipurpose Diffractometer, Cu Kα radiation operated at 40 kV and 40 mA) using a step size of 0.02° with 6.0° per minute scan speeds under the following settings: 2° of anti-scatter slit, 6 mm of irradiated length of automatic mode and 0.04 rad of soller slit. Steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured at room temperature on a HORIBA Jobin-Yvon Nanolog spectrometer equipped with a 450 W xenon arc lamp, single-grating excitation and double-grating emission monochromators (spectral resolution 1 nm) and a Hamamatsu R928 photomultiplier tube. Time-resolved PL measurements were performed using a time-correlated single-photon-counting option on a Nanolog (HORIBA Jobin-Yvon, FluoroHub). 610 nm light pulse from a laser NanoLED (the half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) is 1.39 ns, an average power of 2.4 pJ per pulse) was used as the excitation source. The emission photons dispersed by a double-grating emission monochromator was collected with a Hamamatsu R928 single-photon-counting detector. Time-resolved PL data were analyzed with software DAS6 (HORIBA Jobin-Yvon).
Device fabrication
The FTO-coated glass substrates were patterned by photolithography and etched by zinc powder and HCl (2.0 M) for 5 minutes. The patterned substrates were rinsed with dilute hydrofluoric acid (5.0 wt%) and cleaned by ultrasonication in an aqueous soap solution, milli-Q water, acetone, and IPA sequentially. The clean substrates were subjected to an O3/ultraviolet treatment for 30 minutes. To make a dense titanium dioxide (TiO2) blocking layer, the FTO glasses were coated with 0.15 M TTIP in ethanol solution by the spin-coating method at 3000 rpm which were heated at 500 °C for 30 minutes. After the deposition, the substrates were treated in a 0.04 M aqueous solution of TiCl4 for 30 minutes at 80 °C, rinsed with milli-Q water and dried at 500 °C for 30 minutes. The TiO2 paste with 20 nm-sized particles was synthesized according to a reported procedure.23 The 500 nm-thick TiO2 films were fabricated by spin-coating the paste at 2500 rpm for 60 seconds. After drying at 100 °C, the TiO2 films were gradually heated to 500 °C for 30 minutes and cooled to room temperature. Lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals (i.e., CH3NH3PbI3) were deposited on the TiO2 films according to the above procedure. The hole-transporting material was then deposited by spin-coating at 4000 rpm for 30 seconds. The spin-coating solution was prepared by dissolving 72.3 mg spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine, 17.5 μL of a stock solution of 520 mg mL−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl) imide in acetonitrile in 1 mL chlorobenzene. Finally, 80 nm of gold was thermally evaporated on top of the device.
Characterization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs)
Photovoltaic measurements were performed using an AM 1.5 solar simulator (Photo Emission Tech.). The power of the simulated light was calibrated to 100 mW cm−2 by using a reference silicon photodiode with a power meter (1835 C, Newport) and a reference silicon solar cell to reduce the mismatch between the simulated light and AM 1.5. J–V curves were obtained by applying an external bias to the cell and measuring the generated photocurrent with a Keithley model 2400 digital source meter. The voltage step and delay time of the photocurrent were 10 mV and 40 ms, respectively. Electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) of PSCs were measured using a Solartron 1260 frequency response analyzer. The photoanode was connected to the working electrode. The platinum electrode was connected to the auxiliary electrode and reference electrodes. The impedance measurements were carried out at forward bias under dark conditions. The spectra were measured at various forward bias voltages in the frequency range of ∼0.1 Hz to ∼1 MHz with oscillation potential amplitudes of 10 mV at room temperature. The applied forward bias voltage changed by 50 mV steps from 1000 mV to 0 mV. The obtained impedance spectra were fit to the reported model with Z-view software (v3.2b, Scribner Associates).24–26
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 provides a flowchart that compares two processes to synthesize perovskite materials. The conventional process begins with freshly mined galena whereas our process begins with spent car batteries. The traditional extraction of lead from galena involves two high-temperature processes: (1) a pre-roasting oxidation step (>1400 °C) to turn galena into lead oxides (PbOx) and (2) a pyrometallurgical process (>1200 °C) to reduce PbOx to lead.27 Both procedures require high-energy input and generate carbon dioxide (CO2) as an undesired byproduct. Furthermore, lead vapor and dust can escape with the exhaust into the atmosphere, which can then accumulate in the surroundings and endanger human and ecological health.24,25 In contrast to the complicated, energy-intensive, and potentially hazardous pathways starting from galena, the production from car batteries is more straightforward with minimal emission of harmful byproducts. The synthesis occurs at a lower temperature (∼600 °C) and does not release any CO2. By reusing spent lead-based materials from car batteries, emerging PSC manufacturers could source raw materials from existing waste rather than mining and processing new ore with the aforementioned traditional methods.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the process to synthesize lead iodide perovskite materials from raw lead ore and from spent car batteries. The black, red, green arrows and text describe the steps and products in the synthetic processes from raw lead ore to high-purity lead, from car batteries to high-purity lead (or Pb2+), and from high-purity lead to lead iodide perovskite materials, respectively. Compared to the complicated and high-temperature synthetic pathways from raw lead ore, the production of lead iodide perovskite from car batteries is a much more straightforward procedure with minimal emission of harmful byproducts. 

Fig. 2 and Movie S1† show the detailed synthesis of lead iodide perovskite materials from a spent lead-acid car battery. The process includes three steps: (1) harvesting material from the anodes and cathodes of a car battery, (2) synthesizing PbI2 from the collected materials, and (3) depositing lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals. First, a used 12 V lead-acid battery is disconnected from an automobile. After disconnection, the acid electrolyte (containing concentrated sulfuric acid) is diluted with water and then poured out. The electrodes are further rinsed with water several times and air-dried for two days. The dry car battery is then disassembled with a jigsaw from the top casing to avoid damage to the electrodes. After removal of the casing, the electrode panels become accessible. The disassembly process is conducted by a professional technician, and the toxic waste materials are properly collected and disposed. The disassembled lead-acid battery includes 36 anodes (lead) and 36 cathodes (PbO2), with the dimensions of each electrode being around 15 cm × 15 cm × 0.25 cm. The lead-derived materials on the current collectors are scraped off and rinsed with dilute HCl. The collected materials are then ground into fine powders for further processing. As shown in Fig. S1a and S1b,† the as-obtained lead and PbO2 powders produce identical XRD patterns to the high-purity chemicals of Sigma-Aldrich (#391352, >99.95%) and Alfa Aesar (#12483, >97.0%).
 Fig. 2  Synthetic process of lead iodide perovskite materials from a lead-acid car battery. The process includes three steps: (1) harvesting material from the anodes and cathodes of a car battery (red); (2) synthesizing PbI2 from the collected materials (blue); (3) depositing lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals (green). For more details, please refer to Movie S1.† Spent car batteries can serve as readily available alternative lead sources for the environmentally responsible fabrication of lead-based PSCs. 
To synthesize PbI2 with high yields, the as-obtained lead and PbO2 powders are treated with different synthetic pathways. Because of the low reactivity of PbO2 in HNO3, the generation of Pb2+ is inefficient and the yield is lower than 5% (eqn (1)). 2PbO2(s) + 4HNO3(aq.) → 2Pb(NO3)2(aq.) + 2H2O(l) + O2(g)(1)
As a result, PbO2 requires a composite treatment: first, the powder is sintered at 600 °C for 5 hours in air to decompose PbO2 into PbO (eqn (2)). PbO2(s) → PbO(s) + 1/2O2(g)(2)
The complete transformation is confirmed visually by the color change from dark red to yellow, and quantitatively by matching the XRD pattern of the as-obtained PbO (Fig. S1c†) to that of the high-purity PbO of Sigma-Aldrich (#15338, >99.0%). The as-synthesized PbO powder is highly soluble in dilute acetic acid (1.9 M), and Pb2+ is generated efficiently in the solution. The lead powder from anodes is reduced by dilute HNO3 (0.8 M) and the yield of Pb2+ is close to 100% (eqn (3)). Pb(s) + 4HNO3(aq.) → Pb(NO3)2(aq.) + 2H2O(l) + 2NO2(g)(3)
After both electrodes are transformed into Pb2+ completely, the solutions are both mixed with the potassium iodide (KI) solution. Pb2+ reacts with I− and yields insoluble yellow PbI2 products immediately. After washing with cold water, the as-obtained PbI2 is collected and dried in a vacuum oven overnight. The resulting PbI2 from car batteries are characterized by XRD analysis, and the XRD pattern is identical to that of the high-purity PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich, #211168, >99%) (Fig. S1d†).
After PbI2 is synthesized, lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals are synthesized by the reported sequential deposition process.3 PbI2 is introduced into the TiO2 nanoparticle-based films by spin-coating a solution of PbI2 in DMF at 80 °C. The PbI2/TiO2 composite films are dipped into a solution of CH3NH3I in IPA, and the films change color immediately from yellow to dark brown, indicating the formation of lead iodide perovskite (i.e., CH3NH3PbI3). The XRD pattern of the perovskite nanocrystals from car batteries exhibits the same crystallinity as the one from high-purity PbI2 of Sigma-Aldrich (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  Materials characterization. (a) XRD analysis of the lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. (b) Optical properties: absorption spectra of the PbI2-coated (solid lines, to the left) and lead iodide perovskite-coated (dashed lines, to the left) TiO2 films from car batteries and high-purity commercial products; PL spectra of lead iodide perovskite films (solid lines, to the right) coated on mesoporous Al2O3 substrates fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. SEM images of the lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals synthesized from (c) high-purity commercial PbI2 and (d) car batteries. The identical XRD pattern, absorption, PL spectral properties, and crystallized morphology of both perovskite materials indicate the same chemical structure. 
The study of photophysical properties enables the characterization of organometallic lead halide perovskite and the understanding of the charge photogeneration and recombination mechanisms.28 To evaluate the light-harvesting capability of the lead halide perovskite materials synthesized from car batteries and commercial PbI2, the optical absorbance and the photoluminescence (PL) response of the fabricated thin films are characterized. The thin films synthesized from both sources are prepared under the same parameters as those used for the fabricated devices (e.g., the concentration of PbI2 and methylamine iodide solutions, the spin-coating speed/time, and the drying temperature/time). As a result, the thickness of the PbI2- and perovskite-coated thin films for the optical and PL measurements is almost the same as the thickness in the fabricated devices.
The absorption spectra of PbI2- and perovskite-coated TiO2 films (from car batteries and high-purity PbI2) are plotted in Fig. 3b. The absorption of both PbI2-coated TiO2 films is below 450 nm, and the resulting perovskite-coated TiO2 films show an increased absorbance and a broad absorption spectra ranging from below 400 nm to 850 nm. The PL spectra of lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals deposited on mesoporous alumina oxide (Al2O3) thin films from both sources exhibit a strong single emission band (Fig. 3b). The spectral features of the samples from both sources are the same: the spectral peak position of both the samples is at 747 ± 2 nm (1.66 eV), and the half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) of both the samples is 130 ± 3 meV. Also, the integrated intensities are the same for both preparations. The strong emission is attributed to the radiative recombinations of photogenerated carriers localized in organolead iodide perovskite nanocrystals.28 Furthermore, the dynamics of PL of both organolead iodide perovskite nanocrystals is investigated by monitoring the PL decay at 747 nm (shown in Fig. S2†). All samples exhibit a single exponential relaxation process with the same lifetime of 1.00 ± 0.09 ns.
The identical absorption and PL spectral properties demonstrate that materials sourced from batteries and high-purity reagents display the same optical transitions from ground states to excited states, and vice versa. The similarity indicates that both batches of nanocrystals display the same chemical structure and identical light-absorption capability. The crystallized morphologies of both perovskite nanocrystals are visualized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and the images are shown in Fig. 3c and d. In Fig. 3c and d, the morphologies synthesized from both sources are similar with the crystal size from 20 nm to 400 nm, and the film coverage, as analyzed by image processing (ImageJ), is approximately 100%.
After the PSCs are assembled, the photovoltaic performances of the PSCs fabricated from car batteries and high-purity PbI2 are both tested under AM 1.5G illumination conditions (100 mW cm−2). To compare the photovoltaic performance between the PSCs fabricated from car batteries and high-purity PbI2, a histogram of the PCE from batches of ∼32 PSCs is shown in Fig. 4a. Histogram plots of solar cell performance parameters, including open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC), and fill factor (FF), are also shown in Fig. S3.† In addition, Fig. 4b presents the average PCE and the highest PCE from batches of PSCs. The current density–voltage (J–V) curves of the most efficient PSC are plotted in Fig. 4c, and the related photovoltaic parameters are listed in Table 1. From these photovoltaic measurements, it is clearly demonstrated that the PSCs fabricated from either of the two sources show similar photovoltaic performance, indicating car batteries can serve as alternative lead sources for the environmentally responsible fabrication of lead-based PSCs.
 Fig. 4  Device characterization. (a) The static data of PCE distribution for multiple batches of PSCs (∼65 devices in total). Each batch is around 10–12 devices. (b) Average efficiency and their highest performance of ∼32 devices fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. (c) J–V curves of the most efficient devices and the related photovoltaic parameters listed in Table 1. (d) Resistance of electron recombination of the device fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. The resistances are determined from impedance measurements conducted in the dark. The photovoltaic performance and the resistances of electron recombination of the PSCs synthesized by each route are the same, which demonstrates that the device quality does not suffer from the materials sourced from spent car batteries. 
Table 1 Photovoltaic parameters. The related photovoltaic parameters (including PCE, open-circuit voltage (VOC), short-circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF)) in Fig. 4b




PSC fabricated from
PCE (%)

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)




PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich)
9.73
921
18.42
57.3


Car batteries
9.37
910
18.60
55.4




Furthermore, the two kinds of PSCs are characterized by EIS. Nyquist plots of solid-state PSCs fabricated from car batteries and high-purity PbI2 at 550 mV and 800 mV are both shown in Fig. S4.† Nyquist plots at 800 mV (Fig. S4b and S4c†) and 550 mV (Fig. S4e and S4f†) are both enlarged to observe the detailed features in the intermediate and high frequency region. At high frequency (Fig. S4c and S4f†), the gold/hole-transporting material interface is similar to the liquid–electrolyte interface and the counter electrode in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs).29 The resistance at this interface remains almost the same over the whole applied voltage range, and the resistance is slightly reduced at higher applied voltage, which is often observed in the literature.24 Moreover, at intermediate frequency (Fig. S4b and S4e†), the straight characteristics of the transmission line, which is normally observed in the nanostructured photoanodes, are seen. The transmission lines merge into the semicircles representing the recombination resistance at lower frequency. After PSCs from either of the two sources are characterized by EIS, the spectra are analyzed by following the reported model.24–26,30 The recombination resistances of the devices fabricated from car batteries and high-purity PbI2 are shown in Fig. 4d. The similarity of the resistances of electron recombination in Fig. 4d indicates that the electron-transport properties of the lead iodide perovskite synthesized from the two different sources are identical. From these photovoltaic measurements, it is clearly demonstrated that car batteries can serve as alternative lead sources for the environmentally responsible fabrication of lead-based PSCs. More details regarding fitting the EIS data are provided in the Experimental section and ESI.†
Finally, to highlight the feasibility of producing perovskite materials using this environmentally responsible approach, a simple economic analysis is performed. The average weight of a lead-acid battery is around 18.1 kg, and the lead-related materials are responsible for about 60% of the weight (∼10.9 kg), while the other 40 wt% is comprised of the liquid electrolyte, outer casing, separators, and current collectors.14,15 It is assumed that the weights of the anodes and cathodes are the same (5.4 kg). Based on the experiments performed, the yields from lead and PbO2 electrodes to PbI2 are 95.6% and 97.8%, respectively, which is expected to produce 21.5 kg of PbI2. By considering the structure of PSCs (∼500 nm-thick PbI2 coating) and the material loss during the spin-coating process (∼89.6%), 21.5 kg of PbI2 enables the fabrication of ∼709.0 m2 PSCs.
Since the solar illumination varies in different locations, multiple locations (e.g., Cambridge, MA, US; Las Vegas, NV, US; London, UK) are chosen and analyzed. If the PCE achieves ∼15% (close to the reported PCEs of PSCs in the literature),3,4 the resulting perovskite solar panels can generate ∼398.8 kW h per day based on the annual average illumination in MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts (∼3.75 kW h per m2 per day).20 The generated energy meets the electricity usage for ∼13.7 US residential units (average daily electricity consumption for a United States residential unit is 29.1 kW h per day).21,22 In other words, ∼51.7 m2 perovskite solar panels are required to be installed to provide sufficient electricity for the daily usage of a single US residential unit in Cambridge.21,31,32 If the perovskite solar panels are installed in Las Vegas, Nevada (the annual average illumination is ∼8.25 kW h per m2 per day),20 ∼30.2 US residential units can be powered, and ∼23.5 m2 solar panels are required for each household in this region. In addition, if the same-sized perovskite solar panels were installed in London (the annual average illumination is ∼3.11 kW h per m2 per day),33 ∼26.1 UK residential units can be powered (average daily electricity consumption for a United States residential unit is ∼12.7 kW h per day),34 and ∼27.2 m2 solar panels are required for each household in this region.
Moreover, taking the United States as an example, to power the whole United States (3.9 × 1012 kW h per year),35 about 12.2 million recycled car batteries, which is ∼12% of the spent American vehicle and industrial batteries in 2007,36 are required to fabricate 8634 km2-sized perovskite solar panels installed in Nevada, which is only ∼3% of its total area. With great focus on improving the performance of PSCs in academia and installing the recycled system for PbI2 solution during spin-coating in industry, these numbers can be further calibrated and improved. With the assumption of a 25 year lifetime for the PSCs, the lead sourced from recycled car batteries in the whole US industry for the PSCs could power the US over 200 years. In addition, we are pursuing the recycling and reusing the lead component within the used perovskite solar panels. With these approaches, the time required to find a lead replacement for high-efficiency PSCs can be further increased.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated an environmentally responsible synthetic pathway to reuse car batteries for the fabrication of efficient PSCs. Both the anodes and cathodes of car batteries serve as material sources for the synthesis of lead iodide perovskite materials. In contrast to the traditional lead extraction process, our synthesis pathway from recycled battery materials occurs at a lower temperature (600 °C) and does not include the hazardous emission of lead vapor/dust and CO2 to the environment. The lead iodide perovskite materials synthesized from car batteries and high-purity reagents demonstrate identical material characteristics. The photovoltaic performance of the PSCs synthesized by each route is the same, which demonstrates that the device quality does not suffer from the materials sourced from spent car batteries. Also, EIS measurements reveal that each device type displays the same resistances of electron recombination, indicating that the electron-transport properties of the lead iodide perovskite are identical. Finally, a simple economic analysis reveals that a single lead-acid car battery can supply enough lead material for the fabrication of ∼709 m2 PSCs, which can provide enough electricity to power ∼30.2 US residential units in Las Vegas, Nevada. With these techniques, the time required to find a lead replacement for PSCs can be further increased. The environmentally responsible fabrication is expected to be broadly applicable not only to the PSC technology but also other applications (including but not limited to lead sulfide (PbS) quantum-dot solar cells, lead zirconate titanate (PZT) piezoelectric devices), and the recycling strategy will have important industrial implications in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Eni, S.p.A (Italy) through the MIT Energy Initiative Program. P.-Y.C. and M.T.K. acknowledge support from the MIT Energy Initiative Eni-MIT Energy Fellowship. The authors wish to dedicate this paper to the memory of Officer Sean Collier, for his caring service to the MIT community and for his sacrifice.
Notes and references
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 3, 344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. M. Grätzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. McGehee, Nature, 2013, 501, 323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. A. Sutherland, E. F. Milner, R. C. Kerby, H. Teindl, A. Melin and H. M. Bolt, in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, Wiley,  2000 Search PubMed .
B. P. Lanphear, T. D. Matte, J. Rogers, R. P. Clickner, B. Dietz, R. L. Bornschein, P. Succop, K. R. Mahaffey, S. Dixon, W. Galke, M. Rabinowitz, M. Farfel, C. Rohde, J. Schwartz, P. Ashley and D. E. Jacobs, Environ. Res., 1998, 79, 51 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Mielke and P. L. Reagan, Environ. Health Perspect., 1998, 106, 217 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koller, T. Brown, A. Spurgeon and L. Levy, Environ. Health Perspect., 2004, 112, 987 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tong, Y. E. Schirnding and T. Prapamontol, Bull. W. H. O., 2000, 78, 1068 CAS .

          D. A. J. Rand, J. Garche, P. T. Moseley and C. D. Parker, Valve-Regulated Lead-Acid Batteries., Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2004 Search PubMed .

          D. Pavlov, Lead-Acid Batteries: Science and Technology, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243 CAS .

Number of U.S. aircraft, vehicles, vessels, and other conveyances, U.S. Department of Transportation,  2011 Search PubMed.

PV Solar Radiation (10 km) - Static Map, NREL Search PubMed.

Electric sales, revenue, and average price, U.S. Department of Transportation,  2011 Search PubMed.

Average monthly residential
electricity consumption, prices, and bills by state, U.S. Energy Information Administration,  2012 Search PubMed.
S. Ito, T. N. Murakami, P. Comte, P. Liska, C. Grätzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Gonzalez-Pedro, E. J. Juarez-Perez, W.-S. Arsyad, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N.-G. Park and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 Search PubMed .

Energy and environmental profile of the U.S. mining industry, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE),  2002 Search PubMed.
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421 CAS .
J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 106, 325 CrossRef .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 131, 558 CrossRef PubMed .

Electric power annual, U.S. Energy Information Administration,  2013 Search PubMed.

Historical average annual prices by state by type of customer and provider, U.S. Energy Information Administration,  2012 Search PubMed.
PVGIS solar map.

Household electricity consumption (kWh/year), Would Energy Council,  2010 Search PubMed.

International energy statistics, total electricity net consumption (billion kilowatthours), U.S. Energy Information Administration,  2010 Search PubMed.

          E. Rosenthal, W. A. Lehren, K. Zabludovsky and D. Agren, in The New York Times,  2011 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The movie describing the synthetic process of lead iodide perovskite materials from a lead-acid battery, XRD analysis of lead, PbO2, PbO, PbI2, and PL response of perovskite films, and the static data of photovoltaic performance of PSCs as well as the detailed Nyquist diagrams of PSCs showing the features of the impedance response. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00965gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the process to synthesize lead iodide perovskite materials from raw lead ore and from spent car batteries. The black, red, green arrows and text describe the steps and products in the synthetic processes from raw lead ore to high-purity lead, from car batteries to high-purity lead (or Pb2+), and from high-purity lead to lead iodide perovskite materials, respectively. Compared to the complicated and high-temperature synthetic pathways from raw lead ore, the production of lead iodide perovskite from car batteries is a much more straightforward procedure with minimal emission of harmful byproducts.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthetic process of lead iodide perovskite materials from a lead-acid car battery. The process includes three steps: (1) harvesting material from the anodes and cathodes of a car battery (red); (2) synthesizing PbI2 from the collected materials (blue); (3) depositing lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals (green). For more details, please refer to Movie S1.† Spent car batteries can serve as readily available alternative lead sources for the environmentally responsible fabrication of lead-based PSCs.	 
2PbO2(s) + 4HNO3(aq.) → 2Pb(NO3)2(aq.) + 2H2O(l) + O2(g)	(1)
PbO2(s) → PbO(s) + 1/2O2(g)	(2)
Pb(s) + 4HNO3(aq.) → Pb(NO3)2(aq.) + 2H2O(l) + 2NO2(g)	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Materials characterization. (a) XRD analysis of the lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. (b) Optical properties: absorption spectra of the PbI2-coated (solid lines, to the left) and lead iodide perovskite-coated (dashed lines, to the left) TiO2 films from car batteries and high-purity commercial products; PL spectra of lead iodide perovskite films (solid lines, to the right) coated on mesoporous Al2O3 substrates fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. SEM images of the lead iodide perovskite nanocrystals synthesized from (c) high-purity commercial PbI2 and (d) car batteries. The identical XRD pattern, absorption, PL spectral properties, and crystallized morphology of both perovskite materials indicate the same chemical structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  Device characterization. (a) The static data of PCE distribution for multiple batches of PSCs (∼65 devices in total). Each batch is around 10–12 devices. (b) Average efficiency and their highest performance of ∼32 devices fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. (c) J–V curves of the most efficient devices and the related photovoltaic parameters listed in Table 1. (d) Resistance of electron recombination of the device fabricated from car batteries and high-purity commercial PbI2. The resistances are determined from impedance measurements conducted in the dark. The photovoltaic performance and the resistances of electron recombination of the PSCs synthesized by each route are the same, which demonstrates that the device quality does not suffer from the materials sourced from spent car batteries.	 

PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich)	9.73	921	18.42	57.3
Car batteries	9.37	910	18.60	55.4
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The movie describing the synthetic process of lead iodide perovskite materials from a lead-acid battery, XRD analysis of lead, PbO2, PbO, PbI2, and PL response of perovskite films, and the static data of photovoltaic performance of PSCs as well as the detailed Nyquist diagrams of PSCs showing the features of the impedance response. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee00965g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
