Synthesis and optoelectronic characteristics of 20 nm diameter silver nanowires for highly transparent electrode films  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5RA25310A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5RA25310A
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 11702-11710Synthesis and optoelectronic characteristics of 20 nm diameter silver nanowires for highly transparent electrode films
Eun-Jong Leea, 
Yong-Hoe Kima, 
Do Kyung Hwangb, 
Won Kook Choib and 
Jin-Yeol Kim*a
aSchool of Advanced Materials Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul 136-702, Korea. E-mail: jinyeol@kookmin.ac.kr;   Tel: +82-2-910-4663
bInterface Control Research Center, Future Convergence Research Division, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST), Seoul, 136-791, Korea
Received 
28th November 2015
, Accepted 9th January 2016First published on 13th January 2016AbstractWe demonstrate the polyol synthesis of ultrathin Ag nanowires with diameters of 20 nm and an aspect ratio as high as ∼1000 under high-pressure conditions. The increase in pressure increases density and enhances solubility, making the reactive solution rapidly reach super-saturation and increase the nucleation rate to effect a near-instantaneous formation of Ag nuclei. Clearly, the particle size was small at high pressure and an increase in pressure promoted the formation of small-size Ag seed-particles and small diameter wires. As a result, the Ag nanostructures in this study were initially formed as Ag seed particles with a diameter of 20 nm and subsequently grew into well-defined Ag nanowires with a uniform and narrow diameter distribution in the range of 16–22 nm, with a long dimension of up to 20 μm. Fabrication of random networks of the 20 nm diameter Ag nanowires synthesized lead to the fabrication of flexible transparent electrodes with excellent optoelectronic performance, with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1 and 94% transmittance with a very low haze value of ≤1.0%, making them suitable for electronic display applications.
1. Introduction
Transparent electrode films (TEFs) have recently attracted considerable attention in various flexible optoelectronic devices such as large-area touch screens, thin-film solar cells, and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). Currently, they are made from a sputtered film of indium tin oxide (ITO) due to its high optical properties (up to 90% transmittance and ∼1% haze) and low sheet resistance of down to 60 Ω sq−1.1 However, the high conductivity ITO used in these TEFs, for flexible optoelectronic devices, is particularly costly due to the slow coating rates and high temperature/vacuum processing conditions involved in roll-film sputtering. This has motivated research towards solution-processable alternatives to ITO that can be fabricated at high speed, with low cost processing conditions and give comparable performance. There are several solution-coatable alternatives to ITO, including carbon nanotubes, graphene, conducting polymers (PEDOT:PSS), and silver nanowires (Ag NWs), but only commercially available Ag NWs have demonstrated optoelectronic performance that exceeds that of ITO. Thus, Ag NWs electrodes have been gaining interest as a promising alternative to ITO due to their ease of manufacture, large scale solution processability and high conductivity with mechanical ductility.2–13 Ag NWs with a well-defined small diameter with large aspect ratio are particularly desirable because they have good optical properties due to low light scattering and their plasmonic properties, making them excellent candidates for transparent electrodes. However, in order to achieve the required optical and electrical characteristics, there is still a need to develop more effective processes for the synthesis of Ag NWs with controllable shapes and sizes, in particular, a continuous range of lengths up to at least 20 μm and a diameter of 20 nm to make effective network junctions between the Ag NWs and high optical properties.
Ag NWs are typically synthesized in a solution, using the polyol method that was originally developed by Xia et al.,14–17 to demonstrate their potential as a transparent electrode with satisfactory electrical and optical performance. These studies typically focus on controlling the size, shape, crystal structure, and optical/electrical properties of the Ag NWs. The electrical conductivity of these 2D film structures consisting of Ag NW networks is reported to be approximately 0.8 × 105 S cm−1, whereas the sheet resistance of a 2D percolating Ag NW network exhibits a value of 30 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of approximately 90%. This conductivity value almost matches with that of the conventional crystallized-ITO on glass (∼30 Ω sq−1 at 94% transparency: substrate base) in terms of electrical performance. However, in terms of the optical performance, their transmittance is generally lower. In addition, the haze value of Ag NW films is known to be higher because of the wire geometry and the high light scattering characteristics of Ag. In fact, it is difficult to fabricate sufficiently transparent electrode films using a network of thick Ag NWs because a significant part of the light is scattered from the uneven nanowire surface. This high scattering can cause blurriness particularly if used as a display's transparent electrode, and currently, it is required that the optical haze must meet the level of ITO. Conventional ITO exhibits a haze of approximately 1–1.5% with a sheet resistance of 30–50 Ω sq−1 at a transparency of up to 94% (substrate base) and have been used in display devices.18,19 However, Ag NWs electrodes at 90% transmission can still achieve a low sheet resistance of 20–60 Ω sq−1 because of the high conductivity of Ag, but their high haze value of up to 2% is a major disadvantage for the application of Ag NWs electrodes in display devices. If the haze can be decreased to the level of ITO, in combination with the high conductivity, Ag NWs electrodes can be opened to new frontiers in terms of their applications in various devices. The optical haze is also an equally important yet unstudied parameter in Ag NWs transparent electrodes for use in solar cells. The haze refers to the degree of incidental light scattered forward towards the absorber layer, which enhances the path length of light in the OPV.5 Hu et al.5 provided a study on the haze properties of Ag NWs and investigated the haze factor of Ag NWs with relatively large and small diameters theoretically through their scattering behavior in OPV. With respect to the optical haze of the Ag NWs, Han et al.18 reported that the haze of a Ag NWs electrode film with an average length of 13.5 μm in length and 62 nm in diameter was approximately 3% when the transmittance exceeded 95% with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1. Suganuma et al.19 demonstrated that the haze can be reduced by increasing the length of the Ag NWs. They reported a low haze value of 2.2% with a sheet resistance of 49 Ω sq−1 and 94% transmittance from long Ag NWs of up to 200 μm. We also demonstrated a synthetic method and the optoelectrical properties of Ag NWs with 30 and 45 nm diameters using the polyvinylpyrrolidone-assisted polyol method in the presence of ionic liquids, which serve as soft template salts.20 The 30 nm diameter Ag NWs showed a sheet resistance of 30 ohm sq−1 with a transmittance of 93% and haze of approximately 2%. Thus, we could obtain good conductivity and transmittance values, but their haze value was slightly high. However, haze values of up to 2% are insufficient when compared to ITO in the application of Ag NWs electrodes in display devices. In order to decrease the haze while maintaining a high conductivity, it is necessary to extend the length or decrease the diameter of the wires to make network junctions between the Ag NWs. In general, extending the length and decreasing the diameter of wires have been expected to be a promising strategy to achieve low haze with high conductivity and high transparency. Moreover, smaller diameter Ag NWs directly decrease the haze in the visible light region because of the decrease in light scattering.21 To achieve sufficiently transparent electrode films with a low haze value of less than 1.5% (i.e., the level of ITO) with 30 ohm sq−1 sheet resistance for applications, thin and long Ag NWs are required, up to 20 μm in length with a diameter of at least 20 nm. In efforts to reduce haze, several synthetic methods have been used to create thin and longe NWs with reduced junction resistance. We first reported in a previous letter the basic concepts of how Ag NW synthesis can be controlled to yield diameters in the range of 20–30 nm with lengths of approximately 15 μm using an elevated pressure of 250 psi in a high-pressure polyol reaction.22 At the time, the reaction mechanism was not fully explained and a demonstration of the reduction of optical haze in the transparent electrodes was not carried out for applications in electronic devices.
In this study, to produce Ag NWs with better electrical and optical performance, we successfully synthesized ultrathin Ag NWs in a large scale reactor (2 L), with diameters in the range of 16–22 nm and an aspect ratio as high as ∼1000, using a high-pressure polyol reaction under 1000 psi (69 bar) conditions. Fabrication of random networks of Ag NWs leads to flexible transparent electrodes with excellent optoelectronic performance, namely, a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1 at 94% transmittance and a very low haze value of ≤1.0%, suitable for electronic display applications. This electrical performance matches the properties of crystallized-ITO films and in terms of their optical performance, their haze value is almost the same as that found for ITO films.
2. Experimental
All reagents and chemicals were purchased from commercial sources (Aldrich, Fluka, Acros) and used without further purification. Ultrathin Ag NWs were synthesized using a high-pressure polyol method via the chemical reduction of AgNO3 (Aldrich) with PVP (average molecular weight, Mw = 1300000, Aldrich) as a capping agent and in the presence of a NaCl solution or combined salt solution (NaCl and KBr). The 20 nm diameter Ag NWs were synthesized using the following method. First, 3.78 g of PVP was dissolved concurrently in 400 mL of ethylene glycol (EG) under vigorous stirring. Then, 128 mg of NaCl and 130 mg of KBr were added to the PVP solution and the mixed solution was transferred to a 2 L autoclave reactor using a syringe pump and stirred for 1 h at 200 rpm under 1000 psi (69 bar) pressure and 160 °C temperature. In the second step, 3.24 g of a AgNO3 solution (0.06 mol in EG) was quickly added into the autoclave reactor using a syringe pump and the reaction was maintained for a further 1 h under 1000 psi (69 bar) of N2 and 160 °C. The reactor was then cooled to room temperature and the yield of the obtained wires before purification was from 85% to 90% (as determined by silver ion content analysis using ICP). After the synthesis, the products were purified using acetone and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 90 min to remove the solvent (EG), PVP and other impurities. After the final centrifugation step, the precipitates were re-dispersed in H2O. The 30 nm diameter Ag NWs were synthesized via the same process used to prepare the 20 nm diameter Ag NWs with the exception of being performed under atmospheric pressure conditions. The Ag NWs with a diameter of 40 nm were prepared in a NaCl solution instead of a combined salt solution and under atmospheric pressure conditions.
The Ag NWs, with approximately 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm diameters, were dispersed in DI water for an optimized density of 0.5 mg mL−1 and directly deposited on an O2 plasma-treated polyester (PET) substrate film via a commercially available wet coating method using the Mayer bar coating technique to fabricate the transparent electrode film. The density of Ag NWs deposition was controlled by the volume of the coating solution, determined by the speed of the spin coater or by the mesh size (# 3, 5, 9 and 16) of the Mayer bar. The mesh size of the Mayer bar was determined depending on the thickness of the coating film layer that was required.
The highly conductive Ag NWs electrode films were fabricated without any post-treatment. The morphology and molecular structure of the dispersed Ag-NWs were observed using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, JEOL-JSM5410) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL-JEM2100F). The optical and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) spectra were obtained using ultraviolet spectroscopy (UV/vis, SHIMAZU-UV3150) and a haze meter (NDH 7000). The electrical properties of the Ag NW films were measured using a standard four-point probe technique (Laresta GP, MCP-T60).
Flexible OPVs were fabricated on Ag NW/PET substrates. For the conventional device architecture, PEDOT:PSS (Clevios™ P VP AI 4083) was spin coated at a thickness of 100 nm onto the electrode layer and annealed at 130 °C for 30 min. Poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) 18 mg (Rieke metals, Inc.) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PC60BM) 10.8 mg were dissolved in 1 mL of chlorobenzene and the solution was spin coated at 2500 rpm for 40 s and annealed at 150 °C for 13 min in a glove box. The thickness of the active layer was approximately 100 nm. Finally, the LiF (0.6 nm) and Al (100 nm) electron-collecting and top electrodes were prepared via thermal evaporation. For the reference devices, ITO electrodes on glass substrates (JMC Glass, 30 Ω sq−1 at 94% transparency) were used; all the fabrication processes were identical. The solar cell properties were measured with a solar simulator (ORIEL) with a 150 W light source. The standard light source was calibrated using a standard Si photodiode to realize the AM 1.5 conditions and an intensity of 100 mW cm−2.
3. Results and discussion
The initial polyol synthesis was introduced by Fiévet et al.23 as a simple way to obtain metal particles via reduction in liquid polyol. Recently, Xia and co-workers,14–17 based on the PVP-assisted polyol method, demonstrated a salt-mediated polyol process using NaCl, CuCl2, PtCl2, or CuCl to prepare Ag NWs with 30–50 nm diameter in large quantities. The synthesis takes place in two steps, as shown in Fig. 1; an initial seeding step and a growth step, obtaining octahedral-structured metal seeds and pentagonal-structured Ag wire, respectively. The first step involves the formation of Ag seed particles via nucleation from AgNO3 using ethylene glycol as the solvent. The Ag particles act as seeds, which grow into wires in the presence of AgNO3 and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP). PVP is a surface-capping reagent, which kinetically controls the growth rate of the metal surfaces and subsequently induces 1D growth, leading to formation of NWs. As a capping agent, it prevents the aggregation of the nanostructures, controlling their size and shape; it also acts as an inducing agent to lead the 1D crystal growth along the [110] direction, due to selective absorption of PVP on the different crystal faces. Control of the seed particle structure during the synthesis is therefore very important in determining the shape of the Ag NWs formed. In general, this polyol process is carried under atmospheric pressure. In this study, as in previous studies, we synthesized Ag NWs via AgNO3 reduction in ethylene glycol/PVP in the presence of mixed KBr and NaCl salts under atmospheric pressure.
 Fig. 1  The two-step reaction scheme for synthesizing Ag NWs using a high-pressure polyol process. (a) Under 0 psi pressure, 30 nm sized Ag seed crystals with multi-twin structure are formed via the reduction of AgNO3 and grown into wires with diameters of about 30 nm. (b) Under 1000 psi (69 bar) pressure, 20 nm sized Ag particles are formed and grown into 20 nm wires. 
The reaction scheme shown in Fig. 1(a) is for the atmospheric pressure forms of Ag NWs; Ag seed crystals of approximately 30 nm size with a multi-twin structure were formed via the reduction of AgNO3 as the first step; the Ag seed particles were then grown into wires with diameters of about 30 nm. In the present study, under a the N2 pressure of 1000 psi (69 bar) (Fig. 1(b)), the Ag seed particles and Ag NWs were approximately 20 nm in size and about 20 nm in diameter, respectively. In addition, the size and shape of the Ag nanostructures were controlled by the presence of the mixed salts (KBr and NaCl) with PVP. The ratios of KBr and NaCl to the AgNO3 precursor, as well as the pressure, are parameters that can be used to control the growth of the Ag nuclei and seed particles used during synthesis of Ag NWs in the ethylene glycol solvent. Thus, the ratio of the NaCl and KBr salts to the AgNO3 precursor can be used to control the growth of the Ag nuclei and the nucleation rate of Ag ions is known to have a close relationship with the product size. In the presence of NaCl, the AgCl particles, which serve as twined nuclei for growing twinned seed particles, could be easily formed. Herein, the combination of Ag+ and Cl− reduced the concentration of silver ions and thus, effectively increased the percentage of twinned seed particles. However, for the NaCl salt, though it was able to change the size of the products upon increasing the concentration of the nucleants to molar ratios from 0.0065 to 0.167, the diameter of the Ag NW products never dropped below 40 nm, as shown in Fig. 2(a). KBr salt can also combine with the Ag ions to form AgBr particles; the nucleation rate was enormous and the size of the generated nuclei was reported to be smaller than those of NaCl. Thus, these twinned seed particles formed from KBr solution were so small that they transferred into other shaped particles via fluctuation before growing axially into wires. However, we could demonstrate that NaCl effectively formed twinned seed particles and the concentration of excess KBr could inhibit the growth of the diameter direction during wire growing step. Thus, Br ions inhibit the growth in the thickness during wire growth and their effects are increased efficiently upon applied pressure. Accordingly, in this experiment, KBr and NaCl were utilized as a co-nucleant to increase the nucleation rate to an appropriate level to decrease the size of the Ag NWs in the final product.
 Fig. 2  (a) The diameter of Ag NWs grown as a function of pressure in the range of 0–1000 psi (69 bar). In the absence of KBr, the diameter of the Ag NWs was not influenced by the pressure regardless of the NaCl/AgNO3 concentration. However, for a molar ratio of NaCl/KBr = 2, the diameter of the Ag NWs was decreased with an increase in pressure. (b) The diameter of Ag NWs as a function of KBr concentration for pressures between 0 and 1000 psi (69 bar). The upper data set was measured at a low NaCl concentration (the molar ratio of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.0065) and the lower data set is at a high NaCl concentration (NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.167). The diameters of the synthesized Ag NWs were determined from the mean value of the wires per sample and the mean value was counted from more than 100 wires. Samples of each specimen were also confirmed from the 5 batches prepared. 
Fig. 2 compares the conventional atmospheric pressure process at 160 °C to the other pressure conditions studied for molar ratios of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.0065 (low concentration) and 0.167 (high concentration), with PVP (Mw = 1300000) used as the capping agent. According to a previous report,24 an appropriate amount of NaCl is required to form the Ag NWs in a conventional polyol process. This is because it increases the probability of forming pentagonal twinned seeds, which can grow into the desired wire shape. Herein, the molar ratio of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.0065 was a suitable concentration for the growth of Ag NWs. The shape of the wires was also affected by the concentration of NaCl. In the case of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.167 or higher molar ratios, a difference in the amount of AgCl formed was observed. As a result, this caused a lot of by-products, such as particles, to be generated. As shown in Fig. 2(a), for the reaction without KBr, Ag NWs with 50 nm and 40 nm diameter were obtained with low and high concentrations of NaCl, respectively, but their dimensions were not changed by pressure. However, when KBr was used with NaCl in a molar ratio of 1:2, the diameter of the Ag NWs decreased with an increase in pressure. As a result, at a pressure of 1000 psi (69 bar), Ag NWs with diameters of approximately 20 nm were obtained from this process, with the pressure initially controlling the size of the Ag seed crystals. Fig. 2(b) shows the Ag NW diameter as a function of KBr concentration in the range 0–2.0 mM, for low and high concentrations of NaCl and at both 0 and 1000 psi (69 bar). The diameter was significantly decreased upon increasing the KBr concentration, especially at the higher pressure. From these indications, KBr inhibits the growth in the radial direction during wire growth and at the same time, its effect is increased significantly by applied pressure. However, halide ions play an important role in the polyol reactions of Ag NWs. In particular, Cl ions effectively formed the pentagonal twinned seed and Br ions inhibit the growth of the diameter direction in the wire growing step. Herein, the molar ratio of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.0065 was a suitable concentration for the growth of Ag NWs. The shape of wire was also affected by the concentration of NaCl. In the case of a molar ratio of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.167 or higher, a difference in the amount of AgCl formed was observed. As a result, this caused a lot of by-products, such as particles, to be generated. The synthesis of 20 nm diameter Ag NWs was carried out and was divided into two steps. In the first step, PVP and NaCl/KBr were dissolved in EG solution under vigorous stirring for 1 h at 120 °C, and in the second step, the AgNO3 solution was quickly added into the autoclave reactor and the reaction was maintained for a further 1 h at 160 °C. In particular, the reaction time in the second step was closely related to the growth rate of the wire and it was possible to obtain the highest wire products when the reaction time was 1 h. On the other hand, if the reaction time was longer, the diameter growth of the wire was enlarged and thickened as the by-products produced were in the form of particles.
The Ag NWs synthesized via the high pressure polyol reaction were clearly smaller and have a more uniform dispersion than those made using the conventional atmospheric pressure process. The effect of pressure on the reaction solution was to promote the synthesis of seed particles and wires and enhance the reaction rate. Pressure can reduce the solvent viscosity and increase the contact frequency of the silver ions (Ag+) and electrons (e−), and thereby be as important to the process rates as temperature and the chemical composition. As a result, smaller sized particles and a faster nucleation rate were produced. The role of pressure on the growth mechanism of the Ag NWs has been described by Liao and co-workers25 using classical nucleation theory and is expressed in eqn (a). 
(a)
Eqn (a) invokes the variable energy barrier (ΔG*) to include pressure effects. Herein, ΔG* expresses the result of nucleation associated with a reduction in the concentration of Ag ions (Ag+). The factor γ is the interfacial energy and ΔGv is the difference in Gibbs' free energy per unit volume. The variation of ΔGv with pressure was then expressed by a differential at constant temperature. When compared to ΔGv, the pressure variation of interfacial energy is small and can be ignored. As pressure increases, the energy barrier of nucleation lowers and accelerates nucleation. According to phase transition theory, the ratio of growth rate to nucleation rate determines the crystalline grain size, or equivalently, the particle size will be smaller at increased nucleation rates. Therefore, the particle size decreases with increasing pressure.
However, in our experimental results, we observed that the growth process produced smaller and more dispersed particles under the high-pressure polyol synthesis conditions. Furthermore, increasing the pressure increased the density and enhanced the solubility, making the reactive solution rapidly reach super-saturation and can increase the nucleation rate to give rise to the near-instantaneous formation of Ag nuclei. Clearly, the particle size was smaller under high pressure and increasing the pressure may promote the formation of small-size Ag seed-particles and small diameter wires. As a result, the Ag nanostructures in this study initially formed as Ag seed particles with a diameter of 20 nm and subsequently grew into well-defined Ag NWs with a uniform and narrow diameter distribution in the range of 16–22 nm, with a long dimension of up to 20 μm (the aspect ratio was approximately 1000), as shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3(I) and (II) display the SEM and TEM images of the thin Ag NWs synthesized at a pressure of 1000 psi (69 bar). The TEM images indicate that the diameter of each individual nanowire was uniform along its length with a narrow size distribution in the range of 19–22 nm. From the structural analysis of the side and the tip area of the Ag NWs using high-resolution TEM, along with the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) image, we could also obtain further insight into the structure of the Ag NWs in which the NWs were determined to grow along the [110] direction.
 Fig. 3  (I) SEM and (II) TEM image of the Ag NWs with lengths of 20 μm and 20 nm diameters, synthesized using a high-pressure polyol reaction. The inset of (II) displays the SAED pattern of the Ag NWs with a twinned structure. (III) XRD pattern and (IV) SPR absorption characteristics of the synthesized Ag NWs with 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm diameters. The distributions of length (V) and diameter (VI) for the synthesized Ag NWs. 
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern for the sample prepared here indicates that the crystal structure of these nanowires was face-centered cubic (fcc). Fig. 3(III) displays the XRD patterns and it is seen that all diffraction peaks can be indexed to the fcc phase of Ag. It can be noted that the intensity ratios of the [111] and [200] reflections exhibit relatively high values, indicating the preferred [111] orientation of the Ag NWs. The longitudinal axis was oriented along the [110] direction. Previous studies have indicated a low threshold for twinning parallel to the [111] faces of silver, as inferred from the bi-crystals grown, which were twinned along the [111] plane.26
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) was also used to identify the optical characteristics of the Ag nanostructures produced, as shown in Fig. 3(IV). It is well documented that Ag nanostructures exhibit a wide range of optical phenomena specifically related to SPR, such as absorption and light scattering with characteristics that depend on the geometry and size of the metal particles.27,28 An SPR spectrum can be fundamentally used to determine the size and shape of the Ag NWs by examining the SPR bands that appear at different frequencies. According to previous reports,28,29 the main characteristic SPR peaks for Ag NWs with a diameter of 30–60 nm appear between 372 and 380 nm. These peaks are attributed to the transverse modes of a 1D material with pentagonal cross sections, corresponding to out-of-plane quadrupole and dipole resonance modes. In the present study, as shown in Fig. 3(IV), the SPR absorption band clearly shows two characteristic peaks at 351 and 365 nm, indicative of wires with small diameters. It is important to note that these two SPR peaks appear at significantly shorter wavelengths than those noted above or for wires with diameters between 30 and 60 nm.27,28 As well as causing a blue-shift in the peaks, a reduction in the NWs diameter also reduces the amount of scattered light. It is known that the extinction coefficient depends on both the damping constant and dielectric function.30 For smaller sized Ag NWs, the variation in scattering intensity along the nanowires and the polarization of the nanowires by the electromagnetic field can change the damping constant and dielectric function as well as the shape of the SPR bands.31
The Ag NWs, with diameters of approximately 20 nm and lengths of 20 μm, were dispersed in DI water at an optimized density of 0.5 mg mL−1 and deposited on a plasma-treated PET substrate film using a commercially available wet coating method (e.g., spin coating and Mayer bar coating) for the fabrication of a transparent electrode film. The highly conductive Ag NWs electrode films were obtained without any post-treatment. In Fig. 4, the 2D cast films, consisting of networks of Ag NWs, show a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1, a transmittance of 94% and a low haze value of 1.0% at a wavelength of 550 nm. This sheet resistance almost matches the electrical properties of ITO films (i.e., a sheet resistance of ≤30 Ω sq−1 with a transmittance of 95% and haze value of ≤1.0%). The light transmittance spectrum of the as-cast 20 nm diameter Ag NWs networked film with a 40 nm diameter Ag NWs film for comparison was measured using UV-Vis spectrometry and is shown in Fig. 4(III). The film sample with 20 nm diameter Ag NWs showed an excellent light transmittance of 94% and a haze value of 1.0% at 550 nm wavelength (PET film based), with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1. On the other hand, that of the 40 nm diameter Ag NWs sample showed a light transmittance of 88% and haze value of 2.5% for the same sheet resistance. The difference of 6% in the transmittance was likely associated with the higher haze value, which results from light scattering. The haze factor is a standard metric for quantifying a film's light scattering efficiency. It is thus a critical parameter for optoelectronic devices and is defined according to eqn (b) where Tdiff is the percentage of light diffusively scattered and Ttot is the total light transmitted. 
Haze (%) = Tdiff/Ttot × 100
(b)
 Fig. 4  (I) The optical image of the transparent electrode film containing Ag NWs with 20 μm lengths and 20 nm diameters, and (II) the SEM morphologies of the resulting randomly dispersed Ag NWs network film. (III) The light transmittance spectra of the transparent electrode Ag NWs film (PET-based) with 30 ohm sq−1 sheet resistance: (a) 94% transmittance for the sample containing Ag NWs 20 nm in diameter and (b) 86% transmittance for Ag NWs 40 nm in diameter. (IV) The change in the sheet resistance after a bending test of 1500 cycles. 
Haze values appear to be strongly dependent on the network density or size. Fig. 5 shows the haze and light transmittance of the as-cast Ag NW networked films with NW diameters of 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm as a function of sheet resistance in the range of 5–300 Ω sq−1. As shown in curve (a) of Fig. 5(I) and (II), the Ag NWs film with 20 nm diameter NWs showed a low haze value of ≤1.0% with an optical transmittance value up to 95%, for samples with a sheet resistance of more than 30 Ω sq−1. The optical properties data were superior to that of the 30 nm and 40 nm diameter samples, as shown in curve (b) and (c) of Fig. 5. In particular, for the same sheet resistance, the light transmittance of the Ag NWs film with 20 nm diameter NWs was at least 3–5% more than that of the Ag NWs film with 40 nm diameter NWs. The haze value, in the case of wires with a 20 nm diameter, was at least 1–2% less than the 40 nm diameter wires, as shown in Fig. 5(I). Such a large reduction in the transmittance or haze was attributed to the effects of the NW diameter. Overall, it was seen that the optical properties of the Ag NWs network films with small diameter NWs were superior to those with larger diameters and in particular, the level of haze was largely influenced by the ability of the Ag NWs to scatter light. As a result, 2D Ag films formed by a network of 20 nm sized NWs could produce a sufficiently transparent electrode film for electronic devices, owing to the low intensity of scattered light. By current standards, transparent electrode films with high transmittance and a haze value of at most 1.5% are considered very useful for electronic devices. However, the 2D Ag NWs films formed by a network of 20 nm diameter NWs have optical properties sufficiently comparable to ITO. In addition, Ag NWs network films with small diameter NWs are expected to show better flexibility; the bending test is shown in Fig. 4(IV). To test for mechanical flexible stability of the Ag NW films, a bending test system was designed, as shown in Fig. 4(IV). The system consisted of two contact lines: one of the lines was fixed and the other could be moved laterally. In this test, the bending was rolled at a distance with a diameter of 10 mm that was subsequently unrolled at speed of 20 mm s−1 and the sheet resistance of the film compared to its initial value. Fig. 4(IV) shows the changes in the resistances of the electrode film using the Ag NWs (sheet resistance, 30 Ω sq−1) as a function of bending cycle number. The percentage change in the resistance of the flexible Ag NWs film can be expressed as 0.5% or less after 1500 bending cycles, verifying that the 20 nm diameter Ag NWs film possesses an excellent mechanical flexibility, although no significant difference was observed between the 20 nm and 40 nm samples.
 Fig. 5  Changes in the (I) haze value and (II) optical transmittance measured at various sheet resistance conditions for the Ag NWs transparent electrode films. Legend: films containing Ag NWs with (a) 20 nm, (b) 30 nm and (c) 40 nm diameter NWs (the average length of the wire samples are 18–20 μm, 20–24 μm and 20–25 μm, respectively). The haze value and transmittance were measured at a wavelength of 550 nm. 
The following are necessary criteria for transparent electrodes with a plastic substrate, in order to be used in organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices or organic light-emitting diodes (OLED): a sheet resistance of about 10–30 Ω sq−1, light transmittance higher than 90% and a low haze value, at most 1.5%. Many research groups are beginning to incorporate Ag NWs films fabricated via a printing method as front electrodes for solar applications.32–34 Depending on the experimental conditions used for their application, the Ag NWs films could have haze factors varying between 2% and 10%. If a low haze value was desired for the devices, it could be achieved by size control of the Ag NWs such as increasing the length and decreasing the diameter, which can lead to haze values below 1.5%.20,21 Moreover, smaller diameter Ag NWs can directly decrease the haze in the visible light region because of the decreased light scattering. In addition, to achieve sufficiently transparent electrode films having a high transparency of more than 90% (the level of ITO) with a sheet resistance of 30 ohm sq−1 for solar applications, the transparent electrode films with low haze values are needed. If the transmittance and haze value at the same conductive range can be the same as the ITO level, Ag NWs electrodes will open new capabilities for solar applications. In order to investigate the performance for practical application of the electrode films formed by a network of 20 nm diameter NWs in flexible OPVs, cells were fabricated based upon the following architecture: 125 μm PET film/Ag NWs/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC60BM/LiF/Al. Fig. 6 shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the flexible OPVs with Ag NW transparent electrodes, as well as a rigid ITO electrode device for reference, measured under AM 1.5 G illumination and in the dark. The reference device with an ITO electrode on glass (with a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1) exhibited a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.93% and a fill factor (FF) of 0.46. In comparison, the cell using a 20 nm diameter Ag NWs networked film on PET exhibited a PCE of 2.69% and a FF of 0.37, sufficiently comparable to the reference ITO electrode. On the other hand, the OPV cells with 30 nm and 40 nm diameters Ag NWs networked film electrodes (sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1, optical transmittance of 90–92% and a haze value of 1.7–2.5%), showed lower PCEs of 1.93% and 1.51%, respectively. However, the OPV cell using 20 nm diameter Ag NWs networked electrode on PET film exhibited a PCE of 2.69%, which was almost similar to that found with ITO on glass. The relatively higher PCE of the 20 nm diameter Ag NWs film was considered to have caused a more intense absorption in the active layer from a higher optical transmittance resulting from its low haze value. As shown in curve (a) of Fig. 5, the Ag NWs film with 20 nm diameter NWs showed a relatively lower haze value than those of the 30 nm and 40 nm diameter samples. On the other hand, the light transmittance of the Ag NW film with 20 nm diameter NWs was at least 3–5% higher than those of Ag NWs film with 30 nm and 40 nm diameter NWs.
 Fig. 6  The device structure and current density–voltage characteristics of the OPVs prepared using a Ag NWs layer with 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm diameter NWs (the average length of the wire samples are 18–20 μm, 20–24 μm and 20–25 μm, respectively) and NWs as the transparent electrode (reference curve; solar cell with an ITO electrode on glass). The table is a summary of the performance parameters of the OPVs based on ITO/glass and Ag NWs/PET. 
4. Conclusion
The present study demonstrates that thin Ag NWs with diameters in the range of 16–22 nm can be synthesized using a high-pressure polyol method. Ag NWs with a pentagonal-structure twinned along the [111] plane are subsequently produced and the nanowire dimensions, particularly the diameter, can be controlled by the process pressure. In addition, the characteristic SPR of thin Ag NWs was observed at 365 nm in the absorbance spectrum, which is evidence for the formation of the NWs. Furthermore, the 2D percolating Ag network was found to have a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1 and an optical transmittance of 94%. The high transmittance was the result of reduced light scattering, which yields a low haze value of ≤1.0% and a sheet resistance of 30 Ω sq−1, suitable for electronic display applications. In particular, the OPV cell using the 20 nm diameter Ag NWs networked electrode film exhibited a PCE of 2.69% with a FF of 0.37, sufficiently comparable to the reference ITO electrode. However, even for the 20 nm Ag NWs cell, the PCE of the OPV devices was consistently 0.24 lower than that of corresponding ITO glass-based devices, significantly reducing their observed efficiency. On the other hand, this study demonstrates that the 20 nm diameter Ag NWs electrode satisfies the important criteria of conductivity, transparency, haze, and solution-processability necessary to replace ITO in electronic displays. It is obvious that these transparent conducting Ag NWs films have the potential to outperform conventional ITO, especially when considered as a possible electrode layer in flexible devices.
AcknowledgementsThis study was financially supported in part by the Converging Research Center Program through the Ministry of Science (ICT and Future Planning) (2013K000201) and the Industrial Core Technology Development Project through the Ministry of Knowledge and Commerce (10035644 and 10035648).
ReferencesS. Ye, A. R. Rathmell, Z. Chen, I. E. Stewart and B. J. Wiley, Adv. Matter., 2014, 26, 6670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Wu, J. Xiang, C. Yang, W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2006, 430, 61 CrossRef PubMed .A. Strevens, A. Drury, S. Lipson, M. Kröll, W. Blau and H. Hörhold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 143503 CrossRef .E. Zimmermann, P. Ehrenreich, T. Pfadler, J. A. Dorman, J. Weickert and L. Schmidt-Mende, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 669 CrossRef CAS .C. Preston, Y. Xu, X. Han, J. N. Munday and L. Hu, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 461 CrossRef CAS .A. Aleshin, S. Williams and A. S. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1998, 94, 173 CrossRef CAS .T. Granlund, L. A. Pettersson and O. Inganäs, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 5897 CrossRef CAS .J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435 CrossRef CAS .Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H.-Y. Lu, C.-Y. Chou, J.-H. Wu, J.-J. Lin and G.-S. Liou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 3629 RSC .J. Liang, L. Lu, K. Tong, Z. Ren, W. Hu, X. Niu, Y. Chen and Q. Oei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Sun, B. Sun, B. Mayers and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 165 CrossRef CAS .Y. Sun, Y. Yin, B. T. Mayers, T. Herricks and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4736 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353 CrossRef CAS .B. Wiley, Y. Sun, J. Chen, H. Cang, Z.-Y. Li, X. Li and Y. Xia, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 356 CrossRef CAS .T. Kim, A. Canlier, G. H. Kim, J. Choi, M. Park and S. M. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 788 CAS .T. Araki, J. Jiu, M. Nogi, H. Koga, S. Nagao, T. Sugahara and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 236 CrossRef CAS .M. H. Chang, H. A. Cho, Y. S. Kim, E. J. Lee and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 330 CrossRef PubMed .C. Preston, X. Han, J. N. Munday and L. Hu, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 461 CrossRef CAS .E. J. Lee, M. H. Chang, Y. S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 042118 CrossRef .F. Fiévet, J. Lagier and M. Figlarz, MRS Bull., 1989, 14, 29 CrossRef .X. Tang, M. Tsuji, M. Nishio and P. Jiang, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2009, 82, 1304 CrossRef CAS .S. C. Liao, W. E. Mayo and K. D. Pae, Acta Mater., 1997, 45, 4027 CrossRef CAS .J. P. Kottmann, O. J. F. Martin, D. R. Smith and S. Schultz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235402 CrossRef .Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Analyst, 2003, 128, 686 RSC .J. Mock, M. Barbic, D. Smith, D. Schultz and S. Schultz, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 6755 CrossRef CAS .B. J. Wiley, S. H. Im, Z.-Y. Li, J. McLellan, A. Siekkinen and Y. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. N. Prasad, Nanophotonics, John Wiley & Sons,  2004 Search PubMed .J. Mock, S. Oldenburg, D. Smith, D. Schultz and S. Schultz, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 465 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, T. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price, B. J. Wily and W. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4075 CAS .W. Gaynor, J. Y. Lee and P. Peumans, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. C. Chen, L. Dou, R. Zhu, C.-H. Chang, T.-B. Song, Y. B. Zheng, S. Hawks, G. Li, P. S. Weiss and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The two-step reaction scheme for synthesizing Ag NWs using a high-pressure polyol process. (a) Under 0 psi pressure, 30 nm sized Ag seed crystals with multi-twin structure are formed via the reduction of AgNO3 and grown into wires with diameters of about 30 nm. (b) Under 1000 psi (69 bar) pressure, 20 nm sized Ag particles are formed and grown into 20 nm wires.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The diameter of Ag NWs grown as a function of pressure in the range of 0–1000 psi (69 bar). In the absence of KBr, the diameter of the Ag NWs was not influenced by the pressure regardless of the NaCl/AgNO3 concentration. However, for a molar ratio of NaCl/KBr = 2, the diameter of the Ag NWs was decreased with an increase in pressure. (b) The diameter of Ag NWs as a function of KBr concentration for pressures between 0 and 1000 psi (69 bar). The upper data set was measured at a low NaCl concentration (the molar ratio of NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.0065) and the lower data set is at a high NaCl concentration (NaCl/AgNO3 = 0.167). The diameters of the synthesized Ag NWs were determined from the mean value of the wires per sample and the mean value was counted from more than 100 wires. Samples of each specimen were also confirmed from the 5 batches prepared.	 

	(a)

 	Fig. 3  (I) SEM and (II) TEM image of the Ag NWs with lengths of 20 μm and 20 nm diameters, synthesized using a high-pressure polyol reaction. The inset of (II) displays the SAED pattern of the Ag NWs with a twinned structure. (III) XRD pattern and (IV) SPR absorption characteristics of the synthesized Ag NWs with 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm diameters. The distributions of length (V) and diameter (VI) for the synthesized Ag NWs.	 

Haze (%) = Tdiff/Ttot × 100
	(b)

 	Fig. 4  (I) The optical image of the transparent electrode film containing Ag NWs with 20 μm lengths and 20 nm diameters, and (II) the SEM morphologies of the resulting randomly dispersed Ag NWs network film. (III) The light transmittance spectra of the transparent electrode Ag NWs film (PET-based) with 30 ohm sq−1 sheet resistance: (a) 94% transmittance for the sample containing Ag NWs 20 nm in diameter and (b) 86% transmittance for Ag NWs 40 nm in diameter. (IV) The change in the sheet resistance after a bending test of 1500 cycles.	 

 	Fig. 5  Changes in the (I) haze value and (II) optical transmittance measured at various sheet resistance conditions for the Ag NWs transparent electrode films. Legend: films containing Ag NWs with (a) 20 nm, (b) 30 nm and (c) 40 nm diameter NWs (the average length of the wire samples are 18–20 μm, 20–24 μm and 20–25 μm, respectively). The haze value and transmittance were measured at a wavelength of 550 nm.	 

 	Fig. 6  The device structure and current density–voltage characteristics of the OPVs prepared using a Ag NWs layer with 20 nm, 30 nm and 40 nm diameter NWs (the average length of the wire samples are 18–20 μm, 20–24 μm and 20–25 μm, respectively) and NWs as the transparent electrode (reference curve; solar cell with an ITO electrode on glass). The table is a summary of the performance parameters of the OPVs based on ITO/glass and Ag NWs/PET.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
