 Ab initio methods for the computation of physical properties and performance parameters of electrochemical energy storage devices  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP03611H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP03611H
(Tutorial Review)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 1476-1503
Ab initio methods for the computation of physical properties and performance parameters of electrochemical energy storage devices

        
          
            Israel 
            Perez
          
          
        
      
National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT)-Department of Physics and Mathematics, Institute of Engineering and Technology, Universidad Autonoma de Ciudad Juarez, Av. del Charro 450 Col. Romero Partido, C.P. 32310, Juarez, Chihuahua, Mexico. E-mail: israel.perez@uacj.mx
Received 
      5th August 2022
    , Accepted 6th December 2022First published on 23rd December 2022AbstractWith the rapid development of electric vehicles and mobile technologies, there is a high demand for electrochemical energy storage devices and electrochemical energy conversion devices. Devices meeting these needs include metal-ion batteries (MIBs), supercapacitors (SCs), electrochromic devices (ECDs), and multifunctional devices such as electrochromic batteries and supercapatteries. Currently, the goal has been the enhancement of operational parameters and physical properties that results in a higher performance of these devices. In the case of batteries, SCs, and supercapatteries, scientists seek to improve the equilibrium voltage, energy density, power, capacitance, and charge rate. In the case of ECDs, the focus is on improvement of the optical modulation and coloration efficiency. However, synthesis and characterization of new materials, or of materials with optimized properties, is time consuming and highly expensive. Computational simulation of materials can expedite the experimental endeavor by modelling novel atomic structures and predicting device performance. This is possible using ab initio theories and applying physical principles that allow us to understand the underlying mechanisms governing the behavior of materials in these devices. Taking as a point of departure density functional theory (DFT), in this review, we discuss the first principles methods used for the computation of physical properties and performance parameters of electrochemical energy storage devices. A wide coverage of DFT is given, dealing with the strengths and weaknesses of the most popular functionals used in the field of electrochemical energy storage. With these tools, ab initio methods for the computation of basic properties such as effective mass, mobility, optical band gap, transmissivity, conductivity (ionic and electronic), and criteria for structure stability (cohesive energy, formation energy, adsorption energy, and phonon frequency) are addressed. We also highlight the first principles techniques for the calculation of performance parameters in MIBs, SCs, and ECDs.
Israel Perez
Prof. Israel Perez obtained his PhD from the Research Center and Advanced Studies in Mexico in 2010. From 2011 to 2013, he spent a postdoctoral stay at the University of Saskatchewan in Canada working with synchroton radiation tools. Afterwards he joined the Department of Physics and Mathematics of the Autonomous University of Juarez City in Mexico. He is professor of materials science and nanotechnology. His research interests include nanomaterials with applications to supercapacitors, electrochromic devices, metal-ion batteries, multifunctional devices, and other energy storage devices. He also employs ab initio calculations for the computation of physical properties and performance parameters of these devices.
1 Introduction
The ever-growing demand for alternative sources of clean and carbon-free energy compels us to rethink how we address technological issues. New advanced and environmentally friendly materials are required to tackle the energy consumption that the world is facing today and the future of energy calls for the development of more sophisticated energy storage technologies. Electrochemical energy storage devices (EESDs) and electrochemical energy conversion devices (EECDs) have been developed as the most viable solution to the energy crisis; these include metal-ion batteries (MIBs), microbatteries (MBs), supercapacitors (SCs), electrochromic devices (ECDs), and others.1–10
The progress in these technologies depends not only on improving the physical properties and operational parameters of current materials, but also on designing novel materials with superior properties. The experimental discovery of new materials is laborious, expensive, and demanding in terms of infrastructure and laboratory resources. From this perspective, simulation and computational tools are highly attractive because computational modelling can boost the discovery process and help to unveil physical mechanisms that are unreachable with present technology.

Ab initio-based methods have gained considerable attention from material scientists in the last two decades. Scientists acknowledge the importance of applying fundamental theories to the understanding of phenomena taking place in modern electronic technology. In many cases, experimental information is available but an insight into the underlying mechanism of, for instance, ionic diffusivity in electrodes for batteries, is lacking. This is due to experimental limitations since it is quite difficult to track ion trajectories in materials with current technology. Moreover, when materials have not been synthesized, simulation and models from first principles represent an excellent tool to predict new structures and assess physical properties that may catalyze the experimental search for these materials; resulting in great progress in the field. Both experiment and computational modelling are supplementary to the scientific endeavor.
Many physical properties of materials, EESDs, and EECDs can be now routinely and precisely predicted using ab initio-based techniques; including ground state energies, formation energies, cohesive energies, activation and adsorption energies, equilibrium voltages, optical properties, electron mobility, ionic diffusion, specific capacity, and energy densities.11–14 On the other hand, an ever-increasing number of scientists apply artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques for the prediction of new crystal structures as potential candidates for electrodes and electrolytes in EESDs.15 Moreover, high-throughput computational studies require a body of methodologies and physical criteria that can help to discriminate among the myriad of possible candidate materials from large databases.16,17
It is worth mentioning that, in the last two decades, material scientists have been working on the development of multifunctional devices (MFDs) that combine two or more technologies in one single unit, with the aim of optimizing the use of materials, reducing cost, and production time. Among the MFDs that relate ECDs, MIBs, and SCs, we can count: electrochromic batteries, photoelectrochromic devices, electrochromic supercapacitors, and supercapatteries.7,18–21 All these technologies are currently under intense research and undergoing a great expansion. Hence, devices capable of manipulating and storing energy in one single unit are highly attractive. Under this scenario, it is worth devoting a review dealing, in a rigorous and concise form, with ab initio methodologies for the calculation of the most essential physical properties and performance parameters of contemporary EESDs and EECDs.
This review highlights some of the most fascinating advances made in the computation of physical properties and performance parameters in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion. As a first step, we provide an overview of density functional theory (DFT) which is the basis of ab initio methodologies. We then move on to review the theory for the calculation of the physical properties of crystalline materials that form the ground for the prediction of operational parameters in systems with similar features; including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), ECDs, and SCs. In this way, the methods will be provided for those interested in either gaining insight into the electronic/ionic dynamics of existing materials and for those working on the design of new ones. Due to their close similarity in construction, components, and performance, we restrict ourselves to discuss the physical foundations within the context of LIBs, SCs, and ECDs which has been the basis for MFDs.
To achieve our goal, this review is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the foundations of the DFT. Basics of the theory are given and a discussion of the most common exchange–correlation functionals is presented. The physical properties such as the group velocity, effective mass, mobility and optical band gap are treated in Section 3. Section 4 is devoted to discuss criteria for structural stability both at zero temperature and arbitrary temperatures. These criteria entail the determination of the cohesive energy, the energy of formation, the adsorption energy for pure and impure systems with different types of point defects (interstitial, substitutional, and charged supercells), as well as phonon frequencies. The basic theory for the calculation of the ionic diffusivity in electrodes and the ionic conductivity is addressed in Section 5. The theory not only applies to electrodes but also to solid state electrolytes. The principles for the calculation of the theoretical voltage, capacity, and energy density in LIBs is given in Section 6. Thermal corrections due to lattice vibrations are also taken into consideration. Sections 7 and 8 deal with the working principles of ECDs and SCs, respectively; and the computational techniques for the determination of performance parameters such as optical modulation, coloration efficiency, capacitance, capacity, energy density, and peak power are developed here. In Section 9, the importance of machine learning in the determination of the physical properties of materials is highlighted. Finally, a summary and pertinent remarks are given in Section 10.
2 Density functional theory
2.1 Overview
The calculation of physical properties from first principles of condensed matter systems has been quite challenging due to the large number of particles involved in the Hamiltonian. The first ab initio quantum method for evaluating the physical properties of metals, came from Arnold Sommerfeld around 192822 when he assumed an electron moving freely in a periodic crystal. Although a simple model, Sommerfeld paved the way for more advanced approaches. Quantum mechanics was immediately applied to the study of many electron systems and soon physicists realized that the problem turned out to be intractable under traditional methods. One of the first successful methods ever developed to deal with the many-body problem for the computation of the ground state energy of solids was the Hartree–Fock approach (still widely used today in chemistry).23,24 As the field evolved, several alternatives and more exact theories were put forward; among these, today we can count the DFT,25,26 the GW method,27 Monte Carlo methods,28,29 and time dependent DFT (TDDFT).30 Due to its relative simplicity, power prediction, and low computational cost, DFT has gained large popularity among chemists, condensed matter physicists, material engineers, and material scientists. In the following we shall deal with the elements of this theory.
2.2 The Kohn–Sham method
Density functional theory was put forward as an alternative solution to the many-electron problem in condensed matter physics and theoretical chemistry.25,26 It is based on the idea that the electron density ρ(r), where r is the position vector, can be used to compute the ground state energy, E[ρ], of an electronic system and from this most of its physical properties can be obtained. The formulation applies to any system of interacting electrons subject to an external potential Vext(r), i.e., atoms, molecules, gases, liquids, solids or any other physical system. The theory assumes a system of non-interacting electrons whose ground state energy is equivalent to the energy of the actual system. The fundamental equations in DFT for a system of N non-interacting electrons are: (1)where εi and ψi (i = 1…N) are the Kohn–Sham eigenenergies and eigenfunctions, respectively. The first term in brackets represents the kinetic energy, with me the electron mass and ∇2 is the Laplacian operator. The second term is the effective potential given by (2)Here the second term is known as the Hartree term. The last term is the exchange–correlation potential that can be determined from the functional derivative of the exchange–correlation energy, Exc[ρ], that is: (3)The spin-dependent charge density can be estimated from the eigenfunctions as follows: (4)where the sums run over all occupied states and both spins (σ), respectively. Veff depends on ρσ and hence the eqn (1)–(4) must be solved self-consistently. These set of equations are the celebrated Kohn–Sham equations (KSE) that define conventional DFT.
With the KSE solved, total energy of the electron system is: (5)where tσ is the kinetic energy and ENN is the nucleon–nucleon energy. The third term is the energy due to the external potential, usually the energy of the ionic lattice in which the electron moves but other external potentials, such as magnetic or electric, can be added. The last two terms correspond to electron–electron interaction energies. The forth term is called the Hartree integral and arises from pure electrostatic interactions among electrons. By its nature, this term includes a spurious self-interaction that may lead to significant errors for strongly correlated systems as we discuss in Section 2.5. The last term is the energy due to exchange and correlation effects which are included as an average.
Kohn–Sham DFT is a powerful tool for the prediction of the ground-state properties of condensed matter systems. Yet, as any other theory, DFT contains assumptions that delimit its scope and one should be aware of its strengths and limitations. For instance, the electron density [eqn (4)] and the total energy [eqn (5)] correspond to the ground state which implies that no excited states are taken into account in the calculation. Also the temperature of the system is assumed to be 0 K and no external stresses are assumed to be applied. Under this warning, care should be exercised in applying the theory to interpreting spectral results, especially those related to radiation spectra where excitations dominate the electromagnetic phenomena. To treat electronic excited states that result from radiation-matter interactions, more sophisticated approaches have been developed. The TDDFT30–33 and the many-body perturbation theory, through the Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE),34–37 deal with the time-dependent nature of electromagnetic radiation and are more suitable to treat light phenomena such as nonlinear optics, photoluminescence, and absorption and emission of light (in different intensity regimes). Nowadays, these methods are routinely applied and are available in several noncommercial codes.38–42 The catch is that they are computationally expensive and, therefore, large computational resources are required.
To end this subsection, it is worth mentioning that there are plenty of computational packages that solve the KSE and calculate several physical magnitudes, the differences among such packages mainly reside on the basis set used in each case to solve the KSE and on the type of electronic system under study. For instance, in the case of periodic systems, the codes ABINIT,43 VASP,44 QUANTUM EXPRESSO,45 CASTEP,46,47 and SIESTA,48 use pseudopotentials along with plane waves or atomic orbitals to solve the KSE. The pseudopotential approach approximates the core electron potential and explicitly deals with valence electrons. On the other hand, WIEN2K49 and RSPT50 are full potential codes that take into account both core and valence electrons without any approximation. Linearized augmented plane waves plus localized orbitals (LAPW + lo) and linearized muffin-tin orbitals (LMTO) are used as basis sets, respectively. Other codes, such as Gaussian,51 use Gaussian orbitals as basis set and are more suitable to treat atoms, molecules, clusters, and nanoparticles, which are usually non-periodic systems. A study conducted in 2016 on the performance of 15 DFT codes using 40 different basis sets, showed that most codes give similar results for the Perdew–Burke–Enrzerhof equation of state applied to 71 elemental crystals; only older methods showed less precision.52
2.3 Exchange–correlation functionals
In principle, all quantities in the KSE can be known save for Exc, which is undetermined. Thus, the KSE can only be solved provided that an explicit form for Exc is given. The first approximation to the exchange–correlation energy, the local density approximation (LDA), and its spin-dependent version, the local spin density approximation (LSDA),53,54 regards the electron density as nearly a constant all over the material. In the early days of DFT, the LDA ansatz represented a step forward towards the understanding of the physical properties in metals. However, as it is evident, the LDA is only applicable to systems with slowly-varying densities and, therefore, it is of no utility for most physical systems such as atoms, molecules and non-metallic materials. To cover these systems, soon, new families of exchange–correlation functionals were worked out at the end of the 20th century and early in the 21st century. Another family of functionals, dubbed the generalized gradient approximation (GGA), improved on the LDA by considering both the charge density and its gradient. The most popular GGA functional used today for the calculation of physical properties in periodic materials is the Perdew–Burke–Enrzerhof (PBE) functional,55 although revised versions of this, including the RevPBE, RPBE, PW91, and PBESol, have also been widely applied.56–58 Other improvements in DFT have led to meta-generalized-gradient approximations (MGGA), with the Tao-Perdew–Staroverov–Scuseria (TPSS) functional as one of the most representative exchange–correlation functionals in this family.59 The selection of functional from the myriad of options strongly relies on the type of system and the property under study. Physical properties of molecules and surface energies of solids are well described with the TPSS functional,60 while equilibrium properties of solids in bulk give better results with the functionals from the GGA family.61
The PBE functional and its revised versions have been quite successful in computing many equilibrium properties such as lattice parameters, formation energies, redox energies, binding energies, phonon frequencies, bulk moduli, ferroelectricity, and magnetism. Yet, despite their success, these functionals fail to predict excitonic states, the correct band gaps in most semiconductors, and the right electron localization in strongly correlated materials that possess partially filled d or f orbitals.60,62 Transition metal oxides, rear earth compounds, molecular systems, and many insulators and semiconductors fall within this category and are regularly used in electrodes and electrolytes for EESDs and MFDs.
In part, the failure to predict the right band gaps in these systems, comes from the discontinuity occurring in eqn (3) derived by the use of orbital-independent potentials.63,64 This scenario motivated the search for more sophisticated functionals resulting in the generation of more families. A comprehensive list of functionals can reach several hundreds and it is impossible to review them all here.65 Some functionals have been designed to meet certain requirements in some systems. For example, in atoms and molecules, the electronic density is highly inhomogeneous and varies drastically over space, so functionals must meet this type of charge distribution. On the other hand, in EESDs, EECDs, and MFDs, the main components are periodic solids. This scenario naturally narrows the number of functionals that can be used to deal with this kind of systems. From this limited set of functionals, some have been designed to improve band gaps, and others were developed to describe the localized character of d and f electrons in some transition metal oxides and rare earth compounds, where strong electronic correlations play a leading role. We shall, therefore, discuss the most popular and successful functionals applied to the computation of physical properties in the field of electrochemical energy storage. These functionals include hybrid functionals (hfs), with emphasis on the HSE06 hf; the LDA+U (collectively called DFT+U); and the modified Becke–Johnson (mBJ) potential. Other common functionals used in battery design are: the SCAN from the meta-GGA family, the PW6B95, B87-1, B3LYP-D3, and DSD-PBEP86 for the computation of atomization energies and the mPW2-PLYP-D, DSD-PBE86, PW6B95, and PBEQIDH for the computation of relative energies in solids. When using functionals, scientists should be aware of their merits and shortcomings. Therefore, the study of the theory of each functional beforehand is crucial for its utilization. Due to space limitations and their wide applicability in EESDs and EECDs, we shall briefly reviewed the most significant features of the hybrid functionals with their variants, the DFT+U methodology, and the mBJ potential; the rest are left for the interested reader.13
2.4 Hybrid functionals
Hybrid functionals combined the exchange–correlation energy from LDA/GGA with some percentage of the Hartree–Fock (HF) exchange integral.64,66 This is achieved by adding a screened term that results from splitting the Coulomb operator (1/r) into short-range (SR) and long-range (LR) terms as follows: (6)where erfc(ω*r) = 1 − erf(ω*r) with erf(ω*r) the error function, and ω* is the exchange screening parameter that determines the range of the interaction.67
There are many hfs, but one of the most accurate is the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) functional whose explicit form for the exchange–correlation reads:68 (7)Here a = 1/4 is the mixing constant, EHF,SRx is the SR HF exchange energy, EPBE,SRx and  are the SR and LR components of the PBE exchange energy functional. For ω* = 0 the HSE reduces to the hybrid functional PBEh (also known as PBE0)69 and for ω* → ∞, HSE becomes the PBE functional. Therefore, ω* with values in between these extreme limits can be seen as an interpolation.70 The variant with  and  is known as HSE03, although the most popular version, the HSE06, is obtained when  Bohr−1. The HSE have been tested with atoms, molecules, metals, and semiconductors with excellent results. As an example, Fig. 1 shows the band gap calculations of selected semiconductors: C, Si, Ge, SiC, BN, BP, BAs, BSb, AlN, AlP, AlAs, AlSb, GaN, β-GaN, GaP, InN, InP, InAs, InSb, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, CdS, CdSe, CdTe, MgO, MgS, MgSe, MgTe, CaS, CaSe, CaTe, SrS, SrSe, SrTe, BaS, BaSe, and BaTe. It is pointed out that the HSE gives the best results followed by the TPSS, PBE, and LSDA functionals.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of theoretical vs. experimental band gaps for semiconductors from groups IIA–VI, IIB–VI, II–V and IV. Reproduced from Heyd et al.,68 with the permission of the AIP Publishing, copyright 2005. 

2.4.1 Optimized hybrid functionals. 
The HSE06 functional represents a substantial progress in computing the electronic properties and band gaps of many semiconducting systems, however, this functional underestimates band gaps in insulators. Even for some medium gap systems (1.2 eV to 4.9 eV) with defect levels, a series of significant discrepancies have been reported.71,72 For instance, in the case of GaAs and GaN, the HSE06 predicts a band gap of 1.2 eV and 3.2 eV, against the experimental values of 1.6 eV and 3.6 eV, respectively.73,74 This state of affairs calls for improvements in the level of accuracy of the hfs.
More recently, a new family of optimized hfs (ohfs), dubbed HSE(a,ω) functionals, has emerged.75,76 In ohfs, both the mixing and the screening parameters are varied. In the HSE06 functional, these parameters are fixed to 0.25 and 0.20, respectively. These values were tuned to better fit the experimental data but the values chosen had no physical justification. However, it was later shown that the mixing parameter is strongly related to the dielectric function of the material which implies that its value is material-dependent.77–79 The physical foundation lies in the condition known as the generalized Koopman' theorem which, for the addition of an electron to the system, can be mathematically stated as: εKS − εc = ΔKS = ΔSCF = εN+1 − εN − εc(8)where εN+1 and εN are the eigenvalues for a system of N + 1 and N electrons, respectively. ΔKS and ΔSCF are, respectively, the localization of the Kohn–Sham level and the electron affinity obtained in the self-consistent field. The latter is determined relative to the conduction band minimum εc. The parameters chosen in the HSE(a,ω) functional must reproduce the experimental band gap and obey the generalized koopman' theorem which implies that ΔKS − ΔSCF ≈ 0. Based on these requirements, Deák et al.76 computed the band gap for several semiconductors as shown in Table 1. The results show an unprecedented agreement with experiment. Despite its success, the application of ohfs cannot claim generality because the generalized Koopman' theorem does not apply when the change in the occupation considerably affects the other single particle states as occurs in many strongly correlated materials. Therefore, the ohfs should not be used for the computation of electronic properties of strongly correlated electron systems.
Table 1 Band gaps of selected semiconductors obtained from ref. 76 using the HSE(a,ω) functional




System
Experimental band gap (eV)
Theoretical band gap (eV)

a


ω





GaAs
1.6
1.5
0.25
0.15


CuGaAs
2.6
2.6
0.26
0.08


GaN
3.6
3.8
0.26
0.1


Ga2O3
4.9
5.0
0.26
0.0





2.5 DFT+U method

2.5.1 Method description. 
Although hfs and ohfs make accurate prediction of band gaps, calculations are computationally expensive and time consuming. Moreover, hfs do not deal with strong electron correlations, usually found in many transition metal oxides, which are standard materials in electrodes of EESDs. Dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) is the ideal theory to deal with this type of interactions,80,81 however, it is as expensive as hfs, so, other less time consuming approaches are desirable. One of these is the celebrated LDA+U method, generally known as DFT+U, which was put forward by Anisimov et al. in the early 1990s.82–85 The method was developed to account for transition metals oxides that tend to behave like Mott insulators, i.e., LDA/GGA calculations underestimate band gaps of these materials and in most cases predict them to have metallic character. The problem is strongly linked with the Hartree integral that includes an unphysical repulsive interaction between the electron and itself. Along with the inaccuracy of the exchange–correlation functional, a systematic error in the total energy emerges. This error is carried along with the calculations and for many systems, such as some transition metal oxides, the error becomes significant.
In an attempt to alleviate this problem, Anisimov et al. added a Hubbard term U (borrowed from the Hubbard model) that accounts for correlation effects and corrects for electron self-interaction. This is done by introducing orbital-dependent potentials that are applied to localized electrons in partially filled d or f shells in transition metal and rare earth compounds, respectively. The effect of this potential is to separate the localized orbitals relative to each other creating two Hubbard bands:86 the lower and the upper bands, with U determining the size of the splitting (see Fig. 2). Under these considerations, the total energy of the DFT+U method becomes EDFT+U = EDFT + EU[nσ] − EDC[nσ],(9)where nσ is the set of orbital occupation numbers with spin σ, EDFT is the usual DFT total energy functional without introducing corrections, EU[nσ] is the mean-field approximation for the Coulomb and exchange terms of multiband Hubbard Hamiltonian, and EDC[nσ] is the double-counting (DC) correction of the Coulomb and exchange parts for d or f electrons in the LDA/GGA functional.
 Fig. 2  Density of states of a transition metal oxide (TMO) without electron correlations (a) and with electron correlations (b). TM represents a transition metal, εF is the Fermi energy, and Eg stands for the fundamental band gap. The application of the Hubbard repulsion U leads to a splitting of the 3 d band into an upper and lower Hubbard band, each occupied with X electrons. There are 2X states in the O 2p band, which is fully occupied. 
Now the challenge is to establish a methodology for the computation of the second and third terms of eqn (9). To find the energies, we start by proposing atomic-like orbital potentials which are associated with on-site Coulomb U and Hund exchange J interactions. The orbital energy has the form:83,87,88 (10)where σ is the orbital occupation matrix. In DFT, the electron–electron interactions are included as an average through the LDA/GGA exchange–correlation functional. However, a DC correction has to be introduced considering that the atomic-like limit to the total energy is fulfilled. This consideration immediately leads to the expression for the double-counting energy: (11)where n = Tr(σ)/(2l + 1) and l is the angular momentum (here Tr represents the trace). The correction to the total energy is then EU − EDC and the orbital-dependent potentials read: (12)with I the identity matrix. It is customary to define the effective parameter as Ueff = U − J and report this value in the literature. For nonmagnetic materials, J ≈ 0 and plays a minor role, however, in magnetic materials its value may range to a couple of electronvolts and should not be ignored. For practical purposes, one speaks of the parameter U referring, in fact, to Ueff.


2.5.2 Computing U. 
So far there are two ways of computing U. The first one is a fitting procedure that relies on other results. These results can emerge from two sources: (a) experimental, such as measurements of lattice parameters, band gaps, and energy of formation; or (b) theoretical, such as calculations of these same properties–parameters from other ab initio calculations (e.g. GW, Monte Carlo, DMFT, etc.). Regardless of whether the results have an experimental or theoretical origin, the value of U is varied until the calculations match the results from the other observations.89–92 However, when neither experimental nor theoretical data are available, especially during the design of new materials with no experimental data at hand, e.g., in the design of novel materials applied to LIBs, SCs, ECDs, and other MFDs,93,94 the fitting procedure is no longer useful and one must resort to ab initio resources for the self-consistent computation of U. This leads us to the second way.
The problem of computing U from first principles dates back to the development of the DFT+U approach. So far, several approaches of ab initio methods has been put forward for the determination of U. Among these, we can enlist the constrained DFT (cDFT) approach,82,85,94,95 HF-based methods,96–98 the constrained random phase approximation (cRPA),99–101 and the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT).102,103 The methods differ on theoretical considerations, basis sets, and computational code used. Although, in principle, the methods should not depend on the basis set, it is a fact that computational codes solving the KSE rest on a particular basis set and, therefore, the methodology must be adapted to that specific code. In the literature of EESDs and EECDs the most common methods used for the computation of operational parameters are the cDFT and the DFPT. In what follows we shall outline the main features of these two methods.
Constrained DFT approach. 
In the case of individual atoms with d orbitals, Anisimov and Gunnarsson identified Ueff with F0 of the unscreened Slater integrals,83 whose form is: (13)where ϕ3d2(r) is the 3d wave function and r< (r>) is the smaller (larger) of r and r′. In solids, however, there is a screening effect that reduces the value of Ueff and an effective integral F0eff should be considered. To calculate U, they generated a large supercell and suppressed the hopping integrals that link the d shells of one atom to all other d shells. By varying the electron number they found that the effective integral is: (14)where ε3d↑ is the spin-up 3d eigenvalue. The values of all terms can be easily retrieved from data files in any modern code. In the original treatment, the basis set used was the LMTO. This basis set allows to identify the orbital and hopping terms. However, its implementation with other basis sets, such as the linearized augmented plane waves (LAPW), is not directly possible. In lieu of this, the ambiguity in the identification can be removed by moving the d-states into the core states. Madsen et al. applied this method for NiO and FeO and identified Ueff with F0eff resulting in U ≈ 7.3 eV for both systems and obtaining good results when compared with experiment.88
As we can observe, the calculation of U turns out to be dependent of the particular choice of basis. Certainly, from the theoretical point of view, this is unsatisfactory because the results should be invariant under a change of basis. Liechtenstein et al. recognized this problem and put forward a generalization of the DFT+U method104 which was extended to other basis and implemented in several modern software packages.95,96,99,105,106
Linear-response constrained DFT approach. 
Another variant of the cDFT approach is the so-called linear response cDFT approach (LR-cDFT).93–95 In this method, U is determined as: (15)where εi(nonint) and εi(int) are the localized electron energies of the noninteracting and interacting systems, respectively; ρi is the variation of the electron density localized in the atom i. The challenge here is to determine the variation of a single-electron energy as a function of the charge density through a linear response approach. For this, one defines the response matrix as (16)with ni the i element of the occupation matrix. These functions contain the information related to the response of atomic occupations to the potential shift used to affect the ground state of the system. The index j corresponds to an atom on which the perturbation is applied and the i index is related to an atom where the variation of density is evaluated. With these considerations, the U parameter is determined by the diagonal elements of the inverse response functions for noninteracting and interacting electron systems, i.e.: U = [χ−1(nonint) − χ−1(int)]ii.(17)It turns out that the difference between the perturbed and the initial occupancy of localized electrons divided by the coefficient εj is related to the response function. This implies that, for derivative calculations, values of εj should be small, usually between 0.1 eV and 0.2 eV. So, in practice, the components of the response matrix can be determined from finite differences: (18)where  is a Lagrange multiplier and E the total energy. It is worth mentioning that the off-diagonal elements of the response matrix represent intersite interactions which are not included in the standard on-site DFT+U formalism. To end this subsection, it is worth mentioning that the LR-cDFT method has been applied for the computation of U in electrodes of LiFePO4 which is a typical component in LIBs. Operational parameters such as theoretical voltage and energy density were calculated and good results with experiments were obtained.94
Density functional perturbation theory approach. 
The most modern method for a self-consistent computation of U, uses the reciprocal space formulation of density functional perturbation theory (DFPT). This approach can be seen as an extension of the LR-cDFT. The motivation for the development of this method resides on the fact that the LR-cDFT method requires several supercell calculations which makes it computationally expensive, and therefore more efficient approaches are desirable, especially in view of their potential applications in high-throughput calculations.
The DFPT approach recasts the LR-cDFT into a problem in the reciprocal space, particularly in the first Brillouin zone; thus avoiding the use of tedious supercells and resulting in low computational costs. We have seen that in the LR-cDFT approach the Hubbard parameter U is determined from the response matrix through finite differences. DFPT departs from this point and reformulates eqn (18) into a continuous differential equation as follows: (19)where m is the magnetic quantum number. With this formulation, DFPT computes the response matrix as analytical derivatives and controls the level of accuracy in the calculations. The derivatives are constructed from the linear response Kohn–Sham wave functions by solving the corresponding linear response KSE.
Timrov et al. have recently shown that the response to a perturbation with the periodicity of a supercell can be equally calculated in the first Brillouin zone as the addition of responses of monochromatic contributions.102 If we assume that Ri represents the position of the i atoms in the supercell, we can write this vector in terms of the Bravais lattice vector of the lth primitive cell, Rl, and the position vector τs of the sth atom in the primitive cell, that is, Ri = Rl + τs. In this case, for the index i there corresponds two indices (l′, s′), so i = (l, s) and j = (l′, s′) and the interacting response matrices can be rewritten as (20)With a similar expression for the noninteracting response matrix [χ(noninter)i,j]. It can be shown that the derivatives can be expressed as (21)where Nq is the number of q points in the grid and  is the lattice-periodic response of an atomic occupation to a monochromatic perturbation of wave vector q. With this expression and the symmetry of the system one can construct the response matrix with a minimum computational cost.
So far this method has been implemented in several ab initio packages and has been applied for the computation of strongly correlated systems such as NiO, Ta2O5, SnO2, Cu2O, LiCoO2, LiMPO4 (where M is a transition metal) which are typical materials used in ECDs and cathodes for LIBs.103,107–109

2.6 Modified Becke–Johnson potential
The DFT+U scheme is as cheap as the conventional DFT using the LDA/GGA semilocal functionals, but can only be applied to systems with strong electron correlations. Besides, as we testified in Section 2.5.2, the DFT+U requires the knowledge of atom-dependent parameters and additional and time consuming calculations have to be carried out to obtain the value of U from first principles. Fortunately, the research continues up to this day and novel functionals have been developed. One of the most successful potentials for the calculation of band gaps is the modified Becke–Johnson potential due to Tran and Blaha.110 The authors proposed a modification of the Becke–Johnson potential recasted in the following form: (22)Here vBRx,σ(r) is the Becke–Russel potential, c is also dependent of the electronic density and its gradient and has the form (23)where A = −0.012, B = 1.023 Bohr1/2, and V0 is the volume of the unit cell.
The mBJ potential has demonstrated to remarkably and accurately predict the band gaps of many IIB–VI and III–V semiconductors and wide-band gap insulators, an accuracy higher than the hfs which is comparable to the GW approximation; one of the most sophisticated approaches.111 However, it has been shown that, in many cases, the binding energies of semi-core d-states in these systems exhibit large deviations from experiment.90 The poor description of binding energies stems from the difficulty of the mBJ potential to account for the effect of the localized states. The combination of the mBJ approach with the DFT+U scheme, the mBJ+U method, turned out to be an excellent remedy to the problem.90,91 Another serious drawback is that the mBJ potential is not derived from an exchange–correlation energy functional in accordance with eqn (3). This implies that the self-consistent solution of the potential is not guaranteed. As such, this may result into unphysical artifacts and large number of iterations may be needed for self-consistency, and in many cases convergence is not achieved.112 To avoid the problem of self-consistency, H. Jiang proposed to use the potential in a perturbative approach (named mBJ@PBE), and compared it to the ordinary self-consistent approach [mBJ(sc)] for the following systems: Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, LiF, LiCl, MgO, C, Si, Ge, AlN, AlP, AlAs, AlSb, GaN, GaP, GaAs, GaSb, ZnO(w), ZnO, ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, CdS, CdSe, CdTe, Cu2 O, InN(w), InP, InAs, InSb, PbS, PbSe, and PbTe. The results of these calculations are shown in Fig. 3 where they are compared with the results from the PBE and the HSE06 functionals. The PBE functional gives the worst results all over the whole interval, the other functionals are comparable in the interval from 0 eV to 8 eV, and for band gaps larger than 8 eV, the mBJ(sc) gives better results.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of theoretical vs. experimental band gaps for selected semiconductors using PBE, mBJ@PBE, mBJ(sc), and HSE06. Adapted from H. Jiang et al.90 and Heyd et al.,68 with the permission of the AIP Publishing, copyright 2013, 2005. 
2.7 Energy dispersion corrections
For systems where van der Waals interactions are significant, DFT alone is not designed to deal with weak interactions. These systems include adsorption of molecules/atoms on surfaces, layered compounds, heterostructures, interfaces, and two-dimensional systems (graphene, silicene, borophene, phosphorene, etc.); most of these are usually found in electrodes for SCs, MIBs, MBs, ECDs, and MFDs.4,5,113,114 In such systems, London dispersion forces can play an important role and neglecting these interactions could be detrimental for the accuracy in the prediction of a physical property. To tackle this problem, energy dispersion corrections (Edisp) to the total energy are accounted for. There are several corrections to the semilocal functionals, but here we just mention two which are the most popular.49 The first one is the so-called DFT-D method, with its variants DFT-D2 and DFT-D3;115 and the other is the nonlocal van der Waals functional (NL-vdWF),116 with its variants vdW-DF2 and vdW-DF.117 The NL-vdWF approach, along with an appropriate family of functionals (e.g. optPBE-vdW, optB88-vdW, and optB86-vdW),118,119 gives good results for the calculation of total energies, band gaps, and other equilibrium properties.
After correction for dispersion effects, the total energy of a system is given by: E = EDFT − Edisp.(24)In the DFT-D3 scheme, the dispersion correction energy can be determined as the sum of two- and tree-body energies: EDFTdisp = E(2) + E(3). The major contribution coming from the two-body term expressed as: (25)The first sum is over all atoms pairs AB, CABi is the averaged ith-order dispersion coefficient for the atom pair, rAB is the internuclear distance, and si are scaling factors. fd,i(rAB) is a damping function that is supplemented to avoid singularities near rAB and double-counting effects of correlation at intermediate distances.
The other type of correction, the NL-vdWF, is given by: (26)where Φ is a function of ρσ, ∇ρσ, and |r − r′|. Both approaches are computationally cheap and are implemented in most modern codes. Several nonlocal van der Waals functionals have been tested in order to choose the best option for a given application. It was found that rev-vdW-DF2 is good for both weakly and strongly bound solids.120,121
3 
        Ab initio computation of physical properties
As we discussed in Section 2, the calculation of the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions from DFT is essential for the knowledge of the total energy from which many physical properties can be reckoned. In this section we show how the results from DFT can be applied for the calculation of basic physical properties such as group velocity, effective mass, electron mobility, and electronic band gap.
3.1 Group velocity
The group velocity n,k of a particle in a band n depends on the gradient in k space of its energy, ε, through the relation:22 n,k = ∇kεn(k)(27)where k is the particle wave vector and ε(k) is the dispersion relation for the band n. The dispersion relations can be obtained from the band structure computed from DFT and thus the electron or hole velocities can be easily calculated. The most important bands are those close to the Fermi level in semiconductors, namely, the valence band and the conduction band.
3.2 Effective mass
In materials, especially in semiconductors and insulators, the mass of charge carriers (electrons and holes) may differ considerably from the electron rest mass in vacuum (me = 9.109 × 10−31 kg). Effective mass, m*, is the concept introduced to replace the mass of a charge carrier in solids and depends on the particle's energy through the dispersion relation εn(k). As such, the effective mass can give information of the charge carrier coefficients, the charge carrier concentration, mobility, optical band gap, electronic conductivity, and other relevant physical magnitudes that are crucial for the design of electrodes and solid electrolytes in many EESDs and MFDs. Since k is tridimensional, in general, the effective mass is a tensor quantity defined as:22 (28)Here i and j are used to denote the components of k, ħ is Dirac constant, and the + (−) sign stands for electrons (holes). The electron effective mass  is evaluated at the conduction band minimum (CBM), while the hole effective mass  is evaluated at the valence band maximum (VBM). In isotropic systems, and as a first approximation, one can assume that the dispersion relation, at both the CBM and VBM, has a parabolic form at a given point in k-space.122–126 In this particular case, the effective mass is fitted with the relation (29)Under this premise, the determination of the effective mass assumes a parabolic dispersion relation for a short interval around the CBM or the VBM and the data is fitted with a second order polynomial: , where the energy is in eV and k = 2π/λ is given in 1/Å. Therefore, applying eqn (29) to this polynomial, the effective mass turns out to be: (30)where  is the fitting coefficient of the quadratic term for either electrons or holes.
The accurate calculation of m* using this method, requires the use of a dense difference k-mesh around a given k-point or direction. Such high-resolution k-mesh may turn out to be computationally expensive for cells with large number of atoms; among these we have: doped-semiconductors, two-dimensional materials, nanoparticles, nanoribbons, nanotubes, nanoclusters, etc. One way to circumvent this, applies the k·p perturbation theory, with p the particle momentum.127 In the non-degenerate case, the method carries out a second order expansion of εn(k0) around the point of interest, k0, which leads to an expression for the effective mass as follows: (31)Here δα,β is the Kronecker delta, pαn,l = 〈unk0|α|ulk0〉 is the matrix element of the momentum operator α = −iħ∂/∂rα and unk being the periodic function of the Bloch wave function ψnk(r) = unk(r)eir·k. The summation index l runs over all occupied and unoccupied states. The momentum elements pαn,l can be retrieved from calculations of optical properties widely implemented in most contemporary DFT packages. So, after computation of the optical properties, one can resolve for the effective mass tensor with relatively low computational resources. For instance, this method is implemented in the program mstar which is part of the modules of the Wien2k package.127
3.3 Mobility
Mobility, μq, measures how quick charge carriers in metals and semiconductors can be displaced. Charge carriers in metals are electrons, but in semiconductors, holes also partake in electric currents. Thus, it is customary to define an electron mobility, μe, and a hole mobility, μh. The mobility can be computed from ab initio calculations according to the following relation:22 (32)where e is the electronic charge (1.602 × 10−19 C), and τ is the mean free time or relaxation time. For some materials, particularly metals, the relaxation time can be considered a constant, but in general it depends on impurity concentration and temperature. The computation of τ from first principles is by no means trivial. Brugger and Schenk worked out the problem for semiconductors under electric fields.128 They realized that the relaxation time depends strongly on the impurity concentration and derived a general formula for its computation. The expression for the relaxation time as a function of k for a given band is: (33)where  is a unit vector pointing in the direction of the electric field, Sg−1 is the inverse scattering operator, S(k)−1 is the vector whose ith component is the i moment of the inverse scattering operator, g(k) is the moment for which the relaxation time is needed, and f[ε(k)] is the well-known equilibrium Fermi–Dirac distribution given by: (34)where μ is the chemical potential, T is the temperature, and kB = 8.62 × 10−5 eV K−1 is the Boltzmann constant. In brief, the relaxation time must be determined for each especial case. For instance, the relaxation time of a Bi2O2Se monolayer under biaxial strain for electrons or holes has the form:129 (35)where , E0 is the total energy, E1 is the deformation potential obtained from E1 = ∂2Eedge/∂(Δa/a0)2, Eedge is the shift of the band edge, Δa the change in lattice parameter relative to the equilibrium lattice parameter a0, and S0 is the Seebeck coefficient of the system in equilibrium. Other examples of particular systems can be found in the literature.130–132
The mobility can also be related to the electronic conductivity, σe, as: σe = e(neμe + nhμh),(36)where ne and nh are the concentration of electrons and holes, respectively. In extrinsic semiconductors the conductivity is mainly due to impurities, so σe ≈ enqμq, with q either electrons or holes depending if the semiconductor is n or p type, respectively. Electronic conductivity is also available from ab initio calculations. For instance, the package BoltzTraP2 computes this, and other transport quantities, solving the linear Boltzmann transport equation.133 From this theory the conductivity turns out to be dependent on the electron energy and the temperature through the formula: (37)where Nk is the number of k-points sampled, f(ε) is the Fermi–Dirac distribution eqn (34), δ is the Dirac delta function, and V0 is the cell volume. As can be seen, the relaxation time remains undetermined and has to be calculated for each material.
3.4 Band gap
The concept of band gap in solid state physics is ubiquitous and routinely used. Yet, for our discussion, it is important to make a clear distinction among the band gaps found in this field because their quantitative similarity causes a lot of confusion. One has to distinguish three band gaps, namely: the electronic band gap (EBG), also named intrinsic or fundamental band gap, the optical band gap (OBG), and the Kohn–Sham band gap (KSBG); denoted with the symbols Eg, Egop, and EgKS, respectively. The first gap is defined as Eg = * − *, where * is the first ionization potential and * the first electron affinity.64 This gap can be experimentally determined, for instance, from X-ray absorption and emission spectra (XAS and XES) or from angular resolved photoemission and inverse photoemission spectra. The OBG is related to the optical absorption edge and is defined as Egop = Elow − E0, with Elow denoting the energy of the lowest excited many-particle state and E0 the ground-state energy for the optimized lattice. This gap is commonly determined from optical measurements of the absorption spectrum. Therefore, the OBG is the result of an excitonic state. In many semiconductors with low impurity concentrations Eg ≈ Egop, this similarity may lead to confusion between these gaps. In general, however, these magnitudes might differ considerably and one must be aware of it. On the other hand, the KSBG is defined as EgKS = εc − εv, where εc and εv are the energies of the CBM and the VBM, respectively. From ab initio calculations, this gap has been identified with the fundamental gap, although it is clear that the size of the KSBG depends on the choice of Exc. Usually, LDA, GGA, and MGGA functionals underestimate (sometimes considerably) the size of the EBG, leading to wrong physical interpretations of the electronic structure of a crystal. The formal connection between the KSBG and the EBG is established in the fact that * and * of an N-electron system can be associated with the Nth and (N + 1)th Kohn–Sham eigenvalues (εN and εN+1), i.e., * ≈ εv and * ≈ εc. These considerations lead to the expression: Eg = *− * = εN+1 − εN + Δxc,(38)where Δxc is the magnitude of the derivative discontinuity introduced by the use of Exc (assuming a system with integer particle number). From here, one realizes that, in general, Eg ≠ EgKS because the Δxc is not incorporated, per se, in DFT calculations.

3.4.1 Burstein–Moss shift. 
Having distinguished the nuances among the different band gaps, we now move on to discuss practical expressions that link the OBG with the KSBG. We should keep in mind that the KSBG is derived from DFT which deals with eigenvalues for the ground state, whereas the OBG results from excited states. For this reason, one should resort to more advanced methodologies implemented in perturbative methods, such as the Bether–Salpeter equation, or through TDDFT.
In intrinsic direct-band gap semiconductors at zero temperature, the Fermi level lies somewhere in between εc and εv and, as expected, EgKS is just εc − εv [see Fig. 4(a)]. In degenerate n-type-doped semiconductors, the KSBG is narrowed by many-body effects and the Fermi level is raised to the conduction band. This in turn creates a red shift of the optical absorption edge which is compensated by the Burstein–Moss shift (ΔEBM), i.e., some electronic transitions from the valence to the conduction band are not allowed because low-energy lying states at the conduction band are occupied and more photon energy is required for absorption to occur. At the end, the OBG is larger than the KSBG, creating the illusion that the EBG has increased [see Fig. 4(b)]. This is not so and the computation of the magnitude of Egop requires the incorporation of these effects.
 Fig. 4  Band structure of intrinsic (a) and n-doped degenerate semiconductor (b). Symbology is described in the text. 
The Burstein–Moss shift (BMS) is the difference between the lowest occupied state εm and εc. Such difference can be estimated from the relation:122,134 (39)where nq is the charge carrier concentration (either electrons or holes) and  is the reduced effective mass. It is crystal clear that the BMS is a function of both the carrier concentration and the effective mass of charge carriers.


3.4.2 Optical band gap. 
In semiconductors, the OBG and the KSBG can be related by the following expression: Egop = EgKS + ΔEBM + ΔEBGN,(40)where (41)is the narrowing of the KSBG caused by the scattering between impurities and charge carriers; ε′ is the dielectric constant of the solid in bulk.122 For n-type degenerate semiconductors the relationship |ΔEBM| > |ΔEBGN| always holds true. Using eqn (39)–(41), it is straightforward to obtain Egop from first principles.
As an alternative method to estimate Egop for semiconductors from optical calculations, one can resort to Tauc's relationship which reads:135 γEγ = γ0(Eγ − Egop)a,(42)where Eγ is the photon energy, γ is the absorption coefficient computed from an optical module from DFT, γ0 is the band tailing parameter, and a can adopt the values 1/2, 2, 3/2, and 3, for direct allow and indirect allowed transitions, direct forbidden, and indirect forbidden transitions, respectively. To determine Egop, a graph of (γEγ)1/avs. Eγ is plotted. The spectrum will display a sudden increase, indicating the absorption edge. The Egop is obtained by extending a straight line from the absorption edge to the intercept with the horizontal axis, i.e., (γEγ)1/a = 0. The point of interception gives the value of the optical band gap.


3.4.3 Thermal corrections to the band gap. 
The above considerations are assumed to occur at zero temperature; in such case εF = εm holds true. However, in actual situations, the operational temperature of most devices is above 300 K. Temperature effects further raise the Fermi level by about 4kBT relative to εm [see Fig. 4(b)]. With this in mind, the dependence on temperature of the OBG becomes:136 (43)where Egop(0) is the OBG at zero temperature given by eqn (40).
As an alternative, O'Donnell et al. worked out a phenomenological model taking into consideration electron–phonon interactions for semiconductors with band gaps between 1 eV and 5.5 eV. They found a dependence on temperature of the OBG as:137–139 (44)where C* is a dimensionless coupling constant ranging from 1 to 4 for typical intrinsic semiconductors, and 〈ħωph〉 is the average phonon energy, with ωph the phonon frequency. The latter can be computed from band structure phonon calculations and C* can be taken from the literature.

4 Structural stability
The structural stability of a crystalline material can be assessed from the calculation of cohesive energy, enthalpy of formation, energy of formation, and phonon band structure. Fortunately, under some physical considerations, these properties can be reckoned from ab initio calculations. In this section we review the methodologies used for their computation.
4.1 Cohesive energy

4.1.1 Cohesive energy at 0 K. 
Cohesive energy, also called atomization energy (ΔEcoh) or binding energy (Eb), is the energy released when free atoms crystallize into a solid. In another words, it is the energy required to decompose a material into its constituent elements. For single-element materials the cohesive energy per atom can be calculated from the following relation:140 ΔEcoh = −[E0/m − E(mol)],(45)where E0 is the total energy of the solid in equilibrium and m is the number of atoms within the cell at 0 K and without external potentials (no mechanical stresses, no electromagnetic fields, etc.); and E(mol) is the ground-state energy of an isolated atom, ion, or molecule. The negative sign is added by convention to make the cohesive energy positive, corresponding to stable phases; so higher values indicate higher structural stability. Let us bear in mind that this is a convention; in the literature other authors do not add the negative sign.
The total energy in equilibrium E0, also called the optimized energy, can be determined by fitting an equation of state (EOS), such as the Birch–Murnaghan equation,141,142 the Vinet–Rose equation,143 or Poirier–Tarantola equation,144 from which an E(V) dependence can be obtained. For instance, the Birch–Murnaghan EOS is: (46)Here B0 is the bulk modulus, and B1 = ∂B0/∂P|V=V0 with P the pressure. This process is normally done during structure optimization in most DFT codes. The value of E0 is obtained by fitting the EOS to the curve of E vs. V. On the other hand, E(mol) can be determined by creating a sufficiently large supercell, at least 15 Å  of vacuum in all directions, and placing an atom (or molecule) inside. This will simulate a free atom avoiding the interactions among adjacent atoms in the periodic lattice. Notice that the simple cubic symmetry creates incorrect spherical states, so the use of an orthorhombic cell is recommended.
For binary compounds with stoichiometry AmBn, m and n being the number of atoms of each element forming the compound, the cohesive energy per atom can be determined from the following equation: (47)Here, E(A) and E(B) are the ground-state energies of the isolated elements (A and B) and E0(AmBn) is the ground-state energy per formula unit of the compound AmBn. As before the energies of the isolated atoms can be calculated using the same trick as for E(mol).


4.1.2 Temperature corrections to cohesion energy. 
If we would like to compare our DFT calculations with experimental observations, the physical conditions should be as similar as possible. Since DFT calculations are carried out at 0 K, experiments should be corrected for temperature effects; most significantly, for the energy of zero-point vibrations (ε0). From quantum mechanical calculations, it is found that . The zero-point energy can also be put in terms of the Debye temperature (θD) and the correction to be added to the measurements is: (48)where (49)with M0 the atomic mass.140

4.2 Energy of formation: general aspects
The formation energy (ΔEf) is the change of energy occurring during the formation of a compound starting from its elemental constituents. The Gibbs free energy, G, of a physical system with fix number of particles is defined by the equation: G = E0 + PV − TS.(50)Here, V is the volume of the material, S = Se− + Svib is the total entropy, Se− is the electronic entropy, and Svib the vibrational entropy due to atomic and cell vibrations;145 and T is the thermodynamic temperature. The first two terms in eqn (50) are the enthalpy, H. A change in free energy, ΔG, due to a chemical reaction under isobaric and isothermal conditions leads to ΔG = ΔE0 + PΔV − TΔS = ΔH − TΔS,(51)where ΔE0 is the change in energy, ΔV is the change in volume, ΔH is the change in enthalpy, and ΔS the change in entropy.
On the other hand, the Helmholtz free energy can be written as F = E0 + Fvib, where Fvib = Evib − TSvib, with Evib the vibrational energy, including the zero-point energy (ZPE).146 An explicit expression for Fvib is given by: (52)With these considerations the Gibbs free energy can also be expressed in terms of the Helmholtz free energy as G = F + PV, so, a change in the Gibbs energy under the same thermodynamic conditions as above reads ΔG = ΔE0 + ΔEvib − TΔS + PΔV.(53)
Changes in entropy for solids are usually smaller than 0.3 eV at a temperature of 300 K and even smaller close to 0 K.147 On the other hand, it is known that ΔE0 is of order of a few eV per atom, while the PΔV term is of the order of 10−5 eV or smaller.148 If we ignore this term, we arrive at: ΔG = ΔE0 + ΔFvib.(54)
Bearing in mind that calculations in DFT are carried out at zero temperature, the last term in brackets in eqn (52) vanishes and we are left with . Typical vibrational frequencies range from 1012 Hz to 1014 Hz, so ΔFvib < 0.2 eV, which is more than one order of magnitude smaller than ΔE0. From these results we conclude that, at 0 K and neglecting ZPE vibrations, ΔG ≈ ΔH ≈ ΔE0. This finding is relevant not only for the assessment of the structural stability of a compound but also for the computation of the open circuit voltage, capacity, energy density, and other performance parameters characterizing MIBs, SCs, and MFDs. In the following sections we apply this finding to representative chemical reactions occurring in these devices.
4.3 Energy of formation: particular cases
Either during the fabrication of a compound or during the operation of a device, chemical reactions take place. For instance, in the synthesis of a material, reactants in the solid, liquid or gas states are routinely used. A general reaction for the formation of a compound in standard conditions could be (55)where L is the number of atomic species partaking in the reaction, the Ai's represent the atomic species of the substances, the α's are the coefficients of the reactants, the β's are the coefficients of the products and s1, s2,…sj the number of atoms of species Ai. The index i runs from 1 to L. The standard energy of formation for a compound made up of L atomic species is the change in the Gibbs free energy of the reaction, that is: (56)where the first term is the Gibbs free energy of the compound and Gi is the Gibbs free energy of each substance involved in the reaction given by eqn (50). In Section 4.2 we concluded that, at 0 K and ignoring ZPE vibrations, we can set ΔG = ΔE0. With this in mind, we now give particular expressions for the most common cases occurring in the design and fabrication of EESDs and MFDs. In the forthcoming calculations of the energy of formation, we ignore ZPE vibrations and take the temperature to be zero.

4.3.1 Pure systems. 
The formation energy of a pristine compound is found to be: (57)where E0(pure) is the ground-state energy of the system without defects, mi is the number of atoms added. If atoms are added, the sign of mi is positive. μi are the chemical potentials of the isolated atoms conforming the system. As a first approximation, μi ≈ E(mol)i with i denoting the atomic species (for specific values of chemical potentials of elements see ref. 149). By convention, the formation energy is negative. Hence, lower negative values indicate a stronger structural stability.
Pure transition metal oxide. 
The role played by transition metal oxides (TMOs) in the fabrication and development of EESDs and MFDs has been ascendant in the last decades. Thus, it is necessary to devote a space for the description of the particular methodology in the computation of the energy of formation in pure and defective materials based on TMOs. Here, we only deal with point defects, particularly, interstitial and substitutional impurities which are the most common defects encountered in the TMOs.
The formation energy of a pure TMO is given by:150 (58)Here E0(TMO) is the ground-state energy of the TMO, E0(Mi) is the ground-state energy per atom of the metals in the standard solid state, μO is the chemical potential of oxygen, mi is the number of metal cations, and n the number of O atoms. For instance, the formation energy of WO3 is: ΔEf(WO3) = E0(WO3) − E0(W) − 3μO. The chemical potential of oxygen can be computed from the ground-state energy of the O2 molecule, keeping in mind that E(O2) ≈ μO2 and . E(O2) can be calculated with the supercell methodology described in Section 4.1. Although the calculation of the energy of the oxygen molecule from the supercell approach is commonly found in the literature,150 it has been shown that large errors could be introduced depending on the exchange–correlation functional under consideration.151 Nowadays, the most accurate method147 considers the energy of water and the energy of the hydrogen molecule (H2) using the RPBE functional. In such case, the energy of the oxygen molecule is E(O2) = E(H2O) − E(H2).


4.3.2 Systems with point defects. 
The formation energy of a compound with point defects is expressed as: (59)where E0(def) denotes the ground-state energy of the system with a defect (interstitial, vacancy, substitutional, etc.). As before mi is the number of atoms added(removed) to(from) the pure system. If atoms are added, the sign of mi is positive otherwise is negative.
Interstitial doping. 
For a doped TMO with an interstitial metal impurity (dopant), the energy of formation is given as: ΔEf(Inter) = E0(Inter) − E0(TMO) − E0(dopant),(60)where E0(Inter) and E0(dopant) are the ground-state energy of the doped system and the impurity in the solid state, respectively. For instance, for Li-doped WO3 (LixWO3) the formation energy is: ΔEf(LixWO3) = E0(LixWO3) − E0(WO3) − E0(Li).
Substitutional doping. 
In substitutional doping, one cation is replaced by a metal impurity. In this case, we have to consider that the original metal atom is removed so, from eqn (59), m1 = −1. Next, we add the substitutional atom with m2 = 1 and arrive at: ΔEf(subs) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μsubs + μM,(61)where E0(subs) is the ground-state energy of the doped system, μsubs is the chemical potential of the substitutional metal, and μM is the chemical potential of the replaced metal. For instance, in indium tin oxide (ITO), In2O3 is substitutionally doped with tin at the 8b cationic sites to get In2−xSnxO3. In such case, the formation energy becomes: ΔEf(In2−xSnxO3) = E0(In2−xSnxO3) − E0(In2O3) − E(Sn) + E(In).
Substitutional and interstitial doping. 
There are cases in which impurities are introduced as both interstitial and substitutional. Consider a case in which a binary TMO is doped with a transition metal (TM) and a nonmetal (NM). Assuming substitutional doping, the former replaces the original metal (M) and the latter replaces the oxygen. Also, both species can enter as interstitial impurities. Accordingly, there are four possibilities as follows:152
1. TM(subs) and NM(subs) codoping a TMO: ΔEf(subs–subs) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM − μNM + μM + μO,(62)
2. TM(subs) and NM(inter) codoping a TMO: ΔEf(subs–inter) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM−μNM + μM,(63)
3. TM(inter) and NM(subs) codoping a TMO: ΔEf(inter–subs) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM − μNM + μO,(64)
4. TM(inter) and NM(inter) codoping a TMO: ΔEf(inter–inter) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM − μNM,(65)
Charge defects. 
If we have charge defects, the formation energy of a defect with charge q is:123,153–155 (66)where εF = εv + ΔεF (0 < ΔεF < EgKS), εv = εv(Pure) − εv(+1) is the energy of the VBM, with εv(Pure) the energy of the valence band of the pure material and εv(+1) the energy of the valence band with one hole (q = +1) in the dilute gas limit.155Δpp is an additional term that corrects for GGA errors in the estimation of the KSBG.153


4.3.3 Chemisorption or adsorption energy. 
The adsorption energy of an adatom or molecule on a surface is the energy required to create a bond between the adatom/molecule and the surface. The chemisorption energy of m molecules (or adatoms) adsorbed on a surface is:156,157 ΔEf = E0(surf + mol) − E0(surf) − mE0(mol),(67)where E0(surf + mol), E0(surf), and mE0(mol) are the ground-state energies of the surface along with the adsorbed molecules, the pristine surface, and the molecules, respectively.

4.4 Phonon frequencies
Another criterion for the assessment of structural stability of a material comes from the analysis of phonon band structure. The phonon spectrum of an atomic structure contains valuable information of the vibrational modes of both the atoms and the cell. A cell with N* atoms possesses 3 acoustic branches and 3N* − 3 optical branches.22 Acoustic branches give information of the cell's vibration whereas optical branches are related to vibrational modes of atoms within the cell. In a stable structure, the phonon frequencies ωph have real components only, therefore, the appearance of imaginary (or negative) frequencies is a clear indicator of structure instability.158Fig. 5 displays the phonon band structure of SrTiO3 without cell optimization. We can observe negative frequencies an indicative of structural instability.
 Fig. 5  Phonon band structure of SrTiO3 without cell optimization. Negative frequencies are observed, indicating structure instability. 
5 Ionic diffusion
Ionic mobility, in both the electrolyte and the electrodes, determines, in the case of batteries and SCs, the charge/discharge rate whereas in ECDs, the transition time (tt) from the colored state to the bleached state. The time required for a full charge in batteries and SCs is crucial for the applicability of the device in portable electronic gadgets, energy storage systems, and electric vehicles. On the other hand, the discharge time defines the quantity of power that can be delivered to the load. Similarly, a shortest tt is desirable for the usability of ECDs. Thus, the accurate knowledge of the ionic dynamics is beneficial in these devices.
The ionic mobility in electrodes is limited by either the electronic conductivity (σe) or the ionic conductivity (σi). Electronic conductivity depends strongly on electron–electron scattering and electron–phonon scattering. It also depends on temperature and other factors: defects, impurity species, and doping levels. Ionic conductivity can be a function of temperature, crystal structure, and defects (vacancies, interstitials, direct exchange).159 In EESDs, the ionic mobility determines the rate capability of these devices. Both conductivities can be calculated from first principles theories. In Section 3.3 we outlined the description for the computation of the electronic conductivity from DFT,133 here, we focus on the calculations of the ionic conductivity and ionic diffusion from ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations.160,161 Although there are other methods for the computation of ionic diffusion in solids, e.g., the nudge elastic band (NEB) method162 or the eigenvector-following method,163 AIMD can reveal new conduction mechanisms compared to NEB and its range of applicability extends to the nondilute regime, where the NEB method cannot be applied. Due to the complexity of the theory and the limited space available in this review, we only highlight its most relevant aspects. More details can be found in the corresponding literature.
AIMD uses the atomic forces from DFT to track the trajectories of ions in the system according to classical mechanics. In Section 2, we discussed the basis for the computation of the electronic structure calculation under DFT from which the atomic forces can be obtained after the optimization of the unit cell. The process of cell optimization also includes minimization of atomic forces by varying the internal atomic coordinates and setting a tolerance force, usually below 2 mRy Bohr−1.164,165 These forces can be easily retrieved after structure optimization and taken as input for AIMD simulations. Alternatively, machine learning techniques have also been applied for the generation of force fields in AIMD calculations.166,167 In what follows, we shall focus only on ionic conductivity in electrodes, although the theory also applies to solid state electrolytes commonly found in SCs, ECDs, and rechargeable batteries.
First Fick's law establishes the relation between the flux of ions j and the gradient of the particle concentration Cx as: (68)where Dc is the diffusion coefficient; in general a second rank tensor. Microscopically, this coefficient can be determined with the following formula: Dc = θcDJ.(69)Here θc is a thermodynamic factor related to the chemical potential (μ) at concentration x and is defined as (70)and (71)is known as the jump diffusion coefficient, embracing the displacement of the center of mass of all diffusing ions. In eqn (71), Ni is the number of diffusing ions, i(t) is the displacement of the ith ion after time t, and D is the dimension of the crystalline lattice (for bulk materials is 3 and for surfaces is 2). 〈δNi〉 is the average fluctuation of diffusing ions in open systems and 〈Ni〉 represents the average number of ions in a region of the lattice.
The formulation can be further simplified using the tracer diffusion coefficient which is given by:168 (72)
The quantity 〈[i(t)]2〉 is known as the mean squared displacement (MSD) and gives a sense of the average displacement of individual ions as opposed to the expression in parenthesis in eqn (71) that gives the squared displacement of the center of mass of all ions. eqn (72) is of limited use because the number of iterations is considerable for short time intervals. However, simulation convergence can be achieved faster in the long-time limit and the tracer diffusion coefficient can be recasted as follows: (73)where we have defined . In practical situations this is the most common expression used for the computation of the diffusivity; one just reckons the MSD and plots MSD vs. time so the slope is 2DD*.
Expressions (69)–(72) apply in the general case of nondilute systems. However, when the concentration of diffusing defects is low, the interaction among ions is negligible and one speaks of a dilute limit. In this particular case, the chemical potential reduces to μ = μ0 + kBTln(x), θc = 1 (i.e. Dc = DJ), and the diffusivity can be determined from: Dc(T) = D0e−ΔEa/kBT,(74)where we have defined the pre-factor D0 = a2g*fxDν*, a being the hopping distance, usually approximated to the lattice parameter a0; g* is a geometric factor, f is a correlation factor, and xD is the concentration of defects partaking in diffusion. ΔEa = EAS − Ei is the activation barrier representing the energy difference between the energy in the activated state (EAS) and the energy in the initial state (Ei). The coefficient ν* represents a frequency of the order of 1013 Hz and can be estimated from: (75)where , ξ and ζ are generalized spatial coordinates of the ions multiplied by the square root of their mass, Δξ and Δζ are integration volumes along the dividing barrier (known as the dividing surface) and ΔSa the activation entropy. In practical situations, some researchers simplify the form of the diffusion pre-factor as D0 = a2ν*/2 with ν* given by the Debye frequency of the system.169–171
If we wish to compare our calculations with experiment, the temperature dependent ionic conductivity can be related to the diffusivity by the Nernst–Einstein relation:172,173 (76)where ρi is the diffusing ionic density (ρi = Ni/V0), Z the ionic charge magnitude, and HR the Haven ratio. For many materials used in EESDs and ECDs, the density of defects is large and ions start to interact. These interactions may lead to complicated trajectories that each ion may experience different activation energies (Ea). Therefore, the use of eqn (74) is no longer justified and the theory of non dilute diffusion should be applied.
6 
        Ab initio calculations of performance parameters for Li-ion batteries
Batteries can be classified according to the number of charge cycles before disposal. Batteries that tolerate only one charge cycle are termed primary batteries, otherwise are called secondary or rechargeable batteries. The latter are of the most important for mobile technology including electric vehicles, laptops, smartphones, and tablets, just to mention a few. Over the last two decades LIBs have dominated the market due to its high charge capacity, high volumetric energy density, and mass energy density. It is thus worth discussing the working principles of these kind of EESDs.
6.1 Working principles of LIBs
A LIB is, in essence, an electrochemical Galvanic cell mainly composed of three elements: a cathode and an anode, both in contact with an electrolyte usually in liquid solution; although recently great efforts have been put in developing solid state electrolytes (see Fig. 6). The anode is commonly made up of carbon polymorphs such as graphite or graphene and the most advanced LIBs used Si–C anodes. The cathode is made up of layered materials of TMOs with lithium additions such as LiMxO2 (M = Co, Ni, Mn) and LiFe1−xMxPO4. The electrolyte contains Li salts dissolved in organic solvents (e.g. ethylene carbonate or propylene carbonate) and works as an ionic medium.174 During discharge, electrons flow through the external circuit from the anode to the cathode, while Li+ ions flow through the electrolyte in the same direction as the electrons. During this process the anode is reduced and the cathode is oxidized. A separator between the electrodes is placed to block the passage of electrons through the electrolyte. During charge, this process is reversed.
 Fig. 6  Operational principle of a lithium ion battery. During charge, electrons flow from the cathode to the anode through the external circuit whereas Li+ ions travel through the electrolyte in the same direction. During discharge, the process is reversed. 
6.2 Equilibrium potential
We now seek for the calculation of the equilibrium potential of a LIB, which can be identified with the open circuit voltage generated by the battery. As case studies, we consider two LIBs made up of two materials for the anodes: (i) graphite and (ii) lithium. Both LIBs have LiMO2 as cathode. In the first case, the discharge process can be represented by the discharge reaction between the anode and the cathode as:175,176 LiC6(s) + MO2(s) → 6C(s) + LiMO2(s).(77)In the second case, the chemical potential at the anode is constant and the equilibrium voltage is completely determined by lithium variations x in the cathode. In such scenario, the generic reaction takes place:93,177,178 Lix1MO2 + (x1 − x2)Li → Lix2MO2,(78)where x1 > x2. From eqn (56), the corresponding change in Gibbs free energy is ΔGf = G(Lix2MO2) − G(Lix1MO2) − (x1 − x2)G(Li).(79)
From thermodynamic considerations, the maximum electrical work generated by a chemical reaction under isobaric and isothermal conditions between two electrodes in a LIB is the change in the Gibbs free energy ΔGf between reactants and products. On the other hand, the work W is the negative of the change in electrical potential energy (ΔU), that is, W = −ΔU, and the open circuit voltage (oc) is determined as the difference in potential energy per unit of charge, i.e., . Assuming that the change in free energy is thoroughly converted into electrical energy, one can define (80)where z is the mole numbers of ions that are transferred in the reaction, F (= 96485 C mol−1) is the Faraday constant; and zF represents the displaced charge. On the other hand, in an isobaric and isothermal process the change in Gibbs free energy at the cathode is (81)and at the anode is (82)where μCat(Li) and μAn(Li) are the chemical potentials of the cathode and anode, respectively.148 Taking the difference between eqn (81) and (82) and comparing with eqn (79) yields (83)where we have made the change of variable edx = dq. Comparing eqn (80) and (83) we arrive at: (84)This expression tells us that the theoretical voltage is only a function of the chemical potentials of the electrodes. Therefore, the battery's voltage can be manipulated by increasing the difference of chemical potentials. From the previous discussion we conclude that: ΔGf = −zFoc.(85)As discussed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3, the change in Gibbs free energy is the difference between the energies of the products and reactants which is equal to the change in internal energy ΔE0. For reaction (77) the change in energy can be approximated as: ΔGf ≈ ΔE0 = E0(LiMO2) + 6E0(C) − E0(LiC6) − E0(MO2),(86)where E0(LiMO2), E0(C), E0(LiC6), and E0(MO2) are ground-state energies of the lithiated metal oxide, graphite (hexagonal phase), the lithiated graphite, and the transition metal oxide, respectively. Therefore, solving for oc from eqn (85), the equilibrium voltage becomes: (87)Similarly, for reaction (78) the change in energy is given by eqn (79) and the equilibrium voltage becomes (88)Here E0(Lix1MO2), E0(Lix2MO2) are the total energies of the lithiated (discharge state) and delithiated (charge state) systems, respectively, and E0(Li) is the energy of metallic Li in the standard structure.
6.3 Specific capacity and energy density
The theoretical mass energy density (um), volumetric energy density (uV), and the specific capacity (C) are performance parameters of rechargeable batteries that characterize, respectively, the energy per unit mass (in W h kg−1), the energy per unit volume (in W h L−1), and the capacity to deliver charges to the load (in mA h). These parameters can be calculated using the following expressions:13 (89) (90) (91)
In eqn (89)–(91),  and  are the sums of mole masses and mole volumes of the reactants (both anode and cathode materials), respectively, and M is the mole mass of an electrode material.
6.4 DFT scheme for the simulation
The computation of the performance parameters at zero Kelvin for LIBs starts by defining the materials making up the battery. As an illustration, let us consider a LIB composed of a carbon anode and a LiNiO2 cathode. To compute the equilibrium voltage we make use of eqn (87) which requires the difference in internal energy as obtained from eqn (86). In this expression, the knowledge of the total energies per formula unit per mol for the systems graphite, LiC6, LiNiO2, and NiO2 are required (see Fig. 7). These energies are obtained after an optimization procedure and all DFT packages can easily compute them. For graphite and LiC6 the PBE functional gives good results. NiO2 is a strongly correlated material and the DFT+U method should be used for the calculation of the energy. Most modern packages have the DFT+U method implemented. However, as already discussed in Section 2.5, U can be taken from the literature or computed from first principles. The optimization procedure consists in varying the volume or the structure parameters of the unit cell until a minimum energy is reached. The fitting is achieved with eqn (47) and E0 is obtained for each system. Structure stability is checked by calculating the formation energy according to eqn (60) (also the cohesion energy or phonon frequencies can be used). If the formation energy is negative the atomic structure is stable and one can proceed with further calculations (similarly, if phonon frequencies are positive the structure is stable).
 Fig. 7  Atomic structures used for the computation of operational parameters of a Li-ion battery composed of a graphite anode and a LiNiO2 cathode. Atomic structure visualization provided by the VESTA software package.179 
For the calculation of the energy density, one can use eqn (89) and (90). The masses appearing in eqn (89) are the mole masses of the electrodes which can be easily obtained from the periodic table, while ΔGf is again given by eqn (87). For the volumetric energy density we just add up the volume of the electrodes. Lastly, for the computation of the capacity, we use eqn (91) and estimate the charge transfer (zF) for 1 mol of lithium. In this case the molar mass is that of the cathode.
6.5 Thermal corrections to equilibrium voltage and related quantities
At room temperature the Gibbs free energy is given by expressions (52) and (54), so the change in vibrational energy for the battery with graphite electrode becomes ΔFvib(T = 300) = Fvib,T=300(LiMO2) + 6Fvib,T = 300(C) − Fvib,T=300(LiC6) − Fvib,T=300(MO2),(92)and a similar expression immediately follows for a lithium anode. A further simplification can be achieved if one assumes that corresponding vibrational energies of the metal M and the O in MO2 and in LiMO2 are equal, and similarly for C in graphite and in LiC6. Thus, the vibrational energy reduces to ΔFvib(T = 300) = Fvib,T=300(Li in LiMO2) − Fvib,T=300(Li in LiC6).(93)Phonon frequencies can be estimated directly from phonon band structure calculations or following a harmonic approximation where it is considered that Li describes a harmonic motion with potential: Φi = 0.5κiδi2,(94)where i refers to Li in LiMO2 or to Li in LiC6, κi denotes the force constant, and δi a deviation from equilibrium. Potentials can be computed from a cluster approximation with any ab initio molecular package, while the force constants are determined from eqn (94) fitting the vibrational potentials with a parabola. Finally, the phonon frequencies are determined as: (95)where mLi is the mass of a lithium atom. For harmonic motion, the vibrational energy can be further simplified to:175 (96)where A is Avogadro's constant.
7 
        Ab initio calculations of performance parameters for electrochromic devices
Electrochromism is the effect of changing the optical properties of a material by intercalation/deintercalation of ions driven by an electric field. Electrochromic materials used in ECDs can be constituted of viologens, conducting polymers, metal coordination complexes, or TMOs.6,180,181 Among these, the latter group enjoys more popularity due to its low cost and high electrochromic performance. Understanding how absorption occurs in TMOs during intercalation/deintercalation could be the key to explain the electrochromic effect. Within the context of band theory, it is believed that electrons injected into the crystalline lattice of electrochromic electrodes fill new levels at the bottom of the conduction band and optical absorption can be seen as electron transitions between the occupied states in the valence band and the unoccupied states in the conduction band.182 The number of electrons injected(extracted) is modulated by the number of ions inserted(extracted) into(from) the lattice. Absorption in turn is related to transmissivity which is the variable of interest in these devices. In the following subsection we discuss how to compute the transmissivity from ab initio methods.
7.1 Optical properties
The operational parameters in ECDs depend on the amount of charge transferred from the electrolyte to the electroactive material and on the changes in the transmissivity of the material as the ions intercalate(deintercalate) into(from) the lattice. Let us then first start by discussing the optical properties of solid materials.
When electromagnetic radiation interacts with matter, three phenomena can take place: Radiation can be reflected, absorbed, or transmitted. These magnitudes are related by the expression:  +  +  = 1, where , , and  denote the reflectivity, the absorbance, and the transmissivity, respectively. Among these, the transmissivity is of importance for the determination of the coloration efficiency in ECDs and MFDs. Let us bear in mind that most of these devices are made of thin layers of a few nanometers thick which are usually deposited on glass, sapphire, and quartz substrates. Therefore, the transmissivity becomes a complex process because light is reflected multiple times, and, so, transmitted among layers also multiple times. The theory of transmissivity is of formidable complexity that cannot be developed in this short review. Instead, here we deal with particular cases which are commonly used in materials implemented in ECDs.
The transmissivity of a semiconductor with equal front and back reflectivity and normal incidence to the surface is given by:138,183 (97)where d is the thickness of the layer and ϕ = 4πη0/λ; λ is the radiation wavelength. We define η = η0 + iη1 as the complex refractive index, with η0 the refractive index and η1 = γλ/4π the extinction coefficient.
In order for absorption to occur, energy of incident light must meet the condition Egop ≤ Eγ. For the unrealistic case in which the amount of absorption is negligible (γ ≈ 0), the transmissivity becomes: (98)The “cos” term represents a series of oscillations as the photon energy changes, however, not all instruments have the resolution to observe such oscillations. If we ignore them, a typical expression for extrinsic semiconductors including absorption is: (99)Nowadays it is pretty common to find semiconducting thin films in ECDs. Thin films of different materials are usually deposited on transparent substrates that also affect transmissivity due to the presence of interfaces where several reflections take place. In the case of a direct-band gap semiconductor deposited as a thin film on a substrate, the transmission expression is approximated by:184 (100)where  i (i = 1, 2, 3) are the reflectivities at the air–film, film–substrate, and substrate–air interfaces, respectively. The previous expression can be further simplified if the substrate is glass or quartz; in this situation one can assume that 2 ≈ 3, then (101)where s is the reflectivity of the substrate. If the refractive index falls within 1.3 and 2.5, as is the case in glass substrates, the transmittance reduces to185  = (1 − s)exp(−dγ).(102)
Knowledge of reflectivities can be acquired from DFT packages and the computation of the transmissivity in layered materials can be easily predicted. For instance, in a transmissivity experiment, the light beam is usually at right angle relative to the sample surface. So, the reflectivity at normal incidence is given by (103)Most modern DFT codes offer a linear optical module that computes , η, and γ, and the prediction of transmissivity is feasible.
7.2 Working principles of electrochromic devices
A standard ECD is made up of five layers placed in a sandwich arrangement: an ionic storage layer and an electrochromic layer both made up of a TMO; in the middle an ionic conductor (in liquid or solid state), and the electrical contact is facilitated by two transparent conductive oxides (TCOs) placed at the ends (see Fig. 8). The electrolyte is usually a liquid Li-based solution, although most recently, solid state electrolytes of LiNbO3, LiBO3, LiTa2O5, Ta2O5, and LiPON have been implemented.186–193 Preferred TCOs are indium tin oxide (ITO) and fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO).194 According to current understanding, an applied bias voltage drives the ions into the electrochromic material where intercalation takes place. Reverting the polarization extracts the ions from the electrochromic layer and diffuse through the electrolyte until their final destination in the ion storage layer. During ionic intercalation, cathodic materials change their transmittance from maximum to minimum, known as the colored state, while during ionic deintercalation the device is driven to the bleached state where transmittance is maximum. Typical cathodic materials are: Bi2O3, Ta2O5, MoO3, CoO, Nb2O5, TiO2, and WO3. For anodic materials the above process is reversed. Representative materials used as anodes are: FeO, IrO, IrO2, NiO, V2O5, Cr2O3, CoO2, MnO2, RhO2.6,182
 Fig. 8  Schematic of an electrochromic device. 
7.3 Optical modulation and coloration efficiency
The amount of charge inserted(extracted) into(from) the electrochromic layer for a given applied voltage determines the transmissivity of the electrochromic layer.195 The physical quantity that characterizes the degree of electrochromism a material exhibits must take into consideration the inserted charge for an induced transmissivity. The coloration efficiency (CE), at a wavelength (λ0), characterizes the material's electrochromism and is written as:194 (104)where Qx is the inserted/extracted charge, (105)is the optical density, and b and c are the transmissivities in the bleached and colored states, respectively. For the calculation of CE, one can use either the inserted charge (Qin) or the extracted charge (Qout), although it is more common to find in the literature the former.
7.4 DFT scheme for the simulation
The simulation from first principles of the electrochromic parameters consists in computing both the charge transfer and the transmissivity for both the colored (c) and bleached (b) states. The bleached state is represented by the pure material while the colored one by a doped system; with the inserted ion playing the role of dopant. For cathodic materials, the transferred charge to the electrochromic layer is simulated by inserting impurities in interstitial sites. As an example, Fig. 9 shows the cubic structure for WO3 and LixWO3. In this example, the lithium concentration is one lithium atom inserted in a 16-atom supercell (x = 0.0625). Thus, the impurity concentration represents the inserted charge. WO3 is a strongly correlated material and DFT+U method should be used throughout the calculations. With this approximation, we first carry out a geometrical optimization of the unit cell and check for structure stability computing the formation energy of both the pure and doped systems through eqn (58) and (60), respectively. If structure is stable, we proceed to employ the optical module included in the DFT package for the computation of optical properties. For our purposes, we require the complex refractive index, the absorption coefficient, and the reflectivity. Some optical modules calculate the dielectric tensor from which all these quantities can be derived as a function of wavelength or photon energy.182 With these quantities at hand, the transmissivities for the colored and bleached states can be computed from one of the eqn (97)–(102), depending on the case under study. The typical case is that of a glass substrate with a refractive index of 1.53 which gives good results using eqn (102). Finally, employing eqn (104) and (105), the coloration efficiency can be predicted.
 Fig. 9  Atomic structure of WO3 used as an electrochromic layer in ECDs. Pure system (left) representing the bleached state and doped system (right) representing the colored state. Atomic structure visualization provided by the Xcrysden software package.196 
8 
        Ab initio calculations of performance parameters for supercapacitors
8.1 Working principles of supercapacitors
A parallel-plate capacitor is a device composed of two parallel plates of area A0 separated by a distance w as shown in Fig. 10(a). The plates can be separated by either vacuum or a dielectric substance (the substance physical state is irrelevant) with dielectric permittivity ε (also known as dielectric constant). When a voltage  is applied to the plates an electric field builds up between them holding an amount of charge Q.197 If the voltage is turn off, the capacitor remains charged due to the Coulomb attraction between the electric charges in the plates. The capacity to store an amount of charge for a given voltage is called the capacitance C0 which is defined as: (106)The voltage is proportional to the electric field through  = /w. To compute the electric field, we take as an integrating surface a small cylinder on each plate and apply Gauss' law to this cylinder, then: (107)with  the displacement field and  the surface area equal to A0. From the above expression and (106) the capacitance for a parallel-plate capacitor turns out to be: (108)If the medium is the vacuum ε = ε0 = 8.854 × 10−12 F m−1, corresponding the vacuum permittivity.
 Fig. 10  (a) Parallel-plate capacitor. (b) Double-layer supercapacitors. 
The capacitance of conventional capacitors is purely electrostatic in nature, but capacitance can also have an electrochemical origin. A SC is an electrochemical capacitor made up of two electrodes and an electrolyte with a dielectric constant ε. Additionally, similar to MIBs, a separator is added to avoid electron flow through the electrolyte [see Fig. 10(b)]. The charge storage in these devices can be achieved by two mechanisms: (1) electron transfer that induces different redox reactions in the electroactive materials, obeying Faraday's laws of electrochemistry; and (2) charge storage at the electrode–electrolyte interface where a bias voltage is applied. The first mechanism gives rise to a capacitance because variations in charge, dq, strongly depend on variations in the electrode potential, d, leading to a measurable differential capacitance, Cdif = dq/d. Since this capacitance is different from the conventional one, the capacitance produced is called pseudocapacitance. In the second mechanism, the capacitance is of a conventional type but it is much larger in magnitude than in parallel-plate capacitors due to the small separation (w is a few Angstroms) between the electrode and the electrolyte that form a Helmholtz double layer. For this reason these capacitors have been called electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC) whose capacitance is denoted as CDL. In some SCs both mechanisms are involved, so they are known as hybrid SCs.21,198 With the development of nanotechnology, a quantum capacitance, CQ, has been reported in electrodes made of low dimensional materials. Two-dimensional materials such as graphene, silicene, nanoribbons, and nanotubes fall within this category. The associated capacitance arises from electron quantum confinement.199–202
8.2 Capacitance of supercapacitors
In a SC whose electrodes are fabricated from bulk materials, the total capacitance, CT, can be calculated assuming that the device is constituted of capacitors in series, then: (109)where C− is the double-layer capacitance at the anode and C+ the double-layer capacitance at the cathode. The capacitance in general depends on temperature, impurity concentration, electrolyte type, active material, ionic size, and other factors. As a simple case, we assume the Helmholtz model, where the double layer is composed of point charges evenly distributed along the electrodes. For this model, the double-layer capacitance of each electrode can be estimated from eqn (108).
Some manufacturers often used the specific capacitance which can be defined, similar to batteries, relative either to the mass of the electrode, or to its volume, or to its effective surface area. These quantities are called, respectively, the gravimetric or mass capacitance (CG), the volumetric capacitance (CV), and the surface area capacitance (CA). The most popular capacitance is the first one and is expressed as: (110)where m is the mass of the active material. If the material of the electrode is porous, the mass must include the mass of the electrolyte filling the pores. The mass capacitance depends on both CA and the effective surface area (SSA) and is given by: CG = CA·SSA.(111)
Thus, increasing the SSA increases the mass capacitance. This can be accomplished using nanomaterials such as nanotubes, nanoribbons, and 2-dimensional systems.
In the case of graphene or graphene oxide electrodes, a quantum capacitance shows up. This capacitance has been defined as:201,203,204 (112)where Q0 is the excessive charge and Φ is the potential. A common approach to the computation of the quantum capacitance, known as the fixed band approximation, assumes that the band structure and the density of states [D(ε)] do not depend on variations of electron charging. If we also neglect screening effects in the inner planes of the graphene layers, it turns out that the excessive charge is proportional to the density of states and the Fermi–Dirac distribution function, f(ε), where ε is the energy relative to the Fermi level (zero energy). Assuming that the chemical potential of the electrode is changed by applying an external electrical potential Φ, the excessive charge can be calculated from: (113)Using eqn (112), the quantum capacitance becomes: (114)Here the density of states can be approximated near the Dirac point by:203 (115)where gs and gv are the respective spin and valley degeneracies (equal to 2) and vF is the Fermi velocity of charge carriers (≈108 cm s−1). As an alternative, the density of states can also be obtained from DFT calculations. Notice that calculations are carried out at room temperature (T = 300 K) and the energy is linear around the Fermi level. As a reference, we mention that quantum capacitance is commonly reported as a function of electrical potential.203 Finally, more advanced and sophisticated calculations that take into consideration band structure relaxation and screening effects can be found in the literature.205,206
8.3 Energy density and power
The volumetric energy density (uV) stored in a capacitor and the associated power give us a sense of how much energy a capacitor can store and how fast the energy can be released, respectively. The assessment of these quantities is important, specially when compared to the performance of rechargeable batteries.
The differential work done, dW, to bring a charge q from infinity to an arbitrary point is proportional to the applied voltage d, i.e., (116)where we have used eqn (106). Upon integration from 0 to Q we obtain (117)After charging the capacitor, the energy is stored as potential energy which is equal to the work done in moving the charges. Using eqn (106) and the result from eqn (117), the energy stored in a capacitor is: (118)Therefore, the energy density per unit volume and per unit mass are, respectively: (119)and (120)Another common operational parameter for the characterization of SCs is the peak power density, defined as mi = /m. One standard approach for the determination of this quantity, assumes that one-half the energy of the discharge transforms into heat and the other half remains as electric energy, this is the so-called matched impedance condition.207 As is well known, the power is the product of the voltage and the current, then (121)where we have used Ohm's law ( = IR). But since only one-half is stored in the form of electric energy (which means that the discharge efficiency is 50%), the peak power density is (122)It is worth mentioning that this expression not only applies for SCs but also for rechargeable batteries. So, oc also represents the open circuit voltage of a battery or the nominal voltage of the SC. Similarly, R represents the equivalent series resistance of the SC or the internal resistance of the battery. The value of the resistance can be known from experiments (usually electrochemical impedance spectroscopy) or from DFT conductivity calculations.
8.4 DFT scheme for the simulation
As described in Section 8.2, the total capacitance of a SC may possess classical and quantum contributions. The classical part, in its simple form, can be computed from eqn (108), although more sophisticated approaches are found in the literature depending on the system under study.208 The surface area is known in advance while the thickness is usually a few Agnstroms (sometimes nanometers) which gives a large capacitance compare to conventional parallel-plate capacitors. In SCs made up of two-dimensional materials the quantum capacitance provides the major contribution. The prototype material for these kind of SCs is graphene (see Fig. 11). The DFT workflow for the simulation is as follows. We start by assuming a supercell of graphene monolayer and add a 20 Å-vacuum in the z direction. Next, unit cell optimization is carried out for this structure using a GGA functional (PBE, RevPBE, PW91, PBESol, etc.). Structure stability is checked by computing the formation energy from eqn (57) or, in case molecule adsorption is considered in the model, eqn (67). After optimization, the quantum capacitance can be determined by numerical integration of eqn (114). It was found that, near the Dirac point, the density of states (DOS) depends linearly on the energy as described by eqn (115). However, the DOS can also be computed from DFT calculations from where a spectrum of DOS as a function of energy is obtained. If we would like to know the potential dependence of the capacitance, we just calculate the capacitance varying the potential in eqn (114). With the capacitance at hand, and using eqn (118)–(120), one can straightforward compute the energy density per unit volume or unit mass.
 Fig. 11  Typical monolayer of graphene. Atomic structure visualization provided by the VESTA software package.179 
9 Machine learning applied to materials science
In the previous sections, we have presented the theoretical foundations for the ab initio computation of the most relevant physical properties and operational parameters related to EESDs, EECDs, and MFDs. The theory not only sets the foundations for a deep understanding of the physico-chemical process taking place in these systems but also defines criteria for the selection of materials with special properties suitable for technological applications. During the design of new materials, large databases are scrutinized and the computation of the physical properties turns out to be time consuming, demanding high computational resources. These issues can be lessened to some degree with the help of new computational tools such as machine learning.
Machine learning (ML) is a rapidly expanding subfield of artificial intelligence that aims at developing computational algorithms capable of learning without human intervention. ML has been applied to chemistry, materials engineering, condensed matter physics, and materials science for the prediction of crystal structures and physical properties of materials.15 Due to the complexity of this topic, it is impossible to treat it here, however, we feel it is worth reviewing a few examples to highlight its importance in these fields.
In 2016, De Jong et al. and Calfa et al. applied ML to provide a better insight into the mechanical properties of polycrystalline materials, in particular, in the study of the elastic properties (the bulk modulus B0 and the shear modulus G) of large data sets of polycrystalline inorganic compounds.209,210 Similarly, ML has been used in the prediction of the band gap and Fermi energies in metal oxides.210 Redox potentials, and electronic properties in molecular electrodes for Li-ion batteries have also been computed using DFT ML algorithms.211 In addition, researchers have applied ML to predict the crystal structure and properties of binary compounds,212 to reproduce the HOMO and LUMO for organic solar cells,213 and to have a better insight into the thermodynamic parameters such as adsorption energy and activation energy in heterogeneous catalytic reactions.214,215
Beyond these applications, scientists have employed ML at a different level; particularly, in order to improve ab initio computational methods. ML has been used to improve the DFT methodology, to optimize the exchange–correlation functionals in DFT calculations,216,217 to bypass the KSE,218 to derive new force fields in dynamic molecular simulations,166,167 and to create adaptive basis sets for large scale DFT simulations.219 Nowadays the use of ML is ubiquitous in materials science and its contribution in the search for materials with novel properties is invaluable.
10 Conclusions
In this review, we have presented, from first principles, the theoretical basis for the determination of physical properties and performance parameters of EESDs and EECDs. The application of this knowledge can be further extended to the study of MFDs which combine two or more technologies. Due to its prominent place in condensed matter physics, chemistry, and materials science, we outlined the foundations of DFT and of the most popular exchange correlation functionals. Among these, we reviewed the hybrid functionals, the DFT+U method, the mBJ potential, and the energy dispersion corrections for weak interacting systems. Advantages and drawbacks in each case were also discussed with the aim of guiding scientists in the selection of the best functional for each type of system. On the other hand, the most relevant physical properties of materials were also addressed. We highlighted the methodologies for the calculation of the effective mass, electron mobility, electronic conductivity, and relaxation time; characteristics crucial for the understanding of electron dynamics in materials. The ambiguities in the meaning of the different band gaps (i.e., EGB, OBG, and KSBG) were appropriately dispelled and mathematical expressions, along with thermal corrections, were offered to obtain the OBG of semiconductors from DFT calculations.
The criteria for the structural stability of periodic solids, quite useful for the design of new atomic structures and applicable in high-throughput computations, were widely covered. Chemical and thermodynamical arguments were offered for the calculation of cohesion energy, formation energy, and phonon frequencies. Because of its relevance, the energy of formation of transition metal oxides, with several point defects, was reviewed in detail. We discussed the basis for ionic diffusivity and ionic conductivity starting from AIMD simulations. With all these tools, the ab initio methodologies for the calculations of performance parameters of LIBs, ECDs, and SCs were established. We also outlined the methodology for the calculation of the transmissivity from first principles, which is a key factor for the prediction of operational parameters in ECDs and MFDs based on the electrochromic effect.
In summary, we have exposed the impact and the importance of ab initio methods in structure design, property prediction, and computation of performance parameters of EESDs, EECDs, and MFDs. Ab initio methodologies have become essential to the discovery of novel materials and to the optimization of current ones. The ever-growing interplay between theory and experiment is pivotal to meeting the current and future needs of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Author contributions
Israel Perez conceived the project, obtained the funding, obtained copyright permissions, and wrote the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The author gratefully acknowledge the support from the National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT) Mexico [project 3035]. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The author thanks the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and critics that highly improved the quality of this work.
Notes and references
D. Deng, Energy Sci. Eng., 2015, 3, 385–418 CrossRef .
M. A. Hannan, M. M. Hoque, A. Hussain, Y. Yusof and P. J. Ker, IEEE Access, 2018, 6, 19362–19378 Search PubMed .
C. Zhan, P. Zhang, S. Dai and D.-E. Jiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1241–1246 CrossRef .
K. S. Kumar, N. Choudhary, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 482–495 CrossRef .
B. Raj, A. K. Padhy, S. Basu and M. Mohapatra, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 136501 CrossRef .
W. Wu, M. Wang, J. Ma, Y. Cao and Y. Deng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800185 CrossRef .
P. Yang, P. Sun and W. Mai, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 394–402 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 614, 90–96 CrossRef .
C. G. Granqvist, M. A. Arvizu, İ. B. Pehlivan, H.-Y. Qu, R.-T. Wen and G. A. Niklasson, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 1170–1182 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yang, Y.-M. Zhang, Y. Cai, B. Yang, C. Gu and S. X.-A. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8687–8720 RSC .
A. Urban, D.-H. Seo and G. Ceder, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 1–13 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Energy Environ. Mater., 2018, 1, 148–173 CrossRef .
Q. He, B. Yu, Z. Li and Y. Zhao, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 264–279 CrossRef .
A. Harper, M. Evans, J. Darby, B. Karasulu, C. P. Koçer, J. Nelson and A. J. Morris, Johnson Matthey Technol. Rev., 2020, 64, 103–118 CrossRef .
S. Chibani and F.-X. Coudert, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 080701 CrossRef .
K. Choudhary, I. Kalish, R. Beams and F. Tavazza, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–16 CrossRef .
A. Kabiraj and S. Mahapatra, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 100718 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, J. Wang and P. S. Lee, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 1469–1476 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Tong, Y. Tian, H. Zhang, X. Li, J. Ji, H. Qu, N. Li, J. Zhao and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 13–37 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, X. Wang, S. Cong, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100524 CrossRef .
G. Z. Chen, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 173–202 CrossRef .

          N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, et al., Solid state physics, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York London,  1976 Search PubMed .
V. Fock, Z. Phys., 1930, 61, 126–148 CrossRef .
S. Massidda, M. Posternak and A. Baldereschi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 5058 CrossRef .

          R. G. Parr, Density functional theory of atoms and molecules, Springer, London,  1980, pp. 5–15 Search PubMed .

          T. Tsuneda, Density functional theory in quantum
chemistry, Springer, Tokyo,  2014 Search PubMed .
L. Hedin, Phys. Rev., 1965, 139, A796 CrossRef .

          B. L. Hammond, W. A. Lester and P. J. Reynolds, Monte Carlo methods in ab initio quantum chemistry, World Scientific,  1994, vol. 1 Search PubMed .

          R. Nazarov, R. Hood and M. Morales, APS March Meeting Abstracts, 2015, pp. Y10-011.
Y.-M. Byun, J. Sun and C. A. Ullrich, Electron. Struct., 2020, 2, 023002 CrossRef .
K. Burke, J. Werschnik and E. Gross, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 062206 CrossRef .
M. E. Casida and M. Huix-Rotllant, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 287–323 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Adamo and D. Jacquemin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 845–856 RSC .
D. Rocca, D. Lu and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 164109 CrossRef .

          D. Rocca, Y. Ping, D. Lu and G. Galli, APS March Meeting Abstracts, 2012, pp. B39-007.
D. Rocca, Y. Ping, R. Gebauer and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 045116 CrossRef .
X. Blase, I. Duchemin, D. Jacquemin and P.-F. Loos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7371–7382 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Marini, C. Hogan, M. Grüning and D. Varsano, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2009, 180, 1392–1403 CrossRef .
J. Deslippe, G. Samsonidze, D. A. Strubbe, M. Jain, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2012, 183, 1269–1289 CrossRef .
X. Gonze, F. Jollet, F. A. Araujo, D. Adams, B. Amadon, T. Applencourt, C. Audouze, J.-M. Beuken, J. Bieder and A. Bokhanchuk, 
            et al.
          , Comput. Phys. Commun., 2016, 205, 106–131 CrossRef .
D. Sangalli, A. Ferretti, H. Miranda, C. Attaccalite, I. Marri, E. Cannuccia, P. Melo, M. Marsili, F. Paleari and A. Marrazzo, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 325902 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Vorwerk, B. Aurich, C. Cocchi and C. Draxl, Electron. Struct., 2019, 1, 037001 CrossRef .
A. H. Romero, D. C. Allan, B. Amadon, G. Antonius, T. Applencourt, L. Baguet, J. Bieder, F. Bottin, J. Bouchet and E. Bousquet, 
            et al.
          , J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 124102 CrossRef .
J. Hafner, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 2044–2078 CrossRef .
P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli and M. Cococcioni, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2017, 29, 465901 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Segall, P. J. Lindan, M. A. Probert, C. J. Pickard, P. J. Hasnip, S. Clark and M. Payne, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 2717 CrossRef .
S. J. Clark, M. D. Segall, C. J. Pickard, P. J. Hasnip, M. I. Probert, K. Refson and M. C. Payne, Z. Kristallogr. – Cryst. Mater., 2005, 220, 567–570 CrossRef .
J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, J. D. Gale, A. Garca, J. Junquera, P. Ordejón and D. Sánchez-Portal, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 2745 CrossRef .
P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, F. Tran, R. Laskowski, G. K. Madsen and L. D. Marks, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 074101 CrossRef .
R. Tank and C. Arcangeli, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2000, 217, 89–130 CrossRef .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, X. Li, M. Caricato, A. V. Marenich, J. Bloino, B. G. Janesko, R. Gomperts, B. Mennucci, H. P. Hratchian, J. V. Ortiz, A. F. Izmaylov, J. L. Sonnenberg, D. Williams-Young, F. Ding, F. Lipparini, F. Egidi, J. Goings, B. Peng, A. Petrone, T. Henderson, D. Ranasinghe, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. Gao, N. Rega, G. Zheng, W. Liang, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, K. Throssell, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. J. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. N. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, T. A. Keith, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. P. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, C. Adamo, R. Cammi, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, O. Farkas, J. B. Foresman and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 16 Revision C.01, Gaussian Inc., Wallingford CT,  2016 Search PubMed .
K. Lejaeghere, G. Bihlmayer, T. Björkman, P. Blaha, S. Blügel, V. Blum, D. Caliste, I. E. Castelli, S. J. Clark and A. Dal Corso, 
            et al.
          , Science, 2016, 351, aad3000 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13244–13249 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang and W. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 890 CrossRef .
B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 7413 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 136406 CrossRef .
J. Tao, J. P. Perdew, V. N. Staroverov and G. E. Scuseria, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 146401 CrossRef PubMed .
V. N. Staroverov, G. E. Scuseria, J. Tao and J. P. Perdew, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 12129–12137 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, J. Tao, V. N. Staroverov, G. E. Scuseria and G. I. Csonka, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 062201 CrossRef .
V. N. Staroverov, G. E. Scuseria, J. Tao and J. P. Perdew, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075102 CrossRef .
I. Yakovkin and P. Dowben, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2007, 14, 481–487 CrossRef .
S. Kümmel and L. Kronik, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2008, 80, 3 CrossRef .
S. Lehtola, C. Steigemann, M. J. Oliveira and M. A. Marques, SoftwareX, 2018, 7, 1–5 CrossRef .
J. Muscat, A. Wander and N. Harrison, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 342, 397–401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heyd, J. E. Peralta, G. E. Scuseria and R. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 174101 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Adamo and V. Barone, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 6158–6170 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Krukau, O. A. Vydrov, A. F. Izmaylov and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 224106 CrossRef .
J. Paier, M. Marsman, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, I. C. Gerber and J. G. Ángyán, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 154709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Paier, M. Marsman, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, I. Gerber and J. Ángyán, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 249901 CrossRef .
M. Marsman, J. Paier, A. Stroppa and G. Kresse, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 064201 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, T. A. Abtew, T. Cai, Y.-Y. Sun, S. Zhang and P. Zhang, Solid State Commun., 2016, 234, 10–13 CrossRef .
P. Deák, M. Lorke, B. Aradi and T. Frauenheim, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 126, 130901 CrossRef .
A. Alkauskas, P. Broqvist and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2011, 248, 775–789 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, G. Miceli, G.-M. Rignanese and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 073803 CrossRef CAS .
G. Miceli, W. Chen, I. Reshetnyak and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 121112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gerosa, C. E. Bottani, L. Caramella, G. Onida, C. Di Valentin and G. Pacchioni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 155201 CrossRef .
V. I. Anisimov, F. Aryasetiawan and A. Lichtenstein, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 767 CrossRef CAS .
K. Held, I. Nekrasov, G. Keller, V. Eyert, N. Blümer, A. McMahan, R. Scalettar, T. Pruschke, V. Anisimov and D. Vollhardt, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 2599–2631 CrossRef CAS .
O. Gunnarsson, O. Andersen, O. Jepsen and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 39, 1708 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Anisimov and O. Gunnarsson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 43, 7570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Anisimov, F. Aryasetiawan and A. Lichtenstein, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 767 CrossRef CAS .

          V. I. Anisimov, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2010, pp. 3–134.
F. Wrobel, H. Park, C. Sohn, H.-W. Hsiao, J.-M. Zuo, H. Shin, H. N. Lee, P. Ganesh, A. Benali and P. R. Kent, 
            et al.
          , Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101, 195128 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Anisimov, I. Solovyev, M. Korotin, M. Czyżyk and G. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 16929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. H. Madsen and P. Novák, EPL, 2005, 69, 777 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lutfalla, V. Shapovalov and A. T. Bell, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 2218–2223 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 134115 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Gao, T. A. Abtew, Y. Wang, P. Zhang and W. Zhang, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 184706 CrossRef .
N. Bondarenko, O. Eriksson and N. V. Skorodumova, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125118 CrossRef .
F. Zhou, M. Cococcioni, C. A. Marianetti, D. Morgan and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 235121 CrossRef .
M. Shishkin and H. Sato, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 085135 CrossRef .
M. Cococcioni and S. De Gironcoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 035105 CrossRef .
N. J. Mosey and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 155123 CrossRef .
L. A. Agapito, S. Curtarolo and M. B. Nardelli, Phys. Rev. X, 2015, 5, 011006 CAS .
A. N. Andriotis, R. M. Sheetz and M. Menon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245103 CrossRef .
L. Vaugier, H. Jiang and S. Biermann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 165105 CrossRef .
B. Amadon, T. Applencourt and F. Bruneval, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 125110 CrossRef .
B. Amadon, T. Applencourt and F. Bruneval, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 199907 CrossRef .
I. Timrov, N. Marzari and M. Cococcioni, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 085127 CrossRef .
I. Timrov, N. Marzari and M. Cococcioni, Phys. Rev. B, 2021, 103, 045141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 52, R5467 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dudarev, G. Botton, S. Savrasov, C. Humphreys and A. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, T. Maxisch and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 195107 CrossRef .
N. E. Kirchner-Hall, W. Zhao, Y. Xiong, I. Timrov and I. Dabo, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11, 2395 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ricca, I. Timrov, M. Cococcioni, N. Marzari and U. Aschauer, Phys. Rev. Res., 2020, 2, 023313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cococcioni and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 033801 CrossRef .
F. Tran and P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 226401 CrossRef .
J. Camargo-Martnez and R. Baquero, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 195106 CrossRef .
A. P. Gaiduk and V. N. Staroverov, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 101104 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yildirim, A. Kinaci, Z.-J. Zhao, M. K. Chan and J. P. Greeley, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21141–21150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bahari, B. Mortazavi, A. Rajabpour, X. Zhuang and T. Rabczuk, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 203–282 CrossRef .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef .
M. Dion, H. Rydberg, E. Schröder, D. C. Langreth and B. I. Lundqvist, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 246401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, É. D. Murray, L. Kong, B. I. Lundqvist and D. C. Langreth, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 081101 CrossRef .
J. Klimeš, D. R. Bowler and A. Michaelides, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2009, 22, 022201 CrossRef .
J. Klimeš, D. R. Bowler and A. Michaelides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 195131 CrossRef .
F. Tran, J. Stelzl and P. Blaha, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 204120 CrossRef .
F. Tran, L. Kalantari, B. Traoré, X. Rocquefelte and P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 063602 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, S. Huang and Z. Wang, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 527–531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, L. Huang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xi, R. Li, W. Li, G. Xu and H. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4789–4795 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhong, M. Wu and X. Lei, Mater. Sci.-Pol., 2016, 34, 916–923 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, R. Maurya and S. K. Pandey, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2016, 49, 425601 CrossRef .
T. de Boer, M. F. Bekheet, A. Gurlo, R. Riedel and A. Moewes, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 155205 CrossRef .
O. Rubel, F. Tran, X. Rocquefelte and P. Blaha, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2021, 261, 107648 CrossRef CAS .

          S. C. Brugger and A. Schenk, 2005 International Conference On Simulation of Semiconductor Processes and Devices, 2005, pp. 151–154.
N. Wang, M. Li, H. Xiao, H. Gong, Z. Liu, X. Zu and L. Qiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 15097–15105 RSC .
A. Faghaninia, J. W. Ager III and C. S. Lo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 235123 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, C. Ban, L. Li, C. Wang, W. Chen and X. Liu, AIP Adv., 2021, 11, 055120 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Tromer, L. F. C. Pereira, M. Ferreira and M. da Luz, J. Appl. Phys., 2022, 131, 115704 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Madsen, J. Carrete and M. J. Verstraete, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2018, 231, 140–145 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hamberg, C. G. Granqvist, K.-F. Berggren, B. E. Sernelius and L. Engström, Phys. Rev. B, 1984, 30, 3240 CrossRef CAS .
I. Perez, J. L. E. Carrejo, V. Sosa, F. G. Perera, J. R. F. Mancillas, J. T. E. Galindo and C. I. R. Rodrguez, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 712, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rakhshani, Y. Makdisi and H. Ramazaniyan, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 1049–1057 CrossRef CAS .
K. O'donnell and X. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 2924–2926 CrossRef .
K. Irmscher, M. Naumann, M. Pietsch, Z. Galazka, R. Uecker, T. Schulz, R. Schewski, M. Albrecht and R. Fornari, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. Shrestha, M. Souri, J. G. Connell, S. Park and A. Seo, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–8 CrossRef .
K. Lejaeghere, V. Van Speybroeck, G. Van Oost and S. Cottenier, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2014, 39, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
F. Murnaghan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1944, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Birch, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 809 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vinet, J. H. Rose, J. Ferrante and J. R. Smith, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1989, 1, 1941 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Poirier and A. Tarantola, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 1998, 109, 1–8 CrossRef .
F. Zhou, T. Maxisch and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 155704 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Reuter and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 65, 035406 CrossRef .
Z. Zeng, F. Calle-Vallejo, M. B. Mogensen and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7526–7533 RSC .
M. Aydinol, A. Kohan, G. Ceder, K. Cho and J. Joannopoulos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 1354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirklin, J. E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J. W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. Rühl and C. Wolverton, npj Comput. Mater., 2015, 1, 1–15 Search PubMed .
A. Mahmoudi, H. Faraoun, M. Benabadji, I. Abdellaoui and M. Dergal, Solid State Commun., 2016, 229, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kurth, J. P. Perdew and P. Blaha, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 1999, 75, 889–909 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, S. Wen, J. Liu and G. He, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2012, 21, 302–307 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 235104 CrossRef .
S. Lany, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 245207 CrossRef .
S. K. Nayak, W. A. Adeagbo, H. T. Langhammer, W. Hergert, T. Müller and R. Böttcher, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 527–531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Q. Zhang, L. Huang, R. Li, W. Li, G. Xu and H. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21244–21249 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Xi, L. Huang, W. Li, R. Li, G. Xu and H. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 26740–26744 RSC .
Y.-R. An, X.-L. Fan, S.-Y. Wang, Z.-F. Luo, Y. Hu and Z.-H. Xia, Nanotechnology, 2018, 30, 085405 CrossRef PubMed .

          P. Heitjans and J. Kärger, Diffusion in condensed matter: methods, materials, models, Springer Science & Business Media,  2006 Search PubMed .

          D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Computational science series: Understanding molecular simulation: from algorithms to applications, Academic press,  2002 Search PubMed .

          D. Marx and J. Hutter, Ab initio molecular dynamics: basic theory and advanced methods, Cambridge University Press,  2009 Search PubMed .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901–9904 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Munro and D. J. Wales, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 3969 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, D. Singh and H. Krakauer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 43, 6411 CrossRef .
L. Marks, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2013, 9, 2786–2800 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, H. Li, F. C. Pickard IV, B. Narayanan, F. G. Sen, M. K. Chan, S. K. Sankaranarayanan, B. R. Brooks and B. Roux, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2017, 13, 4492–4503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Durholt, G. Fraux, F.-X. Coudert and R. Schmid, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 2420–2432 CrossRef .
A. Van der Ven, G. Ceder, M. Asta and P. Tepesch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 184307 CrossRef .
A. Zobelli, C. Ewels, A. Gloter and G. Seifert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 094104 CrossRef .
H. Ullah, M. Noor-A-Alam, H. J. Kim and Y.-H. Shin, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 065102 CrossRef .
H. Ullah, M. Noor-A-Alam and Y.-H. Shin, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 103, 391–402 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Friauf, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 494–505 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. De Klerk and M. Wagemaker, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3122–3130 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS .
E. Deiss, A. Wokaun, J.-L. Barras, C. Daul and P. Dufek, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3877 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Bhatt and C. O'Dwyer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4799–4844 RSC .
M. Aydinol and G. Ceder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3832 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Chevrier, S. P. Ong, R. Armiento, M. K. Chan and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 075122 CrossRef .
K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2008, 41, 653–658 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Llordés, S. D. Lounis and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10555–10572 RSC .
T. Jarosz, K. Gebka, A. Stolarczyk and W. Domagala, Polymers, 2019, 11, 273 CrossRef .
I. Perez, J. C. M. Faudoa, J. R. A. Acuña and J. T. E. Galindo, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2021, 190, 110248 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Schroder, Semiconductor material and device characterization, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey, USA,  2006, pp. 585–587 Search PubMed .
R. Weiher and R. Ley, J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 37, 299–302 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Hong, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1989, 22, 1384 CrossRef .
G. Atak and Ö. D. Coskun, Opt. Mater., 2018, 82, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Q. Chen, Q. Zhang, G. Dong, X. Zhong, Y. Xiao, M.-P. Delplancke-Ogletree, F. Reniers and X. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 617–623 CrossRef CAS .
P.-W. Chen, C.-T. Chang, M. M. Ali, J.-Y. Wu, Y.-C. Li, M.-H. Chen, D.-J. Jan and C.-T. Yuan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 182, 188–195 CrossRef CAS .
X. Che, Z. Wu, G. Dong, X. Diao, Y. Zhou, J. Guo, D. Dong and M. Wang, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 662, 6–12 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, G. Dong, Q. Chen, J. Guo, Y. Xiao, M.-P. Delplancke-Ogletree, F. Reniers and X. Diao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 545–553 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Q. Liu, Q. Zhang, B. Lu, J. Zhai and X. Diao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 110017 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, L. Xie, T. Chang, J. Bell, A. Huang, P. Jin and S. Bao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 317, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, K. Du, Z. He, T. Wang, X. Zhong, T. Ma, J. Yang, Y. He, G. Dong and S. Wang, 
            et al.
          , Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
I. Perez, V. J. Sosa, F. Gamboa Perera, J. L. Enriquez-Carrejo and J. C. Mixteco Sanchez, J. Chem. Phys., 2022, 156, 094701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. A. Acuña, I. Perez, V. Sosa, F. Gamboa, J. T. Elizalde, R. Faras, D. Carrillo, J. L. Enrquez, A. Burrola and P. Mani, Optik, 2021, 231, 166509 CrossRef .
A. Kokalj, J. Mol. Graphics Modell., 1999, 17, 176–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, D. Sun, X. Han, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Electrolytes for electrochemical supercapacitors, CRC press,  2016 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
A. Shylau, J. Kłos and I. Zozoulenko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 205402 CrossRef .
H. Pan, J. Li and Y. Feng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 654–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhan, J. Neal, J. Wu and D.-E. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22297–22303 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, J. Wang, Z. Meng, F. Hu and X. Jian, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2018, 19, 1579–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Paek, A. J. Pak and G. S. Hwang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, A1 CrossRef .
T. Sruthi and K. Tarafder, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2019, 42, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Wood, T. Ogitsu, M. Otani and J. Biener, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Radin, T. Ogitsu, J. Biener, M. Otani and B. C. Wood, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 125415 CrossRef .
A. Burke, J. Power Sources, 2000, 91, 37–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shylau, J. Kłos and I. Zozoulenko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 205402 CrossRef .
M. De Jong, W. Chen, R. Notestine, K. Persson, G. Ceder, A. Jain, M. Asta and A. Gamst, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Calfa and J. R. Kitchin, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 2605–2613 CrossRef CAS .
O. Allam, B. W. Cho, K. C. Kim and S. S. Jang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 39414–39420 RSC .
Y. Saad, D. Gao, T. Ngo, S. Bobbitt, J. R. Chelikowsky and W. Andreoni, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 104104 CrossRef .
F. Pereira, K. Xiao, D. A. Latino, C. Wu, Q. Zhang and J. Aires-de Sousa, J. Chem. Inf. Model., 2017, 57, 11–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Toyao, K. Suzuki, S. Kikuchi, S. Takakusagi, K.-I. Shimizu and I. Takigawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 8315–8326 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi and I. Miyazato, J. Comput. Chem., 2018, 39, 2405–2408 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Snyder, M. Rupp, K. Hansen, K.-R. Müller and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 253002 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hollingsworth, L. Li, T. E. Baker and K. Burke, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 148, 241743 CrossRef .
F. Brockherde, L. Vogt, L. Li, M. E. Tuckerman, K. Burke and K.-R. Müller, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schutt and J. VandeVondele, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2018, 14, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

Israel Perez
	Prof. Israel Perez obtained his PhD from the Research Center and Advanced Studies in Mexico in 2010. From 2011 to 2013, he spent a postdoctoral stay at the University of Saskatchewan in Canada working with synchroton radiation tools. Afterwards he joined the Department of Physics and Mathematics of the Autonomous University of Juarez City in Mexico. He is professor of materials science and nanotechnology. His research interests include nanomaterials with applications to supercapacitors, electrochromic devices, metal-ion batteries, multifunctional devices, and other energy storage devices. He also employs ab initio calculations for the computation of physical properties and performance parameters of these devices.
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of theoretical vs. experimental band gaps for semiconductors from groups IIA–VI, IIB–VI, II–V and IV. Reproduced from Heyd et al.,68 with the permission of the AIP Publishing, copyright 2005.	 
εKS − εc = ΔKS = ΔSCF = εN+1 − εN − εc	(8)

GaAs	1.6	1.5	0.25	0.15
CuGaAs	2.6	2.6	0.26	0.08
GaN	3.6	3.8	0.26	0.1
Ga2O3	4.9	5.0	0.26	0.0
EDFT+U = EDFT + EU[nσ] − EDC[nσ],	(9)

 	Fig. 2  Density of states of a transition metal oxide (TMO) without electron correlations (a) and with electron correlations (b). TM represents a transition metal, εF is the Fermi energy, and Eg stands for the fundamental band gap. The application of the Hubbard repulsion U leads to a splitting of the 3 d band into an upper and lower Hubbard band, each occupied with X electrons. There are 2X states in the O 2p band, which is fully occupied.	 
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
U = [χ−1(nonint) − χ−1(int)]ii.	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of theoretical vs. experimental band gaps for selected semiconductors using PBE, mBJ@PBE, mBJ(sc), and HSE06. Adapted from H. Jiang et al.90 and Heyd et al.,68 with the permission of the AIP Publishing, copyright 2013, 2005.	 
E = EDFT − Edisp.	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
n,k = ∇kεn(k)	(27)
	(28)
	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
σe = e(neμe + nhμh),	(36)
	(37)
Eg = *− * = εN+1 − εN + Δxc,	(38)

 	Fig. 4  Band structure of intrinsic (a) and n-doped degenerate semiconductor (b). Symbology is described in the text.	 
	(39)
Egop = EgKS + ΔEBM + ΔEBGN,	(40)
	(41)
γEγ = γ0(Eγ − Egop)a,	(42)
	(43)
	(44)
ΔEcoh = −[E0/m − E(mol)],	(45)
	(46)
	(47)
	(48)
	(49)
G = E0 + PV − TS.	(50)
ΔG = ΔE0 + PΔV − TΔS = ΔH − TΔS,	(51)
	(52)
ΔG = ΔE0 + ΔEvib − TΔS + PΔV.	(53)
ΔG = ΔE0 + ΔFvib.	(54)
	(55)
	(56)
	(57)
	(58)
	(59)
ΔEf(Inter) = E0(Inter) − E0(TMO) − E0(dopant),	(60)
ΔEf(subs) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μsubs + μM,	(61)
ΔEf(subs–subs) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM − μNM + μM + μO,	(62)
ΔEf(subs–inter) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM−μNM + μM,	(63)
ΔEf(inter–subs) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM − μNM + μO,	(64)
ΔEf(inter–inter) = E0(subs) − E0(pure) − μTM − μNM,	(65)
	(66)
ΔEf = E0(surf + mol) − E0(surf) − mE0(mol),	(67)

 	Fig. 5  Phonon band structure of SrTiO3 without cell optimization. Negative frequencies are observed, indicating structure instability.	 
	(68)
Dc = θcDJ.	(69)
	(70)
	(71)
	(72)
	(73)
Dc(T) = D0e−ΔEa/kBT,	(74)
	(75)
	(76)

 	Fig. 6  Operational principle of a lithium ion battery. During charge, electrons flow from the cathode to the anode through the external circuit whereas Li+ ions travel through the electrolyte in the same direction. During discharge, the process is reversed.	 
LiC6(s) + MO2(s) → 6C(s) + LiMO2(s).	(77)
Lix1MO2 + (x1 − x2)Li → Lix2MO2,	(78)
ΔGf = G(Lix2MO2) − G(Lix1MO2) − (x1 − x2)G(Li).	(79)
	(80)
	(81)
	(82)
	(83)
	(84)
ΔGf = −zFoc.	(85)
ΔGf ≈ ΔE0 = E0(LiMO2) + 6E0(C) − E0(LiC6) − E0(MO2),	(86)
	(87)
	(88)
	(89)
	(90)
	(91)

 	Fig. 7  Atomic structures used for the computation of operational parameters of a Li-ion battery composed of a graphite anode and a LiNiO2 cathode. Atomic structure visualization provided by the VESTA software package.179	 
ΔFvib(T = 300) = Fvib,T=300(LiMO2) + 6Fvib,T = 300(C) − Fvib,T=300(LiC6) − Fvib,T=300(MO2),	(92)
ΔFvib(T = 300) = Fvib,T=300(Li in LiMO2) − Fvib,T=300(Li in LiC6).	(93)
Φi = 0.5κiδi2,	(94)
	(95)
	(96)
	(97)
	(98)
	(99)
	(100)
	(101)
 = (1 − s)exp(−dγ).	(102)
	(103)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of an electrochromic device.	 
	(104)
	(105)

 	Fig. 9  Atomic structure of WO3 used as an electrochromic layer in ECDs. Pure system (left) representing the bleached state and doped system (right) representing the colored state. Atomic structure visualization provided by the Xcrysden software package.196	 
	(106)
	(107)
	(108)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Parallel-plate capacitor. (b) Double-layer supercapacitors.	 
	(109)
	(110)
CG = CA·SSA.	(111)
	(112)
	(113)
	(114)
	(115)
	(116)
	(117)
	(118)
	(119)
	(120)
	(121)
	(122)

 	Fig. 11  Typical monolayer of graphene. Atomic structure visualization provided by the VESTA software package.179	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
