Photonic crystal coupled plasmonic nanoparticle array for resonant enhancement of light harvesting and power conversion   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42438J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42438J
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14334-14339Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotonic crystal coupled plasmonic nanoparticle array for resonant enhancement of light harvesting and power conversion†

        
          
            Haoran 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobin 
            Hu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Hong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Feiyang 
            Cai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Binyuan 
            Zhao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Ping 
            Cheng
          
        
      b
aState Key Lab of Metal Matrix Composites, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200240, China. E-mail: hxb@sjtu.edu.cn; byzhao@sjtu.edu.cn; zhangdi@sjtu.edu.cn;  Fax: 86 21 34202843;   Tel: 86 21 3420 2843
bResearch Institute of Micro/Nano Science and Technology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
Received 
      17th July 2012
    , Accepted 8th August 2012First published on 13th August 2012AbstractPhotonic crystal coupled with plasmonic nanoparticle arrays to form a periodic plasmonic architecture was prepared by loading Au nanoparticles inside the inverse opal TiO2 film. The visible and near infrared light absorption was increased by 62% and the overall light-to-electricity conversion yield was thus increased by 41% compared with the control test.
Dramatic progress has been achieved so far by many researchers to promote dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) coming into commercial use.1–4 Recently, a few groups introduced periodic photonic crystal (PC) architectures into DSCs based on TiO2 or Si, attempting such thin-film semiconductors optically coupled with photonic crystals to enhance light harvesting.5–11 It was reported that a 26% increase of photocurrent was achieved over the visible range due to slow photon propagation and multiple light scattering effects.8 Their subsequent results further indicated that the light harvesting enhancement derived from the mirror-like back reflection of PCs and the surface resonant mode of incident light propagation near the interface between PCs and another dielectrics,9,10 thereby enhancing light absorption. Another promising method boosting the power conversion efficiency is to adopt plasmonic noble metallic nanoparticles for broadband light absorption and effective charge separation.12–14 The interplay between dye molecules and plasmonic nanoparticles have been extensively investigated for interesting optical applications in biosensors,15 especially in DSCs to overcome a major problem of charge recombination.12,16 Spherical plasmonic nanoparticles are attracting the interest of many researchers because they exhibit a pronounced visible light absorption by localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) originating from the collective coherent oscillation of free conductive electrons. Many researchers have indicated that the resonant interaction between the surface charge oscillation and the electric field of the light not only gives rise to enhancement of fluorescence, Raman scattering and second harmonic generation, but can also quench the radiation of adsorbed molecules to cause a resonant energy transfer from dye to plasmonic nanoparticles, which can occur depending on the vicinal distance.17,18 In addition, the resonant energy transfer can also take place between donor and plasmonic nanoparticles.19 For example, dye molecules are close to plasmonic nanoparticles in the donor solution of DSCs, resonant energy transfer is favorable for charge separation by means of photo-excited electrons transferring from plasmonic nanoparticles into TiO2 conductive band and the simultaneous transferring of compensative electrons from a dye or donor molecule to plasmonic nanoparticles (while blocking the transport of holes at the same time),20,21 thus increasing light harvesting and photocurrent output. On the other hand, the electric field enhancement around the noble metallic nanoparticles can also promote the vicinal dye's absorption of light.16,22 In contrast to the typical DSC absorbing light by a geometric light trapping mode for all wavelengths of light equally, both of the above approaches adopted a resonant mode of certain light waves induced by the periodic architecture of PCs or the LSPR of plasmonic nanoparticles, enhancing light absorption only in the range where it can be most beneficial.
Although a series of impressive advancements have been achieved by introducing periodic PC architectures and plasmonic nanostructures into solar cells for broadband light absorption and effective charge separation, one of the current foremost challenges is still the innovation in architecture and sensitization for further improvement of light harvesting and power conversion efficiency.23 Since both architectures of the optical PCs and the plasmonic nanostructures are quite efficient at modulating incident light and have been used for broadband light absorption, it makes sense to make use of their synergetic effect by architectural coupling to trigger resonant enhancement of light harvesting and power conversion. Here, we demonstrate a coupling architecture in which the three-dimension (3D) Au nanoparticles array is deposited inside the inverse opal TiO2 film and introduced into DSCs. Optical and electronic experiments, as well as theoretical calculations, were conducted to prove that the architectural coupling is effective for arousing synergetic modulation of incident light for light harvesting and power conversion promotion.
The coupled architecture is composed of two layers shown as Fig. 1a (See Fig. S1, ESI† for more details), a microporous nanocrystalline TiO2 (nc-TiO2) layer and an interconnected macroporous inverse opal TiO2 (pc-TiO2) layer on a FTO glass substrate (fluorine-doped tin oxide glass substrate, 2.2 mm thick and 14 ohm sq−1, NGS Japan). The nc-TiO2 layer is made from a commercial P9 paste (Solaronix, Swiss) with 9 nm TiO2 nanocrystalline particle size by doctor-blading onto a FTO glass and maintaining a thickness of about 6 μm.2 After sintering at 450 °C for 45 minutes, the obtained nc-TiO2 layer on FTO glass is vertically put in a vial with about 0.2 wt% polystyrene particles aqueous solution for polystyrene opal colloidal crystal preparation. The temperature and humidity is kept at 38 °C and 75%. The pc-TiO2 layer is prepared by injecting a tetra-n-butyl titanate aqueous solution into the polystyrene opal colloidal crystal template upon the nc-TiO2 layer according to Mallouk's report and made to be about 4 μm thick.7 After sintering again for polystyrene removal and anatase TiO2 formation, the double-layer TiO2 photoelectrode (one nc-TiO2 layer and one pc-TiO2 layer) on FTO glass is obtained with a thickness of around 10 μm (Fig. 1b). Templating from the opal polystyrene colloidal crystal in our experiment, the macropores within the inverse opal pc-TiO2 layer is about 204 nm (see Fig. S2, ESI,† for more details). The 3D Au nanoparticles array is loaded by putting the double-layer photoelectrode (to make the surface clean for Au loading, the photoelectrodes were heated under 110 °C for 40 minutes to remove the hydroxyl groups) into an aqueous solution containing 20 nm Au nanoparticles with a 29.4 mM concentration (See Fig. S3a, ESI†), which is synthesized by using 100 mL 0.01% HAuCl4 aqueous solution reduced by dropping 4 mL 1% sodium citrate in boiling deionized water for 7 minutes. The Au nanoparticles are hard to oxidize due to its intrinsic chemical inertness and the protection of citrate on the surface. The density of Au nanoparticles within the pc-TiO2 layer is controlled by loading time. After loading for 40 minutes, the density of Au nanoparticles within the pc-TiO2 layer is shown as the inset in Fig. 1b. Within the double-layer photoelectrode, the nc-TiO2 layer is designed to generate photo-excited carriers and decrease current leakage. Upon the nc-TiO2 layer, the inverse opal pc-TiO2 layer is proposed to make use of slow photon, backscattering and surface resonance effects for light harvesting.6–10 Much more importantly, the inverse opal pc-TiO2 layer builds a wall around Au nanoparticles, forming the plasmonic 3D nanoparticles array inside. The coupling of pc-TiO2 and nanoparticle array forms a periodic plasmonic architecture, which can modulate the incident light to change the electromagnetic field distribution within the photoelectrode. In addition, it's notable that these Au nanoparticles are mainly loaded within the inverse opal pc-TiO2 layer, since these Au nanoparticles are about 20 nm in size, too big to access the microporous nc-TiO2 layer.
 Fig. 1  Architecture and morphology of photonic crystals coupled with 3D plasmonic Au nanoparticle array. Side view (a) and top view (b) of the double-layer inverse opal TiO2 electrode with Au nanoparticles loading taken from a DSC after testing. Inset in (b): magnified view of the distribution of Au nanoparticles on the wall of the inverse opal TiO2. 
Within the inverse opal pc-TiO2 layer, Au nanoparticles are mainly distributed onto the wall to form a periodic array structure with the same structural periodicity. Except for the light trapping induced by the LSPR of Au nanoparticles, the architectural coupling inevitably induces a strong synergic effect between the inverse opal structure and the plasmonic nanoparticles array. The vicinal Au nanoparticles can interact with each other, triggered by the incident light, to result in a plasmonic electromagnetic (EM) mode transport throughout the whole nanoparticle array.12,24,25 Coupling this 3D periodic nanoparticle array into the pc-TiO2 layer may induce a different synergic optical phenomenon from both the individual PC and the plasmonic nanoparticle array.
In order to illustrate this synergic optical phenomenon, the transporting modes of plasmonic EM waves (induced by the interactions between Au nanoparticles simplified as dipoles) along the Au nanoparticle array26 and Bloch waves in pc-TiO2 are calculated. If they share the same transporting modes, a strong coupling resonance can be induced and result in special optical phonomena.27
To simulate the plasmonic EM transporting modes of individual Au nanoparticle arrays, we assume that there are 14 Au nanoparticles evenly distributed in each sphere of pc-TiO2, and the Au nanoparticles are small enough to be considered as dipoles. Thus the EM transporting modes can be derived from the equation of motion for the coupled dipoles. Referring to the 1 dimensional equation applied in other works,28 the 3 dimensional equation can be written as (1)in which, the left part of the equation stands for the dipole moment of sth dipole in the lth unit cell (the Au nanoparticles in a sphere are considered as a unit cell) in the α direction (x, y or z direction). The first term on the right describes dipole eigenmotion at resonant angular frequency, w0, which is the same as the LSPR frequency of individual Au nanoparticles, and set to 3.60 × 1015 rad s−1, namely 2.3655 eV (according to the absorption spectra of Au nanoparticle aqueous solution in Fig. S3b, ESI†). The second term and third term model the damping of plasmonic waves along the chain. The constant ΓI is the electronic relaxation frequency due to interactions with electrons, phonons, lattice defects, or impurities and ΓR is the relaxation frequency due to electromagnetic radiation. The fourth term incorporates the electrodynamic interactions with all the neighboring dipoles. In our simulation, the damping terms are ignored for simplicity. The Bloch wave dispersion relationship of PC is calculated with the widely used plane wave expansion method.
The calculated transporting modes of plasmonic EM transport and Bloch wave in PC corresponding to different transporting directions are plotted together in Fig. 2a. For the individual Au plasmonic crystals, the transporting modes are all centered at the eigenfrequency (2.3655 eV) and made up of 3m (the unit cells of a plasmonic crystal constructed a fcc structure, in which m is the number of nanoparticles in a cubic cell) degenerate branches, similar to the twofold degenerate branches—the transverse mode and longitudinal mode—in 1 dimensional transporting mode curves. Fig. 2b is the vertical axis zoomed EM transporting mode curves: the EM transporting mode curves do not cross the horizontal line representing the eigenfrequency except for the intersections at some specific points (the number of the intersection points depends on the geometric parameters), due to the strong dipole interactions resulting in frequency deviation. Therefore, there would be no resonant mode corresponding to the eigenfrequency. For the plasmonic photonic crystals, EM transporting mode curves intersect those of PC in the Γ–L direction, Γ–X direction, and L–U direction, giving direct theoretical support to the coupling resonance which would result in special optical effects besides the eigenfrequency.
 Fig. 2  (a) Transporting modes of plasmonic electromagnetic (EM) waves of Au nanoparticle array (dots) and Bloch waves in pc-TiO2 (lines). (b) The vertical axis zoomed EM transporting mode curves; the horizontal line represents the position of eigenfrequency. 
For the coupling architecture of the inverse opal TiO2 loaded with the plasmonic Au nanoparticle array, its real optical absorption is tested by a Maya 2000-Pro Spectrometer (Ocean Optics, USA) to verify the architectural resonance by means of synergetic modulation on incident light. As a control test of the double-layer TiO2 film (d-TiO2) with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer, a single nc-TiO2 film (s-TiO2) made from commercial P9 paste is also prepared at approximately 10 μm thickness. Both types of TiO2 films are on FTO glass substrates for the optical test. The Au loading is conducted by soaking both types of TiO2 films into a 29.4 mM aqueous solution of 20 nm Au nanoparticles for 40 minutes, respectively. After drying in an oven, the dye sensitization is conducted by dipping both types of TiO2 films in a 0.5 mM N3 anhydrous alcohol solution under darkness for 24 hours at 40 °C. N3 is a cis-bis-(isothiocyanato)-bis-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato)-ruthenium(II) complex (RuL2(NCS)2, L = 2,2′-bipydyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate, Solaronix, Swiss). Under the same conditions, Fig. 3a and b shows that both types of TiO2 films have increasing light absorption after Au loading and N3 sensitization, but the d-TiO2 film has much more obviously increasing light absorption in the visible and near-infrared range under the same testing conditions. More importantly, Fig. 3a shows that two d-TiO2 films with Au nanoparticle loading presents two absorptive enhancements centered at 490 nm and 645 nm whether dye sensitized or not. However, the two absorptive peaks disappear for another two d-TiO2 films without Au nanoparticle loading even if in the same condition of dye sensitized or not. The result demonstrates that the loading of the Au nanoparticles array is the prerequisite for the two enhanced light absorptions. Especially for the case of d-TiO2 film with dye sensitization but without Au loading, the absorption around 510 nm should be attributed to the contribution of N3 which has an absorption at 535 nm (Fig. S4, ESI†). On the other hand, taking the control test further into consideration, Fig. 3b shows the absorptive characteristics of the s-TiO2 films. Although the loading of Au and the sensitization of N3 are certainly effective to increase light absorption, the s-TiO2 film does not present characteristic absorptions, which shows that the inverse opal structure is another prerequisite for above two enhanced light absorptions. Thereafter, we can conclude that the coupling architecture is really effective to trigger a resonant enhancement of light absorption in the visible and near-infrared range. In collaboration with the simulated result in Fig. 2b for the coupling architecture, it is inferred that the two tested absorption peaks (490 nm and 645 nm), both beside the tested LSPR wavelength 524 nm, ought to come from the coupling resonance between Au nanoparticles array and pc-TiO2, as indicated in Fig. 2. The intrinsic LSPR of Au nanoparticles doesn't result in obvious absorption peaks for d-TiO2 films with Au loading, compared with those induced by coupling resonance, for there is no calculated matched transporting modes at the eigenfrequency. Although there are some variations in wavelength range between the calculation and the experiment, the light harvesting ranges of the coupling architecture is roughly in agreement with the ranges of calculated matched transporting modes, theoretically and experimentally supporting the conclusion than the absorption enhancement at 490 nm and 645 nm are induced by the coupling resonance. Except for the coupling resonance, the pc-TiO2 layer also plays an important role in reflecting incident light for PC's band gap, resulting in an amplification of light intensity in the nc-TiO2 film due to the overlapping of incident light and reflected light. The fabricated pc-TiO2 has a band gap centered at 455 nm (see Fig. S2a, ESI†), which overlaps with the dye molecules' intrinsic absorption at 400 nm and 510 nm. Hence, the amplified light intensity would enhance dye molecules' absorption. d-TiO2 with dye sensitization has an obvious absorption enhancement around 455 nm, boosting the dye molecules' intrinsic light absorption at 400 nm and 510 nm compared with s-TiO2 with dye sensitization. For d-TiO2 with dye sensitization and Au loading, this enhancement overlaps with the absorption at 490 nm induced by resonance coupling. Consequently, the absorption around 455 nm (the band gap) is significantly boosted due to the resonance compared with d-TiO2 with dye sensitization without Au loading. Therefore, the light harvesting of d-TiO2 films with Au loading is mainly attributed to the coupling resonance of plasmonic EM waves along the Au nanoparticle array and Bloch waves in pc-TiO2, rather than the intrinsic LSPR of Au nanoparticles or the band gap of pc-TiO2 layer. As a whole, comparing d-TiO2 film against s-TiO2 film after Au loading and dye sensitization, the coupling architecture induces a 62% increase of light harvesting in the visible and near infrared range from 400 nm to 800 nm. However, too much loading of Au nanoparticles is not better for light harvesting. Fig. 3c shows that the absorptive enhancement of the same type d-TiO2 films increases first and then decreases with the loading increase of Au nanoparticles for both sensitized and unsensitized films. The reason is that Au nanoparticles can trap photons with frequencies close to their plasmons by resonant coupling, while at the same time scatter photons for nearly all visible frequencies. Excessive Au nanoparticles not only make scattering dominant but also weakens light density in a given incident light,29 preventing loaded dyes from absorbing plenty of photons, which is thus unfavorable for light harvesting. In our experiment, all films are soaked in a 29.4 mM aqueous solution containing Au nanoparticles for 40 minutes except when stated otherwise.
 Fig. 3  (a) Experimental light absorptive spectra of d-TiO2 films with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer on FTO glasses. (b) Experimental light absorptive spectra of s-TiO2 films made from commercial P9 paste with about a thickness of about 10 μm. The Au nanoparticle loading time is 40 minutes for both d-TiO2 and s-TiO2 films. (c) Light absorptive spectra of d-TiO2 films with 0, 10, 40, 120 and 300 minute loading time in the same concentration of Au nanoparticle aqueous solution for both dye sensitized and unsensitized films. For all cases, the N3 sensitization is fulfilled under darkness for 24 hours at 40 °C, and all samples are penetrated using anhydrous ethanol drops for absorption tests. 
To evaluate the contribution of the coupling architecture of PCs with plasmonic array to photocurrent, both d-TiO2 and s-TiO2 films on FTO glasses have been assembled into DSCs for current–voltage tests. After Au loading and N3 sensitization, a commercial electrolyte solution (local supplier) containing 0.3 M 1,2-dimethyl-3-propylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (DMPII), 0.05 M iodine, 0.5 M lithium iodide and 0.5 M 4-tert-butyl-pyridine (4-TBP) in 3-methoxypropanenitrile was injected into an assembled cell illuminated under a xenon lamp of 100 mW cm−2, calibrated by a standard silicon solar cell. Although the Au loading and the dye sensitization are favorable to increase the photocurrent for both types of cells, Fig. 4a shows that only the cell assembled from the d-TiO2 electrode with Au loading presents the highest photocurrent output in comparison with the control test. It is clear that there is a 41% increase of light-to-electricity conversion efficiency (η) from the s-TiO2 to the d-TiO2 with Au loading as electrode in DSCs. It is believed that the efficiency increase comes from the resonant couple in the architecture of PC and plasmonic array. According to the results above, the periodic distribution of Au nanoparticles is able to not only concentrate most photons around the interfacial area, which is extremely favorable for the dye to absorb light, promoting photo-excited electron generation by the resonant coupling, but can also help electron–hole separation in the boundary area due to the presence of extra interfaces of Au/dye and Au/TiO2. Since the dual TiO2/dye interface in a typical s-TiO2 cell has been changed to be the ternary interface of TiO2/Au/dye or TiO2/dye/Au in the current d-TiO2 cell, the original travel path of photo-excited electrons from dye direct to TiO2 semiconductor must be changed. Whether electrons travel from Au to dye to TiO2 or from dye to Au to TiO2, both travel paths are particularly beneficial for charge separation in the current d-TiO2 cell.30–32 In the first path, photo-excited electrons of the dye are injected into the TiO2 semiconductor much quicker than holes are transferred into Au nanoparticles; the asymmetry of charge travel rates is effective to restrain charge recombination.30 In the second path, photo-excited electrons of the dye can ballistically jump over the interfacial Schottky barrier of TiO2/Au and then can be very easily injected into the conductive band of TiO2 semiconductor.31 Meanwhile, the non-ballistic transfer of holes across Au nanoparticles into TiO2 is clogged because there is no available band level in the TiO2 semiconductor to accept the energy of holes. The charges asymmetry of travel modes in the second path is much preferential for charges separation.32 As a consequence, our tests demonstrate that the coupling architecture is not only effective for light harvesting, but also beneficial for photocurrent promotion. Furthermore, our tests shown in Fig. 4b also indicate that the excessive loading of Au nanoparticles pushes photocurrent down rather than up like its effect on light harvesting. Since the overall photon density is given for a certain incident light, excessive Au loading may weaken photon density and thus make dye excitation insufficient, and the quenching efficiency of excited dyes with excess Au nanoparticles is also increased. The appropriate loading is occurs for a soaking time of about 40 minutes; the d-TiO2 electrode with Au loading shows the most light harvesting and thus generates the greatest photocurrent output.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of DSCs for both types of electrodes of d-TiO2 film with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer and 10 μm thick s-TiO2 film on FTO glasses. The loading time of Au nanoparticles is 40 minutes. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of d-TiO2 electrodes with Au loading by soaking in a 29.4 mM aqueous solution for 10, 40, 120 and 300 minutes, respectively. The test area of photoanodes was 0.4 cm2 under illumination of a 100 mW cm−2 xenon lamp. 
The incident photon-to-electricity conversion efficiency (IPCE) of d-TiO2 electrode with Au loading in comparison with the control test presents similar conclusions to the current–voltage tests (Fig. 5). As a result of the whole spectrum's boost in light absorption due to coupling resonance, the IPCE values of d-TiO2 electrode with Au loading are significantly boosted for the whole spectrum. Dye molecules play a key role in photon-to-electricity conversion. The dye molecules’ efficiency in conversion decides the characteristics of the IPCE spectra—a boost of light absorption would increase the IPCE values—but it is hard to obviously modify the IPCE spectra’s shape. Therefore, the boosted IPCE spectra also has a maximum at 535 nm, where the dye molecules most efficiently convert photons to electricity. In addition, at around 645 nm, the IPCE spectra also upward uplift a little compared with other cells, corresponding to the coupling resonance's light harvesting at 635 nm.
 Fig. 5  IPCE characteristics of DSCs for both types of d-TiO2 film electrodes with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer and 10 μm thick s-TiO2 film on FTO glasses. The loading time of Au nanoparticles is 40 minutes. These spectra was measured by an IPCE tester from Crowntech, and calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell. 
In conclusion, we have shown, as far as we know, for the first time that a coupling architecture of PC and plasmonic nanoparticle array induces synergetic modulation to incident light for resonant enhancement in light harvesting and power conversion. For the cell with the coupling architecture, the light harvesting in the visible and near infrared range is increased by 62% and the overall light-to-electricity conversion yield is thus increased by 41% in contrast to the control test. We believe that the coupling architecture of PC and plasmonic nanoparticles array may improve practicality of commercial DSCs. We also anticipate that our findings are interesting not only for typical Si and DSCs but also for organic and quantum solar cells because the coupling architecture can change the distribution of the incident electromagnetic plane waves and extremely localize the incident light in the interfacial area, thus promoting light harvesting and charge separation.
Notes and References
B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Müller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. V. Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66–78 CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Denkstein, J. V. D. Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. L. Chen, G. V. Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915–1919 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guldin, S. Hüttner, M. Kolle, M. E. Welland, P. Müller-Buschbaum, R. H. Friend, U. Steiner and N. Tétreault, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2303–2309 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334–6342 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. O’Brien, N. P. Kherani, S. Zukotynski, G. A. Ozin, E. Vekris, N. Tetreault, A. Ghutinan, S. John, A. Mihi and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4177–4182 CrossRef .
A. Mihi and H. Míguez, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 125131–125137 CrossRef .
L. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, L. T. Su and A. I. Y. Tok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 209–215 CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193–204 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Pala, J. White, E. Barnard, J. Liu and M. L. Brongersma, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1–6 CrossRef .
R. Gordon, D. Sinton, K. L. Kavanagh and A. G. Brolo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1049–1057 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D’Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215–218 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dulkeith, A. C. Morteani, T. Niedereicholz, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, S. A. Levi, F. C. J. M. Van Veggel, D. N. Reinhoudt, M. Möller and D. T. Gittins, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 2030021 CrossRef .
A. O. Govorov and I. Carmeli, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Govorov, J. Lee and N. A. Kotov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 125308 CrossRef .
S. D. Standridge, G. C. Schatz and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8407–8409 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yum, E. Baranoff, S. Wenger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 842–857 CAS .
C. Hägglund, M. Zäch and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 013113 CrossRef .
S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. E. Koel and A. G. Requicha, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 229–232 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Maier, M. L. Brongersma, P. G. Kik, S. Meltzer, A. A. G. Requicha and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, W. Zhou and T. W. Odom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 529–539 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, J. W. Hartman and H. A. Atwater, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 16356–16359 CrossRef .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 191113 CrossRef .
F. O. Lenzmann, B. C. O’Regan, J. J. T. Smits, H. P. C. E. Kuipers, P. M. Sommeling, L. H. Slooff and J. A. M. V. Roosmalen, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2005, 13, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. McFarland and J. Tang, Nature, 2003, 421, 616–618 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Catchpole, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2006, 364, 3493–3503 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42438jThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Architecture and morphology of photonic crystals coupled with 3D plasmonic Au nanoparticle array. Side view (a) and top view (b) of the double-layer inverse opal TiO2 electrode with Au nanoparticles loading taken from a DSC after testing. Inset in (b): magnified view of the distribution of Au nanoparticles on the wall of the inverse opal TiO2.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Transporting modes of plasmonic electromagnetic (EM) waves of Au nanoparticle array (dots) and Bloch waves in pc-TiO2 (lines). (b) The vertical axis zoomed EM transporting mode curves; the horizontal line represents the position of eigenfrequency.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Experimental light absorptive spectra of d-TiO2 films with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer on FTO glasses. (b) Experimental light absorptive spectra of s-TiO2 films made from commercial P9 paste with about a thickness of about 10 μm. The Au nanoparticle loading time is 40 minutes for both d-TiO2 and s-TiO2 films. (c) Light absorptive spectra of d-TiO2 films with 0, 10, 40, 120 and 300 minute loading time in the same concentration of Au nanoparticle aqueous solution for both dye sensitized and unsensitized films. For all cases, the N3 sensitization is fulfilled under darkness for 24 hours at 40 °C, and all samples are penetrated using anhydrous ethanol drops for absorption tests.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of DSCs for both types of electrodes of d-TiO2 film with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer and 10 μm thick s-TiO2 film on FTO glasses. The loading time of Au nanoparticles is 40 minutes. (b) Current–voltage characteristics of d-TiO2 electrodes with Au loading by soaking in a 29.4 mM aqueous solution for 10, 40, 120 and 300 minutes, respectively. The test area of photoanodes was 0.4 cm2 under illumination of a 100 mW cm−2 xenon lamp.	 

 	Fig. 5  IPCE characteristics of DSCs for both types of d-TiO2 film electrodes with one 6 μm thick nc-TiO2 layer and one 4 μm thick pc-TiO2 layer and 10 μm thick s-TiO2 film on FTO glasses. The loading time of Au nanoparticles is 40 minutes. These spectra was measured by an IPCE tester from Crowntech, and calibrated with a standard silicon solar cell.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42438j

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
