Solar hydrogen production from seawater vapor electrolysis   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE03568F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE03568F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1725-1733Solar hydrogen production from seawater vapor electrolysis†

        
          
            Sudesh 
            Kumari
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            R. 
            Turner White
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bijandra 
            Kumar
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Joshua M. 
            Spurgeon
          
        
      *
      Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA. E-mail: joshua.spurgeon@louisville.edu
Received 
      24th November 2015
    , Accepted 9th March 2016First published on 10th March 2016AbstractSolar photovoltaic utilities require large land areas to produce power equivalent to a conventional fossil fuel utility, and also must be coupled to cost-effective energy storage to overcome the intermittency of sunlight and provide reliable, continuous energy generation. To target both of these disadvantages, a method was demonstrated to produce hydrogen fuel from solar energy by splitting seawater vapor from ambient humidity at near-surface ocean conditions. Using a proton exchange membrane electrolyzer with seawater-humidified air at 80% relative humidity at the anode and dry N2 at the cathode, sufficient electrolysis current density was maintained to operate near the maximum energy-conversion point when driven by a triple-junction amorphous Si solar cell of equivalent area. Fluctuations in atmospheric water content were demonstrated to have minimal effect on the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, remaining ∼6% with relative humidity ≥30%. Direct solar-driven H2 production from seawater vapor was maintained at >4.5 mA cm−2 for >90 hours. The calculated solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency before and after 50 h of operation changed from 6.0% to 6.3% using an ambient seawater humidity feedstock as compared to a drop from 6.6% to 0.5% using liquid seawater feedstock.

Broader context
The conversion of solar energy into clean fuels such as hydrogen is a promising method for energy storage to turn solar into both a portable, energy-dense form for transportation applications as well as a reliable, dispatchable primary energy source for utility-scale generation. The limitation of the solar flux at the earth's surface necessitates large land areas for a solar photovoltaic utility to provide power on par with a traditional power plant, which is both a significant expense and a concern for wild habitat. At this scale, energy storage via water-splitting requires large amounts of freshwater, which could be a strain on resources in a water-scarce environment. Ideally, the abundant water resources of the ocean could serve as the feedstock for hydrogen generation, but electrolysis in seawater is hampered by the salts and impurities. These contaminants foul the catalysts and system components and drive up the required voltage, significantly decreasing electrolysis efficiency. However, the atmospheric water vapor over the sea is largely free of contaminants, with high relative humidity near the ocean surface year-round. We demonstrate herein the feasibility of stable solar hydrogen production from the ambient humidity in a marine environment at efficiencies comparable to production from land-based, liquid freshwater-splitting.

Introduction
Solar energy, which is abundant and widely distributed, is a key renewable resource for meeting global energy needs in an environmentally sustainable manner, but the intermittency of sunlight makes cost-effective energy storage a requirement to incorporate solar utilities at large scale into the energy market. An ideal solution to this obstacle is to store the energy in the form of chemical bonds in energy-dense fuels.1–3 The formation of clean H2 fuel through water-splitting is one feasible approach for solar fuels production on a global scale.4 One drawback, however, that all terrestrial solar utilities face is that they are limited by the solar flux, necessitating large land areas to harvest enough energy to be comparable to a typical coal-based power plant. A recent analysis of a potential photoelectrochemical solar hydrogen production facility determined that a 1 GW annual average output would require ∼180 km2.5 The difficulty of acquiring this much contiguous land area, the cost of the purchase, and the potential consequences to wild habitat are all concerns for large-scale solar utilities. Moreover, the availability of cheap land coupled with the need for high solar insolation make desert environments desirable for large installations, but the scarcity of water resources in such regions could complicate energy storage via water-splitting at this magnitude.
Existing electrolysis technologies include alkaline water electrolyzers and proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyzers.6–8 Both approaches rely on liquid water electrolyte to achieve sufficiently high current densities (∼1 A cm−2) for commercial applications, which would require large quantities of fresh water for a solar fuel utility. The water input to these electrolyzers is further purified to deionized (DI) water to prevent the impurities from depositing on the catalysts and increasing the overpotential of the water-splitting reaction. Pumping and purifying liquid water is thus an energy loss in these systems. Although there have been studies on novel catalysts and membranes for electrolyzers to split seawater,9–15 commercially available PEM electrolysis systems currently rely on DI water to operate.16
By intelligent integration of a photovoltaic (PV) array with an electrolysis system, it may be possible to solve many of the issues with solar energy utilities simultaneously, while easing the burden on water usage as well. For a commercial stand-alone electrolyzer, the economic incentive is to achieve the highest possible current densities, which necessitates the use of liquid water reactant. For a photovoltaic array producing sufficient voltage to split water, the solar flux limits the overall current density to ∼20 mA cm−2 and thus requires a large photoactive area.4 In addition to reducing the balance of systems costs, integrating the PV and electrolyzer together enables a reduced current density load on the electrolyzer since the photoactive component determines the footprint. At lower current densities, the demands on the electrolyzer catalysts are reduced, potentially enabling the use of less active, but cheaper and more abundant catalysts. Also, a PEM electrolyzer can sustain solar-flux-magnitude current densities using a water vapor, rather than liquid water, feedstock.17–20 It should thus be possible to build a complete, integrated solar fuels device that operates directly from the humidity in the environment to produce H2 at the same efficiency as separate PV and liquid water electrolyzer systems.
An ocean environment is a sensible place to employ an ambient humidity solar hydrogen system because the near-surface relative humidity (RH) is high year-round. While specific humidity varies somewhat with latitude, the global RH over the oceans is fairly steady between ∼75–85% with only minor variation seasonally.21–23 Whereas liquid water electrolyzers require DI water to prevent impurities from fouling the catalysts (thus greatly reducing the efficiency in saltwater), a marine solar water vapor electrolysis system would indirectly split seawater with no active water purification. The solar array could be set up away from the coast, obviating the need for large tracts of land and precious water resources. Herein we demonstrate the feasibility of solar-driven H2 formation operating stably under realistic conditions akin to ambient humidity over the ocean.
Experimental
Electrolyzer system
Commercially available PEM reversible fuel cells (Horizon, FCSU-023) were used in electrolyzer mode to split seawater vapor in this study. The electrolyzer consisted of two stainless steel grids (one for the anode and one for the cathode), two carbon Toray paper sheets as gas diffusion layers, and one membrane electrode assembly (MEA) with catalyst particles on either side of a sulfonated polytetrafluoroethylene (i.e., Nafion) proton-exchange membrane (Fig. 1). The particulate catalyst material was the same for both electrodes (Pt/C), and was dispersed on the MEA following standard hot press methods. The electrolyzer had separate gas inlet and outlet ports for both electrodes. The active area of the MEA was 5 cm2. A new PEM electrolyzer was used for each extended stability measurement performed to produce Fig. 7–9. For the measurements performed with liquid water feedstock, the PEM electrolyzer was immersed in a large beaker, providing liquid to both the anode and cathode without active pumping of the fluid.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the electrolysis cell using matched projected areas of triple-junction amorphous Si (tj-a-Si) and the MEA. 
Ultra-high purity N2 (>99.99%) or dry air were used as carrier gases in all vapor-fed experiments. The carrier gas was saturated with seawater vapor by passing the gas through a series of two bubblers filled with either seawater (Carolina Biological Supply Company, Seawater, 153783 – Atlantic Ocean water of 18 Ω cm resistivity containing <0.55 M Na+ and Cl− plus smaller quantities, 10–50 mM, of Mg2+, Ca2+, K+, and SO42−) or 18 MΩ cm resistivity deionized H2O. The carrier gas was saturated with water vapor by bubbling the gas at a flow rate of 10–50 sccm (with mass flow controllers from MKS instruments). The fully humidified gas stream was subsequently mixed with a dry gas stream, both at controlled flow rates, to create a gas flow of the desired relative humidity (RH). The system produced precise (±2% RH) relative humidity as monitored continuously by a relative humidity probe (Omega, RH-USB sensor). The fully saturated carrier gas stream before the addition of dry gas was measured to have RH ∼100%. To reduce the back diffusion of ambient conditions into the electrolysis unit, the output stream from the electrolyzer was bubbled through a water bath. A lack of significant gas leakage in the system was confirmed by collecting the output gas stream in an inverted, liquid-filled graduated cylinder and comparing the collected volume to the time-integrated gas flow rate. Gas tubing joints were also checked visually for leaks using soapy water. All experiments were performed at room temperature.
Data collection
Before each measurement of current density vs. voltage (J–V) behavior under each set of experimental conditions (flow rate, RH, etc.), the electrolyzer was allowed to equilibrate under steady-state gas flow conditions at open circuit for >1 h. An SP-200 model Bio-Logic potentiostat was used to apply DC bias to the electrolyzer and to measure the current, through pins in contact with the current collector metal grids at either electrode. When using liquid water feedstock, the J–V behavior was measured by sweeping the voltage at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. To establish steady-state J–V performance curves with water vapor feedstock, the current was measured after 10 min under potentiostatic conditions at each voltage, using an applied bias from 0.5 to 2.6 V in 50 mV increments. Thus, each water-vapor-fed J–V measurement took >8 h. The current density was determined using the full projected area of the active part of the membrane electrode assembly (5 cm2). Reproducibility was verified by repeated measurements at a few select conditions with current densities observed within ∼±5–8%. Primary sources of uncertainty included RH fluctuation and slight drift over the >8 h measurements and variation in the performance of different PEM electrolyzer units.
Membrane conductivity was determined using an established two-probe AC measurement technique,24 using frequencies between 5 MHz and 0.01 Hz with an oscillation of 10 mV. Bio-Logic Zfit software was used to determine the membrane resistance by fitting an equivalent circuit for PEM fuels cells.24 Membrane conductivity was subsequently calculated by dividing the membrane thickness (120 μm) by the tested membrane area (5 cm2) and the measured membrane resistance.
Faradaic efficiency
Faradaic efficiency was determined by measuring the concentration of H2 in the cathode output gas, and comparing this value to the total charge passed during the time period in which the cathode gas sample was produced. During the electrochemical measurements, H2 concentration in the cathode output stream was analyzed using a gas chromatograph (GC). The GC was an SRI 8601C equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). The electrolyzer output gas was continuously flowed through the GC port, with an automated valve collecting 1 mL samples for testing at the specified times. The carrier gas was N2 at 40 psi. For each reported value, the electrolyzer was operated potentiostatically at 1.6 V (or at the operating potential in the case of the PV-driven measurement) for ∼60 min, with 4 GC measurements at 15, 30, 45, and 60 min averaged to determine faradaic efficiency.
Solar cell measurements
The photovoltage required for sunlight-driven water electrolysis was accomplished in this study by employing a commercial triple-junction amorphous Si (a-Si) photovoltaic from SolarFocus. The active area in all measurements was 5 cm2 to match the electrolyzer active area (Fig. 1). A Xe arc lamp (Oriel 67005) with an AM1.5 filter was the illumination source at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 as determined using a calibrated photodiode. In the case of the direct PV-driven seawater vapor electrolysis measurements, the tj-a-Si cell was directly connected to the PEM electrolyzer under illumination with the potentiostat connected in ammeter mode to monitor current only. The electrolyzer was blocked from illumination during these measurements to prevent temperature-dependent drift in the electrochemical performance. To approximate diurnal daylight conditions during the direct PV-driven electrolysis, the system was illuminated for 8 continuous hours, followed by 16 hours without illumination, repeated over >11 days to generate the reported illuminated current density vs. time behavior.
Results
Liquid water feedstock

Fig. 2 shows the effect on the J–V behavior of the PEM electrolyzer with liquid water feedstock. DI liquid water and liquid seawater feedstocks showed very similar initial J–V performance, with an applied bias of 1.6 V producing similar current densities of ∼60 mA cm−2. After a 60 h potentiostatic measurement under operating conditions at 1.6 V, the DI liquid water feedstock case changed little (not shown) while the electrolyzer fed with liquid seawater showed a drastic drop in current density. After this 60 h period, the PEM electrolyzer run on liquid seawater yielded almost negligible electrolysis current at <2 V.
 Fig. 2  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, of a PEM electrolyzer with a feedstock of liquid DI water (black), liquid seawater at initial conditions (red), and liquid seawater after 60 h at 1.6 V applied bias (green). 
Flow rate effect

Fig. 3 shows the measured J–V behavior of the electrolyzer with a flow of N2(g) fully saturated with seawater vapor as the feedstock to both the anode and cathode. The mass-transport-limited electrolysis current density increased with increasing N2(g)/H2O(g) flow rate, from ∼15 mA cm−2 at 10 sccm to ∼38 mA cm−2 at a flow rate of 30 sccm to each electrode. Under these conditions with a flow rate of 20 sccm to each electrode, the faradaic efficiency for H2 production at the cathode was measured to be ∼93% by GC (Table 1), with a H2:O2 ratio of 2:1.15 for the cathode/anode output streams, respectively.
Table 1 Faradaic efficiency (%) for H2(g) measured at the cathode under different feedstock conditions to the PEM electrolyzer




Feedstock to anode/cathode
H2 faradaic efficiency (%)




N2, RH100, 20 sccm/N2, RH100, 20 sccm
93


Air, RH100, 20 sccm/air, RH100, 20 sccm
0


Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm
63




 Fig. 3  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, with varying carrier gas flow rate. The legend specifies the carrier gas flow rate to each side of the PEM electrolyzer, which was fully humidified (∼RH100) N2 using seawater. 
Carrier gas effect

Fig. 4 shows the effect on the J–V behavior of using seawater-humidified air and/or N2(g) as the carrier gas at 10 sccm to the anode and/or cathode of the electrolyzer. A significant difference occurred in the J–V performance of the electrolyzer when the gas introduced to the cathode was changed from N2(g) to air. In each case, the current density remained negligible at <0.75 V. With air and N2(g) carrier gas to the anode and cathode, respectively, the current density remained low until V > 1.5 V, at which point J increased and plateaued at ∼11 mA cm−2 at >1.7 V. However, with air fed to both the anode and cathode, the onset potential for significant current decreased to ∼0.7 V, with the current rising rapidly and reaching a limiting current density of ∼70 mA cm−2 at >1.5 V. The observed PEM electrolyzer behavior for N2 gas at the anode and air at the cathode was similar to the case for air at both electrodes. With fully humidified air supplied to the cathode, the measured faradaic efficiency for H2 production at the cathode was ∼0% (below the GC resolution, Table 1).
 Fig. 4  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, when using either air or N2 carrier gas. The legend specifies the carrier gas supplied to the electrolyzer anode/cathode, respectively. The gas flow rate was 10 sccm to each electrode with fully humidified (∼RH100) air or N2 using seawater. 
Operation under marine conditions
To test the electrolysis performance at conditions that could be feasibly achieved using ambient vapor at the near-surface ocean, seawater-humidified RH80 air was fed to the anode with dry N2 fed to the cathode. Fig. 5 shows the resulting PEM electrolyzer performance with varying air flow rate to the anode while maintaining the N2 cathode flow rate at 10 sccm. For a low flow rate (10 sccm) to the anode, the limiting current density was ∼8 mA cm−2 while current densities >18 mA cm−2 were achievable by increasing the seawater-humidified flow rate to 50 sccm or higher.
 Fig. 5  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, when varying the gas flow rate of seawater-humidified air (RH80) at the anode. The cathode was fed dry N2 at 10 sccm in each case. 
Relative humidity effect
Changes in the relative humidity of seawater vapor to the anode input air feedstock significantly affected the J–V behavior of the electrolyzer. When the relative humidity at the anode was decreased, a corresponding decrease in the limiting current density was observed as shown in Fig. 6. With a seawater-humidified air flow of 20 sccm to the anode and dry N2 at 10 sccm to the cathode, current densities >12 mA cm−2 were achieved at RH80 and decreased to <4 mA cm−2 at RH20. The 1 Sun illuminated J–V performance of the triple-junction a-Si PV is included in Fig. 6 as well for comparison to highlight the effect on the solar-driven electrolysis operating point. The PV was measured to have an open-circuit voltage, Voc, of 1.92 V, a short-circuit current density, Jsc, of 5.88 mA cm−2, a fill factor of 0.70, and a power-conversion efficiency, η, of 7.9%.
 Fig. 6  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, for the triple-junction amorphous Si PV under illumination (light green) as compared to a PEM electrolyzer when varying the RH of air at 20 sccm to the anode with dry N2 at 10 sccm to the cathode. The legend provides the percent relative humidity in the anode feedstock. 
Electrolyzer stability

Fig. 7 shows the change in the electrolysis current density with time for an input of liquid seawater, or 10 sccm dry N2 to the cathode/20 sccm RH80 air to the anode using either seawater vapor or DI water vapor. The PEM electrolyzer was operated potentiostatically at 1.6 V during the measurement, near the expected operating point when driven by the triple-junction a-Si PV. The current density for electrolysis in liquid seawater started high but continually decayed over >50 h to <2 mA cm−2. In contrast, for water-vapor-fed electrolysis, the current density quickly reached a stable value whether the humidity came from seawater or DI water. Stability was demonstrated for >50 consecutive hours at realistic marine conditions of 80% relative humidity. For the seawater vapor electrolysis, the current density remained stable over the course of the experiment at ∼7–8 mA cm−2, consistent with the performance at 1.6 V expected from Fig. 5.
 Fig. 7  Plot of current density, J, vs. time, at an applied voltage of 1.6 V. The electrolyzer feedstock was either liquid seawater (red), seawater-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm to the anode (black), or DI water-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm to the anode (green). Dry N2 at 10 sccm was input to the cathode for both water-vapor-fed conditions. 

Fig. 8 shows a comparison between the J–V behavior of the PEM electrolyzer with a feedstock of either liquid seawater or seawater-humidified air, before and after the extended potentiostatic operation from Fig. 7. When initially immersed in liquid seawater, the electrolyzer did not reach a limiting current density within the experimentally measured voltage range, with a current density of 56.5 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V from the first J–V curve.
 Fig. 8  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, for the triple-junction amorphous Si PV (tj-a-Si) under illumination (light green) as compared to a PEM electrolyzer with a feedstock of liquid seawater before (black) and after (red) 50 h at 1.6 V, and with seawater-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm flow to the anode and dry N2 at 10 sccm at the cathode before (orange) and after (blue) 50 h at 1.6 V. 
After the 50 h potentiostatic measurement with liquid seawater feedstock, the current density decreased to 0.2 mA cm−2 in the final J–V curve, 0.4% of the initial value at 1.6 V. In contrast, with seawater vapor feedstock the limiting current density reached ∼11 mA cm−2 for a new electrolyzer, dropping modestly to ∼8 mA cm−2 when measured immediately after the 50 h potentiostatic measurement. However, at 1.6 V the seawater-vapor-fed current density was essentially unchanged, remaining 6–7 mA cm−2 before and after the extended measurement. The 1 Sun illuminated J–V performance of the triple-junction a-Si PV is included in Fig. 8 as well for comparison to highlight the effect on the solar-driven electrolysis operating point.
Light-driven operation at realistic conditions
To approximate realistic conditions for a solar fuels generation device splitting water from ambient humidity over the ocean, the electrolyzer was operated directly from the tj-a-Si cell under AM1.5, 1 Sun illumination using seawater-humidified RH80 air at the anode. The day-night cycle was approximated by illuminating the PV + electrolyzer for 8 continuous hours per day, with the cumulative data under illumination shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Plot of current density, J, vs. time for electrolysis directly driven by a triple junction a-Si PV under 1 Sun illumination. The electrolyzer feedstock was seawater-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm to the anode and dry N2 at 10 sccm to the cathode. The illumination was provided to the system in 8 h intervals each day, with the arrows marking the break between each illumination period. 
During the entire process, the electrolyzer feedstock was maintained using seawater-humidified air (RH80) at 20 sccm and dry N2(g) at 10 sccm to the anode and cathode, respectively. The resulting current density of the electrolyzer was stable with an average value >4.5 mA cm−2 over the cumulative illuminated period of 90 h. The arrows in Fig. 9 indicate the end of one 8 h light cycle and start of the next on the following day. Although some decrease in current density was observed during an 8 h period, the current density generally increased the following day. The equation for solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency, ηSTH, is: (1)where J is the externally measured current density (assuming 100% faradaic efficiency to H2), the thermodynamic potential for water-splitting at room temperature is 1.23 V, and Pin is the incident illumination power density. Using eqn (1), the average ηSTH was ∼6.0% on day 1 to ∼5.5% on day 11 of the measurement. However, GC measurements at the cathode during this experiment indicated that leaking or crossover is a problem in this prototype system, with the faradaic efficiency for H2 averaging ∼63% (Table 1).
Ionic conductivity of the membrane was measured under these operating conditions at the start, after 8 hours of operation, and after a subsequent 16 hour period without applied bias, as reported in Table 2.
Table 2 Membrane conductivity measurements. Conductivity values are an average of three measurements




Feedstock to anode/cathode
Condition
Conductivity (mS cm−1)




N2, RH100, 20 sccm/N2, RH100, 20 sccm
Initial
10.0


Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm
Initial
4.7


Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm
After 8 h at 1.6 V
3.6


Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm
8 h at 1.6 V, 16 h off
4.9




Discussion
Liquid water feedstock
The major advantage to using liquid water feedstock for the electrolysis, as shown in Fig. 2, is the high current density achievable before the onset of mass transport limitations. Within the experimental voltage range, the PEM electrolyzer did not reach a limiting current density with liquid water. The formation of gas bubbles at the active sites and subsequent mass transport issues will eventually limit the current, but the limiting current density with liquid water is much greater than that achievable under a 1 Sun solar flux. Fig. 2 also shows that the initial electrolysis performance using liquid seawater was nearly identical to that achieved with DI water. However, while the performance in DI water is quite stable, the current density in seawater decayed continuously over the course of a 60 h potentiostatic measurement. Afterwards, the J–V behavior in liquid seawater showed near negligible performance in the tested voltage range. This decrease in the current density is partially due to the fouling of the catalyst owing to the impurities present in the seawater, such as the electrochemical reduction of impurity metals onto the cathode. The polarity of the applied voltage was subsequently reversed to test the possibility of stripping the impurities from the catalyst to recover the electrolyzer performance, resulting in modest current density gains but with significant irreversible degradation from the original J–V behavior. Discoloration of the liquid seawater electrolyte after this extended test further indicated that corrosion of the internal electrolyzer components may contribute to this decline as well.
Flow rate effect
When the feedstock is switched from 55.5 M liquid water to a water vapor gas stream, the greatly reduced concentration of H2O molecules makes mass transport limitations during electrolysis a far greater concern. Furthermore, the membrane ionomer, Nafion, must be kept well hydrated to maintain a high ionic conductivity.25 The flux of water molecules to the MEA thus has a strong effect on the limiting electrolysis current density, which can be directly controlled by the flow rate of humidified carrier gas. As Fig. 3 shows, increasing the flow of RH100 N2 from 10 to 30 sccm increased the limiting current density by ∼150%. The 30 sccm limiting current density of ∼38 mA cm−2 demonstrates that even the best-performing solar cells could be operated with water vapor electrolysis without suffering from mass transport limitations. However, operating costs and compressor energy losses provide incentive to operate at the minimum gas flow rate that enables the PEM electrolyzer load curve to intersect the PV performance curve at the point of maximum efficiency. A lower cathode gas flow rate for the same electrolysis current will also lead to higher concentrations of H2 in the output stream, which should allow for more efficient downstream separation of the product fuel. The high faradaic efficiency measured at the cathode output under these conditions (Table 1) shows that the water vapor electrolysis to H2 is the dominant reaction. The losses are attributable to membrane H2 crossover to the anode and minor leaks from the cell.
Carrier gas effect
To drive solar hydrogen production directly from ambient humidity, it is necessary to use air (∼79% N2, ∼21% O2) as a carrier gas. As shown in Fig. 4, this has significant consequences for the electrolyzer performance. When air is admitted only to the anode side with inert gas supplied to the cathode, the electrolyzer behavior exhibited similar, though somewhat lower, current density to that observed with inert carrier gas only. The introduction of oxygen in the carrier gas to the anode does not significantly change the ongoing chemistry because water oxidation at the anode already creates O2. The greatly increased O2 concentration at the anode in air relative to inert gas could marginally decrease water oxidation due to Le Chatelier's principle. When air is fed to the cathode, however, the presence of a significant concentration of O2 changes the preferred reaction from hydrogen evolution to oxygen reduction. Rather than reducing protons to H2, the protons combine with the O2 to form H2O just as a fuel cell cathode does. This reaction is thermodynamically easier to run than hydrogen evolution, so the onset potential (∼0.7 V) for current generation drops well below the thermodynamic potential for water-splitting (1.23 V). The kinetic favorability of oxygen reduction relative to hydrogen evolution effectively swamps out all H2 production in the presence of air at the cathode, leading to a faradaic efficiency for H2 fuel of ∼0% (Table 1). An efficient solar fuel generation system operating on ambient humidity must therefore protect the hydrogen evolution catalyst from environmental O2, which can be achieved by sealing the cathode in a recirculating inert gas.
Operation under marine conditions
To test the electrolyzer under realistic conditions for efficiently producing fuel at the ocean surface, the anode was fed air at the near-surface marine average of RH80 humidified from seawater while the cathode was fed 10 sccm dry N2. The low cathode flow rate was chosen to minimize compressor losses and maximize H2 output concentration, kept dry for the ease of downstream H2 purification, and inert gas only to prevent oxygen reduction as a significant side reaction. Fig. 5 shows the achievable electrolysis behavior under these marine-like conditions with varying anode gas flow rate. At 20 sccm seawater-humidified RH80 air flow, the limiting current density was 11–12 mA cm−2 which is sufficient for most PV cells providing the >1.5 V required for water-splitting. A low but significant current density (<1.5 mA cm−2) was observed at these conditions below 1.5 V that was not observed when N2 was the carrier gas fed to both electrodes (Fig. 3). This non-zero current density has an onset potential at ∼0.7 V and can be attributed to O2 crossover from the anode leading to oxygen reduction as highlighted in Fig. 4. This crossover loss is significant but comparable to that measured in PEM fuel cells using a similar Nafion membrane.26
Relative humidity effect
Although the near-surface relative humidity over the ocean is fairly consistent at 75–85%,21–23 the actual concentration of water vapor in the air, or specific humidity, varies with temperature. To investigate the robustness of an ambient ocean humidity solar fuels system to fluctuations in atmospheric water content, the PEM electrolyzer performance with varying relative humidity at room temperature was studied. Fig. 6 shows that decreasing RH at room temperature produced a concomitant drop in the limiting current density of the electrolyzer. Lower relative humidity leads to a reduced water vapor flux to the active sites, reducing the limiting current density. However, the decrease is particularly pronounced at RH < 60%, which may be due to partial dehydration of the membrane. Nafion must be kept well-hydrated to maintain a high ionic conductivity, with water preferentially filling hydrophilic, negatively charged channels which allow the selective transfer of protons.25,27 Without sufficient water, the channels constrict and the membrane conductivity is significantly reduced.
The effect of reduced humidity on the electrolyzer performance is primarily manifested in the limiting current density, which is not reached until ∼1.7 V. When the electrolysis is driven by a PV such as the triple-junction a-Si cell, however, the operating voltage will be at the intersection of the PV and electrolyzer J–V curves,28 which is estimated to occur at ∼1.6 V for most of these electrolysis conditions. At 1.6 V, the electrolyzer limiting current density is greater than the PV photocurrent density for RH ≥ 30. Therefore, the predicted ηSTH of ∼6% using the triple-junction a-Si to drive seawater vapor electrolysis over equivalent areas is expected to be resistant to drops in the ambient humidity (Table 3). For a more efficient photovoltaic reaching water-splitting voltages at higher photocurrent densities, the solar-to-fuel efficiency would be more sensitive to humidity, requiring a greater H2O(g) concentration to keep up with the PV current density. This loss could however be offset by increasing the seawater-humidified anode air flow rate when the ambient specific humidity decreases enough to affect solar-to-hydrogen performance.
Table 3 Projected operating conditions for varying anode air RH when driven by the triple junction a-Si as in Fig. 6. Calculated solar-to-hydrogen efficiency assumes 100% faradaic efficiency for H2 production




Relative humidity (%)
Voltage (V)
Current density (mA cm−2)
Projected ηSTH (%)




80
1.53
5.04
6.20


70
1.53
5.09
6.26


60
1.53
5.06
6.22


50
1.55
4.99
6.14


40
1.55
4.97
6.11


30
1.58
4.83
5.94


20
1.70
4.03
4.96




Electrolyzer stability
As previously mentioned, PEM electrolyzer performance is not stable in liquid seawater. The steep decrease in the current density with liquid seawater over 50 h at 1.6 V displayed in Fig. 7 is largely due to the dissolved impurities in the seawater fouling the catalyst and significantly increasing the reaction overpotential. With seawater-humidified air as the feedstock, the current density for the electrolysis remained steady for >50 h, evidence that the gas stream did not have significant impurities to poison the catalyst. The magnitude and stability of the electrolysis current was comparable whether the air flow was humidified with DI or seawater, exhibiting only minor fluctuations in current density that were attributed to variations in the relative humidity over the course of the measurement. Despite bubbling the air through actual ocean water, the salts and impurities are effectively left behind in the liquid phase, reminiscent of ocean evaporation leading to freshwater precipitation. After ∼17 h of operation, the seawater-humidified RH80 air fed electrolyzer actually outperformed the liquid seawater fed electrolyzer.
The J–V behavior of the electrolyzers before and after 50 h under operation (Fig. 8) further highlights the benefits of the vapor-fed design for solar fuels generation. The operating current density and resulting efficiency with an area-matched, triple-junction a-Si PV driving the reaction drops to negligible fuel production after 50 h in liquid seawater while remaining essentially unchanged at ambient near-surface ocean humidity conditions. Assuming 100% faradaic efficiency for H2, the calculated ηSTH in liquid seawater decayed from an initial value of 6.5% to only 0.5% over 50 h, while the ηSTH with seawater-humidified RH80 air changed from 6.0% to 6.3% over the same period. This result demonstrates the viability of the water vapor electrolysis approach to stably and efficiently generate H2 from seawater.
Light-driven operation at realistic conditions
In a real solar fuels installation, electrolysis would not operate continuously but rather intermittently with the day/night cycle. Practical stability for a marine solar water-vapor-splitter was thus measured by directly driving electrolysis via the illuminated triple-junction a-Si PV under 1 Sun for 8 hours per day. 8 hours was deemed a reasonable time period considering seasonal variations of daylight and the weakness of solar insolation at the hours near dawn and dusk. The resulting illuminated PV + electrolyzer seawater-vapor-fed system showed variable but stable current density over >90 cumulative hours (Fig. 9). Although the current density was observed to marginally decrease over a given day, the performance was recovered at the start of the next illumination cycle. This behavior could be attributed to a slow dehydration of the MEA under reaction conditions, followed by a return to steady-state behavior after rehydration during the dark periods. This explanation is supported by the membrane conductivity measurements conducted at the key points throughout the one-day cycle (Table 2). While the magnitude of the membrane conductivity was in agreement with previously reported values with variable humidity gas feedstock,24 the conductivity declined 23% after 8 hours of operation before recovering fully after 16 hours without applied bias.
Periodic measurements of the H2 faradaic efficiency during this realistic operating condition yielded a consistent value averaging ∼63% (Table 1). This loss means that the actual solar-to-hydrogen efficiency would be proportionally less than predicted and represents a significant inefficiency in this system. The major source of this loss in H2 is presumed to be due to O2 crossover from the air at the anode to the cathode and subsequent redirection of current to oxygen reduction, as discussed above. GC measurements of the O2 concentration from crossover in the cathode output stream under these flow conditions resulted in 1924 ppm O2 when there was no applied bias to the electrolyzer, and 1223 ppm O2 with a bias of 1.6 V. The reduced O2 concentration detected in the cathode under applied bias is attributed to oxygen reduction at the expense of hydrogen evolution. The ∼1.5 mA cm−2 crossover current density identified at similar conditions in Fig. 5 is consistent with the measured faradaic efficiency, since this represents ∼33% of the average 4.5 mA cm−2 operating current density. This crossover loss is somewhat high but close to expected for a membrane designed for a PEM fuel cell.26 For a fuel cell/electrolyzer operating closer to 1 A cm−2, this crossover loss is not a significant blow to the device efficiency, but for a solar-flux-limited current density this loss causes an unacceptable drop in overall efficiency. For devices operating at high current density, the membrane thickness is chosen to minimize resistance from ionic transport with acceptable crossover loss. For a solar-driven system at low current density, however, the ionic conductivity of Nafion has been shown to be more than sufficient,29 meaning that a thicker membrane could be employed with little loss due to additional ohmic resistance. Future optimization of the efficiency of solar seawater-vapor-splitting through improved faradaic efficiency for H2 will thus depend on thicker membranes or alternative ionomers to reduce gas crossover in the device. Higher photocurrents from more efficient PV would also improve the faradaic efficiency because the crossover would represent a smaller fraction of the total current density.
The results provide a proof-of-concept for a fully integrated system floating at the ocean surface like a system of buoys. One possible design and implementation is highlighted and described more completely in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Besides the standard economic challenges for solar energy, the device would need a cost-effective MEA for use over large areas. As previously mentioned, the low current densities open the possibility of replacing noble metal catalysts with cheaper, less active substitutes and potentially replacing Nafion with a cheaper alternative. A solar marine utility, however, would have significant advantages over a land-based solar fuels utility.5 Besides the obvious savings in land costs, the vapor fed system would bypass the need for square miles of highly acidic or highly caustic liquid electrolyte and associated environmental/safety concerns, as well as the major capital expense of the metal structures needed to support and orient a liquid-filled photoelectrochemical panel. A solar buoy utility would also produce rather than consume freshwater, increasing its desirability in drought-ridden coastal regions such as California.
Conclusions
By combining appropriately designed photovoltaics into an integrated system with a novel seawater vapor electrolysis system, vastly abundant ocean water could be converted to energy-dense, clean hydrogen fuel while minimizing balance-of-system costs. The feasibility of solar-driven seawater-vapor-splitting has been established in an approach that bypasses the catalyst fouling issues associated with liquid seawater. Conditions have been established for vapor-fed electrolysis to enable PV-driven H2 production from ambient humidity at efficiencies comparable to that achievable with liquid electrolyte. Effects on the performance due to marine humidity fluctuations were shown to be minimal and tolerable. Stable, direct solar H2 production at realistic near-surface ocean operating conditions with a predicted solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of ∼6% was demonstrated for more than 90 h. This concept could create a new market in offshore solar utilities with built-in energy storage to solve the intermittency issue, minimize land usage and environmental impacts of solar arrays, and are the first energy facilities to be net freshwater producers.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research at the University of Louisville for financial support.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 376–384 CrossRef .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, III, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, III, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264–3278 CAS .
S. Marini, P. Salvi, P. Nelli, R. Pesenti, M. Villa, M. Berrettoni, G. Zangari and Y. Kiros, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 384–391 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ursua, L. M. Gandia and P. Sanchis, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 410–426 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Merge and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kato, M. Sato, Y. Sasaki, K. Izumiya, N. Kumagai and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kato, J. Bhattarai, N. Kumagai, K. Izumiya and K. Hashimoto, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8230–8236 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kato, K. Izumiya, N. Kumagai and K. Hashimoto, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 219–224 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. A. Ghany, N. Kumagai, S. Meguro, K. Asami and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 21–28 CrossRef .
K. Izumiya, E. Akiyama, H. Habazaki, N. Kumagai, A. Kawashima and K. Hashimoto, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 3303–3312 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Kariduraganavar, R. K. Nagarale, A. A. Kittur and S. S. Kulkarni, Desalination, 2006, 197, 225–246 CrossRef CAS .
A. Di Blasi, L. Andaloro, S. Siracusano, N. Briguglio, G. Brunaccini, A. Stassi, A. S. Arico and V. Antonucci, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 7612–7615 CrossRef CAS .
Proton OnSite, http://protononsite.com/products/hydrogen-generator/.
J. M. Spurgeon and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2993–2998 CAS .
S. Sawada, T. Yamaki, T. Maeno, M. Asano, A. Suzuki, T. Terai and Y. Maekawa, Prog. Nucl. Energy, 2008, 50, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Modestino, M. Dumortier, S. M. H. Hashemi, S. Haussener, C. Moser and D. Psaltis, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 2287–2296 RSC .
C. Xiang, Y. Chen and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3713–3721 CAS .
W. T. Liu, W. Q. Tang and P. P. Niiler, J. Clim., 1991, 4, 1023–1034 CrossRef .
S. Pfahl and N. Niedermann, J. Geophys.
Res.: Atmos., 2011, 116, D19104 CrossRef .

          A. da Silva, A. C. Young and S. Levitus, Atlas of Surface Marine Data 1994, Volume 1: Algorithms and Procedures, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC,  1994 Search PubMed .
S. Ma, Z. Siroma and H. Tanaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2274–A2281 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Larminie and A. Dicks, Fuel Cell Systems Explained, John Wiley & Sons, West Sussex, England,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. Inaba, T. Kinumoto, M. Kiriake, R. Umebayashi, A. Tasaka and Z. Ogumi, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5746–5753 CrossRef CAS .
C. Heitner-Wirguin, J. Membr. Sci., 1996, 120, 1–33 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Winkler, C. R. Cox, D. G. Nocera and T. Buonassisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E1076–E1082 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, C. X. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922–9935 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee03568fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
The conversion of solar energy into clean fuels such as hydrogen is a promising method for energy storage to turn solar into both a portable, energy-dense form for transportation applications as well as a reliable, dispatchable primary energy source for utility-scale generation. The limitation of the solar flux at the earth's surface necessitates large land areas for a solar photovoltaic utility to provide power on par with a traditional power plant, which is both a significant expense and a concern for wild habitat. At this scale, energy storage via water-splitting requires large amounts of freshwater, which could be a strain on resources in a water-scarce environment. Ideally, the abundant water resources of the ocean could serve as the feedstock for hydrogen generation, but electrolysis in seawater is hampered by the salts and impurities. These contaminants foul the catalysts and system components and drive up the required voltage, significantly decreasing electrolysis efficiency. However, the atmospheric water vapor over the sea is largely free of contaminants, with high relative humidity near the ocean surface year-round. We demonstrate herein the feasibility of stable solar hydrogen production from the ambient humidity in a marine environment at efficiencies comparable to production from land-based, liquid freshwater-splitting.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the electrolysis cell using matched projected areas of triple-junction amorphous Si (tj-a-Si) and the MEA.	 

 	Fig. 2  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, of a PEM electrolyzer with a feedstock of liquid DI water (black), liquid seawater at initial conditions (red), and liquid seawater after 60 h at 1.6 V applied bias (green).	 

N2, RH100, 20 sccm/N2, RH100, 20 sccm	93
Air, RH100, 20 sccm/air, RH100, 20 sccm	0
Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm	63

 	Fig. 3  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, with varying carrier gas flow rate. The legend specifies the carrier gas flow rate to each side of the PEM electrolyzer, which was fully humidified (∼RH100) N2 using seawater.	 

 	Fig. 4  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, when using either air or N2 carrier gas. The legend specifies the carrier gas supplied to the electrolyzer anode/cathode, respectively. The gas flow rate was 10 sccm to each electrode with fully humidified (∼RH100) air or N2 using seawater.	 

 	Fig. 5  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, when varying the gas flow rate of seawater-humidified air (RH80) at the anode. The cathode was fed dry N2 at 10 sccm in each case.	 

 	Fig. 6  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, for the triple-junction amorphous Si PV under illumination (light green) as compared to a PEM electrolyzer when varying the RH of air at 20 sccm to the anode with dry N2 at 10 sccm to the cathode. The legend provides the percent relative humidity in the anode feedstock.	 

 	Fig. 7  Plot of current density, J, vs. time, at an applied voltage of 1.6 V. The electrolyzer feedstock was either liquid seawater (red), seawater-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm to the anode (black), or DI water-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm to the anode (green). Dry N2 at 10 sccm was input to the cathode for both water-vapor-fed conditions.	 

 	Fig. 8  Plot of current density, J, vs. applied voltage, V, for the triple-junction amorphous Si PV (tj-a-Si) under illumination (light green) as compared to a PEM electrolyzer with a feedstock of liquid seawater before (black) and after (red) 50 h at 1.6 V, and with seawater-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm flow to the anode and dry N2 at 10 sccm at the cathode before (orange) and after (blue) 50 h at 1.6 V.	 

 	Fig. 9  Plot of current density, J, vs. time for electrolysis directly driven by a triple junction a-Si PV under 1 Sun illumination. The electrolyzer feedstock was seawater-humidified RH80 air at 20 sccm to the anode and dry N2 at 10 sccm to the cathode. The illumination was provided to the system in 8 h intervals each day, with the arrows marking the break between each illumination period.	 
	(1)

N2, RH100, 20 sccm/N2, RH100, 20 sccm	Initial	10.0
Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm	Initial	4.7
Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm	After 8 h at 1.6 V	3.6
Air, RH80, 20 sccm/N2, RH0, 10 sccm	8 h at 1.6 V, 16 h off	4.9

80	1.53	5.04	6.20
70	1.53	5.09	6.26
60	1.53	5.06	6.22
50	1.55	4.99	6.14
40	1.55	4.97	6.11
30	1.58	4.83	5.94
20	1.70	4.03	4.96
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee03568f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
