Performance enhancement strategies of fibrous solar cells for wearable hybrid energy systems  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA09175E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA09175E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 3210-3244Performance enhancement strategies of fibrous solar cells for wearable hybrid energy systems

        
          
            Xuwang 
            Tian
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongshi 
            Guo
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqi 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Orest M. 
            Ivasishin
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Jianhua 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Automobile Materials, Ministry of Education, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: zhangjiaqi@jlu.edu.cn
bCollege of Textile, Donghua University, Shanghai 201620, China. E-mail: yanjianhua@dhu.edu.cn
cG. V. Kurdyumov Institute for Metal Physics, Kyiv 03115, Ukraine
Received 
      25th November 2022
    , Accepted 16th January 2023First published on 18th January 2023AbstractThe rapid development of intelligent electronics in recent years gives birth to wearable electronic textiles. Fibrous solar cells (FSCs) are considered as promising energy storage systems for wearable electronic textiles since they are easy to integrate or weave into flexible textiles, which can adapt to various twisting or stretching deformations. Most studies of FSCs focus on improving the photoelectric conversion efficiency and output stability, as well as their own modular integration and integration with energy storage batteries to form wearable hybrid energy systems. This review focuses on discussing prospective strategies and methods for enhancing the stability and reliability of FSCs and reviews recent advances in this important area. First, the technical advantages of fiber geometry, the factors and mechanisms that affect the stability, and the development history of FSCs are systematically summarized and analyzed. Then, prospective strategies to improve the conversion efficiency and stability of FSCs as well as strategies of using FSCs to construct wearable hybrid energy systems are emphatically summarized and discussed. Finally, the remaining challenges and technical difficulties that may hinder the performance improvement and large-scale production of FSCs are proposed, and the development opportunities of FSCs are prospected.Xuwang TianXuwang Tian is a PhD candidate in the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University. His current research focuses on flexible electronics and human-computer interaction design.Yongshi GuoYongshi Guo is a PhD candidate in the College of Textiles, Donghua University. Her research is on flexible electronics and human-computer interaction design.Jiaqi ZhangDr Jiaqi Zhang received his PhD degree from Imperial College London in 2017. Then, he joined Jilin University as an associate professor. His research focuses on optoelectronic semiconducting materials and devices, based on photophysics and carrier dynamics analysis.Jianhua YanDr Jianhua Yan received his PhD degree from West Virginia University in 2015 and joined Donghua University as a full professor in 2017. His research focuses on nanofiber fabrication and nanofibrous devices.
1. Introduction
Fossil fuels are the main source of supporting the energy demand of modern industry and human life, but they are unsustainable in the earth's crust and their burning can release a lot of greenhouse and pollution gases, so developing green and renewable energy to supplement and eventually replace fossil fuels is necessary and urgent. Solar energy is a great alternative since it has the characteristics of being environmentally friendly, renewable, sustainable, and abundant. In the past few decades, many research efforts have been devoted to the development of stable and efficient solar cells.1–6 At present, solar cells are applied to a certain extent and their cost is gradually decreasing. Nevertheless, it is still necessary to improve the performance and expand the scale to replace fossil fuels in order to meet the global energy demand.7
As the world enters the era of the Internet of Things (IOT), more independent and distributed power supplies are needed for personal devices, such as smart watches, sports bracelets, tablets and other wearable IOT devices.7–10 However, traditional solar cells based on fixed, centralized and rigid panels are incompatible with wearable electronics, which aim to achieve flexibility, portability and low power consumption.11–15 Therefore, in recent years, researchers have been committed to developing flexible solar cells for wearable electronics.16–21 Although flexible solar cells based on polymer films have developed rapidly, the films have poor permeability and can only bear a limited bending radius, which limits their further applications in wearable electronics.11,22,23 Fibrous solar cells (FSCs) made of or having the shape of fibers have attracted extensive attention.24–29 FSCs can be prepared based on coaxial, twisted, and staggered structures.11,30,31 According to the type of photosensitive material, FSCs can be divided into fibrous dye sensitized solar cells (FDSSCs),32,33 fibrous organic solar cells (FOSCs),34,35 and fibrous perovskite solar cells (FPSCs).36,37
In general, FSCs are light and soft and can adapt to various twisting or stretching deformations. Moreover, they can be further woven into flexible, breathable and deformable textiles, thus promoting the advanced applications of traditional weaving, knitting, and embroidery processes.38–40 A considerable amount of research work has been devoted to improving the performance of FSCs, which in turn promotes the development of wearable electronics. On one hand, researchers tried to combine FSCs with energy storage batteries to construct hybrid energy systems for wearable electronics.28,41–44 On the other hand, FSCs are woven into a fabric type power supply through textile technology, which inspired the progress of electronic clothing industries.8,45–47 Although FSCs have made significant progress, it is still challenging to achieve feasible output performance, mass production, and environmental stability. The small size and curved surface of fibers increase the complexity of device manufacturing, while most existing FSCs show poor performance compared with their planar counterparts.23,48 In addition, it is also important to optimize the materials and assembly structures in FSC systems and understand the interfacial energy loss in devices to enhance their energy harvesting and operation stability. Furthermore, the manufacturing of fibers, device construction and system integration are also necessary for large-scale production.
In this review, for the first time, we focus on discussing the mechanism, strategies and methods for enhancing the stability and reliability of FSCs and have systematically reviewed the latest development of FSCs and their applications in hybrid energy systems (Fig. 1). The specific logic of this review is described as follows. In Section 2, the technical advantages of fiber geometry for solar cells are first introduced, and then the impact of photoelectric conversion efficiency (PCE), operation stability and hybrid energy systems on the performance improvement of FSCs is systematically described through introducing the structure types, photoelectric conversion mechanism and development history of FSCs. In Section 3, the main prospective strategies to improve the PCE of FSCs are fully discussed from the aspects of suppressing photon reflection and escape, promoting the extraction and transmission of interfacial carriers, adjusting the active layer morphology, and improving the photoelectric characteristics of the transport layer. In Section 4, the factors and mechanisms that affect the stability of FSCs, as well as the strategies to enhance the environmental and mechanical stability of FSCs, are outlined and analysed. In Section 5, the recent progress of integrated FSC systems is discussed from three aspects of single module integration, multi-source energy harvesting, and hybrid energy systems. In Section 6, the remaining problems and challenges that may hinder the performance improvement and large-scale production of FSCs are proposed, and the development opportunities of FSCs are then prospected.
 Fig. 1  A brief overview of the contents discussed in this review. The discussion focuses on the prospective strategies and methods to improve the stability and reliability of FSCs and then systematically reviews the recent development of FSCs and their applications in hybrid energy systems. 
2. Overview of wearable FSCs
Fiber is a kind of material with a large length to diameter ratio (aspect ratio) of generally >500 and a diameter of <100 μm. Different types of materials (such as metals, ceramics, carbon, polymers and composites, etc.) can be manufactured into functional fibers with different specifications through electrospinning, wet spinning, chemical vapor deposition, template method and other processes.49–53 In addition, fibers can be easily prepared into breathable and deformable textiles by twisting, weaving and knitting technologies. With the advent of the IOT era, the development of miniaturized and wearable electronic devices has promoted the development of intelligent and multi-functional fibers. In particular, the addition of functional semiconductors and electroactive materials to fibers has opened the field of fiber electronics. FSCs are an important branch of optical fiber electronics, which has a bright future in wearable energy harvesting and has attracted extensive attention in recent years.54–58 This section focuses on the technical advantages of fiber geometry in FSCs and the photoelectric conversion mechanism of FSCs, and summarizes the evolution history of FSCs.
2.1 Advantages of FSCs
The traditional power system cannot meet the requirements of small size, light weight, and high flexibility of wearable electronics. FSCs provide solutions for self-powered devices and a direct way to achieve environmentally friendly, renewable, sustainable, and flexible energy harvesting platforms. In addition, due to many advantages of fiber geometry, such as high flexibility, large surface area, easy integration, good surface fitting and freedom from the impact of the incident light angle, FSCs can play a vital role in self-powered equipment.33,59,60
The exposure surface has a great influence on the output power density and overall performance of solar cells and other photoelectric devices.36,61 For instances, planar structure solar cells (PSSCs) can only collect light from one side, but the conversion efficiency drops sharply at high incidence angles due to surface reflection, thus reducing the overall PCE of the device (Fig. 2a and b).61 By contrast, the cylindrical and symmetric structure of FSCs provides a large active surface area that enables them to capture light from multiple pathways. Therefore, they can work effectively at a wider incidence angle and output stable power (Fig. 2c and d).30,62–64 Various studies showed that FSCs can effectively collect diffuse light to obtain high power output and had constant performance under different incident light angles.65–70 The low angle dependence of FSCs contributes to the three-dimensional layout of solar cells and the integrated photovoltaic design. FSCs can also be further woven into fabric solar cells, and the fabric structure gives them a curly rough surface and a wide range of photo-active areas.48,71 Curling rough surfaces can reduce surface reflection and enhance the collection of incident light. Compared with PSSCs, fabric solar cells have double photoactive sides, which can effectively collect diffuse light and enhance the PCE of devices (Fig. 2e).72
 Fig. 2  Structural advantages of fibers in solar cells. (a) A 3D light collection diagram of PSSCs. (b) Angle dependence of the normalized short-circuit current of PSSCs. (c) A 3D light collection diagram of FSCs. (d) Angle dependence of the normalized short-circuit current of FSCs and composite FSCs. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The interaction of incident light with PSSCs and FSCs. (f) The effect of geometry on flexibility. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The corresponding deformation diagrams of a single knitting coil at states of (0) initial, (1) lengthening, (2) widening, and (3) deformation. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic diagram of stretching a knitted fabric. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. 
The high aspect ratio of FSCs endows them with great mechanical properties, including bending, twisting and stretching, which enable them to be directly integrated into wearable electronic devices and other textile products.73–76 For any given geometry, the bending stiffness in a particular direction is proportional to the fourth power of its radius along the section direction, as shown in formula (1).77 The length to diameter ratio of FSCs along each direction of the circular section through the central axis is approximately equal, thus ensuring the minimum bending stiffness in each direction, which is an important feature of wearable devices (Fig. 2f). The sectional radii of PSSCs' central shafts are usually not equal, resulting in different bending stiffness in all directions. For example, the shaft with diameter D2 is harder than the shaft with diameter D1, so it is difficult to apply it directly to wearable devices. I = r4(1)where I is the bending stiffness and r is radius in the cross-section direction. FSCs can be integrated or directly woven into textiles through various weaving technologies. Converting FSCs into knitted structures increases their extensibility in the warp or weft direction since an applied tension to the knitted fabric can change the knitting loop structure (Fig. 2g and h).77–79 Extensibility is necessary for device durability, output stability and wearing comfort.
Building a hybrid energy harvesting and storage system is an effective strategy to stably provide energy for wearable electronics. The output power of FSCs is easily affected by the time, place, weather, and other environmental conditions. By combining the advantages of solar energy, thermal energy and mechanical energy harvesting devices and supplementing their weaknesses, hybrid systems can effectively improve the energy conversion efficiency.80–83 In addition, the cooperative behaviour of multi-source energy harvesting reduces the impact of the environment on the stable operation of self-powered wearable electronic devices. On the other hand, solar radiation is unsustainable in time and space, which limits the direct application of FSCs in wearable devices. Combining energy harvesting and storage into an integrated device is an ideal strategy for developing sustainable power systems, which is critical for wearable electronics.84,85 Compared with traditional flat hybrid energy devices, fiber or fabric hybrid energy devices have better flexibility, portability, wear resistance and integration. The ability of FSCs to weave, knit and twist with other fiber-based devices further broadens the integration scope of fiber-based devices to form an integrated multi-functional structure. At present, FSCs have been widely reported in hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems.86–89
2.2 Structures of FSCs
The development of solar cells is mainly divided into three stages. The first stage is dominated by crystalline silicon solar cells, and the second stage is dominated by thin film semiconductor solar cells, including amorphous silicon, gallium arsenide, cadmium telluride, and copper indium gallium selenium. While the third stage is mainly to explore new materials and new structures of solar cells, including dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), organic solar cells (OSCs), perovskite solar cells (PSCs), etc. The development of third-generation solar cells into a one-dimensional fiber form can give them high flexibility, a large exposure surface, great surface compliance and other merit characteristics.
The geometric structure defines the physical, mechanical and functional characteristics of the device, so a reasonable structural design is required to maintain the mechanical and functional characteristics of wearable energy devices.90 The structure of FSCs determines the charge transfer path, which in turn affects the interfacial charge transfer and the PCE of devices.33 One dimensional FSCs mainly include three structures: coaxial structure (Fig. 3a and b),91 twisted structure (Fig. 3c and d) and interlaced structure (Fig. 3e and f).64,92 Generally, FSCs have a multi-layer structure, wherein the fiber working electrode is successively coated with an electron conductive material, a photosensitive material and a hole transport material. And then the counter electrode is assembled on the photoanode by coaxial coating, twisting and winding or interlaced configuration.11,59 It is feasible to weave one-dimensional FSCs into two-dimensional textile solar cells, which can not only increase the overall power output, but also be easier to integrate into wearable electronic devices.
 Fig. 3  Structure and working mechanism of FSCs. (a) Coaxial structure of FDSSCs and (b) its SEM image. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Twisted structure of FPSCs and (d) its SEM image. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Interlaced structure of FOSCs and (f) its SEM image. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Working mechanism of FDSSCs. (h) Working mechanism of FPSCs. (i) Working mechanism of FOSCs. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In comparison with traditional PSSCs, FSCs have several obvious advantages. First, FSCs have a high surface area and three directional light harvesting capacity, which can work at a wider incidence angle and effectively collect diffuse light to enhance the actual output power.62–64 Second, the large aspect ratio of FSCs endows them with great flexibility and deformability, which promise output stability and wear comfort under various mechanical deformations.70,89,92 Third, flexible FSCs can be woven, knitted and twisted with other fiber based devices to build flexible hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems.26,32,89
2.3 Working mechanism of FSCs
Solar cells are a device that converts light energy into electrical energy. Its working mechanism can be simply divided into two processes of absorbing photons to generate carriers, and then collecting and utilizing the photogenerated carriers.93–95 The absorption process of photons takes place in the semiconductor photoactive layer. When the photon energy is greater than the semiconductor band gap width, the photon will interact with and excite the ground state electrons in the photoactive layer (named the valence band (VB) in inorganic materials and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) in organic materials) to the excited state (named the conduction band (CB) in inorganic materials and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) in organic materials). Since the VB or HOMO has an equal number of positive charges after being excited out of an electron, it can be considered that holes have been generated in the VB or HOMO. At this time, there is still Coulomb interaction between the photo-generated electrons and holes, which is called an electron–hole pair. In inorganic solar cells, the interaction between electron–hole pairs is weak, which can effectively separate and form free electrons and free holes at room temperature. However, in OSCs, the free electrons and holes cannot be formed spontaneously, and they can only diffuse into the materials in the form of an electron–hole pair, which is called an exciton. When excitons diffuse to the donor–acceptor interface, and the photo-generated excitons are transferred to the charge transfer state and dissociated into free carriers by the driving force provided by the energy level gaps of the two contact materials. Then free electrons and holes rapidly diffuse to the corresponding transport layer interface under the action of a built-in electric field and are selectively extracted and transported by the electron and hole transport layers. Finally, the carriers are collected by the corresponding cathode and anode, and the whole photoelectric conversion process is completed through an external circuit. The photoelectric conversion mechanism and functional coating layers of FSCs based on coaxial, twisted, and interlaced structures are the same as those of PSSCs.11,90
Taking Fig. 3a as an example, one-dimensional FDSSCs refer to a fibrous solar cell with organic dye molecules as the photosensitive substances that are composed of a fibrous photoanode, electrolytes and a counter electrode. The photoanode comprised a conductive substrate, a semiconductor TiO2 layer and photosensitive dye materials. Its working principle can be described as follows. When the incident light is illuminated, the dye molecules absorb the photon energy and excite electrons. Since the CB energy level of TiO2 was lower than the LUMO energy level of the dye molecules, electrons would enter the CB of TiO2, and then further moved to the photoanode and propagated in the external circuit.96 The dye molecules that lose electrons react with the reduced state I− to generate ground-state dye and oxidized state I3−. The oxidation state I3− diffuses to the counter electrode and reacts with the electrons of the counter electrode, thus forming a complete cycle (Fig. 3g).
In comparison with FDSSCs or FOSCs, the PCE of FPSCs is usually higher due to the great advantages of optical perovskite materials such as their adjustable band gaps, large optical absorption coefficient, low exciton binding energy and large charge diffusion distance. FPSCs are mainly composed of fiber working electrodes, support layers, electron transport layers, light absorption layers, hole transport layers and counter electrodes (Fig. 3c). The working mechanism of FPSCs is shown in Fig. 3h. When the perovskite layer absorbed the photon energy, the electrons in the VB transitioned to the CB and produced excitons, which diffused to the interface and formed free holes and free electrons. While the free electrons entered the electron transport layer (ETL) with a lower CB, and free holes entered the hole transport layer (HTL) with a higher VB. Both the free electrons and holes moved to the two poles of the cell respectively to complete the photoelectric conversion process.97
On the other hand, compared with FDSSCs, all solid state FOSCs show higher security. FOSCs adopt organic semiconductors as photosensitive layers and include fiber working electrodes, ETLs, photosensitive materials, HTLs and counter electrodes (Fig. 3e). The photosensitive layer is composed of a donor (P-type semiconductor) and an acceptor (N-type semiconductor), which can be either a planar or a bulk heterostructure. The core part of FOSCs is the PN heterojunction, which dominates light excitation and charge separation, and is similar to the PN junction of traditional silicon based solar cells. The working mechanism of FOSCs is shown in Fig. 3i. When FOSCs were irradiated with light, the photo-induced electrons would transition from the donor HOMO level to the acceptor LUMO level and generated excitons, which moved to the donor acceptor interface (PN junction) to separate and form free carriers, and then transferred to the electrode surface to form current.98
2.4 Evolution and development pathways of FSCs

Fig. 4 summarizes the evolution and development pathways of FSCs. In 2002, Koyuncu et al. first constructed coaxial FDSSCs by coating a photo-active material on a metal wire.99 This work has laid a foundation for the development of FSCs and stimulated more studies on the application of FSCs. Then, twisted structure FDSSCs were studied and reported in 2008 by Fan et al.30 The FDSSCs did not contain any transparent conductive oxides, and the output power was not affected by the incident light angle. After that, a series of studies on coaxial, twisted, and interlaced structures have emerged, further promoting the development of FSCs, such as coaxial FPSCs48 and FOSCs,100 twisted FPSCs60 and FOSCs,63 and interlaced FDSSCs40 and FOSCs.92 Generally, the energy conversion and storage parts were independent, but integrating the two functions into the same fiber could improve the overall energy conversion and storage efficiency of devices. In 2011, Bae et al. used graphene as a single fiber electrode to build a hybrid energy conversion and storage device.85 Then in 2016, Chen et al. developed a microcable structure textile that could simultaneously collect solar energy and mechanical energy.25 The hybrid textiles introduced an innovative module manufacturing strategy, which greatly reduced the thickness, weight, cost and applicability of mass production of devices. In the same year, Wen et al. reported a hybrid self-charging power textile system that aimed to simultaneously collect sunlight and mechanical motion energy, and then store them in batteries for powering wearable electronic devices.28
 Fig. 4  The representative examples and timeline of FSCs. Image for “Coaxial DSSCs”: reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2002, Trans Tech Publications Ltd. Image for “Coaxial OSCs”: reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics. Image for “Twisted DSSCs”: reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Twisted OSCs”: reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2009, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Image for “Multisource energy harvesting and storage devices”: reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Coaxial PSCs”: reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Twisted PSCs”: reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Interlaced dye-sensitized solar cells”: reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Multisource energy harvesting textiles”: reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. Image for “Integrated energy conversion and storage textiles”: reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Image for “Environmentally stable textile PSCs”: reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. Image for “Photoanode chemical tuned for FDSSCs”: reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.102 Image for “Flexible composite perovskite solar yarn”: reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Concentrators boost efficiency of FDSSCs”: reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. Image for “Highly efficient and stable FDSSCs”: reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Image for “Highly efficient FOSCs”: reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. 
For the practical applications of FSCs, environmental adaptability and mechanical flexibility are important factors. In 2020, Xu et al. developed a new textile based on FPSCs, in which aligned TiO2 nanotubes acted as an effective stress buffer layer to achieve high interface stability.101 The gap filling and multiple sintering of CsPbBr3 quantum dots realized a dense and solid active layer on the fiber substrate surface. These PSC textiles could work at −40 to 160 °C and demonstrated long-term stability and a high PCE, which paved a new way for the design of temperature resistant wearable FSCs. Currently, extensive studied are devoted to improving the PCE of FSCs, including optimizing the device structure, regulating the active layer morphology, improving the photoelectric characteristics of the transport layers, etc. For example, Ardhi et al. adopted poly(2-ethyl-2-oxazoline) as the functional interlayer of a TiO2 photoanode and successfully implemented a new strategy to improve the performance of FDSSCs in 2020.102 The significant performance enhancement (i.e., a high peak PCE of 11.22%) was attributed to the dual function of the PEOx interlayer, which not only passivated the defect sites of the TiO2 photoanode and enhanced the light capture ability, but also improved the photogenerated electron injection and extraction kinetics at the TiO2/dye interface. In addition, the dye loading on the TiO2 photoanode surface was also increased.
Then, Li et al. first reported a yarn type FDSSC by twisting CH3NH3PbI3-PVP nanofibers (as organic carrier selective layers) into flexible solar yarns, which showed a high PCE of 15.7%.103 Then, Huang et al. started with the design of nanoelectronic and photonic modules, and carried out in-depth research on an integrated wearable textile of FDSSCs and flexible luminous solar concentrators (LSCs).104 In this hybrid system, the LSC assisted the expansion of the photon capture area of FDSSCs, which significantly improved the PCE by 84%. In a recent study, Gu et al. developed a method to improve the PCE of FDSSCs using a highly active catalyst as a counter electrode.55 Specifically, by effectively adjusting the growth temperature of Ni3Te2 crystals to synthesize highly efficient electrocatalysts, the maximum PCE of FDSSCs reached 11.81%. In addition, FDSSCs assembled with Ni3Te2 exhibited high electrochemical stability and excellent dynamic bending stability. It is also worth noting that Lv et al. introduced organic semiconductors based on non-fullerene receptors as light capture materials, and the PCE of the prepared FOSCs was as high as 9.4%.105 The reported FOSCs not only could easily drive electronic devices, but also could be woven into textiles to charge smart watches, demonstrating their great potential application in wearable electronic devices.
In a short summary, most researchers have focused on improving the PCE and output stability of FSCs, as well as designing new structures to integrate into self-powered wearable devices. Although the PCE and application technology of FSCs have made great progress, they still face some major challenges. The influencing factors of PCE and operation stability have not been fully studied. Summarizing the influencing factors that have been studied and exploring the possible factors are important steps to promote the further development of FSCs.
3. Strategies to improve the PCE of FSCs
PCE is a key factor in the development of solar cell devices, especially for FSCs. A high PCE ensures acceptable power output. The PCE of FSCs is proportional to the open circuit voltage (Voc), the short-circuit current density (Jsc) and the filling factor (FF), while these three parameters are closely related to the photon harvesting ability and the extraction and transport efficiency of the photogenerative carriers.106–109 By optimizing the photoelectric conversion process of FSCs, the PCE of devices can be effectively improved. This section will outline the main strategies to improve the performance of FSCs from two aspects of photon capture enhancement and improved extraction and transmission of photogenerated carriers.
3.1 Strategies to enhance the photon capture capability
FSCs have high surface areas and three directional light harvesting capacity, which can avoid a significant reduction in PCE caused by changes in the incident light angle. However, both the refractive index mismatch of the functional layers and the imperfect extinction coefficient of the absorber layers in FSCs may lead to light reflection on the surface and at the internal interface, resulting in a large number of photon losses. Fig. 5a shows the interaction between incident light and FSCs. R1 and R2 represent the light loss caused by surface reflection and the light escaping from the device due to incomplete absorption, respectively.110,111 It is obvious that increasing the PCE of FSCs requires inhibition of R1 and R2 to enhance photon capture. Optical manipulation technology provides the possibility to achieve efficient optical collection. The optical manipulation strategies can be divided into two types according to potential mechanisms. The first is aimed at reducing the reflection of the device surface.112,113 FSCs can be integrated with concentrators or reflectors. By focusing the reflected light back on the surface of FSCs, the reflection and escape of photons can be suppressed, which can effectively enhance photon absorption. Another method focuses on capturing the transmitted light from the substrate to the active layer, thereby reducing photon escape.114,115 The auxiliary photon capture can be realized by introducing light redirection methods such as scattering and diffraction to extend the optical paths of the incident light in the absorber layer. In addition, due to the excitation of surface plasmon resonance and surface plasmon polariton, metal nanoparticles (NPs) and periodic nanopatterns exhibit unique optical coupling capabilities that can also be applied to enhance photon capture.116,117
 Fig. 5  Strategies to enhance photon capture. (a) Interactions between incident light and FSCs. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Demonstration of using a side attached LSC to inhibit photon reflection. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Using micro-reflectors to inhibit photon reflection. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) FDSSCs based on TMCA and multilayer structure photoanodes. (e) A SEM image of the light scattering layer. (f) J–V curves of different light scattering layer thicknesses of FDSSCs. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (g) Layered structure photoanode FDSSCs based on Ti micro-ridges/nanorods. (h) A SEM image of the photoanode. (i) J–V curves of FDSSCs on different Ti wire substrates. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (j) Physical image and structure of FDSSCs based on an Ag@SiO2 NP photoanode. (k) A SEM image of the Ag@SiO2 NP photoanode. (l) J–V curves of SS-FDSSCs before and after the introduction of Ag@SiO2 NPs. (j–l) Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2021, Tsinghua University Press. 

3.1.1 Suppression of surface reflections. 
As shown in Fig. 5a, part of the incident light is directly reflected by the external surface of FSCs, resulting in a reduction of the upper limit of external quantum efficiency (EQE). Due to the refractive index shift, light reflection occurs at the interface between the two media. According to the Fresnel equation, the reflectivity of an s-polarized wave, namely transverse electric (TE) wave, is described by formula (2), (2)
The reflectivity of a p-polarized wave, namely transverse magnetic (TM) wave, is described by formula (3), (3)wherein n1 and n2 are the refractive indices of the incident and the transmission media, respectively, and θi and θt are angles of incidence and refraction, respectively. When the incident light is perpendicular to the medium surface, the incidence angle and refraction angle are both 0, and the reflectivity of the medium surface can be described by formula (4), (4)
The reflection coefficient depends on the refractive index difference between the two media. For solar cells, due to the great difference in the refractive indices between different functional layers, the incident light can be reflected at various interfaces, especially on the substrate and at the air interface.111 Therefore, it is of great significance to reduce the reflection loss of incident light to meet the requirements of practical applications.
LSCs can refocus the reflected light on the surface of FSCs to suppress photon reflection. For example, Peng et al. integrated FDSSCs with LSCs to maximize the utilization of incident photons by collecting stray light, achieving optical efficiencies ranging from 8.27% to 22.05%.118 On this basis, more subsequent studies choose LSCs to prepare high-efficiency solar devices.104,119 In addition, LSCs can collect directional optical radiation on a large area and convert high-energy photons into low-energy photons absorbed by the active layer, as well as transferring the radiation wave to a small area. For instance, Huang et al. significantly improved the PCE by 84% by integrating FDSSCs and LSCs.104 In this study, they explored the effect of re-emitted light from waveguides at different attachment positions (side, top and bottom) on FDSSCs. They found that the side connected LSC improved the PCE by enhancing the light collection area, recovering the lost photons and reorienting the light (Fig. 5b). In addition to integrating with a LSC, the combination of micro-reflectors could also effectively recover reflected light and reduced reflection loss. For example, Fu et al. installed optical FSCs in simple and low-cost reflectors, which effectively captured diffuse light in all directions, and improved the maximum output power by 5 times (Fig. 5c).61 Liang et al. also used the diffuse illumination mode of a self-made aluminum reflector to increase the maximum output power of FDSSCs by 3 times.120 They found that when FDSSCs and a parabolic condenser were vertically illuminated, the incident light was reflected by aluminum foil and focused on the FDSSCs. Dong et al. applied the vapor assisted deposition method and introduced diffuse light reflectors into FPSCs, which showed a great 3D light collection capability, and the PCE could be increased by 77%.121


3.1.2 Reduction of photon escape. 
The strategies of using LSCs and micro-reflectors are to reduce the light reflection on the FSC surface and increase the light transmission to the active layer. It should be noted that the refractive indices of different functional layers of FSCs are different, which leads to the reflection of incident light at various interfaces, and the top electrode has a high transparency, so unabsorbed photons can easily escape from the device. Compared with the light escaping from the device that cannot be absorbed, the proportion of reflected light by the surface layer is relatively low. Therefore, strategies of assisting photon capture to reduce light escape deserve attention. Integrating biomimetic or periodic nanostructures into the active layer or buffer layer of FSCs is a widely used light capture strategy.114,116,122,123 The introduction of nanostructures increases internal scattering and facilitates the capture of incident light, thus effectively enhancing photon absorption. In addition, inserting NPs into the active layer or an appropriate interface in FSCs can successfully introduce a light scattering center into the solar cell for light collection.124,125 The Lambert–Beer law describes the relationship between light absorption and the optical path length as:126 (5) (6)where L is the length of the optical path, I0 and IL are the intensities of the incident light and the transmitted light, respectively, k(λ) is the complex part of the refractive index of the material, λ is the wavelength of the incident light, and α is the absorption coefficient.
Formula (6) reveals that the light absorption is strongly dependent on the light wavelength since the extinction coefficient k(λ) is dependent on the wavelength. For FSCs, under normal direction light, the optical path length L in the active layer with thickness d is L = 2nd (n is the refractive index of the active layer).111 The active layer of FSCs is usually thin and the optical path of the thinner active layer is shorter, resulting in ineffective absorption of incident light. Therefore, extending the optical path in the active layer is an effective strategy to enhance the light collection of FSCs. The introduction of micro–nano structures into FSCs can effectively extend the optical length of the incident light in the ultra-thin active layer.
For example, Liu et al. developed efficient FDSSCs based on TiO2 micro-core arrays (TMCAs) and multilayer structure photoanodes (Fig. 5d).127 The TMCAs were prepared by electrochemical and chemical reactions and could be used as an electronic transmission channel and light scattering center of the semiconductor layer. The light scattering layer was made of TiO2 hollow spheres and was located between the porous and the dense layers, which could improve the light absorption capacity (Fig. 5e). Fig. 5f shows the effect of the thickness of the light scattering layer on the performance of FDSSCs. Compared with F-2, F-3 increased the thickness of the light scattering layer and improved the light absorption efficiency, and thus significantly enhanced the PCE. In addition, Liu et al. designed a layered photoanode with enhanced charge and light collection capabilities for FDSSCs (Fig. 5g).128 Specifically, the layered photoanode was composed of Ti microridges and nanorods (Fig. 5h). The microridges and micropits could be used as photoelectron transmission channels and light collection centers, respectively, to achieve high electron transmission rates and excellent light collection capabilities. At the same time, Ti nanorods were used as light scattering centers to further improve the light capture ability. Therefore, FDSSCs (T-3) made with a Ti microridge/nanorod modified photoanode had the highest PCE of 8.128%, which was 61.6% higher than that of the traditional photoanode (Fig. 5i). In addition, the unique light collection ability of the new photoanode was mainly from the multiple reflections of the micropits and the light scattering ability of the nanorods, thus improving the utilization of the incident light. Obviously, this new layered photoanode had both light collection and scattering properties.
Surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) were caused by coherent oscillation of delocalized electrons excited at an interface between a metal and dielectric, and their propagation direction was along the metal surface.129 In some cases, due to the severe surface morphology, the excited SPPs cannot propagate along the surface, resulting in local surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). The LSPR will couple with incident light with the same frequency and momentum, which is conducive to light absorption in metal/semiconductor systems.111 In addition to the advantages of light absorption, LSPR also has excellent light scattering ability due to the strong electric field generated around the metal NPs.110 Plasma nanostructures with different properties, shapes and sizes have been widely used in solar cell functional layers. For example, Kim et al. prepared solid-state FDSSCs (SS-FDSSCs) with enhanced performance by introducing Ag@SiO2 NPs into a TiO2 photoanode (Fig. 5j).130 Ag@SiO2 NPs were attached to the TiO2 surface (Fig. 5k), which generated LSPR when being exposed to optical frequency radiation. The optimized FDSSCs had an efficient LSPR, which could enhance photon capture and suppress charge recombination. As a result, the SS-FDSSCs achieved a maximum PCE of 5.38%, 35% higher than that of the reference devices (Fig. 5l).
As mentioned above, optical management has become a common strategy to enhance light collection and achieve high PCE of FSCs. Optical manipulation structures such as LSCs and micro-reflectors are always combined to suppress photon reflection and escape. In addition, the introduction of micro/nano-structures can increase the internal scattering and plasma effect of FSCs to extend the optical path of incident light in the active layer and effectively enhance the photon absorption. One of the key factors to achieve highly efficient FSCs is to make full use of photons. At the same time, it is also necessary to reasonably design the device structure, adjust the active layer morphology and improve the photoelectric characteristics of the transport layer to ensure the extraction and transmission of photogenerated carriers.

3.2 Strategies to enhance the extraction and transport of photogenerated carriers
The extraction and transmission of photogenerated carriers are key factors affecting the PCE of FSCs. The extraction and transmission efficiencies of photogenerated carriers are affected by device structures, fabrication processes, functional layer compositions and interface contact.131–133 Therefore, by designing device structures, optimizing the preparation processes, regulating the active layer morphology and improving the transport layers, the extraction and transmission of carriers at the interface can be promoted, and nonradiative recombination can be suppressed, thus reducing open circuit voltage loss and improving the PCE and the operation stability of FSCs.

3.2.1 Device structure design. 
Optimizing the device structure can improve the extraction and transmission efficiency of photogenerated carriers, and thus reduce the energy of FSCs. To further improve the performance of FSCs, researchers constantly improve and optimize the device structure. First, take FDSSCs as examples. The ion diffusion and charge transfer efficiency of the counter electrode are important factors affecting the performance of FDSSCs. For example, Liu et al. designed integrated energy conversion and storage devices with composite hollow fiber electrodes of graphene/carbon nanotubes/polyaniline (G/CNTs/PANI) (Fig. 6a).134 In this design, the outer layer of CNTs could well support the inner graphene and prevented the aggregation of graphene when removing the substrate (Fig. 6b). The synergistic effect and seamless connection between CNTs and graphene provided great electrical and electrochemical properties for the as-obtained hollow fibers. FDSSCs based on the G/CNTs/PANI fiber electrodes achieved a high PCE of 4.20%, which was much higher than that of FDSSCs using Pt wire (3.41%), G/CNT (2.54%) and graphene (1.29%) fiber electrodes (Fig. 6c). The high PCE of these FDSSCs was attributed to the fast charge transfer of covalently connected G/CNTs and the synergistic effect between PANI and nano-carbon materials. In addition, inspired by pine needle vascular tissue, Kang et al. designed a hollow carbon nanotube (HCNT) fiber counter electrode with a layered channel structure (Fig. 6d).135 The electrode was prepared by using a series of techniques including chemical vapor deposition, twist treatment and Pt NP deposition. The introduction of rich micro- and nanochannels effectively promoted ion diffusion and charge transfer and improved the effective area of electrochemical reactions (Fig. 6e). In addition, Pt NPs were uniformly deposited on the HCNT fiber surface, which further enhanced the catalytic activity (Fig. 6f) and delivered an excellent PCE of 11.94% (Fig. 6g).
 Fig. 6  Device structure designs. (a) Preparation process of a hollow G/CNTs/PANI fiber. (b) A cross-section SEM image of the hollow G/CNTs/PANI fiber. (c) J–V curves of FDSSCs with different fiber electrodes. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, Springer Singapore. (d) The structure of FDSSCs and the flow direction of electrons in the external circuit. (e) HCNT fiber (left) and hierarchical channel for rapid ion diffusion and charge transport (right). (f) SEM images of HCNT@Pt fibers. (g) J–V curve of the best performing FDSSCs, and the inseted table shows the corresponding photovoltaic parameters. (d–g) Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (h) Structure of planar interface FPSCs. (i) SEM image of the perovskite deposit. (j) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (h–j) Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Then, take FPSCs as examples. Fabricating high-quality perovskite active layers on curved/cylindrical fiber electrodes is a key challenge reported in previous studies, since it is difficult to produce a dense perovskite layer with large crystal size.48,60 On the other hand, the high coverage of the perovskite layer affects the efficient generation and separation of excitons, while the crystal size affects the carrier diffusion length, mobility and lifetime.136–138 In order to overcome these problems, Qiu et al. designed planar interface FPSCs, which enhanced the coverage and crystal size of the perovskite layer, showing a high PCE of 9.49% (Fig. 6h).139 Specifically, perovskite materials were continuously and uniformly coated on a flat fiber substrate to form micron sized crystals at the interface (Fig. 6i), and flexible and conductive CNTs were used as electrodes and hole extraction layers, respectively. The long lifetime of carriers in CH3NH3PbI3 micron crystals and effective hole extraction in CNTs were conducive to high performance. By optimizing the thickness of the photosensitive layer and CNTs, the photon capture was enhanced, and the hole transmission resistance was reduced to obtain the highest PCE in their work (Fig. 6j). In a short summary, the reported multi-scale microstructure design was a reasonable direction to enhance the extraction and transmission of electron–hole pairs, thus improving the performance of FSCs.


3.2.2 Manufacturing process optimization. 
Optimizing the device fabrication process plays an equally important role with designing new device structures in improving the PCE of FSCs. A fiber electrode is the basis for layer deposition to form FSCs, but the uniformity and overall quality of the photosensitive layer and other functional layers cannot be guaranteed since it is difficult to deposit functional materials on its high curvature surface.33 Common methods for preparing PSSCs, such as spin coating, printing and spraying, are not suitable for fiber bending surfaces.59,89 Therefore, selecting appropriate deposition methods are key to improve the performance and mechanical stability of FSCs. In this section, we will discuss the influence of fabrication processes for photosensitive layers and transport layers on the performance of FSCs.
First, the quality of the photosensitive layer directly affects the optical absorption capacity, carrier diffusion length, defect density of states, charge separation and transmission and other properties of FSCs. The stability, uniformity, and charge trap density of the functional layer during bending depend on the effectiveness of the deposition method. In addition, the layer deposition methods used to manufacture FSCs play a crucial role in determining their cost and scalability. Therefore, it is very important to select appropriate photosensitive layer deposition methods and optimize and improve the photovoltaic performance of FSCs. This section will use specific examples to discuss various deposition methods of photosensitive and transport layers, and their relative merits and flaws.
Dip coating is a widely used technique for depositing photosensitive and functional layers of fiber optoelectronic devices. For example, Li et al. manufactured highly flexible, all solid state FPSCs based on CNT fiber electrodes through the dip coating process.60 The maximum PCE of all solid state FPSCs was 3.03%, and they exhibited long-term stability of >96 h and a high reliability of >1000 bending cycles under air conditions. In addition, Hu et al. prepared high-performance FPSCs using lead acetate as the precursor with the dip coating process (Fig. 7a).140 By adjusting the thermal annealing time and different equivalent hydration water, the morphology and crystallization of the perovskite layer were improved, and the defects in the perovskite film were reduced (Fig. 7b). The maximum PCE and Voc of FPSCs reached 7.53% and 0.96 V, respectively (Fig. 7c). Mei et al. fabricated FPSCs on titanium wires through a stable and economical two-step coating method.141 By controlling the concentration of PbI2 and the number of coating cycles, uniform perovskite films can be prepared by this method, and the PCE of FPSCs in air is 5.2%.
 Fig. 7  Optimization of the fabrication process for photosensitive layers. (a) Schematic diagram of FPSCs prepared by the dip coating method. (b) A cross section SEM image of FPSCs. (c) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of FPSCs prepared by VAD. (e) A cross section SEM image of FPSCs. (f) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH. (g) Schematic diagram of FPSCs prepared by cathodic deposition. (h) A cross section SEM image of FPSCs. (i) J–V curves of FPSCs prepared by cathodic deposition and dip coating. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH. 
The dip coating method has the advantages of simple and rapid deposition, but it is difficult to control the thickness and coverage of the functional layer, resulting in poor photosensitive layer quality and carrier transmission efficiency.142,143
Vapour assisted deposition (VAD) combines the liquid phase and vapor phase processes for forming films, and has the advantages of wide applicability of substrates and high film quality, which shows great application potential for depositing second phase materials on fiber substrates.121,144 For example, Dong et al. applied vapor assisted deposition to the preparation of FPSCs and optimized the manufacturing process to obtain high-quality perovskite film layers (Fig. 7d and e).121 The anti-recombination ability of the finally prepared FPSCs was greatly improved, which was conducive to the transmission and collection of carriers, and the PCE reached 10.79% (Fig. 7f). In addition, by introducing diffuse light reflectors, the output power of FPSCs was increased by 77%, showing great 3D light collection capability.
Another popular method of cathodic deposition is to add a photosensitive layer on a cylindrical substrate by an electrochemical deposition process, which has the advantages of simplicity, economy, and speed. For example, Qiu et al. developed high-performance FPSCs with this method (Fig. 7g).145 Compared with FPSCs manufactured by the dip coating process, the designed porous PbI2 plate array provided more voids for the penetration of CH3NH3I solution, and the formed CH3NH3PbI3 layer had higher coverage and uniformity, which promoted the extraction and transmission of carriers (Fig. 7h). Therefore, the maximum PCE and Voc of FPSCs were increased to 7.1% and 0.85 V, respectively (Fig. 7i).
On the other hand, the transport layers (ETL and HTL) between the photosensitive layers and the electrodes also play a crucial role in improving the efficiency of FSCs. The functions of the transport layers mainly include the following four points: first, adjusting the electrode work function to form an ohmic contact between the electrode and the photosensitive layer; second, improving the directional transmission of electrons and holes, and reducing the interface recombination rate of carriers; third, facilitating the enhancement of the photon capture ability of the photosensitive layer; fourth, improving the stability of FSCs.146,147 Therefore, optimizing the preparation process to control the compositions and structures of the transport layers is crucial to improve the photovoltaic performance of FSCs.
The most popular material used for constructing ETL layers in FSCs is TiO2, which can support the photosensitive layer, promote the extraction of interface charges, and reduce the effect of hysteresis. In comparison with a dense TiO2 film, a mesoporous TiO2 layer usually shows better optical manipulation and charge separation characteristics. Therefore, introducing nanostructures in/on the TiO2 surface is regarded as an effective strategy for light redirection transmission and expanding the interface area between the TiO2 ETL and the photosensitive layer to promote charge separation. For example, Liu et al. fabricated flexible FDSSCs by preparing a TiO2 micron-cone-nanowire array (TCW) as the photoanode through a two-step method (Fig. 8a).148 Specifically, a TiO2 micron-cone array (TC) made by an electrochemical method was used as the framework of the photoanode, and then a TiO2 nanowire array (TW) was coated on the TC surface through a hydrothermal reaction to form a dye adsorption layer to improve the PCE of the FDSSCs (Fig. 8b). They found that the height of the TC had a great influence on the dye absorption ability and carrier recombination resistance. The adsorption capacity gradually increased with the increase of the TC height. However, this in turn increased the electron transmission distance and thus increased the carrier recombination phenomenon, which led to the decrease of Voc and limited the enhancement of Jsc. Therefore, the TC height should be balanced to achieve the optimal performance. They found that the highest PCE was 4.75% when the TC height was 19 μm (T-4) (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  Optimization of the fabrication process for transport layers. (a) Preparation process of a TCW and its bending state. (b) A SEM image of the TCW photoanode. (c) J–V curves of FDSSCs based on different photoanodes. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Preparation process of the TMC/TNP micro-cone array photoanode. (e) A SEM image of the TMC/TNP photoanode. (f) J–V curve of the TMC and TNP/TMC photoanode based FDSSCs. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (g) The electron transport path of Ti micro-ridge/nanorod layered photoanode. (h) A SEM image of the Ti micro-ridge/nanorod photoanode based FDSSCs. (i) Nyquist curves of FDSSCs on different Ti wire substrates. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Another example is that Hong et al. used an anodizing process and an immersion coating technology to synthesize a TiO2 microcone array/TiO2 NP (TMC/TNP) composite photoanode (Fig. 8d and e).149 In this delicate design, the TMC layer was not only used as a light scattering layer to promote the utilization of light, but also as an intermediate layer to well connect the TNP and Ti wire for effective charge transfer. They found that an appropriate amount of TNP could produce sufficient dye adsorption sites and induce effective charge transfer to reduce the charge recombination rate. After optimization, the PCE of TNP/TMC photoanode FDSSCs reached 3.70%, which was about 1.7 times higher than that of TMC photoanode based FDSSCs (Fig. 8f). This PCE enhancement was caused by higher dye adsorption and more charge excitation due to TNP deposition. With a similar idea, Liu et al. designed a new layered photoanode with Ti microridges/nanorods to simultaneously improve the light capture ability, PCE, and structural stability of FDSSCs (Fig. 8g and h).128 In this design, Ti nanorods were used to increase the contact area between the substrate and TiO2 layers to inhibit carrier recombination and improve electron lifetime. As a fast electron transmission channel, the micro-ridges shortened the electron transmission distance from the TiO2 layer to the substrate and realized fast electron transmission. The charge transfer resistance of FDSSCs was analyzed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (Fig. 8i). T-3 modified with Ti microridges/nanorods showed the highest carrier recombination resistance. As a result, FDSSCs based on this new photoanode had a high PCE of 8.128% and a large charge collection efficiency of 93.1%.


3.2.3 Doping engineering. 
Optimizing the device structure and fabrication process can effectively improve the efficiency of photon capture and carrier extraction and reduce the energy loss. To further improve the PCE to the efficiency limit, other effective strategies have been developed to suppress the nonradiative recombination in FSCs. Generally, the non-radiative recombination comes from bulk material defects, interface defects and energy level mismatch, which are the main reasons affecting the PCE of FSCs.150–152 Researchers have found that both doping and interface engineering could effectively improve the quality of the photosensitive layer film and reduce the defects of bulk and interface defects, thus minimizing non-radiation recombination. In this section, we will focus on the doping engineering strategy.153–155
Doping engineering has been widely used in efficient, stable and hysteresis free FPSCs. For PSCs, the popular adopted additive dopants usually include a morphology regulator, energy level regulator, phase stabilizer, defect passivator and stability enhancer.156 They can be salts, molecules, polymers, and NPs. Additives can adjust the morphology of thin perovskite films by affecting the colloidal size of precursors and forming nucleation intermediates.157–159 In addition, additives can protect perovskite layers from damage by inhibiting the non-radiative recombination rate and the ion migration through the ionic bond or coordination bond that coordinated on grain boundaries, and thus can improve the open circuit voltage, eliminate hysteresis, and significantly enhance the operation stability of PSCs.160,161
For FPSCs, it is still a great challenge to effectively deposit an active layer on the fiber surface while maintaining an excellent morphology. Precise processing techniques and material combinations are needed to form the required perovskite compositions. For example, Li et al. prepared a flexible solar yarn based on perovskite composite nanofibers (CH3NH3PbI3-PVP) (Fig. 9a).103 The device was designed with Ag yarn as the negative electrode, CNFs as the positive electrode, P3HT as the HTL, and PCBM-SnO2 as the ETL. A mixed active layer structure was fabricated by using flexible PVP to support the uniform and compact growth of perovskite NPs, which promoted the larger average grain size of perovskite and reduced the defect density and recombination rate (Fig. 9b). The connection of perovskite crystals on the supporting polymer chain was realized by the acid base interaction between the CH3NH3+ cation and carbonyl oxygen in PVP (Fig. 9c). The interconnected fiber mesh was conducive to multiple reflections in the layer to further promote photon collection. As a result, this delicate design enabled FPSCs with a high PCE of 15.7% (Fig. 9d). In addition, the high flexibility, environmental stability, and wearability of solar yarns demonstrated potential applications in textile electronics. Similarly, Balilonda et al. also prepared highly flexible lead-free perovskite solar yarns based on CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-PVP composite nanofibers doped with [6,6]-phenyl C61 methyl butyrate (PC61BM) (Fig. 9e).70 In short, the device was designed with Ag yarn as the negative electrode, CNFs as the positive electrode, P3HT as the hole transport layer, and composite nanofiber (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP as the photosensitive layer (Fig. 9f). The lone pair of –CO groups in PVP could coordinate with the perovskite Sn ions (Fig. 9g). After doping 0.17 wt% PC61BM into CH3NH3I:SnCl2-PVP composite nanofibers, the average carrier lifetime increased from 278.71 ns to 300 ns, and the PCE increased to 7.49% (Fig. 9h). PC61BM was an electron transport material, which could enhance the charge amount in the photoreactive nanofiber layer and helped to create an electric field responsible for collecting charge carriers on their respective electrodes. In addition, PC61BM could also repair and close crystal gaps, thereby reducing charge carrier traps and recombination, and improving the Voc and filling factor. This novel photosensitive nanofiber layer was flexibly selected to replace the easily broken perovskite layer, which provided a feasible strategy for further large-scale application of solar yarns.
 Fig. 9  Doping engineering. (a) Solar yarn structure of CH3NH3PbI3-PVP. (b) A SEM image of CH3NH3PbI3-PVP nanofibers. (c) Action mechanism of CH3NH3PbI3 and PVP. (d) J–V curve of the best performing CH3NH3PbI3-PVP solar yarns. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Wiley VCH. (e) Solar yarn structure of (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP. (f) A cross section SEM image of (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP solar yarn. (g) Action mechanism of CH3NH3SnI3−xClx and PVP. (h) J–V curve of the best performing (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP solar yarn. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (i) Structure and physical drawing of FDSSCs based on the mp TiO2 photoanode. (j) A SEM image of MOF-801. (k) A SEM image of mp TiO2. (l) J–V curves of the TiO2 and mp TiO2 photoanode based FDSSCs. (i–l) Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (m) FDSSC structure based on the TiO2–rGO photoanode. (n) Separation and transport of electron–hole pairs in the TiO2–rGO photoanode. (o) J–V curves of the TiO2 and TiO2–rGO photoanode based FDSSCs. (m–o) Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing Ltd. 
To further improve the photoelectric performance of FSCs, a large number of researchers focus on optimizing the conductivity and work function of the transport layers to improve the extraction and transmission efficiency of free holes and electrons.162–165 For DSSCs, the photoanode plays a critical role in absorbing photosensitizer dyes and transferring electrons. The amount of dye adsorbed in the semiconductor oxide film should be increased to improve the photoelectric utilization efficiency of the photoanode.166 In addition, the semiconductor oxide film can be doped to accelerate the electron transmission rate and reduce the electron hole recombination.167 For example, doping heteroatoms can reduce the band gap of TiO2 and broaden the light response range, so as to make full use of sunlight. At the same time, the reduction of the band gap width can promote more electrons to jump to the CB and generate more active sites, thus combining with more dye molecules and making the photogenerated electrons rapidly inject into the TiO2 CB.
For example, Kim et al. embedded MOF-801 into mesoporous TiO2 (mp TiO2) layers to prepare efficient and stable solid FDSSCs (Fig. 9i).168 TiO2 NPs were adsorbed on the surface of MOF-801, providing a prerequisite for photogenerated electron transport (Fig. 9j and k). The optimized FDSSCs of the mp TiO2 layer could effectively extract and transport electrons in one direction and inhibited charge recombination, which helped to achieve a high PCE of 6.50% (Fig. 9l). In addition, Gu et al. combined reduced graphene oxide (rGO) into a TiO2 photoanode to improve the electron collection efficiency and PCE of FDSSCs (Fig. 9m).169 The highly conductive rGO nanosheet could greatly accelerate the electron transmission in the photoanode and the constructed TiO2–rGO heterojunction could enhance the separation of electron–hole pairs and inhibit the recombination of electrons in TiO2 and holes in the dye molecules (Fig. 9n). As a result, the FDSSCs based on a 0.5 wt% rGO modified fibrous photoanode showed a maximum PCE of 5.36%, which was 36% higher than that of the pure TiO2 photoanode (Fig. 9o).


3.2.4 Interface engineering. 
FSCs are usually composed of at least five layers, which will increase the charge accumulation and may result in a greater trap density and recombination rate. Design uniform functional layers and their effective interface contacts with fibers are critical for achieving efficient light collection, photoelectron generation and charge transfer. Therefore, in addition to suppressing the non-radiative recombination through doping engineering, interface engineering is also widely used to improve carrier extraction and transmission, reduce recombination loss and improve photoelectric conversion efficiency.170–172 However, it is not easy to grow a uniform distributed coaxial functional layer on the curved fiber surface, which always results in a poor contact between layers.48,60 Moreover, the coaxial stacking active surface area generally decreases from the outermost layer to the inner layer, resulting in unbalanced charge accumulation (Fig. 10a).36 In recent years, the mechanism study and material development of interface engineering for FPSCs and FDSSCs have made great progress. Generally, interface engineering includes regulating crystal growth, passivating surface defects, constructing gradient energy levels, and preventing ion migration.173–175
 Fig. 10  Interface engineering by regulating crystal growth. (a) Charge accumulation caused by different surface areas of functional layers in FSCs. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Structure of FPSCs. (c) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (d) The modified Ti wire coated with CsPbBr3 QDs and (e) its morphology change after being sintered. (f) Demonstration and a SEM image of the QD filled grain gaps. (g) A dense CsPbBr3 photosensitive layer. (b–g) Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In FPSCs, the quality of perovskite films directly affects the light absorption capacity and carrier separation and transmission, so it is important to prepare smooth, uniform, dense and highly crystalline perovskite films. High quality perovskite thin films usually have three characteristics of high coverage and density without pinholes, high crystallinity and low defect density, and large grain size with few grain boundaries.176,177 However, polycrystalline films prepared by a solution method usually have a large number of grain boundaries, which are the main channel for ion migration and the main area for electron defect aggregation, and can reduce the charge transfer efficiency and carrier life, thus affecting the photovoltaic performance and stability of FPSCs.178–181 Therefore, it is of great significance to control crystal growth, reduce the number of grain boundaries and passivate grain boundaries to inhibit the non-radiative recombination and reduce the Voc loss of FPSCs. For example, Xu et al. developed a multiple sintering method to obtain a fully covered and uniform large size crystalline perovskite deposit on the fiber surface (Fig. 10b).101 The FPSCs prepared based on the perovskite layer exhibited high interfacial stability and a high PCE of 5.37% (Fig. 10c). Specifically, directional TiO2 nanotubes were grown on the surface of a Ti wire by an anodic oxidation process, which were used as a thermal stress buffer layer and ETL. The modified Ti wire was then immersed in CsPbBr3 quantum dot (QD) solution to form a thin layer on the surface (Fig. 10d). Then, these CsPbBr3 QDs were transformed into bulk CsPbBr3 by sintering (Fig. 10e). After that, the modified Ti wire was immersed again into the CsPbBr3 QD solution to fill the gap between crystals with CsPbBr3 QDs and the newly added QDs were then converted into large crystals by sintering (Fig. 10f). This process was repeated for several cycles until a dense and uniform photo-active layer was formed (Fig. 10g).
Since the overall PCE of FDSSCs is mainly affected by the charge collection efficiency, which is closely related to the electron transfer process and electron–hole recombination time, many studies focused on improving the quality of TiO2 NP networks to achieve faster electron transfer.148,182,183 Another method is to shorten the transport distance from the TiO2 NP layer to the fiber electrode while maintaining the structure and surface characteristics of the TiO2 NP layer and the number of loaded dyes.30,128,149 Therefore, by optimizing the interface between TiO2 NPs and fiber electrodes through structural design, the charge transfer can be further promoted and the PCE can be thus improved.
For example, Song et al. introduced nanopillar arrays and TiO2 dense layers on a Ti wire to improve the electron transport efficiency of the photoanode and to improve the performance of FDSSCs.182 In particular, the nanopillar array was in situ constructed on the Ti wire by a simple acid etching, and then TiO2 thin layers and TiO2 NPs were deposited on the nanopillar array by atomic layer deposition (ALD) and paste coating methods (Fig. 11a). The length of the acid etched nanopillar was 450 ± 50 nm, and the coated TiO2 NPs filled the gap between the nanopillars (Fig. 11b). Compared with the smooth surface of the Ti wire, the TiO2 coated nanorods on the Ti wire shortened the transmission distance of electrons from TiO2 NPs to the metallic Ti substrate. However, the formation of nanocolumns increased the surface area and generated more carrier recombination sites, which increased the possibility of reverse transfer of electrons through the TiO2/electrolyte interface. Therefore, carrier recombination at the electrode/electrolyte interface could be inhibited by depositing a dense TiO2 layer on the Ti nanopillar through ALD (Fig. 11c). Compared with ordinary FDSSCs using mixed phase TiO2 NPs, the performance of FDSSCs has been effectively improved with a 45% increment in PCE (Fig. 11d). In addition, the nanopillar helped to combine the TiO2 NPs with the Ti wire, thereby improving the flexibility of FDSSCs, and preventing TiO2 NPs from falling off when the device was bent. In addition, Song et al. also prepared dense TiO2 films by ALD to improve the performance of FDSSCs (Fig. 11e).184 The compact TiO2 film improved the interface performance of Ti/TiO2 (Fig. 11f), and inhibited the carrier recombination in Ti/electrolyte, thus speeding up the electron transmission and improving the charge collection efficiency. Compared with FDSSCs without this ALD treatment, its PCE and bending performance were significantly improved (Fig. 11g).
 Fig. 11  Interface engineering by optimizing the interface contact. (a) Structure and preparation process of FDSSCs. (b) SEM images of the TiO2 coated Ti nanopillar arrays by ALD. (c) The electron transport paths with or without the nanopillar photoanode. (d) J–V curves of FDSSCs with different photoanodes. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (e) FDSSC structure based on a compact TiO2 photoanode film and (f) its cross section SEM image. (g) J–V curves of the compact TiO2 photoanode film based FDSSCs with different film thicknesses. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
In FOSCs, the quality of the photosensitive layer and interlayer interfacial contact will directly affect the light absorption ability, carrier separation and transport. By optimizing the interlayer interfacial contact, the electron transfer can be further promoted, thereby enhancing the photoelectric conversion efficiency. Zhang et al. introduced TiO2 NPs between the photosensitive layer and the electrodes to improve charge separation and transport, and carbon nanotube fiber electrodes to increase the stability, thus developing novel high-efficiency FOSCs.185 The outer surface of the vertically aligned CNTs is bumpy, and the introduction of TiO2 NPs helps to generate thin and uniform P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT:PSS layers on the surface of the working electrode. Furthermore, TiO2 NPs effectively increase the polymer loading, reduce the resistance of charge transport, and enhance light scattering. Compared with FOSCs unloaded with TiO2 NPs under the same conditions, the PCE was improved by 36%.
In a short summary, this section reviews the latest progress of FSCs in terms of photon capture and extraction and transmission of photogenerated carriers. The methods of enhanced photon capture are introduced in detail, the factors affecting the extraction transmission efficiency of photogenerated carriers are analyzed, and the main strategies to improve the PCE of FSCs are summarized on this basis. Table 1 summarizes various types of FSCs and related photovoltaic parameters.
Table 1 Summary of optimization strategies and key parameters of FSCs




Types
Photoactive materials
Design
Optimization method

V
oc (V)

J
sc (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




FDSSCs
N719
Parallel
Structural design
—
—
—
4.20

134



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Coaxial
Structural design
0.91
15.90
65.60
9.49

139



FDSSCs
N719
Parallel
Preparation technology
0.82
6.54
—
3.70

149



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Preparation technology/reduce photon escape
0.703
14.785
78.20
8.128

128



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Preparation technology/reduce photon escape
0.702
16.036
71.70
8.07

127



FOSCs
P3HT:PCBM
Coaxial
Reduce photon escape
0.55
9.31
44.00
2.27

186



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.615
8.75
56.40
3.03

60



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.825
2.165
35.30
0.631

187



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.95
15.14
75.00
10.79

121



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Coaxial
Preparation technology
—
—
—
3.30

48



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Coaxial
Preparation technology
0.85
14.50
56.00
7.10

145



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Coaxial
Preparation technology
0.864
11.80
64.30
6.58

188



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Coaxial
Preparation technology
0.96
14.18
61.00
7.53

140



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.80
8.85
73.70
5.25

141



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Coaxial
Preparation technology
0.713
12.32
6.09
5.35

189



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.67
10.44
67.90
4.75

148



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.694
7.576
59.50
3.13

183



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Preparation technology/interface engineering
—
13.816
—
7.41

184



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Preparation technology
0.74
11.05
75.00
6.41

190



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3-PVP
Twisted
Doping engineering
1.92
11.94
54.20
15.70

103



FPSCs
CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-PVP
Twisted
Doping engineering
1.52
4.75
72.50
7.49

70



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Doping engineering
0.79
12.94
52.00
5.36

169



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Doping engineering
0.71
12.20
74.00
6.50

168



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Doping engineering
0.68
10.37
76.15
5.38

130



FPSCs
CsPbBr3
Coaxial
Interface engineering
1.19
6.48
70.00
5.37

101



FDSSCs
N719
Twisted
Interface engineering
—
—
—
7.72

182



FOSCs
P3HT:PCBM
Twisted
Interface engineering
0.52
9.02
38.00
1.78

185



FOSCs
PM6:Y6:PC71BM
Twisted
Interface engineering
0.71
25.40
52.50
9.40

105






4. Strategies to enhance the stability of FSCs
For FSCs, on the premise of ensuring high efficiency, enhancing stability is the key strategy to promote their further development and commercialization. In addition, the enhanced stability of FSCs can further prevent the leakage of toxic materials and reduce safety hazards. The stability of FSCs is mainly affected by environmental factors (such as water, oxygen, temperature, and light) and mechanical factors (such as tension, compression and shear). Environmental factors easily cause corrosion and degradation of the functional layers, and mechanical stresses in the application process easily cause cracks, fractures and peeling of the functional layers. Therefore, to realize the scalability and industrialization of FSCs, more attention should be paid to enhancing the operation and mechanical stability. This section will outline and discuss different strategies for enhancing the environmental and mechanical stability of FSCs.
4.1 Strategies to enhance environmental stability

4.1.1 Air stability. 
Air stability is a key problem that restricts the commercialization of FSCs. Oxygen and water in the environment can cause serious physical and chemical degradation of the electrode, transport layer and photosensitive layer. The penetration of oxygen and water into FSCs can result in the oxidation of the metal electrode, thus forming an electrically insulated metal oxide layer, which hinders the extraction and transmission of charges.191 In addition, it will also create defects at the interface between the oxidized electrode and the transport layer, resulting in serious non-radiative carrier recombination.192,193 For example, the widely used HTL of PEDOT:PSS in FOSCs showed high absorption of acidity and moisture inair.194,195Fig. 12a shows the influence of air on FSCs. Oxygen can directly diffuse into the FSC device and lead to oxidation of the photosensitive layer under the effect of light irradiance. When oxygen diffuses to the TiO2 ETL, it will cause oxygen defects and hinder current extraction. On the other hand, the diffusion of water into the device through the gap can cause the dissolution of materials and reduce the device performance.196
 Fig. 12  Strategies to enhance the environment stability of FSCs. (a) Effect of oxygen and water on the performance of FSCs. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2020, Wiley VCH. (b) Structure of FOSCs. The film morphology of the active layer at (c) 48% RH and (d) 69% RH. (e) Comparison of the PCE of FOSCs based on chloroform and chlorobenzene solvents under different RH conditions. (f) Comparison of the long-term stability of FOSCs with and without packages. (b–f) Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. (g) Schematic diagram of thermal stress released by TiO2 nanotubes and finite element simulation of the CsPbBr3 layer. (h) The interface between the CsPbBr3 layer and dense TiO2 substrate. (i) The interface between the CsPbBr3 layer and TiO2 nanotube substrate. (j) During strain formation, the adhesion between the annealed CsPbBr3 film and the substrate shrank vertically. (k) Normalized PCE of FPSCs over a wide temperature range. Long term stability at (l) a low temperature of −20 °C and (m) a high temperature of 100 °C. (g–m) Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Physical encapsulation is an effective method to improve the air stability of FSCs. It can prevent oxygen and moisture from intruding into the device to cause corrosion, and can also prevent the leakage of toxic materials, thereby effectively ensuring the service life and safety of FSCs. For example, Lv et al. systematically studied the effects of the ETL/HTL, active layer, counter electrode, solvent and environmental humidity on the performance of FOSCs.105 Highly efficient FOSCs (Fig. 12b) based on non-fullerene receptor (NFA) light collecting materials were prepared, and the optimized PCE was up to 9.40%. In this study, environmental humidity was the key factor affecting device performance in the manufacturing process. For instance, the active layer film was dense and smooth under 40% relative humidity (RH), and there were no pinholes on the surface (Fig. 12c). However, when RH was increased to 69%, a large number of holes appeared on the film surface, and the ETL layer was exposed and came into direct contact with the HTL layer to induce carrier recombination, which resulted in poor photovoltaic performance (Fig. 12d). Therefore, they concluded that low humidity manufacturing conditions could produce high PCE, and high humidity manufacturing conditions could seriously damage the device performance (Fig. 12e). In addition, the solvent was also an important factor affecting the FSC performance, which determined the crystal accumulation and morphology of the organic active layer. For example, FOSCs based on chlorobenzene showed better humidity resistance, and the obtained devices could still achieve an efficiency of >5% under 60% RH (Fig. 12e). The long-term stability of FOSCs was further improved through packaging, and the stability of the packaged devices was significantly improved. After 2 months of outdoor storage, the remained PCE was larger than 50% (Fig. 12f). The adoption of inert moisture proof polymers can significantly slow down the degradation of perovskite caused by oxygen and moisture and can also inhibit the volatilization and leakage of toxic substances, resulting in good stability and safety of FPSCs. An example is that Balilonda et al. selected polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) to package the FPSCs and the PCE could remain at 75% after 85 h in air, while the PCE of the unpacked FPSC controls decreased to 12% under the same conditions.70 Similarly, Li et al. also verified this conclusion by comparing two FPSCs with and without the PMMA package under atmospheric conditions.103 After 216 h, the unpacked FPSC retained 36.5% of its original PCE, but the PMMA packaged devices retained 87.4% of their original PCE.


4.1.2 Thermal stability. 
Since solar cells operate under continuous light, it is inevitable to work continuously at relatively high temperatures. Unfortunately, FSCs usually suffer from thermal instability in real environments. The thermal instability of solar cells is largely related to physical degradation since the materials used in FSCs have a higher decomposition temperature than the operating temperature.197,198 In the photosensitive layer, the main reason for thermal instability is the fragility of the film, which may change its optimal state under heating.199,200 The optimal photosensitive layer is usually not in thermodynamic equilibrium, that is, the morphology can slowly evolve to equilibrium without external factors. Heating provides additional thermodynamic energy, which can accelerate the morphological evolution even at low temperatures.201,202 In addition, heating also leads to the degradation of the contact interface and transport layer, thus reducing the efficiency of electron extraction.203 On the other hand, heating can also accelerate the diffusion process of metal atoms caused by metal electrodes, thereby reducing device performance.204,205
Interface engineering plays a crucial role in improving the thermal stability of FSCs. For example, the thermal expansion coefficient ratio of CsPbBr3 (1.2 × 10−4 K−1) was two orders of magnitude higher than that of TiO2 (8.2 × 10−6 K−1) or Ti (8.5 × 10−6 K−1) substrates that were broadly used in FPSCs. The mismatch of thermal expansion coefficients can lead to the instability of the device structure and may accelerate the degradation of the perovskite layer, thus leading to performance degradation or even failure of the device under temperature changes.206,207 For example, Xu et al. developed a new strategy to stabilize the interface and constructed a fiber based perovskite solar cell textile, which showed high interface stability and high PCE.101 Specifically, TiO2 nanotubes were grown radially along the Ti wire through electrochemical anodization. This in situ growth ensured the integration of Ti and TiO2, which was conducive to the flexibility and mechanical stability of FPSCs. The porous structure of TiO2 nanotubes acted as a stress buffer layer, and the arrangement structure ensured the electron transmission efficiency. Fig. 12g shows the thermal stress release process with temperature changes observed through finite element analysis. For FPSCs with dense TiO2 ETLs, the thermal stress was concentrated at the interface between the CsPbBr3 layers and dense TiO2 layers, resulting in a gap of about 10 nm (Fig. 12h). The aligned porous TiO2 nanotubes had fewer restrictions on the deformation of CsPbBr3 during the temperature changes, which could effectively alleviate the residual interface thermal stress in the CsPbBr3 layer. Therefore, the CsPbBr3 layer could be closely combined with TiO2 nanotubes, and the TiO2 nanotube based FPSCs showed significantly enhanced stability (Fig. 12i). Compressive stress in the vertical direction would lead to smaller plane spacing of CsPbBr3 films, while CsPbBr3 films on TiO2 nanotubes had smaller compressive stress (Fig. 12j). As a result, in the wide temperature range of −40 to 160 °C for unpacked FPSCs, the PCE could remain at 90% and had good operation stability (Fig. 12k). In addition, when the unpacked FPSCs were stored for 240 h at −20 °C and 100 °C, PCE also remained at more than 90% of its original value, achieving long-term stability under severe temperature conditions (Fig. 12l and m).
On the other hand, liquid electrolytes have been widely used to manufacture FDSSCs, but they have stability problems such as evaporation and leakage. Researchers found that the use of gel or solid electrolytes could enhance the stability of FDSSCs which is attractive for wearable applications.208,209 For example, Li et al. developed a new type of gel electrolyte for stretchable FDSSCs using poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) as the gel and hydrophobic 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide as the solvent.208 The gel electrolyte kept quasi-solid states from room temperature to 98 °C, and could withstand a high temperature of 300 °C. The PCE of FDSSCs based on this gel electrolyte reached 5.47%. After being heated to 110 °C and then cooled to 30 °C, the PCE could return to its original state, showing excellent thermal stability. In addition, Sun et al. developed flexible quasi-solid FDSSCs using a mixture of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazole iodide (EMII), 1-propyl-3-methylimidazole iodide (PMII) and iodine as a quasi-solid electrolyte.91 The coaxial FDSSCs were subjected to 50 heating and cooling cycles from 20 °C to 120 °C, and the PCE remained at 91% of its original value. The quasi-solid FDSSCs have high thermal stability and flexibility, avoiding the risk of organic electrolyte leakage during repeated deformation.
In a short summary, the physical packaging, doping engineering, interface engineering and solid electrolytes can enhance the stability of FSCs by increasing the grain size, passivating the defects, and regulating the interface contact. Table 2 summarizes strategies to enhance the environmental stability of FSCs and related photovoltaic parameters. The ratio of PCE maintained after the test is expressed as PCE/PCE0.
Table 2 Strategies to enhance the environment stability of FSCs




Types
Photoactive materials
Test conditions
PCE (%)
PCE/PCE0 (%)
Ref.


Air (relative humidity)
Heat (°C)
Duration
Strategy




FOSCs
PM6:Y6:PC71BM
Open-air
Room temp.
60 days
Encapsulation (k after −502)
9.40
50

105



FPSCs
CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-C61-PVP
Open-air
Room temp.
85 h
Encapsulation (PMMA)
7.49
75

70



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3-PVP
Open-air
Room temp.
216 h
Encapsulation (PMMA)
15.70
87.4

103



FDSSCs
N719
—
—
30 days
Encapsulation (epoxy resin)
5.47
90

208



FDSSCs
N719
35 ± 5%
25 ± 2.5
35 days
CNTY as the electrode
4.00
∼70

210



FDSSCs
N719
35 ± 5%
21 ± 2.5
40 days
Doping (Ag@SiO2 NPs)
5.38
∼90

130



FDSSCs
N719
—
—
Washing 10 times
Solid electrolyte (LiTFSI)
6.16
92

211



FDSSCs
N719
Open-air
20–120
—
Solid electrolyte
2.60
91

91



FPSCs
CsPbBr3
—
−40–160
240 h
Interface engineering
5.37
90

101



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Open-air
Room temp.
150 h
Interface engineering
9.49
∼100

139



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Open-air
Room temp.
168 h
—
5.01
80

64



FOSCs
P3HT:PCBM
Nitrogen atmosphere
Room temp.
14 days
—
2.26
75.22

69



FOSCs
PTB7:PC71BM
Open-air
Room temp.
15 days
—
1.62
85

92






4.2 Strategies to enhance mechanical stability
When FSCs are woven or integrated into wearable smart devices, mechanical stability is the key factor to determine their working life and PCE. In practical applications, FSCs will suffer from mechanical stress caused by rapid and frequent body movements and external environmental factors, such as repeated bending, compression, stretching and twisting. As described in Section 2.1, although the aspect ratio of FSCs endows them with good mechanical properties, many types of degradation still occur under various mechanical stresses (Fig. 13a).212 (i) Linear mechanical tension will produce strain in the photosensitive layer that many changes the film morphology, thus reducing the device performance.213 (ii) Mechanical stress may cause delamination of the photosensitive layer, carrier transport layer and electrode, thus reducing the contact area and hindering charge transmission and extraction.214 (iii) Mechanical stress may cause perforation and fracture of functional layers and accelerate oxygen and water penetration into the device to degrade functional layers.215 (iv) Transverse strain may cause the degradation of the relatively brittle layer under the same strain value, thus reducing the device performance.216 The components and the structural stability of functional layers are key factors determining the mechanical durability of FSCs.33 The fiber electrode needs to be tough enough to avoid fracture under deformation, and the interface between the electrode and the functional layers needs to be stable enough to prevent the functional material from peeling off. Therefore, it is an effective strategy to design device structures at the macro- or micro-scale to obtain high mechanical adaptability and functions.
 Fig. 13  Strategies to enhance the mechanical stability of FSCs. (a) Schematic diagram of multiple performance degradation caused by mechanical stress. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A SEM image under bending of the Ni3Te2 electrode. (c) Dynamic bending test of FDSSCs. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (d) A SEM image of a TCW photoanode under bending. (e) Photovoltaic performance of FDSSCs under different bending states. (f) Photovoltaic performance of FDSSCs under different bending times. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) A SEM image of the spring photoanode under the tension state. (h) J–V curves of FDSSCs before and after exerting a tension at 50% strain. (i) Photovoltaic performance of FDSSCs under different stretching states. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (j) Photos of FPSCs under the distortion state. (k) Photovoltaic performance of FPSCs under different twisting times, and η0 and η correspond to the PCE before and after bending, respectively. (l) Photovoltaic performance of FPSCs under different bending times. (j–l) Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For example, Gu et al. designed a hexagonal nickel telluride (Ni3Te2) laminated microchip as the flexible counter electrode of FDSSCs, which showed a maximum PCE of 11.81%.55 In addition, the FDSSCs assembled with the Ni3Te2 counter electrode exhibited high electrochemical stability and excellent dynamic bending stability. In the bending process, Ni3Te2 microchips well adhered to the Ni wire surface since the in situ grown layered nanosheet array greatly released the stress in the composite fiber (Fig. 13b). After 2000 consecutive bending cycles of FDSSCs, the PCE could remain at 75.12%, and the attenuation rate of each bending cycle was only 0.12‰, showing excellent dynamic flexibility (Fig. 13c). In addition, Liu et al. designed a flexible TiO2 micron-cone-nanowire array (TCW) photoanode for FDSSCs.148 The TiO2 micro-cone had strong adhesion with the Ti fiber substrate, and the large surface area of TiO2 nanowire arrays (TWs) ensured high dye adsorption capacity, which endowed the FDSSCs with great flexibility and high PCE. When the bending radius of the Ti/TCW photoanode was 0.45 mm, there was a slight crack in the TiO2 layer, but TCWs did not fall off from the substrate due to the strong adhesion between TiO2 micron-cone arrays (TC) and Ti substrate (Fig. 13d). Fig. 13e and f show the effects of different bending radii and bending times on the performance of FDSSCs. When the bending radius was 1 cm, the PCE decreased from 4.75% to 4.59%, maintaining 96.6%. After 100 times of bending with a bending radius of 2 cm, the PCE attenuation rate was less than 2.4%, confirming that the FDSSCs had excellent flexibility. Balilonda et al. prepared highly flexible lead-free perovskite solar yarns based on CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-PVP composite nanofibers doped with [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyrate methyl (PC61BM).70 After 1000 bending cycles of the solar yarn, the PCE retained 98% of its original value. Composite nanofibers replace rigid perovskite layers, avoid cracks during bending and twisting, and reduce carrier trap sites. In addition, the elimination of the ETL in the solar yarn design makes it more suitable for bending, twisting, and knotting. This novel structure is lead-free, ETL-free, and the photosensitive nanofibrous layer is selected to replace the easily cracked dip-coated perovskite layer, which provides a feasible strategy for further large-scale application of solar yarns.
For wearable FSCs, extensibility is another important characteristic. For example, Liu et al. fabricated superior flexible FDSSCs with high tensile properties based on spring Ti@TiO2 photoanodes.183 When the spring shaped photoanode was stretched to almost a straight line, the TiO2 nanowire array was not damaged, indicating that there was high adhesion and structural stability between the one-dimensional TiO2 nanowire array and the Ti wire substrate (Fig. 13g). The PCE of the FDSSCs only decreased by 0.01% after 100 times of pull-down at 50% strain, demonstrating high tensile properties (Fig. 13h). When this device was stretched from 0 to 100% strain, the PCE remained at above 95.95% of its original value (Fig. 13i). The stretching operation expanded the gap between the photoanode and the counter electrode and pushed more Pt wires into the elastic fiber substrate, resulting in a higher internal resistance and smaller reaction area of the counter electrode. Therefore, the performance degradation of FDSSCs did not come from structural damage. Furthermore, Zhang et al. developed flexible and stretchable FOSCs based on an elastic substrate and a spring-like structure.217 FOSCs showed stable energy conversion efficiency, and after stretching 100 times at 30% strain, the structure was not obviously damaged, the polymer layer remained uniform and continuous, and the PCE was maintained at 97%.
In addition to excellent bending and stretching stability, good twisting stability is also important for wearable devices. For example, He et al. prepared flexible FPSCs using obelisk like ZnO as the electron transport layer.218 The ZnO nano obelisk array was firmly anchored on the fiber substrate. After 100 cycles of continuous twisting at 30°, the PCE remained at 84% (Fig. 13j and k). After 200 cycles of bending, there was no obvious damage on the structure, and the PCE remained at 93% (Fig. 13l), showing great structural stability and flexibility. In addition, Liu et al. fabricated large-area textiles for organic solar cells by designing the interlaced structure of cathode and anode fibers.92 After the organic photovoltaic textile was twisted at 180° 1000 times, a good contact was maintained between the modified positive and negative fibers, and the PCE remained at 100% of its original efficiency.
High quality packaging, optimized fabrication technology, doping engineering and interface engineering can significantly improve the mechanical stability of FSCs. Table 3 summarizes the mechanical stability enhancement strategy and related photovoltaic parameters. In a short summary, this section summarizes the factors and mechanisms that affect the stability of FSCs and describes in detail the strategies to improve the environmental and mechanical stability of FSCs, such as physical packaging, doping engineering, interface engineering, structural design, and selection of solid electrolytes. It also emphasizes the potential research methods to achieve the stability and efficiency of the required equipment, which provides a possible way to promote the commercialization of FSCs.
Table 3 Strategies to enhance the mechanical stability of FSCs




Types
Photoactive materials
Test conditions
PCE (%)
PCE/PCE0 (%)
Ref.


Mechanical stress
Angle (°)
Cycle times
Strategy




FDSSCs
N719
Bending
—
2000
Structural optimization
11.81
75.12

55



FDSSCs
N719
Bending
—
100
Structural optimization
4.75
97.60

148



FDSSCs
N719
Bending
—
600
—
4.00
90

210



FDSSCs
N719
Bending
90
1000
Encapsulation
7.85
90

104



FDSSCs
N719
Bending
—
500
Doping
5.38
90

130



FDSSCs
N719
Bending
—
500
Solid electrolyte
6.16
92

211



FDSSCs
N719
Bending
90
600
Structural optimization
—
78.6

219



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Bending
—
500
Manufacturing process optimization
10.79
∼100

121



FPSCs
CsPbBr3
Bending
45
5000
Interface engineering
5.37
90

101



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3-PVP
Bending
—
750
Doping
15.70
99

103



FPSCs
CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-PVP
Bending
—
1000
Doping engineering
7.49
98

70



FOSCs
P3HT:PCBM
Bending
—
200
—
1.08
97

220



FDSSCs
N719
Stretching
—
—
Structural optimization
2.84
95.95

183



FOSCs
P3HT:PCBM
Stretching
—
100
Structural optimization
1.23
97

217



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3−xClx
Stretching
—
250
Structural optimization
5.01
90

64



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Twisting
30
100
Structural optimization
3.80
84

218



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Twisting
—
500
Structural optimization
9.49
90

139



FPSCs
CH3NH3PbI3
Twisting
—
400
Manufacturing process optimization
7.10
90

145



FOSCs
PTB7:PC71BM
Twisting/bending
180°
1000
—
1.62
∼100

92



FOSCs
P3HT:PCBM
Curling/folding
—
400
Structural optimization
2.27
13/23

186





5. Design strategy of wearable hybrid energy systems
The previous sections comprehensively reviewed and discussed the recent progress of improving the PCE and stability of FSCs, and potential strategies for the further enhancement of a single FSC have also been proposed. However, the power output provided by a single FSC is limited, which is difficult to ensure the stable operation of wearable electronic devices.43,221 In addition, the power output of FSCs is uncontrollably affected by environmental conditions such as time, place and weather, which limits their direct application in wearable devices.222–225 Building a hybrid energy harvesting and storage system is an effective strategy to provide sustainable and stable output power for wearable electronic devices.
System integration is a necessary condition for the application of FSCs under feasible and practical conditions. The integration of monomodule devices, multi-source energy harvesting, and hybrid energy harvesting, and storage are three main strategies for system integration of FSCs. Single module integration can improve power output by combining the same type FSCs, and multisource energy harvesting can harvest energy more effectively with minimal environmental dependence by combining different types of FSCs. Meanwhile integrating energy harvesting and storage devices can conveniently and effectively convert environmental energy into stored energy. This section will summarize the progress of integration systems of FSCs from the above three aspects.
5.1 Integration of monomodule devices
The power output of a single FSC is limited, and it is difficult to provide energy continuously and stably. The output voltage and current of FSCs of the same type can be improved through series or parallel connection, so high output powers can be achieved by integrating FSCs into textile products through weaving technology or directly weaving them into textile products. Take FOSCs as an example, which usually consist of two intertwined fiber electrodes, one of which is coated with a buffer layer and an active layer. Liu et al. fabricated FOSC textiles that could be mass produced by staggering the cathode and anode fibers (Fig. 14a).92 The mass production process successfully integrated device manufacturing, textile weaving and circuit connection. FOSC textiles with a width of 25 cm were made of two modules in series, each of which consists of five modified cathode fibers in parallel (Fig. 14b). The FOSC textiles achieved an Isc of 1.1 mA and a Voc of 0.83 V, while the improved cathode fiber's Isc and Voc were 0.25 mA and 0.42 V, respectively (Fig. 14c). The FOSC textiles could supply power for digital watches under the sun (Fig. 14d). In addition, Xu et al. prepared new types of FPSCs and textiles with a multiple sintering method. The as-fabricated FPSCs had both long-term stability and high PCE, and could be further woven into textiles for wearable applications (Fig. 14e).101 The output voltage and current of the textiles could be adjusted according to the series and parallel designs. The short circuit current of the FPSC textiles connected in parallel increased linearly with the number of devices, while the Voc remained almost unchanged (Fig. 14f). The series connected FPSC textiles could achieve a short circuit current of 0.09 mA and a Voc of 6.22 V (Fig. 14g). The FPSC textiles could fit human skin and continuously supply power to electronic watches under solar radiation (Fig. 14h).
 Fig. 14  Single module integration and multi-source energy harvesting. (a) FOSC textile structure. (b) Photos of FOSC textiles (illustrations are equivalent circuits). (c) Photovoltaic performance of FOSCs and textiles. (d) Demonstration of using the FOSC textiles to power electronic watches. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Photos of FPSC textiles. (f) I–V curves of paralleled FPSCs. (g) I–V curve of FPSCs in series. (h) Demonstration of using the FPSC textiles to power electronic watches. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Structure of the hybrid textile. (j) Photos of hybrid textiles. (k) Electric output of the hybrid textile under various conditions. (i–k) Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (l) Photos of hybrid textiles. (m) Equivalent circuit of the self-charging system. (n) Short circuit current of FDSSCs, TENG fabrics and hybrid textiles. (l–n) Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH. 
5.2 Multi-source energy harvesting
FSCs are one of the most suitable energy harvesting units for self-powered wearable devices. However, the output power of FSCs is vulnerable to environmental conditions. Therefore, it is necessary to further improve the performance and sustainability of energy harvesting devices. Multi-source energy harvesting is an effective method to optimize the output power of intelligent textiles. The energy conversion efficiency can be effectively improved by combining the advantages of solar, thermal, and mechanical energy harvesting devices and supplementing their weaknesses with a hybrid system. In addition, the cooperative behavior of multi-source energy harvesting reduces the environmental impact on the stable operation of self-powered wearable electronic devices. For example, Chen et al. developed a lightweight, foldable, high-performance hybrid textile based on FDSSCs and a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG), which was used to obtain energy from both sunlight and mechanical motion (Fig. 14i).25 The braiding size of the hybrid textile was determined to be 4 × 5 cm (Fig. 14j) by optimizing the system of the electrical connection and structural hybridization between the components. Fig. 14k shows the electrical output of the hybrid textile under different conditions. When the textile was still exposed to the sun, the FDSSCs converted solar energy into electrical energy, which was also applicable to the TENG part under mechanical excitation. When the textile was exposed to ambient sunlight with mechanical excitation, it could generate energy simultaneously from the ambient sunlight and human biomechanical movement. In addition, Pu et al. prepared a hybrid energy harvesting power textile by integrating grating structured TENG fabrics with FDSSCs (Fig. 14l).88Fig. 14m shows the equivalent circuit of the self-charging system, which consisted of TENGs, FDSSCs and lithium-ion batteries. Seven FDSSCs in series were connected in parallel with rectification TENG fabric to increase the charging current of the lithium-ion batteries. Under simulated solar incidence, FDSSCs outputted a stable DC current of about 12 μA and the TENG fabric produced a short circuit current of about 13 μA, while the output current of the hybrid textile was about the sum of each component (Fig. 14n). The hybrid textiles had proved to be flexible and sustainable and were expected to be used in wearable electronics or smart textiles.
5.3 Hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems
Since solar radiation is unsustainable in time and space, combining energy harvesting and storage into an integrated device is an ideal strategy for developing sustainable power systems, which is critical for wearable electronic products. At present, the storage components in integrated systems are mainly supercapacitors and batteries. Generally, supercapacitors with high power density and low energy density are suitable for rapid charging and discharging, while batteries with lower power density and higher energy density are more suitable for sustainable power supply. Lithium-ion batteries and zinc manganese batteries have been reported to be integrated with FSCs, and the hybrid system showed high energy density and sustainable power supply under overcast or dark conditions.
For example, Kang et al. produced a flexible and breathable photovoltaic textile through an expandable manufacturing process.135 In this design, FDSSCs were integrated with fibrous lithium-ion batteries (FLIBs), and this system could store the converted energy from FDSSCs into FLIBs in time for a stable power output (Fig. 15a). From the voltage profile of FLIBs in this hybrid system, FDSSCs could charge FLIBs to 4.2 V and discharge them to 2.5 V at a constant current of 0.5 mA under the illumination of AM 1.5G (Fig. 15b). The self-powered textiles could be integrated with intelligent health care clothing for real-time health monitoring and display (Fig. 15c). Sweaters woven from this hybrid textile could provide power for wearable electronic devices such as smart watches to monitor the heart rate (Fig. 15d), and the integrated textile could visually display the heart rate status (Fig. 15e). In addition, Zhang et al. developed a wearable optical charging fabric as a sustainable and stable power supply to drive the body sensor network, and achieved sustainable and personalized medical care.39 As shown in Fig. 15f, the photo-charged fabric consisted of a photovoltaic energy harvesting module and a rechargeable fabric battery. The fabric could be charged to 6.4 V under solar radiation and could continuously supply power for 2 h at a discharge current of 0.1 mA (Fig. 15g). The optical charging fabric also showed great air stability and water resistance, which could work normally in a twisted and humid environment, and the stored energy could be maintained for more than 60 days (Fig. 15h). The charged fabric (5 × 5 cm) could directly power a mobile phone (Fig. 15i) and could also be used to drive a body sensor network composed of motion, temperature, and humidity sensors (Fig. 15j). The body area sensor network could simultaneously perform environmental and physiological monitoring, including heart rate, body temperature and biomechanical movement (Fig. 15k). These reported wearable hybrid fabrics had a series of functions, which can provide continuous power for personalized medical treatment and body area sensor networks.
 Fig. 15  Hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems. (a) Self-powered textiles integrated with FDSSCs and FLIBs. (b) The optical charging curve of FDSSCs under AM 1.5 (red line) and the discharge curve of FLIBs under 0.5 mA (black line) (the inset figure shows the operation mechanism of electrons flowing from the photoanode to the cathode along the wire). (c) Intelligent health care clothing integrated with self-powered textiles, health monitoring and display modules. Self-powered textiles supply power to various wearable devices of (d) smart watches and (e) heart rate sensors. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (f) Optical charging fabric structure. (g) Stable electrical output of the photocharged fabric in different environments. (h) Air stability. The optical charging fabric supplies power for various wearable devices of (i) mobile phones, (j) temperature and humidity sensors and (k) heart rate sensors. (f–k) Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition to integrating with batteries, a self-powered system integrated with FSCs and supercapacitors has also been widely studied. For example, Song et al. combined FDSSCs with planar micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) to prepare a self-charging power supply system on a polymer sheet (Fig. 16a).182 In this design, three FDSSCs in series and three MSCs in series were constructed. The equivalent circuit in Fig. 16b shows that the FDSSCs outputted DC current, which could simplify the bridge circuit between FDSSCs and MSCs. It can be seen from Fig. 16c that the MSCs in series could be charged to 1.8 V by FDSSCs within 30 s. The illustration shows a self-powered electronic watch. In addition, the self-powered system had excellent flexibility and stability, which was expected to be used in wearable electronic products or intelligent textiles. External wiring between FSCs and energy storage devices may cause internal resistance problems, which did not meet the requirements of miniaturization and multi-function of wearable energy. To solve this problem, Kim et al. prepared a flexible CNT yarn (CNTY) with improved mechanical and electrical properties, and used it as a shared electrode to manufacture a solid-state fiber shaped photoelectric capacitor (SS-FPC) (Fig. 16d).54 The CNTY electrode could be used as the counter electrode of FDSSCs and the electrode of a dimensional electrochemical energy storage (FES) unit without an additional connection process, so as to minimize the energy loss and maintain the structural stability. When FDSSCs were exposed to ambient sunlight, the incident light excited electrons in the HOMO level of dye materials to their LUMO levels. The photoexcited electrons were injected into semiconductor metal oxides and transferred from the external circuit to the FES working electrode. On the other hand, the oxidized dye was reduced by the reducing substance I− in the electrolyte, and I3− obtained electrons from the working electrode of the FES to complete the photo-charging process (Fig. 16e). Based on the synergy of the two units, the optimized SS-FPC showed a total energy conversion efficiency of 4.69% and a discharge time of about 6 min.
 Fig. 16  Hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems. (a) Schematic diagram of a power system of a self-charging power supply device and (b) its equivalent circuit. (c) Charging curve of FDSSCs (the inset figure shows the power supply for an electronic watch). (a–c) Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (d) Structure and physical drawings of a SS-FPC system and (e) its working mechanism. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (f) A hybrid self-charging power textile and (g) its equivalent circuit. (h) Charging curves of FDSSCs and F-TENG (the illustration at the upper left corner is the enlarged F-DSSC charging curve, and the illustration at the lower right corner is the Isc of F-TENG). (f–h) Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Diagram of a hybrid bracelet and (j) its equivalent circuit. (k) The voltage curve of the hybrid energy harvesting device for charging SCs and the working curve for powering the electronic device. (i–k) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Many reported multi-source energy harvesting and storage hybrid systems could improve power output and sustainability. For example, Wen et al. proposed a hybrid self-charging power textile system, which aimed to simultaneously collect environmental sunlight and body movement energy, and then stored them in energy storage batteries.28 Hybrid self-charging power textiles included F-DSSCs, a fibrous TENG (F-TENG) and fibrous supercapacitors (F-SC) (Fig. 16f). The F-DSSCs and F-SC units were individually woven into fabrics as textile structures with series/parallel connection. After connecting the two kinds of textiles, a textile system based on F-TENG was then constructed. The equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 16g. When the F-DSSCs were connected to the circuit, the voltage of the F-SC increased linearly, indicating that the F-DSSCs had a stable output. The internal impedance of F-TENG was usually several orders of magnitude higher than that of F-DSSCs and F-SCs. Therefore, the charging efficiency could be further improved through impedance matching between F-DSSCs, F-TENG and F-SCs. As shown in Fig. 16h, F-SCs could obtain higher voltage when connecting F-DSSCs and F-TENG for simultaneous charging. The hybrid self-charging textile system was a full fiber structure, which could be easily woven into electronic textiles to continuously supply power for mobile or wearable electronic devices.
Similarly, Song et al. also reported a highly elastic and sustainable power source for harvesting and storing energy from environmental sunlight and human movement.86 The hybrid power bracelet consisted of energy harvesting devices of FDSSCs and a TENG, and an energy storage device of a supercapacitor (Fig. 16i). In this design, the TENG and supercapacitor shared the same electrode that could be easily assembled into a device, and FDSSCs could be embedded into TENG's electrode. The equivalent circuit of the hybrid system is shown in Fig. 16j. The flexible FDSSCs and TENG, as generator sets, could charge the SC independently or simultaneously. When the FDSSCs and TENG were connected to SCs at the same time, the voltage raises steadily from 0 to ∼1.8 V within 43 s. The charged SC could stably drive an electronic watch for 85 s and could continuously supply power (Fig. 16k). The energy exploration behavior of the device overcomes the environmental constraints and provides a possible method for developing a self-powered system for wearable electronic devices.
In a short summary, this section summarizes and discusses the research progress of hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems by using FSCs from three aspects of single module integration, multi-source energy harvesting, and hybrid energy harvesting and storage. The integrated system based on FSCs can continuously and stably provide powers to wearable electronic devices and thus can promote their further expansion and industrial application.
6. Conclusion and outlook
This review has systematically introduced the latest development of FSCs and their applications in hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems. A series of strategies for enhancing photon capture and the extraction and transmission of electron–hole pairs to improve the PCE of FSCs were emphatically introduced. Then the factors and mechanisms that affect the stability of FSCs were summarized and analyzed, and prospective strategies to improve the environment and mechanical stability of FSCs were discussed in detail. Finally, integration systems that include FSCs for wearable hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems were fully discussed and analyzed. Although many strategies and technologies have been developed to improve the PCE and stability of FSCs, effective strategies for scalable manufacturing and industrialization of FSCs in the future still face severe challenges. For example, due to the lack of an effective interdisciplinary communication between researchers specializing in solar cells and textile engineering, most research work focuses on adding solar cell functions to the formed fibers, yarns, or fabrics without considering the structural designs from the perspective of fibers, yarns, or textiles. In this section, we will analyze and discuss the remaining problems and challenges in the development of FSCs from the aspects of PCE, stability, large-scale production, and security, and then put up the research directions of FSCs.
6.1 Prospects for improving PCE
Currently, the performance of FSCs is still lower than that of traditional PSSCs although the development of FSCs has made great progress. The electrode materials selection, materials modification, electrode structure design, manufacturing process optimization and device assembly determine the PCE and operation stability of FSCs. As a conductive substrate and a carrier of active materials, fiber electrodes play an important role in achieving high-performance FSCs. An ideal fiber electrode should have superior flexibility with high mechanical strength, low resistances to facilitate charge transfer, and large surface areas to accommodate active materials. Previously reported fibrous electrodes for FSCs may be difficult to meet the above requirements, and their comprehensive performances need to be further improved. Developing high-performance composite fibers is a promising research direction for FSCs, in which the innovation of materials is a direct way to improve PCE. The properties of functional layers directly determine the photon capture and carrier extraction transmission efficiency of FSCs. At present, the functional materials and manufacturing processes used for FSCs are mainly from planar devices, so it is still challenging to obtain high-quality functional layers and interfaces on curved fiber substrates. In the future, more research should focus on exploring its mechanism and potential relationship, such as the dependence of the load density and arrangement degree on the curvature of the fiber structure. In addition, the combination of advanced structure design and an efficient preparation process is also expected to be studied deeply to further improve the PCE of FSCs.
6.2 Prospects for improving stability
In addition to PCE, mechanical and environmental stability are also important factors that determine the life and practical applications of FSCs. In an actual wearable scene, various continuous mechanical stresses usually cause the functional layers on the fiber electrode surface to peel, break, and wrinkle. Therefore, it is still a challenge to achieve good adhesion between functional coatings and flexible fiber electrodes, so as to obtain great durability. Efforts should be made to optimize the device structure and the deposition methods for functional layers, to enhance the interface adhesion and stability, and to ensure that devices can adapt to shear deformation during their usage. In addition, environmental stability is a key issue that restricts the commercialization of FSCs. Effective packaging plays an important role in blocking oxygen and water in the environment to extend the service life of FSCs. However, the current mainstream packaging materials and technologies cannot meet the requirements of high curvature FSCs. Therefore, it is important to find new and efficient packaging materials and preparation methods suitable for FSCs. On the other hand, interface contact and defect control of functional layers should be extensively studied in the future to enhance the interface stability.
6.3 Prospects for realizing large-scale fabrication
The large-scale manufacturing of FSCs is a key step in their wide application. Although various types of FSCs have been extensively studied in the laboratory, designing an effective route to mass produce and optimize FSCs is still a huge challenge. The large-scale production of FSCs is limited by a variety of manufacturing processes, including fiber substrate preparation, active material deposition, device assembly and packaging, and integration with other electronic components. It has been proved that wet spinning and continuous coating can be used to manufacture optical fiber devices on a large scale.226,227 Therefore, it is necessary to study the effectiveness of these methods in the application of FSCs to provide more meaningful solutions for scale manufacturing. In addition, as the length of FSCs increases, their electrical performance may gradually decline, making it difficult to expand the scale of production. Although series or parallel connection of FSCs can increase the output power, it will increase the production cost and complicate the circuit connection of large-area solar cell textiles. Therefore, it is necessary to further clarify the relationship between integration technology and output power, which will provide a better solution for scalable manufacturing.
6.4 Prospects for improving security
Human health and comfort are the most important criteria in wearable device design and material systems. In the life cycle of FSCs, the harmful solvents and toxic substances produced by material selection, device manufacturing, operation and disposal stages may have an impact on human health and the ecological environment. At the stage of materials selection, N719 dyes, organic electrolytes and lead heavy metal ions are prone to leakage and thus cause pollution. Gradually substituting these toxic materials with environmentally compatible materials is an important research direction, such as introducing lead-free photoactive materials and developing stable and environmentally friendly gel electrolytes. At the stage of device fabrication, low-toxicity, or non-toxic green solvents for the fabrication of photoactive and transport layers should be developed. In addition, efforts should be made to design and optimize layer deposition methods for fiber geometries to achieve bending-stable functional layers while minimizing material waste during layer deposition. At the stage of FSC operation, advanced encapsulation technologies suitable for fibrous substrates should be developed. Encapsulation is a key strategy to obtain safe and stable FSCs. Effective encapsulation can avoid the intrusion of water or oxygen into fiber devices and avoid the deactivation or degradation of active materials and electrolytes, while serving as a protective layer to prevent the leakage of toxic materials. Currently, the use of toxic materials in high efficiency FSCs appears to be essential. An eco-friendly and low-cost recycling system should be developed at the disposal stage to manage the materials and solvents involved in FSCs for sustainable commercialization.
Author contributions
Xuwang Tian: writing – original draft and writing – review & editing. Yongshi Guo: literature survey and writing – review & editing. Jiaqi Zhang: supervision and writing – review & editing. Jianhua Yan: supervision, formal analysis, and writing – review & editing. Orest M. Ivasishin: technical discussion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the fund from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2019YFA0705900) funded by MOST, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61804063 and T2122009) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province (No. 20190201208JC and 20220201070GX).
References
Z. Zheng, J. Wang, P. Bi, J. Ren, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Liu, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Joule, 2022, 6, 171–184 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, C. An, P. Bi, Q. Lv, J. Qin, L. Hong, Y. Cui, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2105803 Search PubMed .
B.-B. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, B. Han, G. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Du and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, D. Y. Lee, J. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee, J. Kim, M. J. Paik, Y. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, M. G. Kim, T. J. Shin and S. Il Seok, Nature, 2021, 598, 444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, L. Yang, H. Wu, Y. M. Cao, J. Zhang, N. S. Xu, S. Chen, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Joule, 2018, 2, 2145–2153 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mishra, S. Ghosh and T. Singh, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 512–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li and T. Chen, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 644–660 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liao, L. Ye, Y. Zhang, T. Q. Chen and H. S. Peng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800456 CrossRef .
W. Zeng, L. Shu, Q. Li, S. Chen, F. Wang and X. M. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5310–5336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Xiang, N. N. Zhang and X. Fan, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2021, 3, 76–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gong, W. Schwalb, Y. W. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Tang, J. Si, B. Shirinzadeh and W. L. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. Zhou, J. H. Byun, Y. Oh, B. M. Jung, H. J. Cha, D. G. Seong, M. K. Um, S. Hyun and T. W. Chou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4788–4797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Liu, X. Pu, C. Y. Jiang, T. Liu, X. Huang, L. B. Chen, C. H. Du, J. M. Sun, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703700 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Zhang, M. Y. Zhao, M. Q. Jian, C. Y. Wang, A. F. Yu, Z. Yin, X. P. Liang, H. M. Wang, K. L. Xia, X. Liang, J. Y. Zhai and Y. Y. Zhang, Matter, 2019, 1, 168–179 CrossRef .
Y. Li, L. Meng, Y. Yang, G. Xu, Z. Hong, Q. Chen, J. You, G. Li, Y. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, G. Xu, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701791 CrossRef .
A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese, S. Nanayakkara, T. Moot, J. Werner, J. Liu, B. To, S. T. Christensen, M. D. McGehee, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry and D. T. Moore, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, J.-Y. Kim, H. J. Son, C.-H. Lee, S. S. Jang and M. J. Ko, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoon, U. Kim, Y. Yoo, J. Byeon, S.-K. Lee, J.-S. Nam, K. Kim, Q. Zhang, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Maruyama, P. Lee and I. Jeon, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2004092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yoon, H. Sung, G. Lee, W. Cho, N. Ahn, H. S. Jung and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 337–345 RSC .
G. R. Chen, Y. Z. Li, M. Bick and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 3668–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. H. Wang, W. Lu and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Heo, J. Eom, Y. H. Kim and S. K. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1703034 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Huang, N. N. Zhang, H. Y. Zou, R. Y. Liu, C. Y. Tao, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16138 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, S. Z. Lin, Z. S. Xu, H. Zhou, J. J. Duan, B. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. M. Fu, J. Q. He, X. Shi, T. Q. Chen, P. N. Chen, B. J. Wang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, M. H. Yeh, H. Y. Guo, J. Wang, Y. L. Zi, W. D. Xu, J. N. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang, C. G. Hu, L. P. Zhu, X. H. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, C. Zhu, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, S. Xia, J. Yu, B. Ding and J. Yan, Mater. Today, 2022, 61, 139–168 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, F. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. W. Tang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 592 CrossRef CAS .
B. Baps, M. Eber-Koyuncu and M. Koyuncu, Key Eng. Mater., 2002, 206–2, 937–940 Search PubMed .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17023 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, S. B. Jo, J. H. Park and K. Cho, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barhoum, K. Pal, H. Rahier, H. Uludag, I. S. Kim and M. Bechelany, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 17, 1–35 CrossRef .
A. Balilonda, Q. Li, M. Tebyetekerwa, R. Tusiime, H. Zhang, R. Jose, F. Zabihi, S. Y. Yang, S. Ramakrishna and M. F. Zhu, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2019, 1, 101–125 CrossRef .
F. Di Giacomo, A. Fakharuddin, R. Jose and T. M. Brown, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3007–3035 RSC .
S. Lee, Y. Lee, J. Park and D. Choi, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 88–93 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Zhang, F. Huang, S. L. Zhao, X. H. Lv, Y. H. Zhou, S. W. Xiang, S. M. Xu, Y. Z. Li, G. R. Chen, C. Y. Tao, Y. Nie, J. Chen and X. Fan, Matter, 2020, 2, 1260–1269 CrossRef .
N. N. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Huang, W. W. Guo, J. Yang, J. Du, X. Fan and C. Y. Tao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 263–269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. D. Gong, Z. Y. Xiang, X. OuYang, J. Zhang, N. Lau, J. Zhou and C. C. Chan, Materials, 2019, 12, 3311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, K. Keum, G. Lee, D. Kim, S. S. Lee and J. S. Ha, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 199–206 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Chai, N. N. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Huang, C. X. Zhao, H. J. Fang, X. Fan and W. J. Mai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9201–9207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Chen, H. Sun, Z. B. Yang, G. Z. Guan, Z. T. Zhang, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 RSC .
W. Weng, J. J. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. X. Li, S. Y. Yang, L. P. Zhu and M. F. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, B. Dong and D. C. Zou, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 611–621 CrossRef .
M. Hatamvand, E. Kamrani, M. Lira-Cantu, M. Madsen, B. R. Patil, P. Vivo, M. S. Mehmood, A. Numan, I. Ahmed and Y. Q. Zhan, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104609 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. B. Yang and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, X. Ni, Q. Wu, C. Yuan, C. Li, D. Li, H. Chen, Y. Lv and A. Ju, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2022, 4, 631–682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, M. Jian, J. Huang, J. Luo, L. Qian and J. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 6035–6047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Das, P. Ghosh and N. C. Das, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2019, 2, 214–233 CrossRef CAS .
X.-X. Wang, G.-F. Yu, J. Zhang, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y.-Z. Long, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100704 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jia, Z. Xu, D. Luo, H. Xiang and M. Zhu, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2022, 4, 573–603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, S. J. Koo, J. Y. Cheon, Y. Jung, S. Cho, D. Lee, J. W. Choi, T. Kim and M. Song, Nano Energy, 2022, 96, 107054 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Gu, C. Y. Zhang, J. D. Cheng, S. Q. Kang, K. Wei, G. Z. Sun, X. P. Gao, X. J. Pan and J. Y. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 442, 136286 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Yang, J. Deng, X. M. Sun, H. P. Li and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2643–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Fu, H. Sun, S. L. Xie, J. Zhang, Z. Y. Pan, M. Liao, L. M. Xu, Z. Li, B. J. Wang, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 45–51 RSC .
Y. P. Fu, H. W. Wu, S. Y. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. C. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 RSC .
W. J. Zhai, Z. F. Zhu, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Adv. Fiber Mater., 2022, 4, 1293–1303 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Xiang, X. Tong, J. Y. Zou and Q. W. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3831–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379–3383 RSC .
B. Weintraub, Y. G. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8981–8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324, 232–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, L. Qiu, X. Lu, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21070–21076 RSC .
F. H. Chen, S. Biria, H. S. Li and I. D. Hosein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47422–47427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Utomo, J. H. Kim, D. Lee, J. Park, Y. C. Kang, Y. H. Kim, J. W. Choi and M. Song, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 584, 520–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Pan, Z. B. Yang, P. N. Chen, J. Deng, H. P. Li and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6110–6114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. B. Qiu, Z. B. Cai, F. Gong, Z. B. Yang, Z. S. Wang and H. S. Peng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2568–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Liu, M. Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Q. Bian, L. H. Zhang, Y. Y. Shang, X. Y. Xia, S. Zhang, D. Q. Yun, Z. W. Liu, A. Y. Cao and C. H. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11027–11034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Balilonda, Q. Li, X. Bian, R. Jose, S. Ramakrishna, M. Zhu, F. Zabihi and S. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 410, 128384 CrossRef CAS .
A. Satharasinghe, T. Hughes-Riley and T. Dias, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2020, 28, 578–592 CAS .
A. Balilonda, Z. Q. Li, Y. Q. Fu, F. Zabihi, S. Y. Yang, X. X. Huang, X. M. Tao and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6957–6991 RSC .
X. Cai, C. Q. Zhang, S. S. Zhang, Y. P. Fang and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2444–2459 RSC .
M. Peng and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20435–20458 RSC .
X. Pu, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702817 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Y. Gao, P. Wang, L. L. Jiang, B. W. Wang, Y. Yao, S. Liu, D. W. Chu, W. L. Cheng and Y. R. Lu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2114–2157 RSC .
J. W. Park and A. G. Oh, Text. Res. J., 2006, 76, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dong, Y. C. Wang, J. N. Deng, Y. J. Dai, S. L. Zhang, H. Y. Zou, B. H. Gu, B. Z. Sun and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9490–9499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Myant and R. Stewart, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2022, 139, e52755 CAS .
S. Strassburg, S. Zainuddin and T. Scheibel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100519 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Q. J. Liang, D. K. Nandakumar, H. Qu, Q. F. Shi, F. I. Alzakia, D. J. J. Tay, L. Yang, X. P. Zhang, L. Suresh, C. Lee, A. T. S. Wee and S. C. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Pan, W. X. Guo, L. Dong, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3356–3361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cho, S. Pak, Y. G. Lee, J. S. Hwang, P. Giraud, G. H. An and S. Cha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908479 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Song, X. Yin, D. Liu, W. T. Ma, M. Q. Zhang, X. Y. Li, P. Cheng, C. L. Zhang, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 103997 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Varma, K. S. Kumar, S. Seal, S. Rajaraman and J. Thomas, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800340 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pu, W. X. Song, M. M. Liu, C. W. Sun, C. H. Du, C. Y. Jiang, X. Huang, D. C. Zou, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601048 CrossRef .
W. J. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. W. Pan, Y. H. Cheng, Z. Y. Shao, H. X. Xiang, G. Y. Chen, L. P. Zhu, W. Weng, H. Bai and M. F. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7009–7061 RSC .
H. Kim, K. R. Pyun, M. T. Lee, H. B. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2110535 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, H. P. Li, X. You, Z. B. Yang, J. Deng, L. B. Qiu and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2014, 2, 345–349 RSC .
P. Liu, Z. Gao, L. M. Xu, X. Shi, X. M. Fu, K. Li, B. Zhang, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19947–19953 RSC .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518–2534 RSC .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Fu, L. M. Xu, J. X. Li, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
S. W. Lee, S. Bae, D. Kim and H. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Kumavat, P. Sonar and D. S. Dalal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 78, 1262–1287 CrossRef .
B. Baps, M. Eber-Koyuncu and M. Koyuncu, Key Eng. Mater., 2002, 206, 937–940 Search PubMed .
J. W. Liu, M. A. G. Namboothiry and D. L. Carroll, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 133515 CrossRef .
L. M. Xu, X. M. Fu, F. Liu, X. Shi, X. F. Zhou, M. Liao, C. R. Chen, F. Xu, B. J. Wang, B. Zhang and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5476–5483 RSC .
R. E. A. Ardhi, M. X. Tran, M. Wang, G. Liu and J. K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2549–2562 RSC .
Q. Li, A. Balilonda, A. Ali, R. Jose, F. Zabihi, S. Yang, S. Ramakrishna and M. Zhu, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000269 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Huang, X. Y. Kang, R. M. Rossi, M. V. Kovalenko, X. M. Sun, H. S. Peng and L. F. Boesel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25974–25981 RSC .
D. Lv, Q. Q. Jiang, Y. Y. Shang and D. Y. Liu, npj Flex. Electron., 2022, 6, 38 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. G. Hamed and G. T. Mola, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2020, 45, 85–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Que, L. L. Zhu, Y. X. Guo, W. X. Que and S. N. Yun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 5321–5334 RSC .
Y. Park, K. Vandewal and K. Leo, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800123 CrossRef .
F. Qiao, Y. Xie, G. He, H. Q. Chu, W. J. Liu and Z. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1269–1280 RSC .
H. Zhang and J. Toudert, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 411–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Chen, T. Y. Jin, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18517–18536 RSC .
J. D. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Sun, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801292 CrossRef .
K. M. Deng and L. Li, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, R. P. Xu, Y. Q. Li, C. Li, J. D. Chen, X. D. Zhao, Z. Z. Xie, C. S. Lee, W. J. Zhang and J. X. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700492 CrossRef .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. H. Fan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 451–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, C. Gao, J. D. Chen, W. Li, Y. Q. Li and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11830–11837 RSC .
G. P. Luo, X. G. Ren, S. Zhang, H. B. Wu, W. C. H. Choy, Z. C. He and Y. Cao, Small, 2016, 12, 1547–1571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, Q. Y. Yang, X. Cai, X. Yu, K. Yan, H. W. Hu, F. R. Zhu and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 926–932 RSC .
M. Peng, X. Yu, X. Cai, Q. Y. Yang, H. W. Hu, K. Yan, H. Wang, B. Dong, F. R. Zhu and D. C. Zou, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, G. M. Zhang, J. B. Yin and Y. C. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dong, J. Hu, X. Y. Xiao, S. Tang, X. Gao, Z. Y. Peng and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900131 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Chen, Y. Q. Li, J. S. Zhu, Q. Q. Zhang, R. P. Xu, C. Li, Y. X. Zhang, J. S. Huang, X. W. Zhan, W. You and J. X. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706083 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, J. Fang, W. Li, Y. Shen, J. D. Chen, Y. Q. Li, H. W. Gu, S. Pelivani, M. J. Zhang, Y. F. Li and J. X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4686–4694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Cheng, L. Zhou, J. A. Li, Y. Q. Li, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 2158–2163 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Cheng, G. F. Ma, J. Li, Y. Xiao, Z. Q. Xu, G. Q. Fan, Y. Q. Li, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22781–22787 RSC .
X. C. Li and K. Niu, Renew. Energy, 2018, 123, 634–638 CrossRef .
G. C. Liu, M. Peng, W. X. Song, H. Wang and D. C. Zou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Liu, M. X. Wang, H. Wang, R. E. A. Ardhi, H. J. Yu, D. C. Zou and J. K. Lee, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 95–102 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chan, M. Wright, N. Elumalai, A. Uddin and S. Pillai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600698 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, S. J. Yoo, D. Lee, J. W. Choi, S. C. Han, T. I. Ryu, H. W. Lee, M. Shin and M. Song, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 2728–2734 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. Iocozzia, M. Zhang, M. D. Ye, S. C. Yan, H. L. Jin, S. Wang, Z. G. Zou and Z. Q. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4854–4891 RSC .
Z. Y. Cao, C. B. Li, X. Y. Deng, S. R. Wang, Y. Yuan, Y. M. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. Q. Liu, L. M. Ding and F. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19768–19787 RSC .
S. Kumar, A. Habib and R. Sundararaman, Trends Chem., 2021, 3, 902–910 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Z. L. Chen, T. Lv, Y. Yao, N. Li, H. L. Li and T. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Kang, Z. F. Zhu, T. C. Zhao, W. J. Zhai, J. C. Xu, Z. M. Lin, K. W. Zeng, B. J. Wang, X. M. Sun, P. N. Chen and H. S. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 2207763 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Dong, Y. J. Fang, Y. C. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. S. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. J. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Nie, H. H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Qiu, S. S. He, J. H. Yang, F. Jin, J. Deng, H. Sun, X. L. Cheng, G. Z. Guan, X. M. Sun, H. B. Zhao and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10105–10109 RSC .
H. W. Hu, B. Dong, B. X. Chen, X. Gao and D. H. Zou, Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 79–84 RSC .
D. Q. Mei, B. Bai, L. L. Qiu, L. Chen, F. Q. Xie and P. F. Du, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 18811–18820 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adnan and J. K. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2168 CrossRef PubMed .
L. K. Huang, C. Li, X. X. Sun, R. Xu, Y. Y. Du, J. Ni, H. K. Cai, J. Li, Z. Y. Hu and J. J. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2017, 40, 13–23 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Lu, Y. H. Liu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, W. R. Tress, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. G. Yang, F. Fu, Z. W. Wang, C. E. Avalos, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, X. Zhang, X. G. Li, Y. Q. Zhan, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, L. R. Zheng, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2020, 370, 74 CrossRef PubMed .
L. B. Qiu, S. S. He, J. H. Yang, J. Deng and H. S. Peng, Small, 2016, 12, 2419–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Manjunath, S. Bimli, P. A. Shaikh, S. B. Ogale and R. S. Devan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 15725–15780 RSC .
Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800276 CrossRef .
G. C. Liu, X. Gao, H. Wang, A. Y. Kim, Z. X. Zhao, J. K. Lee and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5925–5931 RSC .
S. T. Hong and L. Y. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Azzouzi, J. Yan, T. Kirchartz, K. K. Liu, J. L. Wang, H. B. Wu and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. X, 2018, 8, 031055 CAS .
X. K. Chen and J. L. Bredas, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702227 CrossRef .
C. M. Wolff, P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, L. Y. Zheng, X. T. Zhang, W. Z. Xu, W. P. Hu and X. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40163–40171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Xu, Y. Gao, W. J. Ming, F. He, J. Z. Li, X. H. Zhu, F. Y. Kang, J. Y. Li and G. D. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. W. Zhang and J. B. You, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902650 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. J. Guan, Y. S. Sheng, Y. Hu, Y. G. Rong, A. Y. Mei and H. W. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902492 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Han, S. P. Luo, X. W. Yin, Y. Zhou, H. Nan, J. B. Li, X. Li, D. Oron, H. P. Shen and H. Lin, Small, 2018, 14, 1801016 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Q. Bi, C. Y. Yi, J. S. Luo, J. D. Decoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Q. Bi, C. Y. Yi, J. D. Decoppet, J. S. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, G. H. Kim, T. K. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. W. Choi, Y. Jo, Y. J. Yoon, J. W. Kim, J. Lee, D. Huh, H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, J. Y. Kim and D. S. Kim, Joule, 2019, 3, 2179–2192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, P. M. Da, C. Li, Z. P. Wang, Z. C. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. J. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T. W. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Hu, L. Chu, J. Zhang, X. Li and W. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 361, 259–275 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Wang, Z. P. Zhang, Z. K. Tang, C. L. Su, W. Huang, Y. Li and G. C. Xing, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105712 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahapatra, D. Prochowicz, M. M. Tavakoli, S. Trivedi, P. Kumar and P. Yadav, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 27–54 RSC .
F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902579 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Zhao, R. E. Hou, X. Ren, S. Yuan, Y. Y. Lou, Z. Y. Wang, D. D. Li and L. Y. Shi, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 2016, 319, 62–69 CrossRef .
D. Sengupta, P. Das, B. Mondal and K. Mukherjee, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 356–376 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, H. W. Park, S. J. Koo, D. Lee, E. Cho, Y. K. Kim, M. Shin, J. W. Choi, H. J. Lee and M. Song, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 67, 458–466 CrossRef .
X. Y. Gu, E. Z. Chen, M. Y. Ma, Z. Y. Yang, J. L. Bai, L. L. Chen, G. Z. Sun, Z. X. Zhang, X. J. Pan, J. Y. Zhou and E. Q. Xie, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 095502 CrossRef .
M. A. Mahmud, T. Duong, Y. T. Yin, H. T. Pham, D. Walter, J. Peng, Y. L. Wu, L. Li, H. P. Shen, N. D. Wu, N. Mozaffari, G. Andersson, K. R. Catchpole, K. J. Weber and T. P. White, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907962 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Cao, H. X. Wang, H. Y. Li, J. Z. Chen and Z. G. Zang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124903 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, S. M. Hosseini, R. Gunder, A. Petsiuk, P. Caprioglio, C. M. Wolff, S. Shoaee, P. Meredith, S. Schorr, T. Unold, P. L. Burn, D. Neher and M. Stolterfoht, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901090 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Z. Chen and N. G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2742–2786 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Zheng, J. Z. Chen, D. Ouyang, Z. F. Huang, X. J. He, J. Kim and W. C. H. Choy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 57165–57173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Canil, J. Salunke, Q. Wang, M. N. Liu, H. Koebler, M. Flatken, L. Gregori, D. Meggiolaro, D. Ricciarelli, F. De Angelis, M. Stolterfoht, D. Neher, A. Priimagi, P. Vivo and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101553 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Liu, N. Han, W. Wang, R. Ran, W. Zhou and Z. P. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2002582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Liao, C. B. Li, L. S. Xie, Y. Yuan, S. R. Wang, Z. Y. Cao, L. M. Ding and F. Hao, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Haque, J. Troughton and D. Baran, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902762 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Jia, L. Qin, D. Zhao, Y. Tang, B. Song, J. H. Guo, X. M. Li, L. Li, Q. H. Cui, Y. F. Hu, Z. D. Lou, F. Teng and Y. B. Hou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107125 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Castro-Mendez, J. Hidalgo and J. P. Correa-Baena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1901489 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. W. Zhang, X. L. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. M. Chu, Q. F. Ye, X. X. Li, Z. G. Yin and J. B. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 500 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Song, Z. Bie, W. Yan, J. B. Zhu and W. T. Ma, Ecomat, 2022, 4, e12177 CAS .
G. C. Liu, H. Wang, M. X. Wang, W. B. Liu, R. E. A. Ardhi, D. C. Zou and J. K. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 267, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Song, H. Wang, G. C. Liu, M. Peng and D. C. Zou, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Z. T. Zhang, Z. B. Yang, Z. W. Wu, G. Z. Guan, S. W. Pan, Y. Zhang, H. P. Li, J. Deng, B. Q. Sun and H. S. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301750 CrossRef .
C. X. Wu, T. W. Kim, T. L. Guo and F. S. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 367–373 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, A. R. Chowdhury, J. Jaksik, G. Grissom, A. Touhami, E. E. Ibrahim, M. Schauer, O. Okoli and M. J. Uddin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 327–333 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Chen, S. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao, X. Y. Xiao, J. B. Zhou, J. Hu, S. Tang, K. Yan, H. W. Hu, K. Y. Sun, W. Wen, Z. Zhao and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700833 CrossRef .
H. W. Hu, K. Yan, M. Peng, X. Yu, S. Chen, B. X. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3901–3906 RSC .
J. H. Kim, D. S. Utomo, D. Lee, J. W. Choi and M. Song, J. Power Sources, 2021, 512, 230496 CrossRef CAS .
M. Glatthaar, M. Riede, N. Keegan, K. Sylvester-Hvid, B. Zimmermann, M. Niggemann, A. Hinsch and A. Gombert, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 390–393 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Glen, N. W. Scarratt, H. Yi, A. Iraqi, T. Wang, J. Kingsley, A. R. Buckley, D. G. Lidzey and A. M. Donald, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feron, T. J. Nagle, L. J. Rozanski, B. B. Gong and C. J. Fell, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 109, 169–177 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chueh, C. Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 RSC .
F. Z. Wang, Z. A. Tan and Y. F. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1059–1091 RSC .
L. P. Duan and A. Uddin, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Dou, C. C. Chen, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, W. H. Chang, J. Gao, Y. S. Liu, E. Richard and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 4734 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, Q. Q. Shi, Y. Z. Lin, Y. F. Li and X. W. Zhan, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bertho, G. Janssen, T. J. Cleij, B. Conings, W. Moons, A. Gadisa, J. D'Haen, E. Goovaerts, L. Lutsen, J. Manca and D. Vanderzande, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 753–760 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Schaffer, C. M. Palumbiny, M. A. Niedermeier, C. Jendrzejewski, G. Santoro, S. V. Roth and P. Muller-Buschbaum, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6760–6764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nam, J. Yoo, Y. Park, H. Y. Noh, Y. Park, J. Cho, J. A. Kim, J. Kim, H. H. Lee, R. Chang and D. H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9698–9707 RSC .
I. F. Dominguez, A. Distler and L. Luer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601320 CrossRef .
I. T. Sachs-Quintana, T. Heumuller, W. R. Mateker, D. E. Orozco, R. Cheacharoen, S. Sweetnam, C. J. Brabec and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3978–3985 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wimmer, W. Wolf, J. Sticht, P. Saxe, C. B. Geller, R. Najafabadi and G. A. Young, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 134305 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, R. X. Xia, B. B. Fan, X. Liu, Z. F. Wang, S. Dong, H. L. Yip, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803166 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, J. A. Peters, Z. F. Liu, M. Sebastian, J. Im, T. C. Chasapis, A. C. Wibowo, D. Y. Chung, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2722–2727 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, L. J. Schwan, M. Ottosson, A. Hagfeldt and T. Edvinsson, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 10678–10685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Li, J. J. Guo, H. Sun, X. Fang, D. H. Wang and H. S. Peng, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 399–402 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Li, Z. B. Yang, L. B. Qiu, X. Fang, H. Sun, P. N. Chen, S. W. Pan and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3841–3846 RSC .
J. H. Kim, S. K. Hong, S. J. Yoo, C. Y. Woo, J. W. Choi, D. Lee, J. W. Kang, H. W. Lee and M. Song, Dyes Pigm., 2021, 185, 108855 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. J. Koo, H. Cho, J. W. Choi, S. Y. Ryu, J. W. Kang, S. H. Jin, C. Ahn and M. Song, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 15065–15071 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng and X. W. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2544–2582 RSC .
V. Balcaen, N. Rolston, S. R. Dupont, E. Voroshazi and R. H. Dauskardt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 143, 418–423 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Tummala, C. Bruner, C. Risko, J. L. Bredas and R. H. Dauskardt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9957–9964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Juillard, E. Planes, M. Matheron, L. Perrin, S. Berson and L. Flandin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29805–29813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Park, G. U. Kim, S. Lee, J. W. Lee, S. Li, J. Y. Lee and B. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2201623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. T. Zhang, Z. B. Yang, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, G. Z. Guan and H. S. Peng, Small, 2015, 11, 675–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. He, L. B. Qiu, X. Fang, G. Z. Guan, P. N. Chen, Z. T. Zhang and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9406–9410 RSC .
J. X. Zhang, Z. P. Wang, X. L. Li, J. Yang, C. H. Song, Y. P. Li, J. L. Cheng, Q. Guan and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2870–2877 CrossRef CAS .
Z. T. Zhang, X. Y. Li, G. Z. Guan, S. W. Pan, Z. J. Zhu, D. Y. Ren and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11571–11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Yang, J. Deng, H. Sun, J. Ren, S. W. Pan and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, G. Y. Zhu, C. X. Wang, Y. R. Wang, H. F. Zhu, Y. Hu, H. L. Lv, R. P. Chen, L. B. Ma, T. Chen, Z. Jin and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601208 CrossRef .
F. Huang, H. Yu, S. W. Xiang, J. Xue, H. Ming, C. Y. Tao, N. N. Zhang and X. Fan, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 12, 3654–3660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. S. Jiang, S. L. Xie, Y. Zhang, J. Ren, A. Ali, S. G. Doo, I. H. Son, X. L. Huang and H. S. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7601–7605 RSC .
J. Q. He, C. H. Lu, H. B. Jiang, F. Han, X. Shi, J. X. Wu, L. Y. Wang, T. Q. Chen, J. J. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Q. Zhang, X. M. Sun, B. J. Wang, P. N. Chen, Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia and H. S. Peng, Nature, 2021, 597, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liao, C. Wang, Y. Hong, Y. F. Zhang, X. L. Cheng, H. Sun, X. L. Huang, L. Ye, J. X. Wu, X. Shi, X. Y. Kang, X. F. Zhou, J. W. Wang, P. Z. Li, X. M. Sun, P. N. Chen, B. J. Wang, Y. G. Wang, Y. Y. Xia, Y. H. Cheng and H. S. Peng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Xuwang Tian	Xuwang Tian is a PhD candidate in the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University. His current research focuses on flexible electronics and human-computer interaction design.
Yongshi Guo	Yongshi Guo is a PhD candidate in the College of Textiles, Donghua University. Her research is on flexible electronics and human-computer interaction design.
Jiaqi Zhang	Dr Jiaqi Zhang received his PhD degree from Imperial College London in 2017. Then, he joined Jilin University as an associate professor. His research focuses on optoelectronic semiconducting materials and devices, based on photophysics and carrier dynamics analysis.
Jianhua Yan	Dr Jianhua Yan received his PhD degree from West Virginia University in 2015 and joined Donghua University as a full professor in 2017. His research focuses on nanofiber fabrication and nanofibrous devices.

 	Fig. 1  A brief overview of the contents discussed in this review. The discussion focuses on the prospective strategies and methods to improve the stability and reliability of FSCs and then systematically reviews the recent development of FSCs and their applications in hybrid energy systems.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural advantages of fibers in solar cells. (a) A 3D light collection diagram of PSSCs. (b) Angle dependence of the normalized short-circuit current of PSSCs. (c) A 3D light collection diagram of FSCs. (d) Angle dependence of the normalized short-circuit current of FSCs and composite FSCs. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) The interaction of incident light with PSSCs and FSCs. (f) The effect of geometry on flexibility. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) The corresponding deformation diagrams of a single knitting coil at states of (0) initial, (1) lengthening, (2) widening, and (3) deformation. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic diagram of stretching a knitted fabric. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH.	 
I = r4	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Structure and working mechanism of FSCs. (a) Coaxial structure of FDSSCs and (b) its SEM image. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Twisted structure of FPSCs and (d) its SEM image. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Interlaced structure of FOSCs and (f) its SEM image. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Working mechanism of FDSSCs. (h) Working mechanism of FPSCs. (i) Working mechanism of FOSCs. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  The representative examples and timeline of FSCs. Image for “Coaxial DSSCs”: reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2002, Trans Tech Publications Ltd. Image for “Coaxial OSCs”: reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics. Image for “Twisted DSSCs”: reproduced with permission.30 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Twisted OSCs”: reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2009, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Image for “Multisource energy harvesting and storage devices”: reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Coaxial PSCs”: reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Twisted PSCs”: reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Interlaced dye-sensitized solar cells”: reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Multisource energy harvesting textiles”: reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. Image for “Integrated energy conversion and storage textiles”: reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Image for “Environmentally stable textile PSCs”: reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. Image for “Photoanode chemical tuned for FDSSCs”: reproduced with permission. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.102 Image for “Flexible composite perovskite solar yarn”: reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. Image for “Concentrators boost efficiency of FDSSCs”: reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. Image for “Highly efficient and stable FDSSCs”: reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. Image for “Highly efficient FOSCs”: reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2022, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Strategies to enhance photon capture. (a) Interactions between incident light and FSCs. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Demonstration of using a side attached LSC to inhibit photon reflection. Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Using micro-reflectors to inhibit photon reflection. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2011, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) FDSSCs based on TMCA and multilayer structure photoanodes. (e) A SEM image of the light scattering layer. (f) J–V curves of different light scattering layer thicknesses of FDSSCs. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (g) Layered structure photoanode FDSSCs based on Ti micro-ridges/nanorods. (h) A SEM image of the photoanode. (i) J–V curves of FDSSCs on different Ti wire substrates. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (j) Physical image and structure of FDSSCs based on an Ag@SiO2 NP photoanode. (k) A SEM image of the Ag@SiO2 NP photoanode. (l) J–V curves of SS-FDSSCs before and after the introduction of Ag@SiO2 NPs. (j–l) Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2021, Tsinghua University Press.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Device structure designs. (a) Preparation process of a hollow G/CNTs/PANI fiber. (b) A cross-section SEM image of the hollow G/CNTs/PANI fiber. (c) J–V curves of FDSSCs with different fiber electrodes. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2020, Springer Singapore. (d) The structure of FDSSCs and the flow direction of electrons in the external circuit. (e) HCNT fiber (left) and hierarchical channel for rapid ion diffusion and charge transport (right). (f) SEM images of HCNT@Pt fibers. (g) J–V curve of the best performing FDSSCs, and the inseted table shows the corresponding photovoltaic parameters. (d–g) Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (h) Structure of planar interface FPSCs. (i) SEM image of the perovskite deposit. (j) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (h–j) Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Optimization of the fabrication process for photosensitive layers. (a) Schematic diagram of FPSCs prepared by the dip coating method. (b) A cross section SEM image of FPSCs. (c) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram of FPSCs prepared by VAD. (e) A cross section SEM image of FPSCs. (f) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.121 Copyright 2019, Wiley VCH. (g) Schematic diagram of FPSCs prepared by cathodic deposition. (h) A cross section SEM image of FPSCs. (i) J–V curves of FPSCs prepared by cathodic deposition and dip coating. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optimization of the fabrication process for transport layers. (a) Preparation process of a TCW and its bending state. (b) A SEM image of the TCW photoanode. (c) J–V curves of FDSSCs based on different photoanodes. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Preparation process of the TMC/TNP micro-cone array photoanode. (e) A SEM image of the TMC/TNP photoanode. (f) J–V curve of the TMC and TNP/TMC photoanode based FDSSCs. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (g) The electron transport path of Ti micro-ridge/nanorod layered photoanode. (h) A SEM image of the Ti micro-ridge/nanorod photoanode based FDSSCs. (i) Nyquist curves of FDSSCs on different Ti wire substrates. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Doping engineering. (a) Solar yarn structure of CH3NH3PbI3-PVP. (b) A SEM image of CH3NH3PbI3-PVP nanofibers. (c) Action mechanism of CH3NH3PbI3 and PVP. (d) J–V curve of the best performing CH3NH3PbI3-PVP solar yarns. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2020, Wiley VCH. (e) Solar yarn structure of (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP. (f) A cross section SEM image of (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP solar yarn. (g) Action mechanism of CH3NH3SnI3−xClx and PVP. (h) J–V curve of the best performing (CH3NH3SnI3−xClx:PC61BM)-PVP solar yarn. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (i) Structure and physical drawing of FDSSCs based on the mp TiO2 photoanode. (j) A SEM image of MOF-801. (k) A SEM image of mp TiO2. (l) J–V curves of the TiO2 and mp TiO2 photoanode based FDSSCs. (i–l) Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (m) FDSSC structure based on the TiO2–rGO photoanode. (n) Separation and transport of electron–hole pairs in the TiO2–rGO photoanode. (o) J–V curves of the TiO2 and TiO2–rGO photoanode based FDSSCs. (m–o) Reproduced with permission.169 Copyright 2019, IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 10  Interface engineering by regulating crystal growth. (a) Charge accumulation caused by different surface areas of functional layers in FSCs. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (b) Structure of FPSCs. (c) J–V curve of the best performing FPSCs. (d) The modified Ti wire coated with CsPbBr3 QDs and (e) its morphology change after being sintered. (f) Demonstration and a SEM image of the QD filled grain gaps. (g) A dense CsPbBr3 photosensitive layer. (b–g) Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Interface engineering by optimizing the interface contact. (a) Structure and preparation process of FDSSCs. (b) SEM images of the TiO2 coated Ti nanopillar arrays by ALD. (c) The electron transport paths with or without the nanopillar photoanode. (d) J–V curves of FDSSCs with different photoanodes. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (e) FDSSC structure based on a compact TiO2 photoanode film and (f) its cross section SEM image. (g) J–V curves of the compact TiO2 photoanode film based FDSSCs with different film thicknesses. (e–g) Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

FDSSCs	N719	Parallel	Structural design	—	—	—	4.20	
134

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Coaxial	Structural design	0.91	15.90	65.60	9.49	
139

FDSSCs	N719	Parallel	Preparation technology	0.82	6.54	—	3.70	
149

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Preparation technology/reduce photon escape	0.703	14.785	78.20	8.128	
128

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Preparation technology/reduce photon escape	0.702	16.036	71.70	8.07	
127

FOSCs	P3HT:PCBM	Coaxial	Reduce photon escape	0.55	9.31	44.00	2.27	
186

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.615	8.75	56.40	3.03	
60

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.825	2.165	35.30	0.631	
187

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.95	15.14	75.00	10.79	
121

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Coaxial	Preparation technology	—	—	—	3.30	
48

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Coaxial	Preparation technology	0.85	14.50	56.00	7.10	
145

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Coaxial	Preparation technology	0.864	11.80	64.30	6.58	
188

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Coaxial	Preparation technology	0.96	14.18	61.00	7.53	
140

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.80	8.85	73.70	5.25	
141

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Coaxial	Preparation technology	0.713	12.32	6.09	5.35	
189

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.67	10.44	67.90	4.75	
148

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.694	7.576	59.50	3.13	
183

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Preparation technology/interface engineering	—	13.816	—	7.41	
184

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Preparation technology	0.74	11.05	75.00	6.41	
190

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3-PVP	Twisted	Doping engineering	1.92	11.94	54.20	15.70	
103

FPSCs	CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-PVP	Twisted	Doping engineering	1.52	4.75	72.50	7.49	
70

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Doping engineering	0.79	12.94	52.00	5.36	
169

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Doping engineering	0.71	12.20	74.00	6.50	
168

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Doping engineering	0.68	10.37	76.15	5.38	
130

FPSCs	CsPbBr3	Coaxial	Interface engineering	1.19	6.48	70.00	5.37	
101

FDSSCs	N719	Twisted	Interface engineering	—	—	—	7.72	
182

FOSCs	P3HT:PCBM	Twisted	Interface engineering	0.52	9.02	38.00	1.78	
185

FOSCs	PM6:Y6:PC71BM	Twisted	Interface engineering	0.71	25.40	52.50	9.40	
105


 	Fig. 12  Strategies to enhance the environment stability of FSCs. (a) Effect of oxygen and water on the performance of FSCs. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2020, Wiley VCH. (b) Structure of FOSCs. The film morphology of the active layer at (c) 48% RH and (d) 69% RH. (e) Comparison of the PCE of FOSCs based on chloroform and chlorobenzene solvents under different RH conditions. (f) Comparison of the long-term stability of FOSCs with and without packages. (b–f) Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2022, Springer Nature. (g) Schematic diagram of thermal stress released by TiO2 nanotubes and finite element simulation of the CsPbBr3 layer. (h) The interface between the CsPbBr3 layer and dense TiO2 substrate. (i) The interface between the CsPbBr3 layer and TiO2 nanotube substrate. (j) During strain formation, the adhesion between the annealed CsPbBr3 film and the substrate shrank vertically. (k) Normalized PCE of FPSCs over a wide temperature range. Long term stability at (l) a low temperature of −20 °C and (m) a high temperature of 100 °C. (g–m) Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


FOSCs	PM6:Y6:PC71BM	Open-air	Room temp.	60 days	Encapsulation (k after −502)	9.40	50	
105

FPSCs	CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-C61-PVP	Open-air	Room temp.	85 h	Encapsulation (PMMA)	7.49	75	
70

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3-PVP	Open-air	Room temp.	216 h	Encapsulation (PMMA)	15.70	87.4	
103

FDSSCs	N719	—	—	30 days	Encapsulation (epoxy resin)	5.47	90	
208

FDSSCs	N719	35 ± 5%	25 ± 2.5	35 days	CNTY as the electrode	4.00	∼70	
210

FDSSCs	N719	35 ± 5%	21 ± 2.5	40 days	Doping (Ag@SiO2 NPs)	5.38	∼90	
130

FDSSCs	N719	—	—	Washing 10 times	Solid electrolyte (LiTFSI)	6.16	92	
211

FDSSCs	N719	Open-air	20–120	—	Solid electrolyte	2.60	91	
91

FPSCs	CsPbBr3	—	−40–160	240 h	Interface engineering	5.37	90	
101

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Open-air	Room temp.	150 h	Interface engineering	9.49	∼100	
139

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Open-air	Room temp.	168 h	—	5.01	80	
64

FOSCs	P3HT:PCBM	Nitrogen atmosphere	Room temp.	14 days	—	2.26	75.22	
69

FOSCs	PTB7:PC71BM	Open-air	Room temp.	15 days	—	1.62	85	
92


 	Fig. 13  Strategies to enhance the mechanical stability of FSCs. (a) Schematic diagram of multiple performance degradation caused by mechanical stress. Reproduced with permission.212 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A SEM image under bending of the Ni3Te2 electrode. (c) Dynamic bending test of FDSSCs. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (d) A SEM image of a TCW photoanode under bending. (e) Photovoltaic performance of FDSSCs under different bending states. (f) Photovoltaic performance of FDSSCs under different bending times. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) A SEM image of the spring photoanode under the tension state. (h) J–V curves of FDSSCs before and after exerting a tension at 50% strain. (i) Photovoltaic performance of FDSSCs under different stretching states. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (j) Photos of FPSCs under the distortion state. (k) Photovoltaic performance of FPSCs under different twisting times, and η0 and η correspond to the PCE before and after bending, respectively. (l) Photovoltaic performance of FPSCs under different bending times. (j–l) Reproduced with permission.218 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


FDSSCs	N719	Bending	—	2000	Structural optimization	11.81	75.12	
55

FDSSCs	N719	Bending	—	100	Structural optimization	4.75	97.60	
148

FDSSCs	N719	Bending	—	600	—	4.00	90	
210

FDSSCs	N719	Bending	90	1000	Encapsulation	7.85	90	
104

FDSSCs	N719	Bending	—	500	Doping	5.38	90	
130

FDSSCs	N719	Bending	—	500	Solid electrolyte	6.16	92	
211

FDSSCs	N719	Bending	90	600	Structural optimization	—	78.6	
219

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Bending	—	500	Manufacturing process optimization	10.79	∼100	
121

FPSCs	CsPbBr3	Bending	45	5000	Interface engineering	5.37	90	
101

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3-PVP	Bending	—	750	Doping	15.70	99	
103

FPSCs	CH3NH3SnI3−xClx-PVP	Bending	—	1000	Doping engineering	7.49	98	
70

FOSCs	P3HT:PCBM	Bending	—	200	—	1.08	97	
220

FDSSCs	N719	Stretching	—	—	Structural optimization	2.84	95.95	
183

FOSCs	P3HT:PCBM	Stretching	—	100	Structural optimization	1.23	97	
217

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3−xClx	Stretching	—	250	Structural optimization	5.01	90	
64

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Twisting	30	100	Structural optimization	3.80	84	
218

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Twisting	—	500	Structural optimization	9.49	90	
139

FPSCs	CH3NH3PbI3	Twisting	—	400	Manufacturing process optimization	7.10	90	
145

FOSCs	PTB7:PC71BM	Twisting/bending	180°	1000	—	1.62	∼100	
92

FOSCs	P3HT:PCBM	Curling/folding	—	400	Structural optimization	2.27	13/23	
186


 	Fig. 14  Single module integration and multi-source energy harvesting. (a) FOSC textile structure. (b) Photos of FOSC textiles (illustrations are equivalent circuits). (c) Photovoltaic performance of FOSCs and textiles. (d) Demonstration of using the FOSC textiles to power electronic watches. (a–d) Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Photos of FPSC textiles. (f) I–V curves of paralleled FPSCs. (g) I–V curve of FPSCs in series. (h) Demonstration of using the FPSC textiles to power electronic watches. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (i) Structure of the hybrid textile. (j) Photos of hybrid textiles. (k) Electric output of the hybrid textile under various conditions. (i–k) Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (l) Photos of hybrid textiles. (m) Equivalent circuit of the self-charging system. (n) Short circuit current of FDSSCs, TENG fabrics and hybrid textiles. (l–n) Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2016, Wiley VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems. (a) Self-powered textiles integrated with FDSSCs and FLIBs. (b) The optical charging curve of FDSSCs under AM 1.5 (red line) and the discharge curve of FLIBs under 0.5 mA (black line) (the inset figure shows the operation mechanism of electrons flowing from the photoanode to the cathode along the wire). (c) Intelligent health care clothing integrated with self-powered textiles, health monitoring and display modules. Self-powered textiles supply power to various wearable devices of (d) smart watches and (e) heart rate sensors. (a–e) Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (f) Optical charging fabric structure. (g) Stable electrical output of the photocharged fabric in different environments. (h) Air stability. The optical charging fabric supplies power for various wearable devices of (i) mobile phones, (j) temperature and humidity sensors and (k) heart rate sensors. (f–k) Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  Hybrid energy harvesting and storage systems. (a) Schematic diagram of a power system of a self-charging power supply device and (b) its equivalent circuit. (c) Charging curve of FDSSCs (the inset figure shows the power supply for an electronic watch). (a–c) Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2022, Wiley VCH. (d) Structure and physical drawings of a SS-FPC system and (e) its working mechanism. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. (f) A hybrid self-charging power textile and (g) its equivalent circuit. (h) Charging curves of FDSSCs and F-TENG (the illustration at the upper left corner is the enlarged F-DSSC charging curve, and the illustration at the lower right corner is the Isc of F-TENG). (f–h) Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Diagram of a hybrid bracelet and (j) its equivalent circuit. (k) The voltage curve of the hybrid energy harvesting device for charging SCs and the working curve for powering the electronic device. (i–k) Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
