Applications of advanced hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials: from laboratory to market   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CS00136H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CS00136H
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 696-753Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsApplications of advanced hybrid organic–inorganic nanomaterials: from laboratory to market†

        
          
            Clément 
            Sanchez
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Philippe 
            Belleville
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Popall
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Lionel 
            Nicole
          
          
        
      ab
aUPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7574, Laboratoire Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, Collège de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot F-75231 cedex 05, Paris, France
bCNRS, UMR 7574, Laboratoire Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Paris, F-75005, Paris, France. E-mail: clement.sanchez@upmc.fr; lionel.nicole@upmc.fr;  Fax: +33-1-44271504;   Tel: +33-1-44271529
cCEA, DAM, LE RIPAULT, F-37260 Monts, France. E-mail: philippe.belleville@cea.fr;  Fax: +33-2-47345676;   Tel: +33-2-47344982
dFraunhofer ISC, Neunerplatz 2, 97082 Wuerzburg, Germany. E-mail: michael.popall@isc.fraunhofer.de;  Fax: +49 931 4100 559;   Tel: +49 931 4100 522
Received 
      7th October 2010
    First published on 12th January 2011AbstractToday cross-cutting approaches, where molecular engineering and clever processing are synergistically coupled, allow the chemist to tailor complex hybrid systems of various shapes with perfect mastery at different size scales, composition, functionality, and morphology. Hybrid materials with organic–inorganic or bio–inorganic character represent not only a new field of basic research but also, via their remarkable new properties and multifunctional nature, hybrids offer prospects for many new applications in extremely diverse fields. The description and discussion of the major applications of hybrid inorganic–organic (or biologic) materials are the major topic of this critical review. Indeed, today the very large set of accessible hybrid materials span a wide spectrum of properties which yield the emergence of innovative industrial applications in various domains such as optics, micro-electronics, transportation, health, energy, housing, and the environment among others (526 references).
Clément Sanchez
Clément Sanchez, Director of Research CNRS, leads the Laboratory Chimie de la Matière Condensee of Paris at the University of Paris VI. After a PhD at the University of Paris VI in 1981, he did post-doctoral work at the University of Berkeley. Today, he currently leads a research group working on sol–gel chemistry and physical properties of nanostructured porous and non-porous inorganic and hybrid organic–inorganic materials shaped as monoliths, microspheres and films. He has been awarded many scientific French and international prizes.
Philippe Belleville
Philippe Belleville received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Pierre & Marie Curie Paris University in 1991 (Prof. J. Livage Laboratory). He is currently working for the French Commission for Atomic Energy (CEA) as a senior scientist. His research topics include sol–gel chemistry for optical coatings, solar and fuel cell materials, ferroelectric and high “k” thin films, and smart layers for gas sensors. He is a member of the Sol–Gel Optics Program Committee of the SPIE, Optical Society of America (OSA), Technical Committee (TC-16) of the International Commission on Glass (ICG). He was the recipient of the 2003 Ulrich Award for Excellence in Sol–Gel Technology. Since 2007, he is one of the directors of the board of the International Sol–Gel Society (ISGS).
Michael Popall
Dr Michael Popall, born 1955 in southern Germany, studied chemistry at the Technical University Munich. He received his PhD in 1986 in metal–organic chemistry, at the same university. In 1987 he went to Fraunhofer Institut für Silicatforschung (ISC) in Würzburg, Germany and changed from fundamental to applied contractual research with industry and established research on inorganic–organic sol–gel class-II hybrids for use in microelectronic, photonic as well as electrochemical applications. He is now head of ISC-International at Fraunhofer ISC. His materials research is on organic–inorganic hybrids, ORMOCER®s, for optical, dielectric and electrochemical applications. He received the German Science Prize in 2002 (Stifter foundation) and the NanoTech Future Award 2005 (Tokyo, Japan).
Lionel Nicole
Lionel Nicole is Associate Professor at the UPMC-Univ Paris 06. After a PhD in 2002, he held successively two postdoctoral positions in Dr Clément Sanchez’s group (UPMC-Univ Paris 06) and in Professor MacCraith’s laboratory (OSL-DCU, Dublin). His main interests are the conception and production of original hybrid materials for optical applications with a particular concern in the environmental domain and in response to social needs.
1. Introduction
One remarkable feature of natural materials is that they have found optimal trade-offs between durability, mechanical properties and other functions such as density, permeability, colour, hydrophobicity, etc. Indeed, mother nature is an example of this, in the use of soft and sustainable synthetic conditions for organic and inorganic matter for the generation of organic–inorganic (O–I) nanocomposites such as those forming crustacean carapaces, mollusc shells and bone or teeth.1 Moreover, it is said that minerals likely act as catalysts for natural processes. For example, polypeptides can be formed from the catalytic activation of organic matter (condensation of amino acids) confined within the interstitial gap or porosity of inorganic catalysts such as clays or zeolites, thus emphasizing the possible role of hybrid O–I interfaces in the construction of living systems.2,3
Because of their swelling and soft-matter-related properties, clays have always been commonly employed as raw materials that humankind could process, modify or even “alloy” with organic components. In doing so, we have been continuously challenging ourselves towards such a complex level of integration to produce, likely through serendipity, artistic or functional hybrid composites such as those found in green bodies of china ceramics, blue Maya pigments, some prehistoric frescos and more. For example, Maya blue is a nice example of a man-made hybrid O–I material that combines the color of the organic pigment (natural blue indigo) and the resistance of the inorganic clay palygorskite.4
However, in an industrial context, O–I composites were developed as late as in the middle of the last century. This concept of mixing organic and inorganic components, mainly polymers, has been part of manufacturing technologies since the 1940’s.5 Some mixed O–I materials were already patented by companies such as Dupont, Dow Corning, 3M, etc… and also manufactured in various domains within them: paints (inorganic nano-pigments suspended in organic mixtures), paper (cellulosic polymers cross-linked by metal oxo-species), coupling agents such as silanes, silicones or other metallo-organic molecules allowing the modification of glass, ceramics or metallic surfaces…
At the end of the 1950’s, several scientific communities were already giving important contributions to the field of mixed O–I compounds. A few of the highlights from an exhaustive list of research domains concern the intercalation of organic components inside clays and lamellar compounds,2,3,6–9 the organically templated growth of zeolites, the development of silicones and organosilanes.10–12 The period of 1980–1995 was particularly fruitful thanks to the scientific melting pot resulting from the constitution of the sol–gel community. The meeting between material scientists mainly working on glass and ceramics with molecular and polymer chemists allowed an intensive growth in the domain with the creation of many mixed O–I nanocomposites. It is worth mentioning here some of the new material achievements based on hybrid compositions.
The modification or even functionalisation of polymers and macromonomers with sol–gel derived inorganic components, mainly silica or siloxane based species, was performed to improve mechanical, barrier or permeation properties.13–18 Because of the mild conditions provided by sol–gel chemistry, sol–gel derived silica glasses were doped or hybridized with numerous organic dyes19–21 or biomolecules,22giving birth to two important domains known as “sol–gel optics” and biohybrids.23,24 The synthesis of materials resulting from the polycondensation of organosilanes and metal alkoxides,25 and the design of transition-metal oxide based hybrids,26–29 particularly with nanobuilding block (NBB) approaches, pioneered by the Paris and Vienna groups,30,31 also represent major contributions in the field. The name “hybrid” O–I materials was evoked around the 1990s32 when the input of molecular chemistry was obviously creating a “scientific tsunami” in the domain of nanomaterials science.
In that time period (1990–1995), the possibilities of textural, structural and compositional tailoring of hybrids were amplified with the development of the chemistry of bridged and cubic polysilsesquioxane.33–47 The 1990’s were very productive with the birth of two other important research domains based on hybrid chemistry strategies. The first one concerned the synthesis of periodically organized mesoporous materials obtained via sol–gel condensation templated via the formation of micellar lyotropic assemblies generated by amphiphilic molecules or polymers.48–52 The second corresponds to the very interesting family of hybrids known as MOFs (Metal Organic Frameworks) that can be categorized as nanoporous and crystalline hybrid coordination polymers.53–70
The evolution of this dynamic and mushrooming domain has been paved with numerous international symposia, conferences and workshops totally or partly devoted to the scientific achievements made with new hybrid materials; among them MRS and E-MRS symposia, the 1st European workshop on hybrid materials, Euromat, International sol–gel conferences, MOFs conferences, IMMS, Hybrid Materials International Conference…71
Nowadays, hybrid materials chemistry is a unifying scientific domain for chemists and is obviously impacting numerous societal and industrial demands. Hybrid materials chemistry represents an inherent interdisciplinary field of research and development bridging together a variety of communities such as organometallics, colloids and nano-objects, soft matter and polymers, coordination polymers including MOFs, sol–gel, catalysis and surfaces, clays and lamellar compounds, nanocomposites, nanoporous and mesoporous materials, biomaterials, biochemistry and engineering.
Hybrid materials represent an inexhaustible source of inspiration for this large scientific community. The so-called hybrid O–I materials can be broadly defined as nanocomposites with intimately mixed organic and inorganic components. The control of the physico-chemical nature and the extension of hybrid O–I interfaces is paramount since it regulates a material's transparency, chemical homogeneity, and stability. Moreover, its tuning can obviously generate hybrid materials with properties that are not only the sum of the individual contributions of both phases.
Due to the central role played by the hybrid interface, its nature has been used to categorize these materials into two distinct classes.26,72 In Class I materials, organic and inorganic components additively exchange weak bonds (hydrogen, Van der Waals or ionic bonds). In Class II materials, the two phases are totally or partly linked together through strong chemical bonds characterized by a strong orbital overlap (covalent or iono-covalent bonds). Independent of the types or applications, as well as the nature of the interface between organic and inorganic components, a second important feature in the tailoring of hybrid networks concerns the chemical pathways that are used to design a given hybrid material. General strategies for the synthesis of sol–gel derived hybrid materials have been extensively discussed in several reviews.15,26,27,40,72–79 However, to facilitate the reading of this critical review, the general chemical background required in order to understand all synthetic approaches explored to date for the designed construction of hybrid materials will be briefly described in part 2 of this article.
Today, the potential of hybrid materials is reflected by the fact that many of them are entering a variety of markets. New materials and systems produced by man in the future must aim toward higher levels of sophistication and miniaturisation, be recyclable and respect the environment, be reliable and consume less energy or help save energy. The increasing impact of hybrid materials science, both on the academic and industrial scene, can be pictured following the arborescent representation shown in Fig. 1. The design of hybrid materials clearly follows a bottom-up approach. Starting from molecular precursors or well-defined nanobuilding blocks, the materials are processed directly as particles, fibres, coatings, foams or monoliths. They can additionally be obtained with peculiar micropatterning or with hierarchical structures by coupling colloidal fluids with the physical chemistry of complex fluids, soft matter and top down processing strategies.
 Fig. 1  Arborescence representation of hybrid materials on both the academic and industrial scenes. 
These cross-cutting approaches, where molecular engineering and ingenious processing are synergistically coupled allow the chemist to develop complex systems of varying shapes with perfect mastery at different size scales, composition, functionality, and morphology. Achieving hierarchical hybrid architectures involves cross-cutting synthetic strategies opening a land of opportunities to discover new materials which will find applications in numerous fields such as environment, energy, housing, health, automotive, micro-optics, micro-electronics… Today a first blossoming of hybrid material applications has already occurred as illustrated by the few examples pictured in the tree branches of Fig. 1.
Smart coatings and membranes, photovoltaics/fuel cells, therapeutic (bio)vectors, (bio)sensors, catalysts (including bio- and photocatalysis), O–I textiles, and automotive parts give a good but incomplete picture of hybrid material products, components or devices that already exist. These developments only correspond to “the tip of the iceberg” and should therefore expand in the future as new and stricter requirements are being set up to achieve greater harmony between the environment and human activities. Hybrid materials are highly promising advanced materials for which the development has just reached its adolescence. Without a doubt, hybrid materials synthesized through green chemistry, will generate increasing numbers of smart membranes, new catalysts and sensors, novel generations of photovoltaics and fuel cells, smart microelectronics, micro-optical and photonic components and systems, or intelligent therapeutic vectors that combine targeting, imaging, therapy and controlled release properties.
The present review summarizes the general chemical pathways for processing hybrid materials and presents the most striking examples of applications of functional hybrids, selecting them from among the existing prototypes or commercially available hybrid materials.
2. Chemistry background and general synthesis strategies for hybrid materials
2.1 Chemistry background
Hybrid materials are constituted by organic components (molecules) or networks (organic polymers) intimately mixed at the molecular or nanoscopic level with inorganic components mainly metal oxides and metal–oxo polymers but also phosphates, carbonates, chalcogenides and allied derivatives.
Today the main hybrid materials that find applications in industry are based mostly on the association between metal oxides or metal–oxo polymers and organic molecules or macromonomers of all kinds including bio-components. An exhaustive description of all the chemical reactions involved in the construction of organic and inorganic components is beyond of the scope of this article, and the reader is referred to some excellent reviews and books.7,15,26,27,40,72–81 Therefore the short discussion on the chemical background will be restricted to the chemical reactions commonly used to produce these two main components (metal–oxopolymers and organic polymers) and their coupling via a covalent or ionocovalent bonding to yield class II hybrids. In order to simplify, the chemical description of the formation of the organic and inorganic components and their interface will be presented separately. To summarize:

(a) Inorganic part. 
Inorganic metal oxides and metal–oxo polymers are usually produced as amorphous networks, nanocrystalline networks or metal–oxo clustersvia condensation of metal organic precursors (metal alkoxides, modified metal alkoxides) or metallic salts. These inorganic polymerisation reactions belong to the family of hydrolytic and non-hydrolytic sol–gel chemistry. Sol–gel polymerisation can be driven through hydrolysis reactions (addition of water to reactive precursors such as alkoxides, or chemical or thermal modification of the pH of aqueous solutions containing metallic salts) to form reactive M–OH species that condense through oxolation and/or olation reactions yielding metal–oxo oligomers and polymers assembled via M–O–M and/or M–OH–M bridges. Metal–oxo species can also be generated through thermal elimination of organic moieties wherein the respective departure creates M–O–M bridges. Ester elimination, ether elimination, and alkyl chloride elimination are well known examples of leaving molecule that have been used to produce metal-oxides through thermally induced non hydrolytic sol–gel chemistry.82–84


(b) Organic part. 
Organic components can be introduced into an inorganic network in two different ways, as network modifiers (molecules) or network formers (macromolecules).25,26,85 The most commonly used network modifiers or network formers are coupled to inorganic moieties through organo silicon alkoxides or chlorides. Some examples of functional organosilanes are gathered in Table 1.
Table 1 Some examples of network modifiers, network formers and functionalised macromonomers











The introduction of organic network formers into an inorganic network to form hybrid materials can be performed following two main strategies: (i) by using already pre-synthesised functional macromonomers that are compatibilized with the inorganic component either via chemical grafting (class II) or through embedding with a growing inorganic network in a common solvent to form class I hybrid materials; (ii) they can be generated in situ through photo- or thermally induced polyadditions in the presence of a radical initiator, Atomic Transfer Radical Polymerization, polycondensation (polyesters, formophenolic, polyimine, polyamides…), chemically or electrochemically promoted oxidative polymerisation (polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene etc…).


(c) Hybrid interface. 
This third part will concern the chemical nature of the interfaces commonly developed for the processing of hybrids constructed from sol–gel derived metal oxo species (including metal–oxo polymers, clusters, oxide nanoparticles) and organics.
For class I hybrids, homogeneity can be tuned by controlling the extension of a fuzzy interface that optimizes hydrogen bonding between both organic and hydrophilic inorganic components.
For class II hybrids, the extended but weak class I interface can be reinforced through strong chemical bonding. The hydrolytic stability of the resulting chemical bond depends on the nature of the metallic center. Its knowledge is paramount because, this stability controls the final homogeneity and durability of these hybrids. In the basis of the abundant sol–gel literature, lets summarize the observed general trends.

Fig. 2 schematizes the traditional strategies that are employed to bond organic components labeled R (R = molecule, oligomer, polymer…).
 Fig. 2  Traditional strategies employed to bond organic components labeled R. 
M–OR bonds are not stable in a hydrolytic medium, they are cleaved yielding reactive M–OH groups that are the starting point of sol–gel polymerisation. However, even if these bonds are not hydrolytically stable, upon drying and thermal treatment they can back condense with the hydroxylated metal–oxo species located in their close vicinity.
In most common sol–gel synthesis conditions Si–R and Sn–R are hydrolytically stable while M–R are not (M = all transition metals and lanthanides, Ti, Zr, Nb, V, W, Eu, Y, Ce…, and Al).
However two main conditions must be fulfilled: (i) The chemical bonding should be made through Si–Csp3 or Sn–Csp3 links typically as in Si–CH2–CH2– or Sn–CH2–CH2– (Fig. 2A), (ii) However such a bond becomes hydrolytically unstable if hydrogen atoms located in α and β positions of the metal centre are substituted by highly electronegative atoms such as fluorine. This is the reason for which commercially available fluorinated silanes are fluoroalkylsilanes such as (RO)3–Si–CH2–CH2–(CF2)n–CF3 but not (RO)3–Si–(CF2)n–CF3.

            Si–Csp, Sn–Csp and Sn–Csp2 links are not stable in the presence of water and other nucleophilic hydroxylated species as methanol and their stabilities range as follows: Sn–Csp2 > Si–Csp > Sn–Csp.

            Si–Csp2 as in (RO)3–Si–phenyl are thermally (up to 400 °C) and hydrolytically stable. However, care should be taken, because as soon the aromatic ring is substituted by electro-attracting groups such as –F or –SO3H, the organic part can be easily cleaved by water and the organic functionality is lost during materials processing.
For transition metal oxo-based hybrids the grafting of organic moieties can be performed via two strategies (Fig. 2B). The indirect one involves a stable organosilane ((RO)3–Si–CH2–CH2–R) linked to a transition metal alkoxide via an oxo M–O–Si bridge. The stability of the hybrid interface will depend on the stability of the M–O–Si bridge. Such a strategy has been used extensively to synthesize hybrids made of PDMS chains crosslinked by metal–oxo particles (with M = TiIV, ZrIV, AlIII, NbV, TaV…)86–88 or made from organically modified poly-oxo tungstates for instance.89–91
A direct bonding of the organic component to the transition metals or lanthanides can be performed through the use of complexing ligands (Fig. 2C). The stability of the linkage depends directly on the couple metal-complexing ligand. Considering hard metal alkoxides such as M(OR)n (M = Ti, Zr, Nb, Ta…), a common precursor in sol–gel chemistry, the metal-complexing ligand stability ranges as follows: phosphonates > β-diketones and derivatives > carboxylic acids. For a given ligand, the complexing power can be obviously increased by the polydentate modifications. Polyacids, such as α-or β- hydroxy acids are better complexing ligands of titanium and zirconium than monocarboxylic acids.
This short tutorial part on the chemistry and hydrolytic stability of the hybrid interfaces will help the reader to enter more deeply in the field of hybrid materials. Hybrid materials are not only limited to sol–gel process based approaches. Most of the general strategies for the synthesis of a wide range hybrid materials are schematically represented in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the chemical routes that can be used for the synthesis of O–I hybrids. 

2.2 General synthesis strategies for hybrid materials
This part is inspired from our previous article on applications of hybrids.77 However the authors are convinced of the need to present a summarized global view of the different approaches that allow the generation of hybrid materials to guide the reader along the wide range of possibilities offered by bottom up strategies to design advanced materials.
Following our previous review on applications of hybrids, these general routes can be split into three main chemical paths (A, B, C).

Route A corresponds to soft chemistry-based routes including conventional sol–gel chemistry, the use of specific bridged and polyfunctional precursors, hydrothermal synthesis including the synthesis of coordination polymers such as MOFs. Conventional sol–gel pathways to hybrid networks are obtained through hydrolysis of organically modified metal alkoxides or metal halides condensed with or without simple metallic alkoxides. These strategies are simple, low cost and yield amorphous nanocomposite hybrid materials. These materials, exhibiting an infinity of microstructures, can be transparent and easily shaped as films or bulks. They are cheap, very versatile, present many interesting properties and consequently they give rise to many commercial products shaped as films, powders or monoliths. However, they are generally polydisperse in size and locally heterogeneous in chemical composition. Better academic understanding providing an accurate control of the local and semi-local structure of the hybrid materials and their degree of organization is an important issue, especially if in the future tailored properties are sought. Two main approaches are used to achieve such control (Fig. 3). The first one is on the use of bridged precursors such as silsesquioxanes X3Si–R′–SiX3 (R′ is an organic spacer, X = Cl, Br, –OR)74,75,92 where the chemical tailoring of the organic bridge allow the improvement of supramolecular interactions yielding materials with a better degree of organisation. Indeed, in recent work, the organic spacer has been complemented by using two terminal functional groups (urea type).92–98 The combination within the organic bridging component of aromatic or alkyl groups and urea groups allows better self-assembly through the capability of the organic moieties to establish both strong hydrogen bond networks and efficient packing via π–π or hydrophobic interactions.92–98 The second one includes all aspects of hydrothermal synthesis performed at moderates temperatures (20–200 °C) in polar solvents (water, formamide, toluene, alcohol, DMF,…). The presence of organic templates has given rise to numerous microporous hybrid materials such as organically templated zeolites that already deserve an extensive number of applications in the domain of adsorbents or catalysts. More recently, a new generation of crystalline microporous hybrid solids (Metal Organic Frameworks = MOFs) have been heavily developed by several groups (Yaghi,64–70 Ferey,53–60 Kitagawa,61–63 and Cheetham and Rao).99 These hybrid materials are coordination polymers built from telechelic or polyfunctional spacers that coordinate or link in situ generated metal-containing small oligomers such as metallic oxo-clusters (see part 6).

Route B corresponds to the hybridization of well-defined nanobuilding blocks (NBBs) (via assembling or intercalation or intercalation and dispersion) which are suitable methods to reach a better definition of the inorganic component. The use of highly pre-condensed species presents several advantages: (i) they exhibit a lower reactivity towards hydrolysis or attack of nucleophilic moieties than metal alkoxides, and (ii) the nanobuilding components are nanometric, monodispersed, and with better defined structures, which facilitates the characterization of the final materials. These NBB are perfectly calibrated preformed objects such as clusters, organically pre- or post-functionalized nanoparticles (metallic oxides, metals, chalcogenides, etc…), nano-core–shells100 or layered compounds (clays, layered double hydroxide, lamellar phosphates, oxides or chalcogenides) that can host organic components.3,6,8,9,101–106 These NBBs are selected to be able to keep their integrity in the final material.27 They can be capped with polymerizable ligands or connected through organic spacers, like telechelic molecules or polymers, or functional dendrimers (Fig. 3). The variety found in the nanobuilding blocks (nature, structure, and functionality) and links allows one to build an amazing range of different architectures and O–I interfaces, associated to different assembling strategies. Moreover, the step-by-step preparation of these materials usually allows for a high control over their semi-local structure.
One important set of the NBB-based hybrid materials that are already on the market are those resulting from the intercalation, swelling, and exfoliation of nanoclays by organic polymers. Their applications have been extensively described in several excellent reviews.6,8,9,77 These properties and applications will be summarized in the tables presented in part 5 of the present article.

Route C corresponds to procedures based on the self-assembly of amphiphilic molecules or polymers coupled with sol–gel polymerisation. During the last ten years, a new field has been explored, which corresponds to the organization or the texturation of growing inorganic or hybrid networks, its growth has been templated by organic surfactants.50,51,107–111 In this field, hybrid O–I phases are very interesting due to the versatility they demonstrate in the building of a whole continuous range of nanocomposites, from ordered dispersions of inorganic bricks in a hybrid matrix to highly controlled nanosegregation of organic polymers within inorganic matrices. In the latter case, one of the most striking examples is the synthesis of mesostructured hybrid networks.108 A recent strategy developed by several groups consists of a templated growth (with surfactants) of mesoporous hybrids by using bridged silsesquioxanes as precursors. This approach yields a new class of periodically organised mesoporous hybrid silicas with organic functionality within the walls. These nanoporous materials present a high degree of order and their mesoporosity is available for further organic functionalisation through surface grafting reactions.112 Another possibility corresponds to the combination of self-assembly and NBB approaches.27 These strategies combining the nanobuilding blocks approach with the use of organic templates that self-assemble and allow one to control the assembling step are also appearing. These NBB, with tunable functionalities allowing the generation of a large variety of hybrid O–I interfaces via covalent bonding, complexation and electrostatic interactions, can, through molecular recognition processes, permit the development of a kind vectorial chemistry.113,114
Finally the construction of hierarchically structured hybrid materials that are integrated in real devices follows integrative synthesis pathways where chemistry, physics and processing are strongly coupled. Indeed, the synthesis strategies reported above mainly offer the controlled design and assembling of hybrid materials in the nanoscopic to mesoscopic range. The micron to centimetre ranges can be reached by including either other templating strategies and/or processing methods. Recently, micro-molding methods have been developed, in which the use of controlled phase separation phenomena, emulsion droplets, latex beads, bacterial threads, colloidal templates or organogelators lead to the control of the shapes of complex objects in the micron scale.51,109 Moreover, the combination between these strategies and those above described along paths A, B, and C allow to construct hierarchically organized materials in terms of structure and functions.51,109 These synthesis procedures coupled with top-down approaches such as two photon adsorption (TPA), electrospinning, ink-jet and aerosol printing, dip-pen lithography, X-ray lithography, electron beam writing, nano-imprinting and plasma processing could enable us to design and build ever more challenging and sophisticated novel hybrid materials.1,51,109,115–119 These coupled synthesis procedures will probably help to construct hybrid materials and composites as smart as those observed in natural systems. These developments will impact important domains of applications such as those associated with energy, the environment and sustainable development, biology and medical sciences, sciences and techniques of information (transfer, writing, reading), housing, automotive and personal comfort. Some commercial products corresponding to developments in these areas are gathered in the bottom of Fig. 3 and part 5.
3. Processing of hybrid materials
The successful development of hybrid O–I materials is intrinsically linked to the versatility of their processing in addition to the cost and availability of both precursor species and processing devices. Indeed because the rheology of the colloidal hybrid dispersions can be easily adjusted, hybrid materials can be processed through many methodologies used for organic polymers among them: film deposition methods,120 fiber extrusion,120 fiber pulling,121electrospinning,122–124electrochemical deposition,120 (soft)lithography based techniques (dip-pen, X-Ray…),125–127 TPA,128,129 aerosol or spray,130,131 ink-jet printing… (Fig. 4). One difficulty, but also one advantage of hybrid sols can be their reactivity associated to the evolution of the polycondensation and aggregation reactions. These reactions present a partial reversibility and they can be controlled (quenched or speed up) by tuning chemical and physical parameters such as water content, nature of solvent, pH, dilution, temperature, chemical additives… During processing the hybrid oligomers or polymers present in the sols are triggered to form extended solids through evaporation. The consolidation of the hybrid network can be thermally or photochemically assisted. An efficient coupling between the mastered chemistry and processing methods is paramount for any industrial development. The coupling of hybrid materials chemistry with these processing methods and templating strategies allow the construction of hierarchically structured hybrid materials with controllable functionality and multiscale texturation.
 Fig. 4  Processing routes to materials using sol–gel methods. 
The basic understanding of this coupling is paramount, it dictates a more systematic use of in situ characterization techniques that follow, in real time, formation and structuration from the molecular precursor solutions to the final stabilized hybrid materials.132 Today, amongst the various hybrid materials processing methods compatible with sol–gel chemistry (Fig. 4), film depositions are the most commonly developed in industry. Basically, the sol state prior to gelation is ideal for preparing thin films or macro/micro/nano-patterns by chemical solution deposition techniques. Some of these deposition techniques were developed for large-scale substrates and continuous coating while others are well-suited for small substrates and batch processing. The aim of this chapter is not to detail each processing technique, but rather to provide a brief description of the main employed or promising processing techniques.

Dip-coating
120,133–135
Among the available wet chemical deposition techniques, dip coating is the oldest and the most widely used in industry (production and R&D laboratories).120 This could be explained by its ease of use, its cost-efficiency, the high coating quality and its flexibility (several modified techniques based on dip coating have been developed for specific substrate shapes and applications such as drain coating, angle-dependent dip coating, thickness gradients, single-sided coating, withdrawal under rotation, and inside coating). Usually dedicated to coat small flat substrates (mainly in academic and R&D laboratories), this deposition technique allows also coatings on large area and complex shaped substrates. This process results from the immersion of a substrate into the coating solution. The film is formed by removing the substrate from the solution at a precise withdrawal speed under controlled environmental conditions (temperature and atmosphere). The formation of thin films occurs through the evaporation of solvents (mainly alcohol and water) which concentrate the system in non-volatile species leading then to aggregation and gelation. During the drying step, environmental conditions, such as relative humidity, temperature and air flow have to be carefully controlled since sol–gel chemistry is highly sensitive to the water content and temperature. The film thickness is mainly governed by the withdrawal speed, the content of non-volatile species and the viscosity of the solution. Usually performed in batch conditions, dip coating has been adapted to a semi-continuous process for endless flexible substrates like webs or filaments.134 Film defects could be observed such as voids, pinholes, thickness variations, wavy surfaces and incomplete substrate coverage. Voids and pinholes are usually caused by air bubble formation during film deposition or substrate surface contamination. Thickness and uniformity are sensitive to flow conditions in the liquid bath and gas overhead. Moreover chemical stability of large dip-coating baths under atmospheric conditions could also be altered.

Spin-coating
120,135–138
This coating technique has been mainly developed for the spin-on glasses in microelectronics and also substrates presenting a rotational symmetry e.g. optical lenses or eyeglass lenses. This also is the main application technology of dielectrics (e.g. hybrids like ORMOCER®s) and photoresists in processing of the dielectrical interconnection on the backend of chips: i.e. its multilayers, established by spinning of dielectrics and its photolithographic patterning, sputtering of copper, spinning of photoresist and its photolithographic patterning, etching of copper, and spinning of the dielectrics again and so on. In this technique, the desired liquid is deposited onto a substrate held in place using a rotatable fixture (often a motor-driven vacuum chuck). The substrate is then accelerated to very high angular velocities during which the excess liquid (most of the applied liquid) is spread out over the substrate leaving a thin uniform film. This coating technique involves the equilibrium between the centrifugal forces created by rotational accelerations and the viscous forces determined by the viscosity of the liquid. Both thickness and uniformity depend on the rotational speed, the content of non-volatile species in the sol, the volatility and the viscosity of the liquid. The major advantages of spin coating are low cost, reproducibility, uniformity, simplicity, ease of integration, and ability to use different substrate materials. The main disadvantage of the method is that a smooth, flat substrate should be used and a surplus of material is lost, depending on spinning speed. Moreover, depending on the sol quality and substrate characteristics, some defects could be observed such as striations, gradual radial thickness variations, chuck marks, or “comets”.

          Spray coatings
          120,139–143

Spray coating techniques are widely used in industry for organic lacquers and are suitable for coating substrates presenting irregular/complex shapes. In this process, very fine droplets are formed from the solution using atomisers or nebulisers. These fine droplets are then carried into the coating chamber with a carrier gas and deposited on the substrate by gravity or with an electrostatic field. The quality of the coating is determined by the size of the droplet, which can be reduced by decreasing the viscosity of the solution, increasing the atomising pressure or using a Venturi nozzle. Spray coating techniques offer several advantages compared to the spin and dip coating techniques: it is a faster coating process, waste of coating sols can be much smaller, coating sols with rather short pot lives can be used and the coating step is compatible with continuous coating processes and commercial equipment (Venkajob).120 Recently reported by Brinker's group,144spray coating combining an aerosol-droplet generator system with a robot-controlled deposition apparatus controlled by a computer-aided program allowed the printing of complex shapes on various (curved and flat) substrates (silicon wafers, glass slides, plastics). Further, with INKtelligent printing® of silver nanoparticles (Fraunhofer IFAM) and ORMOCER® dielectrics (Fraunhofer ISC) by an aerosol based ink-deposition technique software controlled 3D-printed circuit boards and modules to be produced.
Doctor blading120,145,146
Doctor blading is one of the widely used techniques for producing thin films on large substrates with a well-defined thickness. The technique works by placing a sharp blade at a fixed distance from the substrate surface that is to be coated. The coating solution is then placed in front of the blade that is then moved linearly across the substrate leaving a thin wet film after the blade. The final wet thickness of the film is ideally half the gap width but may vary due to the surface energy of the substrate, the surface tension of the coating solution and the viscosity of the coating solution. Compared to spin-coating or dip-coating, the loss of coating solution could be greatly minimized. This technique could also work in batch or in continuous process.
Capillary or meniscus coating120,147
This technique which has a limited use in industry was developed conjointly in the 1990’s by the CEA/Limeil-Valenton and Convac-group Company. Capillary coating is dedicated to coating large flat substrates at room temperature with a very high thickness uniformity and weak edge effect. The process could be basically described as following: a chuck holds the substrate in an upside-down state using a vacuum, a tubular dispense unit can gently be moved under the surface of the substrate using a driving unit on guide rails. The dispense unit consists of a circulating solution reservoir collecting the excess fluid and a pumping system to ensure a continuous solution feed during the deposition travel. No physical contact exists between the tube applicator and the substrate, but a narrow gap permits the creation of a spontaneous meniscus.
Flow coating
In the flow coating process, the liquid coating is poured over the substrate. The coating thickness depends on the angle of inclination of the substrate, the coating liquid viscosity, and the solvent evaporation rate. As a variation of this process, the spinning of the substrate after coating may be helpful in order to obtain more homogeneous coatings. If no spinning process is employed, the coating thickness increases from the top to the bottom of the substrate.
Roll coating
Basically, roll coating is a process whereby liquid flows into a narrow gap between two rotating cylinders, the surfaces of which move either in the same or opposite directions. Some of the liquid passes through the gap and splits downstream into two thin films, each coating one of the rolls. This technique is extensively used in the painting, photographic and tape-recording industries for covering a large surface area with one or several uniform layers. Especially the reverse curvature coating allows the application of hybrids like ORMOCER®s onto foil to obtain a barrier, even ultra barrier coatings/foils for application in flexible solar cells and flexible OLED devices (Fraunhofer POLO).
4. Rational design of hybrid materials
In advanced technologies, the optimisation of numerous applications need a set of requirements sustained in many cases by divergent properties that are very difficult to satisfy by using single component (either organic or inorganic) based materials. Multifunctional materials constitute a golden gate giving access to a large variety of tuneable modern systems and devices. Hybridization allows one to combine, in a single material, properties of organic or biological molecules with those of inorganic compounds. However, these “simultaneous” assimilations of the two different organic and inorganic networks from molecular precursors retaining advantageously both organic and inorganic functionalities is not always a trivial goal. In the course of the synthesis of simultaneous hybrid networks, a preferred segregation between ionic and hydrophilic oxide species from covalent and lipophilic organic moieties can occur. Nevertheless, the size of the phase separation or the degree of interpenetration of the respective organic and inorganic components can be kept at the nanometre scale by using several strategies that eventually can be coupled:
•Modulation of the reactions rate for the formation of the inorganic and organic components,
•Tuning of supramolecular forces via weak chemical bonds (Van der Waals, hydrogen bond, hydrophobic interactions) between both components,
•Judicious adjustment of the hydrophilic/hydrophobic natures,
•Construction of strong bonds (covalent or iono-covalent) between the organic and inorganic components.
The chemistry of hybrid O–I compounds has been strongly developed during the last 30 years for several metal–organic precursors such as M = Si, Sn, Ti, Zr, Al…. Currently, the most common way to introduce an organic group into an inorganic silica network is through the use of organoalkoxysilane precursors, R′nSi(X)4−n (wherein R′n is an Si–Csp3 bond). In most sol–gel conditions, the particular Si–Csp3 bond remains stable towards hydrolysis and the R′ group brings possibilities of new properties to the inorganic network (flexibility, hydrophobicity, refractive index modification, optical response,…). Organic groups R′ can be introduced into an inorganic network in two different ways: as network modifiers (if R′ is a non-hydrolyzable group bonded to silicon such as Si–CH3, Si–phenyl Si–dye, isocyanate, amine, etc…) or network formers (if R′ can react with itself because it contains a vinyl, a methacryl, pyrrole, thiophene or an epoxy group or any additional polymerisable monomers or macromonomers). Both functions have been achieved in the so-called CERAMERS and ORMOCER®s. Indeed, these strategies allow a bypass of micro or sub-micro phase separation that may occur otherwise due to the thermodynamic incompatibility between the inorganic and organic constituents of the network. As a result new multifunctional hybrid nanocomposite materials can be obtained. Moreover, to this day, the improved knowledge of sol–gel chemistry widens the path in real rational designs of hybrid materials.
At this time, a performance and property driven approach is pervasive in chemistry today. Today's outstanding individuals display the capability to tailor hybrid materials utilizing this kind of performance–property driven methodology. Importantly, this approach stems from the requirement of an extensive and integrative scientific background that overcomes current divisions between respective fields of Chemistry, Physics, and Engineering and, thus, provides a basic platform to be truly multidisciplinary. This particular way of thinking developed by such individuals can be delineated into two main steps. First, they list and understand the targeted properties and the requirements, at hand. Then, they open their “toolbox of knowledge” containing precursors (eventually if needed they design and synthesize new ones), and they expertly select the appropriate chemistries and coupled-processing routes. Second they proceed with the synthesis and characterisation of the targeted hybrids without ever forgetting two important rules: (i) the coupling between chemistry, structure, processing; and (ii) the growth of sol–gel derived polymers is often controlled by kinetics. The second rule strongly influencing the first one, wherein recent development of in situ characterisation methods allows one to follow the structural and compositional modifications of the processed hybrid materials in real time. This has been paramount for knowledge improvement, control and reproducibility of sol–gel derived materials.148
An illustration of the rational construction of O–I hybrid nanomaterials for the development of hybrid polymers is described in the following.
4.1 Developments in micro-electronics and photonics
As shown in Fig. 5, it is of utmost importance to know in detail what application is targeted. Most materials nowadays have to fulfil numerous test conditions and norms, and need to be adaptable to processing requirements etc. The classical thinking of tuning dielectric properties towards high-k or low-k as well as considering optics for certain refractive indices is not enough to establish a new material e.g., for optical and electrical applications. Very often, more than a hundred so-called specifications have to be fulfilled, mostly related to certain production processes and their conditions as well as to the later utilisation and environment. Furthermore, solvents and chemicals to be used are limited according to laws like “REACH”, safety rules or just because of price, availability and green practices. O–I sol–gel hybrids fit perfectly for the described industrial needs (an easy choice of (multi)functionality and playing with organic and inorganic chemistry give easy access to materials that are well adapted to product and manufacturing conditions).
 Fig. 5  Specification (here from the electronic industry) driving the choice of precursors and their functional groups for cost-effective in situ build-up of ORMOCER®s. 
Over a period of 30 years, a database was established at Fraunhofer ISC on different compositions and resultant materials with their functions and processing properties. In combination with fundamental knowledge of chemistry, mostly regarding organic cross-linking reactions or the driving of the kinetics of the co-condensation reaction, as described above, inorganic–organic structures can be described and manufactured in a reproducible way.
Fundamental scientists like to have a clear and well-defined structure in the final material, which in principle is possible by use of well-defined nano-building blocks (NBBs), like POSS, silsesquioxanes, or clusters. However, very often their price is a drawback. In addition, one clearly needs to keep in mind, that in most applications, sudden temperature changes are possible. This implies that the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) of the inorganic and organic units/phases/multi-layers etc. have to be taken into account and adapted. Failure to do so will lead to resultant stresses causing nano-cracks which will develop into larger ones; giving rise to a reduced lifetime of the final product. A certain mix of NBBs and sol–gel oligomers or the addition of an organic monomer could help to overcome the issue of inner stress.
The in situ building of sol–gel oligomers, such as ORMOCER® resins, starts from with a mix of cubes, rings and more or less open silsesquioxanes. Depending on the catalyst driving the co-condensation or alkoxolation reactions of the different starting silanes in certain amounts (mostly mono- (R′SiOR3) or difunctionalised alkoxysilanes/silanoles (R′′2SiOR2) have been chosen) a quantitatively well defined mix of D, T, Q structures will be obtained (D = difunctionalised alkoxysilanes R″2Si(OR)2, T = monofunctionalised alkoxysilanes R′Si(OR)3 and Q = Si(OR)4). As the resins consist of several structures, as well as the finally organically crosslinked siloxanes, isotropic material cannot be structurally characterised by classical X-ray methods. It has been shown148 that a combination of spectroscopic techniques with simple visualisation and modelling tools like compass force field149–151 render it possible to obtain information about the oligomer structure and the statistical functionality. Having allocated the final base structure/composition in terms of D, T, Q units of the siloxane, the quantitative spread of D, T, Q in the 29Si-NMR measurement of the co-condensates proves to be a good base for batch control in industrial scale-up production. After documentation of the kinetics of each involved starting silane by NMR spectroscopy, the classification of the spectra of the co-condensates becomes possible and in subsequent measurements for batch control in production, one has only to compare the quantitative spread of different Si–O–Si signals.
ORMOCER®s, basic sol–gel class II hybrids that display specific properties, can be the starting point for a step by step optimisation leading to final materials well-suited for a targeted application. As shown in Fig. 6, one will start with a first modification, e.g., a slight change in the starting composition or concentration of catalyst or change in reaction temperature etc. In the next step, the condensate will be characterised by near infrared (NIR) and infrared (IR) spectroscopy, small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and 29Si-NMR. The data will be the input for simple modelling and one can obtain a visualisation of a possible siloxane structure.
 Fig. 6  Modification/optimisation of ORMOCER® properties towards desired specifications of the final application. (* and other required properties). 
It is not necessary to know the final structure, just a hint about match or mismatch of the sterical needs of for instance the reactive groups for later organic cross-linking of silsesquioxanes provides input for the next modification/optimisation, the cross-linking capability of the oligomers as well as whether there are too many buried inside the silsesquioxanes. In parallel, one can also get an input for estimations on density of later material which is directly linked to the refractive index and the permittivity. Repeating this approach several times allows a step by step tuning of the mentioned properties. In further cycles, also a closer look towards other desired properties, like transparency, distribution of certain functions, porosity, polarity, etc., can be done to find the final match of specifications versus properties.
Based on the methods described in Fig. 5 and 6, a large number of ORMOCER®s were developed and are on the market as different products.77 To update the earlier review, two new examples are given. The difference in comparison to the older published systems is that, here, an additional benefit of sol–gel class-II hybrids is used: ORMOCER®s can easily be applied to various curing methods and patterning technologies like UV-nano-imprinting and multi-photon absorption based on a femto-laser technology in high resolution, allowing complex applications in micro-optics and integrated optics. Moreover, they enable a drastic cost reduction in the processing line. They can be passed through: (a) a wafer-scale production of micro-optical arrays for LED lighting and sensing systems with no need of further alignment and packaging and (b) a two-photon absorption-based processing of electro-optical high density printed circuit boards in 3 steps instead of 17.

Fig. 7 shows the reproducible fabrication of refractive micro-lenses and arrays with parameters derived from system design calculations. The resolution/lens gap is 1 μm. It has a high fill factor and lateral precision. The homogeneity of the focal length is ±1% across the wafer. The patterning of the ORMOCER® results from a UV-replication/nano-imprint technology with ORMOCER® resins (oligomers) initiated by certain photo-initiators. Commonly utilised resins are Irgacure 369 and Lucirin. Applications are laser/fiber collimation, beam-forming elements, homogenisers, fill factor enhancement on detector arrays, field-of-view matching for displays and miniaturised imaging systems as well as sensors.152–162
 Fig. 7  

A
 Double-sided beam homogeniser with 3 different zones NA 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and a buried aperture array. B–CSi CMOS wafer with lens arrays on top of the detector area by selective UV curing. UV-replication in ORMOCER®. Courtesy of Fraunhofer – IOF. 

Fig. 8 gives the scheme of a two-photon absorption (TPA) waveguide writing process for the preparation of optoelectrical boards. Due to the TPA laser writing process, the refractive index of the ORMOCER® is increased and 3-D waveguide cores are produced in the material. In contrast to standard technologies, this new ORMOCER® and TPA technique allows, via higher densification (different crosslinking of the core, based on femto-laser pulses), the fabrication of waveguides with one ORMOCER® layer. The subsequent steps to manufacture a board are: (i) placement of the opto-electrical (o/e) components onto the inner layer of a printed circuit board (standard precision assembly), (ii) application of the ORMOCER® on the surface (by print, spin-on, curtain coating etc.) (iii) waveguide pattering (core, here waveguide bundle) between the o/e components using TPA technology, (iv) lamination of the surface plane and parallel thermal curing of the residual non-TPA-cured ORMOCER® resin, (v) connection of the embedded o/e components using μ-vias and (vi) surface mount assembly of the components.
 Fig. 8  Two-photon absorption (TPA) waveguide writing process. Courtesy of Langer et al. at AT&S. 

Fig. 9 displays the cross section through the directly patterned ORMOCER® layer. The TPA process forms the waveguide bundles by focused cross-linking of the cores, whereas the other ORMOCER® oligomer was thermally polymerised during the lamination process (200 °C and 20 bar) resulting in a lower refractive index than that of the TPA-processed cores, forming the cladding.
 Fig. 9  
            ORMOCER® matrix with waveguide array, (4 waveguide bundles arranged in an array). Courtesy of Langer et al. at AT&S. 
Finally, Fig. 10 illustrates the completely processed opto-electrical circuit board which consists of integrated opto-electronic components (VCSEL- and photodiode-chips) and driving components (VCSEL driver and trans impedance amplifier chips (TIA)). The board presents an optical line (waveguide), an electrical line and an interferer line (transmission of interference signals). The demonstrator passed all main tests and the complete new process is just under final evaluation.
 Fig. 10  Opto-electronic circuit board demonstrator. Courtesy of Langer et al. at AT&S. 
ORMOCER®s in combination with TPA-technology seem to have a brilliant future, not only in the field of micro-electronics and photonics but also in various fields such as life science.128,129,163–165
4.2 Development of hybrids for ophthalmics

(a) Multifunctionl contact lenses. 
The major requirement for contact lenses is the need to strike a balance between good wettability and permeability, and sufficient scratch resistance, flexibility and the ability to meet stringent constraints. Conventional silicone materials do not meet these requirements because they are hydrophobic. A “silicon”-like unit, containing a –Si–CH2–CH2– group was chosen to favor oxygen diffusion, while the presence of CH2OH groups was considered to be suitable for hydrophilicity. With this, GLYMO (glycidopropyltrimethoxysilane) was prehydrolyzed, and then hydrophilic diol units were generated by controlled hydrolytic epoxide ring opening; in following, Ti(OR)4 was added as a condensation catalyst to improve the mechanical properties and to decrease shrinkage of the obtained materials. This resulted in dense, but unfortunately brittle materials, which were not machinable for lenses. Therefore, MEMO (RO)3–Si(CH2)n–O–CO–CH(CH3)CH2 was introduced with hydroxy ethyl methacrylate HEMA to generate a flexible polymethacrylate based substructure via thermal polymerization. HEMA instead of MMA was selected to maintain good wettability and retain the mechanical integrity. The resulting hybrid materials exhibited balance of all the required properties and an improved scratch resistance compared to conventional lenses.25,26


(b) Smart ophthalmic lenses on plastics. 
Among the main requirements for the processing of smart ophthalmic lenses on plastics, properties such as transparency, anti-abrasion, anti-smudge, and anti-dust combined with the possible variation in transmission with the intensity of light are needed (Fig. 11). This multifunctionality can be achieved successfully by using several coatings combined with hybrid chemistry.21,166 Anti-scratch coating of ophthalmic lens surfaces consists of a compromise. Greater surface hardness to counter the effect of fine particles and greater flexibility to increase resistance to large particles allow to combat both fine scratches from wiping and the large scratches caused by physical damage. An effective solution has been found by applying a hybrid O–I nanocomposite coating to the surface of the lens.166
 Fig. 11  Structure of an ophthalmic lens (Courtesy of Essilor International). 
These varnishes composed of both organic acrylate based polymers, organosilane coupling agents and mineral nanoparticles (nanosilica for example) solve the problem of abrasion due to their two-fold properties: resistance to fine scratches due to the hardness of their mineral component and resistance due to large scratches due to the suppleness of their organic component. Moreover, the small size of the inorganic NPs (10 to 20 nm) eliminate any risk of light scattering and ensures perfect transparency. These hybrid combinations that were both cohesive and flexible solves the problem of anti-reflectivity. The deposition onto the anti-scratch varnish of several fine layers of purely mineral materials can be easily performed. The role of the anti-abrasion coating is then to fill the gap between the mechanical properties of the plastic-based materials and those of the fine anti-reflective mineral by sandwiching an intermediate layer between the two. The original structure of the nanocomposite hybrid varnishes, which are both organic and inorganic in nature, provides a mechanical transition. This creates a “dampening” effect between the anti-reflective coating and the base material. Anti-smudge and anti-dust treatments can be additionally performed. The first effect is reached by using in hybrid coatings fluorinated polysilazanes that possess radicals that can react on the silica component yielding good adherence to the coating. Polysilazanes also possess a rich pattern of fluorine that exhibits a strong chemical repulsion to water and oily matter. The second effect requires deposition of anti-static coatings that can be processed by inclusion of transparent conductive components (conductive NPs, ionic species, selected conductive polymers…) to avoid charge accumulation and so the coatings do not attract dust.
Moreover these hybrid coatings can be compatibilized with organic dyes such as chromens or spiro-oxazines to yield photochromic lenses, whose transmission varies with the intensity of light and thus adapt to diverse lighting conditions. From a chemical point of view, photochromism is the reversible transformation between two states of an embedded or grafted dye that provide lenses with varying transmission properties and colour.21,167 The reversible nature and the transmission characteristics of these lenses oscillate between two extremes: the clearest state and the darkest state. When worn permanently, these lenses provide true protection for the eyes and can contribute to preserving a wearer's optimal vision over the long term. Photochromism operates in the following manner: ultraviolet radiation with the necessary energy to initiate the chemical transformation (photo-induced electrocyclic opening of the dye) darkens the lens. Removal of the UV radiation allows the lens to return to its initial clear state (ring closure of the dye). Depending on the rates of the optical transformations, photochromic materials can be used for the design of optical memory devices and switches, optical data storage devices, energy-conserving coatings, eye-protection glasses and privacy shields.168–170 Other applications concern wave guide/fiber optics for optical delay generators,171,172 UV sensors for watches, sunscreen bottle caps and credit cards,171–176 temperature sensors,177 holographic recording media,178–180 coatings on wool fabric181,182 and cosmetics.183 The rates of both light-driven structural changes and of the back reactions are sensitive to the environment in the matrix. The advantages of hybrid systems have been mainly related to a high photochemical stability, the flexibility of the host matrix allowing molecular rearrangements of dyes, the control of the polarity and the hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance (HHB) of the hybrid matrix.184,185 In order to increase the dye content without aggregation and to optimize optical contrast, the grafting of the photochromic dyes on the silica or siloxane based backbone has been previously investigated.186,187 One of the most important properties of photochromic lenses based on organic photoactive molecules in long-term technological applications is their stability in the final product. Again the high versatility of hybrid chemistry allows easy introduction of organic additives, such as methylimidazole and perfluoroalkylsiloxane, which improves the photofatigue resistance. Moreover, plastics with photochromic additives can use several types of photoactive molecules simultaneously whose combined effect can create, depending on their proportions, the grey or brown tints that wearers desire. Indeed, today the important technology producers such as Essilor are performing a true rational design of hybrid coatings to obtain high performing multifunctional ophthalmic plastic lenses.

4.3 Development of hybrid metal coating
High-power laser plants devoted to Inertial Confinement Fusion (ICF) like the National Ignition Facility (NIF)188 at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) or the French MegaJoule-class Laser (LMJ)189 currently require several thousand square-metres of optical coated areas on roughly 10000 optical components. Among these different components, the laser pumping cavity includes a silver-coated large-sized light reflector (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Pictures of real-size reflector coating device (a), hybrid-coated piece (b) and difference between coated (bottom) and uncoated (top) parts of a silver reflector sample (c). 
These silver mirrors are used to back-reflect the flashlamp light towards the laser slabs in order to increase pumping efficiency during the laser pulse amplification step (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Schematic view of a laser-disk amplifier. 
For cooling purposes, the laser cavity of the LMJ facility is operated under a gas flow and due to safety and economical reasons, air flow has been preferred to nitrogen or other gases. Consequently, silver reflectors need to be protective coated to avoid fast tarnishing and oxidation damage. Indeed, the air flow used could contain impurities such as H2O, NH3, NO2, SO2, H2S, COS, HCl… But the most damaging effect is due to ozone formation under oxygen and UV-light conditions. Therefore a protective coating is required to improve silver resistance to oxidation during the complete lifetime of the reflectors (at least an estimated 10000 flashlamp discharges). Moreover, this protective layer needs to be as transparent as possible in the wavelength range from 400 to 1000 nm in order to maintain the silver reflectance property. Additional properties are needed to fulfill the whole requirements (see Table 2).
Because such mirrors are large-sized, complex-shaped and fragile, an adequate coating method has to be selected and developed. The question of developing a newly designed protective coating has thus been asked of sol–gel chemists by the French Commission for Atomic Energy in terms of physical, chemical and economical properties.
Sol–gel chemistry has been extensively applied to produce thin oxide coatings with appropriate protective behavior on metal substrates.190,191 Nevertheless, protection of such silver reflectors should provide resistance to not only gaseous oxidation but also mechanical and chemical attacks during the mounting and replacing steps of the laser maintenance (Table 2). That is why a specific silica-based sol–gel hybrid layer has been developed and optimized, in terms of thickness and composition, to enhance silver resistance to oxidation and tarnishing under UV-irradiation, to protect the silver layer from the clean-room cleaning procedure, to withstand 10000 flashlamp glow-discharge exposures with the lowest possible decrease in the reflection value. The sol–gel deposition process needs to be also compatible with industrial coating onto large-sized and multi-shaped reflectors. These new protected reflectors will need to be replaced much less often than reflectors employed in current solid-state lasers, ensuring both higher performance and lower operating costs.
Table 2 Performance requirements for the sol–gel protective layer




Optical
Mechanical
Chemical




Transmittance >90% @ 500 nm
Adhesion in compliance with 10-010 NFS test

Ethanol dipping test


Transmittance >92% for 500–600 nm range
Adhesion square test in compliance with 2409 ISO test
Washing machine test (detergent included)


Transmittance >95% for 600–700 nm range
 
 


Transmittance >96% for 700–1000 nm range
 
 




Substrates employed in the coating experiment have been specially selected to lower the production cost. Electrodeposited silver-coated (roughly 10-μm in thickness) stainless steel substrates were used to perform sol–gel coating. Prior to the sol–gel coating, silvered plates were cleaned using classic acidic and redox baths and alcohol rinsed. This cleaning procedure was found to increase reflectance of stored silvered samples.

Silica-based hybrid solution was used to obtain sol–gel films. The hybrid solution was prepared in acidic conditions (pH = 2) with a molar ratio TEOS/EtOH/H2O = 1/11/5 and the organic precursor used was selected from among the alkylalkoxysilanes.192 Thin films were deposited by a spinning or dip-coating technique, the latter giving better uniformity and therefore better protection. Withdrawing rates for dip-coating were varied from 10 to 2 cm min−1 in order to optimize deposited film thickness. Subsequent thermal treatment of the as-deposited samples was carried out under nitrogen flow at a maximum temperature of 110 °C. A specific test was used for oxidation resistance evaluation. Sol–gel coated mirrored samples were placed in a UV/ozone closed chamber for increasing periods of time. So, the protected silver layer was exposed to UV light and an O3-saturated atmosphere simultaneously.
As expected, poor adhesive properties and oxidation behavior of the coated mirrors were related to the density of the protective coating. Therefore, sol–gel chemistry was adapted to prepare denser thin films corresponding to a lower hydrolysis ratio h, as shown in Table 3. Moreover, the hybrid material, compared to the pure inorganic one, allows better chemical resistance due to the hydrophobic function of the alkyl surface groups and also reduced coating stress allowing thicker film deposition onto eventually deformable substrates.
Table 3 Protective coating properties for different sol–gel materials




 

Silica hybrid
Sol–gel SiO2

Silica hybrid
Sol–gel SiO2



h = 5

h = 5

h = 10

h = 10




Adhesion after 110 °C/N2curing
Good
Good
Poor
Poor


Surface wetting
Hydrophobic
Hydrophilic
Hydrophobic
Hydrophilic


Refractive index
1.449
1.445
1.420
1.426


Film density
Dense
Dense
Slightly porous
Slightly porous


Thick film deposition
Possible
Tricky
Possible
Tricky




The optical degradation due to the deposition of any layer on top of the pure silvered mirror has been evaluated and optimized regarding the protective hybrid film thickness. Fig. 14 illustrates the spectral specular reflectance for an uncoated electrodeposited silvered reflector and for the same hybrid-coated reflector with various film thickness. It has not been possible to exactly optically determine the layer's thickness because of its very low value, but deposited thickness estimations range from 50 to 10 nm for a respective deposition rate ranging from 10 cm min−1 and 1% silica content to 2 cm min−1 and 0.5% silica content using the dip-coating technique.
 Fig. 14  Absolute specular reflectance spectral curves for hybrid-protected silver reflectors coated with various withdrawing rates and silica content and compared to bare substrate. 
Therefore, one may observe that original specular reflectance of the silvered mirror is nearly maintained for the lowest deposition rate tested, corresponding to a deposited film of only a few nanometres in thickness. With such an ultra-thin layer, the silver reflectance exceeds 90% above a wavelength of 470 nm (Fig. 15). On the other hand, increasing the protective layer thickness leads to a decrease in the visible-range reflectance, corresponding to a loss of silver reflector efficiency.
 Fig. 15  Absolute specular reflectance spectral curves for a hybrid-protected silver reflector coated with a 2 cm min−1 withdrawing rate and 0.5% silica content and compared to bare and cleaned substrate. 
UV light combined with ozone very rapidly damages silvered mirrors (bottom curve of Fig. 16). Severe irreversible degradation occurred after only 4 min of exposure in the UV/O3 chamber. But the as-developed hybrid coating provides an efficient barrier to oxygen attack and prevents damage to the silver reflector with a protective layer as thin as a few nanometres and for a long period of time. Indeed, no change in reflectance is observed for the as-protected silver mirror for which reflectivity remains as high as the unexposed-silver over a minimum period of 45 min under such very severe conditions.
 Fig. 16  Specular reflectance variation with oxidative medium time exposure for hybrid-protected and uncoated silver reflectors. 
Tests have been performed on real-sized silver reflectors to check if this protective coating preserves high-reflectivity front surfaces for long periods of operation under intense broadband flashlamp light and atmospheric corrosive conditions. Withstanding 12742-flashlamp glow-discharge exposures with no detectable changes in the reflection value or in the coating appearance, the very good protective behavior of this coating has been demonstrated. This very thin protective layer also successfully passed the mechanical (US-MIL-C-0675C adhesion test) and chemical resistance experiments, showing no film removal or film damage after these tests. Mechanical and chemical resistance are fulfilling the requirements, allowing industrial automatic washing cycles and wiping of coated reflectors during handling steps.
Production of several hundreds of metallic silver reflectors has been already achieved for CEA high-power laser plants using a liquid deposition process onto large-sized and multi-shaped pieces. On the basis of demonstrated properties of the hybrid coating, the replacement rate of damaged coated reflectors under operation is supposed to be low, decreasing in the meantime operating costs of current solid-state lasers.
In summary, protective hybrid-silica layer deposition conditions have been optimized to durably protect silver reflectors under severe oxidative atmosphere. The as-developed hybrid layer preserves high reflectance of silver over the spectral range (except a slight decrease below 450 nm) and allows the silver reflector to withstand a very corrosive medium with no appreciable degradation.
Through such example, one can rationally conclude that sol–gel hybrid O–I materials can be designed, developed and produced, fulfilling industrial needs and requirements.
5. Landscape of applications
5.1 Protective and decorative coatings/smart coatings
Coatings are still by far the most widespread application of hybrid chemistry since films and coatings development dates back several decades. The main reasons for this are dual. First, the easiness and quickness to prepare a “product” starting from a solution, a sol or a gel is something very rewarding for the scientist. After the solution preparation from precursors using different hybrid routes, one has the ability to easily create a material leading to applications, to verify and to discover properties, just implementing various available deposition processes as described above, right away. Second, cost also explains the numerous applications of hybrid coatings. Indeed, thin film deposition, membrane casting, and coating encapsulation require a quite small amount of solution to protect, to decorate, and to confer new functional properties on a substrate, even a large-sized one. The required solution volume is small and liquid-deposition devices or machines are much cheaper than physical-based deposition methods (PVD, laser ablation, ALD…). Liquid-based techniques are therefore a very easy and economical way to process and produce multi-functional coatings exhibiting protective, decorative or smart properties.
As detailed in Table 4, numerous examples of hybrid coatings are already commercially available, in a pre-industrial stage or in a prototyping step. They are all providing significant improvements to existing products, as new or substitute articles, bringing extended functionalities to substrates, reducing production costs or increasing product lifetimes.
Table 4 Protective and decorative coatings/smart coatings




Name
Materials
Processing
Applications - Properties
Stage (prototype pilot commercial development)
References


Organic part
Inorganic part





Boegel
 EP-II type products (Boeing company licensed products)

Organosilanes
Zr alkoxides
Spray – brush applications

                    Chromate-free conversion and anti-corrosion coatings
Commercial development

                    http://www.actechaero.com/ AC-®130 & AC-®131http://www.socomore.com/ SOCOGEL B0102 & B0202



Schott Clean Plus®

Organosilanes
Organosilanes
Coated on glass panes (oven)
Hydrophobic “Easy to clean” substrate

                    R&D
                  

                    http://www.schott.com
                  



Vitreous protective coating for cookware

Ormocers
Ormocers/SiO2 particles/mineral pigments and fillers
Spray
Protective coating
Commercial development
Seb SA WO/2002/097185 EP2206801 WO/2008/142327 WO/2010/023402



Silrise S100


Acrylic polymer shell
Core shell nanoparticles
Spin- or dip coating
Hard-coats for plastics and antireflective coatings
Commercial development

                    http://www.polyrise.com FR2929281 WO2010/034936



Coatings for television glass panel

Indigo dyes, acrylate resins
Ormocers (Si/Zr)

Spray coating

Absorbing filter, insulating or conductive coatings
Commercial development on LCD/plasma displays
US5706064 US2008152933



Sealants for optical devices

Organosilanes

Siloxanes

Sol–gel sealants for liquid-based optical devices
Optical lenses, zooms and diaphragm
Commercial development

                    http://www.varioptic.com/ EP1939150



Abrasil®, Cleanosil®

Ormocers
Ormocers

Spray coating, dip coating, spin coating
Scratch resistant and easy-to-clean lacquers

                    R&D or commercial development

                    http://www.top-oberflaechen.de/
                  



Ceramiclear®

Organic resins/polysiloxanes

                    SiO2
nanoparticles


Spray coating

Mar and scratch resistant clear coat for automotive
Commercial development

                    http://www.ppg.com/ US6387519



Glasca®, Dynacera®


Polymers/Ormocers
Ormocers

                    Spray coatings
                  
Protective coatings for outdoor applications (enamel on the aluminium product/cement siding)
Commercial development

                    http://www.jsr.co.jp/jsr_e/index.shtml
                  




Among current commercialized protective coatings containing nanocomposite materials, surface films specially developed for corrosion resistance enhancement (conversion) and enhanced organic matrix resin adhesion of aeronautical parts have appealed to hybrid chemistry for many years. Advantages of these O–I coatings compared to conventional conversion ones are mainly the environmentally friendly features. Indeed, hybrid sols such as Boegel-type products (Boeing company licensed products) sold by AC TECH® and Socomore® companies provide an interesting economical and environmental alternative to hazardous processes such as electrolytic-type or chemical-type etching (i.e. phosphoric, chromic or sulfuric acid anodizing, alkaline earth hydroxides etchants).193–197 Using strong acids or bases, or using toxic materials (chromates) in dipping tanks, is damaging from an environmental viewpoint. Large amounts of rinsing water generate hazardous waste that is challenging to cleanup and dispose. For aerospace applications, this drawback drastically increases the cost of the coating process. Therefore the need for non-chromated conversion coating or surface preparation solution for aluminium, nickel, titanium and stainless steel was strong and the development of a long-term durable, water-based, safe, and efficient process welcome. Moreover, these new coatings can be deposited by brushing or spraying instead of dipping, reducing solution amounts and wastes, and allowing field repair and maintenance of aircraft. Such products are made of organozirconium and organosilane mixtures. The Zr-based precursor bonds covalently with the metal surface (the Zr–O bond is stronger than Ti–O or Si–O bonds) while the organosilane coupling agent bearing a reactive functional group preferentially grafts with the adhesive or matrix resin subsequently deposited. The organic moiety of the siloxane precursor is favorably chosen regarding the resin type, for example 3-GPTMS for epoxy or urethane matrixes and primary amine such as amino-alkylsilane or amino-arylsilane for polyimide-based resins. Such hybrid conversion coatings and adhesion promoter thin films are commercially available and currently used for aerospace applications.
Among current applications of hybrids, one can highlight the examples of very common household articles such as functional coatings for cookware and pressing iron soleplates.198–201 Cookware produced by the international company SEB use O–I hybrid nanocomposite coatings to solve the long-term durability of the non-stick properties of cookware. Indeed, PTFE-containing non-stick coatings are limited regarding thermal- and time-stability. The use of expensive fluorinated silanes and micro-structured embossed surfaces have improved coating durability. Nevertheless, improvements are still needed and the replacement of organic-based thickening agents (xanthane gums, cellulose or acrylic polymers) with thermal-stable inorganic lamellate fillers (nanoclays, phyllosilicates, Zr-phosphate) has greatly enhanced deposited coating thickness uniformity and therefore its durability. PTFE-free non-stick coating for cookware is now currently available, based on O–I hybrid thin films containing inorganic fillers for enhanced durability.
Pressing iron soleplates can also be improved using a hybrid coating by adding self-cleaning properties to existing sliding effects. The SEB company has recently patented the use of an Ormosil-based coating as a matrix for supporting a catalytic oxidation species such as noble or group IV metallic salts (palladium, platinum, vanadium, copper). The incorporated catalyst enhances dirt and soil oxidation (fabric fibers, polyamide, polyester) deposited onto the soleplate and the hybrid matrix acts as a reservoir. Self-cleaning properties are therefore durable and the sliding effect is preserved due to the smoothness of the hydride film.
Optical products are probably the most common examples among hybrid coating applications. Some of them are listed in Table 4 and are illustrated in Fig. 17. Thus, one interesting application is dealing with the development and commercial use of organo-silicated hybrid sealants for liquid-based optical lenses, diaphragms or zooms. The Varioptic company has replaced organic glue for such optical devices with a hybrid one in order to get a more versatile sealing agent suitable for various liquids, different substrates (glass, plastic, metal) and lens designs.202 Use of hybrid-containing liquid-based optical devices for cameras, cell phones or endoscope applications is then affordable.
 Fig. 17  Coatings of hybrid O–I materials with anti-corrosion (courtesy of Boeing), easy-to-clean (courtesy of Schott AG), scratch resistant (courtesy of PPG Industries) and decorative (courtesy of Fraunhofer ISC) properties. 
Schott, a pioneering company for sol–gel optical coating use, has developed transparent and easy-to-clean coated glass specifically developed for glass panes of oven baking trays.203 The Clean Plus® commercial product based on Ormocer is covering glass panes and claims to offer durable hydrophobic properties due to functional hydrophobic siloxanes embedded in an inorganic network layer, withstanding high temperatures and household utensil abrasion.
Concerning optical coatings such as antireflective thin films or transparent hard-coats, an interesting application of hybrids deals with core–shell particles embedded into a polymeric layer. This type of coating, developed and commercialized by the Polyrise company, includes inorganic (metallic oxides) or organic (polymers) cores, functionalized and grafted with an organic polymeric shell (using typically a conjugated guanidine as a catalyst), such core–shell particles being dispersed in a polymeric network.204,205 The progressive suite of different materials having different refractive indexes in the core–shell-matrix structure creates an antireflection effect, as well as an abrasion-resistant coating.
In recent years, coated display commercial applications are more and more frequent, notably due to the increasing number of flat panel devices. TV sets with LCD, LED or plasma displays have replaced cathode ray tubes and are including functional coatings for improved viewing. Among these coatings, hybrid coatings are today often used like in Toshiba or Sony devices. Toshiba for example is using an O–I hybrid glass-like layer which contains dyes and pigments for color filter preparation.206 Insulating or conductive properties can be achieved depending on film composition and therefore such a method enables high speed response large-size screen fabrication at lower cost. In the case of Sony, a nanocomposite material has been developed to replace organic resins used as sealing agents in light emitting elements such as LEDs.207 The nanocomposite composition is adjusted to increase the refractive index of the organic resin to as close as 1.76 (sapphire substrate). Inorganic nanoparticles used to raise the optical index are organically functionalized to prevent agglomeration and to allow easy curing of the resin (acrylates). Advantages of nanocomposite use are light weight, low price and mass-productivity.
Scratchproof coatings of plastics with ORMOCER®-lacquers are widely developed and commercialized, the T_O_P Oberflächen company, a start-up from Fraunhofer ISC, is providing Abrasil® and Cleanosil® hardcoats to cover PMMA, PS, ABS or PC substrates with transparent scratch-resistant and easy-clean properties.208,209 The PPG company has commercialized for several years a so-called Ceramiclear® product based on a clearcoat thin film designed to give high gloss and outstanding appearance properties to automotive or aerospace parts. The Ceramiclear® product is a fluoropolymer-containing polysiloxane cured resin filled with surface-treated metallic oxide colloidal particles to enhance scratch resistance.210 Glasca® and Dynacera® are also multifunctional coating materials provided by the JSR Corporation plastic manufacturer, respectively as a protective coating for outdoor applications and as a stain-resistant fluorinated hybrid coating to be applied onto polymeric or metallic surfaces.211
5.2 Energy applications, for tomorrow and the environment
Energy applications for hybrids are more recent than smart coating applications. Hybrids and composites today mainly address fuel cells, Li-batteries and photovoltaic devices (Table 5 and Fig. 18). In fuel cells, O–I materials are widespread in the protonic-based low temperature cell class (PEMFC) as membranes, active layers, or bipolar plates.
Table 5 Energy, fuel cells and photovoltaic cells




Name
Materials
Processing
Applications - Properties
Stage (prototype pilot commercial development)
References


Organic part
Inorganic part





PEMFC
 Helion

Perfluorinated polymers

Silica
nanoparticles

Casting, Doctor blade

Fuel
                    cells
                  
Commercial prototype

                    http://www.helion-hydrogen.com/
                    WO/2009/000779



(Flexible thin film) Rechargeable batteries

ORMOCER®s, Polymers

                    Manganese and Cobalt oxides
Casting and screen printing
Rechargeable polymer lithium batteries
Prototypes
Fraunhofer ISC – Varta company http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de/214–216



Nickel

metal hydride
 batteries

ORMOCER®s
Mixed metals

Spray drying and casting
Protection of nanoscaled misch metal and gel electrolyte
Prototypes
Fraunhofer ISC – Varta company http://ec.europa.eu/research/home.cfm “Novel materials for energy applications”, p21



Hybrid 
PEM
 for 
fuel

cells
 based on “
TiO
2
F
”

ORMOCER®s, Nafion, Polymers

                    Fluorine doped TiO2 particles
Casting and foil technology

PEM
                    membranes with improved thermomechanical and electrical properties
Pilot commercial development

                    BRETON S.p.A and University of Padova, (Vito di Noto) (Italy)



Li-Battery electrolytes


Polymers


Inorganic nanoparticles
                    TiO2, Al2O3
 
 
 

                    Groups of B. Scrosati, V. di Noto, W. Wieczorek and M. Armand



POLO Ultrabarrier foil for 
PV

ORMOCER®s

                    SiO2 or Al2O3 by electron beam or sputtering
Reverse curvature application
Multilayer: e.g. PEN/SiO2/ORMOCER/SiO2 with ultra barrier properties
Prototypes and pilot commercial development
Fraunhofer ISC/POLO-Alliance http://www.polo.fraunhofer.de/en/



Xerocoat

ORMOCER®s

                    SiO2
Dip or spray coating
Solar antireflective coating
Commercial development

                    WO/2006/128232 WO/2005/049757



Solar 
cells

ORMOCER®s

                    SiO2, ZrO2, TiO2
UV-embossing
Solar collectors
Commercial prototype

                    WO/2010/086136




 Fig. 18  Samples of flexible thin film batteries (courtesy of Fraunhofer ISC), nanocomposite PEMFC and hybrid solar cell (courtesy of CEA). 
The French Helion company offering solutions for energy production is evolving innovative technological developments based on polymeric and hybrid new materials.212,213 New electrochemical devices (fuel cell or electrolyser stacks) are still under development. For example, hybrid proton exchange membranes prepared by dispersing organomodified inorganic particles in a polymer are being tested. Thus, nanoparticles (zeolites, zirconium phosphates or phosphonates, metallic oxides or silica) are grafted with proton-exchange acid monomeric species (sulfonate, phosphonate or carboxylate) inducing covalent bonding with the suitable polymeric matrix. Since the conductive function is included in the organomodified filler, use of non-conductive polymers such as robust perfluorinated ones (PVDF, PTFE, ETFE) is allowed, opening the way to fuel cell high temperature operation (above 100 °C).
Rechargeable polymer lithium batteries are also under development using ORMOCER® technology (Fraunhofer ISC-Varta collaboration) in order to prepare flexible thin films.214–216 Li-batteries and supercapacitors will be undoubtedly in the near future a tremendous source of applications for multifunctional hybrid materials.
New and very interesting work is being done at Padua University and the company Breton SpA.217–220 Submicrometric fluorine-doped titania (F-TiO2) obtained through the Breton SpA patented procedure was used as a filler together with the Nafion® ionomer to prepare and characterize hybrid inorganic–organic PEMs labeled as Nafion/[F-TiO2]x (where x = wt.% of F-TiO2) with 0 ≤ x ≤ 15. The water uptake of the membranes is reduced with respect to the pristine Nafion and reaches a minimum at x = 10. Extensive thermomechanical characterization by TGA and DMA shows an improvement in the mechanical properties if x ≥ 10 even at T > 100 °C.
The membranes were used in the preparation of MEAs, which were tested in single-cell configuration in operating conditions, at various relative humidification degrees and back pressures. Tests showed a higher maximum power density in both fully-humidified conditions and at low relative humidity, despite lower water uptake values. In particular, at a back pressure of 5 bar of O2 and fully-humidified conditions, hybrid Nafion/[F-TiO2]x membranes yielded up to 0.63 W cm−2vs. 0.43 W cm−2 of the pristine Nafion; at a back pressure of 1 bar and 25% RH, hybrid Nafion/[F-TiO2]x membranes yielded up to 0.21 W cm−2vs. 0.12 W cm−2 of the pristine Nafion.
In solar applications, coatings play a major role in the global development of solar cells. Applications such as photovoltaics (PV), low emissivity (low-E), solar control and antireflective (AR) are all examples of coated products, where the coatings enable an increase in value and potential usage of the substrate.221 Such coatings could be optimized by the means of functional hybrid chemistry. Thus, antireflective, anti-fogging and protective coatings have been commercialized by the Xerocoat company for a few years.222,223 These ormosil-based films are cured in an ammoniacal environment to achieve abrasion-resistance and to generate a low refractive index single layer. The Schott company is also involved in hybrid materials for PV applications. UV-cured coatings are prepared in order to increase the current collection and therefore the efficiency of solar cells by the mean of a light-trapping structured layer increasing the optical distance for collected photons on the top surface of a silicon plate.224 A UV-sensitive mixture is prepared to allow surface structuration through a standard photochemical embossing technique.
As a synthetic chemical material becomes a commercial product, it means that a long journey has been made to fulfill requirements, to optimize and make the production robust, and to be able to propose competitive, reliable and safe products. This procedure can last several months or years and lots of research efforts are needed to reach the industrial product status.
Nevertheless, despite all the barriers, more and more hybrid products appeared on the market, for companies and for consumers. This illustrates the fact that the design and the production of hybrid O–I nanomaterials has become a competitive alternative and a mature technology offering much potential with more to come.
5.3 Micro-optics, micro-electronics, photonics and optical sensors
Approximately 30 years ago, step by step hybrids started emerging into the “high tech” fields. Companies like Corning, General Electrics, Du Pont, Siemens, Asahi, LG-Chem, Wacker, Shin-Etsu, and several small and medium sized ones developed certain types of spin-on glasses and globe-top materials for semiconductors and their packaging. They are nowadays covering, according to chemical compositions, the classical silicones and siloxanes. But according to process technologies and their demand in high resolution and thermomechanical properties, an organic crosslinking agent is foreseen and integrated into new products. As the chemical reactive functionality of the silica backbone, one will find epoxy, all kinds of alkenyl and styrene groups, whereas methyl and phenyl are used to improve dielectric and thermal properties. For better thin film processing and adaptation to costs, such materials were blended with certain polymers. In addition, particular metal oxide nanoparticles have been used as fillers to alter the rheology, permittivity and thermal stability and finally to adapt to processing.
Redistribution layers in dielectrics and optical layers for chip size packaging, semiconducting matrices in display technology, in sensing systems as well as in LED manufacturing are also based on the above-mentioned material compositions. Depending on the field of application, they are tuned towards dielectric properties. For optical ones, they high light stability and a certain refractive index. These specifications determine the chosen chemical composition: class-II hybrids, like ORMOCER®s are in focus in addition to functionalised silicones (e.g., Accuglass, Semicosil by Wacker, functionalised siloxanes by Silecs and ASAHI, nanodispersed systems for TFT/LCD by Nepes, etc).

Photolithography in projection and contact modes for modern processors, DRAMs, ASICs and photonic components, require resists, dielectrics and optical matrices which are homogeneous and patternable at a resolution better than 50 nm, have an rms-roughness of less than 2 nm, and maintain specific chemical, thermal and mechanical stabilities for front-end and back-end on-chip applications. Industries have to face the problem that physical deposition technologies for SiO2 or Si3N4 such as sputtering or CVDetc. cannot penetrate in to the next generation of semiconductors and their interconnection requires trench structures of less than 20 nm to the bottom. In addition, since nanoparticles will not work in most cases due to their being too large or forming agglomerates, hybrid matrices are sought. Sol–gel based precursors for SiO2 dielectrics form water and alcohols that are not easily removed, whereas polysilazanes, e.g., by AZ-electronics, give rise to very pure and dense SiO2 after reaction with water and oxygen, and only NH3 and H2 gases have to be removed (Table 6).
Table 6 Micro-optics, micro-electronics, photonics and optical sensors




Name
Materials
Processing
Applications - Properties
Stage (prototype, pilot, industrial development, market)
References


Organic part
Inorganic part





Accuglass® 
T-11
, 
T-12B
 and 
T-14
 series

Organosilanes
Organosilanes

Spin coating

Spin-on Glass (interlevel dielectric materials)
On the market

                    https://www51.honeywell.com/sm/em/products-applications/di-electrics.html Volksen 2010



Ormocore, Ormoclad, Ormocomp

ORMOCER®s
ORMOCER®s

Spin coating, photo lithography, soft lithography
Optical waveguides, microlenses, Optical couplers and connectors,
On the market

                    http://www.microresist.de/
                  



Oxygen
 microsensors

Fluorescent Ru complex Organosilanes
Organosilanes
Coated on optical fibres (20 μm)

                    Oxygen optical sensor (liquid and gas phase detection)
Industrial development

                    http://www.presens.de
                  



Planar 
oxygen
 sensors, Transmissive 
pH sensing

Fluorescent Ru complexes/pH sensitive dyes/Organosilanes
Organosilanes
Coated on various substrates (fibreglass filters, optical fibres microscope slide, microtiter plates)

                    Oxygen optical and pH sensors
Industrial development

                    http://www.oceanoptics.com
                  



VOC sensors

Colorimetric (absorption and/or fluorescence) probes/Organosilanes
Organosilanes/TMOS
Casting/dip coating (monoliths/thin films)
VOC sensors for indoor air quality
Prototype and on the market

                    http://www.ethera-labs.com/
                  



Photochromic resin

Photochromic dyes
Ormocers
Casting/Coatings
Photochromic coatings
Industrial development
Protavic SG



Waveguides/thermooptical switch

ORMOCER®s
ORMOCER®s

Spin coating and photolithography
Waveguide switches by heating of the cladding
Industrial development
Matsushita MEW WO/2007/088640



Optical high refractive index matrix

Monomer, polymer

Phenanthrene functionalised Ormocers

Spin coating and imprinting
High reflective microlens arrays
Industrial development
SILECS (Finland, CA)



LISICON
                    ®

Polymers


                    Lisicon
                  
Printing

                    OTFT and polymer electronics
Prototypic/on the market

                    http://www.merck-chemicals.de/
                  



Dielectrics


Polymer

ORMOCER®s

Spin coating

Redistribution layers
Industrial development

                    ASAHI US2010/0123259A1



Globe top, packaging


Silicones


Siloxanes

Casting, spin coating
Protection and passivation
On the market
Shin Etsu



Nanodispersed systems for 
TFT
/
LCD


Polymers


Nanoparticles

Printing, casting,….
Dielectrics, passivation
On the market

                    http://www.nepes.co.kr/
                  



AZ-Spinfil® series
Polysilazanes
 

Spin coating

Spin-on dielectrics
On the market

                    http://www.az-em.com/
                  




Concerning luminescence-based sensing devices, recent advances in the early 2000's have allowed the commercialisation of pH/O2 optical chemical sensors (see Table 6 and Fig. 19). Indeed, direct intensity detection has been replaced in many applications by lifetime-based sensing, often using sophisticated phase-based techniques. Briefly, the excitation source is modulated in frequency as well as in the emitted fluorescence, with a phase shift of the latter signal related to the luminescence lifetime.225–227 These phase-based techniques have permitted the replacement of complex and costly sensing apparatuses by sensing platforms (optical fibres, planar waveguides, microfluidic devices) combined with miniaturised, commercially available, low-cost LED sources and photodiode detectors. The improvements in the detection field (design of new sensing platforms and detection techniques) combined with new promising materials as sensing layers (see Part 6) will most probably lead to a new generation of mobile and low-cost sensors with improved sensing properties.
 Fig. 19  Hybrid O–I coatings as spin-on glass materials (interlevel dielectric materials—courtesy of Honeywell International Inc.) and as optical chemical sensors (courtesy of Ocean Optics, Inc.). 
For microoptics/photonics and integrated optics, the ORMOCER® based systems (Fraunhofer ISC and Micro Resist Technology), i.e., ORMOCORE, ORMOCLAD and ORMOCOMP, are on the market (Table 6 and Fig. 20).228–234 The company Silecs expanded the refractive index to higher values (1.65) by use of phenanthrene based aromatic alkoxysilanes, to obtain ORMOCER® resins that are copolymerised with certain polymers. Thermooptical switches and waveguides based on ORMOCER®s were produced as a prototype by Matsushita Electric Works and Fraunhofer ISC. The latter used highly fluorinated alkoxysilanes focusing on very low optical losses (<0.25 at 1550 nm) in the near infrared spectra.
 Fig. 20  Applications of ORMOCER®s in micro-optics: microlens arrays and planar waveguides (courtesy of micro resist technology GmbH, Fraunhofer ISC and Fraunhofer IOF). 
The NEPES company of Korea sells nanodispersions/composites for TFT/LCD dielectrics, whereas Merck focuses with their LISICON® nanocomposites on polymer electronic applications, recently introduced into the technology of Plastic Logic (Table 6).
In general, sol–gel class-II hybrids with their excellent optical transparency and low-k dielectric properties can easily constitute a matrix for active functions. Rare earth metal compounds for amplification,235rhodium complexes for oxygen sensing (Fraunhofer ISC), electro- and photochromic monomers/dyes/oxides for switching of colours and transparency (Fraunhofer ISC) as well as pH-sensitive dyes and functionality offer a large variety for new materials for sensing devices.236–238
The newly developed TPA-technology (Fraunhofer ISC) opens for ORMOCER®s, with their chemical, mechanical and thermal stabilities, the challenging new field of 3-D applications in integrated optics, opto-electrical (o/e) areas (see above o/e-printed circuit boards by AT&S) and photonics (photonic crystals and devices, see above).128,129,163–165
5.4 Hybrid materials for “human care purposes”
The intimate mixing at a molecular or nanoscopic level of organic or biologic components (molecules, oligomers, polymers) with inorganic components need mild processing and chemical conditions (low temperatures, and pressure, adequate solvents). These conditions are found in bottom up approaches such as those associated with sol–gel chemistry or intercalation driven chemistry as developed for clays and many other inorganic lamellar hosts (LDH, MPS3, V2O5, VOPO4, Zr(HPO4)2·nH2O and other lamellar metallic phosphates and oxides…).

5.4.1 Amorphous sol–gel derived hybrid matrices. 
The embedding or mixing of organic molecules or polymers in sol–gel silica based host matrices, yielding hybrid nanocomposites of class I, was pioneered by D. Avnir20 and J. Mark13 respectively. The organosilanes-based materials chemistry, via the possibility of grafting organic components and functionalities, was developed in the early 1980’s.12,239 It opened new avenues to design class II hybrids. All these strategies allow tailor-made hybrid materials and systems that can play an important role in the development of new applications in domains associated with human health care such as dental applications, cancer therapy and associated therapeutic vectors, drug delivery, implants, body care and cosmetics. Some examples of commercial hybrid products in these areas are gathered in Table 7 and illustrated in Fig. 21 and 22. They will be shortly described in the following sections.
Table 7 Biohybrid materials/bioapplications




Name
Materials
Processing
Applications - Properties
Stage (prototype pilot commercial development)
References


Organic part
Inorganic part





Cool Pearls™ Anti Acne Kits


Benzoyl peroxide


Silica microcapsules
Encapsulation
Acne treatment
Development & certification process

                      http://www.sol–gel.com/
                    



Eusolex® UV-Pearls™

Organic UV filters

Silica microcapsules
Encapsulation
Sunscreen
Commercial development

                      http://www.merck-chemicals.com
                    



Schott DentalGlass®

Methacrylic resin

Silane treated ceramic particles (BaO/SrO/ZrO2 - SiO2), Coupling agent: γ-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane
Casting – brush applications
Dental fillers
Commercial development

                      http://www.schott.com
                    



3M ESPE dental products: Filtek™, 
Ketac
™, Vitrebond™, Z100™ Vitremer™, RelyX™, Vanish™, Clinpro™…
Methacrylic resin/epoxysiloxane derivatives

Silane treated ceramic particles (SiO2 ZrO2 micro- and nano-size)
Casting – brush applications
Dental direct restorative, cement, sealant, varnish
Commercial development

                      http://solutions.3m.com/wps/portal/3M/en_US/3M-ESPE/dental-professionals/
                    



Admira®, Admira® Bond, Admira® Flow, Admira® Seal, Admira® Protect,

ORMOCER®s/Polymers
ORMOCER®s
Casting – brush applications
Dental filling, bonding, flow, sealing and desensitisation material
Commercial development

                      http://www.voco.coc/http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de
                    



Grandio®

Organic resins
Ceramic nanoparticles
Casting – brush applications
Dental direct restorative
Commercial development

                      http://www.voco.com/
                    



Dow Corning® 
VM-2260
, 
VM-2270

[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica
[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica
Aerogels (sub-critical drying conditions) fine particles or beads
Oil and sebum absorption, controlled release, thickener
Commercial development

                      http://www.dowcorning.com/
                    



Nexterion® Microarray

Organosilanes
Organosilanes
Coated on glass

                      DNA and protein microarrays
Commercial development

                      http://www.schott.com
                    



Intra-
Cylane
™

Organosilanes
Organosilanes
Coating hair infiltration
Cosmetic – Hair care
Commercial development

                      http://www.kerastase.co.uk/news/products.aspx#code=Product12
                    



GastroMARK® (ferumoxsil) Particle diameter: ∼400 nm

Poly[N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl] siloxane
Non-stoichiometric magnetite (superparamagnetic iron oxide)
 
Oral gastrointestinal imaging agent (MRI)/Diagnosis of cancer and cardiovascular disease
Commercial development
AMAG Pharmaceuticals, Inc. http://www.amagpharma.com/documents/products/pdfs/gastromark_insert.pdf



Feraheme® (
ferumoxytol
) Particle diameter: 17–31 nm

Polyglucose sorbitol carboxymethylether
Non-stoichiometric magnetite (superparamagnetic iron oxide)
 
Treatment of iron deficiency anaemia/Injection for intravenous use
Commercial development
AMAG Pharmaceuticals, Inc. http://www.feraheme.com/documents/Feraheme%20PI.pdf



Cliavist® (
ferucarbotran
)


                      Carboxydextran
                    
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
 
Liver imaging agent (MRI)/Injection
Commercial development
Bayer Schering Pharma AG



NanoTherm® Particle diameter: ∼20 nm


Aminosilane derivatives
Superparamagnetic iron oxide (magnetite) nanoparticles
 
NPs-induced hyperthermia for cancer therapy under magnetic field
Development & certification process

                      http://www.magforce.de
                    



AuroShell® Particle diameter: ∼120 nm


Thiol-derived poly(ethylene)glycol
Core–shell nanoparticles (silica core nanoparticles about 100 nm with a 20 nm gold shell)
 
NPs-induced hyperthermia for cancer therapy under laser excitation
Development & certification process

                      http://www.nanospectra.com
                    



NanoXray™ Particle diameter: ∼70 nm

Targeted and biocompatible coating
Crystalline nanoparticles (transition metal oxides/rare earth oxides)
 
Cancer treatment via free radical creation and heat generation after standard X-ray absorption
Development & certification process

                      http://www.nanobiotix.com
                      WO/05/120590 WO/06/051198




 Fig. 21  Examples of (bio)hybrid materials in health care and cosmetic applications. Left: Encapsulation of drugs/organic UV filters in protective silica micropearls for acne treatment and sunscreens (courtesy of Sol–gel Technologies and Merck Chemicals respectively). Middle: Application of organosilanes (amino-silane derivatives) in cosmetic purpose: hair treatment (courtesy of L'Oréal). Right: PNCs and ORMOCER®s in dental applications: dental direct restorative, cement, sealant, varnish, dental filling material (courtesy of Fraunhofer ISC). 
 Fig. 22  Hybrid nanoparticles (NPs) in cancer treatment illustrating three promising external activation approaches. Hybrid NPs activation by (i) alternating magnetic field with Nanotherm® (courtesy of MagForce®), (ii) X-ray radiation with NanoXray™ (courtesy of Nanobiotix), and (iii) near infrared laser irradiation with AuroShell® (courtesy of Nanospectra). 
5.4.1.1 Dental applications. 
There are several systems with a hybrid matrix on the market. Just as a more detailed example, we will highlight the systems from VOCO and Fraunhofer ISC, knowing that there are also others like Ceram·X™ from Densply DeTrey which is also based on the Fraunhofer ISC ORMOCER® matrix.240
Since 1999, the VOCO GmbH company has had the Admira® series on the market, and step by step, they are introducing this ORMOCER® based dental filler in countries all over the world (Table 7 and Fig. 21). The filler consists of an ORMOCER® matrix, developed at Fraunhofer ISC,240–245 and certain inorganic fillers. It can successfully replace the classical amalgam fillers. Benefits of using the ORMOCER®, in comparison to polymers, relate to the low polymerization shrinkage, high wear resistance, easy handling (single-component bonding agent), and excellent biocompatibility. It consists of a curable composite for large sized restorations (A), light curable Admira Flow (B) as a flow on demand composite for minimal invasive restorations (applicable by a syringe), Admira Seal (C) as a fissure sealant, Admira Bond (D) for an optimal adapted connection between the dental tissue and the filling material, and Admira Protect (E) as a varnish for desensitisation.
Recent systems are designed to be a monomer free nano-hybrid material, to avoid crosslinking monomers, such as Bis-GMA and TEGDMA (said to possess a certain allergenic effect). To circumvent the monomer addition, certain hybrid nanoscaled fillers are added.215,242,243
Newest developments at Fraunhofer ISC and VOCO are focusing on the use of ORMOCER®s for the rebuilding of endodontically treated teeth. Endodontic therapy, also known as root canal treatment, can preserve teeth when the pulp is diseased or even already dead. Badly damaged teeth with major substance loss occasionally have to be completely rebuilt. Conventional treatment concepts for restoration use a host of different materials, which are not always compatible with each other or with the hard substance of the tooth and could cause root fractures, post fractures and the premature reduced retention of posts and cores—the failure rate is accordingly high. That failure rate could be reduced dramatically by utilizing materials whose properties can be precisely matched with each other. ORMOCER®s are the choice as they offer monomer-free biocompatible resins from different precursor silanes and an adaptable elasticity modulus range (0.05 to 2.35 GPa) with unique low curing shrinkage of just 4.0–5.8% by volume. By introduction of functionalised SiO2 and/or radiopaque SnO2 nanoparticles, materials are produced with extremely low shrinkage of just 1.3% by volume and a high flexural strength up to 155 MPa can be produced. Finally, new hybrid systems can finely adjust the coefficient of thermal expansion and have high bond values to the different dentine areas. In vitro and in vivo tests are currently underway for market launch.216
5.4.1.2 Cosmetic, hair and body care. 
After many years of research, an important commercial development for hair care and hair cosmetics was developed by the company L’Oréal following a smart approach based on the molecular processing of Class II hybrid materials. Indeed, hydrolyzed water soluble amino functionalized organosilanes can easily penetrate the hair cuticle and cortex restoring the fibrous hair framework providing an individual filling strategy for each hair strand. The condensation of the hybrid precursor yields the formation of a material that not only cares for the damaged hairs but also creates a hair volume expansion, a better texture and better mechanical properties (Fig. 21, Table 7). Moreover, all these important hair care and cosmetic properties present durability for up to ten shampoos. These hybrid formulations represent a new approach in hair cosmetics, since both internal polymerization and the long lasting effect on the textures of hair fibers are new. They are named Intra-Cylane™ and are sold by L′Oréal professionnel (fiberceutic) and Kerastase (volumorphose).
Sol–gel technologies developed a set of class I hybrid compounds, some of which are sold by Merck KgaA (Eusolex® UV-Pearls™) and EMD Chemicals Inc.246 These new hybrid compounds target the field of cosmetics and controlled release of “active ingredients” and, in particular, for applications concerning skin care and protection.247,248 Undesirable skin alterations and melanomas created by sun induced premature skin aging require the use of efficient but biocompatible sunscreens. Hybrids developed by sol–gel technologies are based on the encapsulation of active organic components within nanoporous silica micro-capsules. They present several advantages when compared to the present situation, commercial sunscreens. Indeed, by encapsulating the active organic UV filters (80% w/w of the final product) in silica micro-capsules, the contact of these chemicals with the skin is reduced, as is damage from free radicals that may get trapped within the porous host preventing radical damage to the DNA. In particular, these “UV-pearls” incorporated into a suitable cosmetic vehicle to achieve high Sun Protection Factors (SPF), while affording an improved safety profile as the penetration of the UV absorbers is markedly reduced, have already been adopted by companies for sunscreens and daily wear cosmetics.246 The same company has also developed silica rainbow pearls containing organic dyes for cosmetics applications and silica active-pearls (“cool pearls”) containing effective acne medicaments such as benzoyl peroxide, which are as effective as antibiotics but do not cause bacterial resistance or stomach upset. Benzoyl peroxide, in direct contact with skin, provokes skin irritations, dryness and hyper-pigmentation in many patients. Sol–gel active-pearls have undergone successful commercial development because embedding the benzoyl peroxide active ingredient in a silica shell prevents it from coming into contact with the epidermis while gradually delivering it to the follicular region where acne bacteria are located.
Because of their huge volume and light weight hybrid aerogels also present interesting applications in cosmetics (Table 7). The commercial DOW CORNING® VM-2270 is a hydrophobic hybrid, likely methylated, processed as fine porous particles that can efficiently absorb or deliver organic substances. It is used for hair care, skincare, fragrance delivery, and as antiperspirants/deodorants.
5.4.1.3 Therapeutic vectors, drug delivery. 
A major challenge in nanomedicine is to engineer nanostructures and materials that can efficiently encapsulate drugs at high concentration, cross the cell membrane, and controllably release the cargo at the target site over a prescribed period of time. Recently, hybrid inorganic nanoparticles have emerged as a new generation of drug/therapy delivery vehicles in nanomedicine.249,250 The versatility offered by the infinite number of chemical and structural combinations accessible via sol–gel chemistry provide new hybrid materials with unique features that permit the development of a variety of medical applications such as biocarriers, drug targeting, drug delivery systems, biomaterials for bone repair and tissue engineering, and bioseparation including cell sorting.
Indeed, today numerous modern hybrid materials and devices can combine: (a) Nanoparticles (NPs) with magnetic, luminescent, X-ray absorbing properties or with biochemical activity (such as calcium phosphate sources like hydroxyapatites for example)…, (b) Encapsulation of organic components (drugs, biopolymers…), NPs or both in a sol–gel matrix, (c) Organic surface modifications of nanoparticles (NPs) and/or of the sol–gel derived matrix (for example inorganic or hybrid O–I mesoporous hosts) to allow cell targeting reagents, macrophage blurring etc… In the past few years, these approaches extensively explored within research laboratories have generated abundant and interesting literature that have been have extensively reviewed.251–265,374
The authors apologize because there can only be a small selection of a few examples from among the extensive academic literature. Some examples are discussed in the following:

(i) Organically modified magnetic 
nanoparticles
. The synthesis of nanomagnetite hybrids with cationic liposomes, one of the groups of cationic magnetic particles, that can be used as carriers to introduce magnetite nanoparticles into target cells since their positively charged surface interacts with the negatively charged cell surface; furthermore, they find applications in hyperthermic treatments.256–259 Moreover, the development of magnetite nanoparticles conjugated with antibodies are also applied to hyperthermia and have enabled tumor-specific contrast enhancement in magnetic resonance imaging via systemic administration. Since magnetic nanoparticles are attracted to a high magnetic flux density, it is possible to manipulate cells labeled with magnetic nanoparticles using magnets; this feature has been applied in tissue engineering. Magnetic force and cells labeled with magnetic nanoparticles were used to construct multilayered cell structures and a heterotypic layered 3D coculture system.256–259

(ii) Hybrid mesoporous materials. Hybrid materials also participate in an important biomedical development that concerns the research of mesoporous materials eligible for loading and releasing drugs or biologically active molecules in a controlled manner.263–265 Among the possible functional hybrid carriers mesoporous silica and organosilica nanoparticles are particularly attractive because of their biocompatibility and precisely defined nanoporosity (uniform, tunable pore diameters ranging from 2 to 5 nm and large surfaces areas of 700–1300 m2 g−1). Drugs and other components can be loaded by adsorption or capillary filling, and the release profiles adjusted by the combination of pore size and pore surface chemistry. Moreover non-toxic mesoporous silicas can be safely used as both imaging and drug-delivery agents in vivo because one key feature of high area silica is its ability to disintegrate in biologically relevant conditions and thereby be cleared from an organism.266,267 Since 2005, mesoporous silicas have been extensively used in the field of nanomedicine. Examples from the groups of V. Lin,252,268–271 C. Sanchez,272,273 J. Brinker,274,275 M. Vallet-Regi,263–265 J. Zink and J. Stoddart276–279 will shed some light on some of the strategies developed nowadays.
A smart drug delivery carrier should be able to target specific zones of the body and to control the rate and period of drug delivery. Mesoporous hybrid silica based materials, allow a high loading of active molecules and fine control of release kinetics.280,281 Therefore, these versatile hosts have been proposed as implantable, oral, transdermal, injectable drug reservoirs for bone tissue regeneration.280 In particular, it has been recently reported that the incorporation of bisphosphonates in the pores of mesostructured silica may inhibit bone resorption once implanted in osteoporotic bone.282,283 Bisphosphonates could be introduced in implantable devices such as mesostructured materials that would enable local delivery and control of the drug delivery without the subsequent gastrointestinal and renal problems as for the drug orally administered patients. Mesoporous silica–zirconia mixed oxides matrices are significantly more stable in biologically relevant conditions than pure silica materials.266 It allows a better tuning of the carrier degradation and in addition the presence of zirconia may be interesting in drug delivery applications since it can assist in the drug release profiles due to the complexation of phosphonate drugs with zirconia species present at the pore surfaces.273
Moreover, aerosol or spray drying processing can also advantageously be used for the synthesis of multifunctional complex mesoporous materials.130 This technique is extensively used in industry, e.g., for paint pigments, coatings, and pharmaceuticals. Its main advantages are: (i) a green and low-cost process that can readily be scaled up; (ii) possible variation of the dimension and structure of the spheres through the chemical composition of the precursor solution and the set-up conditions; (iii) absolute control of the final composition (the initial stoichiometry in non-volatile species is retained in the final materials); and (iv) mild conditions allowing incorporation of inorganic, organic and fragile bio-components. The tailored design and aerosol processing of innovative hybrid materials coupling original diagnostic and/or therapeutic properties such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast, hyperthermia, radioactivity, safe transport and controlled drug release have been recently reported.272,284 Aerosol generation of mesoporous silica NPs or organosilica is based on the Evaporation Induced Self Assembly process.285 Basically, it consists of evaporating an initial solution containing all the precursors into droplets and, during evaporation, the simultaneous occurrence of micelle formation and silica condensation triggers self-assembling cooperatively with inorganic network condensation. The superparamagnetic behaviour of maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) nanocrystals together with the high surface area and the possibility of functionalising mesoporous silica allow these nanocomposite vectors to combine multiple roles in a single platform. Indeed, it could diversely (i) act as a magnetic carrier for biomolecules such as drugs, recognition/blurring agents and specific ligands; (ii) be localised and followed in the body by magnetic resonance imaging since maghemite nanocrystals are known MRI contrast agents; (iii) induce an increase in local temperature to kill malignant cells and/or trigger drug release, since maghemite nanocrystals are known hyperthermia mediators; (iv) be surface modified with ligands for targeted drug delivery in specific organs, tissues and cells (molecular imaging, therapy).

(iii) Stimuli responsive mesoporous hybrid carriers. The control of drug release via fusion of liposomes on spray generated hybrid mesoporous silica microparticles was investigated by Brinker's group through a biomimetic approach.274,275 His approach is based on an electrostatically mediated liposome fusion on silica-based microparticles followed by a partial lipid exchange allowing control of surface charge, drug uptake/release, and delivery to mammalian cells. This elegant approach led to a cell-like structure or “protocells” usable as advanced biocompatible drug delivery multiplatforms. Compared to some other nanoparticle systems, protocells provide a simple construct for loading, sealing, delivering, and releasing and should serve as a useful vector in nanomedicine. Improvements in both targeting and endocytosis processes could be easily achieved by the incorporation of specific biocomponents, such as transmembrane proteins or phospholipids receptors, during the formation of liposomes and their fusion on microparticles. More precisely, Brinker's approach is based on the ability of lipid membranes from cells to control materials exchange, and in particular to hinder the diffusion of ions and charged hydrophilic molecules. The authors observed that the liposome fusion is mainly driven by electrostatic forces since only fusion takes place between liposomes and silica-based microparticles of opposite charges. Moreover a synergistic loading of the negatively charged drug molecules occurred during the fusion of positively charged liposomes with the negatively charged silica microparticles leading to an important drug uptake (drug concentration can greatly exceed that of the surrounding solution). To improve drug sealing and the endocytosis process, a partial (phospho)lipid exchange which reduces defects in the phospholipid bilayers and tunes the charge of protocells was performed by simply mixing protocells with liposomes of opposite charge. Drug release into mammalian cells depends on the pH of the surrounding medium of the protocells: faster at “low” pH (pH < 6) i.e. in endosomal compartments compared to the cytosol.
Lin et al.271 described an entirely different approach to the creation of mesoporous silicate drug delivery carriers by the use of ‘gatekeepers’, namely agents that cap the pores and can be triggered to release the payload. Organically modified MCM-41 type mesoporous silica submicronic sphere hosts (diameter of about 200 nm) and surface-derivatized CdS nanocrystals as chemically removable caps were used to encapsulate several pharmaceutical drug molecules and neurotransmitters. Lin et al.252,268–271 studied the stimuli-responsive release profiles of vancomycin- and adenosine triphosphate loaded mesoporous hybrid silica nanosphere delivery systems. They were using disulfide bond-reducing molecules, such as dithiothreitol and mercaptoethanol, as release triggers.271 More recently, they reported on the design and synthesis of a glucose-responsive mesoporous silica nanosphere-based double delivery system for both insulin and cyclic adenosinemonophosphate (cAMP) with precise control over the sequence of release. Gluconic acid-modified insulin proteins are immobilized on the exterior surface of mesoporous silica nanospheres and also serve as caps to encapsulate cAMP molecules inside the mesoporous silica network. The release of both gluconic acid-modified insulin and cAMP from the mesoporous host was triggered by the introduction of saccharides, such as glucose. They also have shown that the uncapped mesoporous silica can be efficiently endocytosed by live mammalian cells, leading to effective intracellular release of the cell-membrane-impermeable cAMP.270 Positively charged gold nanoparticles (5 nm in diameter) surface functionalized with a photoresponsive linker (thioundecyl-tetraethyleneglycolester-o-nitrobenzylethyldimethyl ammonium bromide) were electrostatically adsorbed at the negatively charged surface of honeycomb-like MCM-41 mesoporous particles previously loaded with an anticancer drug, paclitaxel. Upon UV irradiation, the photolabile linker anchored to the gold was cleaved, changing the surface charge property of these gold nanoparticles from positive to negative. The charge repulsion between the positive gold nanoparticles and the negative mesoporous silica particles would then uncap the mesopores and allowed the release of guest molecules inside the human fibroblast and liver cells without the undesired drug leaching. This “zero-premature release” easily controlled by low-power photoirradiation under biocompatible and physiological conditions characteristics is of importance for delivery of toxic drugs in chemotherapy. Recently, other mesoporous silica nanoparticle based controlled-release systems with a “zero-premature release” property have been synthesized by using different kinds of pore-blocking caps, such as nanoparticles (NPs),268,271,286 organic molecules,287,288 and supramolecular assemblies.279,289 Different stimuli-responsive strategies, such as chemical,271 pH,288,290,291 electrostatic interaction,292 enzymatic,293redox,277 and photoirradiation,294–298 have been applied as “triggers” for uncapping the pores and releasing the guest molecules from mesoporous silica nanoparticles opening new avenues for the controlled design of smart multifunctional drug nanocarriers.
Last but not least it is worth mentioning beautiful work performed by the groups of J. Zink and J. Stoddart276 that concerns the blending of supramolecular chemistry and mechanostereochemistry with mesoporous hybrid silica nanoparticles. This work recently reviewed has led to mechanised mesoporous hybrid silica nanoparticles that are effectively biological nanoscale ‘bombs’ that have the potential to infiltrate cells and then, upon the pulling of a chemical trigger, explode.276 At the nanoscale level, the mechanism for the release of cargos from the confines of the nanopores in the mesoporous nanoparticles is accomplished by way of mechanical modifications made on the surface of these functionalised mesoporous hybrid supports. These mechanical motions rely on host–guest complexes and mechanostereochemical phenomena through the use of bistable rotaxanes which can be stimulated by changes in pH, light and redox potentials, in addition to enzymatic catalysis.
The area of research called nanopharmacy/nanomedicine has really exploded during the past decade. The surge of smart hybrid nanomaterials has yield a few products that have entered the real market.299,300 Indeed, hybridized inorganic nanoparticles are found in applications as active pharmaceutical ingredients, such as vectors or with an enabling function. Some others are used for in vitro diagnosis such as in lateral flow devices (immunochromatographie) or in delivery systems (drug delivery, as implantable biomaterials, vaccine adjuvants). However, many new hybrids are already developed as prototypes or in early preclinical trials fitting the reality of production and regulatory difficulties inherent to the entry of any new commercial product into, in particular, markets associated with human health and medicine.299 Most of these examples of nano hybrid materials for nanopharmacy or nanomedicine already under commercialization or in pre-clinical investigation and under examination by the Food and Drug Administration are reported in Table 7 and illustrated in Fig. 22. Indeed, a large number of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIO) and Ultrasmall Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide nanoparticles used for cellular imaging, labelling or as blood pool agents are commercial or close to market. Companies, such as Guerbet, AMAG Pharmaceuticals, Bayer Schering Pharma, and GE-Healthcare, are strongly developing these approaches using hybridized magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles.300 Hybrid Nanovectors such as NanoTherm® by MagForce Nanotechnologies GmbH (Berlin) (http://www.magforce.de/) or AuroShell by Nanospectra Biosciences (http://www.nanospectra.com/) are used for tumor thermal treatments, while Nanobiotix develops nanovectors for the treatment of radiosensitive and radioresistant tumors. Other applications use colorimetric sensing based on gold NPs plasmonic response or calcium phosphate based hybrid formulations or materials as vaccine adjuvants. Nymox Pharmaceutical Corporation developed a commercially available lateral flow test based on gold nanoparticles conjugated to specific antibodies for recent smoke exposure called TobacAlert™ based on gold nanoparticles conjugated to specific antibodies. BioSante Pharmaceuticals Company (http://www.biosantepharma.com/) is developing a novel therapeutic drug delivery platform (BioAir™/BioOral™) using biodegradable hybridized calcium phosphate nanodevices for delivering proteinsvia buccal and pulmonary routes. Another hybridized calcium phosphate formulation NanOss™ proposed by Angstrom Medica Inc. (http://www.angstrommedica.com/) presents highly osteoconductive properties. These smart bio-nanomaterials have applications in sports medicine, trauma, spine and general orthopedics markets. BioSante Pharmaceuticals announced a novel vaccine adjuvant (BioVant™) based on the hybridised calcium phosphate nanotechnology for vaccines against different viruses which is in Phase I development under the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Among all the examples reported in Table 7, we select three examples from AMAG Pharmaceuticals (GastroMARK®/Feraheme®), Nanospectra Biosciences (AuroShell®) and Nanobiotix (NanoXray®), respectively, for further discussion. They quite well illustrate the use of different hybrid nanomaterials for cancer therapy. These hybrid nanovector devices based on inorganic nanoparticles surface hybridized with organic molecules, polymers or biomolecules operate via the magnetic, optical or X-ray absorption properties characteristic of the inorganic core.
Magnetic iron oxide particle formulations (SPIO, USPIO) are used for in vivo imaging through Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and for thermal cancer therapy via hyperthermia. Gold shell nanoparticles yield photothermal cancer therapy nanodevices that operate using thermal ablation—the heat associated to their characteristic plasmonic response. Both, hyperthermia and thermal ablation are therapies related to the use of heat as a way of action to kill pathophysiological tissues. Another possibility concerns the use of locally generated reactive radicals through X-ray excited inorganic nano-absorbers to destroy the tumor.
GastroMARK® is an AMAG Pharmaceuticals oral gastrointestinal imaging agent for analysis and marking of the bowel. GastroMARK® is an aqueous oral suspension of silicone-coated, superparamagnetic iron oxide, intended for oral administration as a magnetic resonance imaging contrast media. Hybridization occurs through grafting of [N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl]siloxane at the surface of non-stoichiometric magnetite uniform particles with sizes of approximately 400 nm.301 The presence of a magnetic MRI agent (magnetite) allows a better reading of the images of organs and tissues in the abdomen. On the contrary without contrast agents they can be quite difficult to read because the abdominal organs and tissues cannot be easily distinguished from the loops of the bowel. This hybrid material is known to enhance the ability to distinguish the bowel from adjacent tissues and organs in the upper gastrointestinal tract. Feraheme® also sold by AMAG Pharmaceuticals consists of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles sized 17–30 nm organically coated with a carbohydrate shell (mannitol), which helps to isolate the bioactive iron from plasma components until the iron-carbohydrate complex enters the reticuloendothelial system macrophages of the liver, spleen and bone marrow.302 The iron is released from the iron-carbohydrate complex within vesicles in the macrophages. Iron then either enters the intracellular storage iron pool (e.g., ferritin) or is transferred to plasma transferrin for transport to erythroid precursor cells for incorporation into hemoglobin. Feraheme is being developed to treat iron deficiency anaemia associated with other conditions and disease states including women with abnormal uterine bleeding, and patients with cancer and gastrointestinal diseases. Feraheme is also being developed as a diagnostic agent for vascular-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging to assess peripheral arterial disease.
AuroShell is from Nanospectra Biosciences (http://www.nanospectra.com/). The so-called plasmonic photothermal therapy makes use of the physico-chemical properties of gold nanoparticles and has been found to be orders of magnitude more intense and powerful in tumor destruction than conventional phototherapy.303 Combining thermal ablation and the photothermal properties of gold nanoparticles, Nanospectra Biosciences developed a core–shell intravenous formulation (AuroShell) for particle assisted laser ablation of solid tumors which is currently the subject of a clinical pilot study concerning refractory and/or recurrent tumors of the head and neck. AuroShell consists of a nanometric silica core (about 100 nm) with a 20 nm gold shell. The gold shell is organically hybridized with a thiol derived poly(ethylene)glycol (PEG). The PEG modified surface allows generally to increase the colloidal stability of the nanoparticles in the blood stream and minimize the particle clearing by the macrophage system. The uptake of the AuroShell carrier by tumor cells after intravenous injection underlines the enhanced permeability and retention effect concerning solid tumors. The main advantage of this nanoparticle based device relies on the ability to localize the heating in the tumor where the nanoparticles are located and therefore to shorten the time of irradiation applied.299 However, this system is based on an unspecific/non-controllable way of delivery which also yields accumulation of the nanoparticles in healthy tissue. Improvements can be made by controlling the accumulation of these hybrid nanovectors via controlled targeting (co-hybridization with folic acid or other cancer cell recognition bio-reagents for example) or by direct injection of the nanovector to the tumor site.
Nanobiotix is developing new hybrid nanoparticles of about 70 nm named NanoXray® that can efficiently allow destruction of cancer cells (Table 7). This material was designed to resolve cancer therapy's biggest drawback: destruction of healthy tissue and its subsequent deleterious side effects when a high dose of X-ray is necessary. The particles are surface hybridized with organic functionalities to allow stability in physiological media and accumulation within the tumor. Once inside the tumor's cells, the core made of heavy dense metal oxide (hafnium oxide based core) nanoparticles has properties that convert incoming, standard X-ray radiation into an efficient emission of electrons responsible for the generation of free radicals.304 By controllable external excitation, these locally generated radicals, trigger different types of damage to membranes, proteins and nucleic acids that lead to biological consequences, including cell abnormalities and lethal processes. When the standard X-ray irradiation is “off”, the NanoXray® nanoparticles return to their inactive state. These nanoparticles could be used alone, or in concert with existing anticancer protocols: chemotherapy, surgery, targeted molecules, and immunotherapy. NanoXray®'s lead product, NBTXR3, is ready to enter clinical investigation.


5.4.2 Biohybrids - bionanocomposites. 
Not only organic molecules and polymers but also organic biomolecules, bio-polymers or more complex biocomponents (polysaccharides, polypeptide proteins, nucleic acids, enzymes, virus, cellsetc) can be easily incorporated into or grafted to metal oxide-based networks, hybrid siloxane–oxide matrices and lamellar hosts such as clays, lamellar metal hydroxides, hydroxyapatite, or metal oxides.6,8,9,104,105 The resulting materials can be named biohybrids or bionanocomposites. Several strategies can be used to produce them: (i) by trapping or anchoring bio-components during hydrolysis and condensation of metal alkoxides and/or organosilanes with tuned functionalities in a common selected solvent; (ii) by impregnating bio-components inside an open porous network;305 (iii) by hosting through intercalation biocomponent guests inside the gap of lamellar inorganic compounds. All strategies have been extensively developed either by the clay, sol–gel or polymer chemist communities… These biohybrids are indeed bionanocomposites that exhibit a wide variety of interesting properties (mechanical, optical, electrical, ionic, sensors, bio-sensors, catalysts…) which may be improved via the control of their microstructure.
The two following sections will summarise some striking examples of applications or promising properties of hybrid materials developed via sol–gel chemistry or clay like chemistry approaches.
5.4.2.1 Biohybrids made by sol–gel. 
As reviewed by Livage,306 sol–gel derived bioactive hybrids find applications in the field of biotechnology for the realization of biosensors and bioreactors. The high activity of enzymes, antibodies or micro-organisms allows the performance of specific reactions that would not be possible with the usual chemical routes. Active biocomponents are immobilized on or in sol–gel grown solids in order to be reusable and to protect them from denaturation. Natural and synthetic polymers (polysaccharides, polyacrylamides, alginates…) are currently used for bio-immobilization via covalent binding or entrapment. However, because of their better mechanical strength, and improved chemical and thermal stability, inorganic materials such as sol–gel processed glasses and ceramics can offer significant advantages over the currently used organic polymer hosts (polysaccharides, polyacrylamides, alginates…). Moreover sol–gel derived inorganic hosts do not swell in most solvents preventing the leaching of entrapped bio-molecules.
Many biocatalysts such as enzymes or catalytic antibodies are available for performing a variety of synthetically important transformations or for bio-sensing applications. A large number of enzymes have already been trapped within sol–gel matrices but oxidases (such as glucose oxidase GOD) and lipases are the most studied enzymes. GOD is known to catalyze the oxidation of glucose by molecular oxygen and finds many applications in clinical analysis for the diagnosis of diabetes and in the food industry. Optical bio-sensors or amperometric biosensors have been extensively used in biosensors for the titration of glucose.307,308 Thermal hybrid biosensors based on changes in enthalpy during the enzymatic oxidation of glucose recorded as a thermometric peak by a sensitive thermistor in order to detect glucose in fruit juice, Coca Cola and human blood serum have also been described.309
Lipases are quite robust and versatile enzymes that can catalyze esterification and transesterification reactions or the hydrolysis of esters. Indeed, the use of lipases in suspension in an organic solvent makes possible chemoselective, regioselective and stereoselective esterification or transesterification. These biocatalysts for example can promote the use of bio-mass components for the synthesis of bio-diesel, biodetergents, biosoaps….
However, some limitations for their extensive use as industrial biocatalysts are due to their rather low enzyme activity in organic solvents, a limited long term stability, and difficulty in the separation of some lipases from the resulting products that limits reuse of the biocatalyst. These stability and recyclability problems can be solved via immobilisation of the enzymes. An interesting and successful approach was developed by M. Reetz310 who used a sol–gel procedure to encapsulate lipases in hydrophobic hybrid O–I matrices obtained through hydrolysis and co-condensation of R–Si(OR)3 and TEOS. The tuning of the hydrophobic–hydrophilic balance through the R–Si(OR)3/TEOS ratio is an important key parameter that allows this new class of heterogeneous hybrid biocatalysts to display very high catalytic activities with immediate applications in chemoselective, regioselective and stereoselective organic transformations. These sol–gel derived biocatalysts can find immediate applications in chemoselective, regioselective and stereoselective organic transformations. Fluka already commercializes some promising candidates that find application in the area of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals as well as in the derivatization and refining of fats and oils. The control of the functionality and the hierarchical porous structure of the sol–gel derived supports give promising developments that should give an expansion of the market of hybrid biocatalysts and biosensors.22,311,312
Hybrid sol–gel derived immunosensors have been developed for the analysis of pesticides.313Antibody-based affinity biosensors used for the detection of various chemicals such as fluorescein,139,314dinitrobenzene (DNB)315 or dinitrophenyl (DNP)316 are other emerging applications.
Adequately immobilized cells can retain their metabolic activity. Therefore the resulting materials represent an important challenge for biotechnology because they can be used in a large variety of processes for the food industry, waste treatment, production of chemicals or drugs and even cell transplantation or cell immobilisation. In particular the biocompatibility of silica gels and their high porosity favouring water retention and nutrient diffusion make them interesting hosts for the culture of bacteria317 or fungi318 or antibody entrapment to build efficient immunoaffinity devices or for medical applications.319,320 In this sense, new bio-hybrid matrices using Leishmania donovani infantum promastigotes as antigens trapped within silica gel were developed by Livage et al.319,320 to detect the presence of specific antibodies in the serum of human and dogs through the so-called ELISA (Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assays) tests.

              Cell transplantation is a promising technique that can eventually allow actual organ transplantation. However, to circumvent immune rejection of foreign cells the encapsulation of living cells within porous membranes represents a good shielding alternative to protect cells from immune attacks.
Encapsulated cells such as Langerhans islets involved in the metabolism of glucose and the production of insulin are under study at “Solgene Therapeutics LLC” in the USA.321 The “biosil” process, developed by Carturan and co-workers,322 based on the encapsulation of swine hepatocytes and rat liver deposited onto a substrate and then partially covered by a silica film via the gas phase, is used for extracorporeal bioartificial organs. These bio-hybrids have already been used as a bridge to liver transplantation in patients with fulminant hepatic failure.323 Biogel transplants could emerge as a useful treatment for diseases such as diabetes. Many articles have described the encapsulation of single cells or cell aggregates within silica capsules or alginate microspheres coated by a silica layer.22,324–330
Bio-medical applications represent an obvious future for these sol–gel derived bio-hybrids. In that case, preserving the viability of cells within sol–gel derived hybrid matrices appears to be a real challenge. Studies pioneered by Livage et al.331 and confirmed by other groups332–335 indicating that encapsulated bacteria (E. coli) can survive the gelation procedure and remain able to continue normal metabolic activity within the gel matrix are opening new promising avenues in this field.326–332
5.4.2.2 Hybrid nanocomposites based on inorganic lamellar hosts. 
The area of hybrid and bionanocomposites built from organic and/or biocomponents and layered inorganic components has been extensively reported by Ruiz-Hitzky and co-workers in a few excellent reviews.6,8,9 Bio-nanocomposites present many interesting properties for modern biomedical applications not only providing a high functional versatility but also because their soft components are intrinsically biocompatible and biodegradable. Tuneable pesticide release, pollutants removal, biosensing, smart therapeutic carriers, controlled drug delivery, tissue engineering and artificial bones are a few examples of applications that can be developed in the environmental and biomedical areas from these latter-mentioned hybrid nanocomposites.8,9
Nanostructured hybrid clay derivatives are cheap and useful as adsorbents for environmental applications such as the removal of pollutants or development of environmentally oriented pesticide formulations.8,9 By using less hazardous modifiers, and by reaching a high active ingredient content that allows to reduce volumes of sprayed solution, biohybrid organoclay–herbicide formulations appear to be very promising materials. Environmentally benign modifiers can be biopolymers, allowed cationic pesticides such as mepiquat or difenzoquat, food grade cationic compounds such as berberine,336etc. Natural surfactants, such as phosphatidylcholine formulated with organoclay-herbicide composites constitute an interesting alternative towards the formulation of less hazardous organoclay-based pesticides. These already proven efficient biohybrid–pesticide formulations must find commercial applications in the near future.337 Bionanocomposites based on chitosan–montmorillonite have demonstrated good affinity towards different anionic species yielding new alternatives for pollutant removal.338,339 This property has been recently applied in the removal of selenate toxic anions present in drinking water wells.340 Modifiers of biological origin, also appear to be of great importance as bioacceptable substrates for removal of the toxic species. In this context, phosphatidylcholine-based organoclays derived from montmorillonite and sepiolite have been successfully employed recently for the uptake of mycotoxins.341,342
As extensively described by Ruiz-Hitsky,8,9 profiting from their ability to accommodate active species between their inorganic sheets both natural and synthetic clay minerals are useful protective barriers and “dynamic reservoirs” of pharmaceuticals or biocomponents that exhibit modular drug delivery properties.8,9 Recent examples of hybrid materials based on smectite clays are as drug reservoirs through the intercalation of vitamins B6,343 or timolol maleate,344 in montmorillonite and itraconazole in laponite.345 Layered Double Hydroxides are layered solids that also have the ability to hybridize a wide variety of negatively charged organics and biomolecules, including vitamin C,346drugs such as anti-inflammatory molecules (Ibuprofen347 and derivatives or indomethacin, thiaprofenic acid),348 anti cancer drugs (5-fluorouracil,349methotrexate,350 or podophyllotoxins)351 and even DNA strands. Some new Layered Double Hydroxides/phospholipid bilayer hybrid materials present a strong potential for the storage and sustained release of neutral or lipophilic drugs.352 Moreover, neutral LDH-hybrids can easily penetrate cells through clathrin mediated endocytosis, then exchange anionic drugs with cytoplasmic anions and finally after drug release the partially dissolved LDHs are externalized viaexocytosis. Nanocomposites constituted by polymers and drug-loaded layered compounds present several advantages. They allow a better tuning of the release kinetics, protecting layered compounds against the pH of some biofluids such as gastric fluid, they can improve dispersion stability and mechanical properties. For example following this strategy, drug release carriers for Alzheimer's disease353 with a faster release were processed with [Eudragit® E-100/donepezil/laponite] nanocomposites.
Non-viral vectors in gene therapy354–356 and adjuvants in vaccines357 are also biomedicine applications targeted by clay-based hybrid materials. After the pioneering work of Choy,354–356 numerous LDH–DNA or LDH–RNA based vectors, clay–DNA based vectors, polymer–clay–DNA nanocomposites or even LDH–plasmid DNA358 have been reported. This domain is clearly mushrooming, the interested reader will find a more complete state of the art in a recent review.9
Clay-based hybrids and in particular bio-nanocomposites also present interesting properties for tissue engineering, smart implants and all applications associated with the growing field of regenerative medicine. For this purpose, many bionanocomposites have been synthesized through the assembly of clays with natural (collagen, gelatin, chitosan…) or synthetic polymers (biocompatible PMMAs, biodegradable polyurethanes…). The resulting hybrid materials offer the required properties for their use as bioresorbable scaffolds. Indeed, in addition to biocompatibility, cell adhesion and proliferation and suitable mechanical properties, these macroporous nanocomposites present a good pore interconnectivity to allow for the transport of nutrients and metabolic wastes. The tuning of the nanocomposite porosity is very important because it allows for the controlled rate of biodegradation, which needs to be balanced with the rate of regeneration of new tissue.359–371Among the numerous examples of hybrid compositions and applications it is worth mentioning the pioneering work on sepiolite–collagen bionanocomposites for bone tissue repair.361

              Sepiolite–collagen hybrids cross-linked with glutaraldehyde demonstrate a biocompatible environment for fibroblast growth, and a reduced degradability of the adsorbed protein by collagenase. Moreover the cross-linking allows for a reduced biodegradation rate offering the possibility to tailor the persistence of the implants, which needs to be balanced with re-sorption in order to facilitate the growth of new tissue.360–362In vivo evaluations, of these biohybrids after their subcutaneous implantation in rats, demonstrate a persistence of 100% after several months of implantation.362
Other possible fields of applications of hybrid clays built with synthetic organic molecules or polymers are presented in part 5.5, Table 8, and Fig. 24. These applications are related to the specific improvements yielded by the inorganic components such as mechanical, textural, thermal and barrier properties. In particular, as proposed by Ruiz-Hitzky, hybrid bionanocomposites using natural, cheap, easily recyclable biopolymers and benign inorganic components are opening more sustainable routes to a wide range of applications: food packaging, paper fabrication, processing of safer and functional textiles, materials for buildings and construction, sport equipment and automotive parts, membranes for food processing, drinkingwater purification, and oxygen barrier films are a few examples of domains of application.

5.5 Construction, automotive, sealant, textile & woods
Unsuccessfully commercialised in the 1940's–1990's by several companies (Monsanto, BASF…), silica-based aerogels have been re-commercialised in the 2000's. This was achieved thanks to the research developed in the 1980's–1990's and focused on both chemistry and processing of aerogels. These developments allowed fabrication of aerogels more compatible with industrial and commercial requirements. Aerogel manufacturing at larger scale has become safer, faster and less expensive. Supercritical drying with flammable and potentially explosive solvents involving high pressure and temperature was replaced by the safer non-flammable supercritical CO2 fluid which also requires a lower critical temperature (Tc = 31 °C instead of 230–240 °C for alcohols/acetone). The second main development was performed by Brinker and Smith.372,373 It consists of replacing the supercritical drying step by a less expensive and less risky drying step: the ambient-pressure drying. Briefly, the skeletal network (which could be purely inorganic or hybrid O–I) of the wet gel is rendered hydrophobic by a series of solvent-exchange processes and chemical surface modification with an organosilane (trimethylchlorosilane) reducing thus the gel surface reactivity. Despite an important shrinking of the gel during evaporation of solvent, this surface passivation allows the gel to expand to ∼85% of its original volume once dried (spring back effect). This last approach, i.e. ambient-pressure drying, is currently used by several companies for producing translucent hydrophobic silica-based aerogel granules (for example Cabot Corporation under the tradename Nanogel™ or Dow Corning under the product name VM 2270 Aerogel Fine Particles).
Table 8 Hybrid materials in construction, automotive, sealant, textile and wood applications




Name
Materials
Processing
Applications - Properties
Stage (prototype pilot commercial development)
References


Organic part
Inorganic part





Aspen aerogels® products: Spaceloft®, Pyrogel® and Cryogel® blankets


Methyltriethoxysilane/Hexamethyldisilazane/Silica gel, trimethylsilylated
TEOS/silica precursors
Composite materials: aerogels reinforced with organic/mineral fibres – Continuous gel casting on organic/mineral fibre blankets (roll casting)
Thermal insulation (−270 to 90 °C or −40 to 650 °C)
Commercial development for building & construction and or industrial

                    http://www.aerogel.com
                  



Nanogel® products (Cabot Corporation)

[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica
[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica
Aerogels (sub-critical drying conditions), Translucent granules or composite materials (thermal wrap)
Thermal and acoustic insulators and oil containment/reclamation
Commercial development for building & construction, apparel and industrial

                    http://www.cabot-corp.com
                  



Green tyres – Michelin Energy™ Saver


Styrene-butadiene rubber

Silane treated silica nanoparticles
 
Tyres – Antivibration system
Commercial development

                    http://www.michelin.com Daniel, M and Janin, C. L’Actualité Chimique 340, 8–13, (2010)



TICO
®

Organic dyes/polymers

Inorganic oxide pigment
 
Pigments
Commercial development

                    http://www.heubachcolor.de/en/nc/products/katalog/asia/pigmentpraeparationen-3///ticoR-3.html
                    WO/2004/078852



Kane Ace X-CP Resin


Methyl methacrylate-acrylic copolymer/Polystyrene

                    TiO2 particles, ZnO crystalline nanoparticles capped with silanes
 
Sealant, adhesives with long term resistance to UV light exposure.
Commercial development R&D

                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/Kane-Ace_AcryliC–Capping-Compound.html
                    WO/2007/043496



Nylon
 nanocomposites


Polyamide (Nylon 6/Nylon MXD6/Nylon 6,66/Nylon 6,12)
Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/mostly Nanomer® series T from Nanocor Inc.)
Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting
Gas barrier films for food packaging and beverages/Flame retardant/Automotive part (timing belt, barrier, fuel line and tank, body panels, bumpers)
Commercial development
Bayer AG (Durethan® KU 2–2601) RTP Company (RTP 299 X series) Honeywell Polymers (Aegis® NC & OX) Nanocor Inc. (Imperm®) Ube (Ecobesta) NYCOA (nanoTUFF™, nanoSEAL™) Toyota



Epoxy nanocomposites

Epoxy resin
Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/Nanomer® series E from Nanocor Inc.)
Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting
High voltage insulation
Commercial development
Nanocor (Nanomer® series E)



Polyolefin nanocomposites

Polyolefin (polyethylene, polypropylene, ethylene vinyl acetate)
Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/for example Nanomer® from Nanocor Inc.)
Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting
Flame retardant/Automotive furniture appliance (Step-assist for GMC Safari, Chevrolet Astro Vans and trim, center bridge, sail panel and box rail protector for Hummer)
Commercial development
Nanocor (nanoMax®) Noble Polymer (Forte™, Nubrid™) General Motors Corporation (with Basell USA Inc. and Southern Clay Products, Inc.) PolyOne Corporation (Nanoblend™)



Polyurethane nanocomposites

Polyurethane
Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/Cloisite® from Southern Clay Products Inc.)
Sheet molding
Hull, deck and liner of Yamaha’s WaveRunners® (personal water craft)
Commercial development
Yamaha Motor Corporation (NanoXcel®)



Polyvinyl 
alcohol
 nanocomposites

Polyvinyl alcohol

                    Vermiculite
                  
Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting
Gas barrier films for food packaging
Commercial development
NanoPack Inc (nanoSEAL™)



Polypropylene/
polystyrene
 blends nanocomposites

Polypropylene/polystyrene blends
Montmorillonite (Nanofil® from Southern Clay Products Inc.)
Injection, blow and extrusion molding
Footwell heater vent for various Volkswagen and Audi models
Commercial development
Putsch Kunststoffe GmbH (Elan XP)



Kane Ace 
MX-960


Siloxane-acrylic copolymer/monomers

Siloxane-acrylic copolymer
 
Liquid hybrid epoxy-based resin for coatings, adhesives and composites applications
Commercial development

                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/MX.html
                  



Kanaka 
XMAP
 type-S


                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated acrylic polymer

                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated acrylic polymer
 
Sealant
Commercial development

                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/MSPoly_XMAP.html
                  



Kanaka 
MS

polymer


                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated polypropylene

                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated polypropylene
 
Sealant, adhesives for construction, industrial, DIY, and automotive applications
Commercial development

                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/MSPoly_home.html
                  




Creating this hydrophilic surface is of particular relevance for real-world applications since the adsorption of liquids (essentially H2O which is the ubiquitous compound on earth) could dramatically damage aerogels while evaporating due to capillary stresses. The ambient-pressure drying process illustrates the necessity of organically functionalised aerogels in order to improve their mechanical properties/long-term stability under a humid atmosphere without excessively modifying their intrinsic properties i.e. extremely low thermal conductivity, low sound velocity and to a lesser extent good optical transparency. Functionalisation of aerogels with organic derivatives could involve weak or strong chemical interactions between the organic and inorganic components (class I or class II hybrid materials respectively)26 and could take place theoretically at each stage of aerogel synthesis (in the starting sol, during the gel formation or after the drying step). In practice, chemical modifications of aerogels which lead mainly to class II hybrid materials involve the solubilisation of the organic derivatives either in the starting sol or in the wet gel. These modifications combined with the intrinsic properties imparted by the chemical nature of the framework (which could be pure inorganic, pure organic, hybrid O–I and even metallic) make them very attractive in a wide range of application domains: storage media, optical applications (Cherenkov detectors, luminescent aerogels), electrical applications (batteries, capacitor electrodes, dielectric or piezoelectric materials), (bio)catalysis, (bio)sensors and acoustic and thermal insulators.375–377
Despite the amazing intrinsic characteristics and properties of aerogels, most as-made aerogels present poor mechanical behaviour: they are often highly brittle and fragile. This represents a serious drawback for their commercial applications. O–I hybridization of aerogels overcomes this lack of mechanical properties. Several strategies have been developed resulting in an increase in mechanical properties and facilitating then their further handling. One of these strategies is based on the co-condensation of a flexible polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with TEOS. Gels obtained present a rubber-like flexibility and with 20% of PDMS, they can be elastically compressed by 30%.378 Such mechanical properties (highly compressibility and elasticity) were also reached with aerogels synthesized with methyltrimethoxysilane as a unique precursor displaying compression capability between 60 and 80%.379,380 This behavior was attributed to three factors provided by this hybrid network. First, with an organically substituted trialkoxysilane, the resulting network presents a lower crosslinking density making the macroscopic gel more flexible than bare silica. Second, the low density of silanol groups hinders the nonreversible shrinkage. Third, methyl groups are homogeneously distributed with high density in the network, which will repel each other during the temporal shrinkage on compression. In addition to the improvement of mechanical properties, these aerogels are highly hydrophobic (contact angle > 160°) and could absorb 10–20 times their own weight in (toxic) apolar liquids (petrol, kerosene and diesel for example). Interestingly, this last property, i.e. oil absorption capability, allowed the Dow Corning company and Cabot Corporation to commercialise methylsilylated aerogel as fragrance delivery and retention materials, thickener, sebum absorber and soft focus agent for personal care (see Table 7) and as oil spill management respectively. Another interesting way of enhancing the mechanical properties of aerogels consists of the doping/reinforcing of aerogels by crosslinking organic polymers on the original gel skeletons. Based on the observation that polymers could be reinforced by inorganic fillers, Leventis et al. successfully increased the mechanical properties of aerogels by doping fillers (i.e. aerogels) with polymers.381–383 Briefly using pure silica gel381 or amino-modified silica wet gel382,383 (with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane as a co-precursor), polymerization was performed with diisocyanates,381 multifunctional epoxides382 or p-chloromethylstyrene/styrene383 derivatives before the drying step. However while the mechanical properties (strength, stiffness, flexibility …) are usually enhanced by the organic polymerisation, the insulating ability, optical transparency, and surface area are at the same time reduced. The last way, developed in this chapter, increasing the mechanical properties of aerogels and leading to a commercial development is based on another type of reinforcement. Like steel bars reinforce concrete in buildings, aerogels could be reinforced by microfibers. Using this approach, Aspen Aerogels started to fabricate in the early 2000's flexible fiber–hydrophobic silica aerogel composite blankets via a sol impregnation process followed by supercritical drying with CO2. Depending on the formulation of composites (for example the type of fibers: organic or inorganic), aerogel-based insulation blankets were designed for cryogenic applications (Cryogel®), for clothing and apparel (Pyrogel®/Spaceloft®) or for high-temperature applications (Pyrogel®) allowing then insulation from −265 °C to 650 °C. Moreover, due to their low thickness, flexibility and easy handling features, they could easily insulate any type of plant's equipment (piping, towers, tanks …) even in confined spaces. Their products are now found in subsea oil pipelines (pipe in pipe insulation), refineries, winter apparel, building and construction. For example, aerogel blankets, which display a thickness between 5 and 10 mm, allow a reduction in the outer pipe size while keeping the same insulation characteristics as classical polyurethane-based insulators (see Fig. 23). This delivers substantial savings in both steel and installation costs. In building insulation, aerogel blankets presenting a thermal efficiency 2 to 4 times greater than traditional materials such as polystyrene, mineral wool, and cellulose, deliver more insulation performance with less thickness and could be easily used to insulate walls, floors, and roofs (see Fig. 23). Considering the high optical transparency of aerogels in addition to their insulation properties (thermal and acoustic), Cabot Corporation incorporated its Nanogel® granules in daylighting systems providing an enhancement of insulation while maintaining optimal light transmission. Aerogel granules/particles could be incorporated in many existing daylighting systems (structural composite panels, structural polycarbonate systems, U-channel glass, insulated glass units…). An example of the insulating properties of daylighting systems is presented in Fig. 23. The roof of the Dedmon Centre (photograph and building A on IR imaging) was refurbished with an aerogel fabric layer sandwiched between two layers of structural PTFE fabric. With an ambient exterior temperature of −3.3 °C and an interior temperature of 20 °C, the refurbished roof displayed a surface temperature of −2.2 °C instead of 19 °C for the non-refurbished roof (building B and C on IR imaging). The insulating daylighting system allowed energy savings, CO2 emission reduction and sound dampening.
 Fig. 23  Some commercial products based on hybrid O–I aerogels. Aerogel Products: Various hybrid aerogel products commercially available (top: Aspen Aerogel® flexible composite blankets; bottom: Nanogel™ translucent granules and fine particles-Cabot Corporation®). Subsea pipe-in-pipe insulation (courtesy of Aspen Aerogel®). Building insulation (courtesy of Aspen Aerogel®). Cold to hot industrial insulation (courtesy of Aspen Aerogel®). Insulated daylighting systems (Courtesy of Cabot Corporation®). Insulated apparel: “Hyper Elite/Uber Elite” sleeping pads from Pacific Outdoor Equipment (Aspen Aerogel® products), “Tundra” winter boots/“F22W” snowboard boots from Salomon (Aspen Aerogel® products), “Quota Zero - EXTREME AEROGEL” jacket from Grado Zero Espace: (Nanogel™ – Cabot Corporation), “Champion Supersuit” from Hanesbrands Inc. (ZERO-LOFT™ - Aspen Aerogel® - e21®), “Nanogelite” insulated bottle from Elite Srl (Nanogel™ – Cabot Corporation), “Toasty Feet” insulator insoles/“PolarPad” seat pads from PolarWrap LLC: (Aspen Aerogel® products). 
Another important development leading to commercial products concerns hybrid polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). Basically, PNCs could be described as the combination of a polymer matrix with inorganic or hybrid nano-objects that have at least one dimension in the nanometre range (length scale below 100 nm). Considering the extensive variety of both nano-objects which are mostly commercially available (oxide-based particles, oxo-clusters, POSS, clays, nanoMOFs, metals, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes,…) and existing polymers, their potential combinations and thus the synergetic properties of the resulting PNCs are essentially endless.
Besides their different chemical nature, nano-objects could also be dense or porous, crystalline or amorphous, bare or organically surface-modified, mono-dimensional (nanotubes, fibres…), bi-dimensional (oxo-clusters, clays for example) or tri-dimensional (spherical particles, POSS, nanoMOFs, oxo-clusters) and could present additional intrinsic properties (optical, electronic, magnetic, electrical, catalytic…).
In many cases, the polymer matrix allows easy shaping and better processing of the materials. The inorganic components provide mainly mechanical and thermal stability, but also new functionalities that depend on the chemical nature, the structure, the size, the shape and crystallinity of the inorganic phase.384 The inorganic component can implement or improve electronic, magnetic and redox properties, density, refraction index… Obviously, the final materials are not only the sum of the primary components but a large synergy effect is expected from the close coexistence of the two phases through size domain effects and nature of the interfaces. Generally, the major features of each phase are preserved or even improved in the PNCs (stability, mechanical and thermal behaviour, specific properties, etc.), and furthermore, new properties coming from the synergy of both components are commonly observed as well.
It is worth mentioning that low-volume additions (1–10%) of nano-objects provide mechanical properties (like elastic stiffness and strength) enhancements with respect to the neat polymer that are comparable to that achieved by conventional loadings (15–40%) of traditional micrometre-scale inorganic fillers. This is generally explained by the large surface area to volume ratio of nano-objects when compared to the micro- and macro-additives. In addition to that the lower particles loading facilitates processing and reduces component weight. Most important are the unique value-added properties and property combinations, normally not possible with traditional fillers, such as barrier resistance, optical clarity, scratch/wear resistance, flame retardancy, oxidation, and ablation resistance.
This incredible versatility in terms of chemistry combined with easy and existing processing could easily explain the abundance of articles, patents and finally commercial products related to PNCs over the past 20 years. The aim of this section is to provide a short illustration of PNCs related to their use in commercial applications. The reader will find more detailed information about PNCs in the references.385–396
Commercial developments of PNCs involve mainly two types of nano-objects: oxide-based particles (silica-based particles most of the time) and clays (some examples of hybrid materials based on NPs/clays PNCs are illustrated in Fig. 24). This could be easily explained by the commercial availability and the relatively low cost of such nano-objects. Several strategies have been investigated to prepare PNCs depending on the starting states of both organic and inorganic materials. The polymer matrix could be formed from molecular precursors (monomer – oligomer), preformed linear polymer (in molten, solution, or emulsion states) or a polymer network already cross-linked. Nano-objects could be introduced in the organic part either as molecular precursors or under preformed nano-objects. In practice, the majority of commercial developments involve preformed nano-objects. These nano-objects could be incorporated in the polymer matrix by (i) melt processing (direct mixing of nano-objects with the polymer melt), by (ii) solution processing (a common solvent is used to disperse nano-objects in a polymer solution), by (iii) an in situpolymerisation (dispersion of nano-objects directly in the monomer or monomer solution). However, these inorganic nano-objects (clays and oxide-based particles) usually present a hydrophilic characteristic which could seriously impede homogeneous dispersion in the organic polymer phase leading then to materials presenting properties similar to traditional micro-composites. Since mechanical and physical properties of PNCs depend directly on the uniform dispersion of nanofillers inside the polymer matrices, a surface-modification step is usually necessary to achieve high dispersion rates.
 Fig. 24  Some commercial products based on polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). Polymer reinforcement - top (clay-based PNCs): (a) interior footwell heater vent (Audi and Volkswagen models), (b) seat back (Honda Acura TL), (c) hull and deck of personal watercraft (Yamaha Motor Corporation's WaveRunner®), (d) trim, centre bridge, sail panel and box rail protector (GM Hummer H2 SUT), (e) centre console (Chevrolet HHR). Middle: (f) Michelin-Woco's antivibration systems (hybrid silica nanoparticles) and (g) Pirelli's tyres based on cap (hybrid silica nanoparticles-based PNCs) and base (nanoclay-based PNCs) technology. Bottom (clay-based PNCs): electric insulating plastic jacket (Nexans), flame retardant properties of PP doped with 5% wt of Nanomer® nanoclay (Nanocor®), gas/liquid barrier properties of PNCs shaped as thin films ((h) Nanomer®, (i) Nanolok™, and (j) Durethan® PNCs). 
Functionalisation of these nano-objects requires molecules able to both bond to the particles surface and to interact with the polymer matrix. They should then present anchoring groups interacting with the inorganic particles through covalent, coordinative, electrostatic or hydrogen bonding and an organic part capable of forming covalent bonds (through a polymerization process) to the polymer matrix or interacting via van der Waals forces. Numerous compounds could be used for organically modifying the surface of nano-objects, among them are silane coupling agents, complexing/chelating agents, surfactants, block copolymers, organic ammonium/phosphonium cations…385–399
PNCs made with oxide-based nanoparticles (mainly silica and zirconia) or clays are present in a wide range of fields and have been already described in the previous tables and in part 4.2.b. In the context of Table 8, the example concerning “green tyres” is of particular interest since its impact on our environment (400 million “green tyres” sold by Michelin since 1992 representing 12 billion litres of fuel and 31 million tons of CO2 saved) and on the industrial producing (a lot of manufacturers used silica nanoparticles as fillers with carbon black in high performance tyres) is significant. At the beginning of the twentieth century, carbon black replaced successfully inert mineral loads (zinc oxide) in tyre tread improving the wear resistance by a factor 10.400 The wear resistance of filled rubber is essentially determined by the filler characteristics, especially surface activity and morphology. High surface area carbon black, giving a large interfacial area between filler and polymer combined with its high affinity towards rubber (through van der Waals forces), induces high interaction with the hydrocarbon polymer used in tyres, resulting in improved wear resistance. At the start of the 1990's, a collaboration401 between Michelin402 and Rhodia403 allowed the incorporation of “highly dispersive silica” (HDS) nanoparticles into the tyre tread. In order to minimize filler–filler interactions, while at the same time favouring polymer–filler interactions, a surface-modification of the nanoparticles was necessary. It was achieved by their functionalisation with a coupling agent, bis(3-triethoxysilylpropyl) tetrasulfane (TESPT) which allows covalent bonding between organically-modified nanoparticles and SBR (styrene-butadiene rubber) polymer chains during the vulcanization process.400 This functionalisation was essential since bare silica nanoparticles show very low polymer–filler interactions leading to a strong tendency to agglomerate. In terms of processing, this innovation implied the adaptation of tyre manufacturing and specially the mixing step. In the case of carbon black, the mix consists of essentially decreasing the size of aggregates (around 80 nm). In contrast, silica nanoparticles are added into mixers before organic-modification and particle functionalisation takes place in mixers. A careful control of both temperature and mixing time is needed to first organically modify the nanoparticles and next to covalently bond these modified nanofillers to the polymers during the vulcanization process.400 The “green tyre” technology allows a gain in rolling resistance by almost 20% in comparison with normal tyres, which means a gain in fuel savings with additionally an increase in adherence and wear resistance properties. Taking advantage of the knowledge acquired with the research and the development of the “Green Tyre”, Michelin, through the Joint Venture Woco Michelin AVS, has used highly dispersible silicas to develop new antivibration system (AVS) compounds (called Sil@nd).404 Among the suspension devices in the chassis of a vehicle, there are the antivibratory parts whose principal function is to ensure a reduction in the vibrations felt by the driver or the passengers inside the vehicle. These parts positioned with the interfaces between two metal elements are made with at least a part of rubber which lowers the rigidity (compared to metal) and filters the vibrations (through the viscoelastic character of the elastomer). AVS have to ensure comfort and handling with a high endurance (the aim is that AVS should not be changed during the whole lifetime of the cars). The use of compounds containing highly dispersible silicas allowed improvement of both mechanical properties and the lifetime of AVS parts compared to the traditional carbon black-containing compounds. Organically-modified HDS nanoparticles were a turning point in tyre fillers after ∼100 years of carbon black rule. Nowadays, new nanofillers are under development (alumina – Michelin for example) or already commercially available (starch – Goodyear) allowing an improvement in tyres properties with respect to environmental purposes. This example of nanofillers in tyre manufacturing, carbon black versussilica nanoparticles, is not only related to their reinforcing ability i.e. improvement of mechanical properties of the final nanocomposites. It emphasizes also the importance of additional intrinsic properties of nanofillers. In contrast to HDS nanoparticles, carbon black presents anti-UV properties and a deep black colour which masks the coloured oxidized forms of anti-oxidative agents present in tyre composition.405 These additional properties combined with its lower costs explains the essential part of carbon black as nanofillers.
Intrinsic properties of nano-objects have been advantageously exploited by Heubach Gmbh/Kaneka which used UV-absorbing semiconductor particles for improving the UV light resistance (and then their lifetime) of hybrid pigments and outdoor resin nanocomposites (Table 8).
Two others promising fields concerning hybrid nanocomposites based on nanoparticles which are under investigation should be mentioned. In contrast to the previous examples developed above which deal with the improvement of polymer properties via high dispersion of organically-modified nanoparticles, hybrid nanocomposites have been employed with existing materials such as textiles406 and wood.407 Depending on the composition of hybrid nanocomposites, several properties of wood/textiles have been enhanced like mechanical properties (hardness, abrasion stability…), fire/heat resistance, water, oil and soil repellence or added like UV protection, biocide/antimicrobial behaviour.
Another well-known commercial application of PNCs related to the automotive industry was developed by researchers of Toyota in the early 1990's and concerns clay-based PNCs.396,408–411 Since this pioneering work, research and commercial developments about clay-based PNCs have exploded during the past 20 years. However, in contrast to nanoparticles, preparation of clay-based PNCs are not straightforward. Indeed, the layered structure of clays deeply influences the final properties of PNCs. Depending on the compatibility between organic polymers and clays, clays could display an intercalated or exfoliated structure in the PNCs. In the intercalated structure, the organic component is inserted between the layers of the clay in such way that the inter-layer spacing is expanded, but the layers still bear a well-defined and consistent spatial relationship to each other. In an exfoliated structure, the layers of the clay have been completely separated and the individual layers are distributed throughout the organic matrix. Since the type of delamination determines the properties of the clay nanocomposites, several factors such as the exchange capacity of the clay, the polarity of the reaction medium and the chemical nature of the interlayer cations must be taken into account during the synthesis of the polymer–clay hybrids. Three main strategies have been investigated to prepare clay-based PNCs:391,392,395

(i) Exfoliation–adsorption. In this method, a solvent is used for both exfoliating clays and solubilising the polymer (or the pre-polymer in the case of insoluble polymers such as polyimide). Once nano-clays are delaminated, the polymer could be adsorbed onto the sheets. Upon solvent removal by evaporation (or the mixture precipitated), the intercalated structure remains.

(ii) In situ intercalating 
polymerisation
          . This strategy consists of swelling of clays by a liquid monomer or a monomer solution followed by subsequent polymerisation in the inter-layer space.

(iii) Melt intercalation. In this technique, clays are mixed with the polymer matrix in the molten state. Melt intercalation implies a good compatibility between the layer surfaces and the polymer which will allow the polymer to fill the inter-layer space leading to intercalated or exfoliated PNCs. This method is environmentally friendly since no solvent is required and is compatible with common industrial processes such as extrusion and injection molding.
From an industrial point of view, three main properties of clay-based PNCs have been commercially exploited: improvement of mechanical properties of polymers, gas barrier performance, and fire/heat resistance. Thus markets concerned with clay-based PNCs are mainly automotive and food/beverage packaging.
The first commercial application of these materials was the use of clay/nylon-6 nanocomposites as timing belt covers for Toyota cars (the “Starlet” passenger car), in collaboration with Ube Ind. in 1989.396 This clay-based PNC was prepared through the in situ intercalative polymerization method, in which montmorillonite clay was first organo-modified with 12-aminododecanoic acid and then dispersed in the monomer caprolactam, a further polymerisation step led to an exfoliated clay-based PNC. Compared to neat nylon-6, the properties of clay/nylon-6 PNCs show an increase in Young's modulus of ∼100%, in tensile strength of ∼50% and in heat distortion of ∼150%.412 Shortly after this first commercialisation, Unitika Ltd. introduced nylon-6 nanocomposites for engine covers on Mitsubishi's gasoline direct injection (GDI) engines.413 However for cost reasons, these early applications were unable to retain their position in the highly competitive automotive markets.
As previously mentioned, the auto industry initially displayed most interest in nylon-6 based PNCs for use under the hood, where higher heat distortion temperature and lightweighting were required. In the 2000's, the automotive industry focused on PP and TPO-based PNCs. In the 2002, General Motors, in cooperation with Basell North America and Southern Clay Products, developed an exterior step assist component for its GMC Safari and Chevrolet Astro models. This component was made with a PP-based nanocomposite containing 2.5% of nano-clay in place of 15% talc. The PNC presented numerous advantages compared to the talc-based composite: it was lighter in weight, stiffer, more robust at low temperatures and more recyclable. It helped also to reduce paint delamination, and improved knit-line appearance, colourability, grain patterns, scratch and mar resistance. In term of processing, it presented the advantage of being molded in the same tool as the talc-based composite. However, specific modifications of the molding tool were performed to avoid clay agglomeration during processing. Engineers optimised several processing parameters such as the clay infeed position at the extruder, the screw design, screw speed, temperature, and pressure. Optimisation of the clay dispersion into the polymer matrix was also achieved by chemical improvements in the nano-clays’ surface modification and polymer formulation, leading then to a high rate of exfoliation. Progress in both chemical and processing domains has allowed a development of PNCs use in the automotive field. For example, PNCs were used in body side molding of Chevrolet Impalas (2004) and for some elements in the rear cover of the GM Hummer H2 SUT (trim, centre bridge, sail panel and box rail protector - 2005). During the same time, Honda has used the montmorillonite/polypropylene PNC of Noble Polymers (Forte™) to manufacture the seat back of its Acura TL (2004). Forte-PP based PNC (Forte® 18CPP091) was also used by GM for producing the centre console of the Chevrolet HHR. Nano-clays were also used for compatibilising resin alloys. Putsch Kunststoffe GmbH in Germany, in collaboration with the former nanoclay supplier Sud-Chemie AG, has developed a new blend (Elan XP series) of normally incompatible PP and PS. Elan XP was commercialized for an interior footwell heater vent for various Audi and Volkswagen models.414 Since 2008, Yamaha Motor Corporation produces the hull and deck of their WaveRunner® line of personal watercraft with organically modified montmorillonite/polyurethane PNCs (NanoXcel® PNC). Nanoclays enable the reduction in fiberglass and other bulking (clay) components content, thus lowering the SMC specific gravity by about 25% without sacrificing mechanical properties. Interestingly, Pirelli has developed a new tyre involving two PNCs in the tread of high performance tyre series (winter 240 Sottozero for example). Briefly, this tyre series utilises cap and base technology that combines two different compounds in the tread. The upper part (cap) of the tread that comes into contact with the road surface uses silica-based PNCs (as previously mentioned with Michelin's tyres) providing greater stability in both wet and dry conditions. The sub-part of tread in contact with the casing (base) uses organically modified nano-clays dispersed throughout the polymer and provide the stiffness that enhances stability and driving precision and an equal performance in longitudinal and lateral directions.
These examples illustrate the dynamism of the automotive industry in the use of clay-based PNCs. Considering both environmental concerns (CO2 emissions, materials recycling) and increasing gas prices for consumers, one could think that automotive industrials (polymer and PNCs producers, OEMs and fabricators) will improve the performance of PNCs and develop new PNCs. In this sense, renewable resource-base biodegradable polymers reinforced with organically modified nanoclays could be attractive as a substitute for petroleum-based PNCs.8,9,415–417
Besides automotive applications, clay-based PNCs have been also employed in food and beverage packaging as well as for barrier liners in storage tanks and fuel lines due to their excellent barrier properties. These properties are commonly explained by the formation of a labyrinth resulting in the spatial dispersion of nano-clay platelets within the polymeric structure, which physically delays the passage of gas and vapour. Examples of applications concern modified atmosphere packaging for food (meats, cheese, confectionery, cereals and boil-in-the-bag), extrusion-coating applications in association with paperboard for fruit juice and dairy products, and together with co-extrusion processes for the manufacture of beer and carbonated drinks bottles.
In the food packaging, two plastics are mainly available protecting food from moisture and oxygen: an inexpensive one, polyamide 6, which is somewhat more permeable, and an expensive one, ethylene vinyl alcohol (EVOH), which presents more airtight properties. Bayer has developed a nylon 6 based PNC using Nanocor's clay via the in situ intercalative polymerisation strategy. This PNC, called Durethan KU2-2601, presents advantages of both plastics: it is quite inexpensive and is very airtight but less so than EVOH. Moreover, stiffness of the nanocomposite is doubled, and its gloss and clarity rival those of a costly high-clarity copolyamide film.418 In conjunction with Mitsubishi Gas Chemical, Nanocor has developed a PNC based on the MXD6 high barrier semi-aromatic nylons.419 Marketed under the Imperm® trade name, this PNC exhibits oxygen and carbon dioxide barrier properties that were previously unachievable. Its barrier properties are said to make Imperm® superior to EVOH and its processing characteristics are ideal for multilayer films, bottles and thermoformed containers. Honeywell has developed another nylon-based PNC presenting both active and passive barrier properties. Aegis®OX is composed of nano-clays as the passive barrier and a proprietary, nylon-specific oxygen scavenger as the active agent. Honeywell reports that oxygen barrier properties are comparable to the performance of glass bottles.420
InMat Inc. has developed several nanocomposite coatings presenting gas barrier properties (Air D-Fense™ series and Nanolok™ PT). They consist of an aqueous suspension of nano-dispersed silicates (vermiculite) and polymers (butyl rubber for Air D-Fense™ series and polyester resin for Nanolok™ PT). They could be applied to various elastomeric substrates or PET films via roll coating, spray or dip coating processes. Air D-Fense™ coatings have been used for covering the core of a tennis ball (Wilson Double Core™) providing an increase in the tennis ball lifetime.
PNCs also limit emissions of gasoline, methanol, and organic solvents. Ube America is developing nanocomposite barriers for automotive fuel systems. It uses up to 5% nano-clay in nylon 6 and 6/66 blends. Nylon 6 with 2% nano-clay is said to be five times more resistant to gasoline permeation than unmodified nylon 6. Ube has developed a coextruded barrier fuel line, trade-named Ecobesta, using nylon 6/66 nanocomposite as the core layer.
Besides these two major applications, investigations/development have been performed on electric/thermal insulation, herbicide timed release and medical devices.421,422
Interestingly, composite foams made of O–I hybrid materials have been developed by combining biopolymer matrices with particles of silicates such as sepiolite belonging to the clay minerals group. These very low-density materials (0.02–0.4 g cm−3) are fire resistant, biocompatible and biodegradable, showing mechanical properties that are suitable for diverse and widespread applications. Among others, they have interest for acoustical and thermal insulation in buildings and in the transport industry.423 All the applications about clay-based PNCs cited above involve platelet-shaped clay particles. However, a new company, NaturalNano Inc. (http://www.naturalnano.com), has developed new PCNs with halloysite clay nanotubes (HNTs) as organically modified nanofillers and nylon 6 or PP as polymers (Pleximer®). Halloysite consists of ultra-tiny, hollow tubes of alumina silicate with 100 nm average diameter and lengths from about 500 nm to over 1.2 microns. NaturalNano Inc. reported that halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) do not need exfoliation, can run on standard equipment, and have the potential for use in a wider range of polymers.
The last example of inorganic–organic hybrids are the organically derived siloxane resins. They are made of SiO2 units cross-linked with trimethylsiloxy or hydroxyl groups, and exhibit molecular weights of 2000 to 10000. Their larger application concerns the pressure-sensitive adhesives (PSAs).424,425 Furthermore, these resins are also used in cosmetics, water-repellents and additives for paper release coatings.426 The functionalisation of polypropylene oxide with organically modified silanes results in a liquid polymer that cures in the presence of moisture to form conformable low-cost sealants and caulks.427 This technology has been commercialized by Kaneka.
6. Outlook—promising hybrid materials and related new processes
The use of templating strategies (based on micelles, liquid crystals, nanocasting, latex beads, organogelators, controlled phase separation, etc…), combined with mild chemical conditions (sol–gel chemistry, coordination polymers synthesis - MOFs, NBB-based approaches, commercial PolyOligoSilSesquioxanes) and smart processing methods such as multilayers deposition (via dip-, spin-, laminar- and spray-coating),428–430,52 dip-pen lithography,431Two Photon Absorption (TPA) laser assisted lithography,128 ink jet printing,125,431–433electrospinning,123,434 foaming435–437 and aerosol processing,130,131,144,285,438,439 contribute to a very attractive field of research. Obviously, the development of such a virtually infinite number of combinations is motivated by the easy fabrication of materials with more and more complex structures that will play an important role in many application fields. In particular, hybrid materials presenting multimodal or multiscale porosity are of major interest, for catalysis, fuel cells and batteries, and separation processes, adsorbers and smart adaptative membranes for which optimisation of the diffusion and confinement regimes is required. Moreover, organic or bio-hybridization of these systems is opening up many additional interesting properties. Some striking examples of promising hybrids that concern patterned mesoporous layers, hierarchically structured porous hybrid foams, MOFs starting to be commercially available (sold by BASF), commercial POSS (sold by Hybrid Plastics) and TPA processed 3D hybrids, are reported in Table 9 and Fig. 25. A few of these promising approaches will be commented upon in the following sections.
Table 9 Promising hybrid materials




Name
Materials
Processing
Applications - Properties
Stage (prototype pilot commercial development)
References


Organic part
Inorganic part




MOF (metal organic framework)
Multifunctional ligands
Oxoclusters/metal ions
Powders/Thin films
Catalysis, gas/liquid/drug storage, gas purification
Prototype
Basolite products series of BASF440


POSS
 
 
 
 
Prototype
Hybrid plastics


Mesoporous materials (POMTFs – POMPs)

Polymers, Organosilanes, Dyes, Drugs, Surfactants, Latex…
Transition metal oxides/silica and derivatives/alumina….
Powders/Thin films/Sub-microparticles/Monoliths/Fibers
Micro-optics/photonic devices, microelectronics, energy, environment, functional and protective coatings, biomaterials, environmentally responsive materials, and biomicrofluidics
Prototype

POMTFs52,
Aerosol-based POMPs130



Hybrid foams
Organosilanes, Enzymes, Biocomponents

Silica, titania, zirconia, alumina
Micro-emulsion
Catalysis, Biocatalysis, Chromatography, Membranes
Prototype

311,441,442





 Fig. 25  Promising hybrid materials (MOFs, hybrid HPOMTFs and APPOMHMs, POSS and hybrid foams) and related new processes (TPA). 
6.1 New hybrid porous materials

6.1.1 Periodically organized mesoporous hybrid materials (POMHM). 
The synergetic coupling between soft matter physical-chemistry and hybrid sol–gel chemistry has opened new avenues for advanced materials research. Hybrid Periodically Organized Mesoporous Thin Films (HPOMTF) or Aerosol Processed Periodically Organized Mesoporous Hybrid Materials (APPOMHM) are synthesized viasurfactant templated growth of inorganic or hybrid polycondensates. An exhaustive description of all the periodically organized mesoporous materials obtained as powders, thin films or as aerosol processed materials is beyond of the scope of this article, and the reader is referred to some recent reviews.52,130,443
In summary, HPOMTF and APPOMHM are processed using two main approaches: evaporation induced self-assembly (EISA), and evaporation induced micelle packing (EIMP). These mechanisms are based on cooperative self-assembly, in which surfactant molecules or already formed stable micelle sol–gel derived oxo-polymers combine in a first step to form hybrid intermediate entities that behave as independent composite hybrid species. These hybrid species are composed of oligomeric building blocks that associate with the amphiphilic component. The general pathway to synthesize HPOMTF and APPOMHM follows route B of Fig. 3. The class II hybridization of the final material can be accomplished directly via one pot synthesis using organically modified alkoxysilanes or alkoxystannanes (R′nSi(OR)4−n, R′nSn(X)4−n, or bridged precursors of silsesquioxanes X3Si–R′–SiX3, bridged stannanes X3Sn–R′–SnX3) as precursors or in a subsequent post grafting step. In this latter case, the porous inorganic surface is organically functionalized through chemical grafting of organoalkoxysilanes or complexing organic molecules or macromolecules. The nature of the grafting group and of the property carrier function must be selected to match the chemical composition of the inorganic wall and the targeted application, respectively. Another strategy that can be very convenient to functionalise HPOMTF or APPOMHM with fragile, less common or expansive organic or bio functionalities consists in the synthesis of HPOMTF and APPOMHM containing reactive organic function (amino, thiol, isocyanate, acid …) as anchoring sites. In a second step a high yield coupling organic reaction can be performed (amide, imine, ureido, click chemistry based reactions…) allowing tailoring the HPOMTF and APPOMHM with the targeted new functionality. Both EISA and EIMP are compatible with chemical solution based techniques such as dip, spin, meniscus and spray coatings, aerosol processing…. All these processes are already commonly used in industries, scalable, environmentally benign, provide a fairly good control on the chemical state, are based on relatively low-cost chemicals and do not require expensive equipment.
In addition, polymers, latex beads, biomolecules, drugs, or nanoparticles can be easily dispersed within mesoporous inorganic or hybrid micronic, or submicronic, spheres by the spray-drying method in a “one-pot” preparation process. These materials exhibit functional hierarchical structures composed of several components with tuneable sizes. The control of particle localisation can be achieved through an adequate functionalisation of nanoparticles and accurate control of the spray-drying processing parameters. In contrast to the classical solution precipitation pathway, the aerosol process involves a very limited number of preparation steps, produces material continuously, allows for sampling a simple continuous collection of the powder and generates very low waste. Moreover, the physico-chemical quenching associated with droplet formation allows the “freezing” of materials into metastable states, which are hardly achievable by the usual precipitation method, because the condensation/dissolution equilibrium usually favours the formation of the thermodynamically stable product.444 This “freezing” strategy is not solely limited to the synthesis of supports for catalysts but is already employed for the synthesis of new bioceramics and therapeutic vectors, carrying several independent or complementary functions.284,445,272–274 Moreover, the recent development of robotic engineered aerosol writing allows the micro patterning of inorganic, organic or nanocomposite “ink” materials on arbitrary surfaces. Wherein it opens a land of new possibilities for the design of hierarchically patterned porous coatings and membranes (Fig. 25).144,438,446
On the other hand, the organized confined structure provided by these mesoporous materials (processed as powders or films) is currently used to study the growth of polymers by ATRP using grafting from or grafting to strategies.268,271,286,447–450 The impetus behind such research is the design of new mesoporous hosts bearing polymeric nanovalves that can be thermally or chemically (pH, solvent) controlled for use as smart carriers for controlled delivery systems. Much interesting work has been developed in the area of biomaterials:252,263,264,276,334,451,268–271 biocarriers for the controlled release of drugs, new materials for implants, multifunctional carriers associating hyperthermia treatments, controlled release of active components and targeting and imaging, via enhanced contrast MRI of tumors. APPOMHM biohybrids able to performed endocytosis and targeting have been recently reported by Brinker et al. and new drug delivery carriers based on inorganic or hybrid mesoporous hosts loaded with different drugs are currently being investigated by many groups.452–454 HPOMTFs in principle can also be interesting as medical or cosmetic patches. These few examples represent just some of the relevant aspects of mesoporous materials based research for biomedical applications.
Another major recent advance in the field concerns the synthesis of functional porous mono- and multi-layer devices with different chemical compositions. Recently, the creation of porous nanoperforated membranes allowing full access to their substrate (which can be dielectric, insulator, conductor, semiconductor, or metallic) through the non interconnected nanoperforations have been reported. The difference in the chemical affinities between the accessible substrate area (bottom of the perforations) and the inorganic continuous network (surrounding the perforations) offer a possibility for selective local functionalisation of both phases. These heterogeneous nanostructured surfaces can be seen as tailor-made nano-patterned hybrids and composites on top of which local chemical growth of functional objects is possible. Moreover, this allows, in a second step, to address and selectively locate organic or bio functionalities. This area concerning porous nanoperforated membranes is still in its infancy, but there is no doubt that major developments, involving such novel surfaces as nanostructured substrates, for sensing, biosensing, magnetic or optical memories, multiferroic coatings, nanofluidic devices are being developed now.
Today, all these hybrid mesoporous materials processed as films or micronic or submicronic powders are a very promising family of advanced materials for future applications including: micro-optics and photonic devices, microelectronics, nano-ionics and energy, environment, functional and protective coatings, catalysis and adsorption applications, chromatography, biomaterials, environmentally responsive materials, and biomicrofluidics among others.


6.1.2 Metal organic frameworks (MOFs): promising hybrid porous solids. 
Functional hybrid assemblies with infinite one-, two-, and three-dimensional network structures built from metallic centers or metallic based clusters (mainly metal-oxo and/or metal hydroxo clusters) cross-linked via di- or poly-topic ligands are named ‘‘coordination polymers’’ or “Metal Organic Frameworks” (MOFs).455 The reported polytopic organic linkers that can be flexible or rigid are mainly polycarboxylates, polyphosphonates, polyamines, imidazolates, polypyridines, polycyanolinkers, bis or tris(1,2,3-triazol-1-yl) derived ligands and allied nitrogen donor polyfunctionalized ligands. Most reported MOFs are built with divalent or trivalent metallic centers (among them Cu(II), Zn(II), Ni(II), Pd(II)…, Cr(III), Fe(III), Al(III), Ln(III)…) while fewer MOFs based on metals with higher oxidation states have been reported.455
Conceptually, the early stages of research and development of the field corresponding to coordination polymers started in the 1960’s and 1970’s with the work of Tomic,456 Biondi,457 and Carraher.458 However, the concept of scaffold-like O–I material was pioneered by Robson in 1990459 and at the end of the 1990’s this field of research exploded under the strong motivation of the groups of Férey,53–60 Kitagawa,61–63 and Yaghi64–70 that convinced a large community of chemists of the important scientific and applied interest held by this new generation of crystalline nanoporous MOFs. In the last ten years, more than 15000 articles using the concept of MOFs or coordination polymers have been reported.460 Numerous excellent reviews on MOFs have been recently written and the 2009 Chem Soc Rev themed issue totally devoted to MOFs99,53–70,455,461–463 underline the important scientific impact of this research field. In fact, these MOFs type hybrid materials not only present, compared to other porous solids, an important chemical versatility and tuneable nanoporosity but also they can be produced as robust solids with high thermal and mechanical stability. Interestingly, two very important differences characterise some MOFs with respect to other porous materials, zeolites, metal oxides, carbons:
(i) Some MOFs are known to exhibit high framework flexibility and shrinkage–expansion phenomena associated with interactions with guest molecules;
(ii) The lack of non-accessible bulk volume.
These novel and unique characteristics (world record in surface area (4500 m2 g−1 for MOF177,68 ultimate porosity with no blocked volume in the solid, combined flexible and robust frameworks (MIL53 and MIL88),58 full-exposure to metal sites, high dynamic of guest species in a highly regular nanoporous network) associated with the fast growing number of MOFs with new chemical compositions render MOFs interesting in applications such as liquid adsorbers, gas storage, gas purification and gas separation, catalysis, drug release, magnetic and optical devices, nanoreactors and nanomolds for applied physics, and sensors. For more than five years, BASF has reproducibly scaled up MOF synthetic protocols at the barrel pilot level (about 100 kg of MOF per day) (Fig. 25). These industrial MOF powders can be easily shaped into industrially widespread bodies such as mm sized tablets, extrudates, honeycombs… Some of them as Al-terephthalate, Cu-benzenetricarboxylate, Fe-benzenetricarboxylate, Zn-2-methylimidazole and Mg-formates are sold by Sigma Aldrich as BASOLITE: A100, C300, F300, Z1200 and BASOLITE M050 respectively.440 MOFs have clearly emerged as a fascinating class of porous materials due to their potential applications in various domains related to the environment, energy, health and nanosciences ….455 Recent developments concerning the realisation of organic polymerization reactions within the nanochannels of porous coordination polymers demonstrate that MOFs can be utilized for tailored polymer synthesis and specific polymer confinement.63 This work opened new avenues for the rational design of MOF–polymer nanohybrids and their processing. Therefore numerous fascinating properties and applications can also be expected from these new hybrid nanocomposites. MOFs or coordination polymers are definitely promising materials with expected but not yet materialized for larger applications.440,460,464,465 Because the application and shaping of MOFs are strongly related, there is a split in the following short summary on MOF properties and their potential applications into two parts: (a) MOF powders, monoliths and other shaped bodies; (b) Films and coatings based on MOFs.
6.1.2.1 MOF powders, monoliths and other shaped bodies. 
Today, gas purification, gas separation, reversible gas storage and heterogeneous catalysis are promising research and development areas for which MOF powders could yield applications within a relatively short term.56,440,460,464–466

Gas 
purification
               is a possible field where MOFs can be beneficially used. In particular, the removal of ppm-traces of sulfur components from various gases by MOFs was experimentally evaluated by BASF researchers.464 They have performed successfully in the removal of tetrahydrothiophene (THT) from natural gas, at room temperature, in continuous breakthrough trials by using copper carboxylate Cu-BTC-EMOF. The overall capacity of the MOF outperformed, by one order of magnitude, commercially available activated carbon materials as adsorbents, namely Norit (type RB4) and CarboTech (type C38/4).464
MOFs were also evaluated by BASF researchers in gas separation processes. The separation of Kr–Xe by pressure swing adsorption, as well as the purification of methane in natural gas, were piloted successfully on MOF-adsorbents.440,460,464,465 Interestingly, small-pore MOFs (Basolite M050) show a preferential adsorption of hydrogen over nitrogen allowing separation of both components. CO2 separation is of great interest due to the awareness of global warming over the past years. MOF adsorbents, such as MIL-53(Cr), can efficiently physically adsorb CO2 but they need a higher CO2 partial pressure than those usually found in the streams emitted by fossil fuel burning power plants (60–130 mbar) to reach sufficient adsorption capacities.440,460,464,465 This shows that MOFs currently can be effectively used in CO2 separation at room temperature but only at high pressure.464 Today, the chemical trapping of CO2 by scrubbing with amines is still the selected industrial solution.

Gas 
Storage
               (H2, CO2, CH4) based on the porosity and zeolitic behaviour of MOFs is one of the most highlighted application-oriented works in the field of MOFs. The storage of gaseous hydrogen is a crucial aspect for fuel cells in mobile applications. Because of their high porosity and large specific surface area MOFs have raised some hopes as potential hydrogen storage media. MOFs store hydrogen by physisorption and therefore the low H2–MOFs binding energy (4–8 kJ mol−1) requires cooling to liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K) for an efficient storage of hydrogen. Compared to covalent hydrogen storage media, metal hydride MOFs require little thermal energy for the hydrogen release. Many MOFs are investigated for hydrogen storage. However, even if high hydrogen uptakes of about 7.5%wt at 77 K under pressure of 70 bars have been reported for MOF-177,69 these temperature and pressure conditions of storage limit the birth of real applications in car fuel cells. Today, the tendency is to use the structural richness and chemical versatility of MOFs to improve the H2–MOFs binding energy. Theoretical estimates suggest an optimal binding energy of about 15 kJ mol−1 to store hydrogen at room temperature and pressures between 1.5 and 20 bars.460,467 Highly attractive and flexible MOFs could be good candidates for room temperature hydrogen storage. In this context, biomimetic approaches are also very promising. It is worth mentioning the materials based on Co4(μ4-O)(carboxylate)4 units whose structure is closely related to the one of the active centres in iron haemoglobin. They allow for an efficient improvement in the H2-solid sorption enthalpies up to 10 kJ mol−1.468 In these materials, very high enthalpies have also been reported for O2, CO and CH4.
The limitation in working temperature generally observed for hydrogen adsorption does not occur for other strategic gases such as CO2, methane and small hydrocarbons such as ethylene, which exhibit interesting performances at room temperature and above. In a general way, methane is less adsorbed than CO2 and it seems that this difference in adsorption is due to specific interactions with adsorbents associated with the existence of a large quadrupolar moment for CO2 which does not exist with CH4. The currently reported best adsorbers are MOF-177 (SSA: 4500 m2 g−1, 11 and 17 Å pore diameters)70 and MIL-101 (SSA: 5900 m2 g−1, 29 and 34 Å pore diameters)58 which correspond to the porous solids with the largest pores ever evidenced. They can adsorb more than 30 mmol g−1 of CO2 at pressures higher than 16 bars that corresponds to ten times the amount of pure CO2 in a container at the same pressure.56 It was also demonstrated that the MOF of composition 3D-[Mg2(μ8-dot)(H2O)2] (dot = 2,5-dioxidoterephthalate) was able to filter and retain only the CO2 (sorption capacity of 89 g kg−1) out of a mixture of 20% CO2 and 80% CH4 under pressure. This MOF released 90% of the trapped CO2 under ambient conditions of temperature and pressure.
Concerning methane storage, promising results have also been obtained with the porous MOF 3D-[Cu(μ-SiF6)(4,4′-bipy)2]·8H2O which is stable even after removal of water molecules of crystallization. Adsorption experiments with methane indicated that above a pressure of 5 bars this MOF can take up significantly more methane than zeolite 5A, which has the highest methane adsorption capacity of all zeolites.469 This promising field is moving very fast as illustrated by the exceptionally high uptakes of acetylene reported by Kitagawa's group with the MOFs Cu2(pzdc)2(pyz), (pzdc is pyrazine-2,3-dicarboxylate and pyz is pyrazine). The reported values permit the stable storage of acetylene at a density of 200 times the safe compression limit of free acetylene at room temperature. These values are clearly exceeding the packing density usually obtained in today's storage devices.470
The proposition that MOFs can act as catalysts was also made 20 years ago by Robson459 and was experimentally demonstrated in 1994.471 In principle, MOFs can be very versatile catalysts with tailorable structures and chemical compositions.61 They can work as catalysts through (i) coordinatively unsaturated metal centers, (ii) the reactivity of ligands functionalized with organic groups, (iii) the inclusion of metal-complexes or metallic NPs in the pores, (iv) post synthesis modification. After an incubation period where the intensive developments of MOF structural chemistry allow to fix the basic concepts of MOFs science, the catalytic properties of MOFs started to be experimentally explored by numerous research groups. An exhaustive description of all the work performed on MOFs or coordination polymers acting as catalysts is beyond of the scope of this article, and the reader is referred to some recent excellent reviews by Hupp and co-workers, Ding and colleagues, Lin and co-workers and a few others.99,440,461–463,472–474 As reported by Janiak,460 advantages of MOFs as catalysts are seen in the easy separation of a heterogeneous catalyst, the tailoring of the pore size to yield selectivity, regioselectivity and/or shape and size selectivity by creating an appropriate environment around the catalytic centre in the restricted space available. Incorporating, locking and shielding the active sites into a protective solid framework as in enzymes might prevent chemical and practical problems that are associated with catalyst degradation and product/catalyst separation known in homogeneous systems. Today, many catalytic reactions (enantioselective olefin epoxidation, enantioselective addition, cyanosilylation, alkylation and acetalization of aldehydes, Heck or Suzuki C–C coupling, oxidation reactions of olefins, polyphenols, sulfides, alkanes, alcohols, oxidation to CO2, Knoevenagel condensation, epoxidation of olefins, ring opening and methanolysis of epoxides, cycloadditions, transesterification, Friedel–Crafts alkylations, reduction of nitroaromatics, NO decomposition and NO reduction, photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes, polymerisation reactions such as Ring Opening Polymerisation of cyclic esters, radical polymerisation of styrene, acetyleneetc.) have been tested with MOFs and numerous concepts have been demonstrated.61,460,464,472–474 Among them: enantioselective catalysis, substrate-size-selective catalysis, heterogenisation of structurally well-defined homogeneous catalysts, stabilization through inclusion of fragile catalytic species, framework-encapsulation of molecular and nanoparticular catalysts, demonstration of the possibilities offered by catalysis by using the inorganic crosslinking components as catalysts, post-synthesis modification of the MOF to yield a new catalyst, catalysis-chemical separation coupled systems….460,472–474
However, today the MOF-based catalysis area is still in its adolescent growth period. Current research is now dedicated to find out if the metal centres, the ligands or functionalised ligands, or even metal–ligand interactions or differences in particle size may cause unusual catalytic properties that fully exploit the remarkable features of MOFs to accomplish unique catalytic reactions. Confinement-driven reactivity, cascading reactions, polyheterometallic MOFs for multi-catalysis, creation of hybrid pockets to think of catalytic MOFs as analogues of enzymes are a few issues that deserve to be explored.460,474 Last, but not least, the actual use of MOF catalysts in the applied world should be checked in all interesting cases that MOFs can compete in price with well-known heterogeneous industrial catalysts. Beyond activity and selectivity, also the questions of time-on-stream behaviour and leaching stability will be crucial.440
6.1.2.2 Films and coatings based on MOFs. 
Because of their defined and tuneable porosity and chemical functionality that can be combined with their novel and unique characteristics (as for example their dynamic porous properties) MOFs processed as homogeneous nanoporous films or coatings would open new areas for applications. Separation (smart polyfunctional membranes), protection, highly selective gas or fluid sensors, controlled release of drug or cosmetics, magnetic and optical coatings, electrochemical devices (highly sensitive sensors, micro-systems based electrodes for energy storage and conversion …), microelectronics, catalytic coatings, 2D chromatography represent a few application domains which can potentially be targeted through the fabrication of MOF based films. Since 2005, only a few groups have been studying the processing of thin films of MOFs.475–491 As reviewed by Fischer et al.476 MOF films can be processed via three different strategies:

(i) The most often used is the direct growth/deposition from solvothermal mother solutions on alumina, silica, silicon coatings, carbon substrates or SAM modified substrates which yield more or less densely packed films of intergrown micronic sized crystallites. Following this route Liu et al. reported the processing of a continuous and well-intergrown MOF-5 membrane, on porous α-alumina substrates by in situsolvothermal synthesis.485 J. T. Hupp et al.491 described recently selective MOF (ZIF-8) sensors for chemical vapors and gases, based on Fabry-Pérot devices built from thin-film obtained simply by immersing glass or silicon slides in a freshly prepared methanolic solution of 2-methylimidazole and Zn(NO3)2 at room temperature. Highly responsive, reversible sensors, selective to water and methanol, based on a stress-induced chemical detection using MOF thin films (MOF is HKUST-1) integrated within a microcantilever surface were recently reported.486,492
However, in many cases the direct nucleation of MOFs on non-modified metal oxide and graphite supports can be inhibited. Fischer and co-workers477 developed a smart approach based on the known property of SAMs to direct the nucleation and growth of zeolites.493 It was the first example of deposition of MOFs on substrates modified by self-assembled organic monolayers. By immersion of a carboxylate functionalized SAM-modified Au substrates into a preconditioned, supersaturated mother solution they obtained homogeneous films in a highly oriented fashion composed of well-shaped micronic MOF-5.477 Following a similar strategy, Bein and co-workers481,487 prepared a porous copper carboxylate (HKUST-1) on different functionalized self-assembled monolayers through oriented growth.

(ii) The second method consists of a stepwise layer-by-layer growth onto the substrate. This process for growing of MOF layers via liquid epitaxy was first introduced by Fischer et al.480,494 It is based on the combination of the different reaction components (metallic precursors, polytopic ligands) in a sequential, stepwise fashion. At each individual step, unreacted components are removed viasolvent washing. Recently, Makiura et al.495 reported the rational assembly of ultrathin films of preferentially oriented MOF consisting of metalloporphyrin building units via a layer-by-layer growth technique coupled with the Langmuir–Blodgett method. This elegant method allows not only the fabrication of homogeneous films in a highly oriented fashion but it also offers new or complementary prospects to study the kinetics and mechanism of MOF formation.496,497 However, because it is based on a stepwise layer-by-layer growth and therefore it requires time, self-assembled monolayer (SAM) substrates and a long repetitive process of immersion/washing cycles, in term of applications this method will be likely devoted to specific high added value devices.

(iii) The third method corresponds to the assembly of preformed MOF nanocrystals with controlled size and shape. It is a fast and simple technique for the development of MOF thin films of optical quality, based on chemical solution deposition methods (dip-coating, spray coatingetc…). This route offers several advantages, such as the control of the particle size for a better diffusion of adsorbed molecules and the presence of an intergranular mesoporosity for multi-pore size film systems. Moreover, chemical solution deposition methods are quite mature processing techniques already used in industry which should provide the ability to control the arrangements of channels of porous modules for various nanodevices. Homogeneous high optical quality thin films of the flexible iron muconate MIL-89, with the reversible breathing of the films upon water vapor adsorption, were recently reported.489 This strategy has been extended to the processing of high optical quality thin films of MIL-101(Cr)488 or ZIF-8490 with tuneable thickness (40 nm to 1 mm) and a dual hierarchical porous network. These latter films present a selective adsorption of isopropanolversuswater that make them interesting candidates for sensing applications. As far as sensors are concerned in the future, there is the possibility for development in dip-coated thin films from luminescent MOF nanoparticles.492 This method also needs the synthesis of stable colloidal solutions of well-calibrated MOF nanoparticles. Colloidal sols of MOFs have been obtained via inhibited growth by using mixtures of monofunctional and polyfunctional ligands,489 and careful control of the nucleation step (microwave assisted synthesis) combined with electrostatic stabilisation due to the formation of charged MOF nanoparticles.488 However, despite the mushrooming number of articles concerning MOFs and coordination polymers (more than 5500 references in the last two years),460 only very little work has been undertaken on the synthesis of colloidal sols of MOF nanoparticles.498,488–490 Some of the very limited research results in this area were reviewed by Spokoyny.498 These studies that concern the preparation of size, shape and surface functionalized MOF nanocrystals or colloids merit to be strengthened not only because they open a gate for the easy preparation of porous optical films but also because they clearly represent an important new academic challenge in the construction of MOF based materials and devices based on selective wells, wires, rods and nano-dots.476 A recent beautiful example reported by Férey et al.499 concerns the synthesis of nanoscale porous MOF carriers (from MIL families) as potential platforms for drug delivery and imaging. Specific highly loaded non-toxic porous iron(III)-based metal–organic frameworks with engineered cores and surfaces, as well as imaging properties, which function as superior nanocarriers for efficient controlled delivery of challenging antitumour and retroviral drugs (such as busulfan, azidothymidine triphosphate, doxorubicin or cidofovir) against cancer and AIDS, were reported. The release of the drug from the MIL container was detectable after 30 min of an in vivo intravenous administration in rats and could last for 14 days. The storage capacity depended on the pore size, pore functionalization and the MIL-particle size. For example, 40 mass% of doxorubicin could be stored in (aminoterephthalato)iron(III) (MIL-101-NH2). Moreover, these polyfunctional MOF based carriers potentially associate therapeutics and diagnostics, opening the way for personalized patient treatments.499 Core–shell MOF–silica luminescent nanocarriers for cancer imaging and therapy were also reported in the past years.500 A thin silica shell protects from hydrolysis the nanocore made of a MOF built from terbium ion nodes and cis, cis, trans- (diammine-dichloro-disuccinato)platinum(IV) bridging metallo-ligands. The silica shell plays two other roles. It allows, via its tuneable thickness, to control the release of the Pt(IV) ligands which then convert into antitumor active Pt(II) species inside the cells. Also, it allows to improve cancer cell selectivity via the grafting of an external cyclic pentapeptide known to coax cancer cells to take the peptideviaendocytosis.500 The fabrication of MOF nanoparticles and their associated properties and applications are just in their infancy. Most of the confines are still unexplored, thus still allowing the chemists many gaps and borders to soon fill.


6.1.3 3D meso-macro cellular hybrid foams. 
The construction of porous materials exhibiting complex hierarchical structures is a particularly interesting challenge for materials chemists. Materials expressing multimodal or multiscale porosity are of major interest in particular areas of catalysis, membranes and separation based processes where optimization of the diffusion and confinement regimes are required. While micro- and mesopores provide the size and shape selectivity for the guest molecules, governing the host–guest interactions, the presence of macroporous channels can facilitate access to these active site regions, avoiding pore blocking by reagents or products, improving transport, and reducing residence times which can lead to coking or other deleterious secondary reactions. As such, the design of porous materials having multimodal porosity will allow the development of innovative advanced materials with promising applications in many fields: chromatography, membranes and smart coatings, catalysis, photovoltaic and fuel cells, sensors and biosensors…
One way to obtain 3D mesomacrocellular hybrid materials consists of the use of either direct concentrated aqueous emulsions,501surfactant/colloids stabilized aqueous emulsions502,503 or through gas foaming processes combined with sol–gel chemistry.435,504–507 An original approach to hierarchically structured inorganic and hybrid materials was recently developed by R. Backov et al.437,442,508 who combined controlled polymerisation of metal alkoxide precursors with emulsion and lyotropic mesophases templating modes. The general aim was to develop a new process for obtaining inorganic and hybrid macrocellular silica monoliths with a good control over the final macroscopic cell sizes and morphologies by tuning the oil volume fraction of the starting emulsion. This new series of inorganic or hybrid silica porous networks were labelled Si(HIPE) or organo-Si(HIPE) respectively (Fig. 25), in reference to the first generation of porous organic polymers obtained through the use of concentrated reverse emulsions, known under the name “polymerized High Internal Phase Emulsion”.509–512 This new class of grafted organo-Si(HIPE) are robust centimetric monoliths with both macroporous and mesoporous highly interconnected networks. This family of functional 3D monolithic foams was first tested in the fields of catalysis and adsorption. Organo-Si(HIPE) loaded with internal palladium particles via heterogeneous nucleation offer good turnovers and cycling performances. For instance, the Pd@mercapto-Si(HIPE) matrix allows for 96% of Heck coupling catalysis yield during seven cycling tests. The Pd/iodobenzene molar ratio was settled at 0.004 and 0.002. The turnover number (TON) and turnover frequency (TOF) addressed with these new monolith catalysts are reaching values comparable with ones obtained with powdered commercial catalysts. Considering the fact that the catalysts in use are not powders but rather monoliths bearing hierarchical porosities, the series of Pd@organo-Si(HIPE) compounds combine heterogeneous catalysis efficiency and facile recyclability as catalyzed species and catalyst supports can be easily separated by a simple removal of either the monolith or the solution from the reaction media.
Also, organosilica-based hybrid monoliths exhibiting a hierarchically structured bimodal porous structure with grafted chelating functionality (malonamide, benzoylacetylacetone) can be efficiently loaded with lanthanides to give Eu3+@γ-malonamide-Si(HIPE) and Eu3+@β-diketone-Si(HIPE) hybrid foams. Optical properties of these versatile materials with macro- and microporosity have been addressed throughout their absorption and emission spectra along with their relaxation luminescence properties. Eu3+ containing Organo-Si(HIPE) materials are strongly luminescent foams. This new class of foams clearly opens a land of opportunities for the development of promising applications in catalysis, optics, sensors, chromatographic supports, and so forth. Recently, highly performing new biocatalysts based on hybrid foams have been reported.311 Using selected hybrid foams as hosts, the first lipase@Glymo-Si(HIPE) hybrid macrocellular biocatalysts, where immobilization of crude enzymes is optimized, while circumventing the reactants’ low kinetic diffusion, by the use of silica macroporous hosts were obtained. As a direct consequence, these new hybrid biocatalysts displayed unprecedented cycling catalysis performance, as demonstrated by the syntheses of butyloleate ester (used as bio-diesel lubricant), hydrolysis of linoleic-glycero ester derivatives (end products used for detergent and soap generations) and transesterification (reaction involved in the synthesis of low viscosity bio-diesel). Considering that the catalytic performances are given in terms of absolute conversion percentage and not just relative enzyme activity, the enzyme@Glymo-Si(HIPE) hybrid macrocellular biocatalysts presented in this study display high yield cycling catalysis performances, where turnover numbers (TON) and turnover frequencies (TOF) show promise for real industrial applications. This study can be considered as a milestone for enzyme-based heterogeneous catalyses, thereby enhancing their competitiveness with the supported-catalysts commonly used in industry, in total agreement with current sustainable development issues. Also, these new macrocellular biocatalysts are well suited for large scale industrial production due to their above-mentioned performance characteristics, their easy processing and further enhanced by their net-shapable monolithic character, allowing ease of separation of the catalysts from other reaction components. Beyond, several promising developments of hybrid foams associated with the field of materials dedicated either to energy, sustainable chemistry and biomass valorisation are under investigations.311,441,513–515

6.2 
          Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS)

Polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS®) chemistry has been extensively studied by Hoebbel, Feher, Agaskar, Laine, Lichtenhan, Haddad and others.38–47 Most POSS are commercially available from the Hybrid Plastics company (http://www.hybridplastics.com/) and today there are potentially an unlimited number of POSS® variants known. The basic POSS structure corresponds to a cage of molecular silica comprised of 8 silicon atoms linked together with oxygen atoms. At each of the 8 corners is a substituent which can be just about any chemical group R known in organic chemistry (R can be alkyls, olefins, alcohols, esters, anhydrides, acids, amines, imides, epoxies, thiols, sulfonates, fluoroalkyls, silanols, siloxides….). Moreover POMS® where a metal is incorporated into the cage structure present also interesting properties for catalysis and related fields. POSS® are used to impart improved or unique properties to thermoplastics, thermosets, elastomers and coatings. POSS consumers belong mainly to aerospace, biological, pharmaceutical, agricultural, transportation, and construction industries. Indeed, POSS enters in the formulation of thermosetting resins for coatings, adhesives, and composites. The excellent transferability and dispersability of tailored functional POSS yield a strong nanoreinforcement in thermoset resins based and other composites based on common polymers as with for example Polyphenylene Oxide (PPE), Cyclic Olefin Copolymers, Polypropylene, Polyamide. The reinforcement provided by POSS is highly pertinent in food packaging. POSS Nanoreinforced® Polyamide 6 can meet challenges needed for sausage casing applications and provide additional benefits.516 The resulting packaging exhibits good permeation to CO2 and smoke while providing some barrier to water. Moreover the increase in the shelf life of the product, up to 20 days without refrigeration, and an increase in hydrophobicity that eliminates the need for drying PA before processing were observed. Additionally, the reduced viscosity allows higher throughput of material and lowers production costs. Better clarity and surface of film, better printability, were also obtained. Finally an increased temperature resistance of the resulting hybrids allows for pasteurization and sterilization higher yield of film per kilogram of resin relative to cellulose. POSS® Chemicals and formulated materials are also used in electronics applications as Electronic Hardening Materials, Ultra Low k Materials, sensors (detection based on SAW or Fluorescence), Light Emitting Polymers. For example two-photon fluorophoric sensor groups have been placed on POSS® cages and used in remote detection. These fluorophores change their wavelength of emission in response to their chemical environment, and a set or array of these POSS® compounds can generate a unique fingerprint for a given analyte in solution, on surfaces or in cloud form. The array can be remotely interrogated by an ultrafast infrared laser, and can send information back to a remote fluorimeter. POSS® cages have been placed on ends of semiconducting polymers. Compared with the corresponding parent polymers the POSS® anchored systems have improved thermal stability, identical absorption and photoluminescent properties in solution and as thin films. Devices made from them exhibit higher brightness and higher external quantum efficiency. POMS® and the corresponding powders (Polyhedral Oligomeric Metallo-Silsesquioxane) show many interesting properties, including as polymerization catalysts, radiation shields, light emitters, and more. Aluminium based POMS® catalyst for epoxy and bismaleimide cure, tin based POMS® catalyst for polyurethane cure are well developed examples. POSS are very useful in biomedical applications not only as components in dentistry fillers but also to improve film biocompatibility in poly(carbonate urea) urethane copolymer based nanocomposites. POSS® copolymers can also be tailored to mimic real body tissues.
6.3 TPA processed hybrids
As shown in part 4.1, inorganic–organic hybrid polymers can be polymerized with femtosecond laser pulses, making use of two-photon absorption (TPA) processes to write waveguides in opto electronic circuit boards. The materials are obtained via controlled polycondensation reactions, using organosilanes functionalised with typically (oligo-) methacryl and styryl moieties. The resulting materials can be patterned by a two-photon absorption method which allows one to directly write arbitrary complex structures in three dimensions into the photosensitive hybrid polymer material with a high resolution (resolution is only limited by the voxels of given final optics, at the moment around 100 nm). Among the structures already generated by TPA are photonic crystals517 or mechanical devices such as oscillators or gear wheels and teeth. ORMOCER®s attract considerable attention for optical (microoptics, waveguides) or microelectronic (dielectrics, passivation) applications because their physical and chemical properties can be tailored. One striking property provided by TPA is to fabricate 3D objects monitored by a computer model. Examples are statues, photonic crystals or life science applications which are shown in Fig. 25. This technology is very interesting because it is not only limited to the mm-scale, but can also be extended down to the 200 nm-scale routinely. Moreover it allows fabricating hybrid nano- and microstructures with a high surface quality. There are two major advantages of ORMOCER® formulations compared to conventional organic polymer materials. Hybrids present a better surface quality (the rms roughness is very low, down to less than a few nanometres resulting from their small oligomer units), a high mechanical stability and a high chemical stability allowing washing out of unexposed parts without uptake of solvent and changing precision of structure because of swelling. Besides these advantages, the low optical loss of the material in the visible and the near-infrared wavelength regime combined with the TPA technology provides an attractive opportunity for the fabrication of micro- and integrated optical components and devices such as microlenses, couplers and single- or multimode optical waveguides or multiplexers. In order to fabricate highly sophisticated optical devices, novel concepts for the manipulation of photons have to be developed as well as suitable processing technologies and materials have to be made available. A new class of optical structures or materials, respectively, are photonic crystals which, similar to electronic semiconductors, have a (partial) bandgap. The lattice constant of these structures is in the same order of magnitude as the wavelength of the light. Today, the fabrication of 3D bandgap structures is still in its infancy. TPA coupled with hybrid chemistry allows to efficiently fabricate ‘‘photonic crystal’’ structures in the order of a few minutes. In the example given in Fig. 25, the “photonic crystal” structure is built up from rods with diameters of about 200 nm and spacing distances of 450 nm. Moreover, besides its flexibility in dimensionality, TPA also offers the possibility to tune the location of defects at specific levels within the photonic structure allowing more versatility in the optical design. Further materials development for high refractive hybrids e.g. for metamaterials is currently in progress. This research area is very promising, TPA resolution is improving. Today, it is about 100–200 nm but 100 nm dimensions are expected soon. There is no doubt that major developments, involving such 2D and 3D nanopatterned hybrid materials, will appear in the near future.
7. Hybrid materials market: trends and stakes
The appropriate use of chemistry will enable countries to become safer, resourceful and thus more sustainable. This requires break-through innovations within laboratories and throughout in various successful chemical industries. For this purpose, developing new materials for the automotive industry to address weight reduction, reduce CO2 and NOx emissions and to assure a greener development, is for example a key issue. Other examples in parallel to the latter include new ultra-light hybrid materials reducing aircraft weight, fuel consumption and operating costs, or new surface coatings reducing friction (electroconductive coatings, self-cleaning or anti-icing surfaces). Also, energy efficiency and renewable energy are said to be the two pillars of sustainable energy policy in which hybrid materials will play a major role. Amongst the sources of energy, solar energy is the most widely available; wherein if it were possible to capture less than 0.02%, this amount would suffice for the world's current energy needs. Noticeably, solar energy has garnered the most interest for harvesting its source of energy with an annual average growth of 35% over the past few years by such global investors as Japan, Europe, China, U.S. and India. Yet, barriers to further solar generation include the high price of making solar cells, reliance on weather patterns and cultural acceptance. Along the same lines, the requirements to continually develop hybrid or organic photovoltaics (OPV) technology in the future will include improved and novel p-type/n-type materials, flexible products, roll-to-roll manufacturing processes to reduce costs to 0.5 €/Wp, solar efficiency over 10% and lifetime over 10000 h.
Other areas, such as energy storage, are impacted with the new innovations with hybrid materials with novel phase changing attributes that improve the current batteries with nanostructured electrodes, electrolytes and capacitance.
Another promising field is solid-state lighting where there is the need for more robust organic materials with better light and thermal stability. Such developments require unique new compositions, new functional and innovative structured materials and will be addressed with the “hybrid” approach.518
Figures for the advanced materials market indicate that the global market for “sol–gel”-like products in 2006 was $1 billion. This is forecasted to increase to $1.4 billion by 2011. In terms of market share, the U.S. has currently about 32% of the world market and is expected to increase this market share to 36% by 2011. Optical and electronic applications are the fastest growing market segments from 2006 to 2011, at an annual average growth rate ranging from 12% to 15%.214
In regards to the importance of hybrid nanocomposites, the total revenues from nanoparticles used in polymer-based nanocomposites was $33.7 million in 2006. Due to their very high aspect ratio and requirement of low loadings, this quite small base of revenue represent volumes of 33 kt in 2006. A revenue growth rate of more than 20% is expected every year reaching 25% in 2013 totalling $144.6 million.519
The last few years have seen an important shift in the nanocomposite world market; there has been a large impetus to solve problems in the mass production of nanoparticles and compounds based on them, as well as generating favorable public opinion towards nanotechnology. Nonetheless, it is believed that the biggest threat with nanoparticulates is in the form of health and safety issues for handling nano-based materials. Specific attention is being paid towards education, knowledge and devising safer production routes and uses of “nanos”. Most of the key players in industry together with their research partners are investigating and providing adequate investments to steadily improve the quality of their products in case of health issues (whether or not there is an apparent need). All major countries have set large budgets to test and improve safety and avoid misuse of nano-particles.
8. Conclusions
Many advanced hybrid O–I materials, synthesized via the “chimie douce” route are at the cross-roads of inorganic chemistry, polymer chemistry, organic chemistry, and biology. Functional hybrid organic– (bio–) inorganic materials truly represent a multidisciplinary area where both academic and application-driven research has exploded in the last two decades. Today, a multitude of functional hybrid materials span a very large set of structures, textures and chemical compositions. In addition to their high versatility with regard to shaping, and chemical and physical properties, hybrid nanocomposites present an obvious advantage of facilitating both integration and miniaturisation. They are thus serious candidates for numerous applications such as: smart coatings, functional and protective coatings, catalysis, sensing, photonic and microelectronic, nano-ionics and energy, membranes, biomaterials, catalysis, sensors, biology, medicine, biotechnology, and microfluidics devices…
The growth and importance of this multidisciplinary scientific domain can be illustrated by a respectable number of themed issues published in high impact journals and books. Additionally, a large number of international symposia and conferences have been and continue to be devoted to areas of research with hybrids.71Fig. 26 illustrates the evolution in the number of scientific articles (in blue) and patents (in orange) associated with the broad domain of hybrid materials including, O–I hybrid materials (organic including biologic), mixed O–I materials and compounds, O–I nanocomposites, bionanocomposites, nanobiomaterials, Ormocers, Ormosils, organometallic or metallo-organic coupling agents, coordination polymers, MOFs, etc.
 Fig. 26  Number of papers (ISI Web of KnowledgeSM) and WO patents (WIPO) that use the concept of “sol–gel derived hybrids”, “hybrid materials”, “O–I nanocomposite”, “bionanocomposite”, ormocers, ormosils, “coordination polymers” and “metal organic frameworks”. 
Since the early 1970’s, the academic interest in this diverse family of materials has been accelerating and since the 1990’s, it has become a fast-growing and very complex subject with an almost exponential growth in publications and patents yielding a continuously increasing number of both prototypes and real applications.
Today, hybrid materials present a much larger diversity and their strong applicative potential is clearly becoming a reality. Many hybrid materials have already entered the market or are very close to doing so. Several examples of “commercial hybrids” have been discussed in this non-exhaustive review but they only represent a small fraction of the tip of the iceberg. Some indications about the growing world market of hybrid materials are worthwhile to mention. Hybrid nanocomposites represent an important part of the activities in large companies such as Bayer, GE, Honeywell, BASF, AkzoNobel, Sumitomo, ASAHI Kasei, ASAHI Glass, Dow-Corning, as well as in more specialized enterprises (Henkel, Procter&Gamble, Wacker, Nissan Chemicals, Shin-Etsu, Toppan, Mitsubishi Chemicals, NEPES, Merck, MicroResistTechnologies…). These hybrid nanocomposites are mostly based on relatively cheap inorganic nanomaterials (clays, CNT, metal oxides, phosphates, carbonates) and synthetic polymers. Their commercial uses are mainly associated with the automotive industry, packaging, construction, textiles and recreational applications. Such works are still progressing and are the top in both figures: tons in production and budget.
Ormocers, including POSS derived materials, are clearly consolidating their diversified traditional markets (multifunctional, protective, decorative coatings, insulating hybrid aerogels, micro-optics, microelectronic, dentistry, batteries, solar cells….). Hybrids with multifunctional compositions and fabricated with modern processing techniques such as TPA, nano-imprinting, ink-jet and aerosol process, electrospinning, spraying and electrospraying… will open new windows to other important markets such as multifunctional coatings (scavenger layers, ultra barriers, colouring of food packages depending on detected problems), sensors and the next generation of display devices (AMOLED), photonic instead of electronic data-processing, flexible displays and solar cells as well as polymer electronic devices.
Further energy savings based on the next generation of lighting in addition to even more diversified and thinner components for mobile electronics can be developed, based on an improved integration into the level of electronic and photonic components and systems. Catalysis, cosmetics, nanopharmacy and nanomedicine are drastically investing in R&D programmes devoted to the development of new hybrid nanomaterials. Moreover, MOFs present many fascinating properties and, since being produced by BASF, are in their infancy of being applied into various applications (see Part 6.1).57,60,63,67,464,472,474,476,498,520
For the future, the control of the morphology (from the nano to the micrometre scales) incorporating several functionalities and perfectly controlling the concentrations and spatial dispersions can yield entirely new hybrid materials with not only original and complex architectures but also optimized properties and various roles. New synthetic approaches based on dynamic interactive hybrid systems are very promising. Dynamic selection can allow a given set of nano- or submicron objects (molecules, polymers, biomolecules, biopolymers, liposomes, enzymes and other biocomponents…), reversibly exchanging and continuously organizing at the nano- or macroscopic levels, to build self-optimized hybrid networks. This mode in assembling materials is a sort of biomimetic process that allows spatial/temporal and structural/functional adaptability in response to internal constitutional or to external stimulant factors. These integrative self-assembly based strategies will likely give rise to the birth of truly smart materials.
At the academic level, certain hybrid organic/inorganic systems and materials have already been designed, such as those concerning the sol–gel resolution of constitutional architectures from dynamic combinatorial libraries. Another example concerns the generation of dynamic hybrid materials and systems membranes able to evolve inside pore functional architectures via ionic stimuli, so as to improve membrane transport functions.521,522
Nowadays, biomimetic and bioinspiration are smart tools for the design of innovative materials and systems that are strongly inspiring the community of materials chemistry. Indeed, materials found in nature combined with many wonderful features such as sophistication, miniaturisation, hierarchical organisations, habitation, resistance and adaptability. A multidisciplinary approach towards building materials with reliability, efficiency and green principles is imperative. Bio-inspired strategies are included in a wider emerging new field coined “bio-inspired or integrative materials chemistry”.1,51,115,116,523–526 These strategies, based on a more precise encoding of chemical information, are in the process of giving birth to a new “vectorial chemistry” allowing the assembly of various building blocks (nanoparticles, clusters, hybrid nanocomposites) into increasingly complex hierarchical and functional architectures. This development will, without a doubt, one day open the door to even more innovative hybrid materials, fully recyclable, self-repairing or even self-replicating.
There is a strong wave of scientific and social thought and determination seeking a harmonisation between nature and human ingenuity. In this vein, materials and systems created by humans must become increasingly recyclable, environmentally friendly, energy efficient, reliable, and inexpensive. New green strategies to process hybrids in water using natural polymers and COV-free media are already being investigated at the academic level.
In this very active context, the emergence of the hybrid world within the domain of smart materials has already begun and its continued growth seems assured due to a number of easily identifiable factors. As an example can be mentioned the economic and technical limitations, which always crop up in current technology and which are contrasted by the inexhaustible abundance of hybrid structures with a near infinite continuum of properties.
At the same time, predictive approaches to guide our knowledge of the material landscape and tame this abundance will become more accessible due to the bridging of the chemical and physical disciplines, a trend that is now expanding to biology. These predictive approaches are strongly associated to the development of more systematic fundamental studies that will allow the characterisation of structure and dynamics of the hybrid interfaces or render it possible through monitoring and characterisation in real time all the formation steps from molecular precursors to the final materials. Such experiments are of paramount importance as they will lead to the complete knowledge and control of these complex materials for which the resultant optimised properties arise from efficient chemistry-processed coupling. This will allow predictive approaches to molecular engineering enabling hybrid materials to obtain full maturity, thus facilitating a more extended development at a larger industrial scale.
References

          S. Mann, Biomimetic Materials Chemistry, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1997 Search PubMed .

Clay Minerals and the Origin of Life, ed. A. G. Cairns-Smith and H. Hartman, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1986 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Clay Science, ed. F. Bergaya, B. K. G. Theng and G. Lagaly, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Domenech, M. T. Domenech-Carbo, M. S. del Rio, M. Pascual and E. Lima, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 2371–2379 RSC .
B. Arkles, MRS Bull., 2001, 26, 402 CAS .
M. Darder, P. Aranda and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1309–1319 CrossRef .

Bio-inorganic Hybrid Nanomaterials: Strategies, Syntheses, Characterization and Applications, ed. E. Ruiz-Hitzky, K. Ariga and Y. M. Lvov, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2007 Search PubMed .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, M. Darder, P. Aranda and K. Ariga, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 323–336 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, P. Aranda, M. Darder and G. Rytwo, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9306–9321 RSC .
C. S. Cundy and P. A. Cox, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 663–701 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Ladenburg, in Annalen der Chemie, ed. F. Wohler, H. Kopp, A. W. Hofmann, A. Kekulé, E. Erlenmeyer and J. Volhard, Leipzig und Heidelberg,  1874, vol. 173, p. 143 Search PubMed .
H. Schmidt, A. Kaiser, H. Patzelt and H. Scholze, Journal de Physique, 1982, 12, 275–278 .
J. E. Mark and S. J. Pan, Makromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1982, 3, 681–685 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Mark and C. C. Sun, Polym. Bull., 1987, 18, 259–264 CAS .
Y. Chujo and T. Saegusa, Adv. Polym. Sci., 1992, 100, 11–29 CAS .
H. H. Huang, B. Orler and G. L. Wilkes, Polym. Bull., 1985, 14, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
F. Surivet, T. M. Lam, J. P. Pascault and C. Mai, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 5742–5751 CrossRef CAS .
F. Surivet, T. M. Lam, J. P. Pascault and Q. T. Pham, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 4309–4320 CrossRef .
D. Avnir, V. R. Kaufman and R. Reisfeld, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1985, 74, 395–406 CrossRef .
D. Avnir, D. Levy and R. Reisfeld, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 5956–5959 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau, F. Chaput and J. P. Boilot, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1969–1994 CrossRef CAS .
D. Avnir, T. Coradin, O. Lev and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1013–1030 RSC .
J. Livage, Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Ser. II-B, 1996, 322, 417–427 Search PubMed .
N. Nassif and J. Livage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00122h .
G. Philipp and H. Schmidt, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1984, 63, 283–292 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez and F. Ribot, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 1007–1047 Search PubMed .
C. Sanchez, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, F. Ribot, T. Lalot, C. R. Mayer and V. Cabuil, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3061–3083 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rozes, N. Steunou, G. Fornasieri and C. Sanchez, Monatsh. Chem., 2006, 137, 501–528 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rozes and C. Sanchez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00137f .
G. Kickelbick and U. Schubert, Chem. Ber., 1997, 130, 473–477 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kickelbick and U. Schubert, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1999, 1301–1305 RSC .
C. Sanchez and M. In, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 147, 1–12 .
K. J. Shea and D. A. Loy, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3306–3319 CrossRef CAS .

          K. J. Shea, J. Moreau, D. A. Loy, R. J. P. Corriu and B. Boury, in Functional Hybrid Materials, ed. P. Gomez-Romero and C. Sanchez, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim,  2004, pp. 50–85 Search PubMed .
K. J. Shea, D. A. Loy and O. Webster, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 6700–6710 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. P. Corriu, J. J. E. Moreau, P. Thepot and M. W. C. Man, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 1217–1224 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cerveau and R. J. P. Corriu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 178, 1051–1071 CrossRef .
D. Hoebbel, I. Pitsch and D. Heidemann, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1991, 592, 207–216 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hoebbel, I. Pitsch, D. Heidemann, H. Jancke and W. Hiller, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1990, 583, 133–144 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, Comments Inorg. Chem., 1999, 20, 327–371 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Laine, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3725–3744 RSC .
F. J. Feher and R. L. Blanski, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1990, 1614–1616 RSC .
F. J. Feher and T. A. Budzichowski, J. Organomet. Chem., 1989, 379, 33–40 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Agaskar, Synth. React. Inorg., Met.-Org., Nano-Met. Chem., 1990, 20, 483–493 Search PubMed .
J. J. Schwab and J. D. Lichtenhan, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 12, 707–713 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baney, M. Itoh, A. Sakakibara and T. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 1409–1430 CrossRef CAS .
R. Duchateau, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3525–3542 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonovicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson and E. W. Sheppard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Goltner and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 431–436 CrossRef .
G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093–4138 CrossRef .
C. Sanchez, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, C. Laberty and L. Nicole, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 682–737 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ferey, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3084–3098 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ferey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre and F. Millange, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 217–225 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ferey, Dalton Trans., 2009, 4400–4415 RSC .
G. Ferey, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 191–214 RSC .
G. Ferey and C. Serre, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1380–1399 RSC .
G. Ferey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre, F. Millange, J. Dutour, S. Surble and I. Margiolaki, Science, 2005, 309, 2040–2042 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ferey, Nature, 2005, 436, 187–188 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ferey, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00040j .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kitagawa and K. Uemura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 109–119 RSC .
T. Uemura, N. Yanai and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1228–1236 RSC .
O. M. Yaghi, O. K. M. N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
O. M. Yaghi, H. L. Li, C. Davis, D. Richardson and T. L. Groy, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 474–484 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. Ockwig, O. Delgado-Friedrichs, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Tranchemontagne, J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1257–1283 RSC .
H. K. Chae, D. Y. Siberio-Perez, J. Kim, Y. Go, M. Eddaoudi, A. J. Matzger, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 2004, 427, 523–527 CrossRef CAS .
H. Furukawa, M. A. Miller and O. M. Yaghi, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3197–3204 RSC .
A. R. Millward and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 17998–17999 CrossRef CAS .
Conferences, 
  (a) Hybrid Materials-International conferences-Tours, FR (2009)-Strasbourg, FR (2011); 
  (b) “Organic/Inorganic Polymer Systems” Meeting-American Chemical Society-Napa, USA (1995); 
  (c) International Sol–Gel Conferences (1991, Sevilla ES-1993, Paris FR-1995, Algarve PT-1997, Sheffield UK-1999, Yokohama JP-2001, Padova IT-2003, Sydney AU-2005, Los Angeles USA-2007, Montpellier, FR-2009, Porto Galinhas BR-2011, Hangzhou CH); 
  (d) Sol–Gel Optics I, II, III, IV, V-SPIE Symposia-San Diego, USA (1990, 1992, 1994, 1997, 2000); 
  (e) Organic–Inorganic Hybrid materials for photonic-SPIE symposium-San Diego, USA (1998); 
  (f) Euromat-Biomimetic and Bioinspired approaches to Functional Inorganic and Hybrid Materials (Lausanne CH, 2003); 
  (g) Better Ceramics Through Chemistry-Materials Research Society Symposia-San Francisco, USA (1994, 1996); 
  (h) Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Materials-Materials Research Society Symposia-San Francisco or Boston, USA (1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2007, 2011); 
  (i) ACS symposium on Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Materials II, Ventura, USA (2008); 
  (j) EMRS-Functional Hybrid Materials: Nanoscale Objects to Nanostructured Inorganic and Hybrid Materials symposium (Strasbourg FR, 2007)/Advanced Hybrid Materials symposium (Strasbourg FR, 2010); 
  (k) Hybrid Materials-International conferences-Tours, FR (2009)-Strasbourg, FR (2011).
P. Judeinstein and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 511–525 RSC .
U. Schubert, N. Husing and A. Lorenz, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 2010–2027 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Loy and K. J. Shea, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 1431–1442 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. P. Corriu, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, Série IIC, 1998, 1, 83–89 Search PubMed .
C. Sanchez, F. Ribot and B. Lebeau, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 35–44 RSC .
C. Sanchez, B. Julian, P. Belleville and M. Popall, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3559–3592 RSC .
C. Sanchez, L. Rozes, F. Ribot, C. Laberty-Robert, D. Grosso, C. Sassoye, C. Boissiere and L. Nicole, C. R. Chim., 2010, 13, 3–39 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nicole, L. Rozes and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3208–3214 CrossRef CAS .

Functional Hybrid Materials, ed. P. Gómez-Romero and C. Sanchez, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .

Hybrid Materials: Strategies, Syntheses, Characterization and Applications, ed. G. Kickelbick, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Vioux, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2292–2299 CrossRef .
M. Niederberger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 793–800 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5292–5304 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt and B. Seiferling, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1986, 73, 739 CAS .
B. Julian, C. Gervais, E. Cordoncillo, P. Escribano, F. Babonneau and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3026–3034 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dire, F. Babonneau, C. Sanchez and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 239–244 RSC .
B. Alonso, J. Maquet, B. Viana and C. Sanchez, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 935–939 RSC .
P. Judeinstein, Chem. Mater., 1992, 4, 4–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer, R. Thouvenot and T. Lalot, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 4433–4437 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Mayer, R. Thouvenot and T. Lalot, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 257 CrossRef CAS .
B. Boury and R. J. P. Corriu, Chem. Commun., 2002, 795–802 RSC .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, C. Bied and M. W. C. Man, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 32, 63–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. E. Moreau, B. P. Pichon and M. W. C. Man, Compos. Interfaces, 2005, 11, 609–616 Search PubMed .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, M. W. C. Man, C. Bied, P. Dieudonne, J. L. Bantignies and J. L. Sauvajol, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1527–1537 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, M. W. C. Man, C. Bied, J. L. Bantignies, P. Dieudonne and J. L. Sauvajol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7957–7958 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. E. Moreau, L. Vellutini, C. Bied and M. W. C. Man, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 31, 151–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. E. Moreau, B. P. Pichon, G. Arrachart, M. W. C. Man and C. Bied, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 653–658 RSC .
A. K. Cheetham and C. N. R. Rao, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 93–98 CAS .
E. Bourgeat-Lami, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2002, 2, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Vaia and E. P. Giannelis, MRS Bull., 2001, 26, 394–401 CAS .
E. P. Giannelis, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1998, 12, 675–680 CrossRef CAS .
F. Leroux and J. P. Besse, Actual Chim., 2004, 23–27 Search PubMed .
F. Leroux and J. P. Besse, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3507–3515 CrossRef CAS .
V. Prevot, C. Forano and J. P. Besse, Appl. Clay Sci., 2001, 18, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schuth, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3184–3195 CrossRef .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710–712 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mann, S. L. Burkett, S. A. Davis, C. E. Fowler, N. H. Mendelson, S. D. Sims, D. Walsh and N. T. Whilton, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2300–2310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stein, B. J. Melde and R. C. Schroden, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1403–1419 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. C. van Bommel, A. Friggeri and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 980–999 CrossRef .
R. J. P. Corriu, A. Mehdi, C. Reye and C. Thieuleux, New J. Chem., 2003, 27, 905–908 RSC .
G. Fornasieri, L. Rozes, S. Le Calvé, B. Alonso, D. Massiot, M. N. Rager, M. Evain, K. Boubekeur and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4869–4878 CrossRef CAS .
N. Steunou, S. Forster, P. Florian, C. Sanchez and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 3426–3430 RSC .
C. Sanchez, H. Arribart and M. M. Giraud Guille, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 277–288 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Ozin, Chem. Commun., 2000, 419–432 RSC .
A. Bouchara, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, J. Y. Chane-Ching and C. Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1234–1235 RSC .
A. Bouchara, G. Mosser, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, J. Y. Chane-Ching and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2347–2354 RSC .
Y. Sakatani, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, G. Soler-Illia and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1049–1056 CrossRef CAS .

Sol–Gel Technologies for Glass Producers and Users, ed. M. A. Aegerter and M. Mennig, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston/Dordrecht/New York/London,  2004 Search PubMed .
K. Matsuzaki, D. Arai, N. Taneda, T. Mukaiyama and M. Ikemura, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1989, 112, 437–441 CrossRef .
D. Li and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1151–1170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Madhugiri, W. Zhou, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 63, 75–84 CrossRef CAS .
M. Macias, A. Chacko, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 86, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, T. Kidchob, P. Falcaro and M. Takahashi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 551–575 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Gates, Q. Xu, M. Stewart, D. Ryan, C. G. Willson and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1171–1196 CrossRef CAS .
R. Houbertz, L. Frohlich, M. Popall, U. Streppel, P. Dannberg, A. Brauer, J. Serbin and B. N. Chichkov, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2003, 5, 551–555 CrossRef CAS .
R. Houbertz, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 247, 504–512 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, A. Chaumonnot, L. Nicole and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2010 DOI:10.1002/adma.201001410 .
K. Okuyama, M. Abdullah, I. W. Lenggoro and F. Iskandar, Adv. Powder Technol., 2006, 17, 587–611 Search PubMed .
D. Grosso, F. Ribot, C. Boissiere and C. Sanchez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00039f .
C. J. Brinker, G. C. Frye, A. J. Hurd and C. S. Ashley, Thin Solid Films, 1991, 201, 97–108 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Scriven, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1988, 121, 717 CAS .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–Gel Science, The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, Academic Press, San Diego,  1990 Search PubMed .
D. E. Bornside, C. W. Macosko and L. E. Scriven, J. Imaging Technol., 1987, 13, 122–130 Search PubMed .
D. E. Bornside, C. W. Macosko and L. E. Scriven, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 66, 5185–5193 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meyerhofer, J. Appl. Phys., 1978, 49, 3993–3997 CrossRef .
J. D. Jordan, R. A. Dunbar and F. V. Bright, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1996, 332, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Jordan, R. A. Dunbar, D. J. Hook, H. Z. Zhuang, J. A. Gardella, L. A. Colon and F. V. Bright, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 1041–1051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Langlet, D. Walz, P. Marage and J. C. Joubert, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 221, 44–54 CrossRef CAS .
P. Marage, M. Langlet and J. C. Joubert, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 238, 218–227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Langlet, C. Vautey and N. Mazeas, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 299, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Pang, J. N. Stuecker, Y. B. Jiang, A. J. Bhakta, E. D. Branson, P. Li, J. Cesarano, D. Sutton, P. Calvert and C. J. Brinker, Small, 2008, 4, 982–989 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pitchumani and V. M. Karbhari, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1995, 78, 2497–2503 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Chou, Y. T. Ko and M. F. Yan, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1987, 70, C-280–C282 CrossRef .
P. F. Belleville and H. G. Floch, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1994, 3, 23–29 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Kahlenberg and M. Popall, in Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Materials-2004, ed. C. Sanchez, U. Schubert, R. M. Laine and Y. Chujo,  2005, vol. 847, pp. 419–430 Search PubMed .
H. Sun and D. Rigby, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1997, 53, 1301–1323 CrossRef .
H. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7338–7364 CrossRef CAS .
Materials Studio™ Version 2.2, (2002) Accelrys Inc.
H. Trompeter, D. Michaelis, U. Streppel, T. Pertsch, U. Peschel, F. Lederer and A. Bräuer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 023901 CrossRef .
J. Duparré, P. Dannberg, P. Schreiber, A. Bräuer and A. Tünnermann, Applied Optics – Optical Technology, 2005, 44, 2949–2956 Search PubMed .
P. Schreiber and S. Kudaev, Photonik International, 2006, 111–113 Search PubMed .
F. Wippermann, U.-D. Zeitner, P. Dannberg and A. Bräuer, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 6218–6231 CrossRef .
J. Duparré, F. Wippermann, P. Dannberg and A. Bräuer, Bioinspir. Biomimetics, 2008, 3, 046008 Search PubMed .
K. Stollberg, A. Brückner, J. Duparré, P. Dannberg, A. Bräuer and A. Tünnermann, Opt. Express, 2009, 18, 15747–15759 CrossRef .
P. Dannberg, L. Erdmann, A. Krehl, C. Wachter and A. Brauer, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2000, 3, 437–441 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dannberg, G. Mann, L. Wagner and A. Brauer, SPIE Proc., 2000, 4179 .
A. Brauer, P. Dannberg, G. Mann and M. Popall, MRS Bull., 2001, 26, 519 .
R. Houbertz, G. Domann, J. Schulz, B. Olsowski, L. Frohlich and W. S. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 1105–1107 CrossRef CAS .
R. Houbertz, G. Domann, C. Cronauer, A. Schmitt, H. Martin, J. U. Park, L. Frohlich, R. Buestrich, M. Popall, U. Streppel, P. Dannberg, C. Wachter and A. Brauer, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 442, 194–200 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zehetner, G. Langer, M. Mündlein, J. Nicolics and R. Houbertz, Proceedings IEEE Polytronic, 2007, 245 Search PubMed .
R. Houbertz, P. Declerck, S. Passinger, A. Ovsianikov, J. Serbin and B. Chichkov, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2007, 204, 3662–3675 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schmid, W. R. Leeb, G. Langer, V. Schmidt and R. Houbertz, Electron. Lett., 2009, 45, 219–221 CrossRef .
Essilor, Materials & Treatments, Ophthalmic Optics Files, http://www.varilux-university.org, 2010.
R. Pardo, M. Zayat and D. Levy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00065e .

Organic photochromic and thermochromic compounds, ed. J. C. Crano and R. J. Guglielmetti, Springer, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .

Organic photochromic and thermochromic compounds, ed. J. C. Crano and R. J. Guglielmetti, Springer, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .

Applied Photochromic Polymer Systems, ed. C. B. McArdle, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,  1991 Search PubMed .
D. Levy, F. Delmonte, M. Lopez-Amo, J. M. Oton and P. Datta, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 77, 2804–2805 CrossRef CAS .
D. Levy, F. DelMonte, J. M. Oton, G. Fiksman, I. Matias, P. Datta and M. Lopez-Amo, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 931–935 CAS .

          K. Goudjil, US Patent, US5581090,  1996 .
K. Goudjil and R. Sandoval, Sens. Rev., 1998, 18, 176 CrossRef .

          K. Goudjil, US Patent, US6437346,  2002 .
K. Ock, N. Jo, J. Kim, S. Kim and K. Koh, Synth. Met., 2001, 117, 131–133 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Matias, M. Lopez-Amo, G. Fiksman, J. M. Oton, D. Levy and F. del Monte, Opt. Eng., 1998, 37, 2620–2624 CrossRef CAS .
O. Levi, S. Shalom, I. Benjamin, G. Perepelitsa, A. J. Agranat, R. Neumann, Y. Avny and D. Davidov, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 1178–1181 CrossRef .
M. Serwadczak and S. Kucharski, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2006, 37, 57–62 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Fu, W. L. Hu, M. G. Xie, Y. C. Liu and Q. D. Duanmu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 111, 2157–2162 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, T. Lin, R. Brady and X. G. Wang, Fibers Polym., 2008, 9, 301–306 Search PubMed .
T. Cheng, T. Lin, R. Brady and X. Wang, Fibers Polym., 2008, 9, 521–526 Search PubMed .

          S. Chodorowski Kimmes, A. Lafuma, F. X. Quinn and C. Sanchez, Patent, FR2838960,  2003 .
D. Levy, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2666–2670 CrossRef CAS .
D. Levy, S. Einhorn and D. Avnir, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1989, 113, 137–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nakao, N. Ueda, Y. S. Abe, T. Horii and H. Inoue, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1996, 7, 863–866 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Hou and H. Schmidt, J. Mater. Sci., 1996, 31, 3427–3434 CAS .

          https://lasers.llnl.gov/
        .

French MegaJoule-class Laser, http://www.cea.fr/english_portal/defense/the_simulation_program_lmj_tera_airix.
M. Guglielmi, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 443–449 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morales and A. Duran, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Beaurain, P. Prené, Y. Montouillout and P. Belleville, Patent, WO/2006/092536,  2006 .

          http://www.socomore.com/coating-sol-gel-preparation/c16.html
        .

Patent, US6077885-assigned to Boeing Co-2000.

Patent, US2004099183-assigned to Boeing Co-2004.

Patent, US5939197-assigned to Boeing Co-1999.

Patent, US5958578-assigned to Boeing Co-1999.

Patent, WO02097185-assigned to SEB SA-2002.

Patent, EP2206801 A1-assigned to SEB SA-2010.

Patent, WO2008142327-assigned to SEB SA-2008.

Patent, WO2010023402-assigned to SEB SA-2010.

Patent, EP1939150 A1-assigned to Varioptic-2008.

          http://www.schott.com/uk/english/index.html
        .

Patent, FR2929281-assigned to Polyrise-2008.

Patent, WO2010/034936 A1-assigned to Polyrise-2010.

Patent, US5706064-assigned to Kabushiki Kaisha Toshiba-1998.

Patent, US2008152933 A1-assigned to Sony-2008.
H. van Lente and J. I. van Til, J. Clean. Prod., 2008, 16, 967–976 CrossRef .

          http://www.top-oberflaechen.de/
        .

Patent, US6387519 B1-assigned to PPG Industries Ohio Inc-2002.

          http://www.jsr.co.jp/jsr_e/pd/fc_pd.shtml
        .

Patent, WO2009/000779 A1-assigned to CEA and CNRS-2008.

          http://www.helion-hydrogen.com/
        .
Fraunhofer ISC-Annual report 2006, http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de/uploads/media/annual_report_2006_02.pdf.
Fraunhofer ISC-Annual report 2007, http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de/uploads/media/annual_report_2007_01.pdf.
Fraunhofer ISC-Annual report 2009, http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de/uploads/media/Annual_Report_2009.pdf.
V. Di Noto, M. Piga, S. Lavina, E. Negro, K. Yoshida, R. Ito and T. Furukawa, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1431–1444 CrossRef CAS .
V. Di Noto, M. Piga, L. Piga, S. Polizzi and E. Negro, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 561–574 CrossRef CAS .
V. Di Noto, S. Lavina, E. Negro, M. Vittadello, F. Conti, M. Piga and G. Pace, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
V. Di Noto, R. Gliubizzi, E. Negro and G. Pace, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24972–24986 CrossRef CAS .
Glass Worldwide-issue thirty-July/August 2010, 76-81.

Patent, WO2006/128232 A1-assigned to The University of Queensland-2006.

Patent, WO2005/049757 A1-assigned to The University of Queensland-2005.

Patent, WO2010086136 A2-assigned to Schott Co-2010.
C. McDonagh, C. S. Burke and B. D. MacCraith, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 400–422 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Wolfbeis, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2657–2669 RSC .
T. H. Tran-Thi, R. Dagnelie, S. Crunaire and L. Nicole, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00021c .
S. Cochet, L. Rozes, M. Popall and C. Sanchez, Mater. Sci. Eng. C-Biomimetic Supramol. Syst., 2007, 27, 1401–1405 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uhlig, L. Fröhlich, M. Chen, N. Arndt-Staufenbiel, J. Lang, H. Schröder, R. Houbertz, M. Popall and M. Robertsson, IEEE Trans. Adv. Packag., 2006, 29, 158–170 CrossRef .
U. Haas, A. Haase, V. Satzinger, H. Pichler, G. Leising, G. Jakopic, B. Stadlober, R. Houbertz, G. Domann and A. Schmitt, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 235339 CrossRef .
D. Georgiou, A. Lascarakis, S. Logothetidis, S. Amberg-Schwab, U. Weber, M. Schmidt and K. Noller, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 8023–8029 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laskarakis, D. Georgiou, S. Logothetidis, S. Amberg-Schwab and U. Weber, Chemistry and Physics, 2009, 115, 269–274 Search PubMed .
A. Laskarakis, S. Logothetidis, D. Georgiou, S. Amberg-Schwab and U. Weber, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 6275–6279 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vasko, K. Noller, M. Mikula, S. Amberg-Schwab and U. Weber, Eur. J. Phys., 2009, 7, 371–378 CAS .
L. D. Carlos, R. A. S. Ferreira, V. D. Bermudez and S. J. L. Ribeiro, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 509–534 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rose, S. Dzyadevych, R. Fernandez-Lafuente, N. Jaffrezic, G. Kuncova, V. Matejec and S. P. J. Coat, Technol. Res., 2008, 5, 491–496 Search PubMed .
P. J. Scully, L. Belancor, J. Bolyo, S. Dzyaderych, J. M. Gimson, R. Fernandez-Lafuente, N. Jaffrezic-Renault, G. Kuncová, V. Matêjec, B. O'Kennedy, O. Podrazky, K. Rose, L. Sasek and J. S. Young, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2007, 18, 3177–3186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dembski, C. Graf, T. Krüger, U. Gbureck, A. Ewald, A. Bock and E. Rühl, Small, 2008, 4, 1516–1526 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schmidt, H. Scholze and A. Kaiser, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1984, 63, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wolter and W. Storch, Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1994, 346, 143–149 CAS .
H. Wolter, S. Nique, C. Gellermann, W. Storch, R. Maletz and T. Neumann, NanoMed, 2009 Search PubMed .

          H. Wolter, W. Storch, S. Nique, C. Gellermann, M. Seyfried, R. Maletz and T. Neumann, Hybrid Materials, Tours, France,  2009 Search PubMed .

          H. Wolter, W. Storch, S. Nique, R. Maletz, T. Neumann and M. Danebrock, Proceedings 42nd annual meeting IADR, Thessaloniki, Greece,  2007 Search PubMed .

          H. Wolter, S. Nique, C. Gellermann, S. Storch, R. Maletz and M. Danebrock, Composites at Lake Louise and Academy of Dental Material, Lake Louise, Canada,  2005 Search PubMed .

          H. Wolter, W. Storch, S. Schmitzer, R. Maletz, W. Geurtsen and G. Leyhausen, International Congress on Advanced Materials their Processes and Applications, Munich, http://www.materialsweek.org/proceedings/index.html,  2000 Search PubMed .

Sol–Gel Technologies, http://www.sol-gel.com.
N. Lapidot, O. Gans, F. Biagini, L. Sosonkin and C. Rottman, Eurocosmetics, 2000, 1, 20 Search PubMed .
N. Lapidot, O. Gans, F. Biagini, L. Sosonkin and C. Rottman, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .

Advanced 
Drug
 Delivery Reviews, 2008, 60, Inorganic Nanoparticles in Drug Delivery.

Advanced 
Drug
 Delivery Reviews, 2008, 60, Clinical developments in drug delivery nanotechnology.
I. I. Slowing, J. L. Vivero-Escoto, C. W. Wu and V. S. Y. Lin, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1278–1288 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Trewyn, I. I. Slowing, S. Giri, H. T. Chen and V. S. Y. Lin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 846–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Piao, A. Burns, J. Kim, U. Wiesner and T. Hyeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3745–3758 CrossRef CAS .
K. An and T. Hyeon, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 359–373 CrossRef .
J. Kim, Y. Piao and T. Hyeon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 372–390 RSC .
S. Mornet, S. Vasseur, F. Grasset and E. Duguet, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2161–2175 RSC .
E. Duguet, S. Vasseur, S. Mornet and J. M. Devoisselle, Nanomedicine, 2006, 1, 157–168 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tartaj, M. D. Morales, S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, T. Gonzalez-Carreno and C. J. Serna, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, R182–R197 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Roca, R. Costo, A. F. Rebolledo, S. Veintemillas-Verdaguer, P. Tartaj, T. Gonzalez-Carreno, M. P. Morales and C. J. Serna, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 224002 CrossRef .
V. Sokolova and M. Epple, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1382–1395 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Rosi and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1547–1562 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Vallet-Regi and D. Arcos, Biomimetic Nanoceramics in Clinical Use: From Materials to Applications, RSC Nanoscience & Nanotechnology,  2008 Search PubMed .
M. Vallet-Regi, Dalton Trans., 2006, 5211–5220 RSC .
M. Vallet-Regi, Materialwiss. Werkstofftech., 2006, 37, 478–484 Search PubMed .
M. Vallet-Regi, F. Balas and D. Arcos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7548–7558 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Bass, D. Grosso, C. Boissière, E. Belamie, T. Coradin and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4349–4356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ehrlich, K. D. Demadis, O. S. Pokrovsky and P. G. Koutsoukos, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4656–4689 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giri, B. G. Trewyn, M. P. Stellmaker and V. S. Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5038–5044 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Vivero-Escoto, Slowing, II, C. W. Wu and V. S. Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Zhao, B. G. Trewyn, Slowing, II and V. S. Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8398 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Lai, B. G. Trewyn, D. M. Jeftinija, K. Jeftinija, S. Xu, S. Jeftinija and V. S. Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4451–4459 CrossRef CAS .
B. Julian Lopez, C. Boissière, C. Chaneac, D. Grosso, S. Vasseur, S. Miraux, E. Duguet and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1563–1569 RSC .
M. Colilla, M. Manzano, I. Izquierdo-Barba, M. Vallet-Regi, C. Boissiere and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1821–1830 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Liu, X. M. Jiang, C. Ashley and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7567 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Liu, A. Stace-Naughton, X. M. Jiang and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1354 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Coti, M. E. Belowich, M. Liong, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. A. Lau, H. A. Khatib, J. I. Zink, N. M. Khashab and J. F. Stoddart, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 16–39 RSC .
T. D. Nguyen, Y. Liu, S. Saha, K. C. F. Leung, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 626–634 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nguyen, H. R. Tseng, P. C. Celestre, A. H. Flood, Y. Liu, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10029–10034 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, K. C. F. Leung, T. D. Nguyen, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 685–693 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vallet-Regi, M. Colilla and I. Izquierdo-Barba, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2008, 4, 1–15 Search PubMed .
M. Vallet-Regi, F. Balas, M. Colilla and M. Manzano, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2008, 36, 163–191 CrossRef CAS .
F. Balas, M. Manzano, P. Horcajada and M. Vallet-Regi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8116–8117 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nieto, F. Balas, M. Colilla, M. Manzano and M. Vallet-Regi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 116, 4–13 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruiz-Hernandez, A. Lopez-Noriega, D. Arcos, I. Izquierdo-Barba, O. Terasaki and M. Vallet-Regi, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3455–3463 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, H. Fan, A. Stump, T. L. Ward, T. Rieker and C. J. Brinker, Nature, 1999, 398, 223–226 CrossRef CAS .
F. Torney, B. G. Trewyn, V. S. Y. Lin and K. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 295–300 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Mal, M. Fujiwara and Y. Tanaka, Nature, 2003, 421, 350–353 CrossRef CAS .
R. Casasus, E. Climent, M. D. Marcos, R. Martinez-Manez, F. Sancenon, J. Soto, P. Amoros, J. Cano and E. Ruiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1903–1917 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Radu, C. Y. Lai, K. Jeftinija, E. W. Rowe, S. Jeftinija and V. S. Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13216–13217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, Y. W. Yang, K. Patel, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2222–2226 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, K. Oh, S. C. Lee and C. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1455–1457 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. F. Leung, T. D. Nguyen, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5919–5928 CrossRef CAS .
K. Patel, S. Angelos, W. R. Dichtel, A. Coskun, Y. W. Yang, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2382–2383 CrossRef CAS .
E. Johansson, E. Choi, S. Angelos, M. Liong and J. I. Zink, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 46, 313–322 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Vogtle, L. De Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589–6592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, E. Choi, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zink, Small, 2008, 4, 421–426 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nguyen, K. C. F. Leung, M. Liong, Y. Liu, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2101–2110 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, K. Lee and C. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1275–1278 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rivera Gil, D. Huhn, L. L. del Mercato, D. Sasse and W. J. Parak, Pharmacol. Res., 2010, 62, 115–125 CrossRef CAS .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064–2110 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.amagpharma.com/documents/products/pdfs/gastromark_insert.pdf
        .

          http://www.feraheme.com/documents/Feraheme%20PI.pdf
        .
X. H. Huang, P. K. Jain, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Lasers Med. Sci., 2008, 23, 217–228 CrossRef .

          L. Levy, A. Pottier, A. Rouet, J. Marill, C. Devaux and M. Germain, Patent, WO/2009/147214,  2009 .

          D. Avnir, S. Braun, O. Lev, D. Levy and M. Ottolenghi, in Sol-Gel Optics, Processing and Applications, ed. L. C. Klein, Kluwer Academic Publishers,  1994, p. 539 Search PubMed .

          J. Livage, T. Coradin and C. Roux, in Functional Hybrid Materials, ed. P. Gomez-Romero and C. Sanchez, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004, ch 7 Search PubMed .
P. Audebert, C. Demaille and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 911–913 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wilson and A. P. F. Turner, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1992, 7, 165–185 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramanathan, B. R. Jonsson and B. Danielsson, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2001, 427, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Reetz, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 943 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, A. B. Garcia, H. Deleuze, M. F. Achard, C. Sanchez, F. Durand, V. Oestreicher and R. Backov, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4555–4562 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hartmann and D. Jung, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 844–857 RSC .
B. Hock, A. Dankwardt, K. Kramer and A. Marx, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1995, 311, 393–405 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, U. Narang, P. N. Prasad and F. V. Bright, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 2671–2675 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aharonson, M. Altstein, G. Avidan, D. Avnir, A. Bronshtein, A. Lewis, K. Lieberman, M. Ottolenghi, Y. Polevaya, C. Rottman, J. Samuel, S. Shalom, A. Strinkowski and A. Turnaiansky, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1994, 346, 519 CAS .
A. Bronshtein, N. Aharonson, A. Turniansky and M. Altstein, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 2050–2058 CrossRef CAS .
R. Armon, J. Starosvetzky and I. Saad, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2000, 19, 289–292 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Peralta-Perez, G. Saucedo-Castaneda, M. Gutierrez-Rojas and A. Campero, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2001, 20, 105–110 CrossRef .
J. Y. Barreau, J. M. Dacosta, I. Desportes, J. Livage, L. Monjour and M. Gentilini, Comptes Rendus Acad. Sci. Ser. III-Sci. Vie-Life Sci., 1994, 317, 653–657 Search PubMed .
J. Livage, C. Roux, J. M. DaCosta, I. Desportes and J. F. Quinson, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1996, 7, 45–51 CAS .
K. P. Peterson, C. M. Peterson and E. J. A. Pope, Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine, 1998, 218, 365–369 Search PubMed .
G. Carturan, R. Dal Toso, S. Boninsegna and R. Dal Monte, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2087–2098 RSC .
R. Dal Monte, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2000, 18, 291 .
E. J. A. Pope, K. Braun and C. M. Peterson, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 635–639 CrossRef CAS .
G. Carturan, G. Dellagiacoma, M. Rossi, R. Dal Monte and M. Muraca, Sol-Gel Optics IV, SPIE Proc., 1997, 3136, 366 Search PubMed .
J. Fang, J. C. Zhou, E. H. Lan, B. Dunn and J. I. Zink, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 50, 176–183 CrossRef CAS .
E. Callone, R. Campostrini, G. Carturan, A. Cavazza and R. Guzzon, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4839–4848 RSC .
L. Liu, L. Shang, S. J. Guo, D. Li, C.
Y. Liu, L. Qi and S. J. Dong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 523–526 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cohen, J. Starosvetsky, U. Cheruti and R. Armon, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 1236–1252 Search PubMed .
R. Gupta and N. K. Chaudhury, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 2387–2399 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nassif, C. Roux, T. Coradin, O. M. M. Bouvet and J. Livage, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 2264–2268 RSC .
E. C. Carnes, D. M. Lopez, N. P. Donegan, A. Cheung, H. Gresham, G. S. Timmins and C. J. Brinker, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2010, 6, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Carnes, J. C. Harper, C. E. Ashley, D. M. Lopez, L. M. Brinker, J. W. Liu, S. Singh, S. M. Brozik and C. J. Brinker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14255 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Baca, C. Ashley, E. Carnes, D. Lopez, J. Flemming, D. Dunphy, S. Singh, Z. Chen, N. G. Liu, H. Y. Fan, G. P. Lopez, S. M. Brozik, M. Werner-Washburne and C. J. Brinker, Science, 2006, 313, 337–341 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Baca, E. Carnes, S. Singh, C. Ashley, D. Lopez and C. J. Brinker, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 836–845 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rytwo, Y. Gonen and S. Afuta, Appl. Clay Sci., 2008, 41, 47–60 CrossRef CAS .
C. Trigo, R. Celis, M. C. Hermosin and J. Cornejo, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2009, 73, 1652–1657 CrossRef CAS .
M. Darder, M. Colilla and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3774–3780 CrossRef CAS .
M. Darder, M. Colilla and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Appl. Clay Sci., 2005, 28, 199–208 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Blieman and Y. G. Mishael, in XIV International Clay Conference, Castellaneta Marina,  2009 Search PubMed .
B. Wicklein, M. Darder, P. Aranda and E. Ruiz-Histky, MACLA, 2008, 9, 257–258 Search PubMed .
B. Wicklein, M. Darder, P. Aranda and E. Ruiz-Hitzky, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5217–5225 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Joshi, H. A. Patel, H. C. Bajaj and R. V. Jasra, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 1071–1076 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Joshi, B. D. Kevadiya, H. A. Patel, H. C. Bajaj and R. V. Jasra, Int. J. Pharm., 2009, 374, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jung, H. M. Kim, Y. Bin Choy, S. J. Hwang and J. H. Choy, Int. J. Pharm., 2008, 349, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choy and Y. H. Son, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2004, 25, 122–126 CAS .
C. R. Gordijo, C. A. S. Barbosa, A. Ferreira, V. R. L. Constantino and D. D. Silva, J. Pharm. Sci., 2005, 94, 1135–1148 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ambrogi, G. Fardella, G. Grandolini, M. Nocchetti and L. Perioli, J. Pharm. Sci., 2003, 92, 1407–1418 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, E. B. Wang, L. Gao and L. Xu, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 736–741 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Oh, M. Park, S. T. Kim, J. Y. Jung, Y. G. Kang and J. H. Choy, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1024–1027 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xue, R. Zhang, X. Y. Sun and S. L. Wang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2008, 19, 1197–1202 CrossRef CAS .
S. Begu, A. Aubert-Pouessel, R. Polexe, E. Leitmanova, D. A. Lerner, J. M. Devoisselle and D. Tichit, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2679–2687 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Park, Y. Bin Choy, J. M. Oh, J. Y. Kim, S. J. Hwang and J. H. Choy, Int. J. Pharm., 2008, 359, 198–204 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choy, S. Y. Kwak, J. S. Park, Y. J. Jeong and J. Portier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1399–1400 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Choy, S. Y. Kwak, Y. J. Jeong and J. S. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4042–4045 CrossRef .
S. Y. Kwak, W. M. Kriven, M. A. Wallig and J. H. Choy, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 5995–6001 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ruiz-Hitzky, M. Darder, P. Aranda, M. A. M. del Burgo and G. del Real, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4167 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Masarudin, K. Yusoff, R. A. Rahim and M. Z. Hussein, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 045602 CrossRef .

          M. S. Widmer and A. G. Mikos, in Frontiers in Tissue Engineering, ed. C. W. Patrick Jr., A. G. Mikos and L. V. McIntire, Elsevier Science Ltd, Oxford,  1998, vol. ch. II.5, pp. 106–120 Search PubMed .
M. A. Lizarbe, N. Olmo and J. G. Gavilanes, Biomaterials, 1987, 8, 35–37 CrossRef CAS .
N. Olmo, M. A. Lizarbe and J. G. Gavilanes, Biomaterials, 1987, 8, 67–69 CrossRef CAS .
N. Olmo, J. Turnay, J. I. Herrera, J. G. Gavilanes and M. A. Lizarbe, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 1996, 30, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng, C. Z. Wang, X. X. Wang, H. Y. Wang, H. Zhuang and K. D. Yao, React. Funct. Polym., 2007, 67, 780–788 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhuang, J. P. Zheng, H. Gao and K. D. Yao, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2007, 18, 951–957 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Katti, D. R. Katti and R. Dash, Biomed. Mater., 2008, 3 Search PubMed .
D. Depan, B. Kumar and R. P. Singh, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2008, 84b, 184–190 CrossRef CAS .
D. Depan, A. P. Kumar and R. P. Singh, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. A. Muzzarelli, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 76, 167–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wang, T. H. Young, D. J. Lin, M. K. Sun, H. S. Huang and L. P. Cheng, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 661–669 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Pereira, S. Carvalho, M. M. Pereira, M. F. Leite and R. L. Orefice, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 254–263 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Styan, D. J. Martin and L. A. Poole-Warren, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2008, 86a, 571–582 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Deshpande, D. M. Smith and C. J. Brinker, Patent, WO/1994/25149,  1994 .
D. M. Smith, R. Deshpande and C. J. Brinker, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1992, 271, 567–572 CAS .
J. M. Rosenholm, E. Peuhu, L. T. Bate-Eya, J. E. Eriksson, C. Sahlgren and M. Linden, Small, 2010, 6, 1234–1241 CAS .
N. Husing and U. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 23–45 .
A. C. Pierre and G. M. Pajonk, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4243–4265 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Dorcheh and M. H. Abbasi, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2008, 199, 10–26 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kramer, F. Rubio-Alonso and J. D. Mackenzie, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1996, 435, 295–300 CAS .
K. Kanamori, M. Aizawa, K. Nakanishi and T. Hanada, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1589 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Rao, N. D. Hegde and H. Hirashima, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 305, 124–132 CrossRef .
N. Leventis, C. Sotiriou-Leventis, G. H. Zhang and A. M. M. Rawashdeh, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 957–960 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. B. Meador, E. F. Fabrizio, F. Ilhan, A. Dass, G. H. Zhang, P. Vassilaras, J. C. Johnston and N. Leventis, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1085–1098 CrossRef CAS .
U. F. Ilhan, E. F. Fabrizio, L. McCorkle, D. A. Scheiman, A. Dass, A. Palczer, M. B. Meador, J. C. Johnston and N. Leventis, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3046–3054 RSC .
F. Mammeri, E. Le Bourhis, L. Rozes and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3787–3811 RSC .
A. B. Morgan, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2006, 17, 206–217 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Vaia and J. F. Maguire, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2736–2751 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, S. S. Wu and J. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3893–3957 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, J. R. G. Evans, H. C. Greenwell, P. Boulet, P. V. Coveney, A. A. Bowden and A. Whiting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 568–594 RSC .
H. Althues, J. Henle and S. Kaskel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1454–1465 RSC .
E. P. Giannelis, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 29 CAS .
M. Alexandre and P. Dubois, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2000, 28, 1–63 CrossRef .
S. S. Ray and M. Okamoto, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2003, 28, 1539–1641 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Thostenson, C. Y. Li and T. W. Chou, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2005, 65, 491–516 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Tjong, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2006, 53, 73–197 CrossRef .
F. Hussain, M. Hojjati, M. Okamoto and R. E. Gorga, J. Compos. Mater., 2006, 40, 1511–1575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Okada and A. Usuki, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 1449–1476 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. M. Hofman-Caris, New J. Chem., 1994, 18, 1087–1096 Search PubMed .
E. Bourgeat-Lamy, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2002, 2, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .

          E. Bourgeat-Lami, in Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, ed. H. S. Nalwa, American Scientific Publishers,  2004, vol. 8, pp. 305–332 Search PubMed .
M. Daniel and C. Janin, Actual Chim., 2010, 8–13 Search PubMed .
Y. Bomal, P. Cochet, B. Dejean, P. Fourre and D. Labarre, Actual Chim., 1996, 42–48 Search PubMed .

          R. Rauline, Patent, EP 0501227,  1992 .

          Y. Chevallier and J. C. Morawski, Patent, EP0157703,  1985 .
M. Sevignon, Kgk-Kautschuk Gummi Kunststoffe, 2007, 60, 121–123 Search PubMed .
C. Janin, Actual Chim., 1999, 67–71 Search PubMed .
B. Mahltig, H. Haufe and H. Bottcher, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4385–4398 RSC .
B. Mahltig, C. Swaboda, A. Roessler and H. Bottcher, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3180–3192 RSC .
Y. Fukushima and S. Inagaki, J. Inclusion Phenom., 1987, 5, 473–482 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Okada, Y. Fukushima, M. Kawasumi, S. Inagaki, A. Usuki, S. Sugiyama, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, US 4739007,  1987 .
Y. Kojima, A. Usuki, M. Kawasumi, A. Okada, Y. Fukushima, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS .
A. Usuki, Y. Kojima, M. Kawasumi, A. Okada, Y. Fukushima, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, J. Mater. Res., 1993, 8, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kojima, A. Usuki, M. Kawasumi, A. Okada, T. Kurauchi and O. Kamigaito, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1993, 31, 1755–1758 CrossRef CAS .
Plastics, Additives and Compounding, 2002, 4, 30–33.
J. Grossmann and P. Putsch, Kunstst.-Plast Eur., 2005, 95, 180–182 Search PubMed .
J. M. Raquez, M. Deleglise, M. F. Lacrampe and P. Krawczak, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 487–509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lu and R. C. Larock, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 136–147 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Ruiz-Hitzky, M. Darder and P. Aranda, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3650–3662 RSC .

          http://www.research.bayer.com/edition_15/15_polyamides.pdfx
        .

          http://www.nanocor.com/tech_papers/NOVAPACK03.pdf
        .

          http://www51.honeywell.com/sm/aegis/products-n2/aegis-ox.html
        .
Feature Articles on Nanocomposites 2001, 2004, 2006, 2007, http://www.ptonline.com/index.html.
Nanomed™, http://www.fostercomp.com/productsnf.htm.

          E. Ruiz Hitzky, P. Aranda, M. Darder, F. M. Fernandes and C. R. Santos-Matos, Patent, WO/2010/081918,  2010 .
S. B. Lin, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1994, 54, 2135–2145 CrossRef CAS .

          L. A. Jones, Handbook of Pressure Sensitive Adhesive Technology, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 2nd edn,  1989 Search PubMed .

          W. Flannigan, Patent, US 3772247,  1993 .

          T. Watabe, K. Tsuruoka and T. Doi, Patent, JP 09124922 .
C. J. Brinker, Y. Lu, A. Sellinger and H. Fan, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Fuertes, F. J. López-Alcaraz, M. C. Marchi, H. E. Troiani, V. Luca, H. Míguez and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1247–1254 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Fuertes, S. Colodrero, G. Lozano, A. R. Gonzalez-Elipe, D. Grosso, C. Boissiere, C. Sanchez, G. Soler-Illia and H. Miguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3157–3163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Fan, Y. F. Lu, A. Stump, S. T. Reed, T. Baer, R. Schunk, L. V. Perez, G. P. Lopez and C. J. Brinker, Nature, 2000, 405, 56–60 CrossRef .
M. Mougenot, M. Lejeune, J. F. Baumard, C. Boissière, F. Ribot, D. Grosso, C. Sanchez and R. Noguera, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 1876–1882 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fousseret, M. Mougenot, F. Rossignol, J. F. Baumard, B. Soulestin, C. Boissiere, F. Ribot, D. Jalabert, C. Carrion, C. Sanchez and M. Lejeune, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3875–3883 CrossRef CAS .
S. Madhugiri, B. Sun, P. G. Smirniotis, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 69, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carn, A. Colin, M. F. Achard, H. Deleuze, Z. Saadi and R. Backov, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 140 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carn, A. Colin, O. Pitois, M. Vignes-Adler and R. Backov, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7847–7856 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ungureanu, M. Birot, G. Laurent, H. Deleuze, O. Babot, B. Julian-Lopez, M. F. Achard, M. I. Popa, C. Sanchez and R. Backov, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5786–5796 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Wang, D. Grozea, A. Kim, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 99 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, G. Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, B. Charleux and C. Sanchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt and J. Pastre, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 626–636 RSC .
R. Backov, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/b920518g .
S. Ungureanu, H. Deleuze, C. Sanchez, M. I. Popa and R. Backov, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6494–6500 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Fröba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3216–3251 CrossRef .
S. Pega, C. Boissière, D. Grosso, T. Azaïs, A. Chaumonnot and C. Sanchez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2784–2787 CrossRef CAS .
D. Arcos, A. Lopez-Noriega, E. Ruiz-Hernandez, O. Terasaki and M. Vallet-Regi, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1000–1009 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Lu, B. F. McCaughey, D. H. Wang, J. E. Hampsey, N. Doke, Z. Z. Yang and C. J. Brinker, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1733–1736 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, S. Zhu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2428–2433 RSC .
M. Save, G. Granvorka, J. Bernard, B. Charleux, C. Boissière, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, G. V. R. Rao, L. K. Ista, Y. Wu, B. P. Andrzejewski, L. A. Sklar, T. L. Ward and G. P. Lopez, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1262 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Slowing, B. G. Trewyn, S. Giri and V. S. Y. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1225–1236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vallet-Regi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5934–5943 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vallet-Regi, 
            et al., Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011 10.1039/c0cs00025f .
M. Manzano and M. Vallet-Regi, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5593–5604 RSC .
M. Vallet-Regi, J. Intern. Med., 2010, 267, 22–43 CrossRef CAS .
Themed Issue: Metal Organic Frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1201–1508.
E. A. Tomic, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1965, 9, 3745 CrossRef CAS .
C. Biondi, M. Bonamico, L. Torelli and A. Vaciago, Chem. Commun., 1965, 191 RSC .

          C. U. Pittman and C. E. Carraher, in Frontiers in Transition Metal-Containing Polymers, ed. A. S. Abd-El-Aziz and I. Manners, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,  2007 Search PubMed .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1546–1554 CrossRef CAS .
C. Janiak and J. K. Vieth, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 2366–2388 RSC .
D. Bradshaw, J. B. Claridge, E. J. Cussen, T. J. Prior and M. J. Rosseinsky, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 273–282 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Rosseinsky, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 73, 15–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Fletcher, K. M. Thomas and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 2491–2510 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Muller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1284–1293 RSC .
C. Janiak, Dalton Trans., 2003, 2781–2804 RSC .
K. Sanderson, Nature, 2007, 448, 746–748 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bhatia and A. L. Myers, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 1688–1700 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Ma and H. C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11734–11735 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Halder, C. J. Kepert, B. Moubaraki, K. S. Murray and J. D. Cashion, Science, 2002, 298, 1762–1765 CrossRef CAS .
R. Matsuda, R. Kitaura, S. Kitagawa, Y. Kubota, R. V. Belosludov, T. C. Kobayashi, H. Sakamoto, T. Chiba, M. Takata, Y. Kawazoe and Y. Mita, Nature, 2005, 436, 238–241 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujita, Y. J. Kwon, S. Washizu and K. Ogura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 1151–1152 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Ma, C. Abney and W. B. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1248–1256 RSC .
Z. Wang, G. Chen and K. L. Ding, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 322–359 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450–1459 RSC .
D. Zacher, A. Baunemann, S. Hermes and R. A. Fischer, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2785–2792 RSC .
D. Zacher, O. Shekhah, C. Woll and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1418–1429 RSC .
S. Hermes, F. Schroder, R. Chelmowski, C. Woll and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13744–13745 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hermes, D. Zacher, A. Baunemann, C. Woll and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2168–2173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoo and H. K. Jeong, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2441–2443 RSC .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, S. Kowarik, F. Schreiber, M. Paulus, M. Tolan, C. Sternemann, F. Evers, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15118 CrossRef CAS .
E. Biemmi, C. Scherb and T. Bein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gascon, S. Aguado and F. Kapteijn, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 113, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arnold, P. Kortunov, D. J. Jones, Y. Nedellec, J. Karger and J. Caro, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
C. Scherb, A. Schodel and T. Bein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5777–5779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, Z. F. Ng, E. A. Khan, H. K. Jeong, C. B. Ching and Z. P. Lai, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 118, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Allendorf, R. J. T. Houk, L. Andruszkiewicz, A. A. Talin, J. Pikarsky, A. Choudhury, K. A. Gall and P. J. Hesketh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14404 CrossRef CAS .
E. Biemmi, A. Darga, N. Stock and T. Bein, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 114, 380–386 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demessence, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, C. Sanchez and G. Ferey, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7149–7151 RSC .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, D. Grosso, C. Boissiere, S. Perruchas, C. Sanchez and G. Ferey, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1931–1935 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demessence, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, G. Ferey, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7676–7681 RSC .
G. Lu and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7832 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Allendorf, C. A. Bauer, R. K. Bhakta and R. J. T. Houk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1330–1352 RSC .
M. Kubo, W. Chaikittisilp and T. Okubo, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2887–2889 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, T. Strunskus, P. Cyganik, D. Zacher, R. Fischer and C. Woll, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7440–7442 CrossRef CAS .
R. Makiura, S. Motoyama, Y. Umemura, H. Yamanaka, O. Sakata and H. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 565–571 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal, B. Schupbach, A. Terfort, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 481–484 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5038–5041 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Spokoyny, D. Kim, A. Sumrein and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1218–1227 RSC .
P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati, J. F. Eubank, D. Heurtaux, P. Clayette, C. Kreuz, J. S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, V. Marsaud, P. N. Bories, L. Cynober, S. Gil, G. Ferey, P. Couvreur and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 172–178 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Rieter, K. M. Pott, K. M. L. Taylor and W. B. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11584 CrossRef CAS .
A. Imhof and D. J. Pine, Nature, 1997, 389, 948–951 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Yi and S. M. Yang, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2322 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Binks, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1824–1827 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carn, M. F. Achard, O. Babot, H. Deleuze, S. Reculusa and R. Backov, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3887–3895 RSC .
F. Carn, A. Colin, M. F. Achard, H. Deleuze, C. Sanchez and R. Backov, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 62 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carn, H. Saadaoui, P. Masse, S. Ravaine, B. Julian-Lopez, C. Sanchez, H. Deleuze, D. R. Talham and R. Backov, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5469–5475 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carn, N. Steunou, J. Livage, A. Colin and R. Backov, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 644–649 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, B. Julian-Lopez, P. Hesemann, G. Laurent, H. Deleuze, C. Sanchez, M. F. Achard and R. Backov, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7117–7129 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Zhang and A. I. Cooper, Soft Matter, 2005, 1, 107–113 RSC .
N. R. Cameron, Polymer, 2005, 46, 1439–1449 CrossRef CAS .

          N. R. Cameron and D. C. Sherrington, in Advances in Polymer Science, Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg,  1996, vol. 126, p. 163 Search PubMed .

          D. Barby and H. Zia, Patent, EP0060138,  1982 .

          R. Backov, C. Sanchez, H. Deleuze and S. Ungureanu, Patent, FR2912400,  2008 .
N. Brun, C. Sanchez, G. Pécastaing, A. Derré, A. Soum, H. Deleuze, M. Birot, A. Babeau, O. Babot and R. Backov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3136–3145 CrossRef CAS .
N. Brun, R. Janot, C. Sanchez, H. Deleuze, C. Gervais, M. Morcrette and R. Backov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 824–830 RSC .

          http://www.hybridplastics.com/
        .

          R. Houbertz, P. Declerck, S. Passinger, A. Ovsianikov, A. Serbin and B. Chichkov, in Nanophotonic Materials, ed. R. B. Wehrspohn, H.-S. Kitzerow and K. Busch, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
SusChem Hybrid Materials Workshop Report, March 2010.
World Polymer Nanocomposites Markets-M0B5-39-Frost & Sullivan 2007, http://www.frost.com/prod/servlet/frost-home.pag.
J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1213–1214 RSC .
M. Barboiu, A. Cazacu, M. Michau, R. Caraballo, C. Arnal-Herault and A. Pasc-Banu, Chem. Eng. Process., 2008, 47, 1044–1052 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barboiu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7466–7476 RSC .
R. Backov, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 452–464 RSC .
E. Prouzet, S. Ravaine, C. Sanchez and R. Backov, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 1284–1299 RSC .
S. Mann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3393–3406 CrossRef CAS .
R. Backov, Actual Chim., 2009, III–X Search PubMed .

Footnote† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Clément Sanchez
	Clément Sanchez, Director of Research CNRS, leads the Laboratory Chimie de la Matière Condensee of Paris at the University of Paris VI. After a PhD at the University of Paris VI in 1981, he did post-doctoral work at the University of Berkeley. Today, he currently leads a research group working on sol–gel chemistry and physical properties of nanostructured porous and non-porous inorganic and hybrid organic–inorganic materials shaped as monoliths, microspheres and films. He has been awarded many scientific French and international prizes.

Philippe Belleville
	Philippe Belleville received his PhD degree in Chemistry from the Pierre & Marie Curie Paris University in 1991 (Prof. J. Livage Laboratory). He is currently working for the French Commission for Atomic Energy (CEA) as a senior scientist. His research topics include sol–gel chemistry for optical coatings, solar and fuel cell materials, ferroelectric and high “k” thin films, and smart layers for gas sensors. He is a member of the Sol–Gel Optics Program Committee of the SPIE, Optical Society of America (OSA), Technical Committee (TC-16) of the International Commission on Glass (ICG). He was the recipient of the 2003 Ulrich Award for Excellence in Sol–Gel Technology. Since 2007, he is one of the directors of the board of the International Sol–Gel Society (ISGS).

Michael Popall
	Dr Michael Popall, born 1955 in southern Germany, studied chemistry at the Technical University Munich. He received his PhD in 1986 in metal–organic chemistry, at the same university. In 1987 he went to Fraunhofer Institut für Silicatforschung (ISC) in Würzburg, Germany and changed from fundamental to applied contractual research with industry and established research on inorganic–organic sol–gel class-II hybrids for use in microelectronic, photonic as well as electrochemical applications. He is now head of ISC-International at Fraunhofer ISC. His materials research is on organic–inorganic hybrids, ORMOCER®s, for optical, dielectric and electrochemical applications. He received the German Science Prize in 2002 (Stifter foundation) and the NanoTech Future Award 2005 (Tokyo, Japan).

Lionel Nicole
	Lionel Nicole is Associate Professor at the UPMC-Univ Paris 06. After a PhD in 2002, he held successively two postdoctoral positions in Dr Clément Sanchez’s group (UPMC-Univ Paris 06) and in Professor MacCraith’s laboratory (OSL-DCU, Dublin). His main interests are the conception and production of original hybrid materials for optical applications with a particular concern in the environmental domain and in response to social needs.

 	Fig. 1  Arborescence representation of hybrid materials on both the academic and industrial scenes.	 




 	Fig. 2  Traditional strategies employed to bond organic components labeled R.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of the chemical routes that can be used for the synthesis of O–I hybrids.	 

 	Fig. 4  Processing routes to materials using sol–gel methods.	 

 	Fig. 5  Specification (here from the electronic industry) driving the choice of precursors and their functional groups for cost-effective in situ build-up of ORMOCER®s.	 

 	Fig. 6  Modification/optimisation of ORMOCER® properties towards desired specifications of the final application. (* and other required properties).	 

 	Fig. 7  

A
 Double-sided beam homogeniser with 3 different zones NA 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and a buried aperture array. B–CSi CMOS wafer with lens arrays on top of the detector area by selective UV curing. UV-replication in ORMOCER®. Courtesy of Fraunhofer – IOF.	 

 	Fig. 8  Two-photon absorption (TPA) waveguide writing process. Courtesy of Langer et al. at AT&S.	 

 	Fig. 9  
            ORMOCER® matrix with waveguide array, (4 waveguide bundles arranged in an array). Courtesy of Langer et al. at AT&S.	 

 	Fig. 10  Opto-electronic circuit board demonstrator. Courtesy of Langer et al. at AT&S.	 

 	Fig. 11  Structure of an ophthalmic lens (Courtesy of Essilor International).	 

 	Fig. 12  Pictures of real-size reflector coating device (a), hybrid-coated piece (b) and difference between coated (bottom) and uncoated (top) parts of a silver reflector sample (c).	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic view of a laser-disk amplifier.	 

Transmittance >90% @ 500 nm	Adhesion in compliance with 10-010 NFS test	
Ethanol dipping test
Transmittance >92% for 500–600 nm range	Adhesion square test in compliance with 2409 ISO test	Washing machine test (detergent included)
Transmittance >95% for 600–700 nm range	 	 
Transmittance >96% for 700–1000 nm range	 	 


Adhesion after 110 °C/N2curing	Good	Good	Poor	Poor
Surface wetting	Hydrophobic	Hydrophilic	Hydrophobic	Hydrophilic
Refractive index	1.449	1.445	1.420	1.426
Film density	Dense	Dense	Slightly porous	Slightly porous
Thick film deposition	Possible	Tricky	Possible	Tricky

 	Fig. 14  Absolute specular reflectance spectral curves for hybrid-protected silver reflectors coated with various withdrawing rates and silica content and compared to bare substrate.	 

 	Fig. 15  Absolute specular reflectance spectral curves for a hybrid-protected silver reflector coated with a 2 cm min−1 withdrawing rate and 0.5% silica content and compared to bare and cleaned substrate.	 

 	Fig. 16  Specular reflectance variation with oxidative medium time exposure for hybrid-protected and uncoated silver reflectors.	 



Boegel
 EP-II type products (Boeing company licensed products)
	Organosilanes	Zr alkoxides	Spray – brush applications	
                    Chromate-free conversion and anti-corrosion coatings	Commercial development	
                    http://www.actechaero.com/ AC-®130 & AC-®131http://www.socomore.com/ SOCOGEL B0102 & B0202

Schott Clean Plus®
	Organosilanes	Organosilanes	Coated on glass panes (oven)	Hydrophobic “Easy to clean” substrate	
                    R&D
                  	
                    http://www.schott.com
                  

Vitreous protective coating for cookware
	Ormocers	Ormocers/SiO2 particles/mineral pigments and fillers	Spray	Protective coating	Commercial development	Seb SA WO/2002/097185 EP2206801 WO/2008/142327 WO/2010/023402

Silrise S100
	
Acrylic polymer shell	Core shell nanoparticles	Spin- or dip coating	Hard-coats for plastics and antireflective coatings	Commercial development	
                    http://www.polyrise.com FR2929281 WO2010/034936

Coatings for television glass panel
	Indigo dyes, acrylate resins	Ormocers (Si/Zr)	
Spray coating
	Absorbing filter, insulating or conductive coatings	Commercial development on LCD/plasma displays	US5706064 US2008152933

Sealants for optical devices
	Organosilanes	
Siloxanes
	Sol–gel sealants for liquid-based optical devices	Optical lenses, zooms and diaphragm	Commercial development	
                    http://www.varioptic.com/ EP1939150

Abrasil®, Cleanosil®
	Ormocers	Ormocers	
Spray coating, dip coating, spin coating	Scratch resistant and easy-to-clean lacquers	
                    R&D or commercial development	
                    http://www.top-oberflaechen.de/
                  

Ceramiclear®
	Organic resins/polysiloxanes	
                    SiO2
nanoparticles
	
Spray coating
	Mar and scratch resistant clear coat for automotive	Commercial development	
                    http://www.ppg.com/ US6387519

Glasca®, Dynacera®
	
Polymers/Ormocers	Ormocers	
                    Spray coatings
                  	Protective coatings for outdoor applications (enamel on the aluminium product/cement siding)	Commercial development	
                    http://www.jsr.co.jp/jsr_e/index.shtml
                  

 	Fig. 17  Coatings of hybrid O–I materials with anti-corrosion (courtesy of Boeing), easy-to-clean (courtesy of Schott AG), scratch resistant (courtesy of PPG Industries) and decorative (courtesy of Fraunhofer ISC) properties.	 



PEMFC
 Helion
	Perfluorinated polymers	
Silica
nanoparticles
	Casting, Doctor blade	
Fuel
                    cells
                  	Commercial prototype	
                    http://www.helion-hydrogen.com/
                    WO/2009/000779

(Flexible thin film) Rechargeable batteries
	ORMOCER®s, Polymers	
                    Manganese and Cobalt oxides	Casting and screen printing	Rechargeable polymer lithium batteries	Prototypes	Fraunhofer ISC – Varta company http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de/214–216

Nickel

metal hydride
 batteries
	ORMOCER®s	Mixed metals	
Spray drying and casting	Protection of nanoscaled misch metal and gel electrolyte	Prototypes	Fraunhofer ISC – Varta company http://ec.europa.eu/research/home.cfm “Novel materials for energy applications”, p21

Hybrid 
PEM
 for 
fuel

cells
 based on “
TiO
2
F
”
	ORMOCER®s, Nafion, Polymers	
                    Fluorine doped TiO2 particles	Casting and foil technology	
PEM
                    membranes with improved thermomechanical and electrical properties	Pilot commercial development	
                    BRETON S.p.A and University of Padova, (Vito di Noto) (Italy)

Li-Battery electrolytes
	
Polymers
	
Inorganic nanoparticles
                    TiO2, Al2O3	 	 	 	
                    Groups of B. Scrosati, V. di Noto, W. Wieczorek and M. Armand

POLO Ultrabarrier foil for 
PV
	ORMOCER®s	
                    SiO2 or Al2O3 by electron beam or sputtering	Reverse curvature application	Multilayer: e.g. PEN/SiO2/ORMOCER/SiO2 with ultra barrier properties	Prototypes and pilot commercial development	Fraunhofer ISC/POLO-Alliance http://www.polo.fraunhofer.de/en/

Xerocoat
	ORMOCER®s	
                    SiO2	Dip or spray coating	Solar antireflective coating	Commercial development	
                    WO/2006/128232 WO/2005/049757

Solar 
cells
	ORMOCER®s	
                    SiO2, ZrO2, TiO2	UV-embossing	Solar collectors	Commercial prototype	
                    WO/2010/086136

 	Fig. 18  Samples of flexible thin film batteries (courtesy of Fraunhofer ISC), nanocomposite PEMFC and hybrid solar cell (courtesy of CEA).	 



Accuglass® 
T-11
, 
T-12B
 and 
T-14
 series
	Organosilanes	Organosilanes	
Spin coating
	Spin-on Glass (interlevel dielectric materials)	On the market	
                    https://www51.honeywell.com/sm/em/products-applications/di-electrics.html Volksen 2010

Ormocore, Ormoclad, Ormocomp
	ORMOCER®s	ORMOCER®s	
Spin coating, photo lithography, soft lithography	Optical waveguides, microlenses, Optical couplers and connectors,	On the market	
                    http://www.microresist.de/
                  

Oxygen
 microsensors
	Fluorescent Ru complex Organosilanes	Organosilanes	Coated on optical fibres (20 μm)	
                    Oxygen optical sensor (liquid and gas phase detection)	Industrial development	
                    http://www.presens.de
                  

Planar 
oxygen
 sensors, Transmissive 
pH sensing
	Fluorescent Ru complexes/pH sensitive dyes/Organosilanes	Organosilanes	Coated on various substrates (fibreglass filters, optical fibres microscope slide, microtiter plates)	
                    Oxygen optical and pH sensors	Industrial development	
                    http://www.oceanoptics.com
                  

VOC sensors
	Colorimetric (absorption and/or fluorescence) probes/Organosilanes	Organosilanes/TMOS	Casting/dip coating (monoliths/thin films)	VOC sensors for indoor air quality	Prototype and on the market	
                    http://www.ethera-labs.com/
                  

Photochromic resin
	Photochromic dyes	Ormocers	Casting/Coatings	Photochromic coatings	Industrial development	Protavic SG

Waveguides/thermooptical switch
	ORMOCER®s	ORMOCER®s	
Spin coating and photolithography	Waveguide switches by heating of the cladding	Industrial development	Matsushita MEW WO/2007/088640

Optical high refractive index matrix
	Monomer, polymer	
Phenanthrene functionalised Ormocers	
Spin coating and imprinting	High reflective microlens arrays	Industrial development	SILECS (Finland, CA)

LISICON
                    ®	
Polymers
	
                    Lisicon
                  	Printing	
                    OTFT and polymer electronics	Prototypic/on the market	
                    http://www.merck-chemicals.de/
                  

Dielectrics
	
Polymer
	ORMOCER®s	
Spin coating
	Redistribution layers	Industrial development	
                    ASAHI US2010/0123259A1

Globe top, packaging
	
Silicones
	
Siloxanes
	Casting, spin coating	Protection and passivation	On the market	Shin Etsu

Nanodispersed systems for 
TFT
/
LCD
	
Polymers
	
Nanoparticles
	Printing, casting,….	Dielectrics, passivation	On the market	
                    http://www.nepes.co.kr/
                  

AZ-Spinfil® series	Polysilazanes	 	
Spin coating
	Spin-on dielectrics	On the market	
                    http://www.az-em.com/
                  

 	Fig. 19  Hybrid O–I coatings as spin-on glass materials (interlevel dielectric materials—courtesy of Honeywell International Inc.) and as optical chemical sensors (courtesy of Ocean Optics, Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 20  Applications of ORMOCER®s in micro-optics: microlens arrays and planar waveguides (courtesy of micro resist technology GmbH, Fraunhofer ISC and Fraunhofer IOF).	 



Cool Pearls™ Anti Acne Kits
	
Benzoyl peroxide
	
Silica microcapsules	Encapsulation	Acne treatment	Development & certification process	
                      http://www.sol–gel.com/
                    

Eusolex® UV-Pearls™
	Organic UV filters	
Silica microcapsules	Encapsulation	Sunscreen	Commercial development	
                      http://www.merck-chemicals.com
                    

Schott DentalGlass®
	Methacrylic resin	
Silane treated ceramic particles (BaO/SrO/ZrO2 - SiO2), Coupling agent: γ-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane	Casting – brush applications	Dental fillers	Commercial development	
                      http://www.schott.com
                    

3M ESPE dental products: Filtek™, 
Ketac
™, Vitrebond™, Z100™ Vitremer™, RelyX™, Vanish™, Clinpro™…	Methacrylic resin/epoxysiloxane derivatives	
Silane treated ceramic particles (SiO2 ZrO2 micro- and nano-size)	Casting – brush applications	Dental direct restorative, cement, sealant, varnish	Commercial development	
                      http://solutions.3m.com/wps/portal/3M/en_US/3M-ESPE/dental-professionals/
                    

Admira®, Admira® Bond, Admira® Flow, Admira® Seal, Admira® Protect,
	ORMOCER®s/Polymers	ORMOCER®s	Casting – brush applications	Dental filling, bonding, flow, sealing and desensitisation material	Commercial development	
                      http://www.voco.coc/http://www.isc.fraunhofer.de
                    

Grandio®
	Organic resins	Ceramic nanoparticles	Casting – brush applications	Dental direct restorative	Commercial development	
                      http://www.voco.com/
                    

Dow Corning® 
VM-2260
, 
VM-2270
	[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica	[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica	Aerogels (sub-critical drying conditions) fine particles or beads	Oil and sebum absorption, controlled release, thickener	Commercial development	
                      http://www.dowcorning.com/
                    

Nexterion® Microarray
	Organosilanes	Organosilanes	Coated on glass	
                      DNA and protein microarrays	Commercial development	
                      http://www.schott.com
                    

Intra-
Cylane
™
	Organosilanes	Organosilanes	Coating hair infiltration	Cosmetic – Hair care	Commercial development	
                      http://www.kerastase.co.uk/news/products.aspx#code=Product12
                    

GastroMARK® (ferumoxsil) Particle diameter: ∼400 nm
	Poly[N-(2-aminoethyl)-3-aminopropyl] siloxane	Non-stoichiometric magnetite (superparamagnetic iron oxide)	 	Oral gastrointestinal imaging agent (MRI)/Diagnosis of cancer and cardiovascular disease	Commercial development	AMAG Pharmaceuticals, Inc. http://www.amagpharma.com/documents/products/pdfs/gastromark_insert.pdf

Feraheme® (
ferumoxytol
) Particle diameter: 17–31 nm
	Polyglucose sorbitol carboxymethylether	Non-stoichiometric magnetite (superparamagnetic iron oxide)	 	Treatment of iron deficiency anaemia/Injection for intravenous use	Commercial development	AMAG Pharmaceuticals, Inc. http://www.feraheme.com/documents/Feraheme%20PI.pdf

Cliavist® (
ferucarbotran
)
	
                      Carboxydextran
                    	Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles	 	Liver imaging agent (MRI)/Injection	Commercial development	Bayer Schering Pharma AG

NanoTherm® Particle diameter: ∼20 nm
	
Aminosilane derivatives	Superparamagnetic iron oxide (magnetite) nanoparticles	 	NPs-induced hyperthermia for cancer therapy under magnetic field	Development & certification process	
                      http://www.magforce.de
                    

AuroShell® Particle diameter: ∼120 nm
	
Thiol-derived poly(ethylene)glycol	Core–shell nanoparticles (silica core nanoparticles about 100 nm with a 20 nm gold shell)	 	NPs-induced hyperthermia for cancer therapy under laser excitation	Development & certification process	
                      http://www.nanospectra.com
                    

NanoXray™ Particle diameter: ∼70 nm
	Targeted and biocompatible coating	Crystalline nanoparticles (transition metal oxides/rare earth oxides)	 	Cancer treatment via free radical creation and heat generation after standard X-ray absorption	Development & certification process	
                      http://www.nanobiotix.com
                      WO/05/120590 WO/06/051198

 	Fig. 21  Examples of (bio)hybrid materials in health care and cosmetic applications. Left: Encapsulation of drugs/organic UV filters in protective silica micropearls for acne treatment and sunscreens (courtesy of Sol–gel Technologies and Merck Chemicals respectively). Middle: Application of organosilanes (amino-silane derivatives) in cosmetic purpose: hair treatment (courtesy of L'Oréal). Right: PNCs and ORMOCER®s in dental applications: dental direct restorative, cement, sealant, varnish, dental filling material (courtesy of Fraunhofer ISC).	 

 	Fig. 22  Hybrid nanoparticles (NPs) in cancer treatment illustrating three promising external activation approaches. Hybrid NPs activation by (i) alternating magnetic field with Nanotherm® (courtesy of MagForce®), (ii) X-ray radiation with NanoXray™ (courtesy of Nanobiotix), and (iii) near infrared laser irradiation with AuroShell® (courtesy of Nanospectra).	 



Aspen aerogels® products: Spaceloft®, Pyrogel® and Cryogel® blankets
	
Methyltriethoxysilane/Hexamethyldisilazane/Silica gel, trimethylsilylated	TEOS/silica precursors	Composite materials: aerogels reinforced with organic/mineral fibres – Continuous gel casting on organic/mineral fibre blankets (roll casting)	Thermal insulation (−270 to 90 °C or −40 to 650 °C)	Commercial development for building & construction and or industrial	
                    http://www.aerogel.com
                  

Nanogel® products (Cabot Corporation)
	[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica	[(Trimethylsilyl)oxy]-modified silica	Aerogels (sub-critical drying conditions), Translucent granules or composite materials (thermal wrap)	Thermal and acoustic insulators and oil containment/reclamation	Commercial development for building & construction, apparel and industrial	
                    http://www.cabot-corp.com
                  

Green tyres – Michelin Energy™ Saver
	
Styrene-butadiene rubber	
Silane treated silica nanoparticles	 	Tyres – Antivibration system	Commercial development	
                    http://www.michelin.com Daniel, M and Janin, C. L’Actualité Chimique 340, 8–13, (2010)

TICO
®
	Organic dyes/polymers	
Inorganic oxide pigment	 	Pigments	Commercial development	
                    http://www.heubachcolor.de/en/nc/products/katalog/asia/pigmentpraeparationen-3///ticoR-3.html
                    WO/2004/078852

Kane Ace X-CP Resin
	
Methyl methacrylate-acrylic copolymer/Polystyrene	
                    TiO2 particles, ZnO crystalline nanoparticles capped with silanes	 	Sealant, adhesives with long term resistance to UV light exposure.	Commercial development R&D	
                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/Kane-Ace_AcryliC–Capping-Compound.html
                    WO/2007/043496

Nylon
 nanocomposites
	
Polyamide (Nylon 6/Nylon MXD6/Nylon 6,66/Nylon 6,12)	Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/mostly Nanomer® series T from Nanocor Inc.)	Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting	Gas barrier films for food packaging and beverages/Flame retardant/Automotive part (timing belt, barrier, fuel line and tank, body panels, bumpers)	Commercial development	Bayer AG (Durethan® KU 2–2601) RTP Company (RTP 299 X series) Honeywell Polymers (Aegis® NC & OX) Nanocor Inc. (Imperm®) Ube (Ecobesta) NYCOA (nanoTUFF™, nanoSEAL™) Toyota

Epoxy nanocomposites
	Epoxy resin	Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/Nanomer® series E from Nanocor Inc.)	Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting	High voltage insulation	Commercial development	Nanocor (Nanomer® series E)

Polyolefin nanocomposites
	Polyolefin (polyethylene, polypropylene, ethylene vinyl acetate)	Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/for example Nanomer® from Nanocor Inc.)	Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting	Flame retardant/Automotive furniture appliance (Step-assist for GMC Safari, Chevrolet Astro Vans and trim, center bridge, sail panel and box rail protector for Hummer)	Commercial development	Nanocor (nanoMax®) Noble Polymer (Forte™, Nubrid™) General Motors Corporation (with Basell USA Inc. and Southern Clay Products, Inc.) PolyOne Corporation (Nanoblend™)

Polyurethane nanocomposites
	Polyurethane	Organo-modified clays (exfoliated Montmorillonite/Cloisite® from Southern Clay Products Inc.)	Sheet molding	Hull, deck and liner of Yamaha’s WaveRunners® (personal water craft)	Commercial development	Yamaha Motor Corporation (NanoXcel®)

Polyvinyl 
alcohol
 nanocomposites
	Polyvinyl alcohol	
                    Vermiculite
                  	Injection, blow and extrusion molding and film casting	Gas barrier films for food packaging	Commercial development	NanoPack Inc (nanoSEAL™)

Polypropylene/
polystyrene
 blends nanocomposites
	Polypropylene/polystyrene blends	Montmorillonite (Nanofil® from Southern Clay Products Inc.)	Injection, blow and extrusion molding	Footwell heater vent for various Volkswagen and Audi models	Commercial development	Putsch Kunststoffe GmbH (Elan XP)

Kane Ace 
MX-960
	
Siloxane-acrylic copolymer/monomers	
Siloxane-acrylic copolymer	 	Liquid hybrid epoxy-based resin for coatings, adhesives and composites applications	Commercial development	
                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/MX.html
                  

Kanaka 
XMAP
 type-S
	
                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated acrylic polymer	
                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated acrylic polymer	 	Sealant	Commercial development	
                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/MSPoly_XMAP.html
                  

Kanaka 
MS

polymer
	
                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated polypropylene	
                    Dimethoxymethylsilyl terminated polypropylene	 	Sealant, adhesives for construction, industrial, DIY, and automotive applications	Commercial development	
                    http://www.kanekatexas.com/MSPoly_home.html
                  

 	Fig. 23  Some commercial products based on hybrid O–I aerogels. Aerogel Products: Various hybrid aerogel products commercially available (top: Aspen Aerogel® flexible composite blankets; bottom: Nanogel™ translucent granules and fine particles-Cabot Corporation®). Subsea pipe-in-pipe insulation (courtesy of Aspen Aerogel®). Building insulation (courtesy of Aspen Aerogel®). Cold to hot industrial insulation (courtesy of Aspen Aerogel®). Insulated daylighting systems (Courtesy of Cabot Corporation®). Insulated apparel: “Hyper Elite/Uber Elite” sleeping pads from Pacific Outdoor Equipment (Aspen Aerogel® products), “Tundra” winter boots/“F22W” snowboard boots from Salomon (Aspen Aerogel® products), “Quota Zero - EXTREME AEROGEL” jacket from Grado Zero Espace: (Nanogel™ – Cabot Corporation), “Champion Supersuit” from Hanesbrands Inc. (ZERO-LOFT™ - Aspen Aerogel® - e21®), “Nanogelite” insulated bottle from Elite Srl (Nanogel™ – Cabot Corporation), “Toasty Feet” insulator insoles/“PolarPad” seat pads from PolarWrap LLC: (Aspen Aerogel® products).	 

 	Fig. 24  Some commercial products based on polymer nanocomposites (PNCs). Polymer reinforcement - top (clay-based PNCs): (a) interior footwell heater vent (Audi and Volkswagen models), (b) seat back (Honda Acura TL), (c) hull and deck of personal watercraft (Yamaha Motor Corporation's WaveRunner®), (d) trim, centre bridge, sail panel and box rail protector (GM Hummer H2 SUT), (e) centre console (Chevrolet HHR). Middle: (f) Michelin-Woco's antivibration systems (hybrid silica nanoparticles) and (g) Pirelli's tyres based on cap (hybrid silica nanoparticles-based PNCs) and base (nanoclay-based PNCs) technology. Bottom (clay-based PNCs): electric insulating plastic jacket (Nexans), flame retardant properties of PP doped with 5% wt of Nanomer® nanoclay (Nanocor®), gas/liquid barrier properties of PNCs shaped as thin films ((h) Nanomer®, (i) Nanolok™, and (j) Durethan® PNCs).	 


MOF (metal organic framework)	Multifunctional ligands	Oxoclusters/metal ions	Powders/Thin films	Catalysis, gas/liquid/drug storage, gas purification	Prototype	Basolite products series of BASF440
POSS	 	 	 	 	Prototype	Hybrid plastics
Mesoporous materials (POMTFs – POMPs)	
Polymers, Organosilanes, Dyes, Drugs, Surfactants, Latex…	Transition metal oxides/silica and derivatives/alumina….	Powders/Thin films/Sub-microparticles/Monoliths/Fibers	Micro-optics/photonic devices, microelectronics, energy, environment, functional and protective coatings, biomaterials, environmentally responsive materials, and biomicrofluidics	Prototype	
POMTFs52,
Aerosol-based POMPs130

Hybrid foams	Organosilanes, Enzymes, Biocomponents	
Silica, titania, zirconia, alumina	Micro-emulsion	Catalysis, Biocatalysis, Chromatography, Membranes	Prototype	
311,441,442


 	Fig. 25  Promising hybrid materials (MOFs, hybrid HPOMTFs and APPOMHMs, POSS and hybrid foams) and related new processes (TPA).	 

 	Fig. 26  Number of papers (ISI Web of KnowledgeSM) and WO patents (WIPO) that use the concept of “sol–gel derived hybrids”, “hybrid materials”, “O–I nanocomposite”, “bionanocomposite”, ormocers, ormosils, “coordination polymers” and “metal organic frameworks”.	 
Footnote
† Part of the themed issue on hybrid materials.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
