Insights into mechanical compression and the enhancement in performance by Mg(OH) 2 coating in flexible dye sensitized solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP53260G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP53260G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2912-2919Insights into mechanical compression and the enhancement in performance by Mg(OH)2 coating in flexible dye sensitized solar cells

        
          
            T. A. 
            Nirmal Peiris
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            K. G. 
            Upul Wijayantha
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jorge 
            García-Cañadas
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Loughborough University, Loughborough, LE11 3TU, UK
bCardiff School of Engineering, Cardiff University, The Parade, Cardiff, CF24 3AA, UK. E-mail: garciacanadasj@cardiff.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0)2920 8759 50
Received 
      1st August 2013
    , Accepted 28th November 2013First published on 2nd December 2013AbstractThe engineering of flexible dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) by mechanical compression is one of the methods that allow low temperature processing of these devices. However, suppressing the high temperature sintering process also significantly reduces the performance of the cells. In our previous work [J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1211], we have attempted to improve flexible DSC performance by coating the porous TiO2 photoanode with an electrodeposited Mg(OH)2 layer. In that work, we have obtained one of the highest photovoltages reported to date in flexible DSCs (847 mV). In order to gain more insights into the reasons for both poorer performance of compressed cells and the origin of the voltage enhancement achieved by the Mg(OH)2 coating, here we present an in-depth study by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, Mott–Schottky plots analysis and open-circuit voltage decays. The existence of a shunt resistance in the mechanically compressed cells is revealed, causing an additional drawback to the poor inter-particle necking. By introducing the Mg(OH)2 coating the recombination in the cell becomes significantly reduced, being the key reason which is responsible for the higher photovoltage. Additionally, the coating and the compression cause modifications in the surface states and in the nature of the interfaces with the electrolyte. This induces TiO2 conduction band displacements and shifts of the relative position of the modified states that influence the performance.
Introduction
Exploration of lightweight and flexible renewable energy conversion devices is highly important in the modern world because of their advantages as low cost alternatives to conventional silicon solar cells1,2 and their integration in advanced mobile applications and power devices.3 Dye sensitized solar cells (DSCs) are considered a promising low cost technology and also have the potential to compete in the search for environmentally clean sources of electrical energy.4
In DSCs a nanostructured TiO2 electrode is typically sintered at 450 °C on a glass substrate to obtain an interconnective semiconductor network that collects and transports the photo-injected electrons to the contact. It also provides a large area skeleton that allows abundant dye upload on the surface amplifying the photogenerated charge. Engineering the DSCs by mechanical compression is one of the available methods that allow low temperature processing of the cells.5 This permits the use of plastic substrates6 and roll to roll manufacturing at the same time that the energetic costs are reduced by the suppression of the high temperature sintering.7,8
However, compared to glass based DSCs, low temperature processed flexible cells are far behind in performance. One of the reasons for this behavior is the poor inter-particle and particle–substrate connection,9 which leads to a poorer transport of injected electrons and increases the recombination rate, which occurs either from the substrate (back contact) or from the TiO2.
Recently, many efforts have been made to improve the flexible DSC performance by using blocking layers prepared by low temperature deposition methods. Metal oxides (MgO, ZnO, Nb2O5, Al2O3, SiO2, and ZrO2),10,11 metal hydroxides (Mg(OH)2, Zn(OH)2, Al(OH)3, and La(OH)3)12 and high band gap semiconductors13 are widely employed to retard the recombination pathways from both the TiO2 and the substrate. The promising results of our previously reported work confirmed that electrodeposition of a conformal Mg(OH)2 insulating coating on the TiO2 electrode improves the performance of flexible DSCs.14 Especially, a significant enhancement in photovoltage was achieved (847 mV). This is the highest voltage value reported to date for a treated flexible DSC.
In order to understand the origin of the higher performance provided by the Mg(OH)2 coating and gain more insights into the reasons behind the lower performance of mechanically compressed cells, we present here a detailed analysis by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (IS). Although IS is a well-known and widely used technique in the analysis of DSCs,15 very few in-depth studies have been reported on flexible DSCs.9 Most of the literature shows experimental results performed at open-circuit voltage (Voc) or only some dc voltage values,16–18 which does not provide information on the events occurring in the whole voltage region.
Our study analyses the impedance spectra at all the dc voltages in which the device operates, providing a more complete and accurate picture of the cells. For this purpose we discuss the electrical and operational differences in cells made with TiO2 electrodes with and without Mg(OH)2 coating and compression. We observe new features appearing due to the compression. Furthermore, we determine the origin of the photovoltage enhancement and identify the alteration of bandgap states in the coated cells. Electrical events (band displacements and energy shifts in bandgap states) associated with the modification of the substrate/electrolyte interface are also discussed. Open-circuit voltage decays (OCVD) and Mott–Schottky plots are used to support the IS results as well. The new features analyzed provide a more clear understanding of the most relevant processes that cause the lower performance of flexible DSC which is key to identifying new routes for improvement.
Experimental
Nanoporous TiO2 thin film electrodes were prepared from a binder-free colloidal suspension of TiO2 nanoparticles (P25, Degussa). Five consecutive layers of colloidal suspensions were dispersed on ITO-PEN substrates (13 Ω □−1, Peccell Technologies, Inc., Japan) by doctor blade and compression methods.19 The first TiO2 layer was compressed at 80 MPa, the 3 following layers at 30 MPa, and the last layer was not compressed. An additional electrode formed by 5 non-compressed layers was also prepared for comparison. TiO2-coated ITO-PEN substrates were then heated at 140 °C for a 30 min period on the surface of a hot plate.9
A Mg(OH)2 coating was electrodeposited on a TiO2 electrode in an aqueous electrolyte solution composed of Mg(NO3)2·6H2O (Sigma Aldrich) having a concentration of 0.01 M.9 The electrodeposition was carried out in a three electrode configuration using the TiO2 coated ITO-PEN substrate as the working electrode with 0.16 cm2 area, Ag/AgCl electrode and Pt as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. The working and counter electrodes were placed parallel to each other separated by a distance of approximately 1 cm in the electrodeposition solution. The electrodeposition was conducted at a constant current of −0.6 mA (chronopotentiometry) for 2 min using a Potentiostat–Galvanostat (Eco Chemie micro-Autolab type III). After the deposition, the films were removed from the electrolyte solution, washed with distilled water and allowed to dry at room temperature.
Non-deposited and Mg(OH)2 deposited TiO2 films were soaked overnight in an ethanolic solution of 1 × 10−6 M N719 (di-tetrabutylammoniumcis-bis(isothiocyanato)bis (2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylate)) dye (Solaronix SA). The sensitized electrodes were sandwiched with a Pt/Ti alloy-PEN flexible counter electrode (5 Ω □−1, Peccell Technologies, Inc., Japan) using a 25 μm thick Surlyn frame (Solaronix SA). The sandwiched cell was filled with the electrolyte through a hole in the counter electrode and sealed. The iodide/tri-iodide electrolyte comprising 0.4 M LiI, 0.4 M tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI), and 0.04 M I2 dissolved in a 0.3 M N-methylbenzimidazole (NMB) in acetonitrile (AN) and 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) solvent mixture at a volume ratio of 1:1 was used. For the analysis, three different flexible DSCs were made using modified TiO2 electrodes, that is, with (coated cell, CC), without Mg(OH)2 coating (non-coated cell, NC) and a non-compressed (0 MPa cell) as deposited electrode.
Electrochemical experiments were carried out using a potentiostat (Eco Chemie Autolab PGSTAT302N). Steady-state current density–voltage (j–V) measurements of the cells were taken while the cells were illuminated at 100 mW cm−2 light intensity. IS measurements were performed between 0 and −0.9 V at 0.05 V steps in the frequency range from 0.01 Hz to 1 MHz, both in the dark and under illumination. Results were analyzed using Zview Software. All the constant phase elements used in the fittings were converted to capacitance values using a reported procedure.20 Illumination was achieved by means of a warm white LED light source (Floodlight, 50 Watt). The corresponding (j–V) plots were recorded using the same LED light source and also an AM 1.5 Class A solar simulator (Solar Light 16S – 300).
OCVD measurements were conducted by illuminating the cells with the solar simulator at 100 mW cm−2 intensity until the photovoltage was stabilized. Then the light was turned off, and the open-circuit voltage was recorded at 50 ms intervals. All light intensities in all experiments were measured using a pyranometer (Solar Light Co., PMA2144 Class II).
Results and discussion
Most of the internal processes occurring in DSCs are described in IS by the electrical equivalent circuit of Fig. 1a.21 The series resistance Rs accounts for the electrical resistance of the transparent conductive oxide (TCO), the electrical contacts and the wires. Rco and Cco are the resistance and capacitance at the contact between the TCO and the TiO2 respectively. RBL and CBL describe the recombination processes at the TCO/electrolyte interface. The ZD Warburg element relates to the diffusion of the redox species. The reduction process at the platinized counter electrode/electrolyte interface is described by the charge transfer resistance (RPt) and the capacitance (CPt) at the interface. The processes that involve the TiO2 film are described by the transmission line element. The microscopic transport resistance rt accounts for the transport of electrons in the nanoparticles. The recombination process at the TiO2/electrolyte interface is determined by the charge transfer resistance rct and the chemical capacitance cμ (accumulation of charge in the density of states of the TiO2).
 Fig. 1  The equivalent circuit that describes most of the processes that take place in a DSC (a). The equivalent circuit used for the analysis of the impedance results including an alternative shunt path (b). 
Our previous impedance analysis in the dark on flexible DSCs revealed that compression of TiO2 electrodes causes significant differences in the high frequency region (left part) of the impedance spectra.9 This region usually only indicates the oxidation of the redox mediator at the platinized counter electrode. This oxidation process is described by a semicircle consisting of the parallel combination of RPt and CPt. Since additional contributions to RPt and CPt values other than the oxidation process are expected, the high frequency semicircle is going to be determined by RHF and CHF in the present study. The processes that account for RHF and CHF vary from one cell to another. Existing contributions are from different origins as we will discuss accordingly below for each cell.

Fig. 2 shows the dark impedance results at the different applied voltages (Vapp) for the three different cells prepared (0 MPa, NC and CC) obtained by fitting to the equivalent circuit in Fig. 1b. The Rrec and Ccell elements account for the contribution at the interfaces where recombination takes place (rct/RBL and cμ/CBL respectively) and RHF and CHF account for the combination of the shunt path, the counter electrode reaction and the ITO/TiO2 contact (Rshunt/RPt/Rco and Cshunt/CPt/Cco respectively). The Warburg element (ZD) values are not shown in Fig. 2 since they only appear at the most negative voltages and have a minor influence on the analysis. As we will remark later, the transport resistance Rt in the transmission line element was only used for the fitting in some of the spectra in the CC. In the rest of the analysis it did not show up.
 Fig. 2  Dark impedance results of the non-compressed 0 MPa cell (green squares), the coated cell (CC, black circles) and the non-coated cell (NC, white circles). The high frequency resistance RHF (a), high frequency capacitance CHF (b), recombination resistance Rrec (c), and cell capacitance Ccell (d) are plotted versus the applied potential Vapp. In (c) the transport resistance Rt (red squares) from the coated cell (CC) is included. 
Effects of mechanical compression
In order to gather information about the effects of the mechanical compression, we discuss in this section the differences between the non-compressed (0 MPa) and the compressed cell (CC). In the 0 MPa cell the usual trend of RPt and CPt (nearly constant behavior) at voltages more positive than −0.6 V is observed (Fig. 2a and b), and this is the process responsible for the high frequency region response in the non-compressed cell (the shunt path does not appear). However, a deviation (small increase in RHF and a slight decrease in CHF) from this behavior appears when the applied voltage changes towards values more negative than −0.6 V. This is due to the rise of the parallel combination of the contact resistance (Rco) and the contact capacitance (Cco) at the non-compressed ITO–TiO2 contact, which agrees with the increase of Ccell due to cμ (Fig. 2d) taking place at the same potential (i.e. electrons start to accumulate in the TiO2 and to cross the TCO/TiO2 interface). The parallel combination Rco∥Cco connecting in series with RPt∥CPt, is responsible for the increase in RHF and the decrease of CHF.
The obtained Ccell in Fig. 2d exhibits the Mott–Schottky behavior of the cell at the more positive voltages and the exponential increment at more negative values than −0.6 V. However, there are two remarkable differences here with respect to standard liquid cells. (i) The onset voltage −0.6 V for the rise of Cμ is shifted to around −0.2 V compared to the standard liquid cells where the onset usually occurs at around −0.4 V.21,22 (ii) Additionally, Rrec (Fig. 2c) shows a small and nearly constant value in the Mott–Schottky region (Vapp > −0.6 V) associated with strong recombination occurring at the ITO/electrolyte interface. A more steep exponential decrease of several orders of magnitude, as appearing at Vapp < −0.6 V is typically observed in standard cells along the whole applied voltage range. Both (i) and (ii) are consequences of the non-compressed TiO2 electrode which is primarily derived from poor nanoparticle segregation along the substrate and reduced particle–particle and particle–substrate connections. Since most of the nanoparticles remain aggregated in the film, the substrate area exposed to the electrolyte is higher, causing the strong recombination in the back layer and the upwards TiO2 conduction band shift (i.e. the −0.2 V shift of the cμ onset). This is also observed in the Mott–Schottky analysis as we will discuss later.
The mechanical compression is beneficial for segregating the TiO2 nanoparticles, improving the ITO–TiO2 contact, and the connection (necking) between the nanoparticles.9 This process produces significant changes in the impedance spectra of the compressed NC cell as shown in Fig. 2. In the low frequency region (Fig. 2c and d), the onset of Cμ is now at −0.5 V, 100 mV more positive than the 0 MPa cell, thus closer to standard DSCs. On the other hand, the value of the Ccell in the Mott–Schottky region (more positive voltages than −0.5 V) is significantly larger in the NC cell than in the 0 MPa cell. Both facts are due to the reduction of the substrate area exposed to the electrolyte that modifies the potential drop in the Helmholtz layer. A Mott–Schottky plot of all cells is shown in Fig. 3. A significant reduction in the slope of the plots is observed when comparing the 0 MPa and NC cells in Fig. 3a. This is due to a reduction in the area of the substrate/electrolyte interface caused by the segregation of the nanoparticles by the mechanical compression.23 Regarding the exponential increase in the Ccell due to the cμ, the slope is mainly determined by the density of states (DOS) in the bandgap (trap distribution).24 As observed in Fig. 2d, both 0 MPa and NC cells show similar slopes (parallel increase), pointing out that the DOS is not affected by the compression.
 Fig. 3  Mott–Schottky plots of Ccell (a) and CHF (b) for the 0 MPa (green squares), NC (white circles) and CC (black circles) cells. Inset plot in (a) shows a magnification for more clarification. Lines are linear regressions for each plot, except for the CC cell that shows no linear trend. 
By looking at the Rrec values obtained for the NC cell, they are higher than in the 0 MPa cell at all the applied voltages and show the usual exponential trend as in standard DSCs24 (Fig. 2c). On the other hand, it is remarkable that sudden changes in RHF (Fig. 2a) and CHF (Fig. 2b) appear now in the high frequency region of the NC cell. A constant trend at the more positive voltages is followed by a sharp minimum at −0.5 V and then a decrease reaching the trend of the Pt counter electrode response at voltages more negative than −0.7 V is observed. We attribute this feature to a shunt resistance Rshunt (Fig. 1b), i.e. there exists in the cell an alternative path for the electrons to cross other than the usual route through recombination in Fig. 1a. This is produced by the direct contact of the TiO2 with the counter electrode. This resistance depends mainly on the transport resistance in the TiO2. For this reason it shows a constant trend until the film starts to accumulate electrons (Vapp > −0.5 V). Then, the conductivity increases and hence Rshunt decreases in the typical exponential way of the TiO2 transport resistance.15 Once it reaches small values, the Pt resistance dominates at Vapp < −0.7 V and a behavior similar to the 0 MPa cell is observed. The sharp minimum at −0.5 V that relates to the maximum at the same voltage in CHF (Fig. 2b) is due to a mono-energetic deep surface state25 that frequently appears close to the voltage value of the onset of Cμ. Similar features appear in the RHF reported in our previous study evaluating the influence on the mechanical compression where we suggested that a corrosion or degradation process could be responsible for the behavior observed.9 However, the further analysis performed here points out to the existence of a shunt resistance as explained above.
The CHF of the NC cell in Fig. 2b shows a Mott–Schottky trend at the more positive voltages as plotted in Fig. 3b. The apparent flatband potential is now far from the ≈−1.3 V value of ITO observed for Ccell (Fig. 3a). In contrast, it shows a value ≈−0.9 V, which is close to the flatband potential value of TiO2.26 This indicates that the Cshunt relates to the TiO2/electrolyte interface when the film is in the dielectric state. When the accumulation of electrons takes place, Cshunt decreases since the chemical capacitance takes over at low frequencies (Fig. 2d) and the CPt then dominates the high frequency response as occurred with RHF (Fig. 2a).
The origin of the shunt resistance is not completely understood and further studies are needed to fully explain the phenomenon. We believe that the origin of the shunt resistance is due to movements in the TiO2 network derived from the poor sintering and the flexibility of the substrates and/or to the pressure applied to the sandwiched electrodes during the sealing process. It seems that the shunt resistance is a consequence of the use of flexible substrates and it is more unlikely to appear in glass-based DSCs. This, in addition to the losses induced by the low-temperature sintering, could be the main reasons for the poorer performance observed in flexible DSCs when compared with their glass counterparts.
Effects of Mg(OH)2 coating
When Mg(OH)2 is electrodeposited onto the TiO2 electrode (CC), a hydroxide layer is grown from the substrate area non-covered by TiO2 nanoparticles that spreads filling the voids of the nanoporous matrix. By employing a deposition time of 2 min, the Mg(OH)2 is expected to cover the areas of the substrate in contact with the electrolyte and extend some monolayers along the nanoparticulate network.14Fig. 2 shows the changes produced in the dark impedance parameters by the coating process.
By first looking at the Ccell, we observe that the onset of the Cμ is shifted ≈150 mV more positive when the cell is coated. This clearly states that the Helmholtz layer at the substrate/electrolyte interface has been modified by the electrodeposited Mg(OH)2 coating. This is also observed in the Mott–Schottky plots in the inset of Fig. 3a, where the Mott–Schottky linear relation is lost due to the contribution of the coated layer to the total capacitance of the substrate/(electrolyte, TiO2, Mg(OH)2) interface.23 At the more negative applied voltage region, the chemical capacitance of CC shows a peak at −0.65 V that it is not present in the NC (Fig. 2d). This peak produces a valley in the Rrec.25 Similarly, a peak also appears in CHF (Fig. 2b) at the same applied voltage value that relates to the minimum appearing in RHF in the same voltage region (Fig. 2a). These features are due to the modification of TiO2 surface states that become covered by the coating that has penetrated into the porous network, giving rise to a modified distribution.
The modified distribution of states also causes a distinctive feature at −0.75 ≤ Vapp ≤ −0.65 V in the impedance spectra obtained for the CC due to the presence of Rt (red squares in Fig. 2c) which was not visible in the rest of the cells. Fig. 4 shows the spectrum of the cell with the clear linear trend due to this transport resistance observed at mid frequencies, which vanishes at −0.8 V. Rt appears due to the quicker accumulation of electrons occurring in part of the modified surface states, since a peak appears now in the CHF instead of the decrease shown by the NC cell (Fig. 2b). The fact that the transport through the shunt is now influenced by this charge accumulation produces the linear trend in the spectra and the sharp peak in RHF, which drops to very small values that correspond to the contact resistance Rco since the Rshunt is now described by Rt at mid frequencies.
 Fig. 4  Impedance spectrum in the dark of the cell coated with Mg(OH)2 at −0.70 V (dots) and fitting to the spectrum (lines). The right plot shows a zoom at high frequency. 
At Vapp < −0.8 V, the influence of the coated states is no longer significant and the high frequency parameters show the same trend as the Pt counter electrode response (Fig. 2a and b). We remark that Rt is usually observed at voltages close to the onset of Cμ which is when the electron concentration starts to increase in the conduction band.27 However, in the CC it appears at voltages far from the onset region (−0.65 V). This is due to the influence of the modified surface states that are located in the part of the film close to the substrate, where the coating extends.
Another relevant change produced by the effect of the Mg(OH)2 coating is the significant increase of the shunt resistance (Fig. 2a) and decrease of the recombination along the whole voltage range (Rrec increase in Fig. 2c). This largely benefits the cell performance and proves the successful operation of the introduced coated layer. As occurred in the NC cell, the presence of deep surface states which produce the small peaks in RHF and CHF (Fig. 2a and b) also appears. Nevertheless, it is slightly shifted 50 mV positively in the CC respect to NC due to the modification of the Helmholtz double layer produced by the coating.
The comparisons carried out from dark impedance results have revealed a significant number of features produced by the coating layer. However, in order to evaluate how the cells behave under actual operating conditions, experiments under illumination are required.
Analysis of device performance under illumination

Fig. 5a shows the j–V characteristics of the NC and CC cells. As can be seen in the inset of the figure a decrease in the photocurrent (jsc) and an increase in the photovoltage (Voc), fill factor (FF) and efficiency (η) were produced by the Mg(OH)2 coating. Note that the performance of the cells observed in Fig. 5a are lower than in our previous work14 due to the use of a LED light source. When solar simulated light is used similar results to those reported were obtained (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  
j–V curves of mechanically compressed cells with the Mg(OH)2 layer (CC, grey) and without (NC, black) under 100 mW cm−2 LED illumination (a) and solar simulated light (b) from a Solar Light 16S-300, AM1.5G, Class A simulator. 
The decrease in the photocurrent observed in the CC can be explained by a reduction of the amount of adsorbed dye, occurring since the Mg(OH)2 penetrates to some extent along the voids of the nanoparticulate network. This was proved by internal surface area and IPCE experiments in our previous article.14

Fig. 6 shows the impedance results under illumination for the NC and CC cells. A general decrease of all the resistance values with respect to the dark results (Fig. 2) is observed. The RHF decreases around one order of magnitude and the Rrec even higher, especially at the more positive voltages (Fig. 6a and c). This is due to the fact that the photo-injected electrons make the Fermi level no longer homogeneous along the film as in the dark measurements. Therefore, the electron concentration and conductivity of the TiO2 are higher and non-negligible even at the more positive voltages. This also makes it more difficult to distinguish the processes that appeared in the dark results. In the high frequency part both CC and NC cells reach the Pt counter electrode behavior at voltages more negative than −0.6 V (Fig. 6a and 6b), and the effect of the modified surface state distribution induced by the coating is shifted to the more positive voltage region (Vapp > −0.4 V) and additionally broadens, causing the larger CHF values and the maximum in RHF. The small peaks due to deep surface states in both cells in CHF appear at −0.25 V and −0.45 V for the NC and CC cells respectively, producing the small minimums in RHF at the same voltage values. As observed in the dark measurements (Fig. 2a), the Mg(OH)2 coating increases Rshunt in the CC cell, especially in the −0.4 V < Vapp < −0.1 V region (Fig. 6a). This leads to the higher field factor observed in the CC.
 Fig. 6  Impedance results under illumination for the non-coated (NC, white) and coated (CC, black) cells. RHF (a), CHF (b), Rrec (c) and Ccell (d) are plotted versus the applied potential. 
The recombination resistance is higher for the whole potential range (except a small region at the more positive voltages) for the CC cell due to the coating as occurred in the dark measurements. This improvement turns out to be responsible for the enhancement achieved in the photovoltage by the Mg(OH)2 coating layer. However, the displacement of the conduction band position in the TiO2 has to be also taken into account. For this purpose, in Fig. 7Rrec and Ccell are plotted versus the Fermi level voltage VF, which represents the voltage drop in the cell due to the separation of the quasi-Fermi levels of electrons (EFn) and holes (Eredox), i.e. VF = (EFn − Eredox)/q, where q is the elementary charge.24VF is obtained by subtracting the voltage drop in the total series resistance RTS from the applied voltage, VF = Vapp − jRST. The total series resistance is given by RST = Rs + RHF + RD, RD being the diffusion resistance extracted from ZD. Fig. 7b reveals that the coating layer shifts the conduction band position. In order to quantify this shift (ΔEc) and properly compare both NC and CC cells, Rrec and Ccell are plotted versus an “equivalent conduction band” potential Vecb in Fig. 7c and d.24 ΔEc is obtained by displacing −30 mV the VF for Ccell in the CC cell in order for it to superpose that of the NC cell. The Vecb is calculated as Vecb = VF − ΔEc. Fig. 7c reveals the actual recombination kinetics, which is higher than what was initially observed in Fig. 6c. From this analysis it can be concluded that despite the presence of a downwards displacement of the conduction band of 30 mV, the recombination kinetics is much slower in the CC. This leads to the significant Voc enhancement observed in this cell.
 Fig. 7  Representation of the light impedance results from Fig. 6versus the Fermi Level voltage VF (a, b) and the equivalent conduction band potential Vecb (c, d). 

Fig. 8 shows the electron lifetime obtained from OCVD experiments performed in both NC and CC cells. A significant increase is observed due to the coating, in agreement with the impedance results. Moreover, the lifetime curve for the CC shows the linear trend at the more negative voltages indicating the influence of recombination from the conduction band, which is not observed for the NC cell that shows the parabolic trend due to the main recombination taking place through the surface states.26 This indicates that the EFn rises much higher (closer to the conduction band) in the CC cell, hence providing a higher Voc despite the 30 mV downwards shift of the conduction band.
 Fig. 8  The electron recombination lifetime obtained from OCVD measurements for the non-coated (NC, black) and coated (CC, grey) cells. 
Conclusions
An in-depth study based on IS results in mechanically compressed flexible DSCs has been performed. The comparisons carried out between a non-compressed cell (0 MPa) and a non-coated compressed cell (NC) revealed new features appearing in the high frequency response induced by the compression, such as the presence of a shunt resistance. This could be a reason for the poorer performance of flexible DSCs with respect to standard glass DSCs. Additionally, contributions due to the ITO–TiO2 contact were also evaluated.
When an electrochemically deposited Mg(OH)2 coating is applied on the photoanode, a modification of surface states in the TiO2 occurs and the shunt and recombination resistances increase due to the blocking effect. The coated cell exhibited a reduction of photocurrent in addition to a large gain in photovoltage. The lower dye uptake caused by the TiO2 nanoparticles being coated is the main reason behind the photocurrent decrease. A downwards shift of 30 mV in the conduction band position of TiO2 in the coated cell occurs. However, the higher recombination rate is more significant and prevails, leading to the Voc enhancement. OCVD are in agreement with these results and also show much higher electron lifetimes for the CC.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by UK EPSRC, DSTL, Johnson Matthey Plc and Department of Chemistry, Loughborough University. All members of the renewable energy research group in the Department of Chemistry, Loughborough University are acknowledged for their assistance in this work. The authors would like to acknowledge previous related work conducted by S. Senthilarasu.
Notes and references
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Han, A. Islam, H. Chen, C. Malapaka, B. Chiranjeevi, S. F. Zhang, X. D. Yang and M. Yanagida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6057–6060 CAS .
A. Nathan, A. Ahnood, M. T. Cole, S. Lee, Y. Suzuki, P. Hiralal, F. Bonaccorso, T. Hasan, L. Garcia-Gancedo, A. Dyadyusha, S. Haque, P. Andrew, S. Hofmann, J. Moultrie, D. P. Chu, A. J. Flewitt, A. C. Ferrari, M. J. Kelly, J. Robertson, G. A. J. Amaratunga and W. I. Milne, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1486–1517 CrossRef .
J. Q. Peng, L. Lu and H. X. Yang, Renew. Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 19, 255–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Weerasinghe, F. Z. Huang and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 174–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lipomi and Z. A. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3314–3328 CAS .
G. Hashmi, K. Miettunen, T. Peltola, J. Halme, I. Asghar, K. Aitola, M. Toivola and P. Lund, Renew. Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3717–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Tinguely, R. Solarska, A. Braun and T. Graule, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2011, 26, 045007 CrossRef .
S. Senthilarasu, T. A. N. Peiris, J. Garcia-Canadas and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19053–19061 CAS .
A. Kay and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2930–2935 CrossRef CAS .
E. Palomares, J. N. Clifford, S. A. Haque, T. Lutz and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 475–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yum, S. Nakade, D. Y. Kim and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 3215–3219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Liu, L. Wang, Z. S. Xue and B. Liu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6393–6396 RSC .
T. A. N. Peiris, S. Senthilarasu and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1211–1218 CAS .

          J. Bisquert and F. Fabregat-Santiago, in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ed. K. Kalyanasundaram, CRC Press,  2010, ch. 12, p. 457 Search PubMed .
C. Longo, A. F. Nogueira, M. A. De Paoli and H. Cachet, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5925–5930 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Lin, J. B. Li, X. X. Li, B. Cui and L. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13744–13753 CAS .
K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, T. Saukkonen, M. Toivola and P. Lund, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, B876–B883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamaguchi, N. Tobe, D. Matsumoto, T. Nagai and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 812–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Proskuryakov, K. Durose, M. K. Al Turkestani, I. Mora-Sero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, V. Barrioz, D. Lamb, S. J. C. Irvine and E. W. Jones, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Ito, M. Gratzel, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, T. Bessho and H. Imai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25210–25221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, E. Palomares, L. Otero, D. B. Kuang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6550–6560 CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert, P. Bogdanoff and A. Zaban, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, E293–E298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9083–9118 RSC .
J. Bisquert, F. Fabregat-Santiago, I. Mora-Sero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, E. M. Barea and E. Palomares, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 684–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Bisquert, A. Zaban, M. Greenshtein and I. Mora-Sero, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13550–13559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, L. Cevey, P. Chen, M. K. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 558–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The equivalent circuit that describes most of the processes that take place in a DSC (a). The equivalent circuit used for the analysis of the impedance results including an alternative shunt path (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  Dark impedance results of the non-compressed 0 MPa cell (green squares), the coated cell (CC, black circles) and the non-coated cell (NC, white circles). The high frequency resistance RHF (a), high frequency capacitance CHF (b), recombination resistance Rrec (c), and cell capacitance Ccell (d) are plotted versus the applied potential Vapp. In (c) the transport resistance Rt (red squares) from the coated cell (CC) is included.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mott–Schottky plots of Ccell (a) and CHF (b) for the 0 MPa (green squares), NC (white circles) and CC (black circles) cells. Inset plot in (a) shows a magnification for more clarification. Lines are linear regressions for each plot, except for the CC cell that shows no linear trend.	 

 	Fig. 4  Impedance spectrum in the dark of the cell coated with Mg(OH)2 at −0.70 V (dots) and fitting to the spectrum (lines). The right plot shows a zoom at high frequency.	 

 	Fig. 5  
j–V curves of mechanically compressed cells with the Mg(OH)2 layer (CC, grey) and without (NC, black) under 100 mW cm−2 LED illumination (a) and solar simulated light (b) from a Solar Light 16S-300, AM1.5G, Class A simulator.	 

 	Fig. 6  Impedance results under illumination for the non-coated (NC, white) and coated (CC, black) cells. RHF (a), CHF (b), Rrec (c) and Ccell (d) are plotted versus the applied potential.	 

 	Fig. 7  Representation of the light impedance results from Fig. 6versus the Fermi Level voltage VF (a, b) and the equivalent conduction band potential Vecb (c, d).	 

 	Fig. 8  The electron recombination lifetime obtained from OCVD measurements for the non-coated (NC, black) and coated (CC, grey) cells.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
