Single-layer graphene sheets as counter electrodes for fiber-shaped polymer solar cells   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA40710A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA40710A
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 13720-13727Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSingle-layer graphene sheets as counter electrodes for fiber-shaped polymer solar cells†

        
          
            Dianyi 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuli 
            Zhao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Anyuan 
            Cao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chaohua 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhiwei 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zuqiang 
            Bian
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongfan 
            Liu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Chunhui 
            Huang
          
        
      a
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Materials Chemistry and Applications, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China. E-mail: bianzq@pku.edu.cn
bCenter for Nanochemistry, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory for Structural Chemistry of Unstable and Stable Species, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P. R. China
Received 
      8th February 2013
    , Accepted 13th May 2013First published on 14th May 2013AbstractA single-layer graphene sheet represents the thinnest transparent conductive electrode for planar photovoltaic devices on both rigid and flexible substrates. Here, we demonstrate fiber-shaped polymer solar cells wrapped by a Au nanoparticle-adsorbed graphene single-layer sheet as a counter electrode, and show cell efficiencies up to 2.53% under standard illumination, which can be improved to 4.36% when tested on a diffusive reflector. This is a relatively high efficiency reported for fiber solar cells using solid-state polymers as active layers. The graphene layer not only serves as a transparent flexible electrode for the fiber solar cells, but also provides good encapsulation on the polymer layers, resulting in excellent flexibility and device stability in both inertial gas and ambient atmosphere, with less than 5% efficiency degradation in air after 8 days. Single-layer graphene is a potential electrode material for constructing efficient and stable polymer fiber solar cells.
Introduction
Solar cells fabricated on thin fibers can complement application areas of planar structure photovoltaics, for example, in areas such as flexible fiber electronics and woven energy textiles.1–5 Recently, there has been intensive interest in searching for alternative electrode materials for fiber solar cells (FSCs) with the potential to replace traditional noble metals (e.g. Pt).6,7 In addition to more conventional choices including less expensive metal wires (e.g. Ag, steel) and carbon fibers, nanomaterials such as carbon nanotube (CNT) films and spun yarns have emerged as suitable electrodes and are compatible to both dye-sensitized TiO2 and conjugated polymer FSCs.8–13 Different electrodes have yielded solar cell efficiencies in the range of 1–7%, while nanostructure electrodes offer additional advantages in improving the device efficiency and flexibility, as well as reducing material weight and cost.
A one-atomic layer (single-layer) graphene sheet represents the thinnest possible electrode, yet with high optical transparency and electrical conductivity. There have been considerable progresses in synthesizing large-area (cm-scale) uniform graphene sheets with controlled number of layers by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on Cu foils or other substrates.14–17 Researchers have produced high quality single-layer graphene (SLG) films which exhibit very high light transmittance (>95%) at a low sheet resistance (∼100 Ω/□) after thermal annealing, and these excellent properties make it possible to fabricate graphene electrodes for various optoelectronic devices.14,16 After synthesis, graphene sheets can be securely transferred to wafer or plastic substrates by solution process and polymer-assisted stamping technique, which facilitates subsequent device fabrication and measurements. In addition, like exfoliated graphene oxide sheets, the properties of CVD-grown graphene layers can be tuned by chemical doping or other structural modification methods.18–23 Successful synthesis and transfer of large-area graphene layers with tailored properties have paved the way for further exploring their applications in areas such as solar cells.
In fact, thin films consisting of single to few-layer graphene sheets have already been used in planar solar cells as transparent conductive electrodes, in comparison to indium tin-oxide (ITO) or metal films made by thermal evaporation. For example, CVD-grown graphene sheets were transferred to glass slides with conjugated polymer or small molecule layers deposited on the top, and the solar cells with graphene electrodes showed efficiencies in the range of 1–2.6%, which were slightly lower than those of ITO electrodes.23–26 Inverted polymer solar cells made by transferring a Au-doped single-layer graphene sheet or multi layers by repeated transfer onto the polymer layer showed efficiencies up to 3.04%, which was the highest efficiency among planar solar cells involving graphene electrode.27,28 Flexible organic solar cells with bottom graphene layer electrodes fabricated on plastic substrates were also reported, with efficiencies of 1–2.5%.21,29 The above results demonstrate that graphene can be transferred to glass or plastics for making planar solar cells, although it has not been applied to thin fibers to fabricate fiber-shaped devices.
Results and discussion
Here, we fabricated polymer-based fiber solar cells which were entirely wrapped by a SLG sheet as counter electrode. Our device structure was established on a clean surface stainless steel wire which was coated by multiple functional layers including a sintered ZnO nanoparticle film (∼40 nm-thick), a bulk heterojunction layer of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (∼200 nm-thick), and a poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer (∼60 nm-thick) from inside to outside (illustrated in Fig. 1a).10 After that, a CVD-grown SLG on a Cu foil was transferred to the polymer layer, forming a conformal coating around the fiber. The as-grown graphene was characterized by Raman spectroscopy, which showed typical G and 2D peaks with a I2D/IG intensity ratio of ∼3.5, and a symmetric 2D band with a full width at half maximum of ∼34 cm−1, indicating the single-layer structure (Fig. S1, ESI†).17,30–32 The transferring process involved spin-coating a thin poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) layer (300 nm-thick) on the graphene-Cu foil, etching the Cu substrate by a FeCl3 solution, doping the graphene layer by Au nanoparticles, and wrapping the graphene-adhered PMMA sheet around the polymer-coated steel wire in which the graphene side was in direct contact to the polymer (illustrated in Fig. 1b). The PMMA was then washed away by acetone to leave a clean graphene layer wrapping around the fiber. Compared to previous dye-sensitized fiber solar cells,7,8,12,13,33,34 the present devices are in solid state (without liquid electrolyte) and remove the use of a secondary Pt wire electrode. The polymer layers are entirely encapsulated in the continuous graphene layer or the graphene-PMMA sheet. We have used a carbon nanotube film as counter electrode for polymer FSCs in a recent work,10 however, the porous nanotube network can not guarantee full coverage on the active layer.
 Fig. 1  Structure and fabrication process of the fiber solar cells. (a) Illustration of the FSC structure based on a polymer-coated steel wire (primary electrode) and wrapped by a SLG sheet as counter electrode. The outside PMMA sheet used for transferring graphene can be either retained on the fiber or washed away by acetone. (b) Fabrication process of a FSC including PMMA spin-coating on the Cu-supported graphene layer, etching of Cu substrate, Au-doping of graphene, and wrapping the PMMA (with graphene) onto polymer layers to make the device. 
Chemical doping provided a simple way to improve the electrical conductivity of CVD-grown graphene,20,25,27 and here we grafted very fine (∼5 nm) Au nanoparticles uniformly on the surface of the graphene layer by HAuCl4 aqueous solution treatment (see Experimental for details). At an optimized doping period, we obtained a sheet resistance of 320 Ω/□ which is 1/3 that of un-doped graphene resistance (∼1100 Ω/□) measured by standard four-probe technique (Fig. S2, ESI†). At the same time, the Au-doped graphene maintained an average optical transmittance of 95% in the range of 300 to 800 nm, close to that of the pristine SLG (96%) and higher than a single-walled carbon nanotube film (85%–90%) (Fig. S2, S3, ESI†). High optical transparency and reduced sheet resistance of Au-doped graphene layers are important properties for their applications as transparent conductive electrodes.
Freestanding FSCs with either a PMMA coating or only graphene outside (by removing PMMA) were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and solar cell tests. Fig. 2a showed the SEM image of a steel wire (127 μm in diameter) coated by ZnO, P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT layers. The surface of polymer layers prepared by dip-coating was very smooth, making subsequent graphene transfer more controllable. This structure was used to pick up a PMMA sheet floating on solution, and the PMMA (with graphene inside) tightly wrapped around the fiber resulting in good graphene-polymer contact (Fig. 2b). Sometimes we observed corrugated traces and parallel folds on the fiber surface, indicating the presence of a very thin and flexible PMMA sheet. After acetone washing, we obtained a smooth fiber again, indicating that the PMMA had been removed completely (Fig. 2c). Wrinkles can be distinguished from high-magnification SEM images on the fiber surface, which are distinct features of a graphene layer (Fig. 2d). SLG layer can be securely transferred to fiber-shaped substrates with assistance of a PMMA sheet. In addition, a polymer-coated fiber was cut from the middle to expose its cross-section. Multiple polymer layers were uniformly coated around the fiber circumference, with a total layer thickness of about 300 nm (Fig. 2e). While it is difficult to distinguish the bottom ZnO layer, we can see the middle P3HT:PCBM layer (relatively dark) with a thickness of 200 nm (close to the optimized thickness, 180 nm, in our previous report10), and the PEDOT layer covering on the top of P3HT:PCBM layer with a clear interface (Fig. 2f). Our dip-coating process is reliable for producing uniform polymeric layers with controlled thickness and stacked in sequence, which is a basic step for making efficient polymer cells on thin fibers.
 Fig. 2  Characterization of graphene-polymer-steel wire solar cells. SEM images of a steel wire (a) coated by ZnO, P3HT:PCBM, PEDOT layers from inside to outside, (b) wrapped by a PMMA-graphene sheet, and (c) after washing away PMMA by acetone. (d) Close view of the PMMA-removed fiber surface showing the presence of a graphene layer with representative wrinkles. (e) SEM image of the fiber cross-section showing a thin polymer coating around the steel wire surface. (f) Enlarged view of the P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT layers. 
We have measured the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of FSCs with graphene counter electrodes (positive terminal, hole transport). Since the PMMA sheet used for transferring graphene from Cu foil to fiber substrate is thin (300 nm) and highly transparent, the resulting FSC can be illuminated directly through the PMMA cover. Fig. 3a shows the J–V curves of three PMMA-graphene FSCs with different Au-doping times from 0 to 30 min. The doping effect is clear, in which the short-circuit current density (Jsc) increases consistently with the doping time although the open-circuit voltage (Voc) remains constant (0.550–0.560 V). The graphene layer with 30 min Au-doping resulted in a Jsc of 7.94 mA cm−2, a Voc of 0.560 V, a fill factor (FF) of 51.0%, and a maximum power conversion efficiency (η) of 2.27%, owing to reduced sheet resistance without degrading transparency (Fig. S2, ESI†). The cell efficiency obtained from Au-doped graphene electrode has been enhanced by about 80% compared to un-doped pristine graphene (η = 1.24%). Further increasing the Au-doping time to 60 min caused slight drop of Jsc and η (2.13%), due to the aggregation of Au nanoparticles on the graphene surface (Fig. 3a, inset). A 30 min-doping produced relatively small Au nanoparticles with diameters of 5 nm and an average area density of 560 per μm2, while a longer doping time (60 min) resulted in larger particle aggregations (15 nm) and similar area density (590 μm2) (Fig. S2, ESI†). Optimized doping effect stems from the uniform distribution of Au nanoparticles with sufficient density, given that aggregated particles sitting at the interface might disturb the graphene-polymer contact in the FSC. The doping effect could be further explored by promoting more nanoparticle nucleation sites while inhibiting particle growth to large size. We also tried a different method to load Au nanoparticles on graphene layer, synthesizing Au nanoparticles by reduction of HAuCl4 and then grafting these nanoparticles onto graphene by physical adsorption. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) characterization shows the loading density of nanoparticles on graphene by physical adsorption was relatively low (Fig. S4, ESI†). The resulting solar cell had an efficiency of 1.14%, similar to that of the fiber cell with pristine graphene layer (Fig. S5, ESI†). Our current method of directly growing Au nanoparticle onto graphene is more effective in enhancing device performance than physical adsorption of pre-synthesized Au nanoparticles.
 Fig. 3  Solar cell performance of a PMMA-graphene encapsulated FSC. (a) J–V curves of three FSCs in which the graphene electrodes have been doped by Au nanoparticles for different periods. Inset shows cell efficiency versus the different Au-doped time for SLG. (b) Comparison of three FSCs with different types of electrodes including an Au-doped graphene layer, a Pt-doped graphene layer, and a carbon nanotube film, respectively. (c) J–V curves of a FSC at different illumination fiber lengths. Inset shows cell efficiency versus the illumination length. (d) IPCE of a FSC in the wavelength range of 400 to 700 nm. (e) J–V curves of a FSC recorded in the dark, in the light, and in the light when the fiber was placed on a diffuse reflector under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). (f) J–V curves of a FSC in fresh state and after storage in nitrogen for 20 days. Inset showing the efficiency change over a period of 8 days in air. 
We also doped the graphene electrode by another catalytic metal (Pt) through a similar chemical process (using H2PtCl6 aqueous solution as precursor) and attached very fine (2–4 nm) Pt nanoparticles to the graphene layer uniformly (Fig. S6, ESI†). Fig. 3b compares the J–V curves of three FSCs based on the same polymer layers with a Au-doped, a Pt-doped graphene layer, and a carbon nanotube film electrode, respectively. These samples show Voc values of 0.550–0.570 V, Jsc of 7.91–8.14 mA cm−2, FF of 51.2%–54.5%, and cell efficiencies in the range of 2.24% to 2.53% (Table S1, ESI†). The FSC with Au-doped graphene layer counter electrode has the best performance with Voc of 0.570 V, Jsc of 8.14 mA cm−2, FF of 54.5%, and cell efficiency of 2.53%. Here, the main function of Pt nanoparticles should be the improvement of graphene conductivity rather than to provide additional catalytic sites as demonstrated in dye-sensitized solar cells.8 The freestanding nanotube film (Fig. S3, ESI†) was directly wrapped onto the fiber, and resulted in an efficiency of 2.31%, as also reported in our previous work.10 The SLG can be doped by various noble metals (e.g. Au, Pt) and results in FSC efficiencies comparable to the CNT film.
The fiber lengths for most of FSCs were about 2–3 cm, and usually only part of the fiber was illuminated (about 0.5 cm) during solar cell measurements. When the illumination length increased from 4 to 12 mm (defined by a shadow mask), the cell efficiency dropped slightly from 2.31% to 1.97% mainly due to the decrease of FF (from 53.4% to 45.6%) (Fig. 3c). Since charge carriers (holes) have to transport through the graphene layer to the terminal to be collected, it is reasonable that a longer working length could increase the series resistance and lower FF. To realize scalable production of much longer graphene-electrode FSCs, it is critical to maintain the device performance possibly by exploring double- or few-layer graphene to minimize the electrode resistance.
The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) was evaluated in the wavelength range of 400–700 nm for our polymer FSCs. The IPCE signal increased rapidly from 400 nm, peaked at about 500 nm, and dropped to zero at 650 nm (Fig. 3d). The profile of this IPCE curve corresponds well to the light absorption characteristics of P3HT with a cut-off wavelength of 600–700 nm, indicating that the P3HT is the main active layer for light absorption and charge carrier generation in the FSCs. The IPCE value (35% at 500 nm) was obtained based on the generated current from the tested fiber cell in reference to a standard Si cell. We noticed that the incident light spot for IPCE measurement has an oblong shape in size of about 0.2 × 2 mm2, which is much wider than the diameter of our fiber solar cell (0.127 mm), leading to an insufficiency absorbance of the incident light. Therefore the measured IPCE may represent the lower-bound quantum efficiency.
The uniform polymer layers coated around the fiber circumference and transparent graphene electrode allow illumination on the FSC from different angles. To utilize the back side polymer layers that can not directly receive incident light, we placed a diffuse reflector underlying the tested fiber to reflect light to the fiber back (Fig. 3e, inset).13,35,36 In normal condition when the FSC was placed on a black background, a Jsc value of 8.14 mA cm−2 was produced. The Jsc increased to 15.91 mA cm−2 with a back diffuse reflector, almost doubled compared to normal condition (Fig. 3e). Consequently, the cell efficiency was improved from 2.53% to 4.36% measured in reflecting mode, which surpassed a previously reported double-wire structure polymer FSC (η = 3.87%) in which the steel wire counter electrode contributed to the back reflection. It may be possible to construct high efficiency polymer FSCs by improving light absorption through appropriate device configuration.
The polymer FSCs were very stable during storage in nitrogen gas or ambient environment. Usually conjugated polymers suffer from degradation over time especially in air due to oxidation by oxygen and moisture. In our device, we have retained the solid PMMA sheet covering on the fiber after transferring graphene to provide good device encapsulation (Fig. 2b). After 20 days storage in N2, we observed a negligible change in the cell parameters and the efficiency remained about 2.2% (Fig. 3f). When the FSC was placed in air over a week, a slight decrease of cell efficiency from 2.03% to 1.96% was detected (Fig. 3f, inset).
We have washed away the PMMA cover by acetone to leave a clean graphene electrode. After removing PMMA, the neat continuous graphene layer remaining on the fiber surface could be distinguished by SEM (Fig. 2c & 2d). Before and after PMMA removal, the FSC showed similar J–V characteristics with efficiencies of 2.27% and 2.16%, respectively (Fig. 4a). In principle, a fiber solar cell with or without PMMA layer should have the same (or very similar) performance because the PMMA only acts as a top encapsulation layer for graphene transfer. The slight degradation of cell efficiency after PMMA removal might be attributed to a possible damage of the graphene layer or the active polymer layer during the dissolution of PMMA with acetone. The pure graphene electrode resulted in excellent stability upon bending the fiber to large angles. We observed almost identical J–V curves when the FSC was in pristine straight form and bent to 45 and 90 degrees, respectively (Fig. 4b). The Voc remained constant (0.580 V) and the efficiency was maintained above 1.9% during the bending process. SLG has high flexibility and also good adhesion to the polymer layer, which made the FSC bendable without degradation.
 Fig. 4  Solar cell performance of only graphene-encapsulated (PMMA-removed) FSCs. (a) J–V curves of a FSC with PMMA-graphene electrode and after removed PMMA in the dark and light, respectively. (b) J–V curves of a graphene-electrode FSC in straight form and bent to 45 and 90 degrees, respectively. (c) Dark and light J–V curves of a FSC in fresh state and after storage in ambient atmosphere for 7 days. (d) Efficiency decay curves for the FSCs with SLG or CNT film as the counter electrodes in air. 
Finally, the graphene-encapsulated FSCs also showed high stability during storage in ambient atmosphere. The J–V curves of a FSC (after removing PMMA) before and after placing in air for 7 days were recorded (Fig. 4c), during which the cell efficiency dropped very little from 1.91% to 1.83%. Even without PMMA encapsulation, the efficiency degradation was less than 5% after exposing to air for several days. In comparison, the efficiency of the FSC with a CNT film electrode decreased rapidly (from 1.93% to 0.91%) when the cell was stored in air without further encapsulation (Fig. 4d).10,37 A continuous SLG sheet is impermeable to gas or liquid molecules, and could act as a barrier to protect the enclosed polymer layers in our FSC model. The stability of FSCs with a graphene electrode is enhanced considerably compared to a nanotube film having a porous network structure. A planar polymer solar cell with a top graphene electrode and further encapsulated by glass caps and epoxy in the glove box could maintain initial efficiency after 6 months.27 In our FSCs, the graphene layer serves as a counter electrode and an encapsulation cover simultaneously, which is different from most of previous electrodes such as carbon nanotubes and Pt wires.
In conclusion, we adopted SLG sheet as a counter electrode for polymer-based fiber solar cells, and demonstrated cell efficiencies up to 2.53% of individual freestanding devices and more than 4% with back reflection. Chemical doping by Au nanoparticles could reduce the sheet resistance of graphene layer and enhance the solar cell performance. The fiber solar cells encapsulated in a graphene electrode showed high flexibility and improved stability in air compared to previously investigated electrode materials. Single-layer graphene is a potential electrode material for constructing efficient and stable polymer fiber solar cells.
Experimental
1. Preparation of graphene
The SLG sheets were prepared by CVD method in a horizontal thermal furnace using copper foils as substrates.17 After graphene grown on, a thin layer (300 nm) of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was coated on the Cu foil and then the foil was annealed at 110 °C for about 10 min. Subsequently, the Cu foil was dissolved by dipping into an aqueous solution of iron chloride (1.0 M) to leave a PMMA/graphene sheet, then the PMMA/graphene films were transferred to distilled water.
2. Fabrication of the fiber solar cells
Solar cells were fabricated on commercial stainless steel wires (purchased from Alfa Aesar, 0.127 mm in diameter, type 304). Multiple functional layers were prepared in sequence by dip-coating method with a certain coating speed. First, the ZnO precursor layer was applied onto the pre-cleaned surface of a stainless steel wire by immersing the wire into a zinc acetate-ethanol amine in 2-methoxyethanol solution. Then the layer was converted into ZnO nanocrystals by thermal annealing at 300 °C for 60 min in air, and this procedure was repeated for three times to obtain a continuous nanocrystal film with appropriate thickness (∼40 nm). Second, a chlorobenzene solution of P3HT (Regioregular, Rieke Metals) (30 mg mL−1) and PCBM (>99%, Sigma-Aldrich) (24 mg mL−1) was dip coated on the top of ZnO layer in a glove box and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min to form a uniform polymer bulk heterojunction layer on top of ZnO. After that, the wire surface was deposited by a diluted PEDOT:PSS solution in isopropanol at 80 °C and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min. Next, the polymer-coated wire was placed in the water underneath the floating thin film to pick up the PMMA/graphene layer carefully. Then the sample was taken out of water and dried overnight in glove box. For the process of Au nanoparticle doping, PMMA/graphene film was transferred to 2 mM HAuCl4 aqueous solution at 80 °C for certain time.27 After that, the film was transferred to distilled water and then to the polymer-coated wires. For making electrical connection, one exposed end of steel wire (without polymer coating) was connected as negative terminal and the other end of the PMMA/graphene or neat graphene sheet was connected as positive terminal by Ag paste. All fiber solar cells were freestanding and tested without further encapsulation.
3. Characterization and solar cell measurements
The morphology and structure of steel wires, polymer coatings, PMMA/graphene or neat graphene were characterized by SEM images using Hitachi S-4800 cold field emission scanning microscope. The sheet resistance of graphene film was characterized with a four-probe system. TEM characterizations on chemical doped graphene were carried out in a JEM-2100F. Raman spectra were collected on a Jobin Yvon LabRam HR 800 micro-Raman spectrometer with 633 nm excitation. Transmittance spectra of graphene and CNT films were measured by UV-3100 UV-vis-NIR Spectrophotometer (Shimadzu). IPCE was recorded on Keithley 2400 source meter under irradiation of a 150 W tungsten lamp with a 1/4 m monochromator (Spectral Product DK240). The current–voltage curves of solar cells were measured by Keithley 4200 Semiconductor Characterization System, and illuminated by Oriel 300 W solar simulator (Thermo Oriel 91160-1000) with AM 1.5 G filter at a calibrated intensity of 100 mW cm−2 determined by a standard silicon solar cell. The irradiated length of the fiber cells was defined by a photomask, and the irradiated area of cells was taken as this length multiplied by the wire diameter after polymer coating. Current density values were calculated based on the above cell area. For bending tests, the fiber cell was also fixed at one end and bent to desired angles by a tweezer at the other end manually. For stability tests, the fiber cell was stored in glove box (N2 atmosphere) and ambient environment for certain time and then taken out to measure the performance.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to the National Basic Research Program (2011CB933303, 2012CB933404) and the National Natural Science Foundation (NSFC) of China (90922004, 51290272) for financial support. A. Cao acknowledges financial support from the Ministry of Education Doctoral Program (MOE 08600-452-10132-007).
References
D. Zou, D. Wang, Z. Chu, Z. Lv and X. Fan, Fiber-Shaped Flexible Solar Cells, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Zhao, H. Li, H. Wu, D. Zou and D. Yu, Transparent, Double-Sided, ITO-Free, Flexible Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Based on Metal Wire/ZnO Nanowire Arrays, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2775 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, W. Guo, L. Dong, G. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Optical Fiber-Based Core-Shell Coaxially Structured Hybrid Cells for Self-Powered Nanosystems, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3356 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, Gilles Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Solar Power Wires Based on Organic Photovoltaic Materials, Science, 2009, 324, 232 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kylberg, F. A. de Castro, P. Chabrecek, U. Sonderegger, B. T.-T. Chu, F. Nüesch and R. Hany, Woven Electrodes for Flexible Organic Photovoltaic Cells, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, Z. B. Lv, Y. P. Fu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Kafafy, Z. Z. Chu and D. C. Zou, All-Carbon Electrode-Based Fiber-Shaped Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 125 RSC .
S. Hou, X. Cai, Y. Fu, Z. Lv, D. Wang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Transparent Conductive Oxideless, Flexible, and Highly Efficient Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells with Commercialized Carbon Fiber As the Counter Electrode, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13776 RSC .
S. Zhang, C. Ji, Z. Bian, P. Yu, L. Zhang, D. Liu, E. Shi, Y. Shang, H. Peng and Q. Cheng, 
            et al., Porous, Platinum Nanoparticle-Adsorbed Carbon Nanotube Yarns for Efficient Fiber Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7191 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, C. Ji, Z. Bian, R. Liu, X. Xia, D. Yun, L. Zhang, C. Huang and A. Cao, Single-Wire Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Wrapped by Carbon Nanotube Film Electrodes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3383 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, M. Zhao, Y. Li, Z. Bian, L. Zhang, Y. Shang, X. Xia, S. Zhang, D. Yun and Z. Liu, 
            et al., Solid State, Polymer-Based Fiber Solar Cells with Carbon Nanotube Electrodes, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11027 CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, H. Li and H. Peng, Polymer Photovoltaic Wires Based On Aligned Carbon Nanotube Fibers, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23655 RSC .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Cai, F. Gong, Z. Yang, Z. Wang and H. Peng, Intertwined Aligned Carbon Nanotube Fiber Based Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2568 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, H. G. Kia, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Designing Aligned Inorganic Nanotubes at the Electrode Interface: Towards Highly Efficient Photovoltaic Wires, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4623 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim and Y. I. Song, 
            et al., Roll-To-Roll Production of 30-Inch Graphene Films for Transparent Electrodes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Large-Scale Pattern Growth of Graphene Films for Stretchable Transparent Electrodes, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, S. Bae, H. Jang, S. Jang, S. E. Zhu, S. H. Sim, Y. I. Song, B. H. Hong and J. H. Ahn, Wafer-Scale Synthesis and Transfer of Graphene Films, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 490 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung and E. Tutuc, 
            et al., Large-Area Synthesis of High-Quality and Uniform Graphene Films on Copper Foils, Science, 2009, 324, 1312 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Graphene Photonics and Optoelectronics, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Fan, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, X. M. Li, Q. K. Shu, N. Guo and D. H. Wu, Graphene/Silicon Nanowire Schottky Junction for Enhanced Light Harvesting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 721 CAS .
K. K. Kim, A. Reina, Y. M. Shi, H. Park, L. J. Li, Y. H. Lee and J. Kong, Enhancing the Conductivity of Transparent Graphene Films Via Doping, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 285205 CrossRef .
S. Lee, J. S. Yeo, Y. Ji, C. Cho, D. Y. Kim, S. I. Na, B. H. Lee and T. Lee, Flexible Organic Solar Cells Composed of P3HT:PCBM Using Chemically Doped Graphene Electrodes, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 344013 CrossRef .
Y. M. Shi, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, L. J. Li and J. Kong, Work Function Engineering of Graphene Electrode Via Chemical Doping, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Özyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Interface Engineering of Layer-by-Layer Stacked Graphene Anodes for High-Performance Organic Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Choe, B. H. Lee, G. Jo, J. Park, W. Park, S. Lee, W.-K. Hong, M.-J. Seong, Y. H. Kahng and K. Lee, Efficient Bulk-Heterojunction Photovoltaic Cells with Transparent Multi-Layer Graphene Electrodes, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1864 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, J. A. Rowehl, K. K. Kim, V. Bulovic and J. Kong, Doped Graphene Electrodes For Organic Solar Cells, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505204 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Zhong, F. Zhu and K. P. Loh, Large Area, Continuous, Few-Layered Graphene As Anodes In Organic Photovoltaic Devices, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063302 CrossRef .
Z. K. Liu, J. H. Li, Z. H. Sun, G. A. Tai, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, The Application of Highly Doped Single-Layer Graphene as the Top Electrodes of Semitransparent Organic Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Lee, K. H. Tu, C. C. Yu, S. S. Li, J. Y. Hwang, C. C. Lin, K. H. Chen, L. C. Chen, H. L. Chen and C. W. Chen, Top Laminated Graphene Electrode In A Semitransparent Polymer Solar Cell by Simultaneous Thermal Annealing/Releasing Method, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6564 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. W. Zhou, Continuous, Highly Flexible, and Transparent Graphene Films by Chemical Vapor Deposition for Organic Photovoltaics, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865 CrossRef .
T. Iwasaki, H. J. Park, M. Konuma, D. S. Lee, J. H. Smet and U. Starke, Long-Range Ordered Single-Crystal Graphene on High-Quality Heteroepitaxial Ni Thin Films Grown on MgO(111), Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 79 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov and S. Roth, 
            et al., Raman Spectrum of Graphene and Graphene Layers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dai, L. Fu, Z. Zou, M. Wang, H. Xu, S. Wang and Z. Liu, Rational Design of A Binary Metal Alloy for Chemical Vapour Deposition Growth of Uniform Single-Layer Graphene, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 522 CrossRef .
B. Weintraub, Y. G. Wei and Z. L. Wang, Optical Fiber/Nanowire Hybrid Structures for Efficient Three-Dimensional Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8981 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Liu and M. Misra, Dye-Sensitized Photovoltaic Wires Using Highly Ordered TiO2 Nanotube Arrays, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2196 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lv, Y. Fu, S. Hou, D. Wang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Large Size, High Efficiency Fiber-Shaped Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10076 RSC .
Y. Fu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, H. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan and Z. L. Wang, 
            et al., Conjunction of Fiber Solar Cells with Groovy Micro-Reflectors As Highly Efficient Energy Harvesters, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379 CAS .
X. Y. Xia, S. S. Wang, Y. Jia, Z. Q. Bian, D. H. Wu, L. H. Zhang, A. Y. Cao and C. H. Huang, Infrared-Transparent Polymer Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8478 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra40710aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure and fabrication process of the fiber solar cells. (a) Illustration of the FSC structure based on a polymer-coated steel wire (primary electrode) and wrapped by a SLG sheet as counter electrode. The outside PMMA sheet used for transferring graphene can be either retained on the fiber or washed away by acetone. (b) Fabrication process of a FSC including PMMA spin-coating on the Cu-supported graphene layer, etching of Cu substrate, Au-doping of graphene, and wrapping the PMMA (with graphene) onto polymer layers to make the device.	 

 	Fig. 2  Characterization of graphene-polymer-steel wire solar cells. SEM images of a steel wire (a) coated by ZnO, P3HT:PCBM, PEDOT layers from inside to outside, (b) wrapped by a PMMA-graphene sheet, and (c) after washing away PMMA by acetone. (d) Close view of the PMMA-removed fiber surface showing the presence of a graphene layer with representative wrinkles. (e) SEM image of the fiber cross-section showing a thin polymer coating around the steel wire surface. (f) Enlarged view of the P3HT:PCBM and PEDOT layers.	 

 	Fig. 3  Solar cell performance of a PMMA-graphene encapsulated FSC. (a) J–V curves of three FSCs in which the graphene electrodes have been doped by Au nanoparticles for different periods. Inset shows cell efficiency versus the different Au-doped time for SLG. (b) Comparison of three FSCs with different types of electrodes including an Au-doped graphene layer, a Pt-doped graphene layer, and a carbon nanotube film, respectively. (c) J–V curves of a FSC at different illumination fiber lengths. Inset shows cell efficiency versus the illumination length. (d) IPCE of a FSC in the wavelength range of 400 to 700 nm. (e) J–V curves of a FSC recorded in the dark, in the light, and in the light when the fiber was placed on a diffuse reflector under standard illumination conditions (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). (f) J–V curves of a FSC in fresh state and after storage in nitrogen for 20 days. Inset showing the efficiency change over a period of 8 days in air.	 

 	Fig. 4  Solar cell performance of only graphene-encapsulated (PMMA-removed) FSCs. (a) J–V curves of a FSC with PMMA-graphene electrode and after removed PMMA in the dark and light, respectively. (b) J–V curves of a graphene-electrode FSC in straight form and bent to 45 and 90 degrees, respectively. (c) Dark and light J–V curves of a FSC in fresh state and after storage in ambient atmosphere for 7 days. (d) Efficiency decay curves for the FSCs with SLG or CNT film as the counter electrodes in air.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra40710a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
