High temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells: progress in advanced materials and key technologies  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00296H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00296H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1138-1187High temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells: progress in advanced materials and key technologies

        
          
            Rizwan 
            Haider
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yichan 
            Wen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zi-Feng 
            Ma
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David P. 
            Wilkinson
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xianxia 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Shuqin 
            Song
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *be
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China. E-mail: yuanxx@sjtu.edu.cn; yuanxx519@163.com
bDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1W5, Canada. E-mail: jiujun@shaw.ca
cEnergy, Mining & Environment, National Research Council of Canada, Vancouver, BC V6T 1W5, Canada
dThe Key Lab of Low-carbon Chemistry & Energy Conservation of Guangdong Province, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 5102575, China. E-mail: stsssq@mail.sysu.edu.cn
eInstitute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China. E-mail: jiujun.zhang@i.shu.edu.cn
Received 
      30th July 2020
    First published on 27th November 2020AbstractHigh temperature proton exchange membrane fuel cells (HT-PEMFCs) are one type of promising energy device with the advantages of fast reaction kinetics (high energy efficiency), high tolerance to fuel/air impurities, simple plate design, and better heat and water management. They have been expected to be the next generation of PEMFCs specifically for application in hydrogen-fueled automobile vehicles and combined heat and power (CHP) systems. However, their high-cost and low durability interposed by the insufficient performance of key materials such as electrocatalysts and membranes at high temperature operation are still the challenges hindering the technology's practical applications. To develop high performance HT-PEMFCs, worldwide researchers have been focusing on exploring new materials and the related technologies by developing novel synthesis methods and innovative assembly techniques, understanding degradation mechanisms, and creating mitigation strategies with special emphasis on catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, proton exchange membranes and bipolar plates. In this paper, the state-of-the-art development of HT-PEMFC key materials, components and device assembly along with degradation mechanisms, mitigation strategies, and HT-PEMFC based CHP systems is comprehensively reviewed. In order to facilitate further research and development of HT-PEMFCs toward practical applications, the existing challenges are also discussed and several future research directions are proposed in this paper.
Rizwan Haider
Rizwan Haider completed his Mater of Philosophy (MPhil) in chemistry at the University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan, in 2014. He joined the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in 2018 as a PhD student in chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Xianxia Yuan with financial support from Chinese Scholarship Council (CSC). His current research focuses on development of efficient oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalysts for application in proton exchange membrane fuel cells and lithium air batteries.
Yichan Wen
Yichan Wen received her Bachelor of Science degree from Dalian University of Technology in 2018, then she joined the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, as a master student under the supervision of Prof. Xianxia Yuan. Her current research focuses on novel electrolytes for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.
Zi-Feng Ma
Dr Zi-Feng Ma is a Chair Professor and Director of Shanghai Electrochemical Energy Devices (SEED) Research Center at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, where he is responsible for directing the research and development of advanced energy materials and electrochemical energy systems for electric vehicles and energy storage applications. He is a Fellow of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China (FCIESC) and the Chair of the Institute of Energy Storage Engineering of CIESC. Prof. Ma holds or has filed over 50 patents and patent applications and has over 300 publications.
David P. Wilkinson
Dr David P. Wilkinson is a professor and Canada Research Chair in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University of British Columbia (UBC). He is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering (FCAE), Fellow of the Academy of Science of the Royal Society of Canada (FRSC-CA), Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada (FEIC), and Fellow of the Chemical Institute of Canada (FCIA). He previously held the position of Director and Vice President of Research and Development at Ballard Power Systems. His main research interests are electrochemical devices, energy conversion and storage materials, and sustainable energy.
Lei Zhang
Dr Lei Zhang is a Senior Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada (NRC) and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC-UK). She is also an active member of the Canadian Society for Chemistry (CSC) and the Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering (CSChE). She received the first MSc degree in materials chemistry from Wuhan University (1993), the second MSc in physical chemistry from Simon Fraser University (2000), and a PhD in physics from Shanghai University (2020). Her main research interests include advanced materials and technologies in the fields of proton exchange membrane fuel cells, supercapacitors and batteries.
Xianxia Yuan
Dr Xianxia Yuan is a full professor in Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), China. She received her PhD in material physics and chemistry from Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2002. After that she joined the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering in SJTU as an assistant professor (2002–2004) and was promoted to associate professor (2004–2016) and full professor (2016–present). From 2008 to 2009, Dr Yuan worked in the Pennsylvania State University, USA. Dr Yuan's research interest is now focused on advanced materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems including proton exchange membrane fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
Shuqin Song
Professor Shuqin Song received her PhD in physical chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2005. During the following years, she conducted her postdoctoral research in the University of Thessaly, Greece. Then she joined Sun Yat-sen University, China, as an assistant professor (2006–2007) and was promoted to associate professor (2008–2013) and professor (2014–up to now). Since 1999, Dr Song has been engaged in the research field of electrocatalysis, fuel cells and Zn–Air batteries, with an emphasis on the preparation of nanomaterials, the regulation of nanostructures, and performance optimization and application of nanomaterials in the field of new energy conversion and storage systems.
Jiujun Zhang
Dr Jiujun Zhang is a professor in the College of Sciences/Institute for Sustainable Energy at Shanghai University, and a former Principal Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada (NRC). Dr Zhang is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering (FCAE), Fellow of the Academy of Science of the Royal Society of Canada (FRSC-CA), Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada (FEIC), Fellow of the International Society of Electrochemistry (FISE), and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC-UK). Dr Zhang's main research areas are electrochemistry, electrocatalysts, fuel cells, lithium batteries, metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, and H2O/CO2/N2 electrolysis.
1. Introduction
In today's modern era of human society, electricity is essential to drive the technological progress and routine life. Currently, electrical energy is primarily produced from burning fossil fuels such as coal, gas, oil (petroleum), nuclear materials, etc. However, these sources of energy are inefficient, nonrenewable and harmful to the environment. Therefore, exploring clean and sustainable energy sources including wind, solar, hydrothermal waterfall, sea-wave, and so on for generating clean electrical energy has become necessary for the sustainable development of human society. Due to the unstable and intermittent nature of the clean energy sources mentioned above, the produced intermittent electrical energy has to be smoothed, stored and then converted for practical applications. Among various energy storage and conversion technologies, the electrochemical energy technologies such as batteries, fuel cells, supercapacitors, water electrolyzers for hydrogen generation, etc. have been recognized as efficient, reliable and practical options. With respect to this, hydrogen-fueled proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are considered to be highly efficient and clean technology for energy conversion, because of their advantages including high energy/power densities, low/zero emission, silent operation, broad range of applications (from household devices, automobile vehicles, to power grid stations) and capability to supply power and heat even in remote areas.1 In the last three decades, many developed and developing countries all over the world have elevated the development of fuel cells to the level of a national strategy, particularly in the transportation application area.2 For example, the United States Department of Energy (US DOE) has spent an average of about $139 million per year since 2004 on fuel cell and hydrogen related research, development, and demonstration.2,3 Currently, the research and development of hydrogen-fueled PEMFCs for automobile applications is getting even hotter than before.
Depending on the operation temperature, PEMFCs can be classified into low temperature (∼70–95 °C) PEMFCs (LT-PEMFCs) and high temperature (∼120–250 °C) PEMFCs (HT-PEMFCs). Generally, LT-PEMFCs are operated below 100 °C, and they face serious water management challenges leading to complex flow field designs due to the presence of both water vapor and liquid water. LT-PEMFCs need highly pure fuel (hydrogen) with no/low impurities to avoid catalyst poisoning; the reformate gas must be treated by water gas shift and preferential oxidation processes in order to reduce CO content to below 10 ppm; and they also suffer from restricted oxygen mass transport at high current density leading to large polarization.4 In recent years, HT-PEMFCs have attracted more attention due to their several advantages over LT-PEMFCs, including improved reaction kinetics at electrodes, enhanced tolerance to fuel/air impurities, simple plate design, and better heat and water management. These advantages may mean the potential for using low Pt metal loading or even Pt metal free catalysts.5,6 However, there are still some challenges associated with HT-PEMFCs, such as possible corrosion, mechanical failure of bipolar plates (BPPs), and degradation of the catalyst/catalyst support, catalyst layer (CL) and proton exchange membrane (PEM) at high-temperature,7 as well as insufficient heating strategies to achieve and maintain high operating temperature for long-term functioning of HT-PEMFC stacks.6,8 A schematic of the main components, charge transfer mechanism and key materials for HT-PEMFCs is presented in Fig. 1. It can be seen that a single HT-PEMFC cell is mainly composed of a PEM, a CL, a gas diffusion layer (GDL), a BPP and an end plate (EP). Among them, the PEM, CL and GDL together make the membrane electrode assembly (MEA), where the electrochemical reactions take place. At the hydrogen-fueled HT-PEMFC anode, hydrogen is oxidized to produce electrons and protons on the interface of the CL and PEM. These electrons pass through the external circuit to the cathode, and the protons diffuse through the PEM to the cathode where they react with oxygen from air to produce water. The main parameters affecting HT-PEMFCs’ performance include the nature and type of electrocatalyst,9–13 catalyst ink preparation,14 material and manufacturing technology of the PEM,15,16 design and assembly of the MEA and cell/stack,17 and water/heat/gas management strategy including flow-field design.18 Overall, low-cost, high performance and excellent durability are the three major goals for the research and development of HT-PEMFC systems for commercial applications. At the current state of technology, the main focus of HT-PEMFCs is on electrocatalysts, PEMs, BPPs, and the design and modeling of HT-PEMFC systems. Several recent advances have been made which are as follows: (1) the Pt catalyst loading is reduced to 0.1 mg cm−2 at the cathode19,20 along with the improved Pt utilization for ORR catalysis; (2) the iron single atom crystals21 and Fe/Co–N–C based materials22 were explored as ORR electrocatalysts showing promising performance with high thermal stability; (3) implementation of non-precious Fe–C–N catalysts22,23 for HT-PEMFC stacks; (4) better understanding of hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) charge transfer kinetics;24 (5) introduction of magnetically aligned channels in the PEM to enhance proton conductivity at high temperature;25 (6) development of highly durable composite membranes to resolve the membrane degradation,26,27 water retention28 and acid leaching29 problems; (7) an uplift in the industrial level MEA production via slot-die coating30 and catalyst layer quality improvements;31 (8) production of a highly durable and efficient MEA, which can work up to 10000 hours without a significant decrease in performance;32 and (9) development of novel models and methods for reliable analysis of HT-PEMFC materials and components’ degradation.33–35
 Fig. 1  A schematic of the main components, charge transfer mechanism and key materials for HT-PEMFCs. 
With the rapid research and development of HT-PEMFCs driven by the strong force of emerging electric vehicles, many improvements have been made in the most recent years. To facilitate the current and further research and development of HT-PEMFCs, a new review paper based on the state-of-the-art studies is required to summarize the progress made and give a clear picture about the status, challenges, strategies and rules to design, evaluate and promote the performance of HT-PEMFCs, although several papers focusing on the specific/narrow aspect of HT-PEMFCs have been published previously.1,6–8,15,16,36–41 In this article, we will comprehensively review and analyze the development in the field of HT-PEMFCs, including the key materials and components along with their performance, key technologies and component assembly, degradation mechanisms and mitigation strategies, modeling and design and HT-PEMFC based combined heat and power (CHP) systems. The technical challenges are also summarized and analyzed with several proposed future research directions to overcome the challenges toward HT-PEMFCs and their commercial applications.
2. Key materials, components and assembly of HT-PEMFCs
As described in Fig. 1, the MEA consisting of electrocatalysts towards both hydrogen oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions, the PEM, and GDLs is the heart of HT-PEMFCs. Some other necessary hardware components including bipolar plates, gaskets and end plates are also required along with the MEA to assemble HT-PEMFC electricity-producing systems. In this section, the key materials and general methods of MEA fabrication along with bipolar plates and stack assembly will be summarized.
2.1. Electrocatalysts
Hydrogen oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions are the electrochemical reactions taking place in a hydrogen/oxygen (H2/O2, or H2/air) HT-PEMFC. In the current state of technology, the most practical electrocatalysts for HOR and ORR are Pt-based materials. Although some non-Pt electrocatalysts have been reported for both reactions, their practical performances are still not high enough.42,43 In general, anodic HOR catalysis for HT-PEMFCs is comparatively less focused because very low catalyst loading is enough to catalyze the reaction rate to a practical level.43 However, ORR is considered to be one of the major performance limiting factors in HT-PEMFCs as well as LT-PEMFCs. This is why developing ORR catalysts has been the major effort in PEMFC studies during the last two decades. The main issues associated with ORR catalysis include much more sluggish reaction kinetics than that of HOR, catalyst degradation, catalyst agglomeration, and band formation which take place as a result of Pt nanoparticle deposition inside the bulk membrane mostly after a long period operation at low current density (high cell voltage) and/or open circuit voltage (OCV).44
In the course of designing ORR catalysts, attention should be focused on high intrinsic activity and durability as well as low-cost of the materials.45 The intrinsic properties of catalysts are strongly dependent on the nature and type of the material as well as the techniques for catalyst synthesis.46 Moreover, for an effective ORR catalyst, high activity and durability could be achieved by optimizing structure engineering with nano-structuring, alloying, intercalating, and confining of active elements or compounds in the desired materials which should have favorable composition and defects as the catalyst support. For HT-PEMFC applications, a summary of the reported ORR catalysts including Pt group material (PGM)-based catalysts and PGM-free catalysts is given in Fig. 2, and a comparison of their performance is provided in Fig. 3 and these will be discussed in detail in the following sections.
 Fig. 2  A summary of the reported PGM-based and PGM-free catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in HT-PEMFCs. 
 Fig. 3  Performance and durability comparison of various PGM-based (orange) and PGM-free (blue) catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction in HT-PEMFCs. 

2.1.1. PGM-based catalysts. 
PGM-based catalysts have always been in the focus for ORR owing to their excellent performance and durability. The ORR on a Pt surface usually follows the 4-electron mechanism producing water in acidic solutions.47 In the case of HT-PEMFCs, the main issues associated with the Pt/C catalysts for ORR include non-homogeneous dispersion, poor durability, high loading, high-cost and scarcity of the Pt metal. As can be observed in Fig. 2, these issues have been addressed by some modifications to the Pt/C catalyst including Pt-nanoparticles supported on graphitised carbon47 and MWCNTs,48 polymer wrapping on the catalyst support49,50 or oxidized multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs),51 and pyridine group attachment on Pt deposited MWCNTs,52 metal alloying,53–55 and catalyst layer structural modification.56 For example, Vellacheri et al.57 reported a Pt–MoOx interface on the smooth MWCNT surface (Pt–MoOx–MWCNTs) and its use in HT-PEMFCs as a ORR catalyst. The HT-PEMFC device fabricated by using Pt–MoOx(5 wt%)–MWCNTs as the catalyst and polybenzimidazole (PBI) as the membrane showed a balanced platinum surface area, leading to 9 times higher kinetic current density when compared to that with the Pt–MWCNT catalyst. This increase in performance was attributed to the 27 kJ mol−1 decrease in activation energy in the case of Pt–MoOx(5 wt%)–MWCNTs compared to that of the Pt–MWCNT catalyst, because the presence of the Pt–MoOx couple around Pt particles could enrich the Pt surface with Oads species by acting as a nanostructured oxygen reservoir. Similarly, some other studies also reported enhanced performance with the addition of metals or metal oxides as an additive or alloy component with Pt or Pt-group metals.54,58
Polymer wrapping on the catalyst support is an efficient way to improve the performance of Pt-based catalysts in HT-PEMFCs, owing to the enhanced proton conductivity at temperature higher than 100 °C. In order to achieve good deposition of homogeneous Pt nanoparticles on the surface of MWCNTs, poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) was employed to enrich the anchoring sites, as shown in Fig. 4a. The as-prepared catalyst of MWCNTs/PVP/Pt was reported as a highly durable ORR catalyst with a loss of about 40% electrochemical surface area (ECSA) even after 150000 cycles in the potential range from 1.0 to 1.5 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)).49 This performance was 15 times better than that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst which showed about 50% ECSA loss after only 10000 cycles in the same potential range. The HT-PEMFC fabricated using this material as the cathode catalyst showed 3.5 times power density (307 mW cm−2) compared to the commercially fabricated Pt/C (88 mW cm−2) containing device when dry hydrogen (100 mL min−1) and dry air (200 mL min−1) were used at the anode and cathode, respectively, under atmospheric pressure. In another study on MWCNT based ORR catalysts by the same group,59 the authors wrapped MWCNTs with poly[2,2′-(2,5-pyridine)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole] (para-PyPBI) and then deposited Pt particles on the surface to form a catalyst of MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt. They further doped this catalyst with phosphoric acid (PA) and obtained a new catalyst, MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt (Fig. 4b). The HT-PEMFCs fabricated with these catalysts as well as carbon black supported platinum (Pt/CB) were evaluated at 120 °C without humidification. The catalysts of MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt and MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt demonstrated similar durability, which was much higher than that of the conventional Pt/CB. But interestingly, the power density of MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt based HT-PEMFCs reached 414 mW cm−2, which was 2.5 and 2 times higher than those of the MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt (208 mW cm−2) and Pt/CB (167 mW cm−2) based fuel cells (Fig. 4c left). The authors attributed the enhanced performance of MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt to homogeneous dispersion of the PA-doped para-PyPBI in the electrocatalyst layer (Fig. 4c right), which could facilitate proton transfer in the catalyst layer and enhance Pt utilization. They also found that the PA-doping system could be successfully replaced with the poby(vinylphosphonic acid) (PVPA)-doping system without reducing the performance of HT-PEMFCs; the obtained catalyst of MWNT/PVPA–PyPBI/Pt demonstrated a durability for more than 400000 cycles in the potential range from 1.0 to 1.5 V (vs. RHE) at an operating temperature of 120 °C.9 Besides, in order to further improve the performance of CB/PyPBI/Pt, Yang et al.13 used 3D nanoporous carbon (NanoPC) with a high specific surface area of 1037 m2 g−1 as a support wrapped with a pyridine containing PBI (PyPBI) layer before depositing Pt particles of about 2.2 nm in diameter (Fig. 4d). The HT-PEMFC with the as-prepared NanoPC/PyPBI/Pt catalyst showed a power density of 342 mW cm−2 at 120 °C, which was much higher than that of CB/PyPBI/Pt (183 mW cm−2) and commercial Pt/CB (115 mW cm−2) catalyst based cells. Additionally, insignificant loss of ECSA even after 10000 potential cycles was observed, suggesting that it was an excellent example of a durable catalyst for ORR in HT-PEMFCs. The increased stability and better performance might be attributed to the unique nanoporous structure of NanoPC/PyPBI/Pt facilitating reactant diffusion.
 Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structure of PVP and schematic illustration of the preparation process of the MWCNTs/PVP/Pt catalyst; (b) chemical structure of para-PyPBI and schematic illustration of the preparation of a PA-coated electrocatalyst, MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt; (c) polarization of I–V and power density curves of different MEAs at 120 °C for Pt/CB (black), MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt (blue) and MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt (red), and schematic illustration of homogeneous PA-doping on MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt; (d) schematic illustration of the preparation of CB/PyPBI/Pt and NanoPC/PyPBI/Pt electrocatalysts. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
A well-established proton conducting path also plays a very important role in uplifting the performance of HT-PEMFCs. For example, Luo et al.60 modified a CNT/poly(2,5-benzimidazole) (ABPBI)-doped Pt-based catalyst with an ionic liquid (IL) to prepare CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL and found that a well connected proton path could lead to higher stability and better performance of the fuel cells without humidification at 120 °C (Fig. 5). This catalyst showed minimal ECSA loss even after 100000 cycles in the potential range from 1.0 to 1.5 V (vs. RHE) and higher peak potential values compared to the CNT/ABPBI/Pt and commercial CB/Pt catalysts. In addition, the HT-PEMFC assembled with the CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL catalyst showed a power density of 512 mW cm−2 with a Pt loading of 0.3 mgPt cm−2 at 120 °C, which was much higher than that with CNT/ABPBI/Pt (415 mW cm−2) and commercial CB/Pt (365 mW cm−2), and the stability of this catalyst was also greatly improved. They believed that this uplift in performance and stability could be attributed to three reasons: (1) uniformly distributed ionic liquids along CNTs benefiting proton conduction; (2) the increased number of triple phase boundaries (TPB) leading to higher Pt utilization; and (3) the presence of electron transfer from Pt to the nitrogen atom in ionic liquids to reduce Pt oxide formation.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrocatalyst preparation; (b) efficient proton conduction and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) of CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL; (c) normalized ECSAs of commercial CB/Pt (black line), CNT/ABPBI/Pt (blue line) and CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL (red line) as a function of potential cycles from 1.0 to 1.5 V (vs. RHE); (d) CV curves of commercial CB/Pt (black line), CNT/ABPBI/Pt (blue line) and CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL (red line); various I–V curves of commercial CB/Pt (e), CNT/ABPBI/Pt (f), and CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL (g) recorded after different potential cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
A microporous layer (MPL)-free design of cathode structure was developed by direct catalyst deposition on carbon paper without MPL covering.56 When operated at 150 °C, this technique induced a lower ohmic/mass transfer resistance along with an increase in Pt utilization. The HT-PEMFC with 20 wt% Pt/C and a Pt loading of 0.2 mgPt cm−2 delivered a maximum power density of 320 mW cm−2, while when 10 wt% Pt/C was employed with a loading of 0.1 mgPt cm−2, the maximum power density was 200 mW cm−2. These performances were obviously higher than that of the HT-PEMFC with a conventional MPL included cathode reported by the same group.61,62
In order to reduce Pt-loading on the cathode, the concept of a MEA with a binderless electrode was reported.19 Due to the absence of a binder/ionomer in the cathode, the triple phase boundaries in the catalyst layer could be well established by the acid transfer from the acid doped membrane to the electrodes. In this design, catalyst utilization was optimised along with extension of triple phase boundaries and alleviated acid flooding of the catalyst layer by adjusting the ratio of Pt to the supporting carbon. With an ultra low Pt loading of 0.1 mgPt cm−2 using 10 wt% Pt/C as the catalyst, the peak power densities of 482 mW cm−2 for the H2/O2 cell and 321 mW cm−2 for the H2/air cell were obtained at 160 °C and ambient pressure, corresponding to an overall (anode + cathode) Pt utilization of 2.5 and 1.7 kW gPt−1, respectively, and the durability test revealed no net voltage decay during more than 1700 hours of uninterrupted operation at 200 mA cm−2 and 160 °C. This result was probably one of the highest values of Pt utilization reported for PBI-based fuel cells. It was also observed that MEA performance improved with a reduction in the Pt/C ratio, which might be attributed to greater dispersion of catalyst particles in the catalyst layer. Therefore, the balance between high utilization of Pt and reduction in Pt loading should be considered for better performance of HT-PEMFCs and the stacks.
PGM-based catalysts are mostly supported on carbon materials. However, these materials are not durable enough to withstand the harsh operating conditions of HT-PEMFCs for a long duration of time. Carbon undergoes corrosion leading to delamination of catalyst particles,63 and ECSA reduction64 due to dissolution and agglomeration of Pt particles,64,65 resulting in the degraded performance or possible failure of fuel cells. Hence, non-carbonaceous materials (oxides, carbides or borides) and modified carbonaceous materials have attracted great attention due to their better durability in ORR catalysis for HT-PEMFCs. Unfortunately, there are only a few studies on this topic including Nb doped TiO2,64 carbon-Nb0.07Ti0.93O2,65 nanocrystalline tungsten carbide (WC),66 SiCTiC,67,68 SiC,68 TiC and TiC@TiO2.69 Lobato et al.68 prepared Pt/SiC and Pt/SiCTiC catalysts and compared their performance with commercial Pt/C. When Pt content in all the three catalysts was fixed at 40 wt% and the Pt loading in the cathodes was fixed at 0.6 mgPt cm−2, the HT-PEMFCs with both Pt/SiC and Pt/SiCTiC underwent ECSA degradation of 1.27 and 6.08%, respectively, after 100 hours of testing at 160 °C, which was much lower than that of the fuel cell with commercial Pt/C (21.7%) under similar conditions. However, the fuel cells showed lower power densities of 215.7 and 188.2 mW cm−2 when Pt/SiC and Pt/SiCTiC were employed, respectively, compared to the cell with commercial Pt/C (269.9 mW cm−2), after operating at 160 °C for 100 hours with oxygen in the cathode. Similar results were also demonstrated with air as the oxidant in the cathode. According to the authors, the reduced power density and the increased stability may be attributed to larger particle sizes and smaller surface areas of SiC and SiCTiC compared to that of the carbon support. In another study on TiC as a non-carbonaceous support of PGM-based catalysts,70 it was reported that TiC was not electrochemically stable as it suffers from oxidation which could result in a thin layer of TiO2 around TiC particles, leading to the passivation of TiC under HT-PEMFC operating conditions, though it was thermally stable at 200 °C with low solubility and high electronic conductivity. So, they developed a protective layer of TiO2 on TiC and comparatively investigated the effects of TiO2 coating when the Pt–Pd alloy was supported. They found that both the ECSA and ORR mass activity of the TiC@TiO2-supported Pt3Pd catalyst (Pt3Pd/TiC@TiO2) were similar to those of the Pt3Pd/TiC catalyst, suggesting that the presence of an oxide film on the TiC surface could not affect the overall catalytic activity. However, the Pt3Pd/TiC@TiO2 catalyst showed significantly improved electrochemical stability in comparison with TiC-supported catalysts. Therefore, the authors supposed that the TiC@TiO2 core–shell structure should be a promising candidate for HT-PEMFC catalyst support. Although the PGM-based catalysts with a novel support can lead to improvement in durability and reduction in ECSA loss compared to the commercial Pt/C catalyst, still more focus is required to enhance the activity by optimizing the synthesis, composition, structure as well as conductivity of the non-carbon supports.
In summary, the issues associated with Pt-based catalysts could be resolved to some extent by alloying the Pt metal with other metals and by suitable changes in the carbon support, and especially carbon doping along with polymer wrapping can lead to a wonderful uplift in the performance and durability of Pt-based catalysts for ORR. Besides, the modification of the catalyst layer structure might be an important and helpful factor in the reduction of Pt-loading on the cathode, ultimately leading to a reduction in catalyst cost.


2.1.2. PGM-free catalysts. 
Due to the scarcity and high price of PGMs and the poisoning effect of phosphate anions from PA/PBI based membranes on PGM-based catalysts in HT-PEMFCs, PGM-free catalysts with low-cost, abundant resources and easy fabrication have drawn special attention in the last several decades. Numerous research studies have been reported on PGM-free catalysts competing with the state-of-the-art PGM-based catalysts for LT-PEMFCs. For example, transition metals (mostly Fe and/or Co) supported on nitrogen doped carbon (M–N/C) showed performance comparable with Pt/C catalysts. In particular, Fe–N–C catalysts containing atomically dispersed FeN4 moieties have demonstrated activity approaching that of Pt in aqueous acids as well as encouraging performance in PEMFCs.69 However, the low density of active sites, insufficient stability, and poor three phase interfaces within the cathode remain grand challenges for these M–N–C catalysts. A good summarisation of catalysts for LT-PEMFCs can be found in ref. 69. But unfortunately, the HT-PEMFC regime is completely different for PGM-free catalysts. To the best of our knowledge, only a few reports have been published in this regard, and most of them include Fe-containing materials.
As a typical member of PGM-free catalysts, Fe–N–C catalysts71 have been extensively studied in recent years and approved to be the most promising candidates to replace PGM-based catalysts for LT-PEMFCs. In this type of catalyst, the presence of nitrogen, especially pyridinic nitrogen atoms, is mainly responsible for the active catalytic sites by creating Lewis basic sites in the catalyst lattice,72,73 and Fe content in the precursor has a significant effect on the particle size, carbon microstructure, nitrogen-doping level and porosity of the catalyst.74 In 2018, Hu et al.75 affirmed the strong adsorption and poisoning effect of perchloric ions on ORR activity during the Fe–N–C based catalyst evaluation in dilute perchloric acid which is usually used in fuel cell catalyst development, but they found a negligible poisoning effect of phosphate ions when phosphoric acid was used as the solution to evaluate the performance. Accordingly, it was concluded that Fe–N–C could be used in HT-PEMFCs as a catalyst if a phosphoric acid doped PBI membrane could be employed. With their BP-FeNC catalyst, where BP stands for Black Pearls 2000 carbon black, the HT-PEMFCs achieved a peak power density of 184.6 mW cm−2 and a current density of 189.2 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V when non-humidified gases (H2/O2) were used at ambient pressure and 160 °C. At a constant current density of 100 mA cm−2, the cell voltage showed a relatively fast decay (28.6% of the initial value) during the first 50 hours of operation, but it became quite stable with a further loss of only 5.4% in the following 350 hours. Another work on using Fe–N–C as the cathode catalyst in HT-PEMFCs was reported by Gokhale et al.,22 who pointed out that the main issue in the use of this catalyst in HT-PEMFCs was the slow oxygen diffusion through the catalyst layer but not the intrinsic structure of the catalyst. Similarly, a very important work in this field reported by Byeon et al.23 indicated that the pore size of the catalyst could affect the ORR performance because of a parallel change in surface area and oxygen diffusion, and an optimal pore size could lead to better performance with high selectivity (electron transfer number >3.95) for ORR in HT-PEMFCs owing to the enhanced transport of oxygen and protons. However, if the pore size was greater than 0.7 nm, the water flushed very quickly and demetalated most of the Fe–N4 sites.76 Surface fluorination of Fe–N–C by covalent grafting of trifluoromethyl phenyl (Ar-CF3) was reported to improve the catalyst stability because of the hydrophobic and electron withdrawing nature of the Ar-CF3 group which could lead to a reduction in oxidative corrosion of the carbon matrix.77 In contrast, it was reported that fluorination of Fe–N4 could result in the poisoning of most of the Fe-based catalytic sites due to the formation of undesired Fe–F bonds, while it had no effect on the ORR active CNx sites located at the carbon surface. The above research showed the complexity of Fe–N–C based catalyst degradation and also explained that the root cause of the poisoning effect on all the catalytic sites in Fe–N–C based catalysts has different origins.78
Graphite-encapsulated Fe3C nanoparticles were prepared by using a one-step high-temperature autoclave pyrolysis process with cyanamide (99%) and ferrocene (98%) as the precursors, and were evaluated as the cathode catalyst for both LT-PEMFCs and HT-PEMFCs.79 The structure formation mechanism of the Fe3C catalyst is shown in Fig. 6a. The authors found that the pyrolytic temperature played a critical role in the formation of hollow morphologies of microspheres consisting of graphitic layer-encapsulated Fe3C nanoparticles and ORR active sites. As shown in Fig. 6a, melamine-rich microspheres were first formed with uniformly dispersed amorphous Fe species below 500 °C. At temperature about 600 °C, the melamine-rich phase started to evaporate while the initially formed sphere structure could confine the following growth of the graphitic phases as well as the encapsulated Fe3C nanoparticles. Simultaneous formation of Fe3C nanoparticles and electronically conductive graphitic phases occurred at 700 °C. Around this temperature, the synthesized catalysts with negligible surface nitrogen or iron functionalities exhibited superior ORR activity and stability due to the active structure of Fe3C nanoparticles encapsulated by thin graphitic layers. The HT-PEMFC fabricated by using the as-prepared catalyst and the phosphoric acid doped PBI membrane was tested under ambient pressure. As shown in Fig. 6b, its OCV was only about 0.8 V, but the performance could be improved steadily by increasing the operating temperature from 120 to 180 °C, and the maximum current density reached about 445 mA cm−2 with a peak power density of about 60 mW cm−2 at 180 °C. This HT-PEMFC also demonstrated acceptable durability as depicted in Fig. 6c.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the structure formation mechanism for Fe3C catalysts; (b) polarization and power density curves of the H2–O2 fuel cell at different working temperatures under ambient pressure; (c) chronoamperometric curves at a cell voltage of 0.6 V for the Nafion-Fe/C–O2 cell and at a cell voltage of 0.4 V for the Nafion-Fe/C–air cell and the chrono-potentiometric curve at 100 mA cm−2 for the PBI-Fe/C cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another type of Fe-based PGM-free catalyst for ORR in HT-PEMFCs is the iron single atom crystals on graphene (FeSA-G) developed by Cheng et al.,21 which has a novel structure and a favorite electron distribution.80 When it was used as the ORR catalyst with a Fe loading of 0.3 mg cm−2 and PA/PBI/SiO2 composite as the polymer electrolyte membrane, the fabricated HT-PEMFC showed a peak power density of 325 mW cm−2 which was obviously better when compared with the cell with a Pt/C cathode (313 mW cm−2) at a Pt loading of 1 mg cm−2. The cell with a FeSA-G cathode also exhibited superior stability at 230 °C, compared to that with a Pt/C cathode and an identical PEM under identical reaction conditions. The authors attributed the high performance of FeSA-G to the homogeneous atomic distribution of Fe single atoms coordinated with N within the graphene matrix. On the other hand, in the case of the Pt/C catalyst, the increase in the operation temperature could accelerate the aggregation of Pt particles, and the strong adsorption of phosphate ions on Pt also expedited its performance deterioration. This FeSA-G catalyst's performance is one of the highest ones ever reported for PGM-free catalysts for HT-PEFMC application as the cathode as shown in Fig. 3.
The above results and discussion indicate that there still exists huge room for improvement in the development of PGM-free ORR catalysts for HT-PEMFCs. Hence, some intensive experimental work is required to develop high performance PGM-free catalysts with the hope to replace the commercial PGM-based catalysts.

2.2. Proton exchange membranes
The proton exchange membrane (PEM), also known as the polymer electrolyte membrane, is a very thin, hard and robust plastic like polymeric material with proton conductivity. As shown in Fig. 1, the PEM is one of the most important parts of HT-PEMFCs and is fitted in the middle of each cell unit. One of its sides faces, and is connected with, the anode catalyst layer which is responsible for HOR to produce electrons and protons. The other side of the PEM faces, and is attached to, the cathode catalyst layer which is responsible for the ORR to produce water and heat. The PEM should be specially designed for selective diffusion of H+ to give high ionic conductivity (or low ionic resistance) for reducing voltage loss across the membrane. Various methods have been reported for the preparation of PEMs including solution casting,27,84–86 sol–gel method,87,88 doctor blade casting,84,85 solvent evaporation,86 stencil printing,85 nip-roller85 and slot dye extrusion.85,88 Depending on the materials and preparation methods, different types of PEMs have been reported in the literature to get a contemporary HT-PEMFC stack. The main PEM categories include (1) modified perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) membranes; (2) sulfonated hydrocarbon polymers (SHPs) and their composite membranes; (3) phosphoric acid (H3PO4) doped PBI and ABPBI membranes; and (4) acid base membranes. In the following parts we will discuss all of them in detail.

2.2.1. Modified PFSA membranes. 
PFSA membranes consist of a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) backbone with perfluorovinyl ether side chains that terminate with a sulfonic acid functionality and they are more generally known as Nafion® membranes.89 They are suitable for use in LT-PEMFCs, but unsuitable for HT-PEMFCs because they can lose proton conductivity at high temperature owing to their glass transition temperature ranging from 120 to 140 °C90 and the evaporation of water molecules responsible for proton conduction.91 Therefore, modified PFSA membranes have been attracting attention for high temperature applications. The modification strategies for PFSA membranes include incorporation of hygroscopic inorganic materials like SiO2 nanoparticles,28,92,93 mordenite,94,95 zirconia,96,97 TiO2,98–100 graphene oxide and ionic liquids,39,101 poly(ethylene-alt-tetrafluoroethylene) (ETFE) grafted with poly(4-vinyl pyridine) (P4PV),102 acrylic monomers,103 acrylic acid104 and its associated polymers,105 inorganic hetero poly acids like phosphotungstic acid (PTA),106,107 and layered double hydroxide nanoparticles.108 Some self-humidifying membranes like Pt/zeolite Nafion109 and PTFE/PBI composite/hybrid membranes110,111 have also been developed. For example, the 1-vinylimidazole and 1-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone grafted ETFE membrane105 showed high thermal stability at 200 °C and an ionic conductivity of 53 mS cm−1 at 120 °C with 0% relative humidity. Another membrane of Nafion/IL/GO was composited by using a phosphate functionalized imidazolium ionic liquid, graphene oxide and a Nafion® 117 membrane.101 At 110 °C and under anhydrous conditions this membrane showed an ionic conductivity of 61 mS cm−1, which was 1.3 times higher than that of the commercial Nafion® 117 membrane, and the cell with it showed a 13 times higher power density compared to that based on the commercial Nafion® 117 membrane. When examined with thermal gravimetric analysis, this membrane showed thermal stability up to 250 °C, which satisfied the requirements for use in HT-PEMFCs. New fabrication techniques can also be beneficial for performance improvement of PFSA based membranes. One typical example is membrane immobilization,112 in which the membrane is immobilized on pyrex glass leading to suppressed cracks and wrinkes of the Nafion® membrane and a better interaction between the catalyst layer and the electrolyte membrane. This technique led to an enhanced cell performance of 715 mW cm−2 at 150 °C which was higher compared with that of a conventional hot pressed GDL-based MEA (650 mW cm−2). The introduction of quaternized polysulfone into polytetrafluoroethylene to form a composite membrane is also an efficient strategy.113 When loaded with 400% H3PO4, the as-prepared membrane showed an ionic conductivity of greater than 300 mS cm−1 at 180 °C and relative humidity of lower than 0.5%. This performance was far better than that of the simple polytetrafluoroethylene (Nafion®) membranes which could decompose at higher than 90 °C. The membrane produced by Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition showed two times less specific resistance to proton conduction when compared with the Nafion 212® membrane prepared by a continuous plasma deposition method.114 Magnetic field alignment of proton conducting channels in the polymer matrix is also a powerful technique for performance enhancement of PFSA-based membranes.25 The composite proton-conducting paramagnetic complex based on the ferrocyanide coordinated polymer and phosphotungstic acid under a strong magnetic field demonstrated high conductivity through plane-aligned proton channels. Amazingly, this strategy simultaneously overcame the high water-solubility of phosphotungstic acid in composite membranes, thereby preventing its leaching and the subsequent loss of membrane conductivity. The ferrocyanide groups in the coordinated polymer, via the redox cycle, can continuously consume free radicals, thus helping to improve the long-term in situ membrane durability.
Overall, the solid additives restrained in the PFSA membranes can give better performance when compared to the liquid additives due to the evaporation and leaching out of liquids with water at high operating temperature. Moreover, solid hydrophilic additives have been proved to be very useful because they can better maintain water balance and increase the conductivity of membranes.37 However, the operating temperature of modified PFSA membranes is still not high enough to satisfy well the requirement for HT-PEMFCs, because most of them can only work smoothly in the temperature range from 100 to 120 °C. Another problem associated with modified PFSA membranes is the high humidity level required to maintain high proton conductivity at the high temperature for HT-PEMFC operation.


2.2.2. SHPs and their composite membranes. 
SHPs and their composite membranes have been reported to have better mechanical and thermal properties and enhanced water uptake in a wide range of temperature. As a class of SHP materials, sulfonated polyetherketones have been widely investigated for PEMs due to their low cost and high stability at elevated temperature. Normally, the starting material for sulfonated polyetheretherketone is commercial polyetheretherketone, which is sulfonated with sulfuric acid. A better sulfonation control should be the critical step in the synthesis of functionalized monomers.37 For example, a monomer with sulfonyl propoxy side chains was prepared and then polymerised with bisphenol-A and 4,4-difluorobenzophenone to form terminally crosslinked ionomeric blocks in the membrane, which showed high proton conductivity due to the unique structure.115 Some other examples of SHP materials include quaternized poly(ether ether ketone)s,116,117 poly(aromatic ether ketone) composites,118 sulfonated poly(fluorenyl ether ketone)s,119,120 sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone)s121,122 and their composites,123–130 and sulfonated poly(arylene ether ketone)s.131 Another kind of hydrocarbon-based polymer membrane is the modified ether based membranes, including aromatic polyether,132–136 poly(ether sulfone)137–139 and its composites,140,141 poly(arylene ether),142 poly(arylene ether) sulfone143–145 and its composites,146 sulfonated poly(arylene ether) sulfone147–150 and its composites,151–156 sulfonated poly(arylene thioether) sulfone,157 and PA doped poly(tetra phenyl ether ketone sulfone).158 Furthermore, the modified poly(vinylpyrrolidone) membranes have also been explored for HT-PEMFCs due to their low-cost, enhanced acid uptake, better mechanical properties, and high proton conductivity.159
Similar to modified PFSA membranes, the main issue of SHP-based membranes is membrane degradation due to dehydration under high operating temperature of HT-PEMFCs. When operating with this kind of membranes, continuous water supply for membrane humidification is always required, which makes the system more complex in the case of internal membrane humidification. Dehydration also causes many other problems like catalyst layer delamination and membrane thinning.


2.2.3. PBI-based membranes. 
Compared to modified PFSA and SHP-based membranes, PBI-based membranes are generally preferred for HT-PEMFC applications because of their low-cost and excellent chemical and thermal properties in the temperature range from 100 to 250 °C without humidification.160 Diverse types of acids like HNO3, H2SO4, HClO4 and HCl can be doped into PBI membranes to work as the proton donors. However, phosphoric acid (H3PO4, PA) has been proved to be a superior dopant because the membranes doped with it always have high conductivity, excellent thermal stability, and very low vapor pressure at high temperature.161 The major issues associated with PA doped PBI (PA-PBI) membranes include catalyst poisoning due to the leaching of acid, and membrane degradation due to the harsh operating conditions and undesirable electrochemical reactions.
Along with PA-PBI membranes without modification,162–166 many modified PBI membranes have also been reported with enhanced performance. Some of the examples include H2SO4-doped PBI membranes,167 poly(2,5-benzimidazole) based membranes,163,168–173 pyridine based PBI membranes,174–176 sulfonated benzimidazole membranes,177–179 polysiloxane doped PBI membranes,180 fluorine and fluoropolymer doped PBI membranes,179,181–183 aryl ether based PBI membranes,184,185 PBI and poly(2,5-benzimidazole) (ABPBI) based composite membranes,186–197 phenylindane containing PBI membranes,198 imidazole doped PBI membranes,199 poly(imide benzimidazole) based membranes,200 and methylated PBI membranes.201 Among these PBI-based membranes, PA-PBI composite membranes188,189,191,193–197 are identified to be the best for HT-PEMFCs because of the following two properties: (1) the better mechanical and chemical stability attributed to the aromatic polymer backbone and high glass transition temperature (425–436 °C);6,160 and (2) the higher proton conductivity of 70 mS cm−1 even at 160 °C and under dry conditions owing to the phosphoric acid present in the polymer matrix.186
The performance of PBI-based membranes depends on many factors including the amount and distribution of the doped acid,202 type of solvent used,83 extent and type of crosslinking between PBI molecules,91,203,204 and structural properties and morphology of pristine and acid doped PBI.205 As measured, PBI-based membranes can absorb up to 19 wt% water, corresponding to 3.2 water molecules per each PBI repeating unit.160 During the membrane casting, this water can be evaporated by heating the membrane at 110 °C. Generally, the molecular ratio of H3PO4 to bibenzimidazole (BI) is represented by “n” and can be written as eqn (1). n = [H3PO4]/[BI](1)If the value of n is less than 2, it means that no free acid molecules are available in the membrane, while free acid molecules are available if n is greater than 2. Accordingly, the proton transfer mechanisms are different for both cases of n values. The exact mechanism for proton transfer is quite complex and depends on the amount of acid doped, relative humidity and temperature. Protons, having a small size (∼10−15 m) and positive charge, can form H2PO2+, NH4+ and H3O+ in aqueous solution and hydrogen bonding in the presence of highly electronegative atoms like nitrogen. Based on all the above points, different mechanisms have been proposed for proton movement through PBI-based membranes.7 As shown in Scheme 1a, each PBI repeating unit contains two basic nitrogen atoms, and proton hopping may take place along the nitrogen atoms present in PBI chains in non-doped PBI membranes. On the other hand, in the case of doped PBI membranes, there are two possibilities: (1) if there are no free acid molecules, protons can move from H3PO4 to basic nitrogen and then N–H sites to H2PO4−, as shown in Scheme 1b; and (2) when free acid molecules are present, the hopping takes place through H2PO4− as well as proton movement from N–H sites to H2PO4−, as shown in Scheme 1(c). During HT-PEMFC operation at high temperature, proton hopping also takes place along free acid molecules as described in Scheme 1(d) and via water molecules as shown in Scheme 1(e). In short, the proton transfer occurs through “hopping” with the help of the hydrogen bonding network between oxygen atoms of free acid molecules (if available) and protons attached to the basic nitrogen atoms of the PBI polymer. The proton then keeps moving through the hydrogen-bonded phosphoric acid molecule chain.40
 Scheme 1  (a) Chemical structure of poly[2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole] (PBI); (b) H3PO4 protonated PBI with no free acid molecules; proton transfer along (c) acid–BI-acid, (d) acid–acid, and (e) acid–H2O. Reproduced from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, Beilstein-Institute (Open access). 
The introduction of an ionic liquid, nitrogen groups and inorganic fillers may have significant effects on the basic properties of PBI membranes. For example, modification of pyridine functionalized PBIs with phosphonated graphene oxide was proved to be efficient for improving the performance of the PBI membrane;26 the obtained membrane delivered a proton conductivity of 76.4 mS cm−1, and the HT-PEMFC with this membrane demonstrated a peak power density greater than 395 mW cm−2 at an operating temperature of 120 °C. Chen et al.27 developed a protic ionic liquid (PIL)-modified PBI crosslinked composite membrane named cPBI-BF4-X, where the letter “X” represents weight percent of the ionic liquid (X = 0, 10, 20, 30, 40). An outstanding proton conductivity of 117 mS cm−1 at 170 °C was achieved at X = 40. This membrane also exhibited high mechanical/oxidative/thermal stability and acid uptake. The proton conductivity mechanism in this membrane was proposed as shown in Fig. 7. As indicated by the blue lines, proton transfer occurs through acid/base interaction of phosphoric acid with benzimidazole units. In addition, proton hopping from N–H sites to nitrogen atoms can further promote the proton conductivity, mainly following the Grotthuss mechanism. Moreover, PIL can reinforce the proton conductivity by providing a platform in which protons can jump between the main chain and the anionic part indicated by green lines. In the work by Sana et al.,206 a proton conductivity of 120 mS cm−1 was achieved at 160 °C for PBI-based membranes by the introduction of tetraamine into PBI, which resulted in the synthesis of pyridine bridged PBIs. The increase of proton conductivity in both of the above cases can be attributed to the enhanced acid uptake and well connected proton paths.
 Fig. 7  Proton conductivity mechanism of PA-doped cPBI-BF4-X membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
The issues associated with PBI-based membranes include: (1) acid flow out with the condensed water at temperature lower than 100 °C, when the HT-PEMFC device is not working; (2) unsatisfactory mechanical properties under HT-PEMFC operating conditions; and (3) low proton conductivity at high temperature.207 Additionally, acid leaching at low temperature7 leads to chemical degradation of the polymer and other HT-PEMFC materials.208 Therefore, the acid doping level of PBI-based membranes should be optimized for better mechanical stability and to minimize the acid loss during cell operation. Some strategies like covalent crosslinking and fabricating composite membranes have been verified to be effective.


2.2.4. Acid base membranes. 
Acid base membranes have a non-aqueous solvent like acid or protic ionic liquid, which replaces water and acts as a proton carrier along with some solid materials playing the role of proton conduction medium. The solid materials mostly include polymers with basic moieties like imide, amine, amide, alcohol, ether or aprotic ionic liquid, which can react with acid to make complex acid base polymer membranes possessing a proton conductivity of less than 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature. An increase in acid content can uplift the proton conductivity but results in poor mechanical stability, especially at temperature greater than 100 °C.160 In the case of the protic ionic liquid, proton transfer cannot take place effectively in the cell containing a pure protic ionic liquid. Hence, some acidic or basic proton shuttle is compulsory for effective proton transfer between the electrodes of fuel cells.209 The early report on acid base membranes for HT-PEMFCs was published in 2001,210 in which PBI was doped with sulfonated polysulphones and phosphoric acid. This blend membrane showed improved conductivity, in which the acidic polymer acted as a macromolecule cross linking agent and phosphoric acid acted as a proton source of ionic transport. Moreover, the acid base membranes generally have high thermal stability and proton conductivity under low humidity or even in dry conditions. An example of their preparation was a reaction between p-toluenesulfonic acid and nitrilotri(methylenephosphonic acid) to produce protic ionics,211 which were found to be very useful membranes at high temperature up to 200 °C. Due to the presence of basic nitrogen atoms, nitrilotri(methylenephosphonic acid) can accept protons from p-toluenesulfonic acid and act as a Lewis base. Similarly, PBI or acid base PBI can also act as a Lewis base if a proton donating species is available in the polymer matrix. Some examples of these membranes having a polymer as a base include polyimide-based membranes like polyimide composite membranes,212,213 sulfonated polyimides214 and phosphonated polyimides,215 polyethyleneimine,216 sulfonated diamine,217 polyethylene oxide,218 polyvinyl acetate,219 polyacrylamide,220 and polyvinyl alcohol.221 Ionic liquid-doped poly(vinylidenfluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) is another example of acid base membranes with a conductivity of 10−2 S cm−1 at 140 °C.222 This type of membrane includes aprotic ionic liquid-based223–226 and protic ionic liquid-based227–230 polymer composite membranes.
A comparison of all four kinds of membranes is given in Fig. 8, where the average values for power density, proton conductivity, thermal retention and acid or water uptake at 250 °C are displayed. These values were taken from 10 randomly selected references for each type of membrane, with the exception of acid base membranes because only one work reported the value for moisture uptake for this type of membrane224 and another study reported the power density223 for HT-PEMFC application. It can be seen that all four types of membranes have conductivity values higher than 70 mS cm−1 which is required for successful operation of HT-PEMFCs at 160 °C.37,162 Modified PBI membranes are significantly superior in power density while modified PFSA and SHP membranes have similar proton conductivity which is better than that of modified PBI membranes. Acid base membranes also have acceptable power densities but lower proton conductivity. Therefore, more focus is required on the development of novel membranes with high proton conductivity and enhanced durability for improved comprehensive performance of practical HT-PEMFCs.
 Fig. 8  A comparison of different types of proton exchange membranes for HT-PEMFCs; the average values of all parameters are calculated from 10 randomly selected articles. 

2.3. Bipolar plates
Bipolar plates are required to support the MEA, homogeneously conduct heat and electricity, separate the cathode and anode of cells, prevent the leakage of coolant and gas and separate the fluids already present or produced during PEMFC operation. For HT-PEMFCs, the materials of bipolar plates should have thermal conductivity higher than 10 W m K−1 and compression strength of at least 4.2 N cm−2, while electrical resistance and gas permeability should be less than 0.01 mΩ cm2 and 10−4 cm3 s−1 cm−2, respectively.41 In HT-PEMFC applications, metallic bipolar plates may have the advantages of low thickness leading to reduced stack weight, high electrical conductivity, good machining and reduced cost, but may corrode rapidly due to the presence of H3PO4 and high temperature. Hence, researchers are focusing on the synthesis of thermally and electrochemically stable, low cost and easily machinable bipolar plate materials. In this regard, in addition to the widely used graphite composites,231 metals like Ti,232 Al,233,234 Ni,235,236 and stainless steel237,238 and carbon composites239–242 have also been explored to make BPPs.
Graphite based bipolar plates are prepared from natural graphite as a graphite source, and phenolic resins, polyimide or some other polymer acting as the polymer matrix. Different sizes of the expanded graphite (EG) are used to develop bipolar plates mostly using the hot compression molding method. In larger flakes of graphite, a 10 wt% addition of smaller particles of expanded graphite may enhance the electrical conductivity of the composite plate up to 100% without affecting the mechanical properties of composite graphite. The percentage of resin can also affect the properties of plates.231 Higher percentage of resin increases the mechanical properties of expanded graphite. For example, Cui et al.243 prepared bipolar plates by using polyimide and expanded graphite, and found that a large ratio of expanded graphite may be beneficial for enhancing the electrical properties and flexural strength. On the other hand, increasing the amount of polymer could result in reduced hydrogen permeability, decreased bulk density, increased shore and flexural strength but decreased electrical conductivity. Hence, for HT-PEMFC applications, expanded graphite/polyimide material with 40–55% polyimide was found to be suitable. This type of bipolar plate has negligible water absorption and air permeability and is quite efficient for HT-PEMFCs but still has issues of corrosion, acid leaching and manufacturability.244
Stainless steel such as SS316L has also been reported to show satisfactory performance as bipolar plate material for HT-PEMFCs245 but faces similar problems of corrosion and passivation, although there are some merits of higher conductivity, better manufacturability and thinner thickness.245 This type of plate can undergo more severe corrosion near the fuel inlet at the anode side and close to the outlet at the cathode side after long time operation. SEM micrographs of a mechanically polished cross section of the anode and cathode are shown in Fig. 9a and b, respectively, where the pie charts exhibit EDX compositional information of the corrosion product in atomic percent. The corrosion product at the anode side was green in color (Fig. 9c) and was found to be more water soluble as compared to the cathode side corrosion product (Fig. 9d), which was darker in color and was mainly composed of oxide and phosphates with very less Cr2O3 scale product. Another type of stainless steel (SS304) bipolar plate was also evaluated for use in HT-PEMFCs and it showed performance comparable to computer numerical controlled and milled graphite bipolar plates,237 but iron phosphates and ferric oxides were observed on its surface as corrosion reaction products after 300 hours of continuous fuel cell test.
 Fig. 9  SEM micrograph of a mechanically polished cross section of the (a) anode and (b) cathode exposed sample including compositional information from energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the corrosion product in atomic percent; photographs of SS316L bipolar plates on the (c) anode and (d) cathode after 900 hours of operation in a single fuel cell, where the plates were boiled and washed by ultrasonic agitation in deionized water before the photos were taken. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. 
To achieve better corrosion resistance, facile water management and homogeneous fuel distribution, metal bipolar plates are generally coated with various materials such as metals (Ni–Mo,246 Au233,244 and Ag234), metal nitrides (CrN,238,247 TiN,232 and ZrN,248), carbon (graphite,244 carbon black,242 graphene inclusion,240 and boron doped diamond on niobium235), and conducting polymers239 and multi-layers.238 The coating method depends on the nature and type of substrate and the coated material. These methods include, but are not limited to, physical vapor deposition, chemical vapor deposition, electroplating, electroless deposition, spraying and brushing. For example, SS316L coated with ZrN showed extremely high corrosion resistance with a corrosion current density of less than 1 μA cm−2 as required by DOE.248 Bilayers of CrN/Cr on SS316L could provide more than 99.9% corrosion protection in simulated HT-PEMFCs at 130 °C.238 The interfacial contact resistance (ICR) of such plates was only 5.5 mΩ cm2, which was significantly lower than that of bare SS316L (47 mΩ cm2). The challenges associated with these methods of bipolar plate formation include weak adhesion of the coating material, uneven expansion and presence of micropores, pinholes or cracks on the surface.
The most common methods to engrave the channels in bipolar plates include stamping and milling/injection molding. The metal bipolar plates are generally prepared by stamping while carbon and composite bipolar plates are prepared by milling/injection molding. Stamping could be subdivided into three categories: (1) traditional stamping249,250 which includes a male (punch) and female (die) part to produce flow field channels; (2) hydroforming method248,251–253 which excludes the need of male die while replacing it by a high pressure (up to 1000 MPa) water containing chamber; and (3) rubber bed forming254–257 in which force is applied by a rigid punch made up of soft materials like synthetic or natural rubber covering the rubber. Some other methods reported in the literature include selective laser melting,258 electrochemical micromachining,259 and the Lithographie–Galvanoformung–Abformung (LIGA) process.260 The steps involved in such a process include photo masking, ultraviolet (UV) exposure, etching and electroforming of a steel substrate to develop a metallic bipolar plate. The point and area processing for the plates is done by micro-electrical discharge machining.261,262 As can be seen in Fig. 10, flow field channels produced by milling (using graphite) and stamping (using metals) are different with respect to shape and depth.263 The milled channels have a rectangular section while stamped metallic plates have an inner fillet radius in the range from 0.1 to 0.2 mm, limited channel depth and a draft angle of 15 to 45°. This type of geometry can support the intrusion of the gas diffusion layer material into the flow field for improving the flow and distribution properties of liquid and gaseous fuels and oxidant (air or oxygen). In a comparative investigation on flow field channels,264 it was reported that desired power output can be achieved by using an optimal number of cells in a stack and components in a cell, and by increasing the active area per cell. However, increasing the active cell area and the corresponding size of BPPs is limited because it could create multiple problems like uneven pressure, non-homogeneous flow distribution and sealing challenge. Hence, as a compromise between the technical limitations of an increased active cell area and the number of cells, 100 cm2 active area of bipolar plates was found to be most suitable for a HT-PEMFC stack with a power range from 1 to 10 kW. Along with many other factors, the power density of the HT-PEMFC stack is strongly dependent on the thickness of bipolar plates, and metallic plates having a thickness of 0.1 to 0.2 mm are identified as promising candidates to achieve the 2020 target of power specific bipolar plate weight (0.4 kg kW−1).264 Moreover, special flow field designs (e.g. 3D) can uplift the stack performance and the method of stack tightening and enhanced compatibility between MEA and bipolar plates can also help in the production of highly efficient stacks.265
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of the gas channel cross-section (a) in a graphite bipolar plate produced by milling and (b) in a metallic bipolar plate produced by stamping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
The weight of bipolar plates is also a very important factor because light weight means a high energy density of the HT-PEMFC stack. As shown in Fig. 11a and b, a cathode–anode integrated bipolar plate was recently designed along with the design of conventional bipolar plates for comparison.250 In detail, a carbon fibre reinforced composite bipolar plate was prepared by using cyanate ester modified epoxy and non-woven carbon felt. Fabrication of HT-PEMFCs using this bipolar plate could reduce the unit cell thickness to half, and a considerable reduction in cell stack weight, volume and cost could also be achieved at large scale. In addition, bare layers of carbon developed by using a soft layer method could impart high electrical conductivity to the plates. The as-manufactured plates were also found to be stable at high temperature and pressure, and the soft layer fabrication technique also removed the need of additional surface coating or treatment. This type of bipolar plate when tested in a 3-cell stack gave an areal specific resistance of 15.5 mΩ cm2 at a compaction pressure of 1.38 MPa. In this case, adding one cell into the stack required one assembly of the MEA, gas diffusion layer and sub gaskets along with one bipolar plate and two main gaskets. The thickness and weight of one cell with the above explained components were only 1.7 mm and 1.7 g, respectively. Additionally, the stack provided a power of 11.2 W with a power density of 450 mW cm−2 when operated at 140–160 °C. Moreover, it is well known that bipolar plates require a very complicated flow channel design for fuel/oxidant gases and water management. As shown in Fig. 11c, the mold can generally be divided into three sections based on the pressure difference generated due to the change in height of thickness direction. Region t3 experiences lower pressure as compared to region t1 when pressure is applied on the composite laminate placed between two molds. For effective functioning of soft layer method, the applied pressure should be high enough to expose the carbon fibers on the surface which are responsible for the conductivity of bipolar plate. In the mold design with t1 equal to t3, it was difficult to apply high compaction pressure during cell operation because of the very thin t2. Hence, the mold was designed for t1 equal to t2, although the applied pressure may vary in different regions. Fig. 11d–f display the basic concept of the cathode/anode integrated composite bipolar plate. Unlike conventional unidirectional carbon fiber and carbon fabric composites whose thickness is designed to be uniform throughout (Fig. 11d), carbon felt composites can be designed to have varying thickness (Fig. 11e). Using this unique characteristic, channels can be formed at the thicker “flat area” as shown in Fig. 11f. Hydrogen supplied from the H2 manifold will flow in the upper channels, while oxygen supplied from the O2 manifold will flow in the opposite side channels.250
 Fig. 11  Design of (a) a conventional bipolar plate and (b) a cathode/anode integrated bipolar plate; (c) compression molding of a bipolar plate; (d) cross sectional view of composite bipolar plates of unidirectional and fabric type composites; (e) non-woven carbon felt composite and (f) cathode/anode integrated bipolar plate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
In brief, key points for designing and fabricating a bipolar plate include:245,250,263 (1) functionality, which means that the plate should efficiently distribute and collect the fuel/oxidant gases, water and other effluents; (2) high percentage of the active area; (3) manufacturability, which attributes to the fact that anode and cathode plates and cooling flow fields are related to each other and cannot be designed separately; (4) molecular size pinhole control, which means bipolar plates should not have molecular size pinholes because they may trap the molecules and react with the substrate to produce by-products and impurities, which can suppress the performance eventually leading to plate degradation; (5) deformation control under drastic operating conditions for HT-PEMFCs, where low modulus of bipolar plate materials means that plates would be more flexible, resulting in less contact resistance between fuel components; (6) durability or corrosion resistance, which is a major factor as most of the metal plates cannot withstand against phosphoric acid at high temperature; and (7) cost, which should be considered while designing a bipolar plate because graphite or composite plates are about 5 to 10 times costly as compared to metal plates.
2.4. Assembling HT-PEMFCs for materials/components’ performance validation and optimization
The performance of the HT-PEMFC and its stack is mainly limited by the slow ORR kinetics, degradation of the materials and components, and reduced PEM proton conductivity at high temperature. Some other parameters affecting performance include the operating conditions266 and assembly parameters. The stack tightening method, applied pressure and compression ratio are also very important factors which can significantly affect HT-PEMFCs’ and the stack's performance.267–269 As can be seen in Fig. 12, HT-PEMFC assembly is a multistep process which involves catalyst synthesis and evaluation, preparation of the catalyst layer, MEA fabrication, cell and stack assembly, followed by performance evaluation.
 Fig. 12  A schematic of the increase in size leading to a more complex system and difficult handling of HT-PEMFCs. 
The catalyst synthesis and evaluation steps involve engineering of catalyst structure followed by evaluation of its specific activity. As discussed above, HOR catalysis for HT-PEMFCs is comparatively less focused because of its relatively faster kinetics than ORR and very low catalyst loading required, while ORR catalysts have been in the spotlight owing to the sluggish kinetics. So, the evaluation of ORR catalysts will mainly be discussed in the following paragraphs.
As described in the previous sections, an ideal ORR catalyst for fuel cells should have a 4-electron process to produce water by the reaction of protons, electrons and oxygen. The number of transferred electrons can be measured by using rotating disk electrode (RDE) and/or rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) techniques. Generally, in the preparation of the working electrode for RDE/RRDE measurements, a catalyst ink is prepared by mixing the catalyst, binder (conductive ionomer) and a solvent which may be ethanol, propanol, distilled water or a mixture of alcohols and distilled water, and then a thin layer of catalyst ink is applied on the surface of the disk electrode followed by its drying in air. After the drying step, the as-prepared electrode is assembled into a three-electrode system and the data are collected at various electrode rotation rates in a selected potential range. After that, the onset potential, half wave potential and limiting current density could be read from the current–potential (I–V) curves. With reference to the I–V curves of RDE experiments, moreover, a range of potential points with the limiting current density could be selected to obtain a simplified Loutecky–Levich (K–L) plot between inverse of current density “1/Ik” and “1/ω1/2”. The slope of these lines gives the value of B according to eqn (2):46 (2)where I is the disk current density (mA cm−2), Ik is the kinetic current density (mA cm−2), ID is the diffusion limiting current density (mA cm−2) and ω is the angular velocity of the rotating disk electrode (ω = 2πr, where r is the rotation rate per minute). With the value of B, the overall electron transfer number n can be calculated using eqn (3): B = 0.62nF(DO)2/3v−1/6CO(3)where DO is the diffusion coefficient of O2 (cm2 s−1), v is the kinematic viscosity of electrolyte solution (cm2 s−1), and CO is the concentration of dissolved oxygen (mol dm−3).
With RRDE data, n and H2O2 yield (H2O2%) can be calculated by using eqn (4) and (5), respectively: (4) (5)where ID is the current density on the disk electrode (mA cm−2), N is the collection coefficient and IR is the current density on the ring electrode (mA cm−2).
With the optimized catalyst, the next step is the deposition of catalyst ink onto the gas diffusion layer or PEM to form the catalyst layer, resulting in the formation of the gas diffusion electrode (GDE) or the catalyst coated membrane (CCM), which is further used to fabricate the MEA as described in Fig. 13. MEA assembly techniques have a significant effect on the performance of fuel cells and the stacks. Depending on the process of catalyst layer deposition, the catalyst coated substrate (CCS) and CCM can be produced. For CCS,19,27,31,81,91,270 the catalyst ink is deposited onto the GDL making a GDE, followed by hot pressing a piece of PEM sandwiched between two GDEs using high pressure and elevated temperature to form the MEA. For CCM,82,271–273 the catalyst ink is first deposited onto both sides of the membrane to make a CCM, followed by sandwiching this CCM between two GDLs while hot pressing is optional to produce the MEA. Herein, the GDL is generally made of electrically conducting fibre, which is carbon paper or carbon cloth in most cases, coated with a microporous layer usually made of PTFE and carbon for suitable hydrophobicity and reduced acid leaching and gas permeability. For techniques of catalyst deposition, spraying,270,275,276 ultrasonic spraying,19 impregnation,277 coating,275,276 and decal transfer273,274 have been reported. In some literature studies, binderless19 and microporous layer-free56 designs have also been used in order to uplift the Pt utilization and reduce the catalyst loading on the cathode.
 Fig. 13  Schematic of MEA fabrication by CCS and CCM methods. 
After MEA fabrication, a single cell or stack is assembled for performance evaluation. A process flow diagram for semi-automated HT-PEMFC stack assembly is shown in Fig. 14,278 during which the contact pressure279,280 and flow field design18,282 should be optimised. In addition, phosphoric acid temperature and concentration,281 fuel gas stoichiometry,283,284 humidity285 and fuel/oxidant gas compression ratio283 should be optimised during the HT-PEMFC operation.
 Fig. 14  Process flow diagram for semi-automated HT-PEMFC stack assembly. Reproduced from ref. 278. US-Department of Energy (Public access). 
During operation, both HOR and ORR occur in the MEA producing electricity and water without any other by-products, making the HT-PEMFC a green source of energy. A summary of MEA functions and their relation with the MEA properties286 are given in Table 1.
Table 1 MEA functions and their relation with MEA properties. Reproduced from ref. 286, Copyright 2012, InTech (Open access)




No.
Functions
Relation with properties




1
Separating anode and cathode reactions
Depends on membrane permeability


2
Channeling electrons from the anode to the current collector and from the current collector to the cathode
Type and structure of the catalyst and electrical resistivity of the membrane


3
Facilitating the electrochemical reaction/activity
Type and structure of the catalyst


4
Providing a large number of active sites
Type and structure of the catalyst, MEA assembly method


5
Providing structures that facilitate proton transport to the membrane
MEA assembly method, catalyst and its support, distribution and loading of the ionomer


6
Providing structures that can facilitate the transfer of products away from the production sites
MEA preparation, ink composition including hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties


7
Providing channels and structures to transport the reactants to catalytic active sites
MEA preparation, ink composition including hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties, catalyst support and catalyst structure




The performance evaluation of HT-PEMFCs is usually conducted in several steps. For example, after performing break up testing (or activation testing) between 60 and 120 hours at a relatively low current density of 200–300 mA cm−2,287 the load cycling protocol is generally applied consisting of long time cycling with a periodic load change between 600 mA cm−2 (4 minutes) and 1 A cm−2 (16 minutes).280 The test is then completed with a final characterization.
3. Materials and components’ degradation mechanisms and mitigation strategies
Usually, HT-PEMFCs can suffer from a long-term durability issue due to the degradation of their materials and components under high temperature and acidic conditions. The degradation can be classified into chemical,288 mechanical,288,289 thermal290 and electrochemical.291 In this section we will discuss the degradation mechanisms of various materials and components in HT-PEMFCs along with possible mitigation strategies.
3.1. Materials’ degradation mechanisms and possible solutions
Electrocatalysts and the PEM are the two key materials used in HT-PEMFCs. Their aging and time-accelerated degradation are mostly tested by long-term load testing or stop/start cycling. In order to save testing time, accelerated stress testing (AST) is considered to be more efficient because of the following advantages: (1) the current density cycling can lead to five times higher degradation at the same operating voltages but in a very less time;292 (2) good knowledge about the influences of test conditions on ageing mechanisms can be obtained by provoking degradation in a controlled way; (3) open circuit voltage operation of HT-PEMFCs can induce strong degradation due to catalyst agglomeration.293 The stressor in accelerated stress testing may include load cycling,293–295 thermal cycling,296 high temperature and high gas flow cycling,297 fuel starvation,298 and high potential cycling.299 Among them, load cycling is most extensively used, and the steps involved in a simple load cycling procedure are as follows:300,301 (1) heating up the cell to T1 using a continuous heating mode along with a supply of nitrogen to prevent MEA deterioration effects and avoid the overlapping of degradation effects from the contaminants in gas rather than the operating conditions; (2) switching on the hydrogen/reformate and oxygen supply along with 200 mA cm−2 current density to prevent the long-time operation of the MEA under open circuit voltage, which is harmful for the MEA. High load should be avoided in this interval of time because of the low cell voltage due to high ohmic resistance of the membrane; (3) heating up to T2 (T2 is always higher than T1) followed by a constant load of 400 mA cm−2 for 30 minutes; (4) getting a record of I–V curves and cooling down to T1 with a current density of 200 mA cm−2; (5) switching off the oxygen supply, load and fuel supply when the potential has reduced to 0.2 V and purging anode and cathode with nitrogen; (6) cooling down to 80 °C because this temperature is low enough to simulate the heating/cooling of the MEA passing the condensation point of water so that the effects of water not purged with hydrogen stream and trapped in the electrode layer become apparent; and (7) heating up again (loop).
After the completion of accelerated stress testing, the MEA is characterized with reference to the sample before testing using the following techniques: cyclic voltammetry (CV) to tell about the electrochemical surface area of the catalyst, linear sweep voltammetry to provide information about internal short circuit current and hydrogen crossover, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to enable cell resistance determination. Additional ex situ investigations include product water analysis by inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS), and morphological analysis by electron microscopy and/or micro-computed tomography289,293 for studying the nano/microstructures of the tested MEA and its components. The details of HT-PEMFC materials’ research/development and the corresponding experimental techniques are given in Table 2.
Table 2 HT-PEMFC materials’ research and the techniques




Research phase
Parameters
Techniques used




Manufacturing MEA
Layer thickness and uniformity
SEM, EPMA, X-ray radiography


Dispersion state of the catalyst
TEM, granularity analysis






Catalyst layer design
Dispersion of the catalyst and the ionomer
TEM, EDX


Void distribution
Mercury intrusion


AFM, GPC, NMR


Ionomer dispersion in the catalyst ink
μ-Computed tomography






R & D of the electrolyte membrane
Cluster size distribution
DSC, XRD, TEM


Chemical structure analysis
NMR






Wettability of the gas diffusion layer and the catalyst layer
Surface wetting
Contact angle


Permeability of vapors and water
Perporometry






Evaluation of the catalyst layer
Catalyst particle size
XRD, SEM, TEM


Catalyst chemical state
XAFS, XPS


Core shell catalyst
TEM, EDX


Carbon support analysis
Raman, XPS, XAFS


Ionomer distribution
TEM




Schonvogel et al.293,302 performed a load testing on Celtec®-P1100W MEAs (BASF Fuel Cell, Germany) at 160 °C and compared the impacts of different testing procedures on HT-PEMFCs’ performance. In their work, two accelerated stress testings of LC1 and LC2, as shown in Fig. 15, with similar loads but different current densities were performed. Low voltages were observed in both LC1 (Fig. 15a) and LC2 (Fig. 15b) during the early minutes after switching to open circuit voltage, which could be attributed to the time required by the system to attain equilibrium because of the remaining gases inside the cell. Low voltages were also observed after switching from open circuit voltage to the operation under load due to membrane dehydration at open circuit voltage. After the generation of water vapors in the early minutes, the voltage increased again to achieve the cell equilibrium. The irreversible voltage loss due to degradation is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 15c and d. In addition to the accelerated stress testing procedure for 70 hours on both MEAs, LC1 was also performed for 230 hours (LC1b) with only one interruption at half time (Fig. 15e) to verify the observed degradation pathways. The corresponding degradation rates at various current densities were calculated as listed in Table 3. It is observed that high cycling current densities during LC1 resulted in a voltage uplift to about +130 μV h−1, while low current density during LC2 led to a decrease in voltage to about −48 μV h−1. According to the authors, the increase in the voltage in the first case was assigned to the continuing activation phase which created new catalyst active centres by removal of impurities or excess H3PO4 present in the catalyst layer, while a voltage decrease during LC2 could be allocated to the comparatively stronger ageing process leading to a superimposed activation phase.
 Fig. 15  Load profiles (left) and voltage during single cycles (right) over accelerated stress testing operation time. (a) LC1 (16min at 1.0Acm−2/4min at 0.6Acm−2/every 6h 10min at 0.0Acm−2); (b) LC2 (16min at 0.3Acm−2/4min at 0.0Acm−2); (c) LC1a (approx. 70h); (d) LC2 (approx. 70h); (e) LC1b (approx. 230h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 293. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. 
Table 3 Degradation rates at various operating current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 293. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons




Aging test (approximate duration)
Current density (A cm−2)
Potential (ΔE/μV h−1)




LC1a (70 h)
0.0
+130


0.6
−330


1.0
−486






LC2 (70 h)
0.0
−48


0.3
−363






LC1b (230 h)
0.0
−27


0.6
−116


1.0
−126






LC1b (70 h)
0.0
−19


0.6
−189


1.0
−218




Rastedt et al.289 conducted a load cycling study at 160 °C on two different MEAs provided by BASF Fuel Cell (Germany) and Danish Power System (DPS, Denmark), respectively. With micro-computed tomography (micro-CT), it was observed that the load cycling has more effects on catalyst layer degradation as compared to membrane degradation (Fig. 16a and b). A big gap in the catalyst layer could be clearly observed, while the membrane showed no cracks or damage after accelerated stress testing. They also found that the electrochemical conditions inside the MEA during operation can lead to material degradation or decomposition resulting in a reduction of the electrochemical active surface area of the catalyst. On the other hand, the load cycling conditions have no considerable influence on the membrane judging from the membrane internal resistance and hydrogen crossover. In another work by Kerr et al.,303 DPS MEA performance and lifetime were investigated by using dry hydrogen/air, and the result showed an average degradation rate of 9 μV h−1 for the first 10000 hours. They achieved MEA performance of about 0.67 V at 200 mA cm−2 and life-time of total 17000 hours at 0.24 A cm−2 for a 5 kW stack system using hydrogen and air at 160 °C, as shown in Fig. 16c. After this testing, Pt particles grew from 2.3 to 6 nm at the cathode and 3.6 nm at the anode, respectively, as demonstrated in Fig. 16d–f, leading to decreased performance. Membrane thinning was also observed from 50 to 40 μm, and catalyst layers of cathode and anode were reduced to 12 and 4 μm from their original thickness of 30 and 8 μm, respectively. Similar results were also observed with wet hydrogen and reformate gas in this work.
 Fig. 16  Reconstructed μ-CT images of (a) fresh BASF MEA and (b) stressed BASF MEA after load cycling; (c) durability test of the standard DPS MEAs operating at a current density of 0.24 A cm−2; Pt particle size distribution of the Pt/C catalyst from DPS MEA (d) before testing and after 17000 hours testing on the (e) cathode and (f) anode. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2014, The Electrochemical Society. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 303. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
It is believed that PBI can work as a ligand forming coordination compound with Pt, leading to Pt particle dissolution. In this regard, cathode catalyst material (Pt/C) degradation was investigated at 160 °C by Kondratenko et al.304 using 85 wt% aqueous solution of H3PO4 and a mixture of AB-PBI and aqueous H3PO4. It was concluded that migration and coalescence of Pt particles could cause particle coarsening which was mainly responsible for the loss of ECSA in the potential range of 0.87–1.02 V, while Pt particle delamination became a key factor for reduction in ECSA at a higher potential of about 1.12 V. In addition, the presence of 10 g L−1 AB-PBI in aqueous H3PO4 had no effect on particle coarsening at 0.87–1.02 V, but could aid in the suppression of particle delamination at 1.12 V. In this work, the effect of the presence of AB-PBI on the dissolution of carbon supported Pt and platinized Pt was also studied directly at 160 °C and open circuit voltage of the fuel cell. It was found that the presence of AB-PBI in aqueous H3PO4 could enhance the rate of carbon dissolution up to 2 orders of magnitude at 0.87 V for Pt/C, but the effect of accelerated dissolution on ECSA loss was still weaker than that of particle coarsening. Nevertheless, direct addition of PBI and other benzimidazole containing rings into the active layer of the electrode may deteriorate the performance and lifetime of Pt-based catalysts.
During a modelling framework study, the effect of humidity on cathode catalyst material (Pt/C) stability305 was investigated under accelerated stress testing between 0.1 and 1 V at 160 °C for 30000 potential cycles. Together with the m-PBI-based PEM, Pt/C (55.5–58.5 wt%) at a loading of 1.5 mg cm−2 was used on both anode and cathode with nonwoven carbon cloth as the gas diffusion layer and Freudenberg FCCT F23C2 as the microporous layer. The as-prepared cell showed reduced performance with humidified cathode gas supply, which was attributed to Pt particle dissolution, transport and recrystallization. Amazingly, in an unhumidified case, no decrease in catalyst performance was observed which might be assigned to the masking effect of phosphoric acid drying leading to its polymerisation in the catalyst layer. A possible solution for Pt dissolution and coarsening was to add an inorganic filler in the catalyst layer and a best example was 30% zirconium hydrogen phosphate, which could enhance the cell performance by increasing the proton conductivity and durability of the MEA.306
Pt metal doping with other materials like Au, Cu and Ag can also improve the ORR kinetics by improving the resistance against PA poisoning.55 Cobalt-doped Pt supported on a novel composite SiCTiC material67 and PBI-coated oxidised-CNT/Pt51 also showed enhanced durability for HT-PEMFCs by reducing the carbon corrosion and Pt particle migration.
One of the key descriptors of Pt-based catalyst degradation is the change in ECSA since it can be used to estimate the kinetic performance loss of the electrodes. Generally, ECSA can be calculated with the help of hydrogen underpotential deposition or CO stripping using CV curves.307 However, owing to the strongly adsorbed PA anions inhibiting the adsorption of hydrogen on the catalyst during CV experiment, CO stripping voltammetry is preferred for ECSA evaluation in a phosphoric acid environment. In order to measure ECSA accurately, Engl et al.307 compared two different CO stripping evaluation methods based on CO oxidation currents. The first one was ECSACVvs.sec.cycle, which is widely used in the LT-PEMFC study, with the current density of the 2nd potential sweep in the same environment as a baseline, while the other one was ECSACVvs.ref.CV using the CV in a nitrogen saturated electrolyte as the baseline. They pointed out that ECSACVvs.sec.cycle could not distinguish between the CO and other oxidation currents at high temperatures and gave an overestimation of ECSA, while ECSACVvs.ref.CV could exclude this error giving an exact ECSA measurement. Moreover, they developed a third method of ECSACO2 based on the CO2 content of working electrode exhaust gas detected in real-time during the CO stripping measurements. This method could also exclude CO2 produced as a result of oxidation of carbonaceous species other than CO. Both ECSACV vs. ref. CV and ECSACO2 methods were in excellent agreement and provided consistent data.
More recently, some predictive models were developed for better understanding of Pt degradation in HT-PEMFCs.34,308 In an oxidative degradation study308 of Pt and carbon, Pt oxidation and carbon corrosion were reported to be mainly responsible for catalyst layer degradation, as seen in Fig. 17 (left). The various steps involved are schematically displayed in Fig. 17a–f,34 where (a) shows platinum oxidation and PtO surface coverage, (b) shows place exchange between adsorbed O atoms and Pt lattice, (c) shows oxide reduction and cathodic dissolution of exchanged Pt particles, (d) shows carbon corrosion, (e) shows electrochemical Ostwald-Ripening which can be defined as the dissolution and redeposition of Pt2+ ions, and (f) shows Pt2+ ion dissolution into the membrane. The detailed oxidative degradation of carbon and platinum is not a simple process and takes place in several steps as given in the following equations:308,309 C* + H2O ↔ C–OH + H+ + e− (E = 0.20 V vs. RHE)(6) C–OH ↔ CO + H+ + e− (E = 0.80 V vs. RHE)(7) C–OH + H2O → C* + CO2 + 3H+ + 3e− (E = 0.95 V vs. RHE)(8) Pt* + H2O ↔ Pt–OH + H+ + e− (E = 0.70 V vs. RHE)(9) Pt–OH ↔ Pt–O + H+ + e− (E = 0.80 V vs. RHE)(10) Pt–OH + C–OH → C* + Pt* + CO2 + 3H+ + 3e− (E = 0.65 V vs. RHE)(11)
 Fig. 17  A schematic of the interacting partial degradation mechanisms (left), and Pt degradation mechanisms: (a) Pt oxidation and PtO surface coverage; (b) place exchange between Pt lattice and adsorbed O atoms; (c) oxide reduction and cathodic dissolution of exchanged Pt; (d) carbon corrosion; (e) electrochemical Ostwald-Ripening; and (f) Pt2+ ion dissolution into the membrane. (left) Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (a–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
As can be observed in the above equations, water produces hydroxyl groups at sufficient potential, which are further oxidised to stable oxides at higher potential. The surface group of C–OH leads to carbon corrosion in two ways. In the presence of water/steam and at a high potential of 0.95 V, the C–OH groups produce more defective sites by CO2 evolution. Those C–OH groups may also react with the Pt–OH group at lower potential values of 0.65 V producing free Pt and carbon defects. The Pt detachment and agglomeration happen due to carbon support corrosion and redeposition of dissolved particles on the attached Pt, leading to Pt agglomeration. Pt dissolution can only happen from those areas which are not covered by the oxide layer due to Ostwald ripening.310
In addition to catalysts, the PEM is another key material of HT-PEMFCs; its properties and degradation can significantly affect the durability of fuel cells. Fenton solution, composed of H2O2 and ferrous (Fe2+) ions with a pH value between 3 and 6, is mostly used to investigate the oxidative stability of membranes used for PEMFCs. For example, Liao et al.208 tested the oxidative stability of PBI membranes (5 to 50 μm in thickness) by immersing them in 50 mL of Fenton solution in a glass jar with a gas tight cap followed by keeping them at 68 °C for different intervals of time. A significant initial weight loss was observed along with a steady decrease in molecular weight, and the mechanism is shown in Scheme 2. The membrane degradation is initiated by the hydroxyl radicals produced during the Fenton test. These hydroxyl radicals can attack carbon atoms linking the benzenoid and imidazole ring, resulting in the opening of imidazole rings and production of terminal groups and small molecules which could easily undergo further oxidation. FTIR studies also supported the formation of new C–OH groups due to the hydrolysis of CN and C–N but not hydrogen atoms of N–H. Post synthesis thermal curing of the PBI-based cross-linked membrane at 250 °C for 3 hours311 was found to be helpful in increasing the durability, acid uptake, and resistance against pinhole formation for such type of membrane. Another effective method is to develop a composite membrane by incorporating inorganic or organic fillers in the polymer matrix. Some filler examples include SiO2,312–314 TiO2,313 ZrP,313 Al–Si powder,315 phosphonated graphene oxide26 and organo-modified clays.316 The exceptional stability of these composite membranes is attributed to the creation of some special phases by the interaction of these additives and phosphoric acid.
 Scheme 2  (a) End point oxidation and (b) midpoint chain scission mechanism for PBI membrane degradation during the Fenton test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. 
In a HT-PEMFC with acid doped PBI as the membrane, water is released in two steps:317,318 (1) up to 100 °C, water present in the commercially available phosphoric acid can evaporate; and (2) at temperatures around 120–130 °C, the phosphoric acid dimerization takes place, producing water and pyrophosphoric acid. The main volume of water is produced at the cathode due to the reaction of ORR. At high temperature, both membrane conductivity and resistance surge due to the increased ionic conductivity and decreased water content, respectively, leading to a very small effect on the overall performance of the device. A sketch of water distribution inside the HT-PEMFCs is given in Fig. 18,319 where the star represents the production of water in the cathode and water flow is represented by arrows. Water may permeate through the electrolyte membrane at high temperature, but at high anodic flow, the diffusion flux of water limits this permeation. The concentration of the electrolyte differs significantly in cathode and anode catalyst layers and the fuel gas permeation depends on the total water flux through the membrane.319 An increase in water flux (current density) causes membrane swelling leading to increased pore size, thus resulting in high crossover current. Nicotera et al.316 reported the use of organo-modified clay additive of montmorillonite for better water retention in a high temperature proton exchange membrane (HT-PEM). The montmorillonite-modified membrane showed improved water absorption, retention and mobility in the temperature range of 100–130 °C, attributed to the synergy between the hydrophilicity of the organoclay and the capacity to induce an alteration in the polymeric structure. This ensured a good performance of the HT-PEMFC without the need of further humidification.
 Fig. 18  Sketch of water distribution inside a HT-PEMFC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
Acid leaching induced decrease in ECSA and increase in charge transfer resistance during HT-PEMFC operation is a major problem leading to membrane degradation and performance deterioration.320 Hence, a careful monitoring of the electrolyte/acid structure and its leaching is also necessary to understand the performance degradation of the device. The widely used phosphoric acid and recently introduced phosphonic acid and their derivatives play a very important role in the proton conductivity of HT-PEMs. These acids mostly undergo degradation because of high temperature and oxidative degradation. As explained in Scheme 3,321 phosphonic acid and its derivatives degrade by condensation resulting in an adverse effect on the conductivity of the membrane.321,322 Moreover, the thermal stability of the electrolyte/acid could be improved by using additives. For example, Mack et al.323 reported that 20 wt% addition of perfluoroalkyl phosphonic acid (C2F5PO3H2 and CF3PO3H2) in H3PO4 could lead the electrolyte mixtures to show very good thermal stability for HT-PEMFCs operating between 140 and 200 °C. The wetting of the catalyst layer was also increased significantly leading to deeper penetration of the electrolyte into the electrode, which resulted in extended triple phase boundaries. In addition, the ORR charge transfer resistance was decreased, which induced an increase in cell performance to 240 and 270 mW cm−2 with C2F5PO3H2 and CF3PO3H2, respectively. These values were much higher than 180 mW cm−2 for the cell without additives. The improved performance and durability were attributed to improved oxygen solubility in the electrolyte and the reduced phosphate ion adsorption on the Pt particles, which resulted in less Pt blockage and better wetting of the catalyst layer. A summary of HT-PEMFC materials’ degradation along with the possible reasons of failure/degradation is given in Table 4.
 Scheme 3  Possible condensation reactions of phosphonic acid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. 
Table 4 Summary of HT-PEMFC materials’ degradation along with the failure modules




Component
Modes of failure
Possible reason
Ref.




Catalyst layer
Catalyst (Pt) corrosion
Catalyst dissolution

34, 304 and 305



Catalyst detachment

34, 304 and 305



Catalyst sintering

34 and 304



Carbon corrosion
Fuel starvation

403



Voltage reversal

403



Thermal degradation

290



Ionomer decomposition
Radical species

208



Thermal decomposition

404



Pore structure deterioration
Corrosion reaction

405







Proton exchange membrane
Microcracks or pinholes
Manufacturing defects

328



Humidity cycling

305 and 406



Thermal degradation

406



Chemical/electrochemical degradation

403



Catalyst layer delamination
Stress cycling

289 and 305



Membrane thinning
Radical species attack

208 and 288



Thermal degradation

406



Chemical degradation

208



Catalyst agglomeration (Pt band)
Catalyst oxidation/dissolution/reduction

34 and 304







Gas diffusion layer
Increase in mass transport resistance
Continuous start/stop cycling

305



Loss in conductivity
Material degradation

208



Deterioration of water management
—

319 and 335







Bipolar plate
Corrosion
Nature of the material

236 and 244



Acidic environment

208



Passivation
Channel coverage with corrosion products

245







Phosphoric acid
Degradation
Material breakdown due to high temperature and voltage

321



Reaction with the catalyst, water and impurities

292 and 407



Leaching
Flow out with water at lower temperature

320





3.2. Component corrosion and mitigation strategies
BPPs and GDLs are the necessary components in a fuel cell assembly. Under the harsh operating conditions of HT-PEMFCs, they undergo degradation or structural changes, leading to reduced performance and failure of HT-PEMFCs. Therefore, some pre-tests are necessary to check the quality of BPP and GDL materials prior to their use in cell assembly.324 Along with these pre-tests, some post-tests have also been proved very useful to understand the degradation mechanism of BPPs and GDLs.
In the high temperature environment of HT-PEMFCs, BPP and GDL corrosions are the common phenomena because of the possible reactions between BPP and GDL materials and phosphoric acid and its derivatives, along with their thermal degradation. Harting et al.244 compared the effect of BPP corrosion on the performance of HT-PEMFCs using the pyrolytically surface-treated and sealed graphite composite (SSG) with gold-plated flow field and two phenolic resin-based graphite composite materials. The results showed that the degradation rate was less than 10 μV h−1 for both the cells with gold plated stainless steel and surface-treated graphite, and the cell impedance of them was constant at around 80 mΩ cm2 over the complete operation time of 1600 h. The degradation of the cells using gold coated graphite and SSG was purely of cathode kinetic origin from particle growth of the catalyst at 180 °C in the first 1000 h operation (with a constant ohmic cell resistance) amounting to a potential loss of 15 mV, while the graphite composite may uptake a significant amount of acid from the MEA after degradation which reduced the HT-PEMFC performance to a minimum. The performance suppression is twofold in the case of composite graphite materials, owing to the following reasons: (1) an increase in ohmic resistance due to the decrease in the proton conductivity of both membrane and catalyst layer, and an increase in contact resistance; and (2) an increase in ORR overpotential due to loss of acid from the catalyst layer and a decrease in ECSA. High contact resistance between GDL and graphite composite BPP can be reduced by optimising the compression pressure at the interface.325 It was reported236 that BPPs made of nickel-based alloys and bare stainless steel were not suitable for HT-PEMFCs owing to minimal corrosion resistance, and the corrosion resistance of nickel free stainless steel could be enhanced by introducing chromium containing nitrides.326 The nitride layer formed at 1200 °C could impart good corrosion resistance and better electrical conductivity for use of steel BPPs in HT-PEMFCs owing to the presences of Cr2N phases and high content of Cr in the nitride steel. The corrosion resistance of titanium-based BPPs was enhanced by nitrogen plasma immersion-ion implantation of titanium sheets.232 Therefore, high temperature treatment of the material using this technique can impart an oxy-nitride layer on the surface providing good corrosion resistance due to the oxygen atom penetration in grain boundaries, suitable interfacial resistance and good electrical conductivity.
The structural change in GDLs under HT-PEMFC operating conditions also affects the performance of the device.327 To investigate this effect, in situ through plane synchrotron X-ray radiography was presented as a powerful technique to observe the morphology of the GDL below ribs and under the channels of flow field.327,328 As observed in Fig. 19, for both anode and cathode sides, cracks observed under the gas channels are much wider as compared with the ones below the ribs of the BPP. The operating conditions do not show a significant effect on the size of cracks at 140 and 350 mA cm2 and this effect can only be observed at a current density of 600 mA cm−2. This change in GDL structure can be assigned to: (1) the membrane swelling because of dehydration/dilution; and (2) PA transport from the pores of electrodes into the membrane. In the work by Mack et al.,276 it was concluded that electrode morphology has less effect on HT-PEMFC performance as compared with that on LT-PEMFCs, and the presence of PTFE binder might cause slow or less acid uptake by the electrodes which eventually led to longer start-up time.
 Fig. 19  (a) Boxplots of crack width: a region under the channel (blue) and under the ribs (red). The bars specify the minimum and maximum values, and the boxes show the quartiles of the distribution. The mean values are plotted as dots inside the boxes; (b) radiography of an 8.5 mm × 4.5 mm section of a HT-PEMFC at 600 mA cm−2 with the channel region (blue) and land region (red) marked manually; (c) local region under the channel (1.9 mm × 1.4 mm) with morphological changes at 600 mA cm−2. The image was normalized to the OCV image, then rescaled. Reproduced with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
A summary of HT-PEMFC components degradation and the possible reasons are given in Table 4.
4. Fundamental understanding of key materials/components’ performance through design, modeling and experimental testing to achieve performance optimization
In addition to all the factors discussed above, designing, operating and testing conditions are also very important factors affecting the performance of HT-PEMFCs. To achieve optimized performance, novel and efficient materials/components and system designing as well as fundamental understanding of the functional mechanisms are always necessary. In this regard, 3D-computational fluid dynamics (CFD)-based models have been used to understand and optimize the complicated processes involving complex interacting transport, heat management and species conversion process in HT-PEMFC systems.329–332 Depending on the size and complexity, HT-PEMFCs can be divided into several categories including catalyst layer (nm), PEM (μm), MEA (μm mm), cell assembly (mm cm) and HT-PEMFCs or stacks (cm). With increasing size, complexity also increases due to the multiphase flow, problematic gas, water and heat management as well as assembly issues, as described in Fig. 12. On the one hand, a stack can be designed by using multidimensional mechanistic models that can solve energy, mass and momentum balances followed by coupling of these solutions with theoretical electrochemical equations and relations to envisage the electrical and thermal performances of the device. On the other hand, a zero dimensional cell stack model can be developed by using an empirical I–V curve with simple energy balance.333
The design at material and component levels is normally followed by system level designing, calibrating and evaluating to develop controlled functionalities and achieve the set targets. It would be worth mentioning that none of the reported HT-PEMFC models covers all aspects of HT-PEMFCs and stacks. Most of them are focused on a single cell or stack but have ignored heat storage, gas reformer and heating strategies. Additionally, there are few reports on heating strategies, balance of plant (BoP) and dynamics of heat and fuel/oxidant gas models, while the effects of water management, humidification, and material/component designs and degradation on the performance of HT-PEMFCs have been mainly focused in the last few decades. In this section we will discuss different models, designs and effect of parameters to better understand the performance evaluation and operation of HT-PEMFC systems.
4.1. Effect of different parameters on HT-PEMFC performance
The operating parameters which are mainly responsible for the HT-PEMFC performance include operating temperature, water management, flow field design and heat recovery. Their effects on HT-PEMFC performance can be briefly summarized as follows:
(1) A HT-PEMFC operated at high temperature requires high water partial pressure, and has low open circuit voltage and small entropy change in H2/O2 reaction.334 The maximum voltage obtained from a HT-PEMFC at thermodynamic equilibrium, called reversible cell potential or thermodynamic potential, is usually lower than that of a LT-PEMFC because of the harsh environment induced potential losses in the HT-PEMFC. However, from the reaction kinetic point of view, high temperature can speed up both the HOR and ORR rates, which can be expressed by the increased exchange current density.335 Furthermore, the reduced contaminant adsorption on the catalyst surface at elevated temperature can lead to better tolerance to catalyst poisoning. In addition, higher oxygen diffusion through steam and water vapors is also a beneficial factor for HT-PEMFC performance.8,336,337
(2) During fuel cell operation, water flooding can happen when excess water is trapped in the porous cavities of the anode, cathode or bipolar plate channels, which then temporarily blocks the reactants to reach at the active sites, leading to a lower performance. Normally, the cathode flooding is more frequent335 than the anode flooding285,334 due to the electro-osmotic flow of water molecules from the anode to cathode and the water produced by the reaction of protons, electrons and oxygen. Channel flooding mostly happens because of the poor design and manufacturing techniques which cause uneven pressure, temperature and current distribution.8 However, in HT-PEMFCs, flooding is not a big problem because of the high working temperature to evaporate water and remove it quickly. In the case of HT-PEMFCs, water is present in the vapor form and there may be no specific need for complex machining of bipolar plates. Even so, bipolar plate flow field design is also responsible for even reactant distribution to the electrode surface and excess water removal through channels to avoid flooding.
(3) Dehydration especially for long-term cycling can cause severe damage such as catalyst layer delamination and pinhole development in the MEA. HT-PEMFCs can effectively withstand the flooding issue but the dehydration can affect the mechanical stability of the membrane. Therefore, some novel PEMs which can even show better conductivity at very low humidity are eagerly required.
(4) A considerable fraction of energy produced in HT-PEMFCs is removed in the form of heat, which should be well managed to keep the membrane well hydrated and at the same time avoid flooding. In this regard, an optimal temperature is required for efficient cell operation along with effective cooling and heating. In the case of HT-PEMFCs, the high temperature difference between stack and environment offers an easy and comparatively simple heat rejection system.338
In the performance evaluation of HT-PEMFCs, one important factor is the net efficiency of the system. Generally, it could be calculated by eqn (12): (12)where ηfcs is the net efficiency of the fuel cell system, EDC is the direct circuit output energy and QH2 is the lower heating value of input hydrogen which is 241 kJ mol−1.339 Due to some parasitic loss in running the system,17 the net efficiency can be obtained by the product of stack efficiency, BoP (balance of plant) efficiency and fuel efficiency. Hence, eqn (12) should be modified to eqn (13): (13)where 1.482 is the thermoneutral potential calculated by the hydrogen's higher heating value (286 kJ mol−1),339Vcell is the average cell voltage (V), Estack is the output energy of the fuel cell stack (W cm−2), Enet is the output energy of the fuel cell system (W cm−2), Qreaction is the amount of hydrogen consumed in the electrochemical reactions (kJ mol−1) and Qpurging is the amount of hydrogen purged (kJ mol−1).
The voltage of a fuel cell is never equal to the theoretical value because of the irreversible potential loss. These losses are collectively termed as cell polarization or overvoltage. More specifically, polarization is divided into four subcategories:340 (1) open circuit voltage loss, which is mainly caused by the mixed potential of the Pt/PtO catalyst surface and fuel crossover from the anode to cathode; (2) activation polarization, which is caused by the sluggish electrode kinetics expressed as electrode overpotential; (3) ohmic polarization, which is caused by the electronic resistance of electrodes and the ionic resistance of the PEM; and (4) concentration or mass transport polarization, which is caused by mass transfer through catalyst surfaces and catalyst layers.
Before starting the load cycling testing of the fuel cell, a break-in test (or activation step) needs to be carried out, and the time duration and test parameters depend on the nature of catalysts, membranes and assembly of the MEA. The testing parameters like temperature, pressure, relative humidity, fuel/oxidant gas flow rates and load are controlled with the help of testing station and its built-in software. A good example of continuous load testing and start/stop cycling could be seen in ref. 341, where a PA doped PBI membrane was used along with Pt/C based catalysts, and the fuel cell was fed by hydrogen and reformate fuels. It was observed that HT-PEMFC performance increased during the 120 hours of break-in time. This could be attributed to the decrease in ORR kinetic resistance owing to PA redistribution between the electrodes and membranes. In addition, the continuous start/stop cycling in the presence of methanol in fuel (H2, water vapors and methanol) showed an increase in both the mass transfer and ohmic resistance of the MEA, which might be induced by carbon corrosion of the catalyst layer and membrane degradation.341
4.2. Models for HT-PEMFCs
Theoretical models, known as mechanistic models, semi-empirical or empirical/numerical models, are very common for HT-PEMFC studies. Although sometimes the modeling results are not fully accurate when predicting different phenomena occurring in a device, the predicted trends through experimental validation are beneficial for the design and performance optimization.342 HT-PEMFC modeling has made significant progress in the last few decades and many numerical and simulated models have been proposed and evaluated for membranes,86,202,343,344 catalysts,34,345 chemical species transport,342,346 flow field design,18,264,347–349 cooling systems,350,351 exhaust heat recovery,352 secondary current distribution,353 start-up time,354 degradation mechanisms355–357 and system level integration358–361 for optimizing the performance toward commercial level applications of the HT-PEMFCs.
In theoretical modeling and experimental validation, some important key features including technical issues, cost and time should be considered362 during selection and development of models for HT-PEMFCs.

4.2.1. Electrocatalyst models. 
In general, the structure and morphology of both anode and cathode electrocatalysts have significant effects on the performance of HT-PEMFCs. Nano-/micro-scale and macro-scale models have been reported for better understanding of porous electrocatalyst layers.363–367 Nano-scale models are mostly based on the images of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and are used to better understand the electrocatalytic activity and stability of the catalysts.363–365 Macro-scale models can be divided into agglomerate models,366 pseudo-homogeneous models364 and interfacial models.367 Agglomerate models are more complicated than the others as they consider that the catalyst layer is composed of an agglomerate of carbon supported Pt, ionomer and void space for the transfer of fuel/oxidant gases. Pseudo-homogeneous models and interfacial models are similar as both assume that the catalyst layer has constant physical and chemical properties. The only difference between them is that the pseudo-homogeneous models consider the catalyst layer to be a separate computational domain with considerable thickness while interfacial models deal with the catalyst layer as an interface because of its smaller thickness as compared to that of the gas diffusion layer and PEM. Moreover, the agglomerate models are comparatively more useful as they can also calculate overpotentials for the electrode reaction in addition to cathode reaction and potential distribution in the membrane.
The modeling study of sluggish ORR kinetics on the cathode has given a great importance to the morphology and structure as well as composition of the electrocatalysts. In this regard, EIS was adopted to study the potential loss involved in various processes taking place at different rates.368 Normally EIS includes information about the PEM and hardware resistance, electrode double layer capacitance, ORR electron transfer resistance as well as the mass transfer resistance. In an EIS model designed to study the kinetics of ORR through a microkinetic transition state pathway at low current density operation of HT-PEMFCs,345 the feature at the high frequency linear part was assigned to H+ ion transfer resistance in the catalyst layer, the low frequency arc was attributed to the surface adsorbed reaction intermediate relaxation due to the surface adsorbed hydroxyl group depletion in the catalyst layer, and the high frequency arc was directly related to double layer capacitance charge transfer reaction resistance.
The ORR kinetics for HT-PEMFCs can be simply represented by the dissociative mechanisms expressed below as eqn (14)–(16).345,369 The electrochemical interface is firstly formed by a uniform phosphoric acid layer with a thickness of 2 nm over the porous electrode surface345 and the dissolved oxygen in phosphoric acid can be adsorbed on Pt active sites as Oadvia a dissociation step, as described in eqn (14). The adsorbed oxygen is then reduced to produce adsorbed hydroxyl species (OHad), as expressed with eqn (15), which is further reduced to surface adsorbed water (H2Oad) in the next step expressed by eqn (16). Finally, this adsorbed water desorbs from the surface releasing free Pt sites. The reaction given in eqn (14) is fast enough to be always in equilibrium with the dissolved oxygen in phosphoric acid and its equilibrium constant is given in eqn (17). On the other hand, the rate of reaction given in eqn (15) and (16) always follows the microkinetic model as described by eqn (18) and (19). In this study, it was assumed that acid does not block any Pt site and the reactants obey Langmuir's adsorption isotherms. In addition, the backward step in eqn (16) was considered negligible and hence can be omitted. Mass balance and time dependent evolution of the adsorbed species on the Pt surface are given in eqn (20) and (21). The charge balance is described by eqn (22), where the total dynamic current corresponds to the sum of the IORR of reactions as given in eqn (15) and (16) and expressed by eqn (23) and ICdl that is being developed at the electrochemical interface due to H+ accumulation rate and the development of the double layerpseudo-capacitance at the electrochemical interface as given in eqn (24). (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) θO + θOH + θ* = 1(21) Itotal = IORR + ICdl(22) IORR = FSECSA(r2 + r3)(23) (24)In eqn (14)–(24), KOEQ is the dissociative equilibrium constant of Oad adsorption (10 kPa−0.5), θO is the Oad coverage, θOH is the OHad coverage, θ* is the vacant site coverage, PO2 is the partial pressure of O2, KH is Henry's constant in PA (0.8 mol m−3 atm−1), r2 and r3 are the reaction rates (mol m−2 s−1), k2f and k2b are the forward and backward kinetic constants, respectively, of reaction (15) (10−6 and 10−3 mol m−2 s−1), k3f is the forward kinetic constant of reaction (16) (2 × 10−6 mol m−2 s−1), η is the cathode overpotential (V), b is the Tafel slope (), T is the operating temperature (453 K), β is the symmetry factor (0.5), F is Faraday's constant (96485 C mol−1), Γs is the Pt surface atoms (2.18 × 10−5 mol m−2), IORR is the volumetric charge transfer current density of reaction (15) and (16) (A m−3), SECSA is the cathode volumetric electrochemical surface area (9.36 × 107 m−1), Itotal and ICdl are the volumetric total and transient current density (A m−3), respectively, and Cdl is the double layer capacitance (F m−3).


4.2.2. PEM models. 
The micro-/nano-scale ion transport in HT-PEMs is mostly studied by using a combined experimental and macroscopic model including semi or fully empirical relations touching the basic theories. Both molecular dynamics and statistical mechanics-based models have been developed to fully understand the mechanisms and implement for practical use.322,370,371 The molecular dynamics approach is more popular because of its easy implementation in simulation and good agreement with the practical results in most cases. In the literature, various models have been introduced for studying the PEM fabrication process,372 characterization329 and water/thermal management.319,373 The broadly used commercial PBI membrane contains PBI/PA, which is highly non-Newtonian due to its viscosity ranging from 30 to 7000 Pa s depending on both temperature and shear strain rate. With the multiphase computational fluid dynamics studies372 on the viscosity and velocity of membrane casting solution, it was reported that high viscosity could result in bad contact of the membrane/substrate interface due to the entrapped air. Furthermore, high inlet and substrate velocity plays a crucial role in membrane thickness. Siegel et al.329 modeled the solid and fluid-(gas)-phase at different temperatures and current densities of a PBI/PA membrane prepared by a sol–gel method. The developed model was based on the COSMOL Multiphysics® while electrochemical reactions were explained by using the agglomerate approach considering solubility and diffusivity of gases. It was observed that the Arrhenius equation, which is used in most of the design and modeling studies, was valid up to 150–160 °C and could overpredict the membrane conductivity at high solid-phase temperatures because of the change in the amorphous phase concentration of phosphoric acid. As can be seen in Scheme 3, this change in concentration occurs because of the condensation of acid molecules, resulting in dimers, trimers, cyclic trimers or tetramers of phosphonic acid.321
Heggen et al.321 used ab initio calculation to study the PEM related geometry of phosphonic acid, methyl phosphonic acid and organic phosphonic acid. On the basis of the calculated reaction energies for all the proposed reactions given in Scheme 3, only dimer and trimer formations are energetically possible most likely in the presence of some other proton donating species or proton accepting phosphonic acid. It means that phosphonic acid and its derivatives cannot undergo direct dimerization/condensation reaction because of high transition state energies. Additionally, cyclic trimer formation is not energetically favorable because of the ring strain. The above properties prove that phosphonic acid has better stability and can replace the commercially used phosphoric acid for the preparation of acid-doped PBI membranes.
Molecular dynamics322 was also used for cluster formation of heptyl phosphonic acid, and the results showed that cluster geometries of heptyl phosphonic acid were similar to amphiphilic geometries in the liquid form. The aggregation could happen between the polar head groups due to hydrogen bonding, while non-polar tails were pointed outside the cluster. At high temperature, the cluster dynamics was observed to be very fast and because of that, one molecule could take part in many cluster formations in a very short interval of time. The swift movement of molecules can facilitate proton transfer from one cluster to the other. This mechanism also has a possible implication for phosphonic acid containing polymer phases.
Structure and dynamical properties371 including arrangement of PA molecules, hydrogen bond formation and contribution of different atoms in H-bonding were studied for a PA-doped PBI monomer (2-phenyl-1H,1′H-5,5′-bibenzo[d]imidazole) at different temperatures and PA contents. Molecular dynamics studies showed that PA molecules could undergo a high degree of H-bonding among themselves and with benzimidazole (BI) molecules, which was independent of the PA to BI ratio, and the arrangement of PA molecules around BI could become more ordered with increasing ratio of PA. Furthermore, an increase in H-bonding was observed with increasing PA doping level because of the reduced cluster size of BI molecules. It was also observed that BI molecules could arrange themselves in vertical or horizontal alignment by self-stacking. This means that these molecules are able to arrange themselves in any direction throughout the bulk of the membrane.


4.2.3. Humidification models and techniques. 
HT-PEMFCs can efficiently solve the flooding problem, but dehydration is a very evident issue for HT-PEMFCs and the stacks. Hence, continuous water humidification of the inlet fuel/oxidant gases is required in most HT-PEMFCs. In this regard, various physical and chemical humidification techniques have been developed for efficient operation of HT-PEMFCs. Numerous numerical models,374 operating conditions375 and humidification strategies374,376 have also been reported for better understanding and optimizing water dependent performance of HT-PEMFCs.
Dehydration or low humidity can significantly affect the properties and performance of the membrane, resulting in catalyst layer delamination, membrane degradation or radical species formation. This issue can be resolved by humidifying inlet gases with different methods. Overall, humidification methods could be classified as internal and external methods. The internal methods include physical and chemical methods, while the external humidification methods could be sub-classified as direct water injection by gas bubbling on water (Fig. 20a), atomization of water (Fig. 20b), membrane humidifiers (Fig. 20c), enthalpy wheel humidification (Fig. 20d), exhaust gas recirculation (Fig. 20e) and reactant humidification by using a wick (Fig. 20f).376 More details of all the humidification methods can be found in the literature.377 The selection of a humidification system mainly depends on the type of application. An internal humidification system is preferred for portable applications and electric vehicles (EVs), while external humidification is better for stationary applications. Mostly, gas bubbling or direct water/steam injection is preferred for stationary applications. Overall, better water management in cathode and anode chambers and operating temperature optimization can bring enhanced cell performance in both EVs and stationary applications.375
 Fig. 20  Schematic of various methods used for humidifying the reactant gases in fuel cells: (a) direct humidification by bubbling of gases on water; (b) humidification by spraying fine water droplets into the reactant stream; (c) membrane based humidification bottle; (d) enthalpy wheel for heat and humidity exchange; (e) membrane based humidity exchange from the exit gas stream; and (f) transfer of humidity to the reactant stream using a wick. Reproduced with permission from ref. 376. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Anode dehydration due to the electro-osmotic drag of water is a well-known performance limiting parameter for HT-PEMFC applications in EVs, especially in the case of metallic bipolar plate flow field design. In a study of the water transport phenomenon of HT-PEMFCs with porous metallic flow field,375 it was observed that there was a relationship between high temperature operation and availability of water at the cathode side. If the net water drag (NWD) remained at the anode, an increase in operating temperature could lead to an increase in cell voltage due to the fact that the water evaporation could induce increased availability of catalyst sites. However, after a peak value of voltage, a further increase in temperature was found to be harmful to cell performance because of the reversed NWD leading to anode drying. Due to slow anode drying, a steady increase in the air stoichiometric ratio occurred, leading to a transient voltage drop till the cell was shut down.
Operating parameters such as start-up current density, temperature of fuel/oxidant gases, humidity, flow rates and back pressure can significantly affect the membrane dehydration and current distribution in HT-PEMFCs. The suitable start-up current density is dependent on the ambient temperature of the device and should be equal to the threshold current density in the hysteresis curve. A higher or lower current density may result in severe flooding or insufficient water generation.353 In general, the gas flow rates of 1.2/1.2 at the anode/cathode, 3 bar back pressure and low fuel gas temperature or high humidity can give a stable fuel cell operation with less start-up time, homogeneous current distribution and high efficiency.353
As identified, both the uneven current distribution and faster material degradation can occur when the pores in the catalyst layer and gas diffusion layer are saturated with water. This also restricts HT-PEMFC operation at high current densities. Water distribution in the pores of the catalyst layer and gas diffusion layer was studied by using a combination of CFD and nano-scale Monte Carlo (MC) modeling.378 The CFD study revealed that the relative humidity and temperature could significantly vary in the channels and under the ribs, as shown in Fig. 21a. Since the inner surface (surface face towards CL) of the MPL actually accounts for that of the whole GDL to a large extent so in this experiment the measured GDL contact angle was considered as the MPL contact angle. Hence, two boundary conditions for MPL and CL were used under the ribs and channels, respectively, in MC modeling, which was performed within real structures of materials constructed by using a special focused ion beam-scanning electron microscope (FIB-SEM) tomography approach. The effect of the contact angle of different ionomers was studied on the extent of filling of different pore sizes in MPL, CL and PEM. It was observed that if the MPL wettability properties remained constant, an increase in the CL ionomer contact angle could result in improved water transport through the MPL and CL interface. Similarly, due to the hydrophilic nature of the PEM, water accumulation was also possible at the CL and PEM interface. Hence, it was suggested that improved water transport could be achieved by designing a CL having increased hydrophilicity from the MPL to the PEM, which could be attained by modifying the structure or equivalent weight of ionomers.378 Therefore, a better water management could be accomplished by introducing a MPL and a more efficient flow field design and by improving the porous structure of the gas diffusion layer and composite membranes.
 Fig. 21  (a) CFD results for relative humidity (left) and temperature (right). The squared and the trapezoid channel belong to the cathode and anode, respectively, and the region in between represents the GDL and the MEA; (b) results comparison of relative humidity (RH) at the cathode inlet, without dual recirculation (theoretical calculation) and with dual recirculation (experiment). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 374. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Self-humidification and voltage clamping at low current densities can be attained by exhaust gas recirculation on both electrodes. Self-humidification is beneficial for cold start-up, while voltage clamping reduces the catalyst decay when the cell is operated at a lower load. With respect to this, an orthogonal test method was used to study the dynamic characteristics of self-humidification and voltage clamping in dual recirculation HT-PEMFCs.374 It was observed that cathode recirculation induced reduction in the fresh air stoichiometric ratio (SR) could result in a voltage drop from 0.828 to 0.780 V, and the reduced cell voltage at low current densities could lead to an uplift in fuel cell durability. Dual recirculation could significantly reduce and homogenize the high frequency resistance of the fuel cell stack, which was an indicator of membrane water content, resulting in homogeneous membrane hydration, and leading to only 3% performance reduction as compared to external humidification. A comparison of relative humidity (RH) without and with dual recirculation is given in Fig. 21b; a significant difference in relative humidity can be observed for all the experiments, indicating the improved membrane water content with cathode recirculation.374


4.2.4. Heat and temperature management models. 
For quick startup and steady operation of HT-PEMFCs, it is required to heat the stack and maintain the high operating temperature for a long duration of time. Different techniques like direct heating, where electrical heaters are mounted on the surface area of the fuel cell, and hot air heating, in which the cell stack is heated with hot air, are used.379 Hot air heating is considered better because of its fast and homogeneous heat flow and exemption of high-power density terminals with good expansion and conduction properties, while the surface mounted/direct heating strategy is often used for stationary systems where the startup time is not critical as it gives slow but stable heating. Along with heating strategies, cooling techniques and models also have their own significance in maintaining an optimal cell temperature. Based on a CFD simulation study of the 24-cell HT-PEMFC stack with one coolant plate per four cells,380 it was found that temperature management became more critical and complicated with increasing size of the cell stack. In addition, the use of coolant plates was necessary in large stacks of up to 10 kW to maintain an optimal temperature. An increase in the coolant speed, however, could create large pressure drops of about 30 bar in a cell having 30 cm × 30 cm active area and serpentine flow field design. A suggested solution for this problem was the use of parallel channel flow fields. It was further stated that the external air cooling of stacks larger than 1 kW might cause unacceptable temperature variations (greater than 40 K) in the stack, so the cooling should be done through coolant circulating plates. Furthermore, it was suggested to use parallel channel flow field with wider channels to achieve uniform cooling with less pressure drop,380 because the authors found that using four-parallel serpentine flow field on bipolar plates might cause a pressure drop of 10–30 bar. According to Supra et al.,381 the forced convective air cooling was a good option for HT-PEMFC stacks of up to 1 kW, but larger stacks should be cooled with liquid cooling media flowing through specially designed cooling channels. The liquid could be water or oil. However, water may evaporate at HT-PEMFC operating conditions, so a closed water cycle design is required which needs complex control. Therefore, external oil cooling should be the most efficient method for HT-PEMFC stack cooling due to its advantages of a high temperature gradient between heat transfer medium and cell stack, high heat capacity of heat transferring oil and safety from MEA poisoning in the case of leakage as compared to other oil cooling methods such as internal oil cooling of separate channels and cooling cells. Fig. 22a381 displays a diagram of an externally cooled stack including pipes, while Fig. 22b381 demonstrates the experimental setup to validate CFD simulations. The effects of component thickness on temperature distribution in the HT-PEMFC stack were also studied by using a thermograph, as shown in Fig. 22c.284 It was noted that the thickness of the GDL and PEM has significant effects on the temperature distribution, and a reduction in the thickness of the GDL and PEM can promote uniform temperature distribution for enhanced performance.
 Fig. 22  (a) External cooled stack with pipes; (b) experimental setup to validate CFD simulations; and (c) cell structure to measure temperature by a using thermograph. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 381. Copyright 2012, American Society of Mechanical Engineers. (c) Reproduced from ref. 283. E3S Web of Conferences (Public access). 
Neural network-based models are very important artificial intelligence tools and can be used for the HT-PEMFC performance study. Among different models, the multilayer perceptron model382 could give the best results for operating and conditioning temperature and potential measurement in HT-PEMFCs. By using three-dimensional single phase non-isothermal designed models for HT-PEMFCs with implementation into CFD, the temperature dependent non-isothermal designing301 and the doping level of acid331 were studied. The maximum temperature was observed to be located in the cathode catalyst layer and temperature variation increased throughout the cell with increasing current density. The kinetics was studied by solving the electron transport equation in the current collectors, catalyst layer and gas diffusion layer. As can be seen in Fig. 23 for a single cell design, the maximum current density appears in the current collector land area due to the high ohmic loss as compared to mass transport loss. It is also noticed that near the boundary region, though the land area of the current collector with a 1.0 mm wide anode gas channel is smaller than that of the one with a 0.7 mm wide anode gas channel, the former current density is larger than the latter because more hydrogen gas can be supplied with increasing anode gas channel width.301 This result means that both better gas channel and current collector land area design can help to improve the performance of HT-PEMFCs.
 Fig. 23  Current density distribution in the lateral direction in the middle of the cell with different channel width at Vcell = 0.6 V and T = 433 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. 


4.2.5. Models for system level integration of HT-PEMFCs. 
The system level integration of the HT-PEMFC stack is very complex, and numerous factors can affect the performance and durability of the systems. Most of the models reported in the literature used constant parameter (temperature, pressure, humidity, gas flow, etc.) values, but in actual HT-PEMFC operation these factors have variable values. Hence, dynamic models for system level integration of HT-PEMFCs might provide more accurate and precise protocols. But unfortunately, there are only a few stuides332,358–360,383 on the system level integration of HT-PEMFCs, as summarized in the following sections.
Nguyen et al.358 proposed a dynamic model for HT-PEMFCs and the results were compared with experimental data obtained from a HT-PEMFC operated with H2 and reformate gas at temperatures of 155 and 175 °C with the experimental setup displayed in Fig. 24a. It was found that the cell voltage can be increased by 20 mV with changing operating temperature from 155 to 175 °C when pure H2 was employed as the fuel, as shown in Fig. 24b, and this system could bear the effect of CO concentration up to 0.8% (Fig. 24c). Moreover, the step change in current density from 90 to 180 mA cm−2 and back to 90 mA cm−2 was investigated and compared with the dynamic response of the stack using simulated reformate gas. It was observed that the model matched well with some of the cells in the stack, while the others had lower voltage levels during dynamic operation. The higher voltages were assigned to those cells which were not degraded with proper gas flow and temperature, and these results matched well with the experimentally determined dynamic results. The major problems of this model are as follows: the water drag coefficient which is used to determine water back-diffusion from the cathode to anode in a traditional low temperature PEM was assumed to be zero, the CO poisoning effect was not considered and water was assumed to be in vapor phase only in gas channels and electrodes. Moreover, in the modeling framework reformate gas was considered as fuel while modeling results were compared with a HT-PEMFC device operated with hydrogen as a fuel and effectiveness of the above assumptions was only partially verified by the modeling results. A similar study was conducted on the modeling of HT-PEMFCs in the kW range using a 12-cell stack device operating at 160–180 °C using H2/O2 and reformate gas/O2 (reformate gas contains 33 vol% H2, 1 vol% CO and other inert gases).359 It was reported that the performance decrease with the reformate gas could be attributed to catalyst poisoning by CO and effects of H2 dilution. In addition, the large voltage loss at low current densities could be assigned to slow ORR in phosphoric acid. Overall, less than 10% performance loss was observed due to the variation of operating parameters and switch from hydrogen to reformate gas. Hence, it could be concluded that the modeling results should always be compared with the device results operated with the same fuel (hydrogen or reformate gas) as considered in modeling.
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of the system setup; (b) polarization curves on hydrogen at 155 and 175 °C; and (c) polarization curves on hydrogen and reformate gas at 160 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 358. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
A CFD-based model with high accuracy and minor deviation from the experimental values of HT-PEMFC cell composition and flow path is shown in Fig. 25.332 This study considered all the electrochemical processes and major transport phenomena, and allowed 3D transport coupled calculations. As shown in Fig. 25a, there are three main subsystems in the model, named air/oxygen (shown in red), hydrogen/fuel (shown in blue) and thermal/heat management system (Fig. 25a); air and hydrogen are supplied from outside and distributed in the cell through flow field channels (Fig. 25b and c), and heat distribution/management mainly depends on the flow field design, heating method, stack pressure and current density. Fig. 25d shows the components of the fuel cell model used in this experiment, including air, fuel, membrane, and bipolar plates. The reliability of this model for voltage prediction of HT-PEMFCs was verified by comparing the modeling results with an idealized mathematical model and polarization curves with experimentally obtained values with the stoichiometric value of dry hydrogen at the anode and air at the cathode λ = 2/2 (Fig. 25e) and λ = 2/6 (Fig. 25f). It can be observed that there is very good collaboration in modeling and experimental results at all current densities. According to the author, with an overall 5% uncertainty in the experiment, this model was suggested to be suitable for overall performance prediction of HT-PEMFC devices. It was also concluded that the serpentine geometry of bipolar plate channels could reinforce a better distribution of gas in the channels and gas diffusion layer. The major drawbacks of this model include the following: (1) the consideration of catalyst layers to be very thin which were treated as interfaces between membrane and gas diffusion layers, (2) the absence of component compression during cell assembly, (3) consideration of water to be produced at the cathode only in vapor form, (4) no attention to crossover of the oxidant or fuel which means only protons can cross through the membrane and (5) assumption of gas mixtures to obey the ideal gas law.
 Fig. 25  Diagram of fuel cell composition and flow path: (a) straight cell; (b) serpentine geometry, reactants flow from the bottom left inlet to the top right outlet; (c) locations marked with crosses represent inside-channel (white), under-channel (blue), and under-rib (black) sites; and (d) components of the fuel cell model, including air, fuel, membrane, and bi-polar plates; comparisons of polarization curves from numerical and experimental results at a H2 to air stoichiometry of (e) λ = 2/2 and (f) λ = 2/6. The cell was operated at a constant current density of 200 mA cm−2 and 433 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2012, American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
The gas flow configuration has a significant effect on current density homogenization in HT-PEMFCs. A CFD-based extension of the multi-domain model including reformate gas equations for HT-PEMFC stack simulation is a good way to understand the flow configuration of fuel and oxygen gas.384 For a HT-PEMFC short stack shown in Fig. 26a, a 3D CFD model with marked flow pathways of anode (red), cathode (blue) and cooling (yellow) is displayed in Fig. 26b. The authors comparatively investigated the flow arrangement in the stack-flow pathway of reactants in co-flow orientation (Fig. 26c) and counter-flow orientation (Fig. 26d) at a simulated current density of 600 mA cm−2 for reformate/air (Fig. 26e) and hydrogen/air (Fig. 26f). The results revealed that the highest current density homogenization could be achieved with anode and cathode in counter-flow, and anode and cooling in co-flow arrangement, and a less steep or more uniform current density can be achieved by operating the stack with H2/air instead of reformate gas/air at 600 mA cm−2 and an anode/cathode stoichiometry of 1.2/2.
 Fig. 26  (a and b) 3D CFD model of the HT-PEMFC short stack with marked flow pathways of the anode (red), cathode (blue) and cooling (yellow); (c) flow arrangement in the stack-flow pathway of reactants in co-flow orientation and (d) flow pathway of reactants in counter-flow orientation; simulated current density for i = 0.6 A cm−2 for (e) reformate/air and (f) hydrogen/air (stoichiometric ratios λa/c = 1.2/2.0, cell voltage: Vreformate = 0.430 V; VH2 = 0.527 V). Reproduced with permission from ref. 384. Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 

4.3. HT-PEMFC based combined heat and power system
HT-PEMFC based combined heat and power (CHP) systems have several advantages including enhanced efficiency due to waste heat recovery,385,386 reduced greenhouse gases and pollutant emission,387 no need to invest on large distribution power lines,387 less distribution loss,387 auxiliary service to the main electric energy distribution grid387 and integration of renewable energy sources.388,389 It is expected that up to or higher than 90% of overall fuel conversion efficiency could be achieved with HT-PEMFC based CHP systems because of the combined usage of heat (50%) and electricity (40% or above).390 A 47% net cost reduction, as compared to that of separate purchase of electricity from the grid, was proposed when the HT-PEMFC stack was combined with internal combustion engines to produce up to 10 kW CHP systems for residential applications.391 As shown in Fig. 27,392 the main subsystems in the HT-PEMFC based CHP system include a fuel reforming unit to produce H2 or reformate gas, a HT-PEMFC stack to produce heat and electricity, an inverter to convert direct current to alternating current and a heat recovery system to store heat for water boiling.392,393 Power conversion and heat recovery systems are beyond the scope of this article, so here we will focus on the fuel reforming and performance of the HT-PEMFC integrated CHP system.
 Fig. 27  Schematic diagram of the HT-PEMFC system used for CHP generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 392. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
H2 is considered the best fuel for HT-PEMFC based CHP systems, because of the high power output and best electrochemical performance. However, owing to the difficulties in storage and transport of H2, methanol or methane reformate gas is preferred especially for HT-PEMFC based micro-CHP systems.394 This matches well with the advantage of HT-PEMFCs in that they have high resistance against impurities and do not need high purification of reformate gas, which makes the CHP system less complicated. A prototype 5 kW HT-PEMFC stack operated with reformate gas containing 8.9 vol% CO showed 40% electrical efficiency.395 A bio-oil steam reformer, high temperature water-gas shift reactor and HT-PEMFC integrated CHP system showed a maximum reforming efficiency of 66% with reformate gas having less than 5% CO.396 CO percentage in the methane reformate gas can be decreased with increasing the steam to carbon ratio and reformate operating temperature.397 To keep the CO concentration below 3% by volume398 of total gas, which is the maximum allowed limit for HT-PEMFCs, the steam to carbon ratio should be higher than 2. Moreover, a sorption enhanced WGSR may be used to further reduce the amount of CO2 and CO in the produced fuel leading to less pollution and an overall increase in HT-PEMFC and CHP system efficiency.399 A highly pure fuel allows recirculation of the unused fuel at the anode, leading to increased fuel utilization and reduced CO poisoning.374
The models of given components can be combined to design a full HT-PEMFC based CHP model for performance evaluation as reported by Beausoleil-Morrison and Kelly for a gas operated CHP system.333 This model had three environmental boundary conditions including the surrounding air temperature, cooling water temperature and cooling water mass flow rate. The fourth boundary condition was provided by the external controllers, which might be steady-state electrical output requested by the controller or a dimensionless control signal. This model had a solution ability under most of the circumstances, but if the rate of change in the fuel flow rate exceeded empirically derived limitations, the solutions had to be repeated. It is a generalized cogeneration model that can be used for any hydrocarbon fueled PEMFC to produce heat and electricity for building simulations.
A HT-PEMFC based μ-CHP model was investigated for commercialization prospects400 with the following equations to calculate the stack performance: Rohmic = −0.0001667Tcell + 0.2289(25) Rdiff = 0.4306 − 0.0008203Tcell(26) (27) (28) ηohmic = iRohmic(29) Vcell = V0 − ηa − ηc − ηohmic(30) Wcell = Vcelli(31) Vstack = Vcellncells(32) Pstack = AcellncellsWcell(33) (34)In eqn (25)–(34), Rohmic is the ohmic resistance (Ω cm2), Rdiff is the diffusion resistance (Ω cm2), Tcell is the fuel cell operating temperature (°C), ηa and ηc are the anode and cathode overpotential (V), respectively, R is the ideal gas constant (8.314 J K−1 mol−1), ηohmic is the ohmic overpotential (V), i is the current density (A cm−2), i0 is the exchange current density (A cm−2), αanode and αcathode are the anode and cathode charge transfer coefficient, respectively, keh is the H2 electro-oxidation rate constant (A cm−2), θH2 is the H2 adsorption/desorption constant, λair is the air stoichiometry at the cathode side, V0 is the open circuit voltage (V), Vcell is the total cell voltage (V), Vstack is the fuel cell stack voltage (V), Wcell is the power density (W m−2), ncells is the number of cells in the fuel cell stack, Acell is the fuel cell active area (cm2), Pstack is the fuel cell stack electrical power output (W), and Istack is the fuel cell stack current (A).
After obtaining the stack performance as well as the parameters of ohmic and diffusion resistance, anode and cathode overpotentials, ohmic losses, total cell voltage, power density, fuel cell stack voltage, current and electrical power using eqn (25)–(34), these data can be used to calculate the electrical efficiency of the CHP system for residential applications with the software LabVIEW.400 At a load of 25%, the electrical efficiency was calculated to be 45.5%, and it was 38.8% at a full load, while the total efficiency was recorded around 95.2%. The improved electrical efficiency at partial load made this μ-CHP model superior when compared with conventional CHP models using Stirling engines and microturbines. It was also suggested that a more accurate model could be obtained by including the energy analysis which should include both quality and quantity of all energy conversions taking place in a process. Overall, intensive experimental work with more realistic results combined with theoretical modeling is needed and system installation cost should be reduced for the commercialization of μ-CHP.400
4.4. Cost analysis of HT-PEMFCs and the CHP system
The cost of HT-PEMFC materials and components should also be considered during fabrication and design of the devices. The cost difference is mainly due to the high loading of the Pt-based catalyst on both anode and cathode, use of graphite bipolar plates which are more costly than metal plates, and use of the conventional CCS method requiring higher Pt loading during MEA fabrication. Unfortunately, there are no recent studies discussing about the cost analysis of HT-PEMFCs and the CHP systems. It was reported by the U.S. Department of Energy in collaboration with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in 2014 that,278 although HT-PEMFCs show better performance as compared to LT-PEMFCs, the HT-PEMFC stack cost ($840 kW−1) at low production volumes (10 kW, 100 systems per year) is about 47% higher than the low temperature stack cost, while at high production volumes (100 kW, 50000 systems per year), the HT-PEMFC stack cost ($360 kW−1) is 153% higher. Another report401 compared the system installation cost of HT-PEMFCs and LT-PEMFCs, including fuel cell stack, fuel processor, balance of plant, inverters/power-conditioning, CHP components, sales markup, and installation, in 2015. The results showed that the installation price per unit of electric output ($ kW−1) decreases dramatically with both increasing system size and increasing system annual production rate as demonstrated in Fig. 28a. The proportion contributed by each subsystem and component could be separated; Fig. 28b and c display the breakdown of these costs according to the eight major subsystems for the 1 kW and 100 kW system sizes, respectively. At both size levels, installation, sales markup, and power electronics are significant contributors and combine to account for about 67% of the total system cost. Installation has a much larger percentage impact at low system power. On the other hand, the fuel cell and fuel processor subsystems provide core system functionality, and they account for only about 23% (for 1 kW) to 30% (for 100 kW) of total cost. At the 1 kW power level, the fuel processor is more expensive than the fuel cell subsystem, while at the 100 kW power level, the relative costs are reversed, and the fuel cell subsystem is more expensive. This change in relative cost contribution is due to the different rates of cost scaling with the system power level.
 Fig. 28  (a) Total installation cost of the HT-PEMFC system across various system sizes and production rates; (b) 1 kW and (c) 100 kW HT-PEMFC system installation price breakdown by component. Reproduced from ref. 401. Copyright 2015, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) (Open access). 
5. Concluding remarks, challenges and future perspectives
HT-PEMFCs’ commercialization and large-scale applications require durable and economical catalysts and PEMs along with well-designed gas diffusion layers and corrosion resistant bipolar plates. Overall, the catalyst performance could be improved by structure engineering and better dispersion of catalyst particles as well as development of a corrosion resistant support, but the activity, durability and loading are still challenging for both PGM-based and PGM-free catalysts due to catalyst delamination and degradation during long term operation at high temperature. The issues associated with PGM-based catalysts could be resolved to some extent by alloying the Pt metal with other metals and by suitable changes in the carbon support, and especially carbon doping along with polymer wrapping can give a wonderful uplift in the performance and durability. An ultra-low Pt loading of 0.1 mg cm−2 has been achieved with a satisfactory performance by a binderless cathode design, but the long term durability needs further improvement.19 Compared to PGM-based catalysts, the PGM-free catalysts have drawn great attention owing to the scarcity and high price of PGM metals, and some promising progress has been made in recent years. However, the HT-PEMFC application of PGM-free catalysts is at the beginning stage, and the root cause of the degradation mechanism at high temperature is still unknown hindering the development. Therefore, the future research directions of catalysts for HT-PEMFCs can be proposed as: (1) catalysts with high intrinsic activity should be developed, followed by structure engineering to optimize the performance. Special attention should be paid to PGM-free catalysts to well understand the mechanisms aiming at replacing PGM-based catalysts with them; (2) novel non-carbon supports with excellent stability should be focused, and their degradation should be well understood to help optimize the synthesis, structure, morphology as well as conductivity; (3) catalyst layer structure should be specially designed, comparatively studied and optimized to achieve efficient triple phase boundaries, appropriate hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity and reduced catalyst loading, eventually leading to improved HT-PEMFC performance.
The high temperature proton exchange membrane is one of the most critical materials for HT-PEMFCs. Among different types of membranes explored, the operating temperature of modified PFSA membranes is not high enough to satisfy the requirement for HT-PEMFCs, and most of them can only work smoothly in the temperature range from 100 to 120 °C. Both modified PFSA and SHP-based membranes suffer dehydration under the harsh operating conditions of HT-PEMFCs, and continuous water supply for membrane humidification is always required, making the system complex and also causing many other problems like catalyst layer delamination and membrane thinning. Compared to these membranes, PBI-based membranes have been identified to be the most feasible ones and can be used as commercial PEMs for HT-PEMFC applications because of their low-cost and excellent chemical properties in the temperature range from 100 to 250 °C without humidification. However, the proton conductivity and stability can’t satisfy the requirements well. The addition of an ionic liquid, nitrogen groups, inorganic fillers and additives may help to improve the proton conductivity and thermal stability, but the use of plasticizers has been proved unsuitable.402 Moreover, the presence of free electrolytes is a big challenge for PBI-based membranes. On the one hand, the doping of phosphoric acid in PBI membranes leads toward the inevitable free electrolyte in the electrodes which creates problems of poor activity and low permeability of oxygen in phosphoric acid, phosphate ion adsorption on the catalyst surface and electrolyte movement in the cell. On the other hand, this free electrolyte is necessary for cell performance as it acts as an ionic phase conductor in the electrode. To overcome these challenges, the following future research directions could be proposed: (1) alternative acids should be explored and the doping level in PBI-based membranes should be optimized for better performance and to minimize the acid loss during cell operation; (2) acid base membranes are promising candidates to replace PBI membranes because of their high conductivity and excellent stability at high operating temperature, but as a new type of PEM for HT-PEMFCs, much more detailed work should be conducted before their practical applications.
Regarding bipolar plates, their cost, durability, functionality and manufacturability are all major challenges for HT-PEMFC applications. Low density materials like graphite composites and carbon fiber reinforced materials should be preferred due to a net reduction in stack weight, but the volume is large, and durability especially the manufacturability should be well optimized. Metallic bipolar plates with negligible gas permeability are quite efficient for HT-PEMFCs for volume reduction, heat transfer and electrical conductivity, but still face the big challenge of corrosion coming from weak adhesion of coating materials and presence of micropores/pinholes or cracks on the surface. Moreover, the design and manufacture of bipolar plates and the flow field channels have essential effects on the homogeneous distribution of gases/reactants and water in the gas diffusion layer, eventually affecting the comprehensive performance of HT-PEMFCs. So, the future research directions of bipolar plates for HT-PEMFCs should be focused on (1) durable corrosion resistant metallic plates with well adhered fine surface coating without micropores, pinholes or cracks on the surface; (2) efficient design of bipolar plates with good manufacturability for HT-PEMFCs with light weight, small volume, high power density and good durability.
Methods for MEA and cell/stack fabrication have great effects on the performance. The major challenges can be summarized as the accuracy of fabrication at the industrial level. Efficient fabrication techniques which can give homogeneous and durable film deposition and reproducible products should be developed. Moreover, advanced in situ and ex situ techniques should be developed to provide new insight into the performance and degradation of key materials and components under varied operating conditions.69
Modeling and simulation are very helpful in operating, handling and fundamentally understanding the key phenomena occurring in catalysts, membranes, MEAs, bipolar plates, catalyst layers, gas diffusion layers, cells and stacks before, during and after HT-PEMFC operation. Particularly, in the case of HT-PEMFCs, most of the modeling work faces the challenges of insufficient parameter coverage and incorporation of hypothetical conditions which are not applicable during real operation of the systems. Therefore, a more accurate and powerful model should be thoroughly developed for accelerating the progress of HT-PEMFCs.
HT-PEMFC based CHP systems are attractive for many applications, in which the reformate gases are preferred fuels due to the good safety and low-cost. But the impurities present in the reformate gas may damage the components and decrease the performance. Hydrogen as a fuel can give much better performance as compared with reformate gases, but its production, storage, transport and distribution at large scale are still the limitations. On-site production of hydrogen via water electrolysers might be a probable solution for stationary applications of the CHP system. Reformate gas with low impurity content is another direction to promote the development of HT-PEMFC based CHP systems.
Nomenclature
Alphabets

mLMillilitre
μmMicrometer

B
Constant
cmCentimetre
atmAtmospheric
gGram

K
Slope
kWKilowatt
mMeter
mgMilligram
mmMillimeter
MPaMega pascals
mWMilliwatt
mΩMilli Ohm
g l−1Gram per litre
nmNanometer
Pa sPascal seconds
VVolt
WWatt
kJKilo Joule
wt%Weight percent
hHour
mAMilli ampere
mSMilli siemens
AAmpere
μV h−1Microvolt per hour
3DThree dimensional

E
DC
DC output energy

F
Faraday's constant = 96485 C mol−1
DCDirect current

I
D
Current density on the disk electrode, mA cm−2
$USD (United States dollar)

v
Kinematic velocity of the electrolyte solution, m s−1

C
O
Concentration of dissolved oxygen, m−3

I
R
Current density on the ring electrode, mA cm−2
cmgeo−2“Geo” means geometrical area of the electrode

ω
Angular velocity

I

k

Kinematic current density, mA cm−2

η
fcs
Net efficiency of the fuel cell system

N
Collection efficiency of the electrode
°CDegree Celsius

Q
H2
Lower heating value of input hydrogen
CdlDouble layer capacitance

D
O
Diffusion coefficient of O2, m2 s−1
OadsAdsorbed oxygen
mgpt cm−2Milligram of platinum per centimeter square
μAMicro ampere
PaPascal
SSiemens
N cm−2Newton per centimeter square

Abbreviations

ABPBIPoly(2,5-benzimidazole)
ASTAccelerated stress test
BoPBalance of plant
BPPsBipolar plates
CB/PtPlatinum supported carbon black
CCMCatalyst coated membrane
CCSCatalyst coated substrate
CFDComputational fluid dynamics
CHPCombined heat and power systems
CVCyclic voltammetry
ECSAElectrochemically active surface area
EGExpanded graphite
ETFEPoly(ethylene-alt-tetrafluoroethylene)
FeSA-GIron single atom crystals on graphene
GDLGas diffusion layer
HORHydrogen oxidation reaction
HT-PEMHigh temperature polymer electrolyte membrane
HT-PEMFCsHigh temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
ICRInterfacial contact resistance
ILIonic liquid

I–V
Current–voltage
LT-PEMFCsLow temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
M–N–CTransition metals supported on nitrogen doped carbon
MEAMembrane electrode assembly
MPLMicroporous layer
MWCNTsMultiwalled carbon nanotubes
NanoPCNanoporous carbon
NWDNet water drag
OCVOpen circuit voltage
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PAPhosphoric acid
PA-PBIPhosphoric acid doped polybenzimidazole
PBIPolybenzimidazole
PEMPolymer electrolyte membrane
PEMFCsPolymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
PFSAPerfluorosulfonic acid
PGMPlatinum group metal
PILProtic ionic liquid
Pt/CPlatinum supported carbon
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
PVPAPoly(vinylphosphonic acid)
PyPBIPyridine containing polybenzimidazole
RDERotating disk electrode
RHEReversible hydrogen electrode
RRDERotating ring disk electrode
SEMScanning electron microscopy
SHPsSulfonated hydrocarbon polymers
SSGSealed graphite composite
US DOEUnited States Department of Energy
UVUltraviolet
WGSRWater gas shift reactor

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21978331, 21776176 and 21476138).
References
H. Zhang and P. K. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2382–2394 RSC .

          J. Marcinkoski, J. Spendelow, A. Wilson and D. Papageorgopoulos, DOE Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Program Record # 15015, 2015.

          P. Gordon, https://www.smart-energy.com/industry-sectors/storage/40-million-doe-funding-to-advance-the-h2scale-concept/, (accessed July 2020).
S. Authayanun, M. Mamlouk, K. Scott and A. Arpornwichanop, Appl. Energy, 2013, 109, 192–201 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Scofield, H. Liu and S. S. Wong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5836–5860 RSC .
R. Rath, P. Kumar, L. Unnikrishnan, S. Mohanty and S. K. Nayak, Polym. Rev., 2019, 60, 1–51 Search PubMed .
E. Quartarone, S. Angioni and P. Mustarelli, Materials, 2017, 10, 687–703 CrossRef .
R. K. A. Rasheed, Q. Liao, Z. Caizhi and S. H. Chan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 3142–3165 CrossRef .
T. Fujigaya, M. R. Berber and N. Nakashima, ECS Trans., 2014, 64, 159–169 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, L. Yang and D. Cao, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 741–747 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefevre, J. Dodelet and P. Bertrand, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 11238–11247 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, D. T. Tran, J. P. McClure, D. R. Baker, D. Chu and S. D. Walck, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3941–3953 RSC .
Z. Yang, I. Moriguchi and N. Nakashima, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9800–9806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, M. Rodrigo, J. Linares and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wannek, A. Glüsen and D. Stolten, Desalination, 2010, 250, 1038–1041 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wong, W. Wong, K. Ramya, M. Khalid, K. Loh, W. Daud, K. Lim, R. Walvekar and A. Kadhum, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 12, 6116–6135 CrossRef .
G. Wang, Y. Yu, H. Liu, C. Gong, S. Wen, X. Wang and Z. Tu, Fuel Process. Technol., 2018, 179, 203–228 CrossRef CAS .
D. Singdeo, T. Dey, S. Gaikwad, S. J. Andreasen and P. C. Ghosh, Appl. Energy, 2017, 195, 13–22 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martin, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Martin, J. Jensen, Q. Li, P. Garcia-Ybarra and J. Castillo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 28273–28282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, S. He, S. Lu, J. P. Veder, B. Johannessen, L. Thomsen, M. Saunders, T. Becker, R. De Marco and Q. Li, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802066 CrossRef .
R. Gokhale, T. Asset, G. Qian, A. Serov, K. Artyushkova, B. C. Benicewicz and P. Atanassov, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 93, 91–94 CrossRef CAS .
A. Byeon, K. J. Lee, M. J. Lee, J. S. Lee, I. H. Lee, H. Y. Park, S. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoo, J. H. Jang and H. J. Kim, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1805–1810 CrossRef CAS .
A. Unnikrishnan, N. Rajalakshmi and V. M. Janardhanan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 128–140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Li, J. Xue, W. Zhu, J. Zhang, Y. Yin, Y. Qin, K. Jiao, Q. Du and B. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 842–854 CrossRef .
E. Abouzari-Lotf, M. Zakeri, M. M. Nasef, M. Miyake, P. Mozarmnia, N. A. Bazilah, N. F. Emelin and A. Ahmad, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 238–245 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Wang, J. Li, F. Liu, X. Tian, X. Wang, T. Mao, J. Xu and Z. Wang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2019, 95, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, Z. Wei, S. Li, J. Li, Z. Yang and S. A. Grigoriev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 29711–29716 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Lu, C.-P. Chang, Y.-H. Guo, T.-K. Yeh, Y.-C. Su, P.-C. Wang, K.-L. Hsueh and F.-G. Tseng, Renewable Energy, 2019, 134, 982–988 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bodner, H. R. García, T. Steenberg, C. Terkelsen, S. M. Alfaro, G. S. Avcioglu, A. Vassiliev, S. Primdahl and H. A. Hjuler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 12793–12801 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bodner, H. R. García, T. Steenberg, A. Vassiliev, S. M. Alfaro, G. S. Avcioglu and H. A. Hjuler, ECS Trans., 2018, 86, 281–285 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rastedt, J. Büsselmann, T. Klicpera, K. Reinwald, N. Pilinski, A. Dyck and P. Wagner, ECS Trans., 2018, 86, 301–314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, J. Park, Y. Chung and Y. Kwon, Korean Chem. Eng. Res., 2019, 57, 438–443 CAS .
P. Schneider, C. Sadeler, A.-C. Scherzer, N. Zamel and D. Gerteisen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, F322–F333 CrossRef CAS .
D. Froning, J. Yu, U. Reimer and W. Lehnert, Transp. Porous Media, 2018, 123, 403–420 CrossRef CAS .
S. Authayanun, K. Im-Orb and A. Arpornwichanop, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 473–483 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chandan, M. Hattenberger, A. El-Kharouf, S. Du, A. Dhir, V. Self, B. G. Pollet, A. Ingram and W. Bujalski, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 264–278 CrossRef CAS .
T. Myles, L. Bonville and R. Maric, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 16–42 CrossRef .
M. Díaz, A. Ortiz and I. Ortiz, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 469, 379–396 CrossRef .
R. Zeis, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 68–83 CrossRef .
R. Rosli, A. B. Sulong, W. R. W. Daud, M. A. Zulkifley, T. Husaini, M. I. Rosli, E. Majlan and M. Haque, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 9293–9314 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sha, X. Yuan, L. Li, Z. Ma, Z.-F. Ma, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Tong, S. Song, P. Tsiakaras and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118468 CrossRef .

          W. Vielstich, H. A. Gasteiger and H. Yokokawa, Handbook of fuel cells: advances in electrocatalysis, materials, diagnostics and durability, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
X. Yan, Y. Jia and X. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7628–7658 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 146–158 CrossRef .

          W. Xing, G. Yin and J. Zhang, Rotating electrode methods and oxygen reduction electrocatalysts, Elsevier,  2014 Search PubMed .
Y. Devrim and E. D. Arıca, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 18951–18966 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang and N. Nakashima, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23316–23322 RSC .
Z. Yang, X. Yu, Y. Zhang and G. Xu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 108158–108163 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Ling, W. Cai, X. Yu and Z. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 16714–16721 CrossRef CAS .
A. Orfanidi, M. Daletou and S. Neophytides, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 379–389 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. You, D. H. Kim, J. R. De Lile, C. Li, S. G. Lee, J. M. Kim and C. Pak, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 562, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. You, S.-a. Jin, K. H. Lee, C. Pak, K. H. Choi and H. Chang, Catal. Today, 2012, 185, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schenk, S. Gamper, C. Grimmer, M. Bodner, S. Weinberger and V. Hacker, ECS Trans., 2016, 75, 939–942 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yao, W. Zhang, Q. Ma, Q. Xu, S. Pasupathi and H. Su, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 124–133 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vellacheri, S. M. Unni, S. Nahire, U. K. Kharul and S. Kurungot, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2878–2887 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salvatore Aricò, A. Stassi, I. Gatto, G. Monforte, E. Passalacqua and V. Antonucci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15823–15836 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14318–14324 RSC .
F. Luo, Q. Zhang, Z. Yang, L. Guo, X. Yu, K. Qu, Y. Ling, J. Yang and W. Cai, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5314–5322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Su, T.-C. Jao, O. Barron, B. G. Pollet and S. Pasupathi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 155–159 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, H. Su, B. G. Pollet, V. Linkov and S. Pasupathi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 107–113 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, X.-L. Ding, C.-Y. Wang and Z.-F. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1105–1124 RSC .
A. Bauer, L. Chevallier, R. Hui, S. Cavaliere, J. Zhang, D. Jones and J. Rozière, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 77, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ignaszak, C. Song, W. Zhu, Y.-J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. Bauer, R. Baker, V. Neburchilov, S. Ye and S. Campbell, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 75, 220–228 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, A. Ignaszak, C. Song, R. Baker, R. Hui, J. Zhang, F. Nan, G. Botton, S. Ye and S. Campbell, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 61, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. a. Millán, H. c. Zamora, M. A. Rodrigo and J. Lobato, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5927–5936 CrossRef .
J. Lobato, H. Zamora, J. Plaza, P. Cañizares and M. A. Rodrigo, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 516–524 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wang, M. T. Swihart and G. Wu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 578–589 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ignaszak, C. Song, W. Zhu, J. Zhang, A. Bauer, R. Baker, V. Neburchilov, S. Ye and S. Campbell, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, X. Zeng, H.-J. Zhang, Z.-F. Ma and C.-Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1754–1755 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Singh, K. Takeyasu and J. Nakamura, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804297 CrossRef .
D. Guo, R. Shibuya, C. Akiba, S. Saji, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Science, 2016, 351, 361–365 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. T. Chung, D. A. Cullen, S. Wagner, U. I. Kramm, K. L. More, P. Zelenay and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2548–2558 RSC .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, C. Pan, L. N. Cleemann, I. Shypunov and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 234, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chenitz, U. I. Kramm, M. Lefèvre, V. Glibin, G. Zhang, S. Sun and J.-P. Dodelet, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 365–382 RSC .
Y. C. Wang, P. F. Zhu, H. Yang, L. Huang, Q. H. Wu, M. Rauf, J. Y. Zhang, J. Dong, K. Wang and Z. Y. Zhou, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 1914–1921 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, X. Yang, M. Dubois, M. Herraiz, R. Chénitz, M. Lefevre, M. Cherif, F. Vidal, V. P. Glibin and S. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3015–3037 RSC .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, S. Martin, R. Chenitz, C. Pan, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1752–1760 RSC .
C. Wan, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903815 CrossRef CAS .
T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, C. Terkelsen, M. T. Sánchez, L. N. Cleemann and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6076–6080 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Shang, Y. Wang and J. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11060–11066 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nayak, M. Sundarraman, P. C. Ghosh and A. R. Bhattacharyya, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 100, 111–120 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hooshyari, M. Javanbakht and M. Adibi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 205, 142–152 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Harris and D. F. Walczyk, J. Manuf. Processes, 2006, 8, 8–20 CrossRef .
A. Das, P. Ghosh, S. Ganguly, D. Banerjee and K. Kargupta, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 45773–45783 CrossRef .
R. P. Pandey and V. K. Shahi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 14235–14245 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Harris, D. F. Walczyk and M. M. Weber, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 011007 CrossRef .
S. J. Osborn, M. K. Hassan, G. M. Divoux, D. W. Rhoades, K. A. Mauritz and R. B. Moore, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3886–3890 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Jung and J. W. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 12580–12585 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Krishnan, D. Joseph, N. M. H. Duong, A. Konovalova, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, S. W. Nam and D. Henkensmeier, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 544, 416–424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reichman, A. Ulus and E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B327–B333 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, Z. Wan, M. Pan and S. P. Jiang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2003–2008 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kwak, T.-H. Yang, C.-S. Kim and K. H. Yoon, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 160, 309–315 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kwak, T.-H. Yang, C.-S. Kim and K. H. Yoon, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 653–657 CrossRef CAS .
M. Navarra, F. Croce and B. Scrosati, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3210–3215 RSC .
M. Navarra, C. Abbati and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 109–113 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Santiago, B. R. Matos, F. C. Fonseca and M. Linardi, ECS Trans., 2007, 11, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhengbang, H. Tang and P. Mu, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 369, 250–257 CrossRef .
T. Hasegawa, A. B. Béléké and M. Mizuhata, J. Power Sources, 2013, 233, 148–156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maiti, N. Kakati, S. P. Woo and Y. S. Yoon, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 155, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sanlı, S. Tas, Y. Yürüm and S. Gürsel, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 914–925 CrossRef .
X. Li, M. Drache, U. Gohs and S. Beuermann, J. Membr. Sci., 2015, 495, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Drache, X. Ke, U. Gohs and S. Beuermann, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2016, 301, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Saidi and H. Uthman, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 9315–9332 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramani, H. Kunz and J. Fenton, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 1181–1187 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Zheng, J. Xue, T. Huang, Y. Yin, Y. Qin, K. Jiao, Q. Du and M. D. Guiver, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 297–309 RSC .
K. Angjeli, I. Nicotera, M. Baikousi, A. Enotiadis, D. Gournis, A. Saccà, E. Passalacqua and A. Carbone, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 96, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Son, R. K. Sharma, Y.-G. Shul and H. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 733–738 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li and K. Scott, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2123–2128 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. G. Advani and A. K. Prasad, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 530–534 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2921–2925 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1894–1898 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. K. Leoga, L. Youssef, S. Roualdès and V. Rouessac, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 660, 506–515 CrossRef .
R. L. Thankamony, J.-M. Hwang and T.-H. Kim, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 392, 58–65 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, B. Wang, C. Zhao, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Bu, Y. Cui, X. Li and H. Na, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13996–14003 RSC .
N. Zhang, B. Wang, C. Zhao, Y. Zhang, F. Bu, Y. Cui, X. Li and H. Na, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 815–822 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Wang, G. Yang and S. Zhan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 8464–8473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Xiao, S. Bian and Y. Meng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4379–4386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Shu, S. Tian, D. Mei, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 4539–4544 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, D. Li, H. Koshikawa, M. Asano and Y. Maekawa, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 362, 488–494 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Q. Chi, D. X. Luu and D. Kim, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 187, 78–84 CrossRef .
E. Fontananova, F. Trotta, J. C. Jansen and E. Drioli, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 348, 326–336 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, F. Zhang, S. Yi, C. Huang, H. Zhang and M. Pan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 748–754 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, S. M. Jo, J. Choi, K.-Y. Baek, Y. B. Truong, I. L. Kyratzis and Y.-G. Shul, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 3665–3671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park and D. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 1063–1070 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pokprasert and S. Chirachanchai, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 524, 550–556 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Che, F. Feng, L. Liu, H. Fan and Z. Li, Fibers Polym., 2018, 19, 1585–1595 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hänsel and D. Kundu, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 2684–2692 CrossRef .
K. Charradi, Z. Ahmed, P. Aranda and R. Chtourou, Appl. Clay Sci., 2019, 174, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oroujzadeh, S. Mehdipour-Ataei and M. Esfandeh, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1673–1681 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gourdoupi, K. Papadimitriou, S. Neophytides and J. Kallitsis, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Kallitsis, M. Geormezi and S. G. Neophytides, Polym. Int., 2009, 58, 1226–1233 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Papadimitriou, F. Paloukis, S. G. Neophytides and J. K. Kallitsis, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4942–4951 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vöge, V. A. Deimede and J. K. Kallitsis, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 207–216 CrossRef .
K. Kallitsis, R. Nannou, A. Andreopoulou, M. Daletou, D. Papaioannou, S. Neophytides and J. Kallitsis, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Pefkianakis, V. Deimede, M. K. Daletou, N. Gourdoupi and J. K. Kallitsis, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 1724–1728 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Oh, M.-G. Lee and T.-H. Kim, J. Korean Chem. Soc., 2009, 53, 345–354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feng, K. Sasaki and M. Nishihara, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 2692–2699 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Krishnan, D. Henkensmeier, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, V. Rebbin, I.-H. Oh, S.-A. Hong, S.-W. Nam and T.-H. Lim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7152–7161 CrossRef CAS .
R. Borduin and W. Li, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., 2017, 139, 021004 CrossRef .
Y. Chikashige, Y. Chikyu, K. Miyatake and M. Watanabe, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 7121–7126 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyatake, Y. Chikashige, E. Higuchi and M. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3879–3887 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lawrence and T. Yamaguchi, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 325, 633–640 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, P. Heo, T. Ko, K.-h. Kim, S.-K. Kim, C. Pak and J.-C. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 539–547 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, K. Chung, H. Lee, B. Bae and E.-B. Cho, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 236, 292–300 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hara, H. Ohashi, T. Ito and T. Yamaguchi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 4656–4663 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yoon, T.-H. Kim, D. M. Yu and Y. T. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 18981–18988 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Zheng, Z. Zhao and S. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22706–22712 RSC .
K. Kim, P. Heo, T. Ko and J.-C. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Park, Y.-W. Choi, T.-H. Yang, J.-S. Park and S.-H. Kim, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2013, 30, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, I. Sung, Y. Yoon, T. H. Kim, J. Lee and Y. Hong, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 843–850 CAS .
D. M. Yu, Y. J. Yoon, T.-H. Kim, J. Y. Lee and Y. T. Hong, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 233, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, S.-K. Kim, J. O. Park, S.-W. Choi, K.-H. Kim, T. Ko, C. Pak and J.-C. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 537, 11–21 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. Dou and G. Guan, J. Electron. Mater., 2017, 46, 1883–1888 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Ahn, B. Lee, J. Jang, C.-M. Min, S.-B. Lee, C. Pak and J.-S. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2018, 560, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rodrigues, T. Reitz, T. Dang, Z. Bai and K. Bardua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B960–B968 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Seo, Y. D. Lim, M. A. Hossain, S. H. Lee, H. C. Lee, H. H. Jang, M. M. Islam and W. G. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 667–674 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, H. Li, K. Liu, H. Lu, J. Yang and R. He, Fibers Polym., 2018, 19, 2449–2457 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, R. He, J. Jensen and N. Bjerrum, Fuel Cells, 2004, 4, 147–159 CrossRef CAS .

          N. A. B. Daud, E. A. Lotf, S. S. Sha’rani, M. M. Nasef, A. Ahmad and R. R. Ali, presented in part at the E3S Web of Conferences, 2019.
Y.-L. Ma, J. Wainright, M. Litt and R. Savinell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A8–A16 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, S. J. An, J. Y. Kim, J. K. Moon, S. Y. Cho, Y. C. Eun, H. K. Yoon, Y. Park, H. J. Kweon and E. M. Shin, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2004, 25, 1410–1413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, P. Canizares, M. A. Rodrigo, J. J. Linares and G. Manjavacas, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 280, 351–362 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, P. Canizares, M. Rodrigo, J. Linares and J. Aguilar, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 306, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, H. Zhang, L. Xiao, E. W. Choe and B. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2009, 9, 318–324 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and K. Scott, Fuel Cells, 2012, 12, 583–588 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Asensio, S. Borrós and P. Gómez-Romero, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 967–972 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Asensio and P. Gómez-Romero, Fuel Cells, 2005, 5, 336–343 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wannek, W. Lehnert and J. Mergel, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 258–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, L. Petrik and M. Mathe, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 3745–3750 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Gulledge, B. Gu and B. C. Benicewicz, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 306–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. More, A. P. Sunda and A. Venkatnathan, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 19746–19755 RSC .
M. Daletou, N. Gourdoupi and J. Kallitsis, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 252, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, H. Zhang, T. Jana, E. Scanlon, R. Chen, E. W. Choe, L. Ramanathan, S. Yu and B. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2005, 5, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
M. Molleo, X. Chen, H. J. Ploehn and B. C. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2015, 15, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ponce, M. Boaventura, D. Gomes, A. Mendes, L. Madeira and S. Nunes, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 209–216 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Mader and B. C. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 222–237 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Villa, S. Angioni, S. D. Barco, P. Mustarelli and E. Quartarone, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301949 CrossRef .
C. Harms, M. Wilhelm and G. Grathwohl, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 1669–1675 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qian, D. W. Smith Jr and B. C. Benicewicz, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3911–3916 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qian and B. C. Benicewicz, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 4064–4073 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Qian, X. Chen and B. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 832–842 CAS .
H. Dai, H. Zhang, H. Zhong, H. Jin, X. Li, S. Xiao and Z. Mai, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 754–761 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angioni, P. Righetti, E. Quartarone, E. Dilena, P. Mustarelli and A. Magistris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7174–7182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lobato, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, D. Úbeda and F. J. Pinar, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 369, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng and M. Mathe, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 894–898 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eguizábal, J. Lemus, M. Urbiztondo, O. Garrido, J. Soler, J. Blazquez and M. Pina, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8994–9007 CrossRef .
J. Lobato, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, D. Úbeda and F. J. Pinar, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1489–1497 CrossRef CAS .
M. Linlin, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 411, 91–98 CrossRef .
F. Chu, B. Lin, B. Qiu, Z. Si, L. Qiu, Z. Gu, J. Ding, F. Yan and J. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18411–18417 RSC .
K. A. Stewart and H. P. S. Missan, ECS Trans., 2013, 50, 1167–1177 CrossRef .
F. J. Pinar, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, D. Ubeda and J. Lobato, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1547–1556 RSC .
J. Yang, D. Aili, Q. Li, L. N. Cleemann, J. O. Jensen, N. J. Bjerrum and R. He, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ghosh, D. Halder, S. Ganguly, D. Banerjee and K. Kargupta, Int. J. Plast. Technol., 2014, 18, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, T. Allward, S. M. Alfaro, C. Hartmann-Thompson, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, Q. Li, J. O. Jensen and E. J. Stark, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 140, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Rao, V. R. Hande, S. M. Sawant, S. Praveen, S. K. Rath, K. Sudarshan, D. Ratna and M. Patri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37013–37025 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Chen and B. C. Benicewicz, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 796–804 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, F. Chu, N. Yuan, H. Shang, Y. Ren, Z. Gu, J. Ding, Y. Wei and X. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, X. Guo, D. Aili, C. Pan, Q. Li and J. Fang, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 454, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cho, E. Hur, D. Henkensmeier, G. Jeong, E. Cho, H. J. Kim, J. H. Jang, K. Y. Lee, H. A. Hjuler and Q. Li, Eur. Polym. J., 2014, 58, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
F. Conti, F. Bertasi, J. Wackerl, P. Dams, V. Di Noto, W. Lehnert and C. Korte, ECS Trans., 2016, 72, 157–167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Özdemir, N. Özkan and Y. Devrim, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 1–13 CrossRef .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, H. Becker, D. Aili, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 570–578 CrossRef .
O. Ivanova, W. Lüke, A. Majerus, M. Krutyeva, N. Szekely, W. Pyckhout-Hintzen, M.-S. Appavou, M. Monkenbusch, R. Zorn and W. Lehnert, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 533, 342–350 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sana and T. Jana, Polymer, 2018, 137, 312–323 CrossRef CAS .
N. Üregen, K. Pehlivanoğlu, Y. Özdemir and Y. Devrim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2636–2647 CrossRef .
J. Liao, Q. Li, H. Rudbeck, J. O. Jensen, A. Chromik, N. Bjerrum, J. Kerres and W. Xing, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 745–755 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Smith and D. A. Walsh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900744 CrossRef .
C. Hasiotis, L. Qingfeng, V. Deimede, J. Kallitsis, C. Kontoyannis and N. Bjerrum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A513–A519 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jalili, M. Geppi and V. Tricoli, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2015, 19, 1643–1650 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, H. Tang, M. Sun, H. Yang, M. Pan and J. Duan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9782–9791 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Lim, J.-H. Won, H.-J. Lee, Y. T. Hong, M.-S. Lee, C. H. Ko and S.-Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18550–18557 RSC .
Z. Hu, Y. Yin, K.-i. Okamoto, Y. Moriyama and A. Morikawa, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 329, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
E. Abouzari-Lotf, H. Ghassemi, S. Mehdipour-Ataei and A. Shockravi, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 516, 74–82 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tanaka, H. Yamamoto, A. Shono, K. Kubo and M. Sakurai, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1385–1389 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rehman, K. Liaqat, S. Fazil, S. Saeed, M. Waseem, M. Shakeel, S. Mir, I. Bibi and C.-Y. Guo, J. Polym. Res., 2019, 26, 82–95 CrossRef .
P. Donoso, W. Gorecki, C. Berthier, F. Defendini, C. Poinsignon and M. Armand, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 28, 969–974 CrossRef .
S. Petty-Weeks, J. Zupancic and J. Swedo, Solid State Ionics, 1988, 31, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stevens, W. Wieczorek, D. Raducha and K. Jeffrey, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 97, 347–358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Qiao, X. Wang, J. Ma and T. Okada, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernicola, S. Panero, B. Scrosati, M. Tamada and H. Ohno, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 1103–1107 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Jothi and S. Dharmalingam, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 450, 389–396 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Mondal, B. P. Tripathi and V. K. Shahi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4117–4124 RSC .
J. S. Baek, J. S. Park, S. Sekhon, T. H. Yang, Y. G. Shul and J. H. Choi, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 762–769 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Che, H. Fan, X. Duan, F. Feng, W. Mao and X. Han, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 269, 666–674 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chu, B. Lin, F. Yan, L. Qiu and J. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7979–7984 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Chopade, S. So, M. A. Hillmyer and T. P. Lodge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6200–6210 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yan, S. Yu, X. Zhang, L. Qiu, F. Chu, J. You and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1480–1484 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lin, S. Cheng, L. Qiu, F. Yan, S. Shang and J. Lu, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1807–1813 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dhakate, R. Mathur, S. Sharma, M. Borah and T. Dhami, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 934–941 CrossRef CAS .
K. Feng, D. T. Kwok, D. Liu, Z. Li, X. Cai and P. K. Chu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6798–6804 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ribeirinha, G. Schuller, M. Boaventura and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 13902–13912 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, K.-D. Woo, D.-K. Kim, X. Zhu and S. Sui, Met. Mater. Int., 2006, 12, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Weissbecker, A. Schulze-Lohoff, M. Bauer, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, presented in part at the 20th World Hydrogen Energy Conference, Gwangju Metropolian City, Korea, 2014.
V. Weissbecker, U. Reimer, K. Wippermann and W. Lehnert, ECS Trans., 2013, 58, 693–704 CrossRef .
C.-Y. Chen and S.-C. Su, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 13430–13439 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, Y. Cai, K. Wippermann and W. Lehnert, J. Power Sources, 2019, 434, 226718 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lim, M. Kim and Y. H. Yu, Compos. Struct., 2014, 118, 519–527 CrossRef .
A. Ghosh and A. Verma, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 259–265 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, J. W. Lim, S. Nam and I. Choi, Compos. Struct., 2015, 128, 284–290 CrossRef .
M. Kim and J. W. Lim, Compos. Struct., 2015, 119, 630–637 CrossRef .
T. Cui, P. Li, Y. Liu, J. Feng, M. Xu and M. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 1160–1166 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hartnig and T. J. Schmidt, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4237–4242 CrossRef CAS .
P. Alnegren, J. Grolig, J. Ekberg, G. Göransson and J. E. Svensson, Fuel Cells, 2016, 16, 39–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rashtchi, Y. A. Gomez, K. Raeissi, M. Shamanian, B. Eriksson, M. Zhiani, C. Lagergren and R. W. Lindström, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, F1427–F1436 CrossRef CAS .
K. Eom, E. Cho, S.-W. Nam, T.-H. Lim, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim, B. K. Hong and Y. C. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 324–330 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dur, Ö. N. Cora and M. Koç, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 788–799 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, D. Zhang, H. Fu and K. Huang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 13770–13776 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee and J. W. Lim, Compos. Struct., 2017, 167, 144–151 CrossRef .
M. Koc, S. Mahabunphachai and F. Dundar, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 1773–1782 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mahabunphachai, Ö. N. Cora and M. Koç, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5269–5277 CrossRef CAS .
C. Turan, Ö. N. Cora and M. Koç, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12370–12380 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and L. Hua, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3529–3535 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Hua, J. Lan and X. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 8177–8184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, D. a. Liu, P. Hu, X. Lai and J. Ni, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 031009 CrossRef .
M. G. Jung, Y. P. Jeon and C. G. Kang, Key Eng. Mater., 2013, 535, 310–313 Search PubMed .
R. J. Dawson, A. J. Patel, A. E. Rennie and S. White, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 637–645 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Lee, C.-Y. Lee, K.-T. Yang, F.-H. Kuan and P.-H. Lai, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 1115–1121 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Lee, Y.-P. Chen and C.-H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 145, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Hung, T.-C. Yang and K.-c. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2070–2074 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Hung, D.-H. Chang and Y. Chuang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 158–163 CrossRef CAS .
A.-R. Kim, H.-M. Jung and S. Um, Energy, 2014, 66, 50–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Janßen, A. Edelmann, T. Mildebrath, P. Müller, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 18488–18497 CrossRef .

          H. Janßen, J. Supra and W. Lehnert, High Temperature Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cells, Springer, Cham,  2016, ch. 20, pp. 441–457 Search PubMed .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, H. Becker, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F3053–F3062 CrossRef .
A. Diedrichs, M. Rastedt, F. J. Pinar and P. Wagner, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2013, 43, 1079–1099 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chippar, K. Oh, D. Kim, T.-W. Hong, W. Kim and H. Ju, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 7715–7724 CrossRef CAS .
D. Froning, J. Yu, G. Gaiselmann, U. Reimer, I. Manke, V. Schmidt and W. Lehnert, J. Power Sources, 2016, 318, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Han, H.-J. Kim, Y.-G. Shul and E. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2016, 323, 142–146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vengatesan, H.-J. Kim, S.-Y. Lee, E. Cho, H. Y. Ha, I.-H. Oh, S.-A. Hong and T.-H. Lim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Cho, S.-K. Kim, T.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Cho, J. W. Lim, N. Jung, W.-S. Yoon, J.-C. Lee and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, B38–B40 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giacoppo, A. Carbone, I. Gatto, A. Saccà, R. Pedicini, O. Barbera and E. Passalacqua, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2012, 9, 031005 CrossRef .
G. Giacoppo, O. Barbera, A. Carbone, I. Gatto, A. Sacca, R. Pedicini and E. Passalacqua, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 11619–11627 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuk, D.-H. Lee, S. Choi, G. Doo, D. W. Lee and H.-T. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 402–408 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mack, M. Klages, J. Scholta, L. Jörissen, T. Morawietz, R. Hiesgen, D. Kramer and R. Zeis, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schenk, S. Gamper, C. Grimmer, B. E. Pichler, M. Bodner, S. Weinberger and V. Hacker, ECS Trans., 2016, 75, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Wei, T. Lipman, A. Mayyas, J. Chien, S. H. Chan, D. Gosselin, H. Breunig, M. Stadler, T. McKone and P. Beattie,A total cost of ownership model for low temperature PEM fuel cells in combined heat and power and backup power applications, Report LBNL-6772E, Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.(LBNL), Berkeley, CA (United States),  2014 Search PubMed .
F. J. Pinar, N. Pilinski and P. Wagner, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 217–227 CrossRef CAS .
J. Büsselmann, M. Rastedt, V. Tullius, K. Yezerska, A. Dyck and P. Wagner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 19384–19394 CrossRef .
J. Halter, T. Gloor, B. Amoroso, T. Schmidt and F. Büchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 13126–13134 RSC .
F. Liu, M. Kvesić, K. Wippermann, U. Reimer and W. Lehnert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F892–F897 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Nishimura, S. Kamiya, T. Okado, Y. Sato and M. Hirota, presented in part at the E3S Web of Conferences, 2019, 83, 01007.
F. Pinar, M. Rastedt, A. Dyck and P. Wagner, Fuel Cells, 2018, 18, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, D. Singdeo and S. K. Kær, Fuel Cells, 2019, 19, 2–9 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Bladergroen, H. Su, S. Pasupathi and V. Linkov, Electrocatalysis, InTech,  2012, ch. 3, pp. 45–60 Search PubMed .
P. Moçotéguy, B. Ludwig, J. Scholta, Y. Nédellec, D. Jones and J. Rozière, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 299–311 CrossRef .
C. Lim, L. Ghassemzadeh, F. Van Hove, M. Lauritzen, J. Kolodziej, G. Wang, S. Holdcroft and E. Kjeang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rastedt, D. Schonvogel and P. Wagner, ECS Trans., 2014, 64, 741–753 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitamura, Y. Minamida, X. Zhao, Z. Noda, A. Hayashi and K. Sasaki, ECS Trans., 2014, 64, 755–762 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yao, T.-C. Jao, W. Zhang, L. Xu, L. Xing, Q. Ma, Q. Xu, H. Li, S. Pasupathi and H. Su, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 21006–21016 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, L. Xiao and B. Benicewicz, Fuel Cells, 2008, 8, 165–174 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schonvogel, M. Rastedt, P. Wagner, M. Wark and A. Dyck, Fuel Cells, 2016, 16, 480–489 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pilinski, M. Rastedt and P. Wagner, ECS Trans., 2015, 69, 323–335 CrossRef CAS .
F. Valle, N. Zuliani, B. Marmiroli, H. Amenitsch and R. Taccani, Fuel Cells, 2014, 14, 938–944 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, L. Wang, S. G. Advani and A. K. Prasad, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 120, 30–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Eberhardt, M. Toulec, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, F. Büchi and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F310–F316 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, S. J. Andreasen, S. K. Kær and D. Yu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2833–2839 CrossRef CAS .
G.-B. Jung, H.-H. Chen and W.-M. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2014, 247, 354–359 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rau, A. Niedergesäβ, C. Cremers, S. Alfaro, T. Steenberg and H. Hjuler, Fuel Cells, 2016, 16, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng and S. J. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1182–1191 CrossRef CAS .

          F. J. Pinar, M. Rastedt, N. Bruns and P. Wagner, Proceedings of EFC2013 Rome, Italy, 2013.
R. Kerr, H. García, M. Rastedt, P. Wagner, S. Alfaro, M. Romero, C. Terkelsen, T. Steenberg and H. Hjuler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 16860–16866 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kondratenko, M. O. Gallyamov, O. A. Tyutyunnik, I. V. Kubrakova, A. V. Chertovich, E. K. Malinkina and G. A. Tsirlina, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F587–F595 CrossRef CAS .
T. Søndergaard, L. N. Cleemann, L. Zhong, H. Becker, T. Steenberg, H. A. Hjuler, L. Seerup, Q. Li and J. O. Jensen, Electrocatalysis, 2018, 9, 302–313 CrossRef .
O. Barron, H. Su, V. Linkov, B. G. Pollet and S. Pasupathi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 278, 718–724 CrossRef CAS .
T. Engl, K. E. Waltar, L. Gubler and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, F500–F505 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kregar, G. Tavčar, A. Kravos and T. Katrašnik, Energy Procedia, 2019, 158, 1817–1822 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pandy, Z. Yang, M. Gummalla, V. V. Atrazhev, N. Y. Kuzminyh, V. I. Sultanov and S. Burlatsky, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F972–F979 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Darling and J. P. Meyers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1523–A1527 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ossiander, M. Perchthaler, C. Heinzl and C. Scheu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aili, J. Zhang, M. T. D. Jakobsen, H. Zhu, T. Yang, J. Liu, M. Forsyth, C. Pan, J. O. Jensen and L. N. Cleemann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4019–4024 RSC .
Y. Özdemir, N. Üregen and Y. Devrim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 2648–2657 CrossRef .
Y. Devrim, H. Devrim and I. Eroglu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 10044–10052 CrossRef CAS .
K. Seo, J. Seo, K. H. Nam and H. Han, Polym. Compos., 2017, 38, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nicotera, A. Enotiadis, K. Angjeli, L. Coppola, G. A. Ranieri and D. Gournis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 9087–9097 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bazylak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 3845–3857 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Daletou, J. K. Kallitsis, G. Voyiatzis and S. G. Neophytides, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 326, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
U. Reimer, J. Ehlert, H. Janßen and W. Lehnert, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 1837–1845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jeong, K. Oh, S. Ahn, N. Y. Kim, A. Byeon, H.-Y. Park, S. Y. Lee, H. S. Park, S. J. Yoo and J. H. Jang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 365–374 CrossRef CAS .
B. Heggen, S. Roy and F. Müller-Plathe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14209–14215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, T. M. Ataol and F. Müller-Plathe, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 7403–7409 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mack, S. Galbiati, V. Gogel, L. Jörissen and R. Zeis, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 770–773 CrossRef CAS .

          F. S. E. Center, Procedure for performing PEM single cell testing, US Department of Energy Report DE-FC36-06G016028, Arlington, Virginia,  2009 Search PubMed .
D. Singdeo, T. Dey and P. C. Ghosh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 987–995 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, S. Shironita, T. Mizukami, K. Nakatsuyama, K. Souma and M. Umeda, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 6303–6309 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bevilacqua, M. George, S. Galbiati, A. Bazylak and R. Zeis, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 257, 89–98 CrossRef CAS .
D. Froning, W. Maier, J. Groß, T. Arlt, I. Manke and W. Lehnert, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 9447–9456 CrossRef CAS .
C. Siegel, G. Bandlamudi and A. Heinzel, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2735–2749 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Krastev, G. Falcucci, E. Jannelli, M. Minutillo and R. Cozzolino, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 21663–21672 CrossRef CAS .
D. Singdeo, T. Dey and P. C. Ghosh, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2014, 492, 365–369 CAS .
S. Zhang, U. Reimer, Y. Rahim, S. Beale and W. Lehnert, J. Electrochem. Energy Convers. Storage, 2019, 16, 031002 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Beausoleil-Morrison and N. Kelly, Specifications for modelling fuel cell and combustion-based residential cogeneration device within whole-building simulation programs, Report 0662471164, International Energy Agency,  2007 Search PubMed .
F. Zhou, S. J. Andreasen and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 6672–6680 CrossRef CAS .
G. Elden, M. Çelik, G. Genç and H. Yapıcı, Energy, 2016, 103, 772–783 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, S. J. Andreasen, S. K. Kær and J. O. Park, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 14932–14941 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, R. He, J.-A. Gao, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1599 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nalbant, C. O. Colpan and Y. Devrim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 3584–3594 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Barbir, PEM Fuel Cells: Theory and Practice, Elsevier,  2013, ch. 3, pp. 33–72 Search PubMed .
A. Chatterjee, Recent Innovations Chem. Eng., 2018, 11, 120–131 CAS .
F. Zhou, S. S. Araya, I. F. Grigoras, S. J. Andreasen and S. K. Kær, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2015, 12, 021002 CrossRef .
M. Drakselová, R. Kodým, D. Šnita, F. Beckmann and K. Bouzek, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 432–446 CrossRef .
F. J. Pinar, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, D. Úbeda and J. Lobato, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4306–4313 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Harris, D. F. Walczyk and M. M. Weber, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 011007 CrossRef .
P. Giotakos and S. Neophytides, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 292, 285–291 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. B. Beale, U. Reimer, R. T. Nishida, M. Andersson, J. G. Pharoah and W. Lehnert, ECS Trans., 2018, 86, 287–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thomas, A. Bates, S. Park, A. K. Sahu, S. C. Lee, B. R. Son, J. G. Kim and D.-H. Lee, Appl. Energy, 2016, 165, 765–776 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abdulla and V. S. Patnaikuni, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 7, 2806–2820 CrossRef .
S. Grigoriev, A. Kalinnikov, N. Kuleshov and P. Millet, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8557–8567 CrossRef CAS .
J. Supra, H. Janßen, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2013, 10, 051002 CrossRef .
H.-C. B. Jensen and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 5030–5037 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, S. J. Andreasen, M. Chen and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 8490–8498 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kim and D. K. Kim, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2019, 152, 370–376 CrossRef .
D. Singdeo, T. Dey and P. C. Ghosh, Energy, 2011, 36, 6081–6089 CrossRef CAS .
U. Reimer, B. Schumacher and W. Lehnert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F153–F164 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pohl, M. Maximini, A. Bauschulte, J. Vom Schloß and R. Hermanns, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 777–784 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lee, F.-B. Weng, Y.-W. Kuo, Y.-T. Cheng, C.-K. Cheng, C.-H. Tsai and T.-J. Lee, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 250, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nguyen, S. Sahlin, S. J. Andreasen, B. Shaffer and J. Brouwer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4729–4739 CrossRef CAS .
H. Janßen, J. Supra, L. Lüke, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4705–4713 CrossRef .
M. Boaventura, J. Sousa and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 9842–9854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, J. Zhang, C. Song and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, B142–B146 CrossRef CAS .
K. Haraldsson and K. Wipke, J. Power Sources, 2004, 126, 88–97 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Lange, P.-C. Sui and N. Djilali, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3195–3203 CrossRef CAS .
L. You and H. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 991–999 CrossRef CAS .
N. Siddique and F. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5357–5366 CrossRef CAS .
N. Siegel, M. Ellis, D. Nelson and M. Von Spakovsky, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, S. Y. Jung and T. Van Nguyen, AIChE J., 2000, 46, 2053–2064 CrossRef CAS .
O. Antoine, Y. Bultel and R. Durand, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 499, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Wang, J. Zhang and R. R. Adzic, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 12702–12710 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jinnouchi, Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2003, 7, 15–31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pahari, C. K. Choudhury, P. R. Pandey, M. More, A. Venkatnathan and S. Roy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 7357–7366 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bhamidipati and T. Harris, J. Fuel Cell Sci. Technol., 2010, 7, 061005 CrossRef .
T. F. Fuller and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1218–1225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, L. Xu, C. Fang, H. Jiang, J. Li and M. Ouyang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 16268–16278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srouji, L. Zheng, R. Dross, A. Turhan and M. Mench, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raman, S. Swaminathan, S. Bhardwaj, H. K. Tanneru, B. Bullecks and R. Rengaswamy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 389–407 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chang, Y. Qin, Y. Yin, J. Zhang and X. Li, Appl. Energy, 2018, 230, 643–662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pournemat, H. Markötter, F. Wilhelm, S. Enz, H. Kropf, I. Manke and J. Scholta, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Andreasen and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4655–4664 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Reddy, S. Jayanti and D. S. Monder, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 20127–20138 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Supra, H. Janßen, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, presented in part at the ASME 2012 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, 2012.
J. Lobato, P. Cañizares, M. A. Rodrigo, J. J. Linares, C.-G. Piuleac and S. Curteanu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 192, 190–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, J. Zhang, C. Song and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, B142–B146 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kvesić, U. Reimer, D. Froning, L. Lüke, W. Lehnert and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 12438–12450 CrossRef .
G. Chicco and P. Mancarella, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 535–551 CrossRef .
H. Onovwiona and V. I. Ugursal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2006, 10, 389–431 CrossRef .

          K. M. Maribu, A summary of PhD Projects 2005, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Naqvi, E. Dahlquist and J. Yan, Biofuels, 2017, 8, 675–683 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cozzolino, L. Tribioli and G. Bella, Energy, 2016, 106, 774–789 CrossRef .
D. A. Notter, K. Kouravelou, T. Karachalios, M. K. Daletou and N. T. Haberland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1969–1985 RSC .
F. Cappa, A. L. Facci and S. Ubertini, Energy, 2015, 90, 1229–1238 CrossRef .
A. Jo, K. Oh, J. Lee, D. Han, D. Kim, J. Kim, B. Kim, J. Kim, D. Park and M. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 1698–1714 CrossRef CAS .
G. Loreti, A. L. Facci, T. Peters and S. Ubertini, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4508–4523 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hawkes, I. Staffell, D. Brett and N. Brandon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 729–744 RSC .
T. Birth, W. Heineken and L. He, Biomass Bioenergy, 2014, 65, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Authayanun, D. Saebea, Y. Patcharavorachot, S. Assabumrungrat and A. Arpornwichanop, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 1977–1988 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Herdem, S. Farhad and F. Hamdullahpur, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 101, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pechenkin, S. Badmaev, V. Belyaev and V. Sobyanin, Energies, 2019, 12, 3577 CrossRef CAS .
U. Suwanmanee, D. Saebea, V. Hacker, S. Assabumrungrat, A. Arpornwichanop and S. Authayanun, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 171, 20–30 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arsalis, M. P. Nielsen and S. K. Kær, Energy, 2011, 36, 993–1002 CrossRef .

          B. D. James and D. A. DeSantis, Manufacturing cost and installed price analysis of
stationary fuel cell systems,  2015 Search PubMed .
C. Wong, W. Wong, K. Ramya, M. Khalid, K. S. Loh, W. Daud, K. L. Lim, R. Walvekar and A. A. H. Kadhum, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 12, 6116–6135 CrossRef .
M. Inaba, ECS Trans., 2009, 25, 573–581 CrossRef CAS .
K. Oh, P. Chippar and H. Ju, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 2785–2794 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, H.-J. Kim, E. Cho, K.-S. Lee, T.-H. Lim, I. C. Hwang and J. H. Jang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 12888–12896 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ge, R. Banerjee, D. Muirhead, J. Lee, H. Liu, P. Shrestha, A. Wong, J. Jankovic, M. Tam and D. Susac, J. Power Sources, 2019, 422, 163–174 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boaventura, I. Alves, P. Ribeirinha and A. Mendes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 19771–19780 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Rizwan Haider
	Rizwan Haider completed his Mater of Philosophy (MPhil) in chemistry at the University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan, in 2014. He joined the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in 2018 as a PhD student in chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Xianxia Yuan with financial support from Chinese Scholarship Council (CSC). His current research focuses on development of efficient oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalysts for application in proton exchange membrane fuel cells and lithium air batteries.

Yichan Wen
	Yichan Wen received her Bachelor of Science degree from Dalian University of Technology in 2018, then she joined the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, as a master student under the supervision of Prof. Xianxia Yuan. Her current research focuses on novel electrolytes for electrochemical energy storage and conversion devices.

Zi-Feng Ma
	Dr Zi-Feng Ma is a Chair Professor and Director of Shanghai Electrochemical Energy Devices (SEED) Research Center at Shanghai Jiao Tong University, where he is responsible for directing the research and development of advanced energy materials and electrochemical energy systems for electric vehicles and energy storage applications. He is a Fellow of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China (FCIESC) and the Chair of the Institute of Energy Storage Engineering of CIESC. Prof. Ma holds or has filed over 50 patents and patent applications and has over 300 publications.

David P. Wilkinson
	Dr David P. Wilkinson is a professor and Canada Research Chair in the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University of British Columbia (UBC). He is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering (FCAE), Fellow of the Academy of Science of the Royal Society of Canada (FRSC-CA), Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada (FEIC), and Fellow of the Chemical Institute of Canada (FCIA). He previously held the position of Director and Vice President of Research and Development at Ballard Power Systems. His main research interests are electrochemical devices, energy conversion and storage materials, and sustainable energy.

Lei Zhang
	Dr Lei Zhang is a Senior Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada (NRC) and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC-UK). She is also an active member of the Canadian Society for Chemistry (CSC) and the Canadian Society for Chemical Engineering (CSChE). She received the first MSc degree in materials chemistry from Wuhan University (1993), the second MSc in physical chemistry from Simon Fraser University (2000), and a PhD in physics from Shanghai University (2020). Her main research interests include advanced materials and technologies in the fields of proton exchange membrane fuel cells, supercapacitors and batteries.

Xianxia Yuan
	Dr Xianxia Yuan is a full professor in Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), China. She received her PhD in material physics and chemistry from Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2002. After that she joined the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering in SJTU as an assistant professor (2002–2004) and was promoted to associate professor (2004–2016) and full professor (2016–present). From 2008 to 2009, Dr Yuan worked in the Pennsylvania State University, USA. Dr Yuan's research interest is now focused on advanced materials for electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems including proton exchange membrane fuel cells and metal–air batteries.

Shuqin Song
	Professor Shuqin Song received her PhD in physical chemistry from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2005. During the following years, she conducted her postdoctoral research in the University of Thessaly, Greece. Then she joined Sun Yat-sen University, China, as an assistant professor (2006–2007) and was promoted to associate professor (2008–2013) and professor (2014–up to now). Since 1999, Dr Song has been engaged in the research field of electrocatalysis, fuel cells and Zn–Air batteries, with an emphasis on the preparation of nanomaterials, the regulation of nanostructures, and performance optimization and application of nanomaterials in the field of new energy conversion and storage systems.

Jiujun Zhang
	Dr Jiujun Zhang is a professor in the College of Sciences/Institute for Sustainable Energy at Shanghai University, and a former Principal Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada (NRC). Dr Zhang is a Fellow of the Canadian Academy of Engineering (FCAE), Fellow of the Academy of Science of the Royal Society of Canada (FRSC-CA), Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada (FEIC), Fellow of the International Society of Electrochemistry (FISE), and Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC-UK). Dr Zhang's main research areas are electrochemistry, electrocatalysts, fuel cells, lithium batteries, metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, and H2O/CO2/N2 electrolysis.

 	Fig. 1  A schematic of the main components, charge transfer mechanism and key materials for HT-PEMFCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  A summary of the reported PGM-based and PGM-free catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in HT-PEMFCs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance and durability comparison of various PGM-based (orange) and PGM-free (blue) catalysts for oxygen reduction reaction in HT-PEMFCs.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structure of PVP and schematic illustration of the preparation process of the MWCNTs/PVP/Pt catalyst; (b) chemical structure of para-PyPBI and schematic illustration of the preparation of a PA-coated electrocatalyst, MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt; (c) polarization of I–V and power density curves of different MEAs at 120 °C for Pt/CB (black), MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt (blue) and MWCNTs/para-PyPBI-PA/Pt (red), and schematic illustration of homogeneous PA-doping on MWCNTs/para-PyPBI/Pt; (d) schematic illustration of the preparation of CB/PyPBI/Pt and NanoPC/PyPBI/Pt electrocatalysts. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reproduced with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the electrocatalyst preparation; (b) efficient proton conduction and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) of CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL; (c) normalized ECSAs of commercial CB/Pt (black line), CNT/ABPBI/Pt (blue line) and CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL (red line) as a function of potential cycles from 1.0 to 1.5 V (vs. RHE); (d) CV curves of commercial CB/Pt (black line), CNT/ABPBI/Pt (blue line) and CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL (red line); various I–V curves of commercial CB/Pt (e), CNT/ABPBI/Pt (f), and CNT/ABPBI/Pt@IL (g) recorded after different potential cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the structure formation mechanism for Fe3C catalysts; (b) polarization and power density curves of the H2–O2 fuel cell at different working temperatures under ambient pressure; (c) chronoamperometric curves at a cell voltage of 0.6 V for the Nafion-Fe/C–O2 cell and at a cell voltage of 0.4 V for the Nafion-Fe/C–air cell and the chrono-potentiometric curve at 100 mA cm−2 for the PBI-Fe/C cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
n = [H3PO4]/[BI]	(1)

 	Scheme 1  (a) Chemical structure of poly[2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole] (PBI); (b) H3PO4 protonated PBI with no free acid molecules; proton transfer along (c) acid–BI-acid, (d) acid–acid, and (e) acid–H2O. Reproduced from ref. 40. Copyright 2015, Beilstein-Institute (Open access).	 

 	Fig. 7  Proton conductivity mechanism of PA-doped cPBI-BF4-X membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  A comparison of different types of proton exchange membranes for HT-PEMFCs; the average values of all parameters are calculated from 10 randomly selected articles.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM micrograph of a mechanically polished cross section of the (a) anode and (b) cathode exposed sample including compositional information from energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy of the corrosion product in atomic percent; photographs of SS316L bipolar plates on the (c) anode and (d) cathode after 900 hours of operation in a single fuel cell, where the plates were boiled and washed by ultrasonic agitation in deionized water before the photos were taken. Reproduced with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of the gas channel cross-section (a) in a graphite bipolar plate produced by milling and (b) in a metallic bipolar plate produced by stamping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 263. Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Design of (a) a conventional bipolar plate and (b) a cathode/anode integrated bipolar plate; (c) compression molding of a bipolar plate; (d) cross sectional view of composite bipolar plates of unidirectional and fabric type composites; (e) non-woven carbon felt composite and (f) cathode/anode integrated bipolar plate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  A schematic of the increase in size leading to a more complex system and difficult handling of HT-PEMFCs.	 
	(2)
B = 0.62nF(DO)2/3v−1/6CO	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of MEA fabrication by CCS and CCM methods.	 

 	Fig. 14  Process flow diagram for semi-automated HT-PEMFC stack assembly. Reproduced from ref. 278. US-Department of Energy (Public access).	 

1	Separating anode and cathode reactions	Depends on membrane permeability
2	Channeling electrons from the anode to the current collector and from the current collector to the cathode	Type and structure of the catalyst and electrical resistivity of the membrane
3	Facilitating the electrochemical reaction/activity	Type and structure of the catalyst
4	Providing a large number of active sites	Type and structure of the catalyst, MEA assembly method
5	Providing structures that facilitate proton transport to the membrane	MEA assembly method, catalyst and its support, distribution and loading of the ionomer
6	Providing structures that can facilitate the transfer of products away from the production sites	MEA preparation, ink composition including hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties
7	Providing channels and structures to transport the reactants to catalytic active sites	MEA preparation, ink composition including hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties, catalyst support and catalyst structure

Manufacturing MEA	Layer thickness and uniformity	SEM, EPMA, X-ray radiography
Dispersion state of the catalyst	TEM, granularity analysis


Catalyst layer design	Dispersion of the catalyst and the ionomer	TEM, EDX
Void distribution	Mercury intrusion
AFM, GPC, NMR
Ionomer dispersion in the catalyst ink	μ-Computed tomography


R & D of the electrolyte membrane	Cluster size distribution	DSC, XRD, TEM
Chemical structure analysis	NMR


Wettability of the gas diffusion layer and the catalyst layer	Surface wetting	Contact angle
Permeability of vapors and water	Perporometry


Evaluation of the catalyst layer	Catalyst particle size	XRD, SEM, TEM
Catalyst chemical state	XAFS, XPS
Core shell catalyst	TEM, EDX
Carbon support analysis	Raman, XPS, XAFS
Ionomer distribution	TEM

 	Fig. 15  Load profiles (left) and voltage during single cycles (right) over accelerated stress testing operation time. (a) LC1 (16min at 1.0Acm−2/4min at 0.6Acm−2/every 6h 10min at 0.0Acm−2); (b) LC2 (16min at 0.3Acm−2/4min at 0.0Acm−2); (c) LC1a (approx. 70h); (d) LC2 (approx. 70h); (e) LC1b (approx. 230h). Reproduced with permission from ref. 293. Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons.	 

LC1a (70 h)	0.0	+130
0.6	−330
1.0	−486


LC2 (70 h)	0.0	−48
0.3	−363


LC1b (230 h)	0.0	−27
0.6	−116
1.0	−126


LC1b (70 h)	0.0	−19
0.6	−189
1.0	−218

 	Fig. 16  Reconstructed μ-CT images of (a) fresh BASF MEA and (b) stressed BASF MEA after load cycling; (c) durability test of the standard DPS MEAs operating at a current density of 0.24 A cm−2; Pt particle size distribution of the Pt/C catalyst from DPS MEA (d) before testing and after 17000 hours testing on the (e) cathode and (f) anode. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 289. Copyright 2014, The Electrochemical Society. (c–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 303. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 
C* + H2O ↔ C–OH + H+ + e− (E = 0.20 V vs. RHE)	(6)
C–OH ↔ CO + H+ + e− (E = 0.80 V vs. RHE)	(7)
C–OH + H2O → C* + CO2 + 3H+ + 3e− (E = 0.95 V vs. RHE)	(8)
Pt* + H2O ↔ Pt–OH + H+ + e− (E = 0.70 V vs. RHE)	(9)
Pt–OH ↔ Pt–O + H+ + e− (E = 0.80 V vs. RHE)	(10)
Pt–OH + C–OH → C* + Pt* + CO2 + 3H+ + 3e− (E = 0.65 V vs. RHE)	(11)

 	Fig. 17  A schematic of the interacting partial degradation mechanisms (left), and Pt degradation mechanisms: (a) Pt oxidation and PtO surface coverage; (b) place exchange between Pt lattice and adsorbed O atoms; (c) oxide reduction and cathodic dissolution of exchanged Pt; (d) carbon corrosion; (e) electrochemical Ostwald-Ripening; and (f) Pt2+ ion dissolution into the membrane. (left) Reproduced with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (a–f) Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 2  (a) End point oxidation and (b) midpoint chain scission mechanism for PBI membrane degradation during the Fenton test. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  Sketch of water distribution inside a HT-PEMFC. Reproduced with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Scheme 3  Possible condensation reactions of phosphonic acid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society.	 

Catalyst layer	Catalyst (Pt) corrosion	Catalyst dissolution	
34, 304 and 305

Catalyst detachment	
34, 304 and 305

Catalyst sintering	
34 and 304

Carbon corrosion	Fuel starvation	
403

Voltage reversal	
403

Thermal degradation	
290

Ionomer decomposition	Radical species	
208

Thermal decomposition	
404

Pore structure deterioration	Corrosion reaction	
405



Proton exchange membrane	Microcracks or pinholes	Manufacturing defects	
328

Humidity cycling	
305 and 406

Thermal degradation	
406

Chemical/electrochemical degradation	
403

Catalyst layer delamination	Stress cycling	
289 and 305

Membrane thinning	Radical species attack	
208 and 288

Thermal degradation	
406

Chemical degradation	
208

Catalyst agglomeration (Pt band)	Catalyst oxidation/dissolution/reduction	
34 and 304



Gas diffusion layer	Increase in mass transport resistance	Continuous start/stop cycling	
305

Loss in conductivity	Material degradation	
208

Deterioration of water management	—	
319 and 335



Bipolar plate	Corrosion	Nature of the material	
236 and 244

Acidic environment	
208

Passivation	Channel coverage with corrosion products	
245



Phosphoric acid	Degradation	Material breakdown due to high temperature and voltage	
321

Reaction with the catalyst, water and impurities	
292 and 407

Leaching	Flow out with water at lower temperature	
320


 	Fig. 19  (a) Boxplots of crack width: a region under the channel (blue) and under the ribs (red). The bars specify the minimum and maximum values, and the boxes show the quartiles of the distribution. The mean values are plotted as dots inside the boxes; (b) radiography of an 8.5 mm × 4.5 mm section of a HT-PEMFC at 600 mA cm−2 with the channel region (blue) and land region (red) marked manually; (c) local region under the channel (1.9 mm × 1.4 mm) with morphological changes at 600 mA cm−2. The image was normalized to the OCV image, then rescaled. Reproduced with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
θO + θOH + θ* = 1	(21)
Itotal = IORR + ICdl	(22)
IORR = FSECSA(r2 + r3)	(23)
	(24)

 	Fig. 20  Schematic of various methods used for humidifying the reactant gases in fuel cells: (a) direct humidification by bubbling of gases on water; (b) humidification by spraying fine water droplets into the reactant stream; (c) membrane based humidification bottle; (d) enthalpy wheel for heat and humidity exchange; (e) membrane based humidity exchange from the exit gas stream; and (f) transfer of humidity to the reactant stream using a wick. Reproduced with permission from ref. 376. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) CFD results for relative humidity (left) and temperature (right). The squared and the trapezoid channel belong to the cathode and anode, respectively, and the region in between represents the GDL and the MEA; (b) results comparison of relative humidity (RH) at the cathode inlet, without dual recirculation (theoretical calculation) and with dual recirculation (experiment). (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 378. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 374. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) External cooled stack with pipes; (b) experimental setup to validate CFD simulations; and (c) cell structure to measure temperature by a using thermograph. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 381. Copyright 2012, American Society of Mechanical Engineers. (c) Reproduced from ref. 283. E3S Web of Conferences (Public access).	 

 	Fig. 23  Current density distribution in the lateral direction in the middle of the cell with different channel width at Vcell = 0.6 V and T = 433 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 301. Copyright 2006, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of the system setup; (b) polarization curves on hydrogen at 155 and 175 °C; and (c) polarization curves on hydrogen and reformate gas at 160 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 358. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  Diagram of fuel cell composition and flow path: (a) straight cell; (b) serpentine geometry, reactants flow from the bottom left inlet to the top right outlet; (c) locations marked with crosses represent inside-channel (white), under-channel (blue), and under-rib (black) sites; and (d) components of the fuel cell model, including air, fuel, membrane, and bi-polar plates; comparisons of polarization curves from numerical and experimental results at a H2 to air stoichiometry of (e) λ = 2/2 and (f) λ = 2/6. The cell was operated at a constant current density of 200 mA cm−2 and 433 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2012, American Society of Mechanical Engineers.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a and b) 3D CFD model of the HT-PEMFC short stack with marked flow pathways of the anode (red), cathode (blue) and cooling (yellow); (c) flow arrangement in the stack-flow pathway of reactants in co-flow orientation and (d) flow pathway of reactants in counter-flow orientation; simulated current density for i = 0.6 A cm−2 for (e) reformate/air and (f) hydrogen/air (stoichiometric ratios λa/c = 1.2/2.0, cell voltage: Vreformate = 0.430 V; VH2 = 0.527 V). Reproduced with permission from ref. 384. Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic diagram of the HT-PEMFC system used for CHP generation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 392. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 
Rohmic = −0.0001667Tcell + 0.2289	(25)
Rdiff = 0.4306 − 0.0008203Tcell	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
ηohmic = iRohmic	(29)
Vcell = V0 − ηa − ηc − ηohmic	(30)
Wcell = Vcelli	(31)
Vstack = Vcellncells	(32)
Pstack = AcellncellsWcell	(33)
	(34)

 	Fig. 28  (a) Total installation cost of the HT-PEMFC system across various system sizes and production rates; (b) 1 kW and (c) 100 kW HT-PEMFC system installation price breakdown by component. Reproduced from ref. 401. Copyright 2015, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) (Open access).	 
mL	Millilitre
μm	Micrometer

B
	Constant
cm	Centimetre
atm	Atmospheric
g	Gram

K
	Slope
kW	Kilowatt
m	Meter
mg	Milligram
mm	Millimeter
MPa	Mega pascals
mW	Milliwatt
mΩ	Milli Ohm
g l−1	Gram per litre
nm	Nanometer
Pa s	Pascal seconds
V	Volt
W	Watt
kJ	Kilo Joule
wt%	Weight percent
h	Hour
mA	Milli ampere
mS	Milli siemens
A	Ampere
μV h−1	Microvolt per hour
3D	Three dimensional

E
DC
	DC output energy

F
	Faraday's constant = 96485 C mol−1
DC	Direct current

I
D
	Current density on the disk electrode, mA cm−2
$	USD (United States dollar)

v
	Kinematic velocity of the electrolyte solution, m s−1

C
O
	Concentration of dissolved oxygen, m−3

I
R
	Current density on the ring electrode, mA cm−2
cmgeo−2	“Geo” means geometrical area of the electrode

ω
	Angular velocity

I

k

	Kinematic current density, mA cm−2

η
fcs
	Net efficiency of the fuel cell system

N
	Collection efficiency of the electrode
°C	Degree Celsius

Q
H2
	Lower heating value of input hydrogen
Cdl	Double layer capacitance

D
O
	Diffusion coefficient of O2, m2 s−1
Oads	Adsorbed oxygen
mgpt cm−2	Milligram of platinum per centimeter square
μA	Micro ampere
Pa	Pascal
S	Siemens
N cm−2	Newton per centimeter square
ABPBI	Poly(2,5-benzimidazole)
AST	Accelerated stress test
BoP	Balance of plant
BPPs	Bipolar plates
CB/Pt	Platinum supported carbon black
CCM	Catalyst coated membrane
CCS	Catalyst coated substrate
CFD	Computational fluid dynamics
CHP	Combined heat and power systems
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
ECSA	Electrochemically active surface area
EG	Expanded graphite
ETFE	Poly(ethylene-alt-tetrafluoroethylene)
FeSA-G	Iron single atom crystals on graphene
GDL	Gas diffusion layer
HOR	Hydrogen oxidation reaction
HT-PEM	High temperature polymer electrolyte membrane
HT-PEMFCs	High temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
ICR	Interfacial contact resistance
IL	Ionic liquid

I–V
	Current–voltage
LT-PEMFCs	Low temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
M–N–C	Transition metals supported on nitrogen doped carbon
MEA	Membrane electrode assembly
MPL	Microporous layer
MWCNTs	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes
NanoPC	Nanoporous carbon
NWD	Net water drag
OCV	Open circuit voltage
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PA	Phosphoric acid
PA-PBI	Phosphoric acid doped polybenzimidazole
PBI	Polybenzimidazole
PEM	Polymer electrolyte membrane
PEMFCs	Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
PFSA	Perfluorosulfonic acid
PGM	Platinum group metal
PIL	Protic ionic liquid
Pt/C	Platinum supported carbon
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
PVPA	Poly(vinylphosphonic acid)
PyPBI	Pyridine containing polybenzimidazole
RDE	Rotating disk electrode
RHE	Reversible hydrogen electrode
RRDE	Rotating ring disk electrode
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SHPs	Sulfonated hydrocarbon polymers
SSG	Sealed graphite composite
US DOE	United States Department of Energy
UV	Ultraviolet
WGSR	Water gas shift reactor

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
