Dendritic fibrous nano-particles (DFNPs): rising stars of mesoporous materials   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09815H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09815H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5111-5152Dendritic fibrous nano-particles (DFNPs): rising stars of mesoporous materials†

        
          
            Yabin 
            Wang‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Du‡
*b, 
      
        
          
            Zhong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shihui 
            Shi
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Haiming 
            Lv
          
          
        
      a
aShaanxi Key Laboratory of Chemical Reaction Engineering, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yan'an University, Yan'an 716000, Shaanxi, P. R. China. E-mail: ybw_bingerbingo@126.com
bResearch Center for Bioengineering and Sensing Technology, School of Chemistry & Biological Engineering, University of Science & Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: duxin@ustb.edu.cn
cKey Laboratory of Comprehensive and Highly Efficient Utilization of Salt Lake Resources, Qinghai Institute of Salt Lakes, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining 810008, China
Received 
      11th October 2018
    , Accepted 4th January 2019First published on 7th January 2019AbstractDendritic fibrous nano-particles (DFNPs) with three-dimensional (3D) center-radial channels and hierarchical pores have unique structural characteristics including open pore nanochannels, highly accessible internal spaces, large pore volumes, etc., compared with conventional mesoporous materials. Diverse guest species (such as functional molecules or nano-particles (NPs)) could be easily transported through the radial porous architectures, achieving their efficient loading or reaction with the chemically active sites on these nanochannels. During the last decade, silica-based DFNPs have attracted considerable attention and experienced rapid development in terms of synthesis techniques, formation mechanisms, functionalization approaches, and application fields. A majority of investigations have demonstrated that silica-based DFNPs exhibit inherent structural superiorities when they serve as platforms to construct novel nanocatalysts, adsorbent materials, and delivery systems for genes, proteins, or drugs. Therefore, DFNPs may be ideal alternatives as brand-new rising stars. For the first time, this comprehensive review will provide a critical survey on the development of the DFNP family (such as silica-, titania-, carbon-, bioactive glass-, silica & titania-, silica & aluminum-based ones, etc.), including its origin, structural characteristics, commonly used structural models, novel structures (hollow, yolk–shell, Janus-like, etc.), promising applications, and so forth. It is sincerely expected that this summary and in-depth discussion could give materials scientists and chemists certain inspiration to accelerate the DFNP family's booming evolution.Yabin WangYabin Wang received his BS and MS degrees in Applied Chemistry from Northwest Agriculture&Forestry University (NWUAF) in 2011, and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) in 2017, respectively. He is currently a teacher at Yan'an University. His research interests are focused on fabrication and application of dendritic mesoporous nanoparticles, as well as synthesis and application of triazinedithiolsilane compounds. He has co-authored more than 30 papers in refereed journals, including Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Nanoscale, Sensors & Actuators B Chemical, and Corrosion Science.Xin DuXin Du received his BS degree from Nankai University in 2007 and PhD degree from Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2012. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Adelaide. Dr Du now is an associate professor at the University of Science & Technology Beijing. His research mainly focuses on nanoporous materials for drug delivery, gene delivery, catalysis, and new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 80 papers in refereed journals, including Advanced Materials, Advanced Functional Materials, Small, Biomaterials, and Journal of Materials Chemistry A, as the first or corresponding author (over 2000 citation times, H-index: 26).Zhong LiuZhong Liu received his BS degree from the China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) in 2007, and obtained a PhD degree from the Institute of Coal Chemistry (CAS) in 2012. He is an associate researcher at the Qinghai Institute of Salt Lakes (CAS). His research mainly focuses on the preparation of functional materials which are designed for separating useful ions from salt lakes.Shihui ShiShi-Hui Shi received his MS degree in Organic Chemistry from Lanzhou University in 2012, and PhD degree in Theoretical and Informational Chemistry from Université Paris Diderot-Paris 7 in 2016, respectively. He is right now a teacher and researcher at Yan'an University. His research topics include modification of electrodes, electrochemical biosensors and electro-organic synthesis.Haiming LvHaiming Lv received his MS degree from Inner Mongolia University in 2009, BS degree from Jilin University in 2012, and PhD from the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) in 2017, respectively. His research interests include the development of novel nanostructured materials for applications in electrochromism and electrochemistry.
1 Introduction
Mesoporous materials have drawn continuous attention because of their attractive physicochemical properties including large specific surface areas, high porosities, low densities, high mechanical stabilities, low toxicities, etc.1 Furthermore, beyond traditional mesopores, hierarchical (multilevel) structures have become a hot topic recently. The enhanced properties imparted by the multilevel and mesoporous structures enable them to be applied as ideal scaffolds or carriers in catalysis, selective adsorption, CO2 capture, separation, and other promising fields. Such typological materials with high permeability and low toxicity could be especially utilized as support hosts to confine guest species (such as biomacromolecules, proteins, genes, and enzymes) for theranostics.2 There exist silica-based (silicious) and non-silicious mesoporous materials. The latter generally includes mesoporous metal oxides like TiO2 and Al2O3, mesoporous metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), mesoporous carbon, mesoporous bioactive glass, and so on.
Taking silica-based mesoporous materials as examples, since the creation of MCM-41 (Mobil Composite Material) with ordered hexagonal mesopores,3 a great deal of studies have been persistently devoted to theoretical views of mesoporous systems, preparation strategies, characterization methods, and available applications. SBA-15 (Santa Barbara, USA) with tunable large mesopores, which was pioneeringly synthesized by Zhao et al. through triblock polyoxyalkylene copolymers as a pore-forming agent, reached another peak in the development history of silica-based mesoporous materials.4 Later in 2010, Polshettiwar et al. prepared dendritic fibrous silica-based nanospheres with well-defined mesostructures based on a cyclohexane emulsion system.5 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 1a–d show that the nanospheres were monodisperse and had a dendrimer-like structure with center-radial fibrous pore channels. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images in Fig. 1e–m demonstrate that vast pores exerted by the squeezing of the nanowrinkles appeared on the mesoporous sphere's surface. It was easy to understand that radial fibrous SiO2 nanowrinkles gave rise to the formation of center-radial pores with gradually increased pore sizes from the particle interior to the surface. The thicknesses of the wrinkled nanosheets ranged from 4 to 14.2 nm (Fig. 1l, m and S1,† randomly calibrated). The irregular shapes of the quasi-pores and their diameters from 10.9 nm to 35.2 nm (Fig. 1l, m and S1,† randomly calibrated) were obviously uniform, revealing that dendritic fibrous silica nanospheres were disordered in comparison to the ordered mesoporous silica-based materials like MCM and SBA series. NPs with this or very similar structural features were denoted as DFNPs. Materials with this specific architecture have been attracting considerable attention, and plentiful groundbreaking findings have been achieved in the last decade. Titania-, carbon-, bioactive glass-based, and other hybrid NPs have been successively fabricated. The DFNP family has also experienced an evolution from a simple single structure to complex multilevel ones, and an expansion of application fields. However, some issues still need to be profoundly shed light on.
 Fig. 1  TEM (a–d) and SEM (e–g) images of silica-based nanospheres with dendritic fibrous morphologies prepared using a cyclohexane emulsion system. SEM images of the as-prepared nanospheres calcined at 400 °C (h), 550 °C (i), 800 °C (j), and 950 °C (k). SEM images of the corresponding fiber thickness before (l) and after (m) calcination.5 Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010. 
Therefore, based on lots of references and some of our findings, an attempt was made in this review to probe into the following aspects of DFNPs, mainly including: (i) naming rules. First, abundant appellations have contributed to describe silica-based mesoporous materials of dendritic fibrous morphologies up to now, such as dendritic mesoporous silica nanoparticles (DMSNs),6–14 dendritic mesoporous silica nanospheres (DMSNs),15–18 fibrous mesoporous silica microspheres (FMSMs),19,20 wrinkled silica nanoparticles (WSNs),21–27 wrinkled silica nanospheres (WSNs),28 wrinkled mesoporous silica (WMS),29–32 wrinkled mesoporous silica nanoparticles (WMSNs),33,34 radial-like mesoporous silica (RMS),35,36 fibrous silicon dioxide spheres (FSSs),37 fibrous silica nanoparticles or nanospheres (FSNs),38 dendrimer-like mesoporous silica nanoparticles with hierarchical pores (HPSNs),39,40 hierarchically and radially mesoporous (HRM),41 hierarchically structured spherical mesoporous nanoflowers (HSMNFs),42 wrinkle structured periodic mesoporous organosilica (PMO),43 mesostructured silica nanoparticles (MSNs),44–47 qualifiers including “dendritic”,48–51 “fibrous”,52–60 and so on. Actually, these names described mesoporous silica nanospheres of dendritic fibrous textures with similar or identical architectural morphologies. Second, it is favorable for denoting non-silicious NPs of this type in advance to avoid the probable rise of disunities in the future. Third, as DFNPs with complex architectures (hollow, yolk–shell, multi-shell, Janus-like, etc.) have shown up, their already emerged callings are likely to be more promiscuous. (ii) Further insights into structural characteristics. Their secondary structures from the multilevel architectures would be emphasized, including nanofibers (nanowrinkles), macropores, and micropores. Commonly used morphological models, a number of easily confused structures, and some biomimetic appellations would be introduced to achieve a better understanding of DFNP architectures. (iii) Non-silicious DFNPs. Most importantly, this article summarizes recent progress and achievements in titania-, carbon-, bioactive glass-, silica & titania-based DFNPs, etc., covering synthetic methods, current applications, and future developments, for the first time. Their preparation routes and architectural features would be intensively compared with those of silica-based nanospheres. Throughout the review, we put emphasis on similar or easily confused textures of some other NPs. Finally, an outlook will be presented on their development and challenges in the near future.
2 Dendritic fibrous nano-particles (DFNPs)
2.1 Evolution of DFNPs

2.1.1 Groundbreaking research studies. 
The timeline of DFNP development is summarized in Fig. 2. Earlier in 2008, Cai and coworkers tentatively employed tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as a silicon source, diethyl ether as a co-solvent, hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant, and water as a solution phase to prepare mesostructured silica with diverse morphologies.61 In this system, the amount of CTAB was kept constant while the volume proportions of diethyl ether to water were varied. The resultant non-stable interface of the biphasic oil–water system, termed the oil–water two-phase (OWTP) system, could yield silica particles with six well-defined morphologies, including multi-lamellar fragments, spherical particles, vesicles, bicontinuously phased fragments, slices, and crystalline particles. Among the three kinds of spherical particles, nanospheres with radially ordered structures were formed under weak alkaline conditions. What is more, wrinkled slices and irregular vesicular structures appeared to co-occur, including helical structured wrinkles, randomly aggregated wrinkled vesicles, and larger sheet-like aggregates of wrinkled vesicles. Although the OWTP system could produce DFNPs, it gave rise to multiform structures in the final products.61
 Fig. 2  Timeline of DFNP development (♣ and ▲ at the upper right corners of the rectangular frames represent research groups of Vivek Polshettiwar and Dongyuan Zhao, respectively. Different background colors indicate different material-based NPs with dendritic fibrous morphologies). 
The DFNP family stepped into a milestone year in 2010 as two influential research groups successively developed silica-based dendritic fibrous nanospheres or similar structures by different facile techniques. Polshettiwar et al. initially reported the synthesis of silica-based nanospheres with dendritic fibrous features using an emulsion system, and defined the obtained nanospheres as KCC-1 which was an abbreviation of KAUST (King Abdullah University of Science and Technology) Catalysis Center.5 Due to the simple synthetic route and the adjustable sizes both in internal mesopores (ca. 2 to 30 nm) and outer nanospheres (as small as 170 nm to as large as 1120 nm),62,63 KCC-1 was recognized, accepted, and adopted by the majority of research teams.64–90 Until recently, the artificers rechristened KCC-1 as dendritic fibrous nano-silica (DFNS) for the sake of its universality.91–99
Another group with Xin Du as the core researcher also made great contributions to silica-based nanospheres which have a similar structure to that of DFNS.39,44,100–110 They fabricated silica nanospheres using ethyl ether emulsion in 2010,101 and defined them as hierarchically mesoporous silica nanoparticles (HMSNs) later in the same year.107 This ethyl ether emulsion could be considered to be an evolution of the aforementioned OWTP system.61 A simple adjustment of the reaction temperature or stirring rate in the research system was corroborated to be an effective way to controllably regulate the center-radial pore sizes from several nm to hundreds of nm with particle sizes from ca. 100 to 1100 nm.39 It was the first groundbreaking regulation towards center-radial large pore sizes in such large ranges, opening up the possibility of anchoring bigger macromolecules or NPs onto the internal channels of HMSNs. Another description of “dendrimer-like silica nanoparticles with hierarchical pores” (HPSNs) for HMSN texture was put forward by Du Xin et al. later.39,44,104 In the same year, Jiao's team synthesized silica-based nanospheres with a similar dendritic fibrous structure by a facile two step method based on ethyl ether emulsion as well, and employed them as ideal candidates for potential biomedical applications.111 The as-prepared nanospheres were termed “Chrysanthemum-like” which was initiated by a biomimetic perspective for describing the architecture. Afterwards, other qualifiers such as Echinometra mathaei-shaped,112 dandelion-type,113–115Hydrangea-like,37 and nanoflowers42,116,117 were successively applied to describe nanospheres with similar dendritic fibrous textures.
More and more research workers paid close attention to silica-based dendritic fibrous nanospheres in the subsequent three years (2010–2013), including not only silica-based DFNPs with simple structures,20,25,118–122 but also the ones with composite multifunctional textures, such as magnetic core–shell Fe3O4@DFNS68,123 and nonmagnetic core–shell TS-1@DFNS.69,74 Until the latter half of the year 2013, a novel type of carbon-based dendritic fibrous nanosphere was pioneeringly reported by Yi et al.112 The center-radial pores of DFNS spheres as hard templates were filled with phenol formaldehyde (PR) resin from the inside to the outside; then in situ polymerization of the carbon precursors took place, and the so-called Echinometra mathaei-like mesoporous carbons (carbon nano-Echinometra mathaei, CNE) were formed by nanocasting the replicas. Surprisingly, unlike the traditional replication process, CNE possessed the same morphology as that of the DFNS template, as a result of the shrinkage of the PR resin after incorporation into the pores (this exclusive phenomenon will be discussed in Section 3.3.3). Noble metal Pt was introduced into CNE channels to form a composite CNE/Pt nanocatalyst. In the hydrolytic hydrogenation of cellulose, the 3D open pores of CNE/Pt facilitated the access of cellulose oligomers to the active sites of the composite catalysts.112 In addition, early in 2012, Cao's group developed a facile one-pot approach to synthesize hierarchically structured silica or carbon NPs via polymer–silica-surfactant (PSS) composites.124 The as-prepared products included the tubular, hollow dendritic fibrous, and the yolk–shell dendritic fibrous ones. Even though this method could not produce solid dendritic fibrous nano-carbon spheres with the similar architectures shown in Fig. 1, the as-prepared hollow and the yolk–shell dendritic fibrous nano-carbon spheres possessed potential application values. Thus, this method will be significantly introduced in Section 5.2.
In 2014, Chen's group synthesized bioactive glass-based DFNPs by a modified KCC-1 synthesis route,125 where the emulsion method was combined with gelation-induced phase separation technology, and calcium nitrate was added as a calcium precursor. The obtained radial mesoporous bioactive glass (rMBG) spheres were further modified with aminopropyl groups to improve their affinities for loading DNA. The functionalized rMBG spheres acted as promising non-viral vehicles to deliver target genes for bone repair and regeneration. In the same year, the distinguished mesoporous material scientist Dongyuan Zhao and coworkers successfully synthesized silica-based DFNPs by an original biphase stratification approach, and denoted the products as three dimensional dendritic mesoporous silica nanospheres (3D dendritic MSNSs).126 The greatest success of this technique lies in the generation of hierarchical meso-structures with multi-generational, tunable center-radial, and dendritic mesopore channels by stepwise chemical reactions. This breakthrough could not only tune the silica-shell layers from ca. 2.8 to 13 nm and tailor the thickness of each generation from ca. 5 to 180 nm by choosing appropriate conditions, but also prepare other functional core–shell mesoporous materials such as (Ag nanocube)@(3D dendritic MSNSs) and Au@(3D dendritic MSNSs) composites. In a word, the biphase stratification approach could accurately regulate pore and particle sizes of silica-based dendritic fibrous nanospheres step by step. Their subsequent investigations employed “dendritic-mSiO2” to represent the morphologies.127,128 The same research group made a scientific breakthrough to develop 3D open mesoporous TiO2 microspheres with ca. 800 nm diameter, well-controlled radially oriented hexagonal mesochannels, and crystalline anatase walls by means of a simple evaporation-driven oriented assembly (EDOA) method in 2015. Up to now, this is the unique state-of-the-art technique that can create pure titania-based nanospheres with the most similar structural architecture to that of the spherical DFNPs, which opens up the opportunity of tailoring the orientation of inorganic building blocks in assembling various mesoporous materials.129
As a unique category of mesoporous silica materials, mesoporous organosilica nanoparticles (MONs) contain both organic and inorganic moieties in their hybrid silica frameworks. MONs could be chemically functionalized by target reagents through the inserted organic groups.130–134 This remarkable distinctive feature with well-dispersed chemical functionalities endows silica with some unique enhanced properties and performances. In addition, the existence of the organic fragments and their neighboring silanol groups (SiOH) offered the possibility of synthesizing well-defined bifunctional structures.135 Yu et al. made a significant contribution to the development of dendritic mesoporous organosilica nanoparticles (DMONs) since 2016 (ref. 136–140) on the basis of their advanced scientific skills to synthesize DMSNs10,11,14,141–145 and MONs.146
Although Polshettiwar's team manufactured silica & titania-hybrid DFNPs using KCC-1 as a hard template via an atomic layer deposition technique earlier in 2016,79 such an expensive and complex process hindered its development. Lately in 2017, this team broke the bottleneck and coated TiO2 on the dendritic fibers of DFNPs using a simple and sustainable solution deposition technique.92 Unlike conventional mesoporous silica & titania photocatalysts in which the activity declined with the increased TiO2 loading because of surface area reduction, silica & titania-based DFNP hybrids could exhibit outstanding catalytic performance because of their open fibrous morphologies even at the highest TiO2 loading of ca. 30 wt%.


2.1.2 Comprehension of “dendritic” and “fibrous”. 
High-resolution TEM provided overall morphologies and structural organizations, while SEM solely revealed structural details like pores and their shapes (Fig. 1). The callings of “dendritic” and “fibrous” were virtually inspired by TEM imaging to a great extent. The “dendrimer-like” and “dendritic” were first adopted to depict silica nanospheres of this unique texture by Du et al. (Fig. 3a (ref. 108)), followed by Polshettiwar's team (Fig. 3b (ref. 63)), Zhao's team,126–128 and other groups.8,40,147 It is necessary to simply describe the imaging principle of TEM. When an electron beam transmits through one sample, an image would be formed by the interaction of the electrons with the specimen and further magnification. The electrons penetrate DFNPs from top to bottom, giving rise to sample images with relatively bright edges and dark centers, because the transmission thickness is thinner at edges than those around the centers. Fig. 3a–c clearly confirmed the imaging principle, indicating that electrons encounter more DFNP skeletons around the centers. We can perceive that the topographic characteristics of spherical DFNPs in Fig. 3a tended toward dendrimers,108 while the morphological feature in Fig. 3c was similar to radially fibrous.148 DFNPs in Fig. 3b simultaneously possessed obvious dendritic and radially fibrous architectures.63 Most DFNPs fall into the configurable state shown in Fig. 3b, which can be tuned by the channels' sizes from extremely large (dendritic state) to very small (radially fibrous state). As a consequence, it is understandable why the qualifiers of “dendritic” and “fibrous” were utilized to describe their topographies in the meantime.91–93 However, it is not compulsory to simultaneously use “dendritic” and “fibrous” for describing this type of NP, because some nanospheres fall into the extreme state of “dendritic” or “fibrous”. Single utilization of “dendritic” or “fibrous” would be more suitable in those cases. For example, dendritic mesoporous silica NPs were widely utilized by Du et al.,102 Zhao et al.,126 and other teams,15 because the as-synthesized products were very similar to the “dendritic state”, and “fibrous” was also utilized alone.38,60 Nevertheless, the initial use of “dendritic” was to describe the textures of long stems with symmetrical branching structures, which are similar to plants. For example, dendritic Ag nanostructures have been successfully prepared and their topographies resembled plant branches.149 In fact, the significance of using “dendritic” was sublimated by Du and coworkers with inspiration from organic dendrimers.102,104 Branched organic macromolecules constitute spherical dendrimers with 3D branching nanoscale architectures. The unique architectures with a large number of functional groups enable organic dendrimers to either directly conjugate or encapsulate therapeutic molecules as payloads. Dendrimer-based delivery systems have been verified to be very promising theranostics for biomedical applications. By analogizing with dendrimers,102,150 each iterative grafting step was referred to as a generation (G). Fig. 3d illustrates the progressive architectural dendrimers with G from 0 to 4. As two dimensional (2D) dendrimers with G of 4 are overlaid to partially simulate TEM imaging of the corresponding 3D state, the as-obtained scheme agrees well with Fig. 3a–c.
 Fig. 3  The structural transformation of a DFNP from a quasi dendritic state108 (a) to a quasi radially fibrous state148 (c) through an intermediate state of “dendritic fibrous”63 (b). The forming process of a dendrimer by iterative grafting steps (d). Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018. 
In SEM images (Fig. 1e–m), superficial architectural features could be straightforwardly observed, leading to different modifiers like wrinkles (or wrinkled), lamellae (or lamellar), bicontinuous state, etc. Strictly speaking, the conventional fibrous architecture observed by SEM only manifests that the length of a natural or synthetic substance is significantly longer than its width. For instance, Haller's group manufactured fibrous silica on electrically heated platinum surfaces by exposing Pt substrates to nitrogen-diluted silicon tetrafluoride (SiF4) and water vapor earlier in 1961.151 The as-obtained fibrous silica products had circular cross-sections without any visible indication of faces. Their diameters ranged from less than 1 to 50 μm, while lengths from 10 μm to millimeters. Wang et al. fabricated papilla-like magnetic particles from iron microspheres via one-step thermal oxidation.152 High-density nanofibers radially grew on nanosphere surfaces. The nanofibers on iron microparticles were narrow at the tip with diameters of about 47.1 ± 10.9 nm, and wide at the root with sizes of about 189.5 ± 35.3 nm. The length of the nanofibers from the tip to the root was 2.29 ± 0.40 μm. As a consequence, only the combination of SEM and TEM can present the whole structural information of DFNPs.
Furthermore, Suendo et al. revisited silica NPs with various morphologies via the line profile method,64 which revealed the nanospheres' morphologies by quantitatively analyzing their TEM images that were transformed into line profiles with gray value intensities. The corresponding values were extracted along the preselected lines across the TEM images. Nanospheres with unique topologies of nonporous or dense, ordered mesoporous, hollow, core in hollow (rattle or egg yolk), hollow with hierarchical pores, multi-shell, and DFNS were readily distinguished via this methodology. It is worth noting that Yu et al. pioneeringly utilized electron tomography (ET) to investigate the structures of the as-prepared DFNPs through their slices in recent years.136,142,144,153 This technique provided direct observation of their architectural textures.

2.2 Further recognition of DFNPs
It is urgent to precisely define these kinds of NPs with dendritic fibrous topographies owing to their dramatic development. Taking silica-based materials as examples, DFNPs will specifically evolve into DFNS,91,92 originating from the acronym of dendritic fibrous nano-silica. However, DFNS was not adopted in common because multifarious synthesis methods, sundry morphologies, and extensive application fields endow these nano-silica particles with abundant aliases. For example, the aforementioned DMSNs6,8,10,154 or DSNs155 merely manifest that these NPs have micro- or nano-scopic dendritic architectures without any other structural information, giving rise to loss of the characteristic fibrous morphology. Up to now, lots of definitions named by different research groups accordingly appeared, such as the aforementioned FMSMs, FSS, WSN, WMS, RMS, and so on. Even though these names described similar or identical NPs with dendritic fibrous morphologies, they were always confused with each other. Three main reasons account for this disunity. First, the aforementioned three influential groups were denoted DFNS on the basis of their distinctive backgrounds, being KCC-1, HMSNs (or HPSNs) and 3D-dendritic MSNSs (or dendritic-mSiO2). Second, DFNS particles explored by disparate techniques or research teams possessed subtle architectural differences, which potentially stimulated the inventors to define them as novel types. Last but not least, as analyzed in the prior section, most names of DFNS were given from a perspective of TEM images, including “dendritic”, “fibrous”, and “radial”, while other names were enabled by SEM images like “wrinkled”, “lamellar”, etc. In addition, it is evident that the word “mesoporous” was not applied to portray such a type, although the majority of DFNP pores were located between 2 and 50 nm,8,9,45,62,113,115,122,155–158 which falls into diameter values of mesoporous materials which the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has classified.159

2.2.1 Redefinition of DFNPs. 
Considering a more significant contribution of Polshettiwar's team to KCC-1 and their influence in this field, herein, we follow their naming rule of DFNS.91–95,160 NPs with various dendritic fibrous morphologies eventually can be denoted as DFNPs as shown in our review title. It is noteworthy that we depict nanoparticles rather than nanospheres for two reasons. First of all, most DFNPs are spherical, while novel particle shapes like shuttlecock26 and ellipsoid69 were invented as this subject developed. Unless otherwise specified in this review, DFNPs refer to the nanospheres. Second, the acronyms of “dendritic fibrous nano-silica” and “dendritic fibrous nano-spheres” are the same DFNS which may cause chaos and confusion. Non-silicious NPs with similar topologies thus could be described as dendritic fibrous nano-titania (DFNT),161 dendritic fibrous nano-carbon (DFNC), and dendritic fibrous nano-bioactive glass (DFNBG). Some other hybrids correspondingly emerge as dendritic fibrous nano-silica & titania (DFNST), dendritic fibrous nano-silica & carbon (DFNSC), etc.


2.2.2 Research progress of DFNPs. 
The interest in DFNPs from 2008 has rapidly risen for DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types. Up to the end of September in 2018, according to literature retrieval from the RSC, ACS, Wiley, Elsevier, Springer and CNKI (Chinese National Knowledge Infrastructure), the number of officially published documents of DFNPs was ca. 270, covering articles, dissertations, patents, and so on. Among them, ca. 200 literature reports specifically probe into application fields, and the other 70 involve the synthesis mechanism or other aspects.
As is seen from statistical analysis (Fig. 4a), the subject of DFNPs gradually developed from 2008 and rapidly expanded since 2014, where there are about 86.53% records for DFNS, 4.48% for DFNT, 6.12% for DFNC, 2.04% for DFNBG, and 0.81% for other types (Fig. 4b). Only DFNS was focussed on before 2012; thereafter, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and hybrids like DFNSC began to develop year by year. Compared with DFNS, other types of DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, etc. were slightly evolved until the end of 2011 (Fig. 4c). DFNPs were adopted in numerous application fields (Fig. 4d), including catalysis,7,16,18,21,22,30,31,41,65,66,70–79,82,84–87,89,92,95,108,112–114,116,119–121,147,157,162–171 cancer and tumour therapy,11,19,32–34,40,43,139,155,172–175 stroke therapy,176 drug delivery,10,20,67,123,174,177,178 gene and protein delivery (like enzyme),10,63,104,125,142,174,179 water treatment (heavy metal, anthracene, etc.),80,88,117,180–182 super-wetting surfaces,57,103,109,110,140,183 chromatography,48,49,184,185 fluorescence probes,81,118,186 CO2 capture,77,187,188 dye-sensitized solar cells and supercapacitors,23,24,37 bioimaging,40,127 photonic crystals,97,189 chemical mechanical planarization (CMP),190,191 photochromism,94,160 composite materials,158 chemiluminescene,90 heat storage,35 and so on. Catalysis attracted the most attention and accounted for ca. 39%. Applications in biology reached about 32%, including therapies, protein and drug deliveries.
 Fig. 4  Officially published articles, dissertations, and patents of DFNPs retrieved from the RSC, ACS, Wiley, Elsevier, Springer and CNKI from 2008 to 2018-09, including DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types. (a) The percentages of published literature about DFNPs from 2008 to 2018-07. (b) The percentages of published literature in regard to DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types of DFNPs during this period. (c) The percentages of published literature with respect to DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types each year after their successful preparations. (d) The percentages of various applications for DFNPs. The total statistical number of published literature studies about DFNPs is approximately 270, among which circa 200 documents specifically involve application fields and other 70 ones are related to the synthesis mechanism or others. 


2.2.3 Notable factors about DFNPs' architectures. 
2.2.3.1 Nanowrinkles or nanofibers. 
Nanowrinkles or nanofibers are foundational building blocks to construct DFNPs. Fig. 5 exhibits some semi-finished or intermediate products of DFNS prepared using a modified cyclohexane emulsion system.148 When DFNS spheres were developed with a small quantity of chemical reagents, center-radial textures could be apparently observed from a semi-finished product (Fig. 5a,a′). As the content of raw chemical reagents increased, wrinkle structures of the intermediate products grew along the center-radial texture (Fig. 5b,b′). As the construction of the semi-finished product was close to that of the ideal one (Fig. 5c,c′), the interior core was surrounded by wrinkles. These results indicated that (1) nanowrinkles or nanofibers along the center-radial directions could be regarded as building blocks to construct the framework of DFNS spheres; (2) the spatial arrangements of these nanowrinkles could constitute the center-radial pore channels with gradually increased pore sizes from the particle center to the particle surface; (3) the 3D center-radial mesoporous structures effectively prevented the overlap of the nanofibers or wrinkles.102 Nearly all spherical DFNP products are always accompanied by center-radial wrinkles, including KCC-1, DMSN, DSNs, FMSMs, FSS, WSN, WMS, RMS, HPSNs, HRM, HSMNF, HSMNF, PMO, MSN and MPS. Thus, it was acceptable and reasonable to omit these modifiers, including center-radial wrinkle structures,102 center-radial wrinkles, wrinkled,21,22,24,25etc.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of some semi-finished or intermediate products of DFNS prepared using a modified cyclohexane emulsion system.148 Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018. 
Interestingly and inspiringly, Moon et al. investigated the phase behaviours of the microemulsion systems used to synthesize DFNS spheres, and surveyed the influences of the phases on the product's structures.26 Ternary systems were classified into four types according to the numbers and types of phases in the equilibrium state, i.e., three multiphase systems containing a microemulsion layer (Winsor I–III) and one single-phase microemulsion (Winsor IV).192 The Winsor I system constitutes an oil-in-water and an extra oil layer. The Winsor II system is a biphasic system with a water-in-oil microemulsion layer and an extra water layer. The Winsor III system possesses a bicontinuous microemulsion phase in the middle layer of the mixture where most of the surfactant, water, and oil are included. For microemulsion systems studied therein, the internal morphologies and interparticle connective structures could be adjusted using various types of microemulsion systems as structure-directing templates (Fig. 6). When the mixture component of water, surfactant, and oil was surfactant-rich over 15% in the weight ratio, both water and oil were sufficiently dissolved, forming a single-phase microemulsion. The resultant type IV caused the formation of MSNs without nanofibers. As the mixture had a surfactant-poor area less than 15%, the formed multiphase systems consisted of a microemulsion layer. The extra separated solvent layers were developed and labelled Winsor I–III types. With the increase of oil from 1.5 to 7.5 in the weight ratio throughout Winsor II and III (Fig. 6a–d, where the ratio of water to surfactant was 7.5:1), the independent mesopores of silica nanospheres began to gradually interconnect and convert into the wrinkled structures. As the weight ratio of water decreased from 7.5 to 1.0 (the weight ratio of surfactant to oil was kept at 1:10), DFNS spheres emerged as shown in Fig. 6e and f based on Winsor III, and the products were transformed into interconnected bulk gel with wrinkle structures based on Winsor I. This obvious disappearance of the spherical structure could be observed and is illustrated in Fig. 6j. The degrees of freedom defined by Gibbs' phase rule determined the structures of the multiphase emulsion systems, and further influenced the construction of the as-prepared products. Winsor I and II phases were mono-variant two-phase systems with two degrees of freedom; Winsor III was a three-phase system with zero degrees of freedom; Winsor IV with a mono-phasic microemulsion area had two degrees of freedom. For example, the type-III system consisted of a bicontinuous microemulsion, an additional water layer, and an oil layer. Even though the relative concentration of the total components changed, the composition ratio in the microemulsion layer was invariant, resulting in constant substructures of the spherical DFNS (Fig. 6d–f).26
 Fig. 6  SEM images of the silica-based nanoparticles synthesized from the following emulsion systems (a–i) and the corresponding illustration (j). Winsor II (a–c) with weight ratios of water to surfactant to oil as 7.5:1.0:1.5, 7.5:1.0:3.0, and 7.5:1.0:4.5, respectively. Winsor III (d–f) weight ratios of water to surfactant to oil as 7.5:1.0:7.5, 7.5:1.0:10.0, and 5.0:1.0:10.0, respectively. Winsor I (g–i) weight ratios of water to surfactant to oil as 2.0:1.0:10.0, 1.5:1.0:10.0, and 1.0:1.0:10.0, respectively.26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
2.2.3.2 The existence of macropores and micropores. 
For spherical DFNPs, pore sizes gradually increased from the internal centers to the external surfaces along the nanofibers. The majority of DFNPs pores are located in mesoporous states.8,45,62,113,122,156 Nonetheless, there were a few notable exceptions. Du et al.39 successfully fabricated a series of dendrimer-like amino-functionalized silica particles with tunable hierarchical pores (HPSNs-NH2) via a one-pot sol–gel reaction in an ethyl ether emulsion system. The simple adjustment of the reaction temperature or stirring rate was confirmed to be a facile and feasible manner to regulate center-radial large pores. For HPSNs-NH2 spheres with 300 to 700 nm diameter, the pore sizes could boost from ca. 8–119 nm with an average value of 36 ± 21 to ca. 37–267 nm with an average value of 148 ± 45 nm for the first time. Obviously, macroporous pores took shape as center-radial pore sizes were regulated in such large ranges. The plausible formation mechanism was also proposed and attributed to complex cross-coupling of two processes. One process was the dynamic diffusion of ethyl ether from the interior of the droplets to the exterior by heat from the exothermic hydrolysis of silane coupling agents (TEOS and APTES), because ethyl ether possessed a limited solubility in water (0.06 g mL−1 at 25 °C) and a low boiling point (34 °C). The other one was self-assembly of partially hydrolyzed TEOS species with a positively charged structure-directing agent (CTA+) at the dynamic ethyl ether–water interface of uniform small quasi-emulsion droplets to gradually develop condensed silica frameworks.
Seo et al. added non-polar and polar pore modifiers into reaction solutions to prepare silica-based DFNPs with different pore sizes, in which myrcene was applied as the non-polar one while benzyl acetate (BENA) and phytoncide (PHCH) were applied as the polar ones.113 As shown in Fig. 7, myrcene could not generate DFNS spheres and commonly led to 3–5 nm of thin grooves on the as-prepared products' surfaces. BENA molecules produced considerably different types of mesopores on the outer surfaces. CTAB, TEOS, acetone (ACT) and H2O formed homogeneous cylindrical micelles, and turned into silica nanospheres comprising these cylinders. Simultaneously, BENA uniformly distributed in the micelles, filled the conical space, and stabilized silica spheres. As the content of silica at the spheres' centers increased, pore modifier molecules were expelled to the outer surfaces. Upon calcination at 500 °C, the organic pore modifiers were removed, leaving conical pores with dandelion-type morphologies. Thereinto, for BENA and PHCH, these polar pore modifiers distributed near the outer surfaces via the enhanced hydrophobicity that stemmed from the dimerization of carboxylate groups, facilitating the formation of DFNS. The pore diameters ranging from several nm to tens of nm increased from 40 to 65 nm as the amount of BENA enhanced from 5 to 9 g. As for 2-naphthyl acetate (NAPA) bearing an excessively large organic molecular structure, structural formation of spherical silica was hindered and the pore diameter extremely expanded much larger than 50 nm. Evident voids emerged with somewhat skeletal structures and finally turned to be very thin fibrous sheets. Haynes et al. fabricated a kind of ultra-porous structured silica NP similar to DFNS spheres by using surfactant swelling strategies, where dimethylhexadecylamine (DMHA) acted as the co-surfactant and decane as the oil phase.193
 Fig. 7  Formation of dandelion-like silica spheres with dendritic fibrous morphologies by using polar pore modifiers. CTAB, TEOS, ACT, BENA, PHCH, and NAPA are abbreviations of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, tetraethyl orthosilicate, acetone, benzyl acetate, phytoncide, and 2-naphthyl acetate, respectively.113 Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Springer Science Business Media, copyright 2014. 
One of the finest ways to describe structural morphologies of these channels was the metaphor of cone-like or conical pores. The diameters of the outermost conical pores were in a range from several nm to tens of nm. As a consequence, the diameters of conical pores near the core became narrower because the channels' sizes gradually decreased from the outer surfaces to their centers. Apart from conical pore channels, micropores could exist in the nanofiber or nanowrinkle surfaces (Fig. 5c). Seo et al. pointed out that micropores and mesopores coexisted in silica-based DFNPs using N2 adsorption desorption isotherms, indicative of irregularity and heterogeneity of the pore size distribution.113 Some other studies confirmed that DFNS spheres exhibited a type IV character with a H3 hysteresis loop,111,112 revealing that these mesoporous materials were composed of plate-like particles which further aggregated into slit-shaped pores according to IUPAC regulations.159 It could be concluded that two kinds of pores were formed. One was a large slit-shaped pore introduced by the aggregation of abundant plate-like structures; the other was a tiny pore stemming from the adjacent plate-like structures. The diameters of these plate-like structures from KCC-1 were calculated to be ca. 1.2 nm using the Scherrer equation based on the results of X-ray diffraction (XRD).64 In addition, four kinds of medium-range ordered (MRO) planes might inter-grow accompanied by a d spacing of ca. 0.39 nm, which explained that KCC-1 possessed a slightly ordered structure compared to other amorphous silica materials. Guo et al. also found that small mesopores inserted in the walls of the pore channels, testifying that large and small mesopores coexist as well.194
In summary, these unordered and non-uniform pores with different length scales from micropores to mesopores, and even further to macropores constituted hierarchical architectures. The corresponding multi-scale porous systems had more advantages than mono-modal porous ones for a couple of reasons.195 First, hierarchical pores enhanced pore volumes and surface areas, which might facilitate the interactions with other species. Second, hierarchical combinations of multilevel pores were possible, e.g., micropores plus mesopores plus macropores, micropores plus mesopores, or small and large mesopores. Accessible mass transport paths could bring inorganic networks for small molecules, bio-macromolecules or even NPs into or out of the porous matrices. Last but not least, the multilevel pores might not only harmonize the diffusion process of guest molecules with different sizes, but also allow simultaneous loading of diverse species with various sizes, such as magnetic NPs, quantum dots, fluorescent molecules, and so on. These could be confirmed by their extensive application fields as shown in Fig. 4d.
2.2.3.3 Structural or morphological models. 
A few 2D and 3D topographical models of DFNPs have been established and schematically illustrated for more intuitive understanding. Some typically simulated 3D ones are exhibited in Fig. 8a–e from teams of Vivek Polshettiwar,79,91 Dongyuan Zhao,126,128 Xin Du,100,196 Jin-Kyu Lee,23 and Chengzhong Yu,137,197 respectively. Models in Fig. 8f were obtained by optimizing our characterization results in Fig. S1.† Spherical and wrinkled features could be clearly identified along with the pores inserted in the lamellae or sheets, and we considered them as irregular models. Accordingly, models in Fig. 8b served as the regular ones. Even though these models were obviously different, they all represented DFNPs. The reason for this disunity is that each team had individual insight into DFNP morphologies or architectures on the basis of their research studies where various experimental conditions led to different DFNP topographies, as verified by the corresponding SEM, TEM, and/or STEM results shown in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  The commonly used morphological models for spherical DFNPs. Models in Fig. 8a–f are from teams of Vivek Polshettiwar,79 Dongyuan Zhao,126 Xin Du,100 Jin-Kyu Lee,23 Chengzhong Yu,137 and our group,148 respectively. Models in (b) and (f) were regarded as the regular and irregular ones. The schematic diagrams of their nanochannels from narrow to wide were also established. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018. 
The regular models were extensively applied to represent spherical DFNPs,16,29,104,126,198,199 but some other factors have to be taken into account at least from now on. As aforementioned in Fig. 3, electrons penetrated spherical DFNPs from top to bottom, giving rise to sample images with relatively bright edges and dark centers. Nevertheless, the brightness difference could not be very apparently observed in 3D dendritic MSNSs prepared by Zhao et al. via the biphase stratification approach (Fig. 9a–c),126 which implied that electrons encounter almost the same amount of spherical skeletons both around the centers and at edges. The reason should be attributed to the fact that the radial nanochannels were orderly arranged to a large degree, consistent with models in Fig. 8b. TEM images of 3D dendritic MSNSs seemed to be overlaid by dendritic architectures, but with brighter central zones compared to the images in Fig. 3. These 3D dendritic MSNSs had mesopore sizes of ca. 5.5 (Fig. 9a), 7.0 (Fig. 9b), and 13.0 nm (Fig. 9c), respectively. TEM images in Fig. 9d–f and SEM images in Fig. 9d′–f′ showed 3D dendritic MSNSs with one (G = 1), two (G = 2), and three generations (G = 3), respectively. For the latter two (G = 2 and 3), their sample images manifested relatively darker centers and brighter edges, in accordance with their increasing structural G and the rule in Fig. 3. Zhao et al. also fabricated core–shell MSNs with gold nanocages200 or Fe3O4 as cores (Fig. S2†).201 Although no dendritic textures could be observed in TEM images, the authors also depicted their channels as radial, and used the regular models shown in Fig. 8b. Compared to core–shell DFNPs prepared by the KCC-1 pathway with Fe3O4 (ref. 68) and zeolites (TS-1 (ref. 69) or ZSM-5 (ref. 162 and 202)) as cores, TS-1@KCC-1 and ZSM-5@KCC-1 shells were dendritic fibrous and highly consistent with those of KCC-1 both in SEM and TEM images (see Section 3.2.1). Therefore, we recommend models in Fig. 8f to be representatives of spherical DFNPs on the basis of the above discussion; those in Fig. 8b should be carefully adopted for describing dendritic fibrous textures.
 Fig. 9  TEM images (a–c, and d–f) and SEM (d′–f′) of the as-prepared DFNS spheres with one (a–c, d and d′), two (e and e′), and three generations (f and f′) via the biphase stratification approach.126 Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
The core-cone structure in Fig. 8e was proposed by Yu et al. to portray DFNS and DFNOS spheres137 with Dahlia morphologies.142 Nevertheless, their recent work just described the as-obtained silica nanospheres with core-cone textures as “dendritic”.138 Thus, this model would be simply illustrated in Fig. 10. Monodisperse mesoporous silica NPs with core-cone structures (denoted as MSN-CC therein) were obtained in an oil–water system, with CTAC as a structure-directing agent, triethanolamine (TEA) as a catalyst, chlorobenzene as a micelle swelling agent, ultrapure water, and TEOS as a silica precursor. Their pore volume reached up to 2.59 cm3 g−1, the highest one among reported DFNPs. The large pores as nanocarriers could load β-galactosidase protein into mammalian cells. A supramolecular self-assembly mechanism was put forward for their formation in terms of the oil phase to water phase ratio, stirring rate, and growth time. CTAC formed spherical micelles (1) in aqueous solution, and swollen micelles (2) were generated as a result of organic cosolvent chlorobenzene that dissolved into the hydrophobic core. In conventional MSN syntheses defined as region I in Fig. 10, silica-coated composite micelles aggregated together to form NPs with dispersive mesopores (8). The slightly swollen micelles acted as cores for subsequent growth of lamellar structures in region II (3 and 4). Higher ratio of oil to water phases, as well as the stirring rate prompted spherical micelles to become bilayer structures (5), because chlorobenzene quickly diffused and penetrated into CTAC hydrophobic cores. Subunit cone structures grew on the basis of these cores as nucleation sites via bilayer structures, giving rise to structures of more cones with smaller base diameters (6 and b), and less subunits with larger base diameters (7 and c, region III). Some other 3D structural models or the similar ones could be found in the literature.11,22,23,29,102,155,203
 Fig. 10  Proposed formation mechanism for monodisperse mesoporous silica nanoparticles with core-cone structures (MSN-CC).142 Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016. 
For 2D planar structures of DFNPs, it can be imagined that an intact nanosphere was split symmetrically through each center, and the obtained cross profiles reflect the 2D texture. As a result, TEM images of DFNPs could serve as their appropriate schematic diagrams by envisioning that these cross profiles were overlaid (Fig. 3). Polshettiwar et al.204 and Wang et al. followed this way as a part of schematic illustration.169 The proximal 2D sketch was proposed by Ge and coworkers in their study,180 where fiber- and dendrimer-like constructions with channel pores were presented simply and straightforwardly by the combination of solid lines with different lengths and arrangements. However, smaller pores inserted in the wrinkles were not exhibited. Considering both morphologies and pores of DFNPs, we put forward a modified diagrammatic drawing in Fig. 11a.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagrams of 2D planar structures from various silica nanospheres. (a) Spherical DFNS, (b) hierarchical radial porous sphere, (c) hierarchical porous sphere, (d) magnetic radial porous sphere with a core, (e) magnetic core–shell porous sphere, and (f) sunflower-like magnetic porous sphere. 
Earlier in 2011, Du and He categorized spherical micro- or nano-silica with multilevel structures into two main structural categories:195 hierarchically porous spheres as one type comprising radially porous spheres (Fig. 11b) and porous spheres with hierarchical pores (Fig. 11c). The former had radially oriented channels with different sizes of pores embedded in the silica framework. The latter had pores with at least two sizes which could be ordered or unordered. Lin's group utilized the core–shell model in Fig. 11d to portray a nano-composite Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2,205 where nSiO2 and mSiO2 denoted a uniform silica coating and an ordered mesoporous silica shell, respectively. As a matter of fact, it was visualized that a radially porous sphere (Fig. 11b) evolved into a radial core–shell sphere (Fig. 11d). Therefore, in our opinions, the model in Fig. 11e was the most suitable for Fe3O4@nSiO2@mSiO2, in accordance with TEM images from that investigation. Zhang et al. utilized the model in Fig. 10d but without the Fe2O3 core to describe a kind of hollow mesoporous silica as well.206 Very recently, sunflower-like schematic diagrams (Fig. 11f) were drawn by Dong et al. to describe γ-Fe2O3@SiO2@KCC-1.73,165 To our way of thinking, a combination of iron oxide cores with a dendritic fibrous topography shown in Fig. 11a should be an applicable model, because the corresponding TEM images coincide with the proposed model.
2.2.3.4 Notes to biomimetic names. 
Bionics first concentrates on investigating biological methods or natural systems, and then mimics them using modern engineering systems and technologies. For example, bionic micro- and nano-fabrications have been greatly exploited to implement super-wetting surfaces.207 Similarly, some biomimetic names were assigned to DFNPs with the purpose of visually recognizing their morphologies or structures. For instance, Yi et al. regarded DFNC spheres as Echinometra mathaei (Fig. 12a)112 or nano-seaurchin.176 Zhang et al. regarded DFNS spheres as dandelion (Fig. 12b).114 Chen et al. and Teng et al. regarded hollow or solid DFNC spheres as Hydrangea (Fig. 12c).37,208 Other labels were also utilized like Chrysanthemum (Fig. 12d),111 flower,42,117,194 and so on. SEM and TEM images of the as-prepared NPs were compared with photographs of the corresponding living organisms as well in Fig. 12. It is obvious that their morphologies or structures are not perfectly matched. It is worth noting that Echinometra mathaei has its core covered with various spears. The outer surface of dandelion renders itself dendritic, and their backbones are smooth without any branch. Even if these biomimetic names were able to help us to comprehend DFNP architectures, detailed structural features should be distinguished.
 Fig. 12  Photographs of (a) Echinometra, (b) dandelion, (c) Hydrangea, and (d) Chrysanthemum. The inset in (b) displays the elemental skeletons of dandelion. Reprinted with permission from “http://www.chinaz.com”, copyright 2018. SEM (a′–d′) and TEM (a′′–d′′) images of the NPs which were compared to Echinometra,112 dandelion,114Hydrangea,208 and Chrysanthemum,111 respectively. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010. 

3 Dendritic fibrous nano-silica (DFNS)
DFNS was extensively explored, as shown in Fig. 4b and c. Du et al. first published a review in 2015 with emphasis on DFNS's unique structural characteristics and properties, its novel synthesis methods, and its possible formation mechanisms. A few examples of interesting applications were illustrated, mainly covering catalysis, biomedicine, and sacrificial templates. The well summarized knowledge points provided researchers some inspiration for controlled synthesis of DFNS and its potential applications.102 The inventor of the KCC-1, Vivek Polshettiwar, lately reviewed the development of the DFNS material and presented a critical survey on the synthesis and formation mechanism, as well as its application in catalysis, energy harvesting and storage, magnetic and composite materials, CO2 mitigation, and biomedical and analytical applications.91 These two reviews contained the majority of DFNS synthesis pathways; thus only uninvolved and extremely significant contents of DFNS were introduced and discussed below.
3.1 Synthesis techniques
Most importantly, emulsion systems have been utilized to synthesize DFNS spheres due to the greater contributions made by Polshettiwar5,70,120,164 and Du et al.102,104,108 When droplet sizes of emulsion were more than 200 nm in diameter, a milky and non-transparent solution could be obtained termed macroemulsion. As the diameters fell in the 10–200 nm range, the microemulsion was formed with quasi or complete transparence, and was divided into Winsor I–IV.192 With the diameters further decreasing, commonly transparent colloidal solutions could be achieved. The aforementioned synthesis rules in Section 2.2.3.1 have indicated that spherical DFNS could be developed throughout Winsor I to III under appropriate conditions, but it did not mean that DFNS spheres could not be prepared out of microemulsions. The truth was that macroemulsion systems not only allowed the synthesis of well-separated DFNS spheres, but also lead to their mono-disperse size distribution.25,26 Suendo et al. carried out Tyndall experiments to detect the scattering effect of KCC-1 colloidal mixtures illuminated by a narrow beam of light.64 The precursor mixtures were first tested, including an aqueous phase (urea, CTAB, and water) and an organic phase (butanol, toluene, and TEOS). Tyndall effects were identified for both solutions where the light passed through the transparent solution bulks, implying that the precursor mixtures were in colloidal states. The DFNS reaction mixture (specifically the KCC-1 mother liquor here) was prepared by mixing the aqueous phase with an organic phase to form a milky and non-transparent solution. The laser could not pass through during Tyndall measurements, and particles of more than 400 nm in diameter were detected by dynamic light scattering (DLS). The mixture also showed thermodynamic instability and was separated into two phases after 20 h of storage. Moreover, these macroemulsion systems were proved to be oil-in-water types within which the bicontinuous microemulsions were dispersed, consistent with the results verified by Lee's group.25 It was worth noting that both microemulsions and macroemulsions could be used to produce KCC-1.25,26 Nevertheless, their formation mechanisms were absolutely different, and further explorations could be focused on the discrepancies of the as-prepared products. Recently, Polshettiwar et al. unraveled the formation mechanism of DFNS by electron microscopy and real-time small-angle X-ray scattering.93 It was found that structural evolution of bicontinuous microemulsion droplets (BMDs) and their subsequent coalescence were responsible for the formation of the complex DFNS morphology. The co-surfactant also played a quite crucial role in the complex interplay of the self-assembly, dynamics of BMD formation, and coalescence. This work provided a deeper molecular-level understanding of DFNS formation.
The ethyl ether emulsion system proposed by Du et al. brought some inspiration for scientists to create DFNPs via a chemical solvent with special characteristics.39,101 For one thing, ethyl ether has limited solubility in water (0.06g mL−1, 25 °C), and the solubility of water in ethyl ether is also low, ca. 1.47 g/100 mL. For another, the boiling point of ethyl ether is 34 °C. These properties drove ethyl ether to concurrently gasify, escape from the emulsions, and pass through the condensed silica shells leading to the formation of hierarchical large mesopores during the exothermic hydrolysis of TEOS. Ethanol as an additional cosolvent also played a vital role in apparently boosting mutual dissolution of water and ethyl ether, eventually affecting the morphologies and structures of the as-obtained products. As shown in Fig. 13A, silica nanospheres with particular structures could be obtained by regulating the volume ratio (r) of ethanol to ethyl ether. When r = 0, i.e., no ethanol was added, nanodroplets of ethyl ether were formed in the ethyl ether–H2O–CTAB–NH4OH system under vigorous stirring, and would act as dynamic templates. Upon the addition of TEOS, extra heat was released by its hydrolysis and condensation, which could gasify ethyl ether. Simultaneously, silica intermediate species would self-assemble on the surfaces of ethyl ether nanodroplets. Gasified ethyl ether penetrated into condensed silica shells, forming silica hollow nanospheres with pleats. The gasification of ethyl ether might also induce a spontaneous emulsification process. When a small amount of ethanol was introduced, little water, NH4OH, and CTAB would be dissolved in ethyl ether nanodroplets. As r increased from 0.5 to 1.0, their contents became larger as evidenced by the increase of silica nanosphere diameters. Even macropores appeared during the formation of dendritic fibrous channels, instead of a hollow architecture. With further increase of r to 1.5, ethyl ether was totally dissolved in ethanol and the whole emulsion system became homogeneous. Thus, the self-assembly of CTAB molecules and partially hydrolyzed TEOS derivatives would take place in the bulk solution, resulting in the formation of compact mesoporous nanospheres with a smooth surface. When ethanol acted as the sole cosolvent with r near to the infinite, the system could be regarded as a modified “Stöber method”. On the whole, the ethyl ether emulsion system could not only synthesize silica NPs with unique topographies from hollow mesoporous to dendritic fibrous, and further to a mesoporous structure, but also regulate the diameters of the nanospheres with identical or similar textures. Especially, DFNS spheres could be obtained as r ranged from 0.5 to 1.0 where the mother mixtures were proved to be very unstable.101 Based on this system, Du's team fabricated DFNS spheres with more well-defined structures (Fig. 13B) by applying APTES as a co-silicon source at r = 0.33 to 0.5 later.39,104
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the structure-controlled formation of silica nanospheres with varied structures by regulating the volume ratio (r) of ethanol to ethyl ether.101 Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2010. (B) DFNS spheres with more well-defined structures by applying APTES as a co-silicon source at r = 0.33 to 0.5.104 Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. 
Zhang et al. successfully achieved the large-scale (kilogram scale) synthesis of monodisperse DFNS with sizes below 200 nm at atmospheric pressure under mild conditions via a sol–gel technique.122 Instead of “dendritic and fibrous”, a name modifier “stellate” was adopted there to describe the morphology of the as-prepared nanospheres. Cetyltrimethylammonium (CTA+) acted as a templating surfactant, and small organic amines (SOAs) such as TEA, triethylamine, and (hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol served as the mineralizing agents. When counterions of CTA+ were transformed from tosylate (Tos−) to bromide (Br−), interestingly, raspberry-like or wormlike nanospheres could be obtained through ion competition at the electrical palisade of micelles and complex self-assembly.122 The same group further developed DFNS spheres and Au-modified DFNS with controlled diameters between 40 and 300 nm by utilizing Pluronic F127 nonionic surfactant as an inhibitor for particle growth and imidazolium ionic liquids of different alkyl lengths as co-surfactants.8 Very recently, Bein et al. fabricated a kind of large-pore DFNS sphere by incorporating different organic groups (mercapto- and phenyl-) into silica frameworks via a co-condensation approach, and described them as “stellate silica with conical pores”.209 Wang also followed the above synthesis route and named the as-prepared DFNS “stellated fibrous mesoporous silica nanospheres”.172
Based on the work of Zhang et al.,122 a dual-templating method with anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and CTAB as co-templates was exploited to produce DFNS spheres on the kilogram scale.210 At a high concentration of the dual surfactants, mesoporous silica NPs with a silkworm cocoon and/or mono-lamellar vesicle structures were obtained. At a low concentration, synthesis of DFNS with sizes of ca. 100 nm in diameter was realized. A dual template synergistically controlled micelle self-aggregated model was proposed to understand the formation mechanism.210 Guo et al. replaced ethyl ether with aldehyde compounds to fabricate DFNS with tunable mesostructures and controllable sizes.194 When short-chain acetaldehyde was utilized as a co-solvent, DFNS sizes could be controlled from 40 to 850 nm by regulating the initial solution pH and the molar ratio of acetaldehyde to water. For long-chain propionaldehyde or butyraldehyde, DFNS sizes were less than 130 nm but with larger cone-like cavities. Compared to the simultaneous polymerization of styrene into polystyrene,211 the polymerization of acetaldehyde, propionaldehyde or butyraldehyde could be well tuned by regulating synthesis temperature. This is because high temperature prevented aldehyde compounds from developing into large polymer molecules.212
By utilizing different cationic surfactants including CTAB, gemini surfactants with short or long alkyl-chains, and a non-cationic surfactant Ethylan 1008, Holmberg et al. could control the particle size as small as 40 nm and pore size as large as 9 nm,213 which improved the synthesis approach reported by Okuyama's group.211 The results showed that both cationic and non-cationic surfactants could form emulsions for small DFNS formation, and that the particle size and the pore dimensions of the as-obtained products could be tailored by the choice of amphiphile, which enlightens us to find the correlation between surfactant characteristics and the particle morphology in the near future. Min and coworkers recently fabricated a kind of dual-pore coexisting branched DFNS through the KCC-1 method and the Volmer–Weber growth pathway.214 The dual-pores were large pores of 40 to 45 nm from KCC-1 and small pores of 2 to 3 nm from the branch domains. Volmer–Weber growth was usually used to construct Janus nanostructures by surface energy difference.215 Actually, the final products looked like the seaurchin-type structure with KCC-1 as a core and secondly formed nanorods as branches.

3.1.1 Applicability of the proposed synthesis approaches. 
Synthesis approaches of DFNS spheres are compared and listed in Table 1, comprising cyclohexane-based emulsions for KCC-1,5 ethyl ether emulsions for HSMNs,101 and the biphase stratification technique for 3D dendritic MSNSs.126 These approaches can be perfectly repeated just by following the reported routes. However, the process of fabricating 3D dendritic MSNSs requires more care and skills than that of KCC-1 or HSMNs, which makes its maneuverability more normative and rigorous. This results from the synthesis mechanism of biphase stratification, in which the upper oil phases were carefully replaced by other organic solvents twice and the solutions were stirred at a mild rate without mixing the oil phase and the water phase. As illustrated in Section 2.1.1, this technique could produce 3D dendritic MSNSs with more elaborate architectures of multi-generational, tunable center-radial, and dendritic mesopore channels. Stepwise chemical reactions made this method more maneuverable and adjustable. Although particle sizes of KCC-1 and HSMNs could range from ca. 100 to 1200 nm, their diameters were not uniform for one-pot reaction products.5,39,70,104,164 3D dendritic MSNSs were highly uniform with a mean particle size of ca. 180, 250, and 280 nm for each generation.126 Pores on DFNS surfaces became more irregular and non-uniform from KCC-1 to HSMNs. However, ethyl ether emulsion could produce extremely large pores and provide internal nanochannel sites for loading bigger macromolecules or NPs. By-products could only be found in aminated HSMNs (i.e., HSMNs-NH2 (ref. 39)), composed of large hollow spheres of 1.0–10 μm with a mesoporous shell, small hollow spheres of 1.0–2.0 μm with varied shell thickness, and hollow spheres with hierarchical pores, but they can be removed by gradient centrifugation. This phenomenon consisted of the HSMN formation mechanism in Fig. 13 where the NPs' morphologies changed from the hollow mesoporous to the dendritic fibrous, and further to mesoporous. Immature or intermediate products were observed both in KCC-1 and HSMNs. As a whole, to create DFNS particles, microemulsions and macroemulsions for KCC-1 have been widely utilized, then ethyl ether emulsions were used, followed by the biphase stratification technique. Every approach has its own advantages and disadvantages. Researchers can properly select a suitable method based on their unique structural features. In addition, more studies should be performed in ethyl ether emulsions and the biphase stratification technique.
Table 1 Comparison of the approaches applied to synthesize DFNS spheres, including cyclohexane-based emulsions for KCC-1, ethyl ether emulsions for HSMNs, and the biphase stratification technique for 3D dendritic MSNSs




Synthesis approach
Cyclohexane-based emulsions (KCC-1)
Ethyl ether emulsions (HSMNs)
Biphase stratification (3D dendritic MSNSs)




Pore size range

ca. 2–30 nm

ca. 8–200 nm

ca. 2.8–10 nm


Particle size range

ca. 170–1120 nm

ca. 100–1100 nm

ca. 180–280 nm


Repeatability
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent


Maneuverability
Easy
Easy
Normal


Particles' uniformity
Poor
Poor
Excellent


Pores' uniformity
Good
Average
Excellent


By-product
None
Some
None


Intermediate products
Some
Some
None


Universality

ca. 70%

ca. 17%

ca. 3%


Significance
Facility and universality
Macropores for diverse guests
Uniformity for fine control






3.1.2 Methods for uniform spherical DFNS. 
As outlined above, KCC-1 was pioneeringly fabricated by the hydrothermal technique with a microwave instrument.5 After careful observations, two parameters of pressure (P) and stirring rate (R) drew our attention. The former irregularly varied during the fabrication process; the latter could be considered as nothing because the microwave digestion instrument rotated horizontally without blending the organic phase and the water phase. Based on the above considerations, we performed a modified method for KCC-1 by controlling these two factors via low-cost Teflon-lined autoclaves instead of the microwave instrument. Autoclaves filled with KCC-1 mother liquors were fixed at a spindle in a hydrothermal reactor, and then a 60 rpm stirring rate was realized via a power-driven motor by which the organic and water phases could be mixed constantly. Fig. 14A exhibits SEM images, diameter distribution curves, and TEM images of KCC-1 prepared using a microwave digestion instrument (denoted as M-KCC-1), and by hydrothermal methods through Teflon-lined autoclaves without stirring (H-KCC-1) or with stirring (HS-KCC-1, also denoted as one-pot rotating hydrothermal synthesis).148 The diameter distribution of KCC-1 for each method was plotted with percentages as a function of particle diameter. Nanospheres from M-KCC-1 had the most uneven sizes, and the maximum diameter size did not exceed 450 nm. H-KCC-1 nanospheres became uniform and their diameters increased to 900 nm. The majority of the as-prepared particles had particle sizes from 700 to 850 nm (70%). Upon stirring, HS-KCC-1 nanospheres with diameters ranging from 770 to 850 nm accounted for about 75%, indicating the best uniformity. The reason could be deciphered by analyzing the change laws of P and R throughout the reaction courses as follows. To be specific, P came up to 1.1 MPa in the first hour for M-KCC-1, declined to 1.0 MPa in the following two hours, and achieved a minimum value of 0.8 MPa in the last hour. P remained constant for H-KCC-1 and HS-KCC-1 at 120 °C for 4 h, because Teflon-lined autoclaves were tightly sealed. In spite of the fact that P was not measured here, it could be determined using more advanced apparatus in the future. The 60 rpm stirring rate could mix the water and organic phases to generate a homogeneous emulsion all through the procedures, as ascertained in Section 3.1.25,26
 Fig. 14  A) SEM images, diameter distribution curves and TEM images of M-KCC-1 synthesized by microwave reaction (a), H-KCC-1 developed by a hydrothermal method without stirring (b), and HS-KCC-1 obtained by a hydrothermal method with stirring (c). (B) TEM and SEM images of H-KCC-1 (d–f) and HS-KCC-1 (g–i) at different magnifications.148 Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018. 
In addition, the influence of P and R on KCC-1 uniformity could be determined by findings from Suendo et al., where the KCC-1 formation mechanism was disclosed by analyzing the micelle type and the emulsion kinetic rule.64 First, alcohols like n-butanol were mixed hand-in-hand with CTAB at the micellar interfaces, which could generate reverse micelles in the colloidal mixture. Second, two aspects could drive TEOS molecules in the organic phase to diffuse and approach CTAB tails. One was the hydrophobic interaction between the hydrophobic tails of CTAB and TEOS molecules; the other was the high chemical potential created by the concentration gradient of TEOS inside and outside the reverse micelles. Then all hydrolyzed products penetrated into reverse micelles as a result of their polarities. In the end, branched silica polymers (polysiloxane) were produced at the internal Si atoms' positions via a condensation reaction under basic conditions. Meanwhile, linear silica oligomers tended to form closed structures. The intersectional growth of silica polysiloxane and linear oligomers created bicontinuous structures of KCC-1 spheres. It was clear that the appropriate stirring rate (60 rpm) along with the unchanged pressure eliminated the additional chemical potentials, polarities, and nonuniformities of the reaction solutions, yielding nanospheres with uniform sizes or diameters. In spite of great improvements, some issues still need to be investigated. For instance, it is not hard to find that lots of intermediate products and small spheres coexist with ideal HS-KCC-1 nanospheres. Furthermore, every coin has two sides. Although HS-KCC-1 nanospheres were uniform, their diameters were specially concentrated on a large size of ca. 810 nm. Uniform DFNS spheres with other diameters (e.g., 300 or 1000 nm) might be developed by changing the stirring rate or pressure, which deserves further investigations.
A peculiar phenomenon occurred when typical TEM images of three products were compared as shown in Fig. 14A. Dendritic and fibrous textures were easily identified for M-KCC-1 and HS-KCC-1, while these features became obscure for H-KCC-1. Further contrasts at different magnifications (Fig. 14B) found that dendritic and fibrous characteristics also could not be apparently distinguished at view scales of 500 nm (Fig. 14d) and 300 nm (Fig. 14e) for H-KCC-1, different from HS-KCC-1 in Fig. 14g and h, respectively. However, SEM images of H-KCC-1 and HS-KCC-1 showed that the nanowrinkles as well as the channel pores on their surfaces had no apparent difference (Fig. 14f and i). TEM images of H-KCC-1 were prone to be confused with those of MSNs with micropores or solid silica nanospheres. Again, it has to be stressed that structures of the DFNP type must be confirmed by SEM and TEM simultaneously. The reason why no apparent dendritic and fibrous textures existed in H-KCC-1 was probably attributed to the fact that their inner structures were more non-uniform and complicated, including micropores, mesopores, nanochannels, and so forth. Very recently, Jang et al. also fabricated uniform DFNS spheres by applying a cooling stage prior to the conventional synthesis process.190 In a typical synthesis, the reaction emulsion was immediately cooled to 10 °C and maintained for 2 h after the precursors were mixed and stirred at 70 °C for 1 h. The cooling stage stabilized the seeds, allowing them to grow without formation of new seeds, and thus ensuring their uniformity. Then, the reaction was resumed at different temperatures and maintained for 12 h, which gave rise to DFNS spheres with various diameters. In addition, the authors testified that DFNS spheres did not structurally collapse during the chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) process, indicative of superior mechanical stable properties under pressure.190

3.2 Complex architectures
In this section, we simply divide DFNS spheres into the core–shell type, the hollow, the yolk–shell, the Janus one, and so forth. Nevertheless, no absolute limit must be followed to define them. For example, Fe3O4@SiO2@DFNS composites have a core–shell–shell structure, but these nanospheres immediately turn to hollow ones by removing Fe3O4 cores with acid solutions. Fe3O4@RF@DFNS (RF: resorcinol formaldehyde resin) would become the yolk–shell type if RF resin was removed. Besides, as synthetic techniques and preparation strategies rapidly develop, DFNP-based composites with more complex architectures have become prominent very recently, like hollow multi-shell DFNS.138

3.2.1 Core@shell DFNS. 
3.2.1.1 Core@shell magnetic DFNS. 
Structures of the magnetic core@mesoporous silica shell, especially the iron oxide-based ones, have attracted continuous attention due to not only their natural characteristics (biocompatibility, low toxicity, tunable pores, surfaces, etc.), but also due to unique magnetic responsivity for potential applications in heterogeneous catalysis, targeted drug delivery, bioseparation, environmental remediation, enzyme immobilization, and so forth. Liu et al. successfully synthesized monodisperse dendritic fibrous Fe3O4@SiO2@KCC-1 through a modified surfactant templated emulsion formation process.68 First, 170 nm Fe3O4 cores were coated with a nonporous silica layer through a sol–gel method. Then, surfactant templated micelles were developed by self-assembling CPB on Fe3O4@SiO2 surfaces via electrostatic interaction between positively charged CPB and negatively charged SiO2. Finally, composite nanospheres with dendritic fibrous shells and cores were formed by TEOS hydrolysis and condensation, followed by template removal (Fig. 15a). The as-prepared 320 nm DFNS had good adsorption capacity for methylene blue (MB) with a saturated adsorption amount of 48.0 mg g−1. The kinetic adsorption experiment exhibited that 78% adsorption capacity could be accomplished within a short shaking period of 5 min and reached the equilibrium within 30 min. It was concluded that radial-like channels and larger pores played roles in faster and easier adsorption. Sadeghzadeh's group first modified Fe3O4@SiO2@KCC-1 nanospheres with 3-chloropropyltriethoxysilane, then immersed them in a solution of 1-benzyltetrazole, n-butyllithium, and [AuCl(tht)] (tht = tetrahydrothiophene). The as-prepared magnetic Fe3O4@SiO2@(KCC-1)/Au could cyclize propargylic amines with CO2 to yield 2-oxazolidinones with high selectivity, activity, and reusability. The author concluded that the KCC-1 nanostructure not only acted as a “cobweb” for the soluble gold species, but also served as a nano-scaffold to re-uptake the gold(I), thereby avoiding the agglomeration of the gold(I) complex.216 This team recently loaded Ni@Pd nanoparticles onto ionic liquid (IL)-functionalized KCC-1 as robust and recyclable nanocatalysts for cycloaddition of propargylic amines and CO2 (KCC-1/IL/Ni@Pd).87 Because of the amplification effect of IL, high loading capacities of the nanocatalysts were achieved with several advantages like solvent-free conditions, operational simplicity, short reaction times, environmentally benign reaction conditions, cost effectiveness, high atom economy and excellent yields.
 Fig. 15  TEM images of nanoparticles with diverse morphologies developed by means of emulsion systems for DFNS. (a) Fe3O4@SiO2@KCC-1 (reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2013), (b) TS-1@KCC-1 (reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013), (c) ZSM-5@DFNS (reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2016), (d) SiO2@DFNS (reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015), (e) hollow DFNS (reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016), and (f) shuttlecock-shaped DFNS (reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). (g) DFNS/Pt@MSS (reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017). (h) DFNS/Fe3O4 (reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011.). 
Piao et al. created a magnetically recoverable photocatalyst by confining TiO2 NPs into nanochannels of a core–shell composite nanosphere with a superparamagnetic iron oxide nanocluster (SION) as a core.217 The dendritic fibrous nano-silica shell was then coated on the as-prepared SION (SION@DFNS). Anatase TiO2 was finally embedded in the pore channels. The resultant SION@DFNS/TiO2 showed faster dye degradation kinetics than commercial P25 NPs.217 Based on the biphase stratification approach,126 Zhao et al. exploited a shearing assisted bi-liquid phase interface co-assembly mechanism to construct core–shell-shell magnetic DFNS.198 First, water-dispersible Fe3O4 NPs were covered with a RF shell (Fe3O4@RF) via the sol–gel polymerization of RF resin. Second, hexane-swelled CTAB and silica composites were further co-assembled on Fe3O4@RF surfaces at different stirring rates (Fe3O4@RF@DFNS). Particularly, a higher stirring rate led to larger CTAB micelles, thus larger pore channels. After modification with 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GLYMO), the as-grafted Fe3O4@RF@DFNS could immobilize 4 nm spherical trypsin in the pores via reactions between epoxy groups from GLYMO and amino acid groups from the enzyme. The confined trypsin exhibited an outstanding size selectivity for low molecular proteins and good recycling stability. Interestingly, such a core–shell–shell Fe3O4@RF@DFNS could be easily converted into a unique yolk–shell Fe3O4@DFNS with a magnetic core in a hollow DFNS by removing RF via calcination treatment.198
3.2.1.2 Core@shell nonmagnetic DFNS. 
Zeolites are commonly applied in the catalysis industry due to their large crystal sizes, tunable acidities and high thermal stabilities, e.g., TS-1 and ZSM-5. Wu's team encapsulated elliptical TS-1 within KCC-1 (TS-1@KCC-1) to construct inorganic porous core–shell DFNS for the first time (Fig. 15b).69 Under basic conditions, the negatively charged TS-1 NPs adsorbed positively charged CTAB micelles, and then the hydrolyzed TEOS derivatives self-assembled onto these micelles and further condensed. The dendritic fibrous TS-1@KCC-1 was a good support for dispersing and stabilizing Rh(OH)3. The obtained novel core–shell (TS-1)@(KCC-1)/Rh(OH)3 catalyst could synthesize benzamide from ammonia, hydrogen peroxide, and benzaldehyde by a one-pot tandem pathway. Zeolite ZSM-5 was also used as a core to fabricate core–shell DFNS, whose shapes were spherical, consistent with ZSM-5 topographies (Fig. 15c). ZSM-5@DFNS could be applied for carbon monoxide methanation,162 ethyl benzene dehydrogenation and cumene hydrocracking,202 and exhibited high catalytic activity and stability. It may result from dendritic fibrous textures, and the enhanced oxygen vacancies for increased adsorption sites of CO and H2. Qu's group successfully synthesized monodisperse silica spheres with solid silica spheres as cores and fibrous silica as a shell, termed SiO2@DFNS in Fig. 15d.185 The stirring rate during synthesis could finely tune both the thickness and the pore size of the fibrous shell. This result coincided with the rule in our modified method for KCC-1 (Fig. 14), i.e., stirring rate partially determined DFNS's diameters. By continuously adjusting the stirring rate, hierarchical DFNS spheres with various G like aforementioned Zhao's work126 could be obtained in one pot, with the pore size ranging from 10 to 28 nm and the shell thickness up to 200 nm. Hydrophilic SiO2@DFNS was then chemically modified with octadecyltrichlorosilane to hydrophobic ones, which were utilized for separation of peptides and proteins in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The unique fibrous shell structures covered on the tough solid cores led to separation performance as high as 2.25 × 105 plate per m and back pressure as low as 5.8 MPa. Very recently, this team utilized hydrophobic SiO2@DFNS to rapidly separate small proteins, small molecules, peptides, and large proteins with a molecular weight up to 200 kDa.58 The separation performance was as high as 264531 plates per m for fluorene.49 Moreover, the authors modified a kind of metal–organic framework (MOF), i.e., zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8), onto the pore surfaces of core–shell SiO2@DFNS. A separation performance of 210000 plates per m was achieved for a mixture of xylene isomers. SiO2@DFNS-ZIF-8 combined the merits of high selectivity from ZIF-8 and the high separation performance from the core–shell structure.48 Yu et al. selected hybrid fullerene-doped (C60-doped) silica as a core which was covered by dendritic shells with large pore channels. Fullerene NPs acted as photosensitizers and fluorescent agents for imaging. The as-obtained core–shell DFNS spheres were modified with hydrophobic silane to load a therapeutic monoclonal antibody (mAbs) anti-pAkt. Fullerene in the DFNS core generated singlet oxygen (1O2) and fluorescence under UV excitation after intracellular delivery, which could be utilized for intracellular tracking. Anti-pAkt provoked cell inhibition by blocking pAkt and the downstream anti-apoptotic protein. This multifunctional C60-doped core–shell DFNS showed significant capabilities for combined photodynamic and antibody therapy.143


3.2.2 Hollow DFNS (HDFNS). 
Yu et al. exploited a vesicle supra-assembly approach to synthesize HDFNS (Fig. 15e) through a one-pot technique for protein delivery.145 The great difference of this synthesis method was the introduction of APTES as a new silica source besides TEOS. The hollow DFNS spheres could be obtained with amine groups uniformly inserted in their skeletons (HDFNS-NH2), which endowed them with positively charged surfaces. The as-synthesized HDFNS-NH2 could load more negatively charged proteins of large sizes, exhibit greater cellular uptake, and deliver biologically active large enzyme β-galactosidase into CHO-K1 cells more efficiently, compared with the NH2-free HDFNS ones.145 It could be speculated that amino-type silanes along with synthesis conditions should play vital roles in HDFNS formation. For example, Bein's team found that denser or solid-like DFNS spheres were obtained by using APTES and TEOS.209 Mozumdar et al. produced solid-like DFNS spheres as efficient and recyclable solid base catalysts for Knoevenagel condensation by using APTES and TEOS with ethyl ether as the oil phase at 40 °C.28 Zhou's group successfully fabricated hollow silica nanospheres with wrinkled or smooth surfaces by combining the oil-in-water emulsion for DFNS and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as a capping agent, respectively.157 With the increase of hydrothermal temperature from 100 to 200 °C, the morphologies of the as-prepared particles changed from spheres with radially oriented mesochannels to hollow structures. The intermediate products developed at 160 °C exhibited weakened dendritic fibrous and hollow features. A plausible mechanism was proposed based on the influence of high temperatures on the emulsion behaviour and PVP chain. On the one hand, a tempestuous collision occurred between worm-like emulsion units, leading to the formation of bigger sphere-shaped emulsions rather than worm-like emulsion aggregations at relatively low temperatures. On the other hand, the inhibiting effect of PVP molecule chains was weakened to non-tight adsorption at higher temperatures. The above factors caused adjustable surface morphology and size, as well as the tunable interior structure from radially oriented mesochannels to hollow structures. In addition, HDFNS could be applied to immobilize Candida rugosa lipase (CRL) as a novel biocatalyst for catalyzing the esterification reaction between heptanoic acid and ethanol with high activity and conversion efficiency.


3.2.3 Janus DFNS. 
On the basis of Winsor systems for DFNS fabrication, Lee et al. created novel shuttlecock-shaped silica NPs in which center- radial wrinkles were formed on the surface of the spherical cores (Fig. 15f).26 It could be achieved via a one-pot synthetic method with the step-by-step addition of reagents. First, the spherical silica NPs served as surfactants and formed super micelles. Second, super micelles acted as cores, and the wrinkled silica was generated on their outer surfaces. Upon ultrasonic treatment, shuttlecock-like morphologies were developed and could be regarded as the Janus state. Modification of their head and tail parts with different ligands might enable them to be applied in drug delivery, water-repellent textiles, or tandem catalysis. Balkus et al. synthesized gold/palladium coated magnesium NPs embedded in dendritic fibrous silica nanomotors as delivery vehicles for biologically relevant payloads.178 The products could be simply denoted as DFNS/Mg@Au or DFNS/Mg@Pt. Especially, when 4,4′-bis(triethoxysilyl)-1,1′-biphenyl was added into the initial mother solution for obtaining DFNS, fluorescent nanomotors could be obtained. Once these nanomotors were placed in a salt solution, Mg NPs would react with H2O with the assistance of Au or Pt catalysis, and the produced hydrogen gas (H2) executed nano-locomotion. The by-product Mg(OH)2 was biocompatible and the responsive environment was neutral, which made this class of nanomotors as a promising candidate for bodily functions. Then, aspirin was used as a model drug in simulated body fluids and the kinetic model of drug release agreed well with the Higuchi model. The self-propelled DFNS-based nanomotor systems were expected to make a profound impact on diverse applications in drug delivery.178
Very recently, Yu et al. also prepared a kind of quasi shuttlecock-shaped silica NP and described them as “head–tail morphology”.218 Compared to symmetric or spherical DFNS, the as-obtained Janus ones could act as more potent adjuvants for the uptake and activation of antigen presenting cells in mouse models. The authors also investigated the influence of the asymmetrical head–tail silica NPs on hemo-compatibility and maturation of immune cells.153 The results showed that this kind of NP possessed not only tail-length-dependent hemolytic activity, but also superior hemocompatibility due to the decreased level of reactive oxygen species and reduced membrane deformation of red blood cells. In addition, head–tail DFNPs exhibited a higher level of uptake and in vitro maturation of immune cells including dendritic cells and macrophages. Most importantly, a formation mechanism in regard to time-dependent growth and surfactant packing parameter was proposed, and this synthesis method was also expanded to synthesize other structures. Zhang's group fabricated pseudo shuttlecock-shaped Janus structured NPs with dendritic mesoporous silica coated on the partial RF core through a simple one-pot colloidal method.12 A competing growth mechanism about the polymerization rate between silica and RF was proposed to explain the formation of the Janus nanostructure.


3.2.4 Yolk–shell DFNS. 
Very recently, Du's group developed a kind of yolk–shell heterogeneous nanocatalyst, where DFNS spheres served as the yolk and the mesoporous silica structure (MSS) as the protective shell.100 The former loaded plenty of small noble metal NPs inside its center-radial pores (like DFNS/Pt); the latter MSS had perpendicularly aligned pore channels and tunable shell thickness. The special yolk–shell architecture was realized by first coating DFNS/Pt with RF polymer resin, second growing an MSS shell on the DFNS/Pt@RF surface, and finally removing all organic substances by calcination at high temperature in air (Fig. 15g). The unique yolk–shell DFNS/Pt@MSS catalysts exhibited outstanding catalytic performances in 4-nitrophenol reduction, CO oxidation, and the epoxidation reaction with their textural advantages, like fast transport of reaction species and product molecules through permeable channels, thermally-induced aggregation resistance, enhanced stability under weak basic and acidic conditions, etc.100 Zhou et al. applied PVP as an encapsulating agent, moderately adjusted the reaction system of CTAB-PVP in the cyclohexane–ethanol–water emulsion, and novel yolk–shell nanospheres were realized.219


3.2.5 Other types. 
Yang et al. successfully created a novel kind of dendritic fibrous Fe3O4–silica composite nanosphere by embedding 9 nm Fe3O4 nanocrystals between the wrinkles with a modified KCC-1 technique (Fig. 15h).19 The as-prepared products still possessed superparamagnetic features and could serve as drug delivery carriers for targeted cancer therapy. Biological tests certified that they had increased drug accumulation and greatly prolonged circulation time. Further loading of doxorubicin (DOX) on DFNS/Fe3O4 could deliver the confined drugs to HeLa cancer cells to kill them, and generate efficient cytotoxic effects on fibroblast cells. Another composite structure similar to DFNS/Fe3O4 was that ca. 2 nm of Au NPs were immobilized onto the pore channels from DFNS.8 The as-prepared DFNS/Au along with NaBH4 could rapidly reduce 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol, exhibiting excellent catalytic performance. Chen et al. combined the above techniques and developed a type of magnetic DFNS-based complex for enhanced in vivo multimodal imaging, stroke therapy, and mesenchymal-stem-cell (MSC) homing.176 Ultrasmall Fe3O4 NPs were trapped in DFNS pores, then gold seeds were loaded, and finally the multi-gold nanorods (multi-GNRs) further grew. Because the growth of Au nanorods could be more clearly identified than the silica bulk in the TEM image, DFNS-GNR spheres looked like seaurchins which could in situ track the stem cell and possessed high thermal stability after excitation with 808 nm long-term laser pulses. After loading luciferase, DFNS-GNR-Luc could target stroke areas for a prolonged retention, as well as exhibit a reduced infarct volume in the stroke brain and better functional recovery in the stroke mice after cerebral ischemia.

3.3 Applications – updated
The qualities and structures of the NPs undoubtedly play pivotal roles in determining their functions. DFNS particles have unique 3D open dendritic superstructures with central-radial pore channels and highly accessible internal surfaces, which make them very promising as carrier platforms or supports. Especially, DFNS can be chemically modified with desired functional groups for certain applications due to the silanol groups (–SiOH) on their surfaces through a post-modification or one-pot co-condensation approach. Correspondingly, various molecules with varied sizes (like drugs, therapeutic biomacromolecules, functional NPs, fluorescent quantum dots, and so forth), can be in situ loaded or co-loaded by covalent conjugation, electrostatic force, hydrophobic interactions, etc. As a result, DFNS-supported and DFNS-based particles could serve as candidates for catalysis, photocatalysis, energy harvesting for solar cells, CO2 capture, delivery carriers for targets (such as drugs, DNA, genes, and antimicrobial enzymes), photothermal ablation therapy, real-time imaging, etc. More detailed information can be found in the aforementioned reviews from Du et al.102 and Polshettiwar et al.91 Shi et al. recently summarized the nanoparticle-triggered in situ catalytic chemical reactions for tumor-specific therapy, also accelerating the development of the DFNP family in bio-applications.220 Yu et al. reviewed silica-based NPs for therapeutic protein delivery with DFNPs involved.221 Khashab et al. lately summarized the physical chemistry, biosafety, delivery strategies, biomedical applications of mesoporous silica and organosilica NPs, in which the partial content of DFNPs was included.222
It is noteworthy that several fascinating research studies about DFNP applications have successively appeared thereafter, especially the silica-based ones, but mainly concentrated on bio-application fields, such as biocatalysis and biotherapies. Two reasons account for this: the successful exploitation of DFNOS spheres136–138 and realizable constructions of multi-level hierarchical architectures, like the yolk–shell,198 the double-shelled,138 the hybrid core–shell ones,48,51etc. These new application investigations were updated by us below or throughout the review with the corresponding knowledge points.

3.3.1 Catalysis. 
Dendritic silica particles with center-radial pore channels can be very useful as catalyst supports for the loading of various NPs with catalytic activity on the pore surfaces or the introduction of active catalytic species in the silica frameworks.7,16,18,21,22,30,31,41,65,66,70–79,82,84,85,89,92,95,102,108,112–114,116,119–121,147,157,162–170 Herein, we just update the real-time catalysis applications of DFNS.
Qu's group pioneered the work on surface-active artificial enzyme (SAE) NPs through DFNS to successfully catalyze bioconversions in Pickering emulsions.154 DFNS spheres were first chemically modified with octyl groups on their outer surfaces, and with amino plus thiol groups inside the pores where ultrafine gold NPs (AuNPs) were deposited via Au–S bonds. Then thiol-ended catalytic groups were anchored onto AuNP surfaces to form self-assembled monolayers as the catalytic loci. Three types of SAEs were synthesized by changing the catalytic groups from peptides (N-acetyl-Cys-His-Phe) to metal complexes (CeIV–nitrilotriacetic acid complex), and further to DNAzymes (G-quadruplex/hemin), with the purpose of achieving esterase-, phosphotriesterase-, and peroxidase-mimetic activities, respectively. Finally, the as-prepared DFNS-based SAE particles were added to water with sonication and dodecane under vigorous shaking to form a Pickering emulsion. Various Pickering emulsions could be obtained with different oil phases (such as hexane, toluene, ethyl acetate and chloroform), and were stable to coalescence for at least one month by rationally locating diverse functional groups on SAE particles, which was favorable for long-term biphasic conversions. Peptide-anchored esterase-mimetic SAEs could catalyze oil-soluble p-nitrophenyl butyrate (PNPB) into water-soluble p-nitrophenolate anions (PNP) and butyric acid with a higher conversion efficiency of 96% at a higher reaction rate of 0.044 × 10−6 M s−1, compared to non-surface active SAEs (without octyl groups) in which a much lower conversion efficiency was observed at a reaction rate of 0.022 M s−1. Impressively, an excellent recyclability with 90% conversion efficiency was maintained even after 20 cycles, due to almost no loss of peptide and Au in ICP-MS and elemental analysis results. This biphasic biocatalysis on the basis of DFNS-related SAE particles exhibited outstanding generality for phosphotriesterase and peroxidase reactions as well. CeIV complexes in SAEs as catalytic centers could convert oil-soluble p-nitrophenyl diphenyl phosphate (PNPDPP) into hydrophilic p-nitrophenyl (PNP) with 85% conversion efficiency over the course of 60 min with a half-life of 21 min. While G-quadruplex/hemin-confined SAEs could catalytically oxidize hydrophobic (2-chloroethyl)ethyl sulfide (CEES, an organosulfur) to nontoxic sulfoxide under hydrophilic hydrogen peroxide, a remarkable decontamination capability was achieved with a half-life of 15.5 min. More importantly, an increase in the oil–water interfacial area from Pickering emulsions boosted the detoxification efficiency without the additional addition of H2O2. It was deduced that their enhanced catalytic activities are due to the unique 3D architecture of DFNS-based SAE NPs and the maximized oil–water interfacial area at Pickering emulsion droplet interfaces. Moreover, compared to native proteins, DFNS-based SAE spheres behaved as robust biocatalysts and could withstand prolonged exposure to aqueous–organic interfaces with negligible loss of activity.154 This team lately constructed a versatile light-controlled bioorthogonal catalyst by modifying Pd-embedded DFNS with a supramolecular complex of azobenzene (Azo) and β-cyclodextrin (CD) to artificially control the bioorthogonal reactions in living cells.223 The light-gated host–guest interactions between azo headgroups and β-CD played a critical role in reversibly regulating the catalytic activity, mimicking the allosteric regulation mechanism of bio-enzymes. This investigation not only provided a new perspective to customize heterogeneous catalysts with novel functions, but also had huge potential in synthesizing active molecules and activating prodrugs for precision therapy.
Wu's team also adopted chemically functionalized DFNS as Pickering emulsifiers to create dual-stimuli-responsive microcontainers with two payloads in different storage spaces for pre-programmable release.177 DFNS spheres were first modified with poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and then Nile red (NR) successively, yielding DFNS-PNIPAM-NR as Pickering emulsifiers of the final microcontainers. DFNS-PNIPAM-NR NPs were dispersed in 2-(N,N-diethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DEAEMA), 1,6-hexanedioldiacrylate (HDDA), carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA), and H2O to form stable Pickering emulsions. Polymerization reactions occurred and dual-stimuli-responsive hybrid microcontainers were produced with NR in DFNS spheres' pores and CFDA in the hollow core of the microcapsules. The hybrid microcontainers showed independent and programmed release of payloads under different stimuli (pH or temperature) without any mutual interference between guest molecules, because of the two kinds of separate storage spaces. One kind was the pores in DFNS; the other was the hollow core surrounded by a polymer shell. This UV-initiated polymerization of Pickering emulsions could be readily extended to prepare other hybrid microcontainers that respond to more stimuli, such as chemicals, a magnetic field, or reducing conditions. Therefore, this design strategy of suitably applying DFNS architectures was of particular fundamental interest, which paved the way for the application of such pre-programmed functional structures in materials science.177
Jiang's team constructed magnetic biocatalytic colloidosomes using lipase-grafted DFNS for enhanced enzyme catalysis via Pickering emulsification,224 based on their previous investigation on fabricating core–shell magnetic DFNS for lipase immobilization.116 Lipase-modified DFNS (DFNS-Lp), Grubbs' catalysts, and chemically modified Fe3O4 were introduced into a water–oil phase, forming the emulsion droplets enclosed by DFNS-Lp and magnetized with Fe3O4. The inner oil phases of the emulsion droplets were polymerized by ring-opening metathesis for core solidification to realize the DFNS-Lp colloidosome. Different from the core–shell DFNS spheres, the DFNS-Lp colloidosome had a combination of Fe3O4 NPs as the core surrounded by nonmagnetic DFNS-Lp. The final magnetic biocatalytic colloidosome could catalyze the esterification reactions between fatty acids and alcohols of different lengths in organic solvents, with higher productivities than those catalyzed by free lipase. Additionally, glycerol carbonate could be synthesized through transesterification by DFNS-Lp colloidosome catalysts with 85.2% conversion rate of glycerol, demonstrating their excellent versatility.224 Yang et al. lately also adopted DFNS spheres as the stabilizers to develop a special Pickering emulsion system accompanied by an ionic liquid (IL-in-oil) as the catalyst for heterogeneous hydroformylation of 1-dodecene with Rh-sulfo xantphos. The as-prepared Pickering system catalyst outperformed the IL-oil biphase, water-in-oil Pickering emulsion and IL-oil micelle system under similar reaction conditions.17
Costantini et al. immobilized β-Glucosidase (BG) into the wrinkles of DFNS for bio-catalyzing cellobiose hydrolysis.225 The Michaelis constant value (KM) of the DFNS-BG biocatalyst was slightly lower than that of the free enzyme, revealing increased enzyme–substrate affinity. A complete cellobiose hydrolysis could be realized with four consecutive runs, indicative of high operational stability of DFNS-BG. Polshettiwar's group combined ultrasmall pseudo-single atoms of gold (Au) with DFNS-NH2 to catalyze the oxidation reaction of organosilanes to silanols with a very high turnover number (TON) of approximately half a million (591000 for dimethylphenyl silane as a model substrate).56 In addition, the novel catalyst could achieve the alcoholysis of silane and the hydrosilylation of aldehydes with a very high TON. Zhang et al. developed Fe3O4@DFNS-NH2 to immobilize lipase from Candida rugosa (LCR) using glutaraldehyde as the linker.51 The immobilized LCR exhibited an enzyme activity of 630 U g−1, maintained over 560.7 U g−1 of the initial activity (89%) after 28 days, and 434.7 U g−1 (69%) after ten repeated 24 cycles with improved storage stability. Very recently, the same group fabricated Fe3O4@RF@KCC-1 and Fe3O4@SiO2@RF@KCC-1 composites for yolk–shell microspheres as recyclable supports for the immobilization of LCR.59
Polshettiwar's team recently fabricated DFNS-supported Au (DFNS/Au) to serve as a peroxidase, aiming to mimic enzymatic activity as an artificial enzyme.95 DFNS/Au showed superior enzymatic activity for tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) oxidation, which was significantly better than the natural horseradish peroxidase (HRP) enzyme and other artificial enzymes originating from nanomaterials. Hassankhani et al. first synthesized amino-functionalized polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) using APTES and POSS-Cl, and then the as-produced POSS-NH2 was utilized to modify core–shell Fe3O4@KCC-1 for loading Salen-Pd(II).84 The recoverable Fe3O4@(KCC-1)/POSS-NH2/Pd(II) could directly and selectively catalyze the chemical reaction of 2-acetyl-benzaldehyde with cyclopentadiene to obtain pentafulvene.


3.3.2 Bio-applications. 
Owing to their open 3D dendritic superstructures with center-radial pore channels and highly accessible internal surfaces, DFNS with center-radial pore channels can also be an ideal drug, protein, and/or gene carrier for the loading of the molecules with varied sizes to cure cancer, tumour, stroke, etc.10,11,19,20,32–34,40,43,63,67,102,104,123,125,142,155,173,174,176–179
Zhang et al. manufactured traceable, bone-targeted, and defect-related luminescent DFNS carriers for enhanced osteogenic differentiation through a series of chemical modifications and target immobilizations.226 DFNS supports were chemically modified with amino silane, succinic anhydride, alendronate (ALN) and diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) to form group-mixed DFNS–ALN–DTPA where ALN worked as a bone targeting ligand for controlled dexamethasone (DEX) delivery. DEX and Gd3+ were then immobilized onto DFNS–ALN–DTPA, and the resultant Gd(DTPA)2− played a role in contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The final products of DEX-loaded DFNS spheres could significantly enhance the alkaline phosphatase activity and promote the formation of matrix nodules of bone mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs). This traceable and bone-homing delivery system offered a general design strategy for osteoporosis therapy.226 Hu et al. recently confined hydrophobic quantum dots (QDs) into the nanochannels of mercapto-terminated DFNS spheres with high loading capacities.227 The encapsulated DFNS/QDs with an alkylsilane layer could simultaneously accelerate the homogeneous inorganosilica shell formation and prevent QDs from optical degradation induced by ligand exchange in the following procedure. These confined DFNS/QD colloids not only had good compatibility for different coloured QDs with well-preserved fluorescence, high optical stability, excellent colloidal stability, and versatile surface functionality, but also are an ultrasensitive, specific, and robust immunoassay for the C-reactive protein in clinical samples after integration with a lateral flow strip platform.227
The aforementioned dual-pore coexisting branched DFNS consisted of positively charged DFNS with large pores as cores and negatively charged nanorods with small pores as branches.214 The former could load relatively bulky and negatively charged siRNA; the latter could load doxorubicin with capping through the interaction between 1-adamantanethiol and β-cyclodextrin. By using the loading and release profile of model cargos from rhodamine 6G (Rho 6G) and fluorescent cyanine dye 5 labelled with DNA (Cy5-DNA), the feasibility of the dual-modal drug delivery system proved to be realizable, exhibiting therapeutic efficacy against human cervical cancer cell line HeLa via the combinational chemotherapy of Bcl-2siRNA and doxorubicin in vitro. The seaurchin-type DFNS could realize controlled release of dual-cargos with excellent loading capacity and low cytotoxicity. Each cargo-release was accomplished by the first disulfide cleavage for the release of a small molecule inside the branches, and the second anion exchange for the release of a nucleic acid inside DFNS. The excellent gene–chemo combinational therapeutic efficiency and the combinational cancer therapy were successfully demonstrated via a series of quantitative analyses and against the human cervical cancer cell line, respectively.214 Stellate mercapto-grafted DFNS spheres (DFNS-SH) with large pores were modified with aza-dibenzo-cyclooctyne (DBCO) derivatives to trigger copper-free click chemistry reactions for the conjugation of azide-terminated cargos like 5-carboxytetramethylrhodamine azide (TAMRA).209 The as-obtained DFNS–DBCO–TAMRA composites could realize controllable release of TAMRA in HeLa cells. The release of cargoes could be controlled in specific buffer solutions, combined with different stimuli-responsive linkers, like redox-sensitive disulfide bridged and pH-sensitive acetal. In order to develop a pH-responsive block copolymer gate system, Jonuleit et al. first coated DFNS supports with charged hyper-branched polyethylenimine (PEI) and nonionic hydrophilic polyethylene glycol (PEG), then encapsulated tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and finally delivered them into various cancer cell lines and dendritic cells to induce cell death in a time- and dose-dependent manner.228 The loaded TNF-α was stable for up to 5 days in the medium, and its half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) was reduced by more than two orders of magnitude. Hadadzadeh et al. lately coated the reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanosheets with folate-conjugated DFNS, and then immobilized gold NPs on the surface.229 The obtained sandwich-like nano-composite could serve as a multifunctional smart nanocarrier not only for curcumin (Cur) targeted delivery, but also for cell imaging with good biodegradability, excellent biocompatibility, and high drug loading capacity. Along with sustained-release and pH-responsive properties, this novel drug delivery system could be used as a potent anticancer agent for breast cancer therapies.
Zhu et al. fabricated a kind of aldehyde functionalized DFNS by chemically grafting triethoxysilylbutyraldehyde onto the pre-prepared DFNS lately, which was denoted as DFNS-CHO.230 DFNS-CHO could load bovine serum albumin (BSA) owing to the formation of imine bonds between aldehyde groups and primary amines. The confined BSA could be released from DFNS-CHO just in an acidic environment, which made DFNS-CHO a potential nanocarrier for pH-responsive protein drug delivery.230 Tang et al. first modified DFNS spheres with Schiff-base linked imidazole, and then grafted DOX and survivin shRNA expressing plasmid (iSur-pDNA) on their surfaces with high loading capacity.13 In the weakly acidic endosomes or lysosomes, the cleavage of the Schiff-base linkage throughout the as-formed nanocomplexes could lead to microenvironment-specific release of both DOX and iSur-pDNA. Simultaneously, the imidazole modification could evoke efficient endosomal escape via the proton sponge effect, thereby enhancing gene silencing efficiency and nuclear accumulation of iSur-pDNA. An improved inhibitory effect on in vitro cancer cell proliferation and in vivo tumor growth could be observed as well.


3.3.3 DFNS spheres as hard templates. 
DFNS spheres were commonly utilized as hard templates to develop other dendritic fibrous NPs. The hard template methodology actually involved the replication process of one original structure into another one with the corresponding inversed architecture. The regular models shown in Fig. 16a1–a3 were illustrated for comparison. When the templates were removed after precursors had been incorporated, NPs with adverse architectures were obtained. For the irregular DFNS model (Fig. 16b1–b3), the as-prepared replica had a uniform texture with conic pillars radial from the core to the outer surface where the tiny parts of these pillars gathered in the center. As for the practical DFNS model, the as-prepared replica had irregular features as well. The thickness of the nanowrinkles in the DFNS model was too thin because of huge obstructions from software simulation, which made it difficult to observe the replica's internal structure. However, it could be imagined that it should be difficult to distinguish the adverse architecture of the product from that of the practical DFNS model as the thickness of the nanowrinkles increased. TEM images of DFNS templates and their replica were very similar, which shows that the morphologies of the as-prepared replica and the DFNS template were identical. Yi et al. reported that the morphologies of the as-prepared replica and DFNS template were the same.112 Interestingly, NPs with similar inversed architectures have been directly synthesized and became prominent in biochemistry very recently. Some significant examples are illustrated in Fig. S3 and S4.†
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagrams of fabricating nanospheres by utilizing DFNS spheres as hard templates. (a) The regular model, and (b) the irregular one. 


3.3.4 Other applications. 
Polshettiwar et al. recently observed a special photochromism phenomenon from a spiropyran solution in the presence of DFNS.94 Specifically, a colorless suspension containing spiropyran and DFNS could change to blue by UV irradiation without stirring, while the color turned to red by irradiation under stirring. The change of the colors was attributed to the photo-generated merocyanine in a nonpolar environment (toluene, blue) and in a protonated surrounding (on DFNS, red). Furthermore, the authors utilized DFNS to adsorb merocyanine in a spiropyran solution under UV irradiation, giving rise to a red colored hybrid which exhibited negative photochromism by visible light irradiation.160 The as-prepared DFNS hybrids were mixed with organophilic clay by a solid-state doping to realize excellent reversibility of color change. It was deduced that DFNS and organophilic clay separately accommodated the merocyanine (colored) and photogenerated spiropyran (colorless) isomers.
Apart from immobilization of LCR in DFNS,51,59 Zhang et al. prepared glutathione (GSH)-imprinted thermosensitive DFNS via precipitation copolymerization, on whose surfaces functional monomers methacrylic acid and N-isopropyl acrylamide polymerized with N,N′-methylene bisacrylamide as cross-linking agents.53 The GSH-imprinted polymer-DFNS exhibited saturation adsorption capacity (85 mg g−1 within 2 h) and good selective adsorption for GSH (IF = 3.22). Panneerselvam et al. developed core–shell (Fe3O4 + MnO2)@DFNS-RhB as a sensing probe to detect Cu(II) in an aqueous solution.52 Tüysüz et al. loaded Co3O4 nanoclusters onto DFNS pores to catalyze the oxygen evolution reaction with the Ru(bpy)32+–S2O82− photo-sensitizer and sacrificial reagent system.55 Huang et al. fabricated hybrid solid amino-based DFNS-NH2 and vinyl-based DFNS-CHCH2 to conjugate pH-sensitive drug polymers and fluorescent nanomaterials, by embedding the europium(III) complex or immobilizing large molecule fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–bovine serum albumin.15

3.4 Dendritic fibrous nano-organosilica (DFNOS)
As introduced in Section 2.1.1, dendritic mesoporous organosilica nanoparticles (DMONs) were developed by Yu et al. for the first time in 2016.136 We denote DMONs as dendritic fibrous nano-organosilica (DFNOS) as well. Slightly different from typical syntheses of DFNS, 1,2-bis(triethoxysilyl)-ethane (BTEE) was utilized as an additional organosilica precursor (Si–CH2–CH2–Si) besides the inorganic silica precursor TEOS and sodium salicylate (NaSal) as an extra structure-directing agent besides CTAB (Fig. 17A).138 Interestingly, the as-prepared DFNOS spheres shown in Fig. 17B(a–c) exhibited a unique composition gradient across their skeletons.136 The inorganic silica content gradually decreases from the DFNOS center (core) to the outer surface; the organic silica content gradually increased from the core to the outer. The composition gradient originated from the salicylate anion (Sal−) which influenced charge distribution of the hybrid matrix by partially neutralizing CTA+. Sal− also inhibited the hydrolysis and condensation rates of organosilica BTEE, and facilitated penetration into the micelles through its hydrophobic portion. Surprisingly, hollow DFNOS (HDFNOS) or HDFNOS-1S shown in Fig. 17d–f, could be obtained with an inner hollow cavity and radial pore channels in the shell by etching DFNOS with alkaline Na2CO3, because most inorganic silica were removed due to their lower stability compared to organosilica.231 Owing to the existence of organosilica in their frameworks, the hemolytic activities of both DFNOS and HDFNOS were significantly lower than that of pure silica NPs. However, HDFNOS spheres exhibited a higher loading capacity (more than 6 times) for bovine serum albumin (BSA) than that of DFNOS, because of the increased surface area, pore volume and organic content. The successful syntheses of DFNOS and HDFNOS with controllable pore structures, compositions and morphologies were of substantial advances over traditional DFNS and HDFNS, which opened up the possibility of delivering drugs for biomedicine, especially for large sized bio-macromolecules.
 Fig. 17  A) Illustration of the synthesis procedures of DFNOS and HDFNOS (HDFNOS-1S), as well as double-shelled DFNOS and HDFNOS (HDFNOS-2S) (reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). (B) SEM (a and d), TEM (b and e), and electron tomography slice (c and f) of DFNOS (a, b, and c) and HDFNOS (d, e, and f) (reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016). (C) TEM (a and b) and SEM (c and d) images of HDFNOS-2S, the corresponding dark-field STEM image (e) and EDS mapping (f, g, and h) (reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). 
Very recently, the same team developed multi-shell DFNOS and HDFNOS by coating the already formed DFNOS-1S with a similar synthesis procedure.138 It was postulated that the coated layer had a similar composition gradient with the inner part rich in inorganosilica and poor in organosilica, but the outer part rich in organosilica and poor in inorganosilica. During the etching process, HF removed most of the relatively unstable O–Si–O inorganosilica frameworks, giving rise to the formation of void space between adjacent shells. Double-shelled DFNOS (DFNOS-2S) and hollow DFNOS (HDFNOS-2S) were fabricated as typical examples shown in Fig. 17A–C. Inorganic silica HDFNS-2S spheres were obtained by calcinating hybrid HDFNOS-2S to remove the –CH2–CH2– alkyl chain. The loading capacities of HDFNOS-1S, HDFNOS-2S, and HDFNS-2S were excellent with complete adsorption for ovalbumin (OVA) and 80% adsorption for B16F10 tumor cell fragments (TF). The release profile of HDFNOS-2S was more sustained than those of HDFNOS-1S and HDFNS-2S, because both the organosilica rich composition and double-shelled structure were essential factors for the long-term sustained cargo release. HDFNOS-1S and HDFNOS-2S exhibited superior cell uptake performances for fluorescein isothio-cyanate (FITC) conjugated OVA (OVA–FITC). Furthermore, HDFNOS-2S with a rich organosilica composition and double-shelled texture was favourable for the enhanced adjuvant effect in vivo, because HDFNOS-2S and TF could prolong the tumor-free rate of rice and delay the tumor growth up to 31 days, whereas the other two groups had a 100% tumor occurrence within 25 days. This pioneering investigation clearly proved that hollow dendritic fibrous nano-organosilica with multiple shells was an excellent adjuvant for effective cancer immunotherapy.138
The great discrepancy of GSH concentrations between intracellular and extracellular environments had been widely applied as a stimulus to trigger the disintegration of the disulfide bond (–S–S–) incorporated structures.130,232 Yu et al. accordingly introduced bis[3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl]tetrasulfide (BTES) with the partial structure of Si–(CH2)3–S–S–S–S–(CH2)3–Si as an organosilica source to create GSH-responsive biodegradable DFNOS for safe protein delivery.137 Disulfide groups were homogeneously distributed in the hybrid frameworks of DFNOS spheres. The pore structures of ethane-bridged DFNOS were well-preserved after incubation in 10 mM GSH solution, while pores from BTES-incorporated DFNOS suffered degradation, confirming that the GSH leads to –S–S– cleavage (–C–C– groups were quite stable). Especially, the nanochannels' diameters in disulfide-brideged DFNOS could be tuned just by changing the NaSal content, yielding large- and small-pore DFNOS. For normal cells with relatively low intracellular GSH levels, degradation rates of large- and small-pore DFNOS were similar. For cancer cells with relatively high intracellular GSH concentrations, large-pore DFNOS spheres had a much faster degradation rate than that of the small-pore ones. Thus, a kind of pore structure-dependent GSH-responsive degradation behavior was finally realized, which accelerated BTES-incorporated DFNOS as a smart safe nanocarrier with cancer cell specific degradability for therapeutic biomacromolecules in cancer treatment. The choice of a certain silane with a particular functionality actually inspired us to design different DFNOS systems for our target reactions.131–134
By modifying the abovementioned work by Yu et al.,136 Shi and coworkers also fabricated biodegradable and biocompatible DFNOS spheres.233 Then they were used as supports to load Fe3O4 NPs as inorganic nanoenzyme catalysts into the large pores from DFNOS (DFNOS/Fe3O4) for the Fenton reaction. Finally, natural glucose oxidase (GOD) as an enzyme catalyst was integrated into the large pores to fabricate sequential DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD nanocatalysts (Fig. 18a). SEM images in Fig. 18b–d exhibited the morphologies of DFNOS supports, DFNOS/Fe3O4, and DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD, respectively. GOD from the as-prepared nanocatalysts could not only effectively deplete the glucose in tumour cells via nutrient deprivation, but also produce plenty of H2O2 for the subsequent chemo-Fenton catalysis through Fe3O4 NPs under the specific acidic microenvironment of the tumour (Fig. 18e) with outstanding catalytic performances. This sequential catalytic reaction could efficiently generate highly toxic hydroxyl radicals (˙OH), leading to tumour-cell apoptosis and death. The in vivo therapeutic ability of DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD proved to be a significant tumour-suppression effect toward both the 4T1 mammary tumour xenograft and U87 tumour xenograft. Very recently, the same group immobilized catalase in the pore channels of disulfide-bridged DFNOS spheres. The as-prepared multiscale hybrid catalytic nanoreactors, i.e., DFNOS/catalase, were explored as both contrast and synergistic agents for ultrasound-guided high intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) cancer surgery.234 DFNOS/catalase nanoreactors induced H2O2 decomposition in a relatively mild manner by continuously releasing O2 bubbles as the echo amplifier for ultrasound imaging. The accumulative O2 gas gave rise to the greatly enlarged ablated volume under HIFU exposure because of the enhanced cavitation effect. Such an on-demand H2O2-responsive gas releasing mechanism enabled the long-term contrast enhancement of ultrasound imaging within pronounced coagulative necrosis and H2O2-enriched tumor regions. In conclusion, perfluorocarbon-free DFNOS/catalase realized tumor-sensitive theranostic functions without pre-stimulating action, which made HIFU surgery more efficient and precise for future clinical applications. Very recently, this team reported on the large-scale fabrication of monodisperse disulfide-bridged DFNOS particles with controllable architectures, adjustable compositions, and desirable morphologies.235 Apart from spherical DFNOS with different pore sizes controlled by varying the mass ratio of TEA to CTAC, the rod-like ones were also successfully developed with various lengths to diameter ratios by changing the molar quantities of CTAB and NH4OH. In addition, the pore size of the as-synthesized DFNOS spheres could be tuned using different dosages of BTES. The as-obtained DFNOS spheres were modified with PEG groups. The resultant DFNOS–PEG further loaded DOX, forming biocompatible and biodegradable DFNOS–PEG–DOX with significantly improved drug-delivery efficiency and enhanced tumour-suppressing effect for combating cancer.235
 Fig. 18  Fabrication and catalytic–therapeutic schematics of sequential DFNOS spheres. Synthetic procedure for DFNOS/Fe3O4 and DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD nanocatalysts (a), TEM images of DFNOS (b), DFNOS/Fe3O4 (c), and DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD (d) spheres, respectively. The schematic of the sequential catalytic–therapeutic mechanism of DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD for generation of hydroxyl radicals to cure cancer (e).233 Reproduced from ref. 233 Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2017. 
Chen et al. invented a kind of biodegradable and biocompatible monodisperse HDFNOS with large pores for delivering biomacromolecules recently.236 In a typical synthesis, inorganic DFNS served as the core and was coated with disulfide-bridged DFNOS, giving rise to core–shell DFNS@DFNOS. After removing residual organosilica precursors and extracting CTAC templates, the inorganic DFNS cores were selectively etched. The choice of BTES was based on the fact that disulfide groups could accelerate the biodegradation of silica,237 different to the disulfide bonds which were disintegrated by GSH stimuli as stated above.232 The as-obtained HDFNOS spheres exhibited high drug-loading capacity for large biomolecular proteins (ribonuclease A), efficient intracellular uptake, and a high therapeutic outcome against cancer cells.236 Without removing DFNS cores to generate the hollow architecture, Shi et al. recently utilized core–shell DFNS@DFNOS-BTES which loaded desirable genes and drugs for the therapy of multidrug-resistant (MDR) cancer.238 The relatively small pore channels in inorganic DFNS cores provided reservoirs for loading small drug molecules like doxorubicin; while the larger mesopores in the organosilica shell could encapsulate large-sized siRNA molecules. The outer organosilica framework integrated with disulfide bonds from BTES precursors could enable the unique responsiveness to the reductive tumor microenvironment for controlled release of the loaded siRNA gene, followed by the drug DOX. The first released siRNA reversed the cancer cells' MDR and down-regulated P-gp expression in the cell membranes, thus enhancing the antitumor effect of the subsequently released DOX from inorganic DFNS cores. Wang et al. lately developed a facile route to synthesize uniform ethane-bridged DFNOS with large radial pore openings of 17 to 78 nm in a water–ethanol and n-hexane biphasic system via an assembly-reconstruction process.208 During the formation process, CTAB micelles in the organosilica gradually swelled with the diffusion of n-hexane, which induced the reconstruction of the DFNOS skeleton, leading to radially oriented large pores. After chemically modified with APTES, DFNOS-NH2 could load electronegative BSA and react with succinic anhydride to connect PEI for small interference RNA loading (siRNA).
Very recently, Leong et al. introduced diselenide-bond (–SeSe–) organosilica moieties into the framework of DFNS to fabricate biodegradable DFNOS.239 The as-prepared diselenide-bridged DFNOS could first encapsulate cytotoxic RNase A into the 8–10 nm internal pores through electrostatic interactions, and then release the payload via a matrix-degradation controlled mechanism upon exposure to oxidative or redox conditions. Further surface cloaking with cancer-cell-derived membrane fragments, these bioinspired RNase A-loaded DFNOS spheres displayed homologous targeting and immune-invasion characteristics inherited from the source cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo. Jiang et al. fabricated core–shell magnetic ethane-bridged DFNOS by utilizing BTEE as a co-condensation precursor and Fe3O4 as a core for lipase immobilization.116 The as-obtained Fe3O4@DFNOS spheres were employed as supports for covalently immobilizing Candida antarctica lipase B (CALB). The maximum immobilized amount was 93 mg g−1, and the specific hydrolytic activity was up to 22.7 U g−1. The obtained Fe3O4@DFNOS-CALB displayed outstanding pH stability, retained 65% initial activity after incubation in cyclohexane at 60 °C for 96 h, and retained 90% after storage at room temperature for 42 days. In addition, the as-prepared Fe3O4@DFNOS-CALB catalysts could facilitate the effective synthesis of alkyl levulinates through the esterification reactions of levulinic acid alcohols with different chain lengths (like n-butyl alcohol, n-caprylic alcohol, and n-lauryl alcohol) in a solvent-free system. It showed good reusability of 10 times where 85% initial activity was retained in catalyzing butyl-levulinates and more than 96% in catalyzing long chain alkyl levulinates.116
4 Dendritic fibrous nano-titania (DFNT)
Titania (TiO2) as one kind of significant material has been widely studied from synthesis to applications because of its particular optical and electronic properties. Especially, numerous efforts have been made to produce mesoporous TiO2 materials with uniform size, high surface area, and large pore volume. The as-prepared products were further applied in photocatalysis, lithium-ion batteries, solar cells, catalyst supports, sensors, etc.240 As DFNS boomingly developed, DFNT spheres appeared and attracted much attention of scientists owing to their fascinating 3D radial morphologies. It is noteworthy that, like other approaches to prepare silica- or titania-based mesoporous materials, the synthesis methods for DFNT can be generally divided into two categories. One is the hard-templating method in which original templates with definite structures are transferred into reverse ones. The other one is the soft-templating method which uses commonly available surfactants.
4.1 Synthesis techniques

4.1.1 DFNS hard template method and an emulsion technique. 
Our group tried to synthesize DFNT by a modified approach. The raw solvent TEOS was merely replaced with tetrabutyl orthotitanate (TBOT). Other reagents and operations were identical to the KCC-1 route.5 SEM images of the as-prepared titania-based products are shown in Fig. 19a,a′. Disordered and unsystematic nano-fragments with ill-defined spherical structures were polydisperse in sizes (5.0 μm); severe agglomerations existed among the particles. Further observations at 300 nm demonstrated that unpredictable pores randomly distributed on their surfaces. These results revealed that the emulsion system for KCC-1 could not be applied to synthesize DFNT spheres, and CPB molecules acted as templates to a certain extent. The reason might be as follows. Hydrolysis rates for TBOT and TEOS are 1 × 10−3 mol−1 s−1 and 5 × 10−9 mol−1 mol−1 s−1, respectively.241 The former is more than five orders of magnitude greater than the latter. The corresponding condensation rates are 30 mol−1 mol−1 s−1 and 1 × 10−4 mol−1 mol−1 s−1, more than three orders of magnitude greater. In other words, TBOT monomers simultaneously hydrolyzed and condensed before generation of micelles with CPB molecules as templates, giving rise to disordered nano-fragments. Titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) was also tried but failed, because it easily fumes in air, let alone the water-containing emulsion solution.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of titania-based products (a) synthesized by a modified KCC-1 route, (b) prepared by utilizing KCC-1 as a hard template and TBOT as a filler at room temperature, (c) prepared by utilizing KCC-1 as a hard template and TBOT as a filler, therein, the former was heated to 120 °C and the latter was cooled to 0 °C before mixing. 
It is well known that mesoporous silica structures were usually adopted as hard templates to synthesize other mesoporous materials like mesoporous carbons with controlled morphologies and structures. As a result, construction of DFNT spheres by using DFNS spheres as templates is conceptually straightforward, and it may be a routine strategy with good control and reliability. KCC-1 particles were then utilized by filling their dendritic fibrous channels with TBOT or TiCl4 at room temperature. As exhibited in Fig. 19b and b′, segmental KCC-1 spheres and the partial region of a certain sphere were coated with TBOT or TiCl4 film which was discrete and thin. These nanochannels were cone-like with the diameter increasing from the KCC-1 core to the outer surface, and could be approximately treated as nanotubes with one side sealed. Airtight air in dendritic channels repelled the TBOT or TiCl4 solution from the areas. In order to eliminate this effect, we heated KCC-1 to 120 °C and cooled the TBOT or TiCl4 solution to 0 °C and then mixed them as quickly as possible based on the principle of thermal expansion and contraction. The result was not satisfactory either, but KCC-1 surfaces were coated with a more compact and thicker film (Fig. 19c and c′). Capillarity can be the most appropriate analogy for these nanochannel effects. A liquid is able to flow in a narrow space without the assistance of, or even in opposition to, external forces like gravity. Taking a glass tube and water as examples, water can climb up to ca. 30 mm height in a glass tube with 1 mm diameter, manifesting that the liquid height is inversely proportional to the tube's diameter. The nanochannels sealed on one side could absolutely repel liquids from entering their cavities, let alone that the capillarity effect in KCC-1 might be severely magnified especially at the nanoscale.
Since the discovery of KCC-1, Polshettiwar et al. have been attempting to synthesize titania-based nanospheres with dendritic fibrous morphologies.242 They adopted a very similar system to the KCC-1 synthesis process, in which CTAB, urea, water, cyclohexane, TiF4, and 1-pentanol were transferred to a Teflon-sealed microwave reactor under 800 W microwave irradiation. DFNT could not be produced, i.e., the dendritic fibrous morphology could not be duplicated for titania by the KCC-1 pathway despite usage of TiF4 (Fig. S5†). It was interesting that quasi nanoflowers or nanospheres with hierarchical structures were formed at different temperatures for various time periods. When the reactive solution was irradiated using microwaves at 120 °C for 5 min, aggregated flower-like NPs developed with diameters ranging from 200 to 300 nm. A large number of layers interconnected with each other were self-organized in three dimensions to form flowery structures. HRTEM revealed that these organized 3D spheres were made of numerous bundles of multiple rolled layers or sheets. As the reaction time was prolonged to one hour, the bundles segregated into individual thick rods of 35 to 40 nm. Up to 3 h, the stacked tetragonal pyramidal nano-rods radiated from their centers assembled into asterisk-like structures. Temperature-dependent experiments were also conducted at 100 °C and 80 °C. The former could give rise to asterisk-like particles of 500 to 700 nm sizes with nonhomogeneous rods with sharp edges; the latter led to another flower-like morphology with interwoven sharp edged nano-rods. A series of referential control experiments indicated that CTAB served as a structure-directing agent. Urea and organic solvents had no effect on their hierarchical structures and morphologies. Microwave irradiation played a more key role in the morphology control than that of the hydrothermal autoclave method.242 To make a long story short, titanate emulsion systems with fast hydrolysis rates seemed to be unable to easily reproduce dendritic fibrous architectures.


4.1.2 An evaporation-driven oriented assembly approach. 
As stated above in Section 2.1.1, the EDOA technique developed by Zhao and coworkers is the unique state-of-the-art route that can create pure titania-based nanospheres with the most similar structural texture.129 On the whole, the as-prepared nanospheres possessed 3D centre-radial fibrous channels but without nanowrinkles as building units (see analysis in the ESI†), greatly different from that of spherical DFNPs. The nanochannels were more regular (ca. 5.5 nm) and the pores were smaller than those from DFNS in Fig. S1† (irregular quasi-pores, 10.9 to 35.2 nm), giving rise to closely packed cylindrical open ones. Herein, three significant factors restrained TBOT's hydrolysis and condensation rates. The first one was a smaller quantity of water. In the EDOA system, the weight ratio of H2O to TBOT was 1:17, while the weight ratio of H2O to TEOS in the KCC-1 system was 12:1. It was obvious that the water content was much lessened. The second one was a large amount of acid (HOAc and 36 wt% concentrated HCl) which was added to the EDOA, while very weak base (typically urea) was introduced into the KCC-1 system. The last one was the usage of lower temperatures, 40 °C and 80 °C, in the EDOA system while 120 °C for the KCC-1 system. What is more, the cryo-SEM technique was perfectly utilized to explore the reaction mechanism by harvesting the intermediates or products from the sol solutions at different intervals of time.129 In conclusion, the EDOA system deserved to be deeply probed into just like the KCC-1 system.

4.2 Dendritic fibrous nano-silica & titania hybrid
Polshettiwar's team offered an easier path to manufacture silica & titania nanospheres of this type (DFNST) lately by applying an ammonia-assisted solution-phase deposition technique. KCC-1 particles were first ultrasonically dispersed in ethanol as a suspension, then aqueous ammonia was added dropwise to the solution with a pH of 8. TBOT was added dropwise at room temperature, and finally the temperature was increased to 45 °C and maintained for 24 h under continuous stirring. Thereafter, silica from the intermediate products was partially dissolved using aqueous ammonia solution for formation of KCC-1 supported TiO2.92 This approach not only was facile and inexpensive, but also could duplicate dendritic fibrous topologies to the greatest degree. Yu et al. also successfully prepared DFNST through a post-treatment method by mimicking the process,7 in which DFNS spheres were mixed with TBOT and ethanol mixture solutions inside an airtight vacuum desiccator, and then slowly dried at room temperature for 48 h under vacuum. Very recently, Balkus et al. made great progress, and reported a facile and scalable process to directly synthesize DFNST by adding raw materials of silica and titania precursors progressively.30 In a typical synthesis, urea plus CTAB were mixed with butanol and water under vigorous stirring at room temperature. Then cyclohexane was introduced to the mixture and stirred to develop a milky emulsion, to which TEOS was added dropwise and stirred for another interval of time. The resulting mixture was heated to 70 °C for a certain time with continuous stirring. After that, titanium isopropoxide (TIP) solution in isopropanol was added with different Si to Ti ratios. The mixture was further kept at 70 °C to achieve 24 h in total. Concentrated HCl was used to remove the templates through reflux. Fig. 20a–d exhibit SEM and TEM images of the as-obtained DFNST particles. No matter which molar ratio was chosen for the Si to Ti ratio ranging from 20 to 80, dendritic fibrous nanospheres could be formed with nonuniform diameter sizes. Thus, disparate pore sizes could be obtained, even up to 50 nm at maximum from the cores to their surfaces. The Ti coordination environment was examined by diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectroscopy (Fig. 20e). Except for Ti-MCM-41 reference, DFNST samples exhibited no obvious absorption greater than 300 nm, indicating that bulk titanium dioxide was not present in the samples. The narrow absorption bands at ca. 215–225 nm were assigned to isolated tetrahedrally coordinated Ti sites, due to charge transfer from oxygen in a tetrahedral environment. Zhang et al. added the TBOT precursor to the cooled mother liquid which just satisfied the DFNS synthesis, and then the mixture was stirred for 12 hours at room temperature to develop Ti-containing DFNS.210 This path could maintain the DFNS morphology well and acquire DFNST conveniently. The cyclohexene epoxidation reaction catalyzed by DFNST showed a significant chemical reactivity with a CHO yield of 25.1%, higher than that of Ti-MCM-41 (22.9%).
 Fig. 20  TEM (a–d) and SEM images (a′–d′) of DFNST nanoparticles with different Si and Ti molar ratios. (a) Si:Ti = 20, (b) Si:Ti = 40, (c) Si:Ti = 67, and (d) Si:Ti = 80. (e) DR UV-vis spectra of DFNST samples. (f) A schematic illustration of the structural differences between DFNST and MCM-41 type catalysts.30 Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. 
Li et al. anchored nanocrystalline TiO2 with diameters of ca. 15 nm onto nanochannels of the DFNS support by a post-synthesis method.36 The as-obtained DFNS-TiO2 composites were utilized toward the degradation of MB. The optimal TiO2 loading (20 wt%) could achieve the complete MB removal within 70 min, showing outstanding durability for at least six reaction cycles. Very recently, Jang et al. employed DFNS spheres as core templates with titania coating, and hollow SiO2–TiO2 NPs with hierarchically arrayed internal surfaces were prepared by removing the core.27 It should be noted that even though the etching solution was sufficient to remove all SiO2, Si diffused and re-deposited with the assistance of sonication during the etching process. In the final product, Ti and Si were well-distributed throughout the entire bulk. The as-prepared hollow SiO2–TiO2 NPs were utilized as electro-rheological materials, exhibiting a ca. 1.9-fold enhancement in efficiency.
To sum up, the post-grafting method with DFNS as a hard template could endow the as-synthesized DFNST with the same topographic characteristics, including uniformity.7,92 However, some intrinsic disadvantages had to be confronted, like low product yields as a result of multistep synthetic process, decreased surface area originating from partial blocking of pores, and the lack of structural robustness upon template removal. The co-condensation approach in situ as a one-pot technique on the basis of the soft-templating method seemed to be simpler and easier on a large scale,30 because it did not require the fabrication and modification of original hard templates. More studies were needed for the latter to develop DFNST spheres with desired particle sizes and pore sizes. Two key parameters should be particularly taken into account. The first one was related to templates. Monodisperse spherical soft templates took shape by stabilizing the role of surfactants which imparted mesopore structures. The second was related to the self-assembly on account of the precursors' hydrolysis and condensation rates. Ordered self-assemblies of precursors and surfactants proceeded exclusively around the interfaces between the continuous phases and the spherical soft templates.
4.3 The most similar structures or preparation methods
The earlier section has illustrated that Ti-containing precursors rapidly hydrolyzed in aqueous solution compared to Si-containing ones. Therefore, complex nanoscale TiO2 configurations with tunable morphologies still remained a major challenge and seemed to be relatively hardly realized. To circumvent the problems, Kim et al. synthesized 3D spherical TiO2 nanostructures with nanobranches surrounded through a simple hydrothermal synthesis by adjusting the precursor hydrolysis rate and the surfactant aggregation.243 The as-prepared favorable architectures were also denoted as “dendritic” (Fig. S6†), but with larger particle sizes above 2.0 μm. Wu et al. constructed flower-like hierarchical TiO2 composed of abundant highly crystallized anatase nanocrystals via a one-step template-free hydrothermal method with titanocene dichloride (Ti(Cp)2Cl2).244 The morphologies of intermediate products were very similar to that of the spherical DFNPs with nanowrinkles in SEM images, as displayed in Fig. S7.† The above two examples were typical and instructive strategies to synthesize multilevel TiO2 nanostructures with pseudo-DFNT particles by controlling the precursors' hydrolysis rates and the surfactants' behaviours. More detailed research studies should be carried out to find the favourable parameters for DFNT.245,246
Interestingly, Lou's team fabricated a series of TiO2-based nanospheres with extremely similar imaging to that of the spherical DFNPs both in SEM and TEM, as displayed in Fig. 21.247,248 These products were assembled from anatase TiO2 nanosheets (NSs) with exposed (001) high-energy facets via a solvothermal synthesis with or without a templating approach, thus denoted as TiO2 NS hierarchical spheres (TiO2 NSHSs). For the one with the simplest structure (i.e., TiO2 nanospheres in Fig. 21a and b),247 it was concluded that the entire sphere was composed of self-organized TiO2-NSs and the thicknesses of the NSs were 3 nm. As a result, we cannot see obvious nanochannels or quasi-pores on TiO2 NSHS surfaces from their SEM images and apparent 3D centre-radial textures from their TEM images. For core–shell SiO2@TiO2-NSs and SiO2@SnO2@TiO2-NSs (Fig. 21c and d), as well as the corresponding hollow TiO2-NSs and hollow SnO2@TiO2-NSs (Fig. 21e and f, selectively etching SiO2 in a dilute HF solution),248 it is hard to distinguish their morphologies from that of the core–shell KCC-1 or the hollow ones in TEM (Fig. 15c and e).
 Fig. 21  SEM (a–f) and TEM images (a′–f′) of TiO2-based nanospheres with extremely similar imaging to that of the spherical DFNPs. (a and b) TiO2 nanosheet hierarchical spheres, termed TiO2-NSs;247 (c) core–shell SiO2@TiO2-NSs;248 (d) core–shell SiO2@SnO2@TiO2-NSs;248 (e) hollow TiO2-NSs;248 and (f) hollow SnO2@TiO2-NSs.248 Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010. Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010. 
4.4 Applications
Due to the wide band gap, TiO2 has been recognized as one of the most promising semiconductor materials for photocatalytic, photovoltaic, and sensing applications.243 Hierarchically structured 3D TiO2 NPs constituted of 1D or 2D building units were proved to be more attractive semiconductor materials. For one thing, multi-reflection exerted from their numerous voids could enhance light absorption and thus exhibit higher photo efficiencies. For another, more exposed surface regions facilitated the adsorption and photoreaction of reactants. Generally speaking, catalytic activity decreases with an increased TiO2 loading for these hierarchical structures because of the loss of the surface area caused by the blocking of pores.92 Things got different for multilevel DFNT or DFNST, because they had the advantages of unique 3D open dendritic superstructures, central-radial pore channels, and highly accessible internal surfaces. The relatively large surface area remained intact even with the highest TiO2 loading.

4.4.1 Catalysis. 
DFNST, which was developed by Balkus et al. with a one-pot method and further modified by trimethylsilylation to tune their surface hydrophobicities,30 was utilized as a catalyst for cyclohexene epoxidation with and without a solvent. In the former situation, i.e., with acetonitrile as the solvent, DFNST exhibited superior catalytic performance over Ti-containing MCM-41 due to better diffusion of reactants through the intrinsic radial wrinkled structures rather than one dimensional pores (MCM-41, Fig. 20f). In the latter case, the silylated DFNST showed high activity with an epoxide turnover frequency (TOF) of 1401 h−1 and with an epoxide selectivity of 95%. On the whole, DFNST could act as excellent catalysts by taking advantage of not only individual characteristics (like mesopores and radial wrinkled architectures), but also external conditions (like silylation and solvents).


4.4.2 Photocatalysis. 
Pure DFNT spheres produced by the EDOA method were applied to decompose MB dye as the photocatalyst.129 Compared with commercial Degussa TiO2 P25 and conventional mesoporous TiO2 bulk, the photocatalytic decomposition was much faster and could be completed within 12 min under 365 nm of UV irradiation. DFNST prepared via a post-treatment method were also used to degrade a typical organic dye methylene green (MG) as a photocatalyst in comparison with P25.7 The dye adsorption capacity ranged from 68.98% to 53.31% as Ti to Si molar ratios (0.04–0.4) increased in DFNST, while P25 possessed only 1.96%. DFNST samples showed significant reductions of dye concentrations in the UV-off period owing to physical adsorption, whereas the reference P25 exhibited negligible change. During UV-on, DFNST hybrids showed as low as 1.25% reduction within the first 4 h, comparable to the commercial P25 with which the dye concentration dramatically dropped to less 1% in the first 4 h. Total organic carbon (TOC) analyses of the supernatants were carried out to further evaluate their photocatalytic activities. DFNST catalysts showed dramatic reductions in TOC values of 87–98%, while P25 was of 36%. These results indicated that most of the organic dye molecules were photodegraded by DFNST due to their unique features of 3D dendritic structures, radial open channels, and abundant TiO2 active sites. DFNST lately created by coating TiO2 on DFNS through a simple and sustainable solution deposition technique was adopted to generate H2 from water using Pt as a cocatalyst. Notably, these catalysts showed a very high H2 yield (26.4 mmol g−1 h−1) under UV light, which was one of the best reported.92 These DFNST could be stable for 12 h and recyclable with nearly unchanged photocatalytic activities. In addition, the authors dissolved some skeletons of the as-prepared DFNST hybrids for higher Ti loadings. Surprisingly, the catalytic activity of the sample suffered from an obvious decrease even with a higher TiO2 concentration, possibly because the fibrous morphology collapsed and further led to a loss of isolated Ti sites.
Polshettiwar's team manufactured DFNST hybrid nanospheres via the atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique by depositing TiO2 on KCC-1 hard templates for photocatalytic degradation of RhB.79 They found that the TiO2 loading on the silica supports (KCC-1, SBA-15, and MCM-41) kept increasing with the increase in ALD cycles, and became saturated after 60 deposition cycles. The as-prepared TiO2 layers had amorphous nature and could be transformed to crystalline TiO2 at 700 °C. Correspondingly, some small and monodisperse TiO2 NPs could be observed on these samples. Table 2 compares some properties of the as-prepared KCC-1/TiO2, SBA-15/TiO2, and MCM-41/TiO2. Although the TiO2 loading and surface area of KCC-1/TiO2 were not the largest, TiO2 loadings on per unit surface area were twice those of SBA-15/TiO2 and MCM-41/TiO2. Quantum confinement effects could be achieved in KCC-1/TiO2 due to these small and monodisperse NPs. KCC-1/TiO2 needed 53 min to completely degrade RhB with a best TOF value, while P25 and other two types of catalysts could not be achieved. Moreover, the KCC-1/TiO2 catalyst could be reused for at least five cycles with negligible loss in activity, indicative of their robustness. The KCC-1/TiO2 catalyst could also be applied to effectively decompose MB and phenol dyes via fast dye adsorption and desorption. These results indicated that both the surface area and the accessibility to the surface area were critical parameters for TiO2 loading, because KCC-1 had more open 3D fibrous morphologies than those of SBA-15 and MCM-41.79
Table 2 Some physicochemical characteristics and photocatalytic abilities for TiO2-coated KCC-1, SBA-15, MCM-41 and P25, respectively




Samples
TiO2 loading (wt%)
Surface area (m2 g−1)
TiO2 loadinga (wt% SA)
Dec. timeb (min)
TOFc value (10−7 min−1)





a TiO2 loading on per unit surface area (SA).
b Decomposition time for RhB.
c Turnover frequency (TOF).





KCC-1/TiO2
57
598
0.095
53
522


SBA-15/TiO2
63
1391
0.045
210
122


MCM-41/TiO2
39
962
0.040
150
272


Degussa P25
Not given
Not given
Not given
90
Not given




Very recently, Piao et al. developed DFNST hybrid spheres by similar solution deposition, but these NPs had superparamagnetic properties with iron oxide nanoclusters as cores (noted as Fe3O4@DFNST).217 The as-prepared catalysts showed faster degradation kinetics than that of P25 for MB, and could be magnetically recovered easily from water.


4.4.3 Optoelectronic devices. 
Pure DFNT spheres were also applied as conducting mesoscopic photoanode films for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).129 DFNT loaded with more commercial dye N719 had higher light-scattering capacity in the visible and near-infrared (NIR) regions, higher power conversion efficiency (PCE), and more rapid electron transportation rate, due to their 3D open radially-oriented mesoporous configurations.

5 Dendritic fibrous nano-carbon (DFNC)
Mesoporous carbon-based materials are highly attractive because of their particular properties that greatly differentiate from silica-based or titania-based ones, such as chemical inertness, electrical conductivities, and hydrophobic features. These fascinating capabilities have been considered to play vital roles in electrical chemistry, catalysis, separation, drug delivery, etc.249 DFNC particles combine the above natural abilities and the unique 3D radial architectures. Section 3.3.3 has demonstrated that DFNS spheres could be utilized as hard templates to develop DFNT spheres. Similarly, DFNC could be obtained by nanocasting DFNS' morphologies. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the diameter sizes and pore sizes of DFNS vary in terms of their fabrication methods. As a result, the physicochemical properties of the as-obtained DFNC should be compared with reference to those of the DFNS templates. Besides, considering that there are only a few literature reports about DFNC and several for DFNBG, less subtle sections will be divided in each section, but for general understanding.
5.1 Syntheses and applications
DFNC spheres were expected to possess a much higher specific surface area than that of the sacrificed DFNS due to their light weight and accessibility of the inner surface. However, this discrepancy was not that obvious. It was impossible for carbon precursors to enter every interspace of DFNS templates, because of the following factors. First, there existed the magnified repelling effect from the quasi capillarity as illustrated in Section 4.1.1. Second, smaller nanochannels with tinier ends of the pores were not accessible for precursors during the reaction. Especially, some reagents from pre-treatments might occupy these spaces in advance. DFNS architectures with radial conical nanochannels clearly showed that the pores around their centers or cores became smaller. Thus, carbon precursors were less available in these interspaces, giving rise to sparse or even empty centers of DFNC spheres. Balkus's team found that some DFNC spheres originated from DFNS templates were incomplete with half-sphere shapes, inside which the centers or the cores were not that dense compared with DFNS.250 Takanabe and Chen et al. prepared hollow spherical DFNC after the removal of DFNS templates as well.37,147 In general, DFNC exhibited higher surface area than DFNS.

5.1.1 Pure carbon-based DFNC. 
As introduced above, the first DFNC example was realized by Yi et al. with DFNS spheres as sacrificial templates and PF resin as the filler.112 The authors described that the as-prepared DFNC had exactly the same morphology as that of the DFNS templates. The aforementioned practical replication process (Fig. 16) made the authors consider that the as-obtained DFNC spheres were urchin-like or Echinometra mathaei-like as shown in Fig. 12a. Noble Pt was introduced onto the as-made DFNC surfaces as catalysts (DFNC/Pt) to convert cellulose into hexitols. A series of carbon-supported Pt catalysts were also developed as contrasts, including carbon nanotubes (CNT), multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT), activated carbon(AC), graphene oxide (GO), and ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3). The physicochemical properties were comprehensively compared therein, such as surface areas, pore volumes, pore sizes, H2 uptakes, acidities, and Pt dispersions. Most importantly, DFNC/Pt possessed excellent selectivity for sorbitol and the highest yields around 80% for cellulose conversion among these carbon-supported composites. The architecture of DFNC/Pt accounted for its best performances. The dendritic fibrous textures enhanced the affinity between cellulose and the Pt catalyst; the mesopores provided a higher selectivity for soluble oligomers. The spillover effects from Pt surfaces were enlarged by the abundant oxygen groups on DFNC frameworks, which could supply in situ generated H+ for efficient hydrolyses. To the best of authors' knowledge, DFNC/Pt composites served as solid bifunctional catalysts with the best performances for hexitol production from cellulose.114
Chen et al. fabricated DFNC by using DFNS as hard templates and glucose as a carbon source via hydrothermal, carbonization, and etching treatments.37 Alternatively, APTES was chemically grafted onto the silica skeleton to increase the affinity between DFNS templates and the glucose precursor. The as-prepared DFNC exhibited a multi-scale hollow structure with mesoporous channels, leading to relatively high surface area (934 m2 g−1) and bulk density (0.87 cm3 g−1). The petal-like nanowrinkles or nanosheets were partially graphitized. All these structural features were conducive to electrochemical performances of the as-made hollow DFNC as supercapacitor electrode materials, including large gravimetric capacitance (386 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1), outstanding volumetric capacitance (335 F cm−3), excellent rate capability (171 F g−1 at 15 A g−1), and good cycling stability with 94% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles.118 Recently, Balkus's team produced DFNC by utilizing DFNS as hard templates and sucrose as a carbon source through a two-step immersion, carbonization, and etching treatments.251 In detail, DFNS spheres were immersed into a mixed solution of sucrose, H2SO4 and water. The obtained mixture was dried overnight at 100 °C and then heated at an elevated temperature of 160 °C for another 6 h. This process was repeated twice, termed two-step immersion. The resulting DFNC maintained the unique conical pore structures, giving rise to an increased surface area of 1344 m2 g−1 compared with DFNS templates. Extraordinarily, the authors pointed out that sucrose as a carbon source could merely introduce carbon of the lower graphitization level, because significant weight losses occurred from 400 °C to 560 °C, which indicated the oxidation of carbon. Very recently, this group circumvented the above issue by grafting lanthanum oxide (La2O3) onto DFNS templates (denoted as DFNC/La2O3), and then introducing carbon by a chemical vapour deposition (CVD) method with acetylene steam.250 La2O3 functioned not only as the substrate to grow carbon, but also as the catalyst to activate acetylene. CVD was applied because it could grow graphene of good quality. Raman spectra of the as-prepared DFNC exhibited a strong G band (around 1600 cm−1), indicative of ordered sp2 hybridized carbon atoms. TGA analysis demonstrated a higher temperature up to 550 °C for their thermal stability than that of conventional mesoporous carbon of about 500 °C. Therefore, the products had much more sp2 hybridized carbon and fewer defects due to the combination of the La2O3 catalyst and the CVD method.
Wang et al. fabricated a type of dual-pore carbon shell for efficient removal of humic acid (HA) in water through a novel DFNS template-mediated process.182 First, PVP was chemically adsorbed onto DFNS surfaces to enhance their affinities to the carbon precursors. Then, RF monomers were adequately brought into contact with DFNS-PVP, and further heating accelerated the formation of DFNS-PVP@RF from polymeric RF resin. Before the carbonization and etching processes, a silica layer was pre-loaded (DFNS-PVP@RF@SiO2) to act as a physically protective barrier against high temperature. Eventually, dual-pore carbon shells were successfully produced with excellent dispersity in water due to the protection of the outer silica layer, while the reference samples without protection from the silica layer severely aggregated after calcination. The carbon shells could efficiently adsorb HA with pseudo-second-order kinetics and follow the Langmuir isotherm model, owing to their large surface areas, large pore volumes, dual-pore architectures, thin outer carbon layer, and highly hydrophilic surfaces. This research was interesting and heuristic, because DFNS was not just the template for the final NPs. It served as sacrificial template to develop architectures with more elaborate substructures for profound applications.182


5.1.2 Carbon & nitride-based DFNC. 
Wang et al.169 and Takanabe et al.147 successively applied KCC-1 spheres as sacrificial templates to generate dendritic fibrous g-C3N4 and triazine-based carbon nitride catalysts, respectively. Compared with bulk g-C3N4, dendritic fibrous g-C3N4 (DFNC–g-C3N4) exhibited an apparent hypsochromic shift of the photoabsorption edge from 465 to 430 nm, and the corresponding bandgap energy improved from 2.67 to 2.86 eV, indicative of a strong quantum confinement effect. Surprisingly, the light harvesting ability was greatly enhanced in the whole optical spectrum, especially in the 430 to 590 nm region. Then, 3 wt% Pt NPs as cocatalysts were in situ deposited onto DFNC–g-C3N4 to produce H2 for evaluating the photocatalytic activity. Four consecutive catalytic processes could yield 8.1 mmol H2 gas during 20 h without noticeable deactivation and structural collapse. The authors attributed these outstanding abilities to the highly opened 3D hierarchical frameworks with flat strips at the edge of 2D nanosheets which directly accelerated charge collection.169
Triazine-based carbon nitride catalysts produced with KCC-1 as sacrificial templates gave rise to highly crystalline polytriazine imide (PTI) structures composed of copolymerized melamine (Mel) and 2,4,6-triaminopyrimidine networks (TAP). Exceptionally, the as-prepared DFNC had hedgehog-like morphologies with sharp edges because of the usage of the eutectic LiCl and KCl mixture. DFNS could bear temperatures as high as 950 °C with their edges smooth, while the salt mixture (alkali ions) at a temperature of 550 °C indeed reacted with silica, which converted the fibers from smooth to sharp. NPs loaded with 3% Pt of less than 5 nm sizes were also highly dispersed on DFNC-PTI to realize heterojunctions. Accompanied by the dendritic fibrous morphologies, the photocatalytic activity was improved for the as-made catalysts. The resulting HER was 33 μmol h−1 with the evident quantum efficiency (AQE) as high as 22.1 ± 3% at 400 nm. The stability of DFNC-PTI was evaluated for several reaction cycles. A slight deactivation emerged after the first cycle (10 h), while stable performance was retained thereafter for another 40 h.147
Ge et al. recently successfully created a kind of nitrogen-doped (N-doped) DFNC through in situ polymerization of acrylonitrile, carbonization, and etching processes.252 Peculiarly, DFNS spheres were sufficiently immersed in acrylonitrile solution to let their molecules permeate into the voids. Afterwards, the as-prepared DFNS spheres were irradiated by 60Co γ-ray to polymerize acrylonitrile monomers. Upon carbonization and etching, N-doped DFNC spheres were developed with coarse pore structures and a specific surface area of 554.5 m2 g−1. Different from commonly pure mesoporous carbon materials that were hydrophobic with a poor water dispersibility, N-doped DFNC could easily be ultrasonically dispersed in water and exhibited an outstanding adsorption ability for RhB. The equilibrium adsorption capacity reached up to 95.4 mg g−1 at 47.8 mg L−1 RhB concentration, ca. 1.6 times that of the primary DFNS spheres.252


5.1.3 Silica & carbon-based DFNC. 
Considering that CTAC molecules with long-chain alkyl groups were essential for DFNS fabrication as surfactant templates, and inspired by its feature that CTAC could serve as a carbon source Zhao's team created silica & carbon-based DFNC (DFNSC) by in situ carbonizing surfactant templates181 on the basis of their oil–water biphase stratification for 3D dendritic MSNSs.126 DFNSC were fabricated by pretreating DFNS samples with H2SO4 and calcinating them at 600 °C under an argon (Ar) atmosphere. Two kinds of references were also made by directly calcinating DFNS under an atmospheric environment and under an Ar atmosphere without H2SO4 pre-treatment at the same temperature. CTAC molecules were completely removed in air, leaving the silica skeleton. Carbon contents were 6% and 1% for DFNSC with and without H2SO4 pretreatment, respectively. The former changed from white to black in color; the latter became gray. Raman spectra indicated that disordered sp2 C atoms emerged in the condensed aromatic carbon with a low degree of graphitization. Therefore, anthracene was chosen as a model of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) to investigate their adsorption ability. The as-prepared DFNSC with 6% carbon content reached equilibrium within a shorter time at a more rapid rate, and exhibited a higher adsorption capacity for faster kinetic equilibrium. Very recently, Moon et al. fabricated a DFNSC with a canyon-like surface as a high-performance anode material for Li-ion batteries.253 In a typical synthesis, DFNS spheres were mixed with the Mg powder by grinding and annealing at 750 °C under the H2–Ar flow, giving rise to a composite of Si and MgO (dendritic fibrous nano-silica & magnesium, DFNSMg). Then, a gas mixture of C2H2–Ar was supplied to provide a carbon layer for DFNSMg through thermal decomposition. Finally, further carbonization was carried out at 750 °C under a high-purity Ar atmosphere, and the by-products like MgO were removed by HCl etching. The as-prepared DFNSC exhibited stable electrochemical performance, retaining a high specific charge capacity of 822 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, which was 59.1% of the initial one.


5.1.4 DFNC-based hollow carbon nanospheres. 
A small quantity of carbon precursors could duplicate the DFNS's morphology for DFNC as illustrated in Section 5.1. In one situation, the precursors might just cover the internal surfaces and the morphologies were totally identical to those of the DFNS templates. In another, the cavities or nanochannels from DFNS might be merely filled up. After carbonization and silica removal, the reverse textures of the as-prepared nanospheres resembled DFNS's architectures due to the unique feature of DFNPs (Fig. 16). Actually, a third situation could appear that superfluous carbon precursors wrap the carbon-filled DFNS templates. A novel topography of DFNC-based NPs would yield after carbonization and silica removal, which could be simply regarded as a DFNC in a hollow carbon shell, but the outer surface was connected with the internal surface. Du et al. successfully prepared porous hollow carbon nanospheres (PHCNs) of this morphology with crater-like inner surfaces and center-radial nanochannels in the shells to deliver drugs and genes into cancer cells for efficient synergistic therapy by utilizing DFNS as hard templates.174Fig. 22 shows the processes of designing and synthesizing PHCNs (a), their surface modification to PHCNs–PEI–PEG for drug and gene coloading (b), and chemotherapy and improved photothermal therapy by gene silencing in cells (c). In detail, RF polymer resin acted as a carbon precursor. When the RF content was insufficient, nanochannels and pores were partially filled with some large grooves on the particle surface. Nanochannels just filled up with the RF content increased to a certain degree. A further increase of RF gave rise to structures with nanochannels fully filled up and smooth particle surfaces. DFNC-based hollow carbon nanospheres were obtained in this process by RF carbonization and silica etching with a combination texture of center-radial large mesopores, crater-like inner surfaces, and a carbon shell. Then, the PHCNs were chemically modified with PEI and PEG. The as-obtained PHCN–PEI–PEG not only possessed negligible cytotoxicity, outstanding photothermal property, high co-loading capacity of DOX and BAG3-siRNA (a complex of Bcl-2, athanogene domain 3, and 21 nucleotides), but also could efficiently kill cancer cells by delivering these substances with an enhanced therapeutic ability by synergistic effects. The authors fabricated PHCNs/Au NPs later to catalyze the reduction reaction of 4-nitrophenol. This kind of nanocapsule exhibited excellent catalytic activity and stability due to the unique structure coupled with ultra-dispersed Au NPs.254 Very recently, the same team also reported that the PHCNs/Pd NP catalyst possessed high catalytic activity, selectivity, and good recyclability in the catalytic oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde with the unique architecture by means of ultra-dispersed Pd NPs as well.196
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the design and synthesis of porous hollow carbon nanospheres (PHCNs) with uniform micropores and center-radial large mesopores in the shell, and the crater-like inner surface (a), the design of PHCN–PEI–PEG for drug and gene coloading (b), and the chemotherapy and improved photothermal therapy by gene silencing in cells (c).174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 

5.2 Polymer–silica-surfactant method to produce hollow and yolk–shell DFNC spheres
The polymer–silica-surfactant (PSS) method developed by Cao's group was of great significance to produce hollow and yolk–shell pure DFNC spheres.124 Typically, aqueous ammonia solution (NH4OH) and resorcinol were first mixed with another mixed solution of absolute ethanol and deionized water with different ratios, but bearing a total constant volume. CTAB was subsequently added and continually stirred for a homogeneous state. Then formaldehyde solution and TEOS were added to the reaction solution and stirred for a long time. Finally, the above product was treated for 24 h at 80 °C in a Teflon-lined autoclave, further collected by centrifugation, and air-dried at 80 °C for 24 h. As shown in Fig. 23, PSS composites of the rod-like CTAB-coated resorcinol aggregates, spherical CTAB-coated resorcinol aggregates, and CTAB micelles were obtained by self-assembly with volume ratios of ethanol to water as 4:24, 8:20, and 12:16, respectively. The as-obtained PSS composites were treated with two different routes. One was directly calcined at 550 °C in air to form hierarchical structured mesoporous silica; the other was pyrolyzed at 600 °C under a N2 flow and etched by the HF aqueous solution to remove silica for hierarchical structured mesoporous carbon. The as-formed architectures involved the rattle-type carbon nanotube with disordered mesopores (a1), the rod-like silica nanotube with a very thin shell of ca. 30 nm (a2), the rattle-type (yolk–shell) carbon sphere with a radially aligned shell (b1), the hollow silica nanosphere with a radially oriented mesoporous shell (b2), the hollow carbon sphere with a small hollow core (c1), and a flower-like silica sphere with a solid core (c2). Nanospheres shown in Fig. 23b were ca. 450 nm, while the ones in Fig. 23c were ca. 800 nm. In addition, the nanospheres obtained by pyrolyzing PSS composites under a N2 flow and subsequently etched by the HF solution were bigger than those directly calcined, because of the shrinkage of the RF polymer and silica precursors. As for the formation mechanism, when volume ratios of ethanol to water were small (4:24 and 8:20), negatively charged RF aggregates formed in the ternary solution of ammonia–ethanol–water could couple with the positively charged CTAB micelles via electrostatic interactions, leading to rod-like or spherical CTAB-coated RF aggregates. When the ratio increased up to 12:16, only CTAB micelles could be obtained.124
 Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of the formation processes of (1–2) PSS composites, and (3–4) mesoporous carbon or silica nanomaterials with hierarchical structures. The corresponding TEM images of the as-prepared products by the multi-component PSS approach in ethanol aqueous solutions: PSS composites of the rod-like CTAB-coated resorcinol aggregates (a), spherical CTAB-coated resorcinol aggregates (b), and CTAB micelles (c) with volume ratios of ethanol to water as 4:24, 8:20, and 12:16, respectively. TEM images of the rattle-type carbon nanotube with disordered mesopores (a1), the rod-like silica nanotube with a very thin shell of ca. 30 nm (a2), the rattle-type (yolk–shell) carbon sphere with a radially aligned shell (b1), the hollow silica nanosphere with a radially oriented mesoporous shell (b2), the hollow carbon sphere with a small hollow core (c1), and a flower-like silica sphere with a solid core (c2), respectively.124 Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012. 
Very recently, this group modified the PSS approach by utilizing the microwave assisted technique to produce hollow DFNC (HDFNC) spheres at 80 °C in a shorter time interval (1 h).255 At a relatively low volume ratio of water to ethanol (<2.5), HDFNC spheres could be developed (Fig. 23c1) with their diameters and shell thicknesses varying as the ratio further decreased. When the volume ratio of water to ethanol increased to 3 and further to 4, the products showed two types of morphologies: a composite of HDFNC spheres and nanotubes, as well as pure nanotubes. The as-prepared amorphous HDFNC spheres with low graphitization were applied as an anode for lithium-ion batteries. A discharge capacity of 1750 mA h g−1 was achieved for the first cycle and maintained at 862 mA h g−1 even after 100 cycles at a 0.1 A g−1 current. The rate capability and cycle stability were also excellent. It may be ascribed to that the architecture of HDFNC spheres with disordered and hierarchical pores offered efficient active sites and convenient mass diffusion paths to realize superior electrochemical performances.255
Yu et al. invented a surfactant-free polymer-silica (PS) route to create pseudo-HDFNC spheres through a facile in situ Stöber templating method for ultra-high level in-cavity adsorption, where polydopamine (PDA) acted as the polymer.256 The as-prepared nanospheres were characterized by SEM (a–d) and TEM (a′–d′) images shown in Fig. 24. The products were denoted as pseudo-HDFNCx−y, where x is the addition time (min) of dopamine and y is the dopamine concentration (mg mL−1). Four kinds of pseudo-HDFNCx−y were prepared, including HDFNC30−2.5 (Fig. 24a and a′), HDFNC30−5 (Fig. 24b and b′), HDFNC40−5 (Fig. 24c and c′) and HDFNC50−5 (Fig. 24d and d′), respectively. SEM images in Fig. 24a–d show that these NPs all possessed uniform spherical morphologies with particle diameters between 290 and 300 nm. Fig. 24a′ exhibits core–shell pseudo-HDFNC30−2.5 when 2.5 mg mL−1 dopamine was added after the addition of TEOS for 30 min, giving rising to a uniform porous shell with a thickness of 15 nm and a cavity size of 260 nm. As the dopamine concentration was boosted from 2.5 to 5 mg mL−1 (pseudo-HDFNC30−5), an increase in the wall thickness from 15 to 55 nm and a decrease of the cavity size from 262 to 185 nm were detected (Fig. 24b′). When the addition time of dopamine was increased from 40 to 50 min, the cavity size increased from 212 to 222 nm, while the wall thickness decreased from 40 to 36 nm (Fig. 24c′ and d′). The possible formation process is demonstrated in Fig. 24e. TEOS hydrolysis and condensation formed silica primary particles (Ia) first, and a silica cluster was developed through a secondary nucleation process (II). Dopamine was added carefully at a time point after the addition of TEOS (Ib). Zwitterionic PDA oligomers interacted strongly with the negatively charged SiO2 core through the co-condensation reaction, leading to the SiO2@SiO2-PDA core–shell structure (III). Pseudo-HDFNC developed after carbonization (IVa) and NaOH etching (IVb). When NaOCl was utilized instead of NaOH to etch PDA, obvious core–shell structures could be observed and closely approached core–shell DFNS spheres (Fig. 24a′′–d′′). When used as adsorbents for removing di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate as a wastewater pollutant, pseudo HDFNC spheres achieved an ultra-high adsorption capacity of 5084 mg g−1, more than 10 times higher than those of the previous reports.256 From the above architectural analyses, we could see that NPs with hollow dendritic fibrous textures were hard to identify by just depending on the final morphology. The initial topography should be taken into account as well. A typical example from Lan et al. demonstrated that common mesoporous carbon nanospheres turned to the pseudo-state of the hollow dendritic fibrous upon removing the core.257
 Fig. 24  SEM and TEM images of pseudo-HDFNC30-2.5 (a and a′), HDFNC30-5 (b and b′), HDFNC40-5 (c and c′) and HDFNC50-5 (d and d′). Scale bars: (a–d) 200 nm; (a′–d′) 100 nm. Insets (a–d) show average sizes of the cavities and shell thicknesses of the as-obtained nanospheres measured from TEM images. The schematic illustration of in situ Stöber templating for pseudo-HDFNC (e). TEM images of the core–shell DFNC after PDA removal by NaOCl etching pseudo-HDFNC are shown in a to d (a′′–d′′).256 Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
6 Dendritic fibrous nano-bioactive glass (DFNBG)
Mesoporous bioactive glasses (MBG) are synthesized for applications in biomedical fields as organic-inorganic scaffolds. The controllable surface chemistries and resorption rates could release inorganic or organic species sequentially with purpose. The ability to bind drugs with their high pore volumes could satisfy local medicine delivery, instead of systemic delivery, for therapeutic cures at the sites of infections for short periods of time.258 Bioactive glass-based DFNPs deserve to be further probed into, as one kind of MBG.
6.1 Syntheses and applications
In 2014, Chen et al. pioneeringly synthesized bioactive glass-based dendritic fibrous nanospheres by a sol–gel process accompanied by an emulsion method on the basis of the KCC-1 synthetic route.125 In a typical synthesis, the emulsion solution was first mixed for a certain time, and then calcium nitrate Ca(NO3)2 was added as a calcium precursor to finish the reaction. The surface area, mesopore volume, and mesopore size of the as-made DFNBG spheres were 483.98 m2 g−1, 11.3 cm3 g−1, and 10.77 nm, respectively. After immersion in simulated body fluid (SBF) at 37 °C for 7 days, a mineralized layer with phosphate in crystalline phases was developed on their surfaces, indicative of DFNBG with outstanding apatite-mineralization formation properties and biocompatibilities. The negatively charged DFNBG spheres could not load more plasmids because of their same electrical properties (negatively charged). Therefore, the amino groups (–NH2) from APTES were chosen to modify DFNBG for positively charged DFNBG-NH2. The zeta potential and gel electrophoresis results suggested that DFNBG-NH2 successfully endowed itself with positive charges, facilitating the adsorption of FITC and pOA-EGFP (including osteoactivin and green fluorescent protein fusion gene) onto its surfaces. DFNBG-NH2/FITC could enter Hela cells through phagocytosis in a dose- and time-dependent manner, because most of the particles were localized in the cytoplasm rather than in the nucleus. DFNBG-NH2/pOA-EGFP could not only have a high gene loading capacity as a gene carrier, but also protects the pOA-EGFP gene from enzymatic degradation as a protector. In spite of these advantages, the gene transfection efficiency of DFNBG-NH2 still could not compete with commercial liposome transfection reagents, and the positive transfection proportion was not perfectly consistent with the cell percentage.125 This research group also created DFNBG spheres and pineal MBG NPs through a novel sacrificial liquid template method in sol–gel processes.259 In a typical synthesis, soft templates were formed by mixing ethyl acetate (EA), CTAB, and water (EA–CTAB–H2O). Then, different amounts of aqueous ammonia (NH3·H2O) were added with vigorous stirring. Finally, a certain amount of TEOS, triethyl phosphate (TEP), and calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (CN) was sequentially added into the above mixture in every 30 min interval. A continuous stirring at 30 °C for 4 h gave rise to DFNBG spheres. Alternatively, the mixture was transferred into a Teflon-lined autoclave and heated at 100 °C for 20 h under autogenous pressure, leading to pineal MBG NPs. The former DFNBG had spherical morphologies with central radial mesochannels (Fig. 25a–c); while the latter pineal MBG exhibited elliptic architectures with layer-by-layer lamellar wrinkles (Fig. 25e–g). The average sizes plus pores of DFNBG spheres and length-diameter ratios plus pores of pineal MBG nanoparticles became larger, as the NH3·H2O concentration increased from 1 M (Fig. 25a and e) to 3 M (Fig. 25b and f), and further to 5 M (Fig. 25c and g). All the as-made particles displayed type IV isotherm patterns with H3-type hysteresis loops, indicating that these NPs had slit-shaped pores consistent with TEM observations. The plausible formation mechanism was also proposed (Fig. 25h). First, CTAB and H2O produced CTAB micelles. These micelles self-assembled with EA to form emulsion droplets as templates. Second, upon the addition of NH3·H2O which gathered in an aqueous phase, EA molecules began to hydrolyze at oil–water boundaries. Finally, BG sol (TEOS, TEP, and CN) entered oil phases, hydrolyzed and condensed at oil-water interfaces by the assistance of NH3·H2O catalysis. In a word, the emulsion droplet templates corroded and the BG gel formed simultaneously. The synergistic effect of the reaction temperature and NH3·H2O concentration concurrently determined the products' morphology. The higher NH3·H2O concentration accelerated the corrosion of the templates, resulting in bigger pores. The higher temperature disturbed the CTAB arrangement around the oil–water interface, bringing about new lamellar architectures.259
 Fig. 25  SEM (a1–c1, e1–g1) and TEM (a2–c2, e2–g2) images of DFNBG spheres (a–c) and pineal MBG nanoparticles (e–g) with different NH3·H2O concentrations from 1 M (a1, a2, e1, e2) to 3 M (b1, b2, f1, f2) and further to 5 M (c1, c2, g1, g2), respectively. (h) Schematic illustration of the formation processes of DFNBG spheres and pineal MBG nanoparticles.259 Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2015. 
Further investigation about the effect of the CN amount on the morphology of the DFNBG sphere was carried out in the same procedure.260 When the CN content was boosted from 0.286 to 0.531 and further to 0.858 g, the average DFNBG diameter increased from 339 (Fig. 26a1) to 354 (Fig. 26b1) and further to 836 nm (Fig. 26c1), the average pore diameter increased from 3.93 to 5.11 and further to 5.13 nm, while the specific surface area declined from 986.353 to 847.289 and further to 750.141 m2 g−1, respectively. These nanospheres were immersed in SBF solution and soaked for different times; the obtained representative morphologies are exhibited in Fig. 26a2–c2 and a3–c3. In the first 12 h, all DFNBG surfaces became coarser and are covered by some flaky precipitates. Especially for DFNBG with the highest CN content, their surfaces had grown flower-like layers. When the soaking time prolonged to 24 h (another 12 h), flaky precipitates continued to grow up and flower-like layers almost covered the whole particles' surfaces. DFNBG spheres aggregated together and interconnected with one another by some deposits. The nature of these precipitates was characterized as follows. The absorption bands of the phosphate group (PO43−) emerged in FT-IR spectra (Fig. 26B); crystallinity of hydroxylapatite (HA) could be found in XRD (Fig. 26C). The above results proved that all DFNBG spheres possessed good apatite-forming abilities, which opened up the possibility of applying them as drug carriers and injectable biomaterials for hard tissue regeneration.260
 Fig. 26  A) TEM (a1–c1) images of DFNBG spheres developed with different CN contents. SEM images of DFNBG spheres immersed in SBF solutions for 12 h (a2–c2) and 24 h (a3–c3), corresponding to the order in TEM. FT-IR spectra (B) and XRD patterns (C) of DFNBG spheres after soaking in SBF for 24 h.260 Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017. 
This team recently investigated DFNBG as drug carriers for inhibition of tumour cells.173 Preferentially, RhB was embedded in DFNBG pores and the labelling efficiency could reach more than 80%, which indicated that DFNBG could highly interact with the biomolecules. Then DOX-loaded DFNBG-RhB exhibited a good inhibitory effect on Hela cell proliferation. Moreover, DFNBG-RhB-DOX could accelerate the apoptosis of tumour cells, due to the synergistic antitumor effect from DFNBG and DOX. Further study indicated that Ca2+ might be an essential element in the synergistic inhibition.173 Lee et al. prepared aminated DFNBG (DFNBG-NH2) as additive materials for the differentiation of rat dental pulp stem cells (rDPSCs) into odontoblasts.261 The cell viability in rDPSCs was not changed until the DFNBG-NH2 content reached up to 50 μg mL−1. The uptake efficiency was calculated to be ca. 92%, and ATP-dependent macropinocytosis was identified as the endocytosis pathway. All these outcomes indicated that DFNBG-NH2 could serve as potential dentin regenerative additives to promote odontoblast differentiation.
7 DFNPs doped with other elements
It is evident that the addition of appropriate calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P) in DFNS skeletons could yield DFNBG. However, their foundations originate from DFNS synthesis science. Directly mixing other elements during the synthesis processes seems to be advisable, like N-doped DFNC whose superiorities we have expounded over pure DFNC in the last section.252 This type of modification pathway could be selected to create DFNPs with desirable functions.
7.1 DFNPs doped with aluminum (Al)
Zeng et al. doped aluminum (Al) into DFNS spheres to tune their acidities as catalyst supports, named dendritic fibrous nano-silica & aluminum (DFNSAl).262 In a typical synthesis, different amounts of the sodium aluminate (NaAlO2) precursor were introduced into CTAB–H2O–toluene emulsions with 0, 7.5, 15, and 30 mg, respectively. The as-prepared DFNSAl was characterized with SEM and TEM as shown in Fig. 27. Dendritic fibrous features showed up as the NaAlO2 precursor was not added (Fig. 27a) or added with 7.5 mg (Fig. 27b) and 15 mg (Fig. 27c); this unique texture disappeared with NaAlO2 of 30 mg (Fig. 27d). For SEM images, discontinuous ellipsoidal voids with openings existed on their surfaces instead of the representative wrinkles or lamellar structures when NaAlO2 was less than 30 mg (Fig. 27a′–c′); these irregular voids even disappeared with NaAlO2 of 30 mg (Fig. 27d′). Compared with traditional DFNS, the morphology diversity here could be attributed to the reaction temperature and time. DFNS spheres with more specific dendritic fibrous architectures were usually developed at 70 °C for over 15 h (ref. 26) or 120 °C for over 4 h.5 That is to say, only high temperature with less time or low temperature with a longer time could produce DFNS with ideal construction. Reaction conditions of ambient temperature for 4 h herein could not meet these demands. More importantly, these images alerted us that nanospheres without representative nanowrinkles in SEM still did express the dendritic fibrous state in TEM. In addition, SEM images clearly showed that increasing NaAlO2 led to a shrink in the channel width and a denser distribution. The authors speculated that the structural change was a consequence of Hofmeister anion effects of [Al(OH)4]− which caused the transformation of cylindrical micelles into spherical ones (Fig. 27e). DFNSAl spheres as catalyst supports were utilized to load different metals to catalyze CO2 hydrogenation. On the one hand, the DFNSAl catalyst with 5 wt% Cu and 3 wt% ZnO could develop carbon-containing products of CO, methanol, and dimethyl ether (DME). While the DFNS catalyst without Al incorporated and loaded with 5 wt% Cu and 3 wt% ZnO could not yield DME (Fig. 27f). DFNSAl/Cu&ZnO thus could be viewed as a bifunctional catalyst in which the Cu & ZnO composite catalyzed methanol synthesis and DFNSAl acted as a solid acid for methanol dehydration. On the other hand, the composite catalyst with 1.5 wt% Ga2O3 grafted onto DFNSA/Cu & ZnO noticeably improved the total organic selectivity.262
 Fig. 27  TEM (a–d) and SEM (a′–d′) images of DFNSA spheres developed with different amounts of NaAlO2 with 0 mg (a), 7.5 mg (b), 15 mg (c), and 30 mg (d), respectively. (e) Schematic illustration of mesostructural tuning of DFNSAl facilitated by the Hofmeister anion effect of [Al(OH)4]−. (f) Results from catalyst evaluation of DFNSAl/Cu & ZnO and DFNS/Cu & ZnO. (i) Specific activity (CO2 consumption rate normalized by the total amount of Cu and Zn in the catalyst); (ii) organic selectivity (rate of CO2 converting to dimethyl ether and methanol divided by the total CO2 consumption rate); (iii) mole ratio of dimethyl ether to methanol in the product stream; (iv) XRD patterns of spent catalysts.262 Reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
Duan et al. synthesized NiMo- and Al-modified DFNS via a post-synthetic method using sodium aluminate (NaAlO2) as the aluminum source and deionized water as the solvent.263 Al–OH species from hydrolyzed NaAlO2 exchanged with Si–OH groups on DFNS surfaces to form Al–O–Si bonds. In other words, Al atoms were just doped on the surfaces of DFNS spheres. The isomorphous substitution of Si for Al atoms in the Al-DFNS framework induced Lewis and Brønsted acid sites. The former was derived from aluminum with a low coordination or triple bonds; while the latter was developed at the sites where the negative charge was compensated for by protons. Then, NiMo catalysts were fabricated by an incipient wetness impregnation method successively using ammonium molybdate and nickel nitrate as precursors with Mo impregnation. The as-prepared NiMo-Al-DFNS catalysts could be applied for hydride-sulfurization of dibenzothiophene with a higher efficiency of 97.9% than that of commercial NiMo-γ-Al2O3 catalysts. The superior catalytic activity originated from the synergistic effect of center-radial pore channels, increased acidity, suitable metal-support interaction, and excellent accessibility of the well-dispersed active metals.263
7.2 DFNPs doped with copper (Cu) and Al
Hu et al. doped DFNS spheres with copper (Cu) and aluminium (Al) to enhance Fenton-catalytic efficiency for water purification.114 Specifically, a mixed solution of Cu(NO3)2·3H2O and Al(NO3)3·9H2O was added to the emulsion used to synthesize KCC-1 with other parameters being identical. The as-prepared NPs were denoted as dendritic fibrous nano-silica & copper & aluminum bearing an abbreviation of DFNSCuAl. When Cu and Al contents were 1.07 wt% and 1.91 wt%, the catalyst exhibited the highest activity and stability. In the same way, other reference samples were developed, such as DFNS without Cu and Al, DFNSAl with 1.02 wt% Al and without Cu, and DFNSCu with 1.89 wt% Cu and without Al. Moreover, other types of catalysts were obtained for ca. 1.90 wt% Cu doped into MCM-41 and γ-Al2O3 as Cu-MCM-41 and Cu-γ-Al2O3, respectively. Some physicochemical characteristics and catalytic abilities of these catalysts are tabulated in Table 3.
Table 3 Some physicochemical characteristics and catalytic abilities of DFNSCuAl, DFNSAl, DFNSCu, DFNS, Cu-MCM-41 and Cu-γ-Al2O3, respectively




Samples
Ele. con.a (wt%)
SAb (m2 g−1)
BPA ad–dec
BPA ded
TOC ree
Reusability (BPA def)





a Element content.
b Surface area (SA).
c Bisphenol A (BPA) adsorption–desorption equilibrium without H2O2.
d BPA degradation.
e TOC removal.
f BPA degradation within 90 min after 8 circles.





DFNSCuAl
Cu-1.91
488
7.4 ± 0.5%

ca. 98% in 60 min
70%
95.0%


Al-1.07


DFNSCu
Cu-1.89
356
7.1 ± 0.4%

ca. 98% in 60 min
70%
67.2%


DFNSAl
Al-1.02
607
5.7 ± 0.5%
None
10–30%
Not given


DFNS
None
386
Not given
None
10–30%
Not given


Cu-MCM-41
Cu-1.90
1027
2.5 ± 0.3%
80.5% in 120 min
12.6%
Not given


Cu-γ-Al2O3
Cu-1.92
215
6.0 ± 0.6%
47.1% in 120 min
38.3%
Not given




Even though the surface areas of Cu-containing DFNS (DFNSCuAl and DFNSCu) were not very large, bisphenol A (BPA) could reach the maximum during their adsorption–desorption equilibrium. Only Cu-containing catalysts could degrade BPA; dendritic fibrous catalysts exhibited greater catalytic activities within less time. TOC removals of these catalysts followed the similar change rule. It was worth noting that Cu-containing DFNS possessed approximate BPA degradation and TOC removal. However, their reusabilities significantly differentiated with BPA degradation of 95.0% and 67.2% for DFNSCuAl and DFNSCu in 90 min after 8 circles, respectively. Chemical bonds of Si–O–Cu and Al–O–Cu were responsible for this robustness, testified by X-ray absorption fine structure spectra (EXAFS) and XPS. A series of refractory organic pollutants including pesticides, phenols, dyes, pharmaceuticals, and endocrine disrupting chemicals were further degraded with heterogeneous DFNSCuAl at neutral pH and room temperature, in order to study its adaptability and activity. These organic compounds could be effectively decomposed in a short time (60 min) with high conversions ranging from 68.3% to 100%. The complexes stemmed from the combinations of the most aromatic products with Cu2+ promoting the generation of ·OH during the Fenton reaction, resulting in the high utilization efficiency of H2O2 in the DFNSCuAl Fenton system.114 This work not only provided a new insight into designing high-efficiency Fenton catalysts with dendritic fibrous topographies for water purification, but also enlightened us to create DFNPs doped with specific elements for special functionalities.
8 Summary and perspectives
The emergence of DFNPs with radially wrinkled structures has opened up novel synthetic strategies, modification methods, and new opportunities for various applications. In this review, we have specified the nomenclature rule based on their unique structural features, analyzed the synthesis approaches, compared detailed textures, illustrated some interesting applications, and also pointed out some easily confused issues. The open 3D superstructures endow DFNPs with fantastic structural merits, such as center-radial channels, highly accessible internal surface areas, high pore volumes, large porosities and so on. Fig. 28 summarizes the most important aspects of the DFNP subject for future development. In terms of the chemical composition, NPs with this specific category are composed of DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, DFNST, DFNSC, DFNSAl, DFNSCuAl, etc. With respect to the whole morphology, DFNPs with spherical architectures account for the vast majority including hollow and core–shell ones. Some other interesting topographies were also demonstrated like shuttlecock-shaped and asymmetric spherical ones. It is worth mentioning that almost all these special morphologies come from DFNS. Notwithstanding the fact that there has been rapid development in the last decade, much further deep investigations deserve to be carried out in the future as follows:
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of designed syntheses, designed structures, and promising applications of DFNPs. 
8.1 Morphologies and models
The most important aspect that we want to expound throughout the review is the recognition of DFNPs' morphologies, which is embodied in the following: (1) the modifiers of “dendritic” and “fibrous” are inspired from their TEM images, while names like “wrinkles”, “lamellae”, “slices” and so on are relative to the SEM images. It is reasonable to describe DFNPs' architectures by combining TEM with SEM. Fig. 21 is a very interesting example. (2) From the TEM point of view, DFNPs' textures approach the “dendritic state” with extremely wide nanochannel sizes, while close to the “fibrous state” with extremely narrow channel sizes, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Most spherical DFNPs fall in between, therefore, “dendritic fibrous” is simultaneously utilized to depict their topographies. Even though the most suitable nomenclature of “dendritic fibrous nano-X (DFNX)” was put forward for its unity and applicability very recently by Polshettiwar et al. who have been making great contributions to the DFNP subject,91 we advise the scientists to preferentially use DFNX but along with more delicate explanations according to practical features. (3) Most importantly, the meaning of “dendritic” in DFNX was sublimated by Professor Du's team with inspiration from organic dendrimers.102 (4) Structural models for spherical DFNPs in Fig. 8b should be employed with more caution or descriptions, because these ideal ones are not only applicable to the majority of DFNPs, but also extensively applied to diagrammatize other shaped nanospheres.
8.2 Syntheses and mechanisms
Synthesis methods and formation mechanisms are being improved for DFNS day by day, however, the biphase stratification approach should be further probed into since it can easily and efficiently yield monodisperse DFNS with controllable generation and nanochannel sizes. Ti-containing DFNPs should be principally concentrated on, because not only the amazing TiO2 can be extensively applied for energy harvesting, but also the EDOA method was reported for pure DFNT. Controllable hydrolysis rates of TiO2 precursors remain the difficult and important issues. Types of DFNBG, DFNSAl, DFNSCuAl, etc. could be easily duplicated by imitating DFNS ways. For DFNC, the hard template technique seems to be the best choice, but with emphasis on the formation of the graphene crystal with high quality and the discrepancy between the as-prepared products and templates. Challenges still exist in the synthesis and formation of multilevel shell periodic DFNPs and non-spherical ones, like the Janus type.
It is worth noting that when DFNS spheres are utilized as hard templates, some other factors should be taken into account, especially the structural characteristics. Some researchers encountered difficulty in synthesizing other kinds of DFNPs by using DFNS hard templates, which encouraged them to provide a few constructive solutions. For example, Wang and coworkers heuristically applied KCC-1 spheres as sacrificial templates to generate g-C3N4 with dendritic fibrous nano-architectures.169 In order to cast the precursor cyanamide of g-C3N4 into KCC-1 nanochannels, two treatment processes were performed preferentially. Firstly, the as-prepared KCC-1 was mixed with HCl at 60 °C for 24 h to enhance the silicon hydroxyls (–SiOH) on KCC-1 surfaces, improving the affinity of KCC-1 with precursor cyanamide. Secondly, a flask containing HCl-treated KCC-1 and cyanamide was connected to a vacuum system and sonicated. It was clear that chemical modification, impressed pressure (vacuum) and additional power (sonication) simultaneously came into play to conquer the resistance originating from the nanochannels. Takanabe et al. also reported KCC-1 as a hard template to develop a triazine-based carbon nitride (CN) catalyst with different C to N ratios by tailoring the monomer ratio between TAP and Mel.147 The acidified KCC-1 was mixed with TAP and Mel precursors in absolute ethanol. These mixed solid powders were further ground with a eutectic LiCl and KCl mixture, transferred to a half-sealed crucible, and rapidly heated in a muffle furnace. Herein, high temperature was considered to overcome the capillary forces of the conic nanopipes (nanochannels) and beneficial to strongly coordinate with the precursors before poly-condensation. Yi et al. prepared a Pt catalyst supported on a type of three dimensionally opened mesoporous carbon inspired by CNE/Pt where DFNS hard templates were also utilized, to enhance the interaction between a nonsoluble reactant and the catalyst.112 Resol precursors were mixed with KCC-1 and centrifuged. DFNS spheres, which served as promising new candidates of supporting materials for storage at high, middle, and low temperatures, also underwent the impregnation of sodium sulfate (Na2SO4), lithium nitrate (LiNO3), and polyethylene glycol (PEG) into the nanochannels by a post-preparation method.35 Na2SO4 and LiNO3 were melted; while PEG was treated at 80 °C under vacuum before DFNS spheres were added into their molten solutions. Du et al. filled the DFNS templates with a solution of RF polymer resin under magnetic stirring for a very long time.174 In conclusion, extra assistance like energy and force were indispensable for precursor solutions to infiltrate into the central radical channels against their air-resistances.
8.3 Functionalization and applications
Just like DFNS particles, DFNT, DFNST, DFNC, DFNBG, DFNSAl, DFNSCuAl, etc. could be chemically modified through a post-modification or one-pot co-condensation approach with desired functional groups or functional nanoparticles, and so forth. DFNP-supported and DFNP-based particles could serve as promising candidates for certain applications. DFNS with stable silica frameworks could act as scaffolds for extensive applications in catalysis, CO2 capture, delivery carriers for targets, photothermal ablation therapy, real-time imaging, etc. DFNT with anatase titania of high catalytic activity would mainly be applied to harvest energy in catalyses, solar cells, and so on. DFNC could serve as carriers for catalysis, supercapacitor materials, adsorbents, etc., due to their inert carbon nature. DFNBG exhibited potential advantages for bone repair and regeneration. Hybrid DFNPs like DFNSAl or DFNSCuAl possessed specific functions by targeted designs; their multiple functionalities should be considered and highlighted stepwise. Even if most applications had been from DFNS up to now, it was foreseeable that all flowers would bloom together with other DFNP types.
8.4 Perspectives
On the one hand, DFNPs have been gifted with excellent architectures. On the other hand, matrix materials (like carbon) have conferred them special physical and chemical properties. These synergistic effects significantly enhance and expand the DFNP family's functionalities. DFNPs seem to have demonstrated great superiorities over conventional mesoporous materials and to be perfect alternatives as brand-new rising stars. For example, abundant DFNS investigations have proved that they could replace solid silica, MCM-41, or SBA-15.55,79,83,187,188 As a consequence, academic standards of DFNPs are urgently desired with rapid development of their family.
From Fig. 28, it can be seen that possible future directions for DFNPs mainly include designed syntheses (bulk materials), designed structures (novel architectures), and promising applications (designed functionalization). These three parts are interactive and connected. For example, composite hierarchical structures on the basis of dendritic fibrous textures with a multilevel yolk–shell structure100 could serve as novel catalysts, and multi-shell organosilica hybrids138 could act as protein or drug delivery platforms in practical application fields.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. U1607105, 21501009), Youth Innovation Promotion Association (2016377), Doctoral Research Program of Yan'an University (YDBK2017-39, YDBK2016-14), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant no. 2302015-06500017, FRF-BR-17-032A, FRF-BR-17-002B), Research Program of Yan'an University (YDQ2018-14), Shaanxi Province Training Program of Innovation and Entrepreneurship for Undergraduates (201820042), and Innovation Project of Graduate Education from Yan'an University (YCX201822). Dr Yabin Wang especially wishes to thank Jinsuo Zhang (President of Yan'an University) for funding support and humanistic concern.
Notes and references
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schüth and W. Schmidt, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2002, 4, 269–279 CrossRef .
C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710–712 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
V. Polshettiwar, D. Cha, X. Zhang and M. B. Jean, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9652–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lei, C. Xu, A. Nouwens and C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4975–4979 RSC .
C. X. C. Lin, C. Xu, Y. Yang, C. Lei, H. Zhang and C. Yu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 8754–8760 RSC .
Y. J. Yu, J. L. Xing, J. L. Pang, S. H. Jiang, K. F. Lam, T. Q. Yang, Q. S. Xue, K. Zhang and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22655–22665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, X. Li, H. Morita and N. Hanagata, Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 116–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. A. Nor, H. Song, Y. Yang, C. Xu, M. Yu and C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 2646–2653 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Liu, L. Yang, R. Zhu, C. Yu and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26511–26523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qu, H. Hu, J. Yu, X. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Xu and Q. Zhang, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 5269–5274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Zhang, C. Tang and C. Yin, Pharm. Res., 2017, 34, 2829–2841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, Y. Yao, H. Zhao, Q. Sheng, M. Ye, C. Yu and M. Lan, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 7617–7625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huang, L. Liu, S. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu, Z. Yu and S. Zhou, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 519–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Xue, W. Z. Lang, X. Yan and Y. J. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15408–15423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tao, M. Zhong, J. Chen, S. Jayakumar, L. Liu, H. Li and Q. Yang, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 188–196 RSC .
D. Shen, L. Chen, J. Yang, R. Zhang, Y. Wei, X. Li, W. Li, Z. Sun, H. Zhu, A. M. Abdullah, A. Al-Enizi, A. A. Elzatahry, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17450–17459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gai, P. Yang, P. A. Ma, W. Dong, C. Li, X. Li, N. Na and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16420–16426 RSC .
S. Gai, P. Yang, P. a. Ma, L. Wang, C. Li, M. Zhang and L. Jun, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 4511–4516 RSC .
J. Pang, G. Zhou, R. Liu and T. Li, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 59, 35–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jung, Y. J. Kim and J. K. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2016, 37, 386–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kang, J. Lim, W. Y. Rho, K. Jin, D. S. Moon, J. Jeong, D. Jung, J. W. Choi, J. K. Lee and Y. E. Sung, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 30829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, J. Yun, J. Lee, K. Lee and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 52, 2165–2168 RSC .
D. S. Moon and J. K. Lee, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12341–12347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Moon and J. K. Lee, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 15574–15580 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Yoon, J. Ryu, J. Yun, Y. K. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6570–6579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shabir, C. Garkoti, Surabhi, D. Sah and S. Mozumdar, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 194–204 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, L. Zhuang, B. She, Y. Deng, D. Chen and J. Tang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2016, 65, 323–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and K. J. Balkus, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 243, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and K. J. Balkus, Catal. Commun., 2017, 96, 15–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang and H. Townley, Nanobiomedicine, 2016, 3, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Munaweera, B. Koneru, y. Shi, A. J. D. Pasqua and K. J. Balkus Jr, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 123–128 Search PubMed .
I. Munaweera, Y. Shi, B. Koneru, A. Patel, M. H. Dang, A. J. D. Pasqua and K. J. Balkus Jr, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2015, 153, 23–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Qian, J. Li, X. Min, Y. Deng, W. Guan and L. Ning, Energy, 2016, 112, 1074–1083 CrossRef CAS .
T. Qian, X. Yin, J. Li, H. E. Nian, H. Xu, Y. Deng and X. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1314–1322 CrossRef .
D. Guo, X. A. Chen, Z. Fang, Y. He, C. Zheng, Z. Yang, K. Yang, Y. Chen and S. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee and K. Y. Choi, Macromol. React. Eng., 2017, 11, 1600027 CrossRef .
X. Du, X. Li, H. Huang, J. He and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6173–6184 RSC .
L. Dai, Q. Zhang, J. Li, X. Shen, C. Mu and K. Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7357–7372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, Y. S. Yun, H. Park, D. S. Park, D. Yun and J. Yi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7652–7655 RSC .
H. Yang, S. Liao, C. Huang, D. Li, P. Chen, P. Huang, Z. Fu and Y. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 314, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
I. Munaweera, J. Hong, A. D'Souza and K. J. Balkus Jr, J. Porous Mater., 2015, 22, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du and J. He, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2972–2979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yamada, H. Ujiie, C. Urata, E. Yamamoto, Y. Yamauchi and K. Kuroda, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19557–19567 RSC .
E. Yamamoto, M. Kitahara, T. Tsumura and K. Kuroda, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2927–2933 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du and J. He, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8165–8174 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Qu, H. Xuan, K. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng and Q. Xu, J. Chromatogr. A, 2017, 1505, 63–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, Y. Si, H. Xuan, K. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng, H. Q. Yu, M. A. Abdullah and K. A. Alamry, J. Chromatogr. A, 2018, 1540, 31–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, D. Yang, J. Wen, A. S. Filatov, Y. Liu, A. Lei and X.-M. Lin, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 1047–1055 RSC .
Z. Ali, L. Tian, B. Zhang, N. Ali, M. Khan and Q. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 8222–8231 RSC .
K. Radhakrishnan, P. Panneerselvam and A. Ravikumar, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 45824–45833 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Zhou, B. Zhang, L. Tian, Z. Ali and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 932–940 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, B. Li, Z. Shi, L. Zhao, K. Wang and D. Qiu, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 2345–2350 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, R. Rin, J. C. Tseng, C. Weidenthaler, U. P. Apfel and H. Tüysüz, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 4238–4243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dhiman, B. Chalke and V. Polshettiwar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1935–1940 RSC .
H. Alamri, A. Al-Shahrani, E. Bovero, T. Khaldi, G. Alabedi, W. Obaid, I. Al-Taie and A. Fihri, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 349–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, Y. Si, H. Xuan, K. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng and H. Yu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 211, 40–42 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ali, L. Tian, B. Zhang, N. Ali, M. Khan and Q. Zhang, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2017, 103, 42–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Afzal, X. Quan, S. Chen, J. Wang and D. Muhammad, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 318, 308–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cai, Y. Geng, X. Zhao, K. Cui, Q. Sun, X. Chen, Q. Feng, H. Li and E. G. Vrieling, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 108, 123–135 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bayal, B. Singh, R. Singh and V. Polshettiwar, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, Z. Tao, J. C. Praskavich, A. Goswami, J. F. Al-Sharab, T. Minko, V. Polshettiwar and T. Asefa, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10886–10898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Febriyanti, V. Suendo, R. R. Mukti, A. Prasetyo, A. F. Arifin, M. A. Akbar, S. Triwahyono, I. N. Marsih and Ismunandar, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 5802–5811 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. S. Hamid, M. L. Firmansyah, S. Triwahyono, A. A. Jalil, R. R. Mukti, E. Febriyanti, V. Suendo, H. D. Setiabudi, M. Mohamed and W. Nabgan, Appl. Catal., A, 2017, 532, 86–94 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. A. Fatah, S. Triwahyono, A. A. Jalil, N. Salamun, C. R. Mamat and Z. A. Majid, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 314, 650–659 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. A. Abouaitah and A. A. Farghali, J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol., 2016, 7, 1000360 Search PubMed .
K. Yu, X. Zhang, H. Tong, X. Yan and S. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2013, 106, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, L. Xu, H. Wu, K. Zhang and P. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2709–2711 RSC .
M. Bouhrara, C. Ranga, A. Fihri, R. R. Shaikh, P. Sarawade, A. H. Emwas, M. N. Hedhili and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 1192–1199 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, X. Le, C. Dong, Z. Wei, X. Li and J. Ma, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 372–380 CrossRef CAS .
X. Le, Z. Dong, X. Li, W. Zhang, M. Le and J. Ma, Catal. Commun., 2015, 59, 21–25 CrossRef CAS .
X. Le, Z. Dong, Y. Liu, Z. Jin, T. D. Huy, M. Le and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19696–19706 RSC .
H. Peng, D. Wang, L. Xu and P. Wu, Chin. J. Catal., 2013, 34, 2057–2065 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Qureshi, P. B. Sarawade, M. Albert, V. D'Elia, M. N. Hedhili and K. Köhler, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 635–642 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Qureshi, P. B. Sarawade, I. Hussain, H. Zhu, H. Al-Johani, D. H. Anjum, M. N. Hedhili, N. Maity, V. D'Elia and J. M. Basset, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 1671–1678 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sadeghzadeh, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3059–3066 RSC .
Z. N. Siddiqui, K. Khan and N. Ahmed, Catal. Lett., 2014, 144, 623–632 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh, R. Bapat, L. Qin, H. Feng and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2770–2784 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, D. Guo, L. Zhang, H. Li, B. Yang and S. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 3201–3210 RSC .
Z. Sun, H. Li, D. Guo, J. Sun, G. Cui, Y. Liu, Y. Tian and S. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 4713–4722 RSC .
H. Yang, S. Li, X. Zhang, X. Wang and J. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12060–12067 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Zhang, H. Peng, X. Xu, W. Liu, Z. Wang, N. Zhang and X. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 242, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hassankhani, S. M. Sadeghzadeh and R. Zhiani, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 8761–8769 RSC .
S. M. Saadati and S. M. Sadeghzadeh, Catal. Lett., 2018, 148, 1692–1702 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhiani, S. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Emrani and M. Abasian, J. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 855, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sadeghzadeh, R. Zhiani and S. Emrani, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e3941 CrossRef .
S. Ravi, S. Zhang, Y.-R. Lee, K.-K. Kang, J.-M. Kim, J.-W. Ahn and W.-S. Ahn, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 67, 210–268 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mohammadbagheri and A. Najafi Chermahini, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 62, 401–408 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. Qiao, J. Liu, F. Xia, D. Tian and C. Zhou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 267, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maity and V. Polshettiwar, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3866–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bayal, R. Singh and V. Polshettiwar, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 2182–2191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Maity, A. Das, D. Sen, S. Mazumder and V. Polshettiwar, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 13774–13782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamaguchi, A. Maity, V. Polshettiwar and M. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 8080–8085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Singh, R. Belgamwar, M. Dhiman and V. Polshettiwar, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 1600–1604 RSC .
A. Maity and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 3636–3643 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maity, S. Mujumdar and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23392–23398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Singh, A. Maity and V. Polshettiwar, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 10684–10688 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh, N. Bayal, A. Maity, D. J. Pradeep, J. Trébosc, P. K. Madhu, O. Lafon and V. Polshettiwar, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 1–10 CrossRef .
X. Du, C. Zhao, Y. Luan, C. Zhang, M. Jaroniec, H. Huang, X. Zhang and S. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21560–21569 RSC .
X. Du and J. He, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 10057–10062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2015, 11, 392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, Y. Xing, X. Li, H. Huang, Z. Geng, J. He, Y. Wen and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 7864–7871 RSC .
X. Du, B. Shi, J. Liang, J. Bi, S. Dai and S. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5981–5985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, L. Xiong, S. Dai, F. Kleitz and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7627–7637 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, B. Shi, Y. Tang, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 5580–5590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, X. Li and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2365–2372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du and J. He, Nanoscale, 2011, 4, 852–859 RSC .
Y. Xing, X. Du, X. Li, H. Huang, J. Li, Y. Wen and X. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, Y. Xing, M. Zhou, X. Li, H. Huang, X. Meng, Y. Wen and X. Zhang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 255, 84–93 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Z. Li, P. Xu, R. Wu and Z. Jiao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6783–6785 RSC .
D. S. Park, D. Yun, T. Y. Kim, J. Baek, Y. S. Yun and J. Yi, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 2281–2289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lim, H. G. Jang, H. I. Sim, C. H. Shin, J. H. Kim and G. Seo, J. Porous Mater., 2014, 21, 797–809 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lai, L. Zhang, C. Hu and M. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8610–8619 RSC .
Y. Min, K. Yang, Z. Liang, L. Zhang and Y. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 26269–26272 RSC .
J. Gao, W. Kong, L. Zhou, Y. He, L. Ma, Y. Wang, L. Yin and Y. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 309, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, X. Yu, J. Tang, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhang and D. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 217, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Chen, S. H. Hu, W. T. Hung, S. Y. Chen and D. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9568–9575 RSC .
V. Polshettiwar, J. Thivolle-Cazat, M. Taoufik, F. Stoffelbach and S. Norsic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2747–2751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fihri, D. Cha, M. Bouhrara, N. Almana and V. Polshettiwar, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 85–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Park, D. Yun, Y. Choi, T. Y. Kim, S. Oh, J. H. Cho and J. Yi, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 889–895 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, L. Xu, J. Jiang, N. Calin, K. F. Lam, S. Zhang, H. Wu, G. Wu, B. Albela, L. Bonneviot and P. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2427–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsh, J. H. Lee, J. J. Lee, D. W. Han, Y. H. Hwang, H. K. Kim and N. H. Hong, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 345603 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Li and C. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13918–13921 RSC .
X. Li, X. Chen, G. Miao, H. Liu, C. Mao, G. Yuan, Q. Liang, X. Shen, C. Ning and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 7045–7054 RSC .
D. Shen, J. Yang, X. Li, L. Zhou, R. Zhang, W. Li, L. Chen, R. Wang, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 923–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, L. Wen, J. Yang, J. Zeng, Q. Sun, Z. Li, D. Zhao and S. Dou, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 261–270 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Shen, Y. Wei, W. Li, F. Zhang, B. Kong, S. Zhang, W. Teng, J. Fan, W. Zhang, S. Dou and D. Zhao, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2503–2514 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, R. Che, G. Chen, J. Fan, Z. Sun, Z. Wu, M. Wang, B. Li, J. Wei, Y. Wei, G. Wang, G. Guan, A. A. Elzatahry, A. A. Bagabas, A. M. Al-Enizi, Y. Deng, H. Peng and D. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1500166 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Du, F. Kleitz, X. Li, H. Huang, X. Zhang and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707325 CrossRef .
Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3235–3272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, X. Li, L. Xiong, X. Zhang, F. Kleitz and S. Qiao, Biomaterials, 2016, 91, 90–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hoffmann and M. Froba, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 608–620 RSC .
J. G. Croissant, Y. Fatieiev and N. M. Khashab, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604634 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Van Der Voort, D. Esquivel, E. De Canck, F. Goethals, I. Van Driessche and F. J. Romero-Salguero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3913–3955 RSC .
Y. Yang, S. Bernardi, H. Song, J. Zhang, M. Yu, J. C. Reid, E. Strounina, D. J. Searles and C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 704–707 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Wan, Y. Niu, Z. Gu, J. Zhang, M. Yu and C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9008–9016 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Lu, P. L. Abbaraju, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, G. Xiang and C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8446–8450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Tang, P. L. Abbaraju, M. Jambhrunkar, H. Song, M. Zhang, C. Lei, J. Fu, Z. Gu, Y. Liu and C. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 11938–11943 CrossRef .
M. Kalantari, Y. Liu, E. Strounina, Y. Yang, H. Song and C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17579–17586 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Song, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, J. Tang and C. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5770–5776 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, M. Yu, O. Noonan, J. Zhang, H. Song, H. Zhang, C. Lei, Y. Niu, X. Huang, Y. Yang and C. Yu, Small, 2016, 11, 5949–5955 CrossRef PubMed .
P. L. Abbaraju, Y. Yang, M. Yu, J. Fu, C. Xu and C. Yu, Chem.–Asian J., 2017, 12, 1465–1469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, Y. A. Nor, M. Yu, Y. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Xu, N. Mitter and C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6455–6462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Meka, P. L. Abbaraju, H. Song, C. Xu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, M. Yu and C. Yu, Small, 2016, 12, 5169–5177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Niu, J. Zhang, A. K. Meka, H. Zhang, C. Xu, C. X. Lin, M. Yu and C. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 2743–2749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bhunia, S. Melissen, M. R. Parida, P. Sarawade, J. M. Basset, D. H. Anjum, O. F. Mohammed, P. Sautet, T. L. Bahers and K. Takanabe, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 8237–8247 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, Y. Wang and Y. Huang, J. Harbin Inst. Technol., 2018, 50, 116–121 Search PubMed .
X. Wen, Y.-T. Xie, M. W. C. Mak, K. Y. Cheung, X.-Y. Li, R. Renneberg and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4836–4842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. M. J. Fréchet and D. A. Tomalia, Dendrimers and Other Dendritic Polymers, John Wiley & Sons,  2002, 1st edn, pp. 3–40 Search PubMed .
W. Haller, Nature, 1961, 191, 662–663 CrossRef .
L. P. Xu, X. Wu, J. Meng, J. Peng, Y. Wen, X. Zhang and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8752–8754 RSC .
P. L. Abbaraju, A. K. Meka, H. Song, Y. Yang, M. Jambhrunkar, J. Zhang, C. Xu, M. Yu and C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6321–6328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, C. Zhao, E. Ju, H. Ji, J. Ren, B. P. Binks and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1682–1688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, F. Yang, Y. Xue, X. Wei, L. Song and X. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38931–38942 RSC .
L. Ernawati, R. Balgis, T. Ogi and K. Okuyama, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 783–790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, X. Li, Z. Liu, X. Shi and G. Zhou, Solid State Sci., 2017, 63, 62–69 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, E. Habib and X. X. Zhu, Dent. Mater., 2017, 33, 1139–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. W. Sing, Pure Appl. Chem., 1985, 57, 603–619 CAS .
T. Yamaguchi, A. Maity, V. Polshettiwar and M. Ogawa, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3671–3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu and V. Polshettiwar, ChemPhotoChem, 2018, 2, 796–800 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Teh, S. Triwahyono, A. A. Jalil, M. L. Firmansyah, C. R. Mamat and Z. A. Majid, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 523, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, L. Kong, K. Wang, R. Jin, T. Cheng and G. Liu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1750–1757 RSC .
A. S. Lilly Thankamony, C. Lion, B. Singh, A. J. Perez Linde, D. Carnevale, G. Bodenhausen, H. Vezin, O. Lafon and V. Polshettiwar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2190–2193 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Dong, G. Yu and X. Le, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 8623–8629 RSC .
M. Dhiman, B. Chalke and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3224–3230 CrossRef CAS .
X. Le, Z. Dong, W. Zhang, X. Li and J. Ma, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2014, 395, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, X. Le, X. Li, Z. Wei, C. Dong and J. Ma, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 158, 129–135 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, C. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4121–4126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Sadeghzadeh, R. Zhiani, M. Khoobi and S. Emrani, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 257, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
W. Byoun, S. Jung, N. M. Tran and H. Yoo, ChemistryOpen, 2018, 7, 349–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Li, A. Ito, Y. Sogo, Y. Watanabe, K. Hashimoto, A. Yamazaki, T. Ohno and N. M. Tsuji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 1057–1060 RSC .
X. Li, G. Miao, X. Chen, G. Yuan, H. Liu, C. Mao, X. Shen and C. Ning, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2017, 9, 562–570 CrossRef .
X. Du, C. Zhao, M. Zhou, T. Ma, H. Huang, M. Jaroniec, X. Zhang and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1–11 Search PubMed .
B. G. Cha, J. H. Jeong and J. Kim, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 484–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Chen, Y. D. Kang, C. H. Lin, S. Y. Chen, C. H. Hsieh, Y. Y. Chen, C. W. Chiang, W. Lee, C. Y. Hsu, L. D. Liao, C. T. Fan, M. L. Li and W. C. Shyu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6488–6495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cong, Q. Li, M. Chen and L. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3552–3556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Munaweera, M. Trinh, J. Hong and K. J. Balkus, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 9063–9071 CrossRef .
M. Wu, Q. Meng, Y. Chen, Y. Du, L. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Zhang and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 215–222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, J. Wang, M. Wang and X. Ge, J. Hazard. Mater., 2015, 297, 66–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, W. Chen, D. Shen, Y. Wei, X. Ran, W. Teng, J. Fan, W. Zhang and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11045–11048 RSC .
H. Yu, Q. Zhang, M. Dahl, J. B. Joo, X. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Yin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16249–16256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pereira, C. Alves, A. Monteiro, C. Magén, A. M. Pereira, A. Ibarra, M. R. Ibarra, P. B. Tavares, J. P. Araújo and G. Blanco, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2289–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Liu, H. Yu, S. Sun, X. Yun, W. Yan, Q. Qu and Y. Chao, J. Chromatogr. A, 2017, 1499, 196–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qu, Y. Min, L. Zhang, Q. Xu and Y. Yin, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 9631–9638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, H. Kwak and S. Hong, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 7054–7061 RSC .
B. Singh and V. Polshettiwar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7005–7019 RSC .
U. Patil, A. Fihri, A. H. Emwas and V. Polshettiwar, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2224–2229 RSC .
E. Yamamoto, S. Mori, A. Shimojima, H. Wada and K. Kuroda, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2464–2470 RSC .
J. Ryu, W. Kim, J. Yun, K. Lee, J. Lee, H. Yu, J. H. Kim, J. J. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11843–11851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chen, H. Mu, C. Zuo and Y. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 770, 335–344 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Winsor, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1948, 44, 376–398 RSC .
S. M. Egger, K. R. Hurley, A. Datt, G. Swindlehurst and C. L. Haynes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3193–3196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, L. Gu, K. Hou, C. Dai, C. Song and X. Guo, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 58355–58362 RSC .
X. Du and J. He, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3984–4002 RSC .
X. Du, C. Zhao, X. Li, H. Huang, J. He, Y. Wen and X. Zhang, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2017, 2517–2524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, M. Yu, Y. Lu, Z. Gu, Y. Yang, M. Zhang, J. Fu and C. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18247–18254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yue, J. Li, W. Luo, Y. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, X. Wang, C. Wang, W. Li, X. Cheng, A. Alghamdi, A. M. Abdullah, Y. Deng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13282–13289 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, D. Niu, Y. Jiang, C. Xu, S. Pan, J. He, J. Chen, L. Zhang and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10377–10385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Shen, L. Zhou, W. Li, X. Li, C. Yao, R. Wang, A. M. Eltoni, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3030–3037 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yue, J. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, X. Chen, P. Pan, J. Su, A. A. Elzatahry, A. Alghamdi, Y. Deng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15486–15493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Firmansyah, A. A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono, H. Hamdan, M. M. Salleh, F. W. A. Wan and G. T. M. Kadja, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 2016, 5178–5182 RSC .
Z. Sun, X. Zhou, W. Luo, Q. Yue, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, W. Li, B. Kong, Y. Deng and D. Zhao, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 464–482 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fihri, M. Bouhrara, U. Patil, D. Cha, Y. Saih and V. Polshettiwar, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1425–1431 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, C. Li, X. Kang, D. Yang, P. Yang, Z. Hou and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16343–16350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, C. Yang, Q. Liu, J. Li, R. Liang, C. Shen, Y. Zhang, K. Wang, L. Liu, K. Shezad, M. Sullivan, Y. Xu, G. Shen, J. Tao, J. Zhu and Z. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1701741 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, J. Huo and X. Hou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4168–4217 RSC .
M. Dang, W. Li, Y. Zheng, X. Su, X. Ma, Y. Zhang, Q. Ni, J. Tao, J. Zhang, G. Lu, Z. Teng and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2625–2634 RSC .
H.-Y. Chiu, D. Gößl, L. Haddick, H. Engelke and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 644–654 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Yu, B. Peng, S. Ma, T. Ning, B. Shan, T. Yang, Q. Xue, K. Zhang and P. Wu, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5575–5581 RSC .
A. B. D. Nandiyanto, S. G. Kim, F. Iskandar and K. Okuyama, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 120, 447–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Furukawa, T. Saegusa, T. Tsuruta, H. Fujii and T. Tatano, J. Polym. Sci., 1959, 36, 546 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gustafsson, S. Isaksson, A. Altskär and K. Holmberg, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 467, 253–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Lee, S. Kang, M. Ahn, H. Jang and D. H. Min, Small, 2018, 14, 1702564 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. Kwon, G. Krylova, P. J. Phillips, R. F. Klie, S. Chattopadhyay, T. Shibata, E. E. Bunel, Y. Liu, V. B. Prakapenka, B. Lee and E. V. Shevchenko, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 215–223 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Sadeghzadeh, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 30, 835–842 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seo, C. Lee, D. Yoo, P. Kofinas and Y. Piao, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 9587–9595 RSC .
P. L. Abbaraju, M. Jambhrunkar, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Lu and C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2020–2023 RSC .
Y. Zheng, D. Wang, Z. Li, X. Sun, T. Gao and G. Zhou, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 538, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1938–1958 RSC .
M. Yu, Z. Gu, T. Ottewell and C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 3241–3252 RSC .
J. G. Croissant, Y. Fatieiev, A. Almalik and N. M. Khashab, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1700831 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Du, J. Ren and X. Qu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1209 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, Y. Wang, Y. Du, L. Zhou, Y. He, L. Ma, L. Yin, W. Kong and Y. Jiang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 317, 175–186 CrossRef CAS .
V. Califano, F. Sannino, A. Costantini, J. Avossa, S. Cimino and A. Aronne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 8373–8379 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, S. Chen, Y. Jin, C. Zhang, X. Yang, K. Ge, X.-J. Liang, Z. Li and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1585–1593 RSC .
L. Huang, T. Liao, J. Wang, L. Ao, W. Su and J. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705380 CrossRef .
A. Kienzle, S. Kurch, J. Schlöder, C. Berges, R. Ose, J. Schupp, A. Tuettenberg, H. Weiss, J. Schultze, S. Winzen, M. Schinnerer, K. Koynov, M. Mezger, N. K. Haass, W. Tremel and H. Jonuleit, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700012 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Malekmohammadi, H. Hadadzadeh, H. Farrokhpour and Z. Amirghofran, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 2400–2410 RSC .
Z. Tian, Y. Xu and Y. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 71, 452–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Chen, L. Guo, Q. He, F. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Feng and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 529–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Prasetyanto, A. Bertucci, D. Septiadi, R. Corradini, P. Castrohartmann and C. L. De, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 3323–3327 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Huo, L. Wang, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 357 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, N. Zhang, Z. Wang, M. Wu, Y. Chen, M. Ma, H. Chen and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9093–9102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, Y. Chen, H. Lin, W. Du, H. Chen and J. Shi, Biomaterials, 2018, 161, 292–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Yao, F. Xu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8013–8025 RSC .
J. Croissant, X. Cattoën, M. W. C. Man, A. Gallud, L. Raehm, P. Trens, M. Maynadier and J. O. Durand, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6174–6180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, D. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Wang, P. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Liu, H. Yao and J. Shi, Biomaterials, 2017, 133, 219–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shao, M. Li, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, Y.-H. Lao, Z. Chang, F. Zhang, M. Lu, J. Yue, H. Hu, H. Yan, L. Chen, W.-F. Dong and K. W. Leong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801198 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, S. S. Al-Deyab and D. Zhao, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 344–366 CrossRef CAS .

          E. K. My Ali, S. K. Dilip, L. Ouellet and D. Brassard, US7101754,  2006 .
R. Rahal, A. Wankhade, D. Cha, A. Fihri, S. Ouldchikh, U. Patil and V. Polshettiwar, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7048–7052 RSC .
Z. Sun, J. H. Kim, Y. Zhao, F. Bijarbooneh, V. Malgras, Y. Lee, Y. M. Kang and S. X. Dou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19314–19317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu, J. Li and Q. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3448–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, S. H. Wang, Z. F. Bian, C. L. Cai and H. X. Li, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2009, 35, 769–777 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2219–2223 RSC .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124–6130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen, D. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8252–8254 RSC .
C. Liang, Z. Li and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3696–3717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, S. Perananthan, S. D. Panangala, J. P. Ferraris and K. J. Balkus, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 18, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and K. J. Balkus, Mater. Lett., 2017, 195, 139–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, W. Yang, M. Wang and X. Ge, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 323, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, J. Ahn, Y. Oh, J. Tan, D. Lee, J.-K. Lee and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3028–3037 RSC .
X. Du, C. Zhao, X. Li, H. Huang, Y. Wen, X. Zhang and J. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 700, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zou, X. Xu, Y. Zhu and C. Cao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 251, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
O. Noonan, H. Zhang, H. Song, C. Xu, X. Huang and C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9063–9071 RSC .
L. Liu, H. Zhao, L. Shi, M. Lan, H. Zhang and C. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 69–76 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Branda, Clinical Applications of Biomaterials,  1982, ch. 7, pp. 257–286 Search PubMed .
Q. Liang, Q. Hu, G. Miao, B. Yuan and X. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2015, 148, 45–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Liao, M. Shi, C. Liu and X. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2017, 206, 205–209 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, M.-S. Kang, C. Mahapatra and H.-W. Kim, PLoS One, 2016, 11, e0150727 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sheng and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13578–13589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiao, J. Fu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhao, A. Duan, C. Xu, J. Li, H. Song, P. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Catal., 2017, 356, 269–282 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09815h‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Yabin Wang	Yabin Wang received his BS and MS degrees in Applied Chemistry from Northwest Agriculture&Forestry University (NWUAF) in 2011, and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) in 2017, respectively. He is currently a teacher at Yan'an University. His research interests are focused on fabrication and application of dendritic mesoporous nanoparticles, as well as synthesis and application of triazinedithiolsilane compounds. He has co-authored more than 30 papers in refereed journals, including Journal of Materials Chemistry A, Nanoscale, Sensors & Actuators B Chemical, and Corrosion Science.
Xin Du	Xin Du received his BS degree from Nankai University in 2007 and PhD degree from Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2012. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Adelaide. Dr Du now is an associate professor at the University of Science & Technology Beijing. His research mainly focuses on nanoporous materials for drug delivery, gene delivery, catalysis, and new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 80 papers in refereed journals, including Advanced Materials, Advanced Functional Materials, Small, Biomaterials, and Journal of Materials Chemistry A, as the first or corresponding author (over 2000 citation times, H-index: 26).
Zhong Liu	Zhong Liu received his BS degree from the China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) in 2007, and obtained a PhD degree from the Institute of Coal Chemistry (CAS) in 2012. He is an associate researcher at the Qinghai Institute of Salt Lakes (CAS). His research mainly focuses on the preparation of functional materials which are designed for separating useful ions from salt lakes.
Shihui Shi	Shi-Hui Shi received his MS degree in Organic Chemistry from Lanzhou University in 2012, and PhD degree in Theoretical and Informational Chemistry from Université Paris Diderot-Paris 7 in 2016, respectively. He is right now a teacher and researcher at Yan'an University. His research topics include modification of electrodes, electrochemical biosensors and electro-organic synthesis.
Haiming Lv	Haiming Lv received his MS degree from Inner Mongolia University in 2009, BS degree from Jilin University in 2012, and PhD from the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) in 2017, respectively. His research interests include the development of novel nanostructured materials for applications in electrochromism and electrochemistry.

 	Fig. 1  TEM (a–d) and SEM (e–g) images of silica-based nanospheres with dendritic fibrous morphologies prepared using a cyclohexane emulsion system. SEM images of the as-prepared nanospheres calcined at 400 °C (h), 550 °C (i), 800 °C (j), and 950 °C (k). SEM images of the corresponding fiber thickness before (l) and after (m) calcination.5 Reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 2  Timeline of DFNP development (♣ and ▲ at the upper right corners of the rectangular frames represent research groups of Vivek Polshettiwar and Dongyuan Zhao, respectively. Different background colors indicate different material-based NPs with dendritic fibrous morphologies).	 

 	Fig. 3  The structural transformation of a DFNP from a quasi dendritic state108 (a) to a quasi radially fibrous state148 (c) through an intermediate state of “dendritic fibrous”63 (b). The forming process of a dendrimer by iterative grafting steps (d). Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011. Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 4  Officially published articles, dissertations, and patents of DFNPs retrieved from the RSC, ACS, Wiley, Elsevier, Springer and CNKI from 2008 to 2018-09, including DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types. (a) The percentages of published literature about DFNPs from 2008 to 2018-07. (b) The percentages of published literature in regard to DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types of DFNPs during this period. (c) The percentages of published literature with respect to DFNS, DFNT, DFNC, DFNBG, and other types each year after their successful preparations. (d) The percentages of various applications for DFNPs. The total statistical number of published literature studies about DFNPs is approximately 270, among which circa 200 documents specifically involve application fields and other 70 ones are related to the synthesis mechanism or others.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of some semi-finished or intermediate products of DFNS prepared using a modified cyclohexane emulsion system.148 Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of the silica-based nanoparticles synthesized from the following emulsion systems (a–i) and the corresponding illustration (j). Winsor II (a–c) with weight ratios of water to surfactant to oil as 7.5:1.0:1.5, 7.5:1.0:3.0, and 7.5:1.0:4.5, respectively. Winsor III (d–f) weight ratios of water to surfactant to oil as 7.5:1.0:7.5, 7.5:1.0:10.0, and 5.0:1.0:10.0, respectively. Winsor I (g–i) weight ratios of water to surfactant to oil as 2.0:1.0:10.0, 1.5:1.0:10.0, and 1.0:1.0:10.0, respectively.26 Reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 7  Formation of dandelion-like silica spheres with dendritic fibrous morphologies by using polar pore modifiers. CTAB, TEOS, ACT, BENA, PHCH, and NAPA are abbreviations of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, tetraethyl orthosilicate, acetone, benzyl acetate, phytoncide, and 2-naphthyl acetate, respectively.113 Reproduced from ref. 113 with permission from Springer Science Business Media, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 8  The commonly used morphological models for spherical DFNPs. Models in Fig. 8a–f are from teams of Vivek Polshettiwar,79 Dongyuan Zhao,126 Xin Du,100 Jin-Kyu Lee,23 Chengzhong Yu,137 and our group,148 respectively. Models in (b) and (f) were regarded as the regular and irregular ones. The schematic diagrams of their nanochannels from narrow to wide were also established. Reproduced from ref. 79 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM images (a–c, and d–f) and SEM (d′–f′) of the as-prepared DFNS spheres with one (a–c, d and d′), two (e and e′), and three generations (f and f′) via the biphase stratification approach.126 Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 10  Proposed formation mechanism for monodisperse mesoporous silica nanoparticles with core-cone structures (MSN-CC).142 Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagrams of 2D planar structures from various silica nanospheres. (a) Spherical DFNS, (b) hierarchical radial porous sphere, (c) hierarchical porous sphere, (d) magnetic radial porous sphere with a core, (e) magnetic core–shell porous sphere, and (f) sunflower-like magnetic porous sphere.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photographs of (a) Echinometra, (b) dandelion, (c) Hydrangea, and (d) Chrysanthemum. The inset in (b) displays the elemental skeletons of dandelion. Reprinted with permission from “http://www.chinaz.com”, copyright 2018. SEM (a′–d′) and TEM (a′′–d′′) images of the NPs which were compared to Echinometra,112 dandelion,114Hydrangea,208 and Chrysanthemum,111 respectively. Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic illustration of the structure-controlled formation of silica nanospheres with varied structures by regulating the volume ratio (r) of ethanol to ethyl ether.101 Reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2010. (B) DFNS spheres with more well-defined structures by applying APTES as a co-silicon source at r = 0.33 to 0.5.104 Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013.	 

Pore size range	
ca. 2–30 nm	
ca. 8–200 nm	
ca. 2.8–10 nm
Particle size range	
ca. 170–1120 nm	
ca. 100–1100 nm	
ca. 180–280 nm
Repeatability	Excellent	Excellent	Excellent
Maneuverability	Easy	Easy	Normal
Particles' uniformity	Poor	Poor	Excellent
Pores' uniformity	Good	Average	Excellent
By-product	None	Some	None
Intermediate products	Some	Some	None
Universality	
ca. 70%	
ca. 17%	
ca. 3%
Significance	Facility and universality	Macropores for diverse guests	Uniformity for fine control

 	Fig. 14  A) SEM images, diameter distribution curves and TEM images of M-KCC-1 synthesized by microwave reaction (a), H-KCC-1 developed by a hydrothermal method without stirring (b), and HS-KCC-1 obtained by a hydrothermal method with stirring (c). (B) TEM and SEM images of H-KCC-1 (d–f) and HS-KCC-1 (g–i) at different magnifications.148 Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Harbin Institute of Technology, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM images of nanoparticles with diverse morphologies developed by means of emulsion systems for DFNS. (a) Fe3O4@SiO2@KCC-1 (reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2013), (b) TS-1@KCC-1 (reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2013), (c) ZSM-5@DFNS (reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2016), (d) SiO2@DFNS (reproduced from ref. 185 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015), (e) hollow DFNS (reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016), and (f) shuttlecock-shaped DFNS (reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014). (g) DFNS/Pt@MSS (reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017). (h) DFNS/Fe3O4 (reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2011.).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagrams of fabricating nanospheres by utilizing DFNS spheres as hard templates. (a) The regular model, and (b) the irregular one.	 

 	Fig. 17  A) Illustration of the synthesis procedures of DFNOS and HDFNOS (HDFNOS-1S), as well as double-shelled DFNOS and HDFNOS (HDFNOS-2S) (reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017). (B) SEM (a and d), TEM (b and e), and electron tomography slice (c and f) of DFNOS (a, b, and c) and HDFNOS (d, e, and f) (reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016). (C) TEM (a and b) and SEM (c and d) images of HDFNOS-2S, the corresponding dark-field STEM image (e) and EDS mapping (f, g, and h) (reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017).	 

 	Fig. 18  Fabrication and catalytic–therapeutic schematics of sequential DFNOS spheres. Synthetic procedure for DFNOS/Fe3O4 and DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD nanocatalysts (a), TEM images of DFNOS (b), DFNOS/Fe3O4 (c), and DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD (d) spheres, respectively. The schematic of the sequential catalytic–therapeutic mechanism of DFNOS/Fe3O4–GOD for generation of hydroxyl radicals to cure cancer (e).233 Reproduced from ref. 233 Springer Nature Limited, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of titania-based products (a) synthesized by a modified KCC-1 route, (b) prepared by utilizing KCC-1 as a hard template and TBOT as a filler at room temperature, (c) prepared by utilizing KCC-1 as a hard template and TBOT as a filler, therein, the former was heated to 120 °C and the latter was cooled to 0 °C before mixing.	 

 	Fig. 20  TEM (a–d) and SEM images (a′–d′) of DFNST nanoparticles with different Si and Ti molar ratios. (a) Si:Ti = 20, (b) Si:Ti = 40, (c) Si:Ti = 67, and (d) Si:Ti = 80. (e) DR UV-vis spectra of DFNST samples. (f) A schematic illustration of the structural differences between DFNST and MCM-41 type catalysts.30 Reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  SEM (a–f) and TEM images (a′–f′) of TiO2-based nanospheres with extremely similar imaging to that of the spherical DFNPs. (a and b) TiO2 nanosheet hierarchical spheres, termed TiO2-NSs;247 (c) core–shell SiO2@TiO2-NSs;248 (d) core–shell SiO2@SnO2@TiO2-NSs;248 (e) hollow TiO2-NSs;248 and (f) hollow SnO2@TiO2-NSs.248 Reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2010. Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010.	 


KCC-1/TiO2	57	598	0.095	53	522
SBA-15/TiO2	63	1391	0.045	210	122
MCM-41/TiO2	39	962	0.040	150	272
Degussa P25	Not given	Not given	Not given	90	Not given

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration of the design and synthesis of porous hollow carbon nanospheres (PHCNs) with uniform micropores and center-radial large mesopores in the shell, and the crater-like inner surface (a), the design of PHCN–PEI–PEG for drug and gene coloading (b), and the chemotherapy and improved photothermal therapy by gene silencing in cells (c).174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic illustration of the formation processes of (1–2) PSS composites, and (3–4) mesoporous carbon or silica nanomaterials with hierarchical structures. The corresponding TEM images of the as-prepared products by the multi-component PSS approach in ethanol aqueous solutions: PSS composites of the rod-like CTAB-coated resorcinol aggregates (a), spherical CTAB-coated resorcinol aggregates (b), and CTAB micelles (c) with volume ratios of ethanol to water as 4:24, 8:20, and 12:16, respectively. TEM images of the rattle-type carbon nanotube with disordered mesopores (a1), the rod-like silica nanotube with a very thin shell of ca. 30 nm (a2), the rattle-type (yolk–shell) carbon sphere with a radially aligned shell (b1), the hollow silica nanosphere with a radially oriented mesoporous shell (b2), the hollow carbon sphere with a small hollow core (c1), and a flower-like silica sphere with a solid core (c2), respectively.124 Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 24  SEM and TEM images of pseudo-HDFNC30-2.5 (a and a′), HDFNC30-5 (b and b′), HDFNC40-5 (c and c′) and HDFNC50-5 (d and d′). Scale bars: (a–d) 200 nm; (a′–d′) 100 nm. Insets (a–d) show average sizes of the cavities and shell thicknesses of the as-obtained nanospheres measured from TEM images. The schematic illustration of in situ Stöber templating for pseudo-HDFNC (e). TEM images of the core–shell DFNC after PDA removal by NaOCl etching pseudo-HDFNC are shown in a to d (a′′–d′′).256 Reproduced from ref. 256 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 25  SEM (a1–c1, e1–g1) and TEM (a2–c2, e2–g2) images of DFNBG spheres (a–c) and pineal MBG nanoparticles (e–g) with different NH3·H2O concentrations from 1 M (a1, a2, e1, e2) to 3 M (b1, b2, f1, f2) and further to 5 M (c1, c2, g1, g2), respectively. (h) Schematic illustration of the formation processes of DFNBG spheres and pineal MBG nanoparticles.259 Reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 26  A) TEM (a1–c1) images of DFNBG spheres developed with different CN contents. SEM images of DFNBG spheres immersed in SBF solutions for 12 h (a2–c2) and 24 h (a3–c3), corresponding to the order in TEM. FT-IR spectra (B) and XRD patterns (C) of DFNBG spheres after soaking in SBF for 24 h.260 Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from Elsevier B.V., copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 27  TEM (a–d) and SEM (a′–d′) images of DFNSA spheres developed with different amounts of NaAlO2 with 0 mg (a), 7.5 mg (b), 15 mg (c), and 30 mg (d), respectively. (e) Schematic illustration of mesostructural tuning of DFNSAl facilitated by the Hofmeister anion effect of [Al(OH)4]−. (f) Results from catalyst evaluation of DFNSAl/Cu & ZnO and DFNS/Cu & ZnO. (i) Specific activity (CO2 consumption rate normalized by the total amount of Cu and Zn in the catalyst); (ii) organic selectivity (rate of CO2 converting to dimethyl ether and methanol divided by the total CO2 consumption rate); (iii) mole ratio of dimethyl ether to methanol in the product stream; (iv) XRD patterns of spent catalysts.262 Reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 


DFNSCuAl	Cu-1.91	488	7.4 ± 0.5%	
ca. 98% in 60 min	70%	95.0%
Al-1.07
DFNSCu	Cu-1.89	356	7.1 ± 0.4%	
ca. 98% in 60 min	70%	67.2%
DFNSAl	Al-1.02	607	5.7 ± 0.5%	None	10–30%	Not given
DFNS	None	386	Not given	None	10–30%	Not given
Cu-MCM-41	Cu-1.90	1027	2.5 ± 0.3%	80.5% in 120 min	12.6%	Not given
Cu-γ-Al2O3	Cu-1.92	215	6.0 ± 0.6%	47.1% in 120 min	38.3%	Not given

 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of designed syntheses, designed structures, and promising applications of DFNPs.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09815h
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
