Noble metal-based composite nanomaterials fabricated via solution-based approaches  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA05801A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA05801A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3182-3223Noble metal-based composite nanomaterials fabricated via solution-based approaches

        
          
            Hui 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Feng
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Chengyin 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Penglei 
            Cui
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Multiphase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 100190. E-mail: jyang@ipe.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-10-8254-4915;   Tel: +86-10-8254-4915
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 19A Yuquan Road, Beijing, China 100049
Received 
      29th October 2014
    , Accepted 2nd December 2014First published on 5th December 2014AbstractOne of the key frontiers in nanomaterial fabrication is the integration of different materials within the same structure to increase functionality. In particular, interactions between nanoscale materials with distinctly different physical and chemical properties can greatly improve the overall application performance of the nanocomposites and can even generate new synergetic properties. Within the last decade, the development of wet-chemistry methods has led to the development of research in to composite nanomaterials. The efforts of many leading research groups have led to a rich variety of composite nanomaterials. However, the design and synthesis of composite nanomaterials with controlled properties remain a significant challenge. We devote this review for summarizing the solution-based methods used for the preparation of noble metal-based nanocomposites, their characterization and their potential applications in diverse areas to provide readers with a systematic and coherent overview of the field.Hui LiuHui Liu studied Environmental Engineering at South-Central University for Nationalities (B.S. 2008) and Organic Chemistry at the University of Science and Technology, Beijing (M.S. 2010). She received her PhD with Prof. Jun YANG at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS) in 2014 and started as an Assistant Professor of the Materials for Energy Conversion and Environmental Remediation (MECER) Group at IPE-CAS in the same year. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of novel composite nanomaterials for energy conversion and environmental remediation, electrocatalysis, and the phase transfer-based extraction of heavy metals.Yan FengYan Feng received her BSc in Applied Chemistry in 2012 from the University of Jinan. She is currently a PhD student at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS). Her research focuses on the study of Pt-based nanocomposites as selective catalysts in direct methanol fuel cell reactions.Dong ChenDong Chen received his Master's degree from the College of Environmental and Energy Engineering in 2013 at the Beijing University of Technology. He is currently a PhD student at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS). His research focuses on the design and synthesis of Pd-based electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction and formic acid oxidation in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs).Chengyin LiChengyin Li received his BSc in Chemical Engineering in 2013 from Nanjing University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Master's student at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS). His research focuses on the study of phase transfer-based extraction for the recovery of metal ions and its application in nanocrystal synthesis.Penglei CuiPenglei Cui received her PhD in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2013, and then became an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS) in 2014. Her research interests focus on ionic liquid-based synthesis and the structural tuning of multi-metallic heterogeneous nanomaterials.Jun YangJun Yang received his PhD in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering in 2006 from the National University of Singapore (with Professor Jim Yang LEE). After completing postdoctoral research at Boston College and the University of Toronto, he joined the Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, Singapore in 2007. In 2010, he moved to the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as the leader of the Group of Materials for Energy Conversion and Environmental Remediation (MECER). His main research interests include (i) applied catalysis, (ii) nanocomposites for energy conversion, (iii) the synthesis and application of novel nanocrystalline materials, and (iv) separation techniques.
1 Introduction
We are currently witnessing impressive advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology. A variety of recipes have been developed to synthesize, assemble and package nanomaterials/nanostructures into forms more amenable for a wide range of applications.1–17 After close to a decade of intense effort, many nanoparticles can now be produced with fairly good control over their shapes and sizes. A number of nanoparticle geometries, such as wires,18 rods,19 cubes,12 and prisms,11,20 can be routinely synthesized by solution chemistry methods in polar and non-polar environments. There is also an increased interest in the synthesis of more complex nanostructures because of their promising tunable properties for a new generation of technology-driven applications in catalysis,21–24 chemical and biological sensing,25,26 and optics.19,27 As presented in this review, after the remarkable success in synthesizing more conventional hybrid nanomaterials, e.g., core–shell,28–31 alloy,32–34 and bimetallic heterostructures with controlled dimensions and intriguing morphologies,35–41 increasing interest have been devoted towards the development of nanocomposites that consist of different classes of materials with solid-state interfaces.42–61 The attracting factor of these nanostructured composites is that they combine materials with distinctly different physical and chemical properties to yield unique hybrid systems with tunable optical properties,62,63 enhanced photocatalytic activities,45,64–66 and ultrafast carrier dynamics.67,68 Furthermore, interactions between the nanoscale metal and semiconductor components can greatly improve the overall application performance of the nanocomposites and can even generate new synergetic properties. For example, the metal ingredients in semiconductor–metal nanocomposites can enhance the photocatalytic and light-harvesting efficiencies of semiconductors by improving the charge separation and by increasing the light absorption.69–71 In addition, as presented by Talapin and coworkers, contrary to the n-type PbS semiconductor, core–shell structured Au–PbS nanocomposites demonstrate strong p-type gate effects due to the intra-particle charge transfer. The energy level alignments of PbS and Au facilitate the electron transfer from the highest occupied 1Sh quantum confined state of the PbS shell to the Au core, which is analogous to the injection of mobile holes into the PbS shell.72
Composite nanomaterials based on noble metals would be particularly useful for catalytic applications. The adjacent domains of semiconductors or metal oxides with different electron affinities and appropriate energy level alignments could either donate or withdraw electrons from the noble metal domain through the nanometer contact at the interface of the nanocomposites, thus inducing changes in the electron density around the metal atoms. These changes in electron density would tune the catalytic property of noble metals by altering the adsorption of reactants on the metal catalyst. In addition, useful applications could also emerge in the field of photocatalysis because nanoscale sections of certain metals combined with semiconductors or metal oxides could allow the photogenerated charge carriers to perform redox reactions with high efficiency. Therefore, the potential for catalytic applications is expected to dramatically increase with increases in the complexity of the nanocomposites that can be fabricated. We will discuss these possible scenarios in more detail in the corresponding sections.
The early studies of metal-based nanocomposites involved different metals (e.g., Au, Ag, and Pt) deposited on or doped in TiO2 powders for photocatalytic applications.73–79 In these structures, the metal domain induces charge equilibrium in photoexcited TiO2 nanocrystals, which affects the energetics of the nanocomposites by shifting the Fermi level to more negative potentials. The shift in the Fermi level is indicative of the improved charge separation in TiO2–metal systems, and is effective towards enhancing the photocatalytic efficiency.64,65
Only within the last decade the wet-chemistry methods have developed and become a powerful approach toward the synthesis of nanocomposites. In 2004, Banin and coworkers made a breakthrough in semiconductor–metal nanocomposites.42 They demonstrated a solution synthesis for nanohybrids via the selective growth of gold tips on the apexes of hexagonal-phase CdSe nanorods at room temperature. The resulting novel nanostructures displayed modified optical properties due to strong coupling between the gold and semiconductor components. The gold tips showed increased conductivity, as well as selective chemical affinity for forming self-assembled chains of rods. The architecture of these nanostructures is qualitatively similar to bifunctional molecules such as dithiols, and provides a two-sided chemical connectivity for self-assembly and for electrical devices, as well as contact points for colloidal nanorods and tetrapods. These researchers later reported the synthesis of asymmetric semiconductor–metal heterostructures in which gold was grown on one side of CdSe nanocrystalline rods and dots. Theoretical modeling and experimental analysis showed that the one-sided nanocomposites were transformed from the two-sided architectures through a ripening process.80 Subsequently, various approaches were developed for the synthesis of semiconductor or metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites (e.g., ZnO–Ag,81,82 CdS–Au,83,84 InAs–Au,85 TiO2–Co,86 Fe3O4–Au,87 CoFe2O4–Ag,88 PbS–Au,43,44,72,89,90 Ag2S–Au,48 and semiconductor–Pt systems46,47,91,92) by the anisotropic growth of metals on semiconductors through reduction, physical deposition, or photochemistry.
We therefore prefer to devote this review for summarizing the solution-based methods for the preparation of noble metal-based nanocomposites, their characterization and potential applications in catalysis to provide readers with a systematic and coherent overview of this field. Most of the works have only been carried out in the last few years, particularly by the authors in different laboratories. Regarding the great opportunities and tremendous challenges due to the accumulation in nanocomposites, in the final section of this review, we offer some perspectives for the future development of noble metal-based composite nanomaterials. The human being is at the interface of a number of forefront research areas in this period of technology development. We hope through this research effort, researchers can establish a general materials synthesis methodology to influence a rethinking of the current processing technologies: to move towards molecular-level control and regulation, and away from the “top-down” approach and the stringent and expensive control inherent in conventional manufacturing processes.
2 Phase transfer protocols for metal ions and nanoparticles
Metal nanoparticles of different shapes and sizes can be obtained in the organic phase by preparing them in the organic phase itself or by transferring nanoparticles from the aqueous phase to the organic phase. The latter has the advantage of leveraging the many existing methods for preparing metal nanoparticles in the aqueous phase.93,94 In particular, the wet chemistry-based synthesis of nanomaterials including nanocomposites is often carried out in specific solvents. Therefore, the phase transfer of metal ions and nanoparticles is capable of creating favorable solvent surroundings for maximizing the advantages of wet chemistry approaches in fabricating noble metal-based nanocomposites with multiple functionalities.
The phase transfer of metal nanoparticles from aqueous solution to the organic phase is usually accomplished by capping nanoparticles with thiols and amines,95 or by using surfactants to improve the solubility of nanoparticles in the organic phase.96 The applications of phase transfer in metal nanoparticle synthesis and in the surface modifications of quantum dots have recently been reviewed in a number of articles.97,98,99 Thus, this review does not intend to provide a comprehensive coverage of such topics. Instead, we devoted this section to a general protocol for the transfer of metal ions from aqueous solution to an organic medium after providing a brief update of the literature.49 This transfer strategy involves mixing an aqueous solution of metal salts with an ethanol solution of dodecylamine, and then extracting the metal ions into an organic layer (e.g., toluene, hexane or other non-polar solvents). It could be successfully applied towards the synthesis of a variety of metal, alloy and semiconductor nanoparticles. Compared with other general approaches,100,101 this protocol allows metal or semiconductor nanocrystals to be synthesized in an organic medium using aqueous soluble metal salts as starting materials, which are relatively inexpensive and can be easily obtained. In addition, this protocol could also be extended to transfer a variety of noble metal nanoparticles from an aqueous phase to non-polar organic media. As shown in later sections, this phase transfer protocol is an important step preceding the fabrication of noble metal-based nanocomposites with favorable physical/chemical properties.
2.1 Brust–Schiffrin method
The often-cited Brust–Schiffrin method is the earliest approach employing phase transfer to prepare thiol-stabilized nanoparticles.102,103 In this method, gold metal ions from an aqueous solution are extracted to a hydrocarbon (toluene) phase using tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB) as the phase transfer agent. A subsequent reduction occurs in the organic solution using an aqueous NaBH4 solution in the presence of an alkanethiol, yielding Au particles with average diameter of ∼2.5 nm. The overall reaction is summarized in eqn (1) and (2), where the source of electrons is NaBH4:102 AuCl4−(aq) + N(C8H17)4+(C6H5Me) → N(C8H17)4+AuCl4−(C6H5Me)(1) mAuCl4−(C6H5Me) + nC12H25SH(C6H5Me) + 3me− → 4mCl−(aq) + (Aum)(C12H25SH)n(C6H5Me)(2)
Here, the nucleation and growth of the gold particles and the attachment of the thiol molecules simultaneously occur in a single step.
It should be noted that we emphasize the thiol-stabilization in the Brust–Schiffrin method. However, early in 1988, Meguro et al. reported the extraction of H2PtCl6 into organic solvents from an aqueous solution using dioctadecyldimethylammonium chloride, trioctylmethylammonium chloride, or trioctylphosphine oxide as the extractants.104 In this process, Pt4+ ions after extraction were reduced by formaldehyde or benzaldehyde in the presence of sodium hydroxide for several hours at 65 °C. The Pt particles obtained in CHCl3, cyclohexane, or methylisobutylketone were very stable with diameters of 1.5–2.5 nm. Subsequently in 1989, they extended this extraction method for the preparation of organo–gold nanoparticles. The relationship between Au particle size and preparative condition was also discussed.105
Considerable subsequent work with modifications to this classic method ensued, including the use of alkanethiol of different chain lengths,106,107–109 aromatic thiol,110 dialkyl disulfides,111 and various thiol/Au reactant ratios,112 for the synthesis of monolayer-protected clusters (MPCs). In 1998, Murray's group employed hexanethiol instead of dodecanethiol as the stabilizer in a 3:1 thiol/Au ratio and chilled the reaction to yield a solution of clusters with a mean diameter of 1.6 nm and an average composition of Au145(S(CH2)5CH3)50.106 In their subsequent work,113 the same group addressed specific issues of particle growth and monodispersity issues in the preparation of hexanethiol-protected Au clusters by monitoring the size evolution of the particles over the course of 125 h. The researchers found that the average diameter of the Au core gradually increased over the first 60 h of the reaction and then remained largely unchanged afterward (up to 125 h) at ca. 3 nm. The results support the findings that MPCs of the smallest core size could be best obtained by quenching the reaction at a relatively early time,112,114,115 and thus were important for understanding how MPC core sizes evolve in the Brust–Schiffrin cluster synthetic reaction.
Further insights can be derived from the similar treatment of platinum, lending greater understanding for the preparation of other noble metal nanomaterials. Early in 1999, the Brust–Schiffrin method was also extended by Horswell and coworkers for the synthesis of isocyanide-protected platinum nanoparticles.116 The authors followed every step of the Brust–Schiffrin method to prepare tetraoctylammonium-stabilized Pt nanoparticles, which were further functionalized by dodecyl isocyanide via a ligand exchange process. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showed that Pt particles of 1–3 nm in diameter with well-defined crystalline structure were obtained this way.
The Brust–Schiffrin method for nanoparticle synthesis was then extended to generate amine-stabilized nanoparticles by simply substituting an appropriate amine for the thiol. Leff et al. first reported the synthesis of amine-stabilized Au nanoparticles using the Brust–Schiffrin method by substituting the dodecanethiol with dodecylamine or oleylamine.117 Larger Au nanoparticles with diameters up to 7 nm could be accessed by this modified Brust–Schiffrin method. In a later work, Wikander et al. used tetrakisdecylammonium bromide instead of tetraoctylammonium bromide to transfer platinum(IV) chloride from an aqueous solution to toluene, and then reduced the platinum ions using NaBH4 in the presence of alkylamine of different chain lengths. This research demonstrated that the length of the primary amine chains used to coat the platinum nanoparticles could be used to control the nanoparticle size (Fig. 1). The calculated average diameter indicated that there is an inverse relationship between the size of the nanoparticles and the length of the alkylamine. The inspection of the TEM images reveals that Pt nanoparticles are more spherical in shape when short-chain alkylamine are used rather than their longer-chain homologues.118
 Fig. 1  TEM images of platinum nanocrystals obtained by phase-transfer method using different alkylamines as stabilizing agents: (A) C6NH2, (B) C7NH2, (C) C8NH2, (D) C9NH2, (E) C10NH2, (F) C12NH2, (G) C16NH2, and (H) C18NH2. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The extension of Brust–Schiffrin method for the syntheses of nanomaterials is still very active and continues to be a useful tool to prepare Au, Ag, or Pt nanoparticles with controlled size and improved dispersity.119–121 With a suitable choice of phase transfer agent, the Brust–Schiffrin method has also been employed to produce Cu,122 CoPt alloy,123 Ag2S,124,125 and PbS.126 However, because the phase transfer agent and the stabilizer for particles in Brust–Schiffrin syntheses are chemically different, the nanoparticles so obtained were found to contain nitrogenous surface impurities due to the phase-transfer agent. In addition to this contamination problem, the greatest limitation of the Brust–Schiffrin preparation is that the stabilizing ligands, such as thiol or amine, must be compatible with all of the reagents, including the reducing (i.e., NaBH4) and phase transfer agents, thus avoiding adverse influences on the reaction chemistry.
2.2 Ethanol-mediated phase transfer
Notwithstanding the contamination issue, the Brust–Schiffrin method should be recognized for its ability to produce finer metallic nanoparticles. Furthermore, an ethanol-mediated protocol, in which alkylamine is used as a stabilizer-cum-phase transfer agent, has been developed to realize the distinctive advantage of the Brust–Schiffrin method without its associated problem of impurity contamination.49 This protocol is also generic enough for the transition metal ions and can be easily extended to the preparation of metallic and semiconductor nanocrystals with finer sizes.
The transfer of metal precursors from the aqueous solution to the hydrocarbon layer is a two-step approach.49 Typically, the aqueous solution of metal ions is mixed with an equal volume of ethanol containing dodecylamine (DDA) and the mixture is stirred for 3 minutes. Then, toluene is added and stirring is continued for 1 more minute before transferring the mixture to a separating funnel. The formation of two immiscible layers occurs within a few minutes. The transfer of metal salts from the aqueous phase to toluene then completes, leaving behind a colorless aqueous solution. Ethanol is important for the transfer of metal precursors. Metal ions would otherwise not be transferred to the organic phase by the direct mixing of an aqueous metal precursor solution with an organic solvent containing DDA. Prolonged agitation would only result in a turbid mixture of metal salt solution and organic solvent, but no transfer of metal ions took place after the mixture settled down into two immiscible layers in the separating funnel. However, the transfer of metal ions could occur using ethanol as an intermediate solvent based on the fact that water and ethanol are miscible, and this ensures the maximum contact between the metal ions and DDA. Fig. 2 illustrates the complete bleaching of the aqueous phase as the metal ions are successfully transferred from water to toluene.
 Fig. 2  Images showing the successful transfer of Co(II), Os(III), Rh(III), Ru(III), Au(III), and Ir(III) metal ions from an aqueous phase to toluene. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
The mechanism of this protocol was different from that of the Brust–Schiffrin method in which the gold ions from an aqueous solution were directly transferred to a hydrocarbon phase (toluene) based on the electrostatic interaction with tetraoctylammonium bromide.102,103 It was hypothesized that a metal complex between the metal ions and DDA was formed in the process, which could then be more easily extracted by toluene.49 Analyses by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrophotometry (ICP-AES) indicated that the phase transfer efficiencies for a wide variety of metal ions were higher than 95%.
After transfer into the organic solvent, a large number of commonly used methods, e.g., wet chemistry reduction, seed-mediated growth, co-reduction, and solvothermal approaches could be adopted to produce metal or semiconductor nanoparticles with different structures or morphologies. The synthesis of noble metal nanoparticles could thus serve as a typical example to demonstrate the extension of this transfer protocol to nanomaterial preparation. At 100 °C, the reducing agent solution (i.e., a toluene solution of hexadecanediol, tetrabutylammonium borohydride or an aqueous solution of NaBH4) was added to the toluene solution of the noble metal precursor (i.e., Ru3+, Rh3+, Pd2+, Ag+, Os3+, Ir3+, Pt2+, Pt4+, or Au3+), and the mixture was agitated for several minutes. The noble metal colloids thus obtained were highly stable, and showed no sign of agglomeration, even after weeks of storage. The synthesis could be easily scaled up by proportionately increasing the volumes of the metal ion aqueous solution, DDA ethanolic solution and toluene. The nanoparticles and nanostructures synthesized with this phase transfer protocol include monometallic, bimetallic alloy and core–shell, and semiconductors (Fig. 3). Compared with other general approaches,100,101 this protocol allows the synthesis of nanocrystals to be performed in an organic medium using aqueous soluble metal salts as the starting materials, which are relatively inexpensive and can be easily obtained. As demonstrated in later sections, a notable advantage of this transfer protocol is that it could be easily extended to synthesize a large number of semiconductor–noble metal composite nanomaterials, an important challenge in current materials synthesis.42,43,48,60,98 Thus, this universal phase transfer approach represents a simple and flexible route for fabricating nanostructured materials with novel structures and multiple functionalities.
 Fig. 3  TEM images of metal nanoparticles. (a) Ag derived with HDD. (b) Au, (c) worm-like Pd, and (d) Pt from Pt(IV) derived with TBAB. Alloy nanoparticles of (e) Ag–Au, (f) Pd–Pt, (g) Pt–Rh, and (h) Pt–Ru synthesized by co-reduction of the metal precursors with TBAB. Core–shell nanoparticles of (i) 7.4 nm Au@Ag, (j) 12.7 nm Au@Ag, (k) 3.9 nm Pt@Ag, and (l) 9.2 nm Pt@Ag synthesized by seed-mediated growth. Semiconductor nanocrystals of (m) Ag2S, (n) CdS, (o) HgS, and (p) PbS. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
The ethanol-mediated phase transfer method, described in the previous section, is also applicable for the transfer of a large variety of noble metal nanoparticles from the aqueous phase to a hydrocarbon layer.98,127,128 Analogous to the formation of metal ion–DDA complexes, ethanol-mediated transfer for noble metal nanoparticles is primarily based on the formation of uniform alkylamine-stabilized metal nanoparticles through a stabilizer exchange process that involves the mixing of the metal hydrosol and an ethanol solution of DDA, and then the extraction of DDA-stabilized metal nanoparticles into toluene. The typical experiment follows the same steps for transferring metal ions from aqueous phase to a nonpolar organic medium. For example, citrate-stabilized metal hydrosol prepared by the NaBH4 reduction of metal precursors was mixed with an equal volume of ethanol containing dodecylamine, and the mixture was stirred for 2 minutes. Then, toluene was added and the stirring was continued for 3 more minutes. DDA-stabilized metal nanoparticles were rapidly extracted into the toluene layer, leaving behind a colorless aqueous solution.127 This ethanol-mediated transfer method could be used to transfer metal nanoparticles capped by a variety of surfactants such as sodium acetate, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), bis(p-sulfonatophenyl)-phenylphosphine (BSPP), or Triton X-100.129,130 This process was also applicable to transfer nanoparticles prepared by the NaBH4 reduction of metal precursors without a stabilizer. In comparison with the procedure reported by Sarathy and coworkers,131,132 where concentrated HCl has to be used to facilitate the nanoparticle transfer, the ethanol-mediated method is considerably gentler. In addition to its generic applicability, it offers ease of operation and is compatible with the transfer of metals that are reactive towards concentrated HCl.
3 Nanocomposites of gold and semiconductors
Nanocomposites constructed by depositing gold on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals are among the most studied nanocomposites.42–45,48–51,80–92,98,133 The deposition of noble metals on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals is usually conducted in a nonpolar organic solvent via a seed-mediated growth at room temperature. In detail, high quality semiconductor nanocrystals are first prepared in an organic solvent at elevated temperatures, and simultaneously the metal precursors are also transferred into nonpolar organic solvent using established methods. The semiconductor organosol and the metal precursor solution in organic solvent are then mixed together, followed by the addition of a weak reducing agent (usually dodecylamine, DDA). The DDA reduces the metal precursors into metal atoms in the presence of semiconductor nanocrystals, which nucleate and grow on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals, resulting in the formation of semiconductor–noble metal nanocomposites. Usually, noble metal precursors cannot dissolve in nonpolar organic solvents; however, for gold, there are a number of approaches, e.g., the Brust–Schiffrin method,102,103 the general phase transfer protocol introduced in the previous section,49 and the dodecyldimethylammonium (DDAB)-facilitated strategy developed by Banin and coworkers,42 which could be used to transfer its precursors, e.g., commonly used HAuCl4, from the aqueous phase to nonpolar organic solvents. In addition, the successful deposition of noble metals on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals has some specific requirements for the reducing agent; for example, very strong reducing agent, e.g., NaBH4, can lead to a separate nucleation of the noble metal atoms in the solution instead of their growth on the semiconductor nanocrystals. Therefore, although the general phase transfer protocol could assist a wide variety of metal precursors to dissolve in nonpolar organic solvents, only the deposition of gold on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals has been extensively studied over the past decade.
3.1 Deposition of Au on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals
Banin and coworkers are pioneers in the preparation of nanocomposites consisting of a semiconductor and gold, and they made a huge breakthrough in 2004.42 They demonstrated a solution synthesis for nanocomposites via the selective growth of gold tips on the apexes of hexagonal-phase CdSe nanorods at room temperature. The authors prepared CdSe rods and tetrapods of different dimensions by the high-temperature pyrolysis of suitable precursors in a coordinating solvent containing a mixture of trioctylphosphineoxide and phosphonic acids. They dissolved AuCl3 in toluene with the addition of dodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB) and dodecylamine, which serve as reducing agents. Then, they mixed this solution at room temperature with a toluene solution of the colloidal-grown CdSe nanorods or tetrapods. After the reaction, the composite products were precipitated by the addition of methanol, separated by centrifugation, and then re-dispersed in toluene for further characterization. The novel nanostructures displayed modified optical properties due to the strong coupling between the gold and semiconductor components. The gold tips showed increased conductivity, as well as selective chemical affinity for forming the self-assembled chains of rods. The architecture of these nanostructures was qualitatively similar to bifunctional molecules such as dithiols, which provided two-sided chemical connectivity for self-assembly and for electrical devices, as well as contacting points for colloidal nanorods and tetrapods. These researchers later reported the synthesis of asymmetric semiconductor–metal heterostructures in which gold was grown on one side of CdSe nanocrystalline rods and dots, as displayed in Fig. 4. Theoretical modeling and experimental analysis showed that the one-sided nanocomposites were transformed from the two-sided architectures through a ripening process.80
 Fig. 4  Effect of increasing Au/rod molar ratio on growth. The top panels show the experimental results. (a) Original rods of dimension 25 × 4 nm2. (b) NDBs after adding 1.3 μmol of gold precursors to (a). (c) NBTs after adding 1.3 μmol of gold precursors to (b). The lower panels show the theoretical results. (d) Presentation of the system on a two-dimensional lattice. (e) Image of the final morphology at a low gold concentration (the two-dimensional gold density is ρg = 0.001) yielding a two-sided growth. (f) Image of the final morphology at a high gold density (ρg = 0.01) showing a one-sided growth. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
Banin's group further explored the growth mechanism of gold nanocrystals onto preformed cadmium sulfide nanorods to form hybrid metal nanocrystal/semiconductor nanorod colloids.83 By manipulating the growth conditions, they obtained nanostructures that exhibited Au nanocrystal growth at only one nanorod tip, at both tips, or at multiple locations along the nanorod surface. Under anaerobic conditions, they found that the growth of Au occurs only at one tip of the nanorods; thus, generating asymmetric structures. In contrast, the presence of oxygen and trace amounts of water during the reaction promotes etching of the nanorod surface, which provides additional sites for metal deposition, as shown in the scheme in Fig. 5. Three growth stages are observed when Au growth is carried out under air: (1) Au nanocrystal formation at both nanorod tips, (2) growth onto defect sites on the nanorod surface, and finally (3) a ripening process, in which one nanocrystal tip grows at the expense of the other particles present on the nanorod. An analysis of the hybrid nanostructures by high-resolution TEM shows that there is no preferred orientation between the Au nanocrystal and the CdS nanorod, indicating that the growth is nonepitaxial. The optical signatures of the nanocrystals and the nanorods (i.e., the surface plasmon and first exciton transition peaks, respectively) are spectrally distinct; thus, allowing the different stages of the growth process to be easily monitored. The initial CdS nanorods exhibit a band gap and trap state emission; both are quenched during Au growth.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the growth process of Au nanocrystals onto CdS nanorods. Without oxygen, gold grows only at one tip. In the presence of oxygen, the Cd-terminated end is etched, providing a second high-energy site for gold growth, followed by a side growth. With long reaction times, the gold growth ceases and electrochemical ripening leads to the migration of gold from the smallest nanocrystals to the largest nanocrystal. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Banin and coworkers also studied the photocatalytic properties of nanocomposites consisting of CdSe nanorods and gold nanoparticles.45 They found that under visible light irradiation, a charge separation could take place between the semiconductor and the metal parts of the composite particles (Fig. 6a). Analysis of the band offsets between Au and CdSe suggests that this is due to a rapid electron transfer from the conduction band of CdSe to the Au tips, leading to a charge separation (inset of Fig. 6a).134,135 To perform the photocatalysis in the aqueous phase, Banin and coworkers developed a method to directly deposit gold on the surface of CdSe nanorods in aqueous phase instead of transferring the CdSe–Au nanocomposites from an organic solvent to the aqueous phase via ligand exchange reactions because the latter is time-consuming and difficult to realize for large amounts.66 In their new approach, CdSe nanorods were grown by a high-temperature pyrolysis of suitable precursors in a coordinating solvent containing a mixture of trioctylphosphineoxide and phosphonic acids.136 The CdSe nanorods were then transferred to the aqueous phase by exchanging the surface ligands to mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA),66,137 leading to the formation of a stable hydrosol of CdSe nanorods. Then, CdSe–Au nanocomposites with a selective growth of Au at both CdSe rod tips were obtained by adding an aqueous gold precursor solution (HAuCl4) to the CdSe hydrosol with vigorous stirring and under ambient light (Fig. 6b), which displayed a superior catalytic property for the direct photoreduction of a model acceptor molecule, i.e., methylene blue.
 Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of a light-induced charge separation mechanism in a CdSe–Au composite particle in which the photogenerated electron–hole pair separates so that the electron resides at the gold tip and the hole at the CdSe nanorod. The scheme also depicts the transfer of the hole to the scavenger and the reduction of the methylene blue molecule upon electron transfer from the gold tip. The inset shows the energy band alignment between CdSe and Au. (b) TEM image of CdSe–Au nanocomposites synthesized in aqueous solution. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In addition to their excellent work in the synthesis, characterization, and application of semiconductor–gold nanocomposites, Banin's group also revealed some unique scientific phenomena in composite nanomaterials. For example, they reported an interesting diffusion of gold into InAs semiconductor nanocrystals at room temperature.85 The diffusion of Au occurs either in solution or in a solid-state reaction. In the first stage, gold patches are grown on the nanocrystal surface, and a further increase in the gold concentration, or waiting for 24 h, gold diffuses into the nanocrystals. This behavior differs from the case of CdSe, where Au grows on the surface and ripens to form one gold patch in high concentration. As a result of the Au diffusion, InAs is converted into an amorphous InAs or oxidized shell (Fig. 7). The diffusion process found by them might offer a new strategy for metal doping in semiconductor nanoparticles.
 Fig. 7  TEM images of InAs nanocrystals after treatment with gold in toluene solution as a function of increasing gold concentration: (a) after adding 2.75 × 10−6 mol of gold; (b) after adding 5.5 × 10−6 mol of gold. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Following the breakthrough made by Banin's group, various strategies have been developed for the synthesis of semiconductor–Au nanocomposites by the anisotropic growth of gold on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals through reduction, physical deposition or photochemistry. The structure displayed in Fig. 8 for the nanocomposites composed of PbS and gold was reported by Yang and coworkers.89 They chose to use PbS prepared in oleylamine as the target semiconductor nanocrystal because it has a typical cubic crystal structure and can be easily produced in controlled shapes and sizes. They dissolved gold precursors into toluene using Brust–Schiffrin method,102,103 and then mixed them together, followed by the addition of dodecylamine as a reducing agent, which resulted in the formation of PbS–Au nanocomposites. High quality and monodisperse PbS–Au1 and PbS–Au4 nanostructures and PbS–Aun nanocubes could be obtained by controlling the molar ratio of PbS and Au precursors. The authors provided a reasonable method to control the size, number, and distribution of gold nanocrystals on semiconductors, which is important to assist the design and fabrication of composite nanomaterials for catalysis, optoelectronic devices, and chemical/biological sensors. Owing to their narrow size distribution and intrinsic high symmetry, the as-synthesized PbS–Au4 nanocomposites could easily self-assemble into hexagonal arrays. Nonlinear optical measurements show that the PbS–Au4 nanostructure could alter the nonlinear response time of PbS nanocrystals; thus, confirming the applicability of the metal-decorated semiconductor nanocrystals in the development of saturable absorber devices.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of the ordered array of PbS–Au4 heterogeneous nanostructures; (c and d) TEM images of a typical PbS–Au4 nanostructure; (e) HRTEM image of a typical PbS–Au4 nanostructure; (f) SAED pattern; and (g) FFT pattern obtained from the ordered array of PbS–Au4 heterogeneous nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Collaborating with Zeng and Swihart, Prasad's group reported a universal approach for the synthesis of ternary nanocomposites consisting of metal oxide, gold, and semiconductors, as demonstrated in Fig. 9.43 In brief, they mixed PbO, oleic acid, and phenyl ether in a three-necked flask set on a heating mantle. Under argon gas flow, the mixture was heated to 120 °C until a Pb-oleate complex was formed. Then, the pre-prepared peanut-like Fe3O4–Au nanoparticles in hexane were injected, and the hexane was distilled out. Subsequently, a trioctylphosphine (TOP) solution of selenium was rapidly injected into the reaction mixture at 160 °C. The final ternary Fe3O4–Au–PbSe nanocomposites were then withdrawn, washed with acetone under air, followed by centrifugation, and then re-dispersed in hexane. The authors found that the heating strategy and seed particle dimensions were important for forming ternary hybrids. For instance, if the gold component was less than 3 nm in diameter, then the nucleation of PbS or PbSe was difficult, presumably because of the small amount of gold surface area exposed. Moreover, for the ternary Fe3O4–Au–PbS nanocomposites, if the temperature of the reaction mixture was quickly increased to 150 °C after sulfur injection, both dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 hybrid nanoparticles and Fe3O4–Au–PbS ternary composite nanoparticles were formed. This suggests that some Au–Fe3O4 peanut-like particles aggregated to form dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 particles in the presence of sulfur before PbS could nucleate and grow on Au–Fe3O4. The multifunctional nanocomposites that combine magnetic, plasmonic, and semiconducting properties and that are tunable in size and morphology could be obtained. Furthermore, the properties of each component within the hybrids could be strongly modulated by the conjugating component(s) aided by the coherent interfaces between them. In particular, the self-assembling of these nanoparticles into thin films and bulk materials could lead to composite materials with tremendous design freedom, geometric complexity, and multifunctionality.
 Fig. 9  TEM images (a, c, and d) and HRTEM image (b) of Fe3O4–Au–PbSe (a and b) and Fe3O4–Au–PbS (c and d) ternary hybrid nanoparticles. The scale bars are 20 nm in (a), (c), and (d) and 4 nm in (b). Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Based on the morphology of the pre-prepared semiconductor nanocrystals, nanocomposites with unique architecture could be obtained after integrating with gold. Qi and coworkers demonstrated the preparation of uniform PbS–Au nanostar–nanoparticle heterodimers consisting of one Au nanoparticle grown on one horn of a well-defined six-horn PbS nanostar using the PbS nanostars as growth substrates for the selective deposition of Au nanoparticles.51 They produced uniform, well-defined, star-shaped PbS nanocrystals with six horns using the method they previously developed,138 as shown in Fig. 10a. The synthesis of PbS–Au nanostar–nanoparticle heterodimers with an Au tip on one horn was achieved by the reduction of HAuCl4 with ascorbic acid in an aqueous dispersion of PbS nanostars in the presence of CTAB. The microscopic image in Fig. 10b shows the PbS–Au heterostructures obtained with a PbS concentration of 0.48 mM at 27 °C, indicating the exclusive formation of uniform nanostar–nanoparticle heterodimers consisting of PbS nanostars of ∼80 nm and gold nanoparticles of ∼50 nm. An enlarged TEM image is shown in Fig. 10c, which clearly shows that one gold nanoparticle is preferentially grown on one horn of the PbS nanostar. The single crystallinity of the PbS stars is further confirmed by the HRTEM image shown in Fig. 10d, while the crystalline nature of the Au nanoparticles is confirmed by the HRTEM image shown in Fig. 10e. The related XRD pattern (Fig. 10f) shows sharp peaks corresponding to cubic PbS with a rock salt structure and cubic gold. The size of the Au nanoparticles on the horns of the PbS nanostars could be readily adjusted by changing the PbS concentration for the deposition of Au nanoparticles. Furthermore, unusual PbS–Au nanoframe–nanoparticle heterodimers could be obtained after etching the PbS–Au nanostar–nanoparticle heterodimers using 0.05 M oxalic acid, which might be promising candidates as anisotropic nanoscale building blocks for the controlled assembly of useful, complex architectures.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of PbS nanostars. (b), (c) TEM images. (d), (e) HRTEM images and (f) XRD pattern of PbS–Au nanostar-nanoparticle heterodimers formed with [PbS] = 0.48 mM at 27 °C. The HRTEM images shown in (d) and (e) correspond to the framed areas 1 and 2 in (c), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When the synthesis order was reversed, e.g., in the synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals in the presence of previously formed gold nanoparticles, the nanocomposites thus obtained usually have a core–shell structure.48,52,72,139 In an early study, Talapin's group reported the synthesis of core–shell Au@PbS nanocomposites.74 Typically, they added PbO and oleic acid in 1-octadecene (ODE), and heated the mixture to 150 °C under vacuum to form a Pb-oleate complex. After cooling the reaction mixture to 100 °C, dodecanethiol-capped Au nanoparticles with an average size of 4.2 nm dispersed in 1 mL of toluene were added and toluene was distilled out. The growth of PbS shells was initiated by the injection of 0.13 mL of bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide dissolved in 2 mL of ODE with vigorous stirring. The reaction mixture was maintained at the injection temperature for 5–10 min and then cooled to the room temperature, followed by the purification of nanocrystals from the crude solution. The Au@PbS core–shell nanocomposites thus obtained (Fig. 11) could form stable colloidal solutions in chloroform, toluene, and tetrachloroethylene. The thickness of the PbS shell could be tuned by the reaction time, concentration of Au seeds, and amount of injected sulfur precursor. In the Au@PbS core–shells, the authors observed an enhancement of the absorption cross-section due to a synergistic coupling between the plasmon and exciton in the core and shell, correspondingly. Field-effect devices with channels assembled from arrays of Au@PbS core–shell nanostructures demonstrated strong p-type doping, which they attributed to the formation of an intra-particle charge transfer complex. Their work might provide the starting guidelines for designing solution-processed semiconductors with enhanced absorbance and controlled electronic doping for photovoltaic and thermoelectric applications. The core–shell morphology maximizes the interaction between the components and provides a convenient platform for studying exciton–plasmon interactions and other fundamental phenomena at the nanoscale level. Their approach can be applied to a variety of material combinations, such as metal–semiconductor and semiconductor–magnetic material.
 Fig. 11  TEM images of (a) PbS nanocrystals and (b–d) Au–PbS nanostructures. (c) Cubic Au–PbS nanostructures synthesized at 150 °C. (d) Representative high-resolution TEM image of an Au–PbS core–shell nanostructure. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Yu, Wang, and coworkers employed an alternative approach to generate Au@CdS nanocomposites with core–shell construction.52 As illustrated by the scheme in Fig. 12, the gold nanorods used as starting materials were synthesized in aqueous solutions using a seed-mediated growth method.4,140 Their protocol included three steps to obtain Au–Ag, Au–Ag2S, and Au–CdS nanorods: (i) Ag shell growth. First, the silver shell can be easily grown on the gold nanorods because of the perfect match of the lattice constants of the two metals. (ii) Ag2S shell growth. Because the electronegativity of Ag is similar to that of many anions, the Ag shells can easily be modified to form silver compound shells.49,63,141,142 Ag2S shells were obtained by adding excess of sulfur in a growth solution containing Au–Ag nanorods. (iii) CdS shell growth. The Ag2S layer coated on the Au nanorods was converted to the CdS shell through cation exchange reactions between Ag+ and Cd2+ precursors (Cd(NO3)2),143,144 which could be further accelerated by adding NaBH4. The final Au@CdS composite products had complete core–shell structures, and the shell thickness could be controlled from about 4.5 to 15.0 nm by regulating the molar ratio of Cd/Au in the reaction solution. The exciton–plasmon interactions observed in the Au@CdS nanorods induce a shell thickness-tailored and red-shifted longitudinal surface plasmon resonance and quench CdS luminescence under ultraviolet light excitation. Furthermore, the Au@CdS nanorods demonstrate an enhanced and plasmon-governed two-photon luminescence under near-infrared pulsed laser excitation. This approach has the potential to be used for the preparation of other metal–semiconductor hetero-nanomaterials with complete core–shell structures, and these Au@CdS nanorods may open up intriguing new possibilities at the interface of optics and electronics.
 Fig. 12  Growth scheme of Au@CdS core–shell nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Dodecylamine (DDA) is often used as a reducing agent in the deposition of gold on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals in nonpolar organic solvents.42,44,45,48,49,89 For the procedures that use Brust–Schiffrin method102,103 or dodecyldimethylammonium bromide (DDAB)42 to transfer gold precursors into an organic solvent for the subsequent deposition reaction because the phase transfer agent and the reducing agent are chemically different materials, the obtained nanocomposites would contain surface impurities due to the phase-transfer agent, which could complicate the particle surface and lead to a negative effect on further modifications and applications. The general phase transfer protocol described in the previous section could overcome this issue, in which the dodecylamine used as the phase-transfer agent would also act as the reducing agent for the subsequent reduction of gold precursors in the presence of pre-formed semiconductor nanocrystals. No additional reducing agent would thus be needed. This strategy makes use of the distinctive advantage of dodecylamine as a suitable reducing agent for gold deposition on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals without its associated problem of impurity contamination, and is generic enough to be applied to the preparation of semiconductor–gold nanocomposites, as demonstrated by a number of typical examples given in this section.
Upon the DDA-assisted transfer of gold ions, we found that both the reaction time and the metal–semiconductor precursor ratio could have an effect on the deposition of gold on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals, which we illustrated using a CdS–Au composite nanosystem.145 The effect of prolonging the reaction time on the morphologies of CdS–Au nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 13. The deposition of Au on the surface of CdS nanocrystals was carried out in the presence of excess dodecylamine and with a CdS–Au molar ratio of 1:3. After mixing the CdS and Au3+ precursors in toluene for 1 min at room temperature, uniform CdS–Au heterogeneous nanocomposites (Fig. 13a) were obtained as the dominant product. Isolated Au nanoparticles were not observed, indicating that Au preferentially nucleates on the existing CdS nanocrystals rather than homogeneously under the experimental conditions. In most of the cases, the nucleation and growth of Au occur at multiple sites on the surface of CdS nanocrystals. The diameter of the deposited Au domain is ca. 1.1 nm. For the sample collected at 5 min, as displayed in the TEM image in Fig. 13b, an increase in the number and size of Au dots on each CdS nanocrystal is observed. As the time increases, the average size of the Au dots reaches ca. 2.4 nm at 10 min, with no apparent change compared to the dot size at 5 min. However, the number of Au dots on the surface of each CdS nanocrystal continues to increase, as evidenced by the TEM image in Fig. 13c. When the reaction time was increased to 30 min, the TEM image of CdS–Au nanocomposites in Fig. 13d is almost the same as the previous one (Fig. 13c), indicating that the deposition of Au on the surface of CdS nanocrystals could be completed in 30 min.
 Fig. 13  TEM images of CdS–Au nanocomposites synthesized after physically mixing CdS nanocrystals and Au3+ precursors in toluene for 1 min (a), 5 min (b), 10 min (c), and 30 min (d). Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The effect of the CdS–Au precursor ratio on the morphologies of the CdS–Au nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 14. When the growth was conducted at a high CdS–Au molar ratio (i.e., 9:1), CdS–Au heterogeneous nanocomposites with tiny Au dots of approximately 0.8 nm diameter at multiple sites on the surface of CdS nanocrystals were observed under TEM and HRTEM, as shown by Fig. 14a and b. With decrease in the molar ratio of CdS–Au (i.e., a relatively higher ratio of gold in the CdS–Au nanocomposites), analogous to the time-dependent growth of Au dots on the surface of CdS nanocrystals, both the number and size of the Au domains on each CdS nanocrystal were clearly increased, as demonstrated by the TEM and HRTEM images in Fig. 14c–f. When the molar ratio of CdS–Au was reduced to 1:6, the growth of Au on the surface of the CdS nanocrystals significantly changed. As shown by the TEM and HRTEM image in Fig. 14i and j, although the average size of the Au dots continuously increased to approximately 3.2 nm, the number of Au domains on the surface of each CdS nanocrystal was clearly reduced compared with that at the CdS–Au ratio of 1:3 (Fig. 14g and h). The low CdS–Au ratio inducing an intriguing reduction of the Au dot numbers on the surface of CdS nanocrystals could be considered analogous to the work reported by Banin and co-workers,80 in which the two-sided growth of Au tips on CdSe quantum dots or rods was transformed into a one-sided growth at a relatively lower CdSe–Au molar ratio via an electrochemical ripening process. Similarly, the experimental phenomena observed could be interpreted by a more common Ostwald ripening process, which is a phenomenon in which particles larger than a certain critical size grow at the expense of smaller particles due to their relative stabilization by the surface energy term.146 At a high molar ratio of CdS–Au, the gold nucleates and grows at multiple sites on the surface of CdS nanocrystals. With an increase in the Au molar ratio during the synthesis, Ostwald ripening occurs when the size of the Au domains reaches a critical size, as described in common Ostwald ripening theories.147 Upon its completion, each composite particle contains several larger gold dots, resulting in a decrease in the number of Au domains.
 Fig. 14  TEM (a, c, e, g, and i) and HRTEM images (b, d, f, h, and j) of CdS–Au nanocomposites at CdS/Au molar ratio of 9:1 (a and b), 3:1 (c and d), 1:1 (e and f), 1:3 (g and h), and 1:6 (i and j), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The deposition of Au on the surface of different metal sulfide nanocrystals has also been investigated. The nanocomposites obtained are illustrated in Fig. 15, in which the deposition of Au on the surface of different semiconducting metal sulfide nanocrystals can be clearly identified through the brightness contrast in the TEM and HRTEM images. Fig. 15 shows that gold is deposited only at a single site on each Ag2S nanocrystal, whereas it is deposited at multiple sites on each nanocrystal of the other metal sulfides (i.e., CuS, CdS, and PbS). An extreme case is observed with the HgS–Au system (Fig. 15i and j), where numerous sites are available for the nucleation of Au nanoparticles, which could grow and eventually coalesce to form a continuous Au shell on each HgS nanocrystal. The observed species-dependent features for Au deposition on semiconductor nanocrystals have been attributed to the crystal structure of the starting metal sulfide nanocrystals. It might be speculated that the number of sites for Au deposition on the surface of metal sulfide nanocrystals increases with the increase in the structural similarity between Au and semiconductor substrates. For Ag2S nanocrystals, which provide a single site for Au deposition (Fig. 15a and b), its monoclinic structure is significantly different from that of the face-centered cubic Au particle. Hexagonal CuS and face-centered cubic Au also have distinct differences in their crystal structure, while only two or three sites for Au deposition are observed on the surface of each CuS nanocrystal (Fig. 15c and d). For cubic CdS, PbS, and HgS nanocrystals with structures more analogous to that of the face-centered cubic Au particles, multiple Au domains, and even continuous Au shells, are formed on their surfaces, as evidenced by the other TEM images in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  TEM (a, c, e, g, and i) and HRTEM images (b, d, f, h, and j) of Ag2S–Au (a and b), CuS–Au (c and d), CdS–Au (e and f), PbS–Au (g and h), and HgS–Au nanocomposites (i and j), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Deposition of other noble metals on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals
Motivated by their unique properties and great potential in a wide variety of applications, the syntheses of nanocomposites consisting of semiconductor and noble metals other than gold have also attracted significant attention in recent years.46,47,148 Actually, early in the 1980s, researchers had loaded platinum (Pt) or Rhodium (Rh) on the surface of CdS or ZnS semiconductors for producing hydrogen.149–151 However, the overall size of the semiconductor substrates in those reports exceeded the scope of nanotechnology.
Alivisatos' group conducted a pioneering study on the photo-deposition of Pt on the surface of CdS and CdSe–CdS nanocrystals.148 Different from the previously studied aqueous-based deposition of Pt on the surface of semiconductors using a photoreduction approach, they performed the deposition reaction in an organic phase, which included CdS nanorods, an organic soluble Pt precursor, (1,5-cyclooctadiene)dimethylplatinum(II) ((CH3)2PtCOD), and an excess of a tertiary amine (such as TEA or diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA)), which was used as a hole-scavenging agent. An excitation wavelength of 458 nm was chosen by the researchers to ensure that CdS was the only light-absorbing component; thus, preventing a homogeneous nucleation of platinum. After irradiating the reaction mixture for a while under an inert atmosphere, the solution turned from translucent yellow to translucent brown, and the fluorescence of CdS was quenched. TEM images before and after the irradiation showed the formation of heterostructures consisting of small nanoparticles positioned along the length of the CdS nanorods (Fig. 16). The average diameters of the nanoparticles ranged from 1.5 to 2.7 nm, depending on the reaction conditions. The results obtained by Alivisatos's group are in contrast to CdSe–Au heterostructures synthesized by thermal methods, where the gold deposition often preferentially occurs on the nanorod ends.42,83 The authors also found that the photodeposition of Pt on CdS shows a strong dependence on the nature of the amine used. The highest yields were observed with bulky tertiary amines such as DIPEA or TEA. A comparison with octylamine, dioctylamine, and trioctylamine revealed no photodeposition for the primary amine, very little for the secondary, and the most for trioctylamine.
 Fig. 16  Photodeposition of Pt on CdS nanorods. (a) TEM images of CdS nanorods before irradiation and (b) the photodeposition product. After exposure to light, Pt nanoparticles appear along the length of the nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Subsequently, Banin's group reported the synthesis of rod-like CdSe–Pt nanocomposites and their photocatalytic property toward methylene blue.46 They produced CdSe nanorods (70 × 8 nm2) using a previously established method.136,152 After synthesis, the CdSe nanorods were transferred to an aqueous solution by exchanging the alkylphosphine surface ligands with mercapto-undecanoic acid (MUA).66 The deposition of Pt on the surface of CdSe nanorods could be achieved through a facile route. The platinum precursor (PtCl4) was dissolved in water and vigorously mixed with the aqueous CdSe nanorod solution at room temperature for 2 days. A dark brown/black precipitate was formed and collected by centrifugation to yield the CdSe–Pt composite particles, which are displayed by the microscopic images in Fig. 17. No additional reducing agent was added during the deposition process. A comparison between the TEM images of the samples taken before and after the reaction with platinum showed that the mean length of CdSe nanorods was reduced from 70 nm to 55 nm. Comparing the electrochemical potentials,153 two ions of Se2− from CdSe nanorods can reduce Pt4+ to Pt(0) and form Se(0); thus, the nanorods evolve into shorter structures while Pt dots grow. A similar effect has been previously observed in the case of gold growth on a CdTe–CdS–CdTe rod system.154
 Fig. 17  (a–d) Transmission electron microscopy images of Pt growth on CdSe nanorods in aqueous solutions under different pH conditions (scale bars: 50 nm). (a) Isolated nanorods after Pt growth at pH 10. The inset shows the original rod sample with dimensions of 70 nm × 8 nm. (b) An intermediate state is obtained at pH 7. (c and d) pH 4 produces a nanonet structure in which Pt grows along the rod surface. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
The above-mentioned method developed by Banin's group for the growth of Pt on the surface of CdSe nanorods is very complex and time consuming. More importantly, although the rod-like CdSe–Pt nanocomposites they prepared have superior visible light photocatalytic activity for the reduction of methylene blue, the nanocomposites are easily aggregated in aqueous phase, as shown in Fig. 17c and d, and this leads to a significant decrease in the surface area available for the photocatalytic reduction of methylene blue. However, the authors applied a phase transfer to avoid the use of expensive organic metal precursors for producing the semiconductor–noble metal nanocomposites in the aqueous phase, and thus this method offers a good strategy to deposit noble metals on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals.
Mokari and co-workers prepared CdS nanorods in an organic solvent, but they did not transfer them into the aqueous phase; instead, they directly deposited Pt on the surface of CdS nanorods in diphenyl ether at an elevated temperature using platinum acetylacetonate (Pt(acac)2) as the metal precursor.47 Analogous to the deposition of Au on the CdSe nanorods, as reported by Banin and coworkes,42 upon increasing the concentration of a Pt precursor, Pt was also selectively grown at one or two tips of the CdS nanorods because the reactivity of the nanorods is higher at the tips than along the body of the rod due to the increased surface energy, as shown in Fig. 18. The method developed by Mokari and coworkers could be easily extended to deposit bimetallic PtNi or PtCo on the tips of CdS nanorods, and the resulting heterostructures could be of special interest for a variety of applications, including photocatalysis, water splitting, and magnetic applications.
 Fig. 18  Selective growth of Pt nanoparticles with different sizes on CdS nanorods, (A) CdS rods (120 nm × 4 nm), (B) CdS with small single Pt tips (4.3 nm), (C) CdS with larger double Pt tips (5.7 nm), (D) XRD patterns of CdS rods and Pt–CdS hybrid structures with corresponding CdS and Pt bulk patterns (the stick patterns shown above and below, respectively), and (E) selected area EDS spectrum of a single Pt tip, with the inset showing an HRTEM image of two Pt–CdS hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
4 Nanocomposites consisting of silver sulfide (Ag2S) and noble metals
As discussed in the previous section, the deposition of noble metals on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals is usually conducted in nonpolar organic solvents via a seed-mediated growth method. Nevertheless, the noble metals are only limited to gold (Au), silver (Ag), and platinum (Pt)47,48,51,54,66,72,80,83–85,89,90,118–120,133,148 due to the lack of noble metal precursors soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. The general phase transfer protocol described in the previous section could enable a wider variety of metal precursors to transfer from the aqueous phase to nonpolar organic media. However, besides Au and Ag, the other metals cannot be successfully deposited on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals after phase transfer due to the lack of a suitable reducing agent. In addition, the specific applications of nanocomposites (e.g., photocatalysis) are often carried out in aqueous systems. This makes the aqueous synthesis of nanocomposites an important aspect for the wide-ranging application of composite nanomaterials. Therefore, in this section, we aim to summarize the aqueous route for the synthesis of nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S and different noble metals. By reducing various noble metal precursors using citrate in an aqueous phase in the presence of preformed Ag2S nanocrystals, uniform semiconductor–noble metal heterogeneous nanostructures are obtained as the dominant product. In addition to binary nanocomposites, ternary and quaternary hybrid systems can also be achieved via the successive deposition of different noble metals on the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals. In particular, Pt-containing nanocomposites are found to exhibit superior catalytic activity toward methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), the key reaction in direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), due to the electronic coupling effect between the ultrafine Pt crystallites and semiconductor domains.
4.1 Aqueous synthesis of Ag2S nanocrystals
Numerous studies have been devoted to the synthesis of Ag2S nanocrystals in organic media.100,125,155–159 For example, Zhao's group reported a one-step route to control the organization of semiconductor Ag2S nanocrystals.157 In a typical synthetic process, they mixed aqueous AgNO3 solution and the toluene solution of dodecylthiol to form a yellow-colored micellar solution with intensive stirring at room temperature. After 30 min, aqueous Na2S solution was dropped into the microemulsion for the formation of Ag2S nanocrystals, which self-assembled into hexagonal, quasi-orthogonal, and chain-like arrays on the TEM grid. A few studies also report the synthesis of Ag2S nanocrystals in the aqueous phase, either using a protein160,161 or a polymeric membrane162 to passivate the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals to prevent them from aggregating in the solution. However, their self-assembly and poor quality, in terms of morphology, size, and size distribution, makes them unsuitable substrates for the deposition of noble metals.
Alternatively, Yang and Ying developed a room-temperature method based on the reaction between sodium sulfide (Na2S) and coordinating compounds formed by Ag+ ions and bis(p-sulfonatophenyl)phenylphosphane dihydrate dipotassium salt (BSPP) to derive aqueous dispersible Ag2S nanocrystals.60 Typically, 600 mg of BSPP was added to 300 mL of an aqueous AgNO3 solution (1 mM) in a 1000 mL beaker. The mixture was stirred for 1 h to form BSPP–Ag+ complexes,130,163 followed by the prompt addition of 10 mL of aqueous Na2S solution (50 mM), which resulted in a series of color changes before finally arriving at a brown Ag2S hydrosol. A TEM image of the as-prepared Ag2S nanocrystals is shown in Fig. 19a. The nanocrystals were spherical, nearly monodispersed, and had an average size of 7.2 nm. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image (Fig. 19b) illustrates the lattice planes in these nanocrystals, showing an interplanar spacing of ∼0.26 nm, which correspond to the (21) planes of monoclinic Ag2S.
 Fig. 19  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the as-prepared Ag2S nanocrystals.  = 7.2 nm, σ = 0.6 nm,  = 8.4%. σ and  are the standard derivation and the relative standard derivation, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
4.2 Binary and multiple Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites
Ag2S nanocrystals could be used as seeds for the formation of nanocomposites with different metals. With sodium citrate as a reducing agent, and under the experimental conditions (aqueous phase and elevated temperature), metals preferentially nucleated on the existing Ag2S nanocrystals, rather than homogeneously. The TEM images of binary Ag2S–Au, Ag2S–Pt, Ag2S–Os, and Ag2S–Pd nanocomposites are illustrated in Fig. 20a–d, respectively. The deposition of noble metals on the Ag2S nanocrystals could be clearly identified via brightness contrast, and was confirmed by the energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis of an arbitrary single particle with high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM).
 Fig. 20  TEM images of binary Ag2S–Au (a), Ag2S–Pt (b), Ag2S–Os (c), Ag2S–Pd (d), multiple Ag2S–Au–Pt (e), Ag2S–Au–Os (f), Ag2S–Pt–Os (g), and Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os (h) nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
The final morphology of the nanocomposites depended on whether the surface of the substrate particles allowed for only a single nucleation site or multiple ones. Unlike face-centered cubic (fcc) or hexagonal materials, monoclinic Ag2S has very complicated crystal structures. For instance, it has many facets with different lattice spacings, which provide favorable sites to match the lattice planes of various noble metals for their epitaxial growth on the substrate seeds. The experimental results show that only a single site on Ag2S nanocrystal surface is suitable for the nucleation of gold clusters; however, multiple sites exist over the surface of Ag2S seeds for Pt and Os noble metals. An extreme case is observed in the Ag2S–Pd system (Fig. 20d), where numerous sites are provided for the nucleation of Pd nanoparticles, which could grow and eventually coalesce to form a continuous shell on each Ag2S nanocrystal.
The species-dependent features of noble metal deposition on Ag2S nanocrystals could be further employed to derive multiple semiconductor–metal nanocomposites. Complex Ag2S–Au–Pt, Ag2S–Au–Os, Ag2S–Pt–Os and Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os semiconductor–noble metal nanocomposites have been prepared by the successive reduction of noble metal precursors using citrate in the presence of preformed Ag2S nanocrystals, as characterized by the TEM images in Fig. 20(e–h). The growth of more than one type of metal on each Ag2S nanocrystal demonstrates that the nucleation sites on the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals are specific to different metals, which enables the possibility of creating complex nanocomposites between Ag2S and multiple metals via a simple and flexible route.
Pt-containing Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites are attractive for catalytic applications due to their relative small Pt domain size in the nanocomposite systems. The smaller Pt crystallite size translates to a higher surface area, which is beneficial for catalytic reactions. The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of Pt in Pt-containing Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites was determined using cyclic voltammetry. Although the coherent interfaces between Pt and Ag2S in the nanocomposites resulted in some blockage of the surface area of the Pt domains, the ECSA of the Pt in Pt-containing Ag2S–metal nanocomposites averaged 84.5 m2 g−1, which was 16% higher than that of commercial Pt/C (72.9 m2 g−1) due to the smaller Pt domain size of the former (∼1 nm).
4.3 Electrochemical properties of Pt-containing Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites
The other important feature of the nanocomposites is the electronic coupling between the metal and semiconductor domains. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses of the Pt-containing nanocomposites demonstrated that electrons are transferred to Pt from other domains of the nanocomposites due to the intra-particle charge transfer (see Fig. 21 for the energy level diagram). An analogous charge transfer has been observed in the Au@PbS system in which electrons transfer from the PbS shell to the inner Au core results in an n-type to p-type change in hydrazine-treated PbS.72 The electron transfer from Ag2S to Pt could also be described by the generation of a hole in the Ag2S domain. In the presence of Au domain (work function = 5.1 eV),164,165 the alignment of energy levels in Au and Ag2S are favorable for an electron transfer from Au to Ag2S to fill the hole generated by the electron transfer to the Pt domains, further promoting electron transfer from Ag2S to Pt for the Fermi levels to match at the interface. The electron transfer from other domains to Pt in Pt-containing nanocomposites increases the electron density around the Pt sites, causing a weakening of CO chemisorption, and thus an increase in their electrochemical activity for the methanol oxidation reaction, a key reaction in direct methanol fuel cells.60
 Fig. 21  Energy level diagram for Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites predicting the intraparticle charge transfer between different domains. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
However, Pt-containing Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites exhibit poor activity for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), another key reaction in DMFC.166–169 This is not surprising based on a report by Watanabe and co-workers,170 which discussed the alloying of Fe, Ni or Co with Pt to enhance the electro-catalytic activity for oxygen reduction. Fe, Ni and Co have more 5d vacancies than Pt and could withdraw electrons from the latter. This withdrawing effect induces an increase in the 5d vacancies in Pt, increasing 2π electron donation from O2 to the Pt surface, and resulting in an enhanced O2 adsorption to favor oxygen reduction. However, for the Pt-containing Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites, electron donation from the semiconductor to the Pt domains would decrease the 5d vacancies in Pt, and thus the adsorption of O2 on the nanocomposites would be too weak for the O2 dissociation reaction.171–174 This would account for the poor activity of the Pt-containing nanocomposites towards oxygen reduction.
5 Cadmium selenide–platinum nanocomposites with a core–shell construction
The role of surface strain in catalysis, particularly as a means of tuning the catalytic activity, has attracted significant interest in recent years.175–177 When a metal is deposited on a substrate with different lattice parameters, a compressive or tensile strain in the surface of the metal layer usually occurs to fulfill the requirement of epitaxial growth, and this often affects the overlap of the electron orbitals between the metal atoms, and therefore changes the electronic properties of the surface and its reactivity, which in turn influences the bond strength of an adsorbate.178,179 Therefore, the application of compressive strain or tensile stain to a surface can be an effective means to influence the surface reactivity.180 Strain and the associated shift of the d-band can be brought about by growing the desired metal on other materials with a different lattice constant. The overlayer may thus be strained or compressed depending on the lattice mismatch between the two materials. This lateral strain has been studied in a number of pseudomorphic metal monolayers formed on electrode substrates179,181–184 or core–shell nanoparticles constructed by different metals.185–187 However, the investigations of lateral strain in semiconductor–metal nanocomposites, a type of nanostructure that combines materials with distinctly different physical and chemical properties,42,52,61,68,72,188 have not yet been presented.
Analogous to the deposition of Pd on Ag2S nanocrystals,52 we found that in aqueous media, numerous sites on CdSe nanocrystals are also provided for the nucleation of Pt nanoparticles, which then grow and eventually coalesce to form a continuous shell on each CdSe nanocrystal, as displayed by the TEM, HRTEM and STEM images in Fig. 22.59 The thickness of the Pt shell could be controlled by varying the CdSe–Pt molar ratio in the synthesis. Fig. 22d–f illustrate the core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites synthesized at CdSe–Pt molar ratios of 1:1, 2:1, and 1:2, respectively. The thickness of the Pt shell could be varied, as shown by comparing these figures.
 Fig. 22  Core–shell CdSe–Pt nanocomposites synthesized in an aqueous phase using 10 nm CdSe cores: (a) TEM image, (b) STEM image, (c) elemental profile, and (d) HRTEM image of core–shell CdSe–Pt nanocomposites at a CdSe–Pt molar ratio of 1:1; (e and f) HRTEM images of core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites at a CdSe–Pt molar ratio of 2:1 and 1:2, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The XRD analyses of the core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites at different CdSe–Pt molar ratios suggest that the interplanar spacing of Pt is compressed to match the lattice plane of CdSe for its epitaxial growth on the CdSe substrates. The compression of Pt lattice spacing can also be verified by the HRTEM images in Fig. 22. Digital analyses of the images show that the spacing of Pt (111) decreases from 0.2244 nm to 0.2148 nm with decrease in Pt molar ratio in the core–shell nanocomposites. The compressive strain effect of the CdSe core on the deposited Pt shell could be an interesting feature for the core–shell composite nanomaterials in a given catalytic reaction.
At a specific CdSe–Pt molar ratio, e.g., 1:1, the core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites display superior catalytic activity toward the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).59 ORR is the key reaction at the cathode of a direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC),189–191 and the low activity of the cathode catalysts at room temperature is one of the significant challenges that need to be resolved before the commercialization of DMFCs.38,174,192 To overcome this problem, it is necessary to maximize the activity of Pt-based catalysts by engineering their structure, morphology and/or composition.
The observed enhanced catalytic activity for the ORR of core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites could result from the reasonably compressive strain effect of the CdSe core on the Pt shell. It is generally accepted that the common ORR process, i.e., the series 4 electron pathway,193 must involve both the breaking of an O–O bond and the formation of O–H bonds.168,173,174 The most active Pt-based catalyst should have a d-band center with an intermediate value because an optimal ORR catalyst needs to facilitate both the bond-breaking and bond-making steps without hindering either one.171,172 As has been demonstrated,194 the surface of a Pt-based catalyst with a high d-band center value tends to bind adsorbents more strongly; thus, enhancing the kinetics of the dissociation reactions producing these adsorbents. However, a surface with a lower d-band center value tends to bind adsorbents more weakly and facilitates the formation of bonds between them. The compressive strains of the CdSe core on the Pt shell, leading to a broader d-band, result in a down-shift of the d-band center of the Pt shell. At an appropriate CdSe–Pt molar ratio (e.g., 1:1) in core–shell nanocomposites, the downward shift of the d-band center sufficiently balances the bond-breaking and bond-making steps of the ORR process; thus, offering the optimum catalytic activity.
It is worth noting that the core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites also exhibit excellent catalytic activity toward the methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), another key reaction in DMFC,190,195 at a CdSe–Pt molar ratio of 1:2.59 The enhanced MOR catalytic activity of the core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites could also be attributed to the reasonably compressive strain effect of the CdSe core on the deposited Pt shell, which results in the appropriate shift of the d-band center of the Pt shell and an improvement in the adsorption of methanol on the surface of the Pt catalysts. Interestingly, the CdSe–Pt molar ratio for core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites offering the highest activity for MOR is different from that for ORR. This is an interesting feature for these core–shell nanocomposites for their use in DMFC. Compared with DMFC using Pt/C catalysts both at anode and cathode, the inhibition of methanol crossover to a certain level could be expected when core–shell nanocomposites with the optimal CdSe–Pt molar ratio for ORR are used at cathode. This is important for the commercialization of DMFC because the crossover of methanol from the anode to the cathode through the polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) would interfere with oxygen reduction at the cathode, resulting in the creation of a mixed potential, and leading to a drastic decrease in the DMFC performance.196–198
6 Nanocomposites of silver sulfide and noble metals with a controlled nanostructure
These nanostructured composites are attracting interests due to the possibility of integrating materials with vastly different physical and chemical properties into a hybrid nanosystem with a multiplexing capability and tunable physical and chemical properties that may not be obtainable otherwise.62,63,199–201 The interactions between the nanoscale metal and semiconductor components, when synergistic, can lead to significant improvements in application performance. In addition, noble metal nanoparticles with controlled internal structures have been used to modify the noble metal properties in a diverse range of applications such as catalysis,21,202,203 nanoreactors,204 and in drug delivery systems.205–207 For example, Pt nanoparticles with a hollow interior are twice as active as solid Pt nanospheres of roughly the same size for methanol oxidation.98,208 Hyeon and co-workers also reported good catalytic activity for Pd nanoparticles with a hollow interior in Suzuki cross-coupling reactions. Here, the hollow Pd nanoparticle catalyst could be reused seven times without the loss of catalytic activity.21 The increase of activity in these examples could easily be attributed to the large surface area of the hollow structure, and the internal surface of the catalyst being made accessible to the reactants through the porosity in the shell.
Therefore, the integration of semiconductor and noble metal nanoparticles into a nanosystem with a controlled architecture may lead to further improvements of the application performance of noble metal–semiconductor hybrid materials. In this section, we introduce the research developments in fabricating nanocomposites of silver sulfide and noble metal nanoparticles with an overall hollow or cage-bell structure. The synthetic approach is based on a unique diffusion phenomenon of Ag in core–shell nanoparticles with Ag residing in the core or in an internal shell region. In this strategy, core–shell nanoparticles with Ag residing in the core or inner shell region are first prepared as starting templates. Sulfur is then used to promote the inside-out diffusion of Ag from the core or the inner shell region of the core–shell nanoparticles, and to convert the diffused Ag into Ag2S. The overall result is the conversion of the Ag-containing core–shell nanoparticles into silver sulfide–noble metal nanoparticles with hollow or cage-bell structures.
6.1 Inside-out diffusion of Ag in Ag-containing core–shell metal nanoparticles
The inside-out diffusion of Ag in Ag-containing single or double shell core–shell metal nanoparticles is the basis for the synthesis of nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S and noble metals nanoparticles with controlled structures.209,210 Typically, core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles have been used to illustrate this interesting diffusion phenomenon. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images in Fig. 23a and b show the initial uniform core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles. After storage in toluene for seven months at room temperature, Ag diffuses out from the interior of the core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles and the TEM images show a product very different from the original nanoparticles (Fig. 23c and a). There is an increasing presence of isolated Ag nanoparticles and hollow Pt nanoparticles in a mixture of nanoparticles. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of Fig. 23d reveals the structures of the isolated Ag and hollow Pt nanoparticles in which two different sets of lattice fringes with separations of 0.236 nm and 0.228 nm, corresponding to the (111) planes of face-centered cubic (fcc) Ag and Pt, are found in the solid and hollow nanoparticles, respectively.
 Fig. 23  Inside-out diffusion of Ag in core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the original core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles; (c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of the core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles after aging in toluene for seven months at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The inside-out diffusion of Ag is promoted by the multiple-twinned structure of the Ag seeds, which has a strong influence on the stability of the Ag nanoparticles and the overlaid Pt shell. These imperfections in the Ag seed nanoparticles are disruptive to the epitaxial deposition of Pt atoms on the Ag seeds, resulting in a roughness and discontinuity in the subsequently formed Pt shell. The twinned Ag nanoparticles are also inherently unstable and could slowly be etched by dissolved O2 and by Cl− dissociated from the Pt precursor. Because of the concentration gradient between the interior of the core–shell particles and the surrounding solution, the Ag+ ions generated from the O2/Cl− etching of twinned Ag seeds diffuse out through the discontinuous Pt shell, and are reduced by oleylamine to form isolated single crystalline Ag nanoparticles in the colloidal solution. Over time, the core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles would eventually disappear due to the etching and outward diffusion of Ag to leave behind a physical mixture of hollow Pt nanoparticles and single crystalline Ag nanoparticles.
6.2 Nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S and noble metal nanoparticles with hollow or cage-bell structures
This inside-out diffusion of Ag in core–shell nanoparticles has been developed into a general protocol for the fabrication of noble metal nanoparticles with a hollow or cage-bell structure.209 The protocol begins with the synthesis of core–shell Ag–M or core–shell–shell MA–Ag–MB nanoparticles in an organic solvent. Ag is then removed from the core or from the inner shell by bis(p-sulfonatophenyl)phenylphosphane (BSPP), which binds strongly with Ag+ ions to promote the inside-out diffusion process and to allow the complete removal of Ag in 24–48 hours, leaving behind an organosol of hollow– or cage-bell-structured metal nanomaterials.
Subsequently, Yang's group found a more cost-effective alternative to produce hollow/cage-bell–structured metal nanomaterials, and they employed elemental sulfur (S) to replace expensive BSPP to remove the Ag component from the core–shell particles. However, they experimentally found that the inside-out diffusion of Ag in core–shell nanoparticles could be further developed as a general protocol to fabricate nanocomposites of Ag2S and metal nanoparticles with a hollow or cage-bell structure.210 As illustrated by the scheme in Fig. 24, after mixing the core–shell nanoparticles and sulfur in toluene, the Ag+ ions released by the O2/Cl− etching of the twinned Ag seeds diffuse out through the discontinuous metal shell, and react with sulfur to form Ag2S nanocrystals decorated on the outer shell of the metal nanoparticles (Fig. 24a). The Ag2S nanocrystals grow with the continued outward diffusion of Ag+ ions until the Ag core is completely removed, leaving behind a colloidal solution of nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S and metal nanoparticles with a hollow interior (Fig. 24b). Finally, the Ag2S nanocrystals on the surface of the metal shell undergo a ripening process, e.g., Ostwald ripening,146 to form larger and more stable domains on the surface of the metal shell (see Fig. 24c).
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration showing the formation of nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S and metal nanoparticles with a hollow interior based on the inside-out diffusion of Ag+ in Ag-containing core–shell nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 210 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
With a slight modification, the abovementioned protocol could also be used to prepare nanocomposites of Ag2S and noble metal nanoparticles with a cage-bell structure. As a typical example, the core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt nanoparticles are first prepared, and after treatment with elemental sulfur, the internal Ag shell is removed from the core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt nanoparticles by the aforementioned inside-out diffusion of Ag+ ions. The reaction of Ag+ ions with the sulfur results in the formation of Ag2S patches on the surface of the as-prepared cage-bell Au–Pt nanoparticles; thus, finalizing the fabrication of the nanocomposites of Ag2S and Au–Pt nanoparticles with a cage-bell structure. The morphologies of the starting core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt nanoparticles and the final nanocomposite are shown by the TEM images in Fig 25a and b. The cage-bell structure of the metallic domains is revealed by the appearance of the void space between the core and the outer shell regions. The void space is formed by the removal of the Ag inner shell by elemental sulfur. The Ag2S patches on the surface of the cage-bell metal domains display a stronger contrast than the void space, as can be seen in the TEM image in Fig. 25b. The HRTEM image in Fig. 25c of a single composite Ag2S–cage-bell Au–Pt nanoparticle shows three different sets of lattice fringes, with separations of 0.26 nm in the light patches, 0.24 nm in the core, and 0.23 nm in the shell region. These fringes correspond to the (21) planes of monoclinic Ag2S and the (111) planes of face-centered cubic Au and Pt, respectively. The TEM characterizations confirm that the size and morphology of the remaining metallic domains in the nanocomposites are virtually unchanged after the treatment with sulfur, suggesting that the diffusion of the Ag from the inner shell of the core–shell–shell nanoparticles did not cause the collapse of the particle geometry.
 Fig. 25  TEM images of core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt (a), Ag2S–cage-bell Au–Pt (b); HRTEM images of the nanocomposites of Ag2S–cage-bell Au–Pt (c); UV-visible spectra of core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt nanoparticles before and after treatment with elemental sulfur (d). Reproduced from ref. 210 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.3 Ternary nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S, Au, and Pt nanoparticles with hollow interiors
The strategy for the fabrication of nanocomposites of Ag2S and hollow-structured noble metal nanoparticles could be further developed to produce ternary nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S, Au, and Pt nanoparticles with hollow interiors, labeled as Ag2S–Au–hPt.211 In brief, the gold precursors (HAuCl4) were first transferred from an aqueous solution to toluene using the general transfer protocol described in the second section, and then mixed with the Ag2S–hollow Pt (Ag2S–hPt) nanocomposite organosol in toluene. Ternary Ag2S–Au–hPt nanocomposites are found as the dominant product after aging the mixture of Ag2S–hPt hetero-dimers and HAuCl4 in toluene for 2 h, as indicated by the TEM and HRTEM images in Fig. 26. The isolated Au nanoparticles were not observed, indicating that Au preferentially nucleates on the existing Ag2S–hPt heterodimers under the experimental conditions. In most of the cases, Au is deposited only at a single site on the Ag2S domain in each Ag2S–hPt heterodimer. The average diameter of the deposited gold patches is ca. 8.3 nm, which is discernible by the strong brightness contrast in the TEM and HRTEM images.
 Fig. 26  TEM image (a), HRTEM image (b), STEM image (c), line-scan analysis (d), and elemental mapping (e–i) of a single particle (c) of the ternary Ag2S–Au–hPt nanocomposites as prepared by depositing Au on the Ag2S–hPt heterodimers in toluene at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
Direct evidence for the formation of ternary Ag2S–Au–hPt nanocomposites is provided by the line scanning analysis and the elemental mapping of an arbitrary single composite nanoparticle (Fig. 26c) in the high-angle annular dark-field STEM mode. As shown in Fig. 26d for the line-scanning analysis, Au and Pt signals are present on the left- and right-hand side, respectively, whereas the Ag and S signals are only concentrated in the core region. The line-scanning analysis is in accordance with the nanoscale mapping results (Fig. 26e–i), which also show that the Au and Pt components are distributed on two different sides of the ternary nanocomposites. Furthermore, the HRTEM image reveals that the crystal planes of Au are not parallel to those of Ag2S in each heterodimer nanoparticle (Fig. 26b), indicating that the growth of Au on the surface of Ag2S domain takes place under different orientations.
The ternary Ag2S–Au–hPt nanocomposites exhibit an enhanced electrocatalytic property toward the methanol oxidation reaction due to the strong electronic coupling between Pt and other domains in the hybrid particles. This study offers a vivid example of the enhancement of the material properties by the structural tailoring of the nanocomposites, and suggests that the concept might have potential for the design and synthesis of other heteronanostructures for catalytic applications other than methanol oxidation reaction.
7 Nanocomposites of metal oxides and noble metals
Heterogeneous nanoparticles consisting of metal oxides and noble metals represent an important type of composite nanomaterial, which often shows improved physical/chemical properties over those of the single-component nanoparticles,212–214 analogous to the case of semiconductor–noble metal nanocomposites. The enhancement could be attributed to the synergetic effect that occurs at the interface of the noble metal and metal oxide domains in the nanocomposites.213,215–219 For example, gold is usually a chemically inert metal, but Au nanoparticles deposited on a metal oxide substrate display superior catalytic activity for the oxidation of carbon monoxide (CO).213,217–224 It is believed that the high activity of metal oxide–Au nanocomposites is induced by a junction effect, which arises from the transfer of electrons from the oxide support to the Fermi level of the adjacent gold domain through the intimate contact between them.215,225
As summarized by Sun and coworkers,226 it is important to study metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites because each side of the domain in the heterogeneous structure is restricted to the nanometer scale and a small variation in electron transfer across the interface between these two limited electron “nanoreservoirs” can lead to a drastic change in properties for each domain. Therefore, metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites offer an interesting platform to investigate the physical/chemical properties of materials based not only on each particle dimension and morphology, but also on the communication between the two different domains. Analogous to the hot topics related to semiconductor–noble metal nanocomposites, the primary objectives in the field of metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites could be categorized as follows: (i) to develop general strategies to prepare metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites with the control on the size and morphology of each domain in the composite particles; (ii) to understand the synergetic effect and interface boundary sites in metal–metal oxide systems, which are of importance for the enhanced properties of the metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites, e.g., catalysis; (iii) to explore various applications of the nanocomposites, e.g., as highly active catalysts for energy conversion reactions and as multifunctional probes for target-specific imaging and delivery. In this section, we introduce the recent research progress in the syntheses and applications of metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites, particularly highlighting the general strategies used to produce dumbbell-like nanocomposites that contain noble metal and magnetic nanoparticles or quantum dots, and we illustrate the interesting optical and magnetic properties found in these composite particles.
7.1 The pioneering work by Haruta et al.
The pioneering discovery of Haruta and coworkers on the low-temperature CO oxidation by gold nanoparticles, when supported on appropriate metal oxides, started a new era of research into Au as a catalyst for a plethora of catalytic reactions.220 The oxidation of CO is an important issue in many industrial, environmental, and domestic sectors of society. The stationary emissions of CO continue to pose problems in many industrial processes that involve combustion and partial oxidation of hydrocarbons. Before Haruta's discovery, the catalysts used for CO oxidation were hopcalite catalysts (mixed oxides mainly composed of Mn and Cu) or noble metals, e.g., platinum or palladium. However, these catalysts, although they have high catalytic activities, are either not water tolerant or are not sufficiently active at ambient temperature nor in the presence of concentrated CO.227–230 The novel gold catalysts employed by Haruta and coworkers were prepared by co-precipitation from an aqueous solution of chloroauric acid and the nitrate of transition metals. The authors found that the novel catalysts were composed of ultrafine gold particles and one of the oxides of the 3d transition metals of group VIII, namely, Fe, Co, or Ni. Then, they carried out the CO oxidation catalytic activity measurements in a small fixed-bed reactor, and concluded that the highest oxidation activity was achieved using gold combined with α-Fe2O3, Co3O4, or NiO. The optimum content of gold was found to be 5 atom% with α-Fe2O3 and Co3O4, or 10 atom% with NiO. Fig. 27 shows the conversion efficiency of CO as a function of duration time at various catalyst temperatures. These gold catalysts are able to completely oxidize CO even at −70 °C, and exhibit remarkably enhanced activity compared to gold powder and the host metal oxides. For instance, when the latter single compounds are used, the oxidation of CO needs considerably higher temperatures, ranging from 100 °C for Co3O4 to 300 °C for gold powder under the same experimental conditions.
 Fig. 27  Oxidation efficiency of CO as a function of duration time. ○ 5 atom% Au/α-Fe2O3; Δ 5 atom% Au/Co3O4; □ 10 atom% Au/NiO; ◇ hopcalite catalyst; Catalysts 0.20 g, CO 1 vol% air 66 mL min−1. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from the Chemical Society of Japan. 
The authors compared the new catalysts with those obtained by an impregnation method. In conventional gold catalysts supported on γ-Al2O3 or α-Fe2O3 by impregnation, even when they were calcined at 200 °C, the gold crystallites were considerably larger, ca. 20 nm. Indeed, the results for these impregnated catalysts show that such catalysts are active only at temperatures above 100 °C. Therefore, it is clear that co-precipitation leads to a considerably higher dispersion of gold than impregnation. Moreover, the high dispersion of gold brings about the extremely high activity for CO oxidation at temperatures below 0 °C. Furthermore, because the selection of the host oxides is another important factor, the specific interaction of gold particles with the oxides of Fe, Co, and Ni might also be responsible for the remarkable enhancement of oxidation activity, as evidenced in a number of follow-up studies.
7.2 Early studies in metal oxide–Au nanocomposites
The discovery of the remarkable catalytic activity in the low-temperature oxidation of CO spurred a significant growth in the studies related to metal oxide–gold nanocomposites and metal oxide-supported gold catalysts. Though at early stage, the research in this field emphasizes the importance of catalyst preparation and the effect of different metal oxides on the catalytic activity of deposited gold particles.217,231–243 In particular, most of the detailed studies have concentrated on TiO2–Au nanocomposites. For example, in their initial work, Haruta et al. showed that α-Fe2O3 was active, and subsequently they also showed that Au supported on TiO2 substrates was equally effective for CO oxidation.221
It is well established that the deposition precipitation method, in which a previously formed metal oxide support is stirred in a solution of a gold compound and pH value is varied by the addition of a base (i.e., NaOH or urea), could be used to obtain very small gold nanoparticles on the surface of the metal oxide support. The mechanism for the deposition precipitation method in the Au–TiO2 system was studied in great detail by Louis and coworkers.241 They prepared TiO2–Au composite materials by cation adsorption and deposition–precipitation with urea (DP urea) and NaOH (DP NaOH) and characterized them by various techniques during the preparation to determine the nature of the species deposited and the chemical phenomena occurring during these preparations. They found that in the case of the cationic adsorption of the [Au(en)2]3+ complex, the preparation has to be performed at room temperature to avoid the decomposition of the complex and reduction of gold. In this way, small gold particles could be obtained after calcination, but the gold loading was low. Both the methods of deposition–precipitation (DP NaOH and DP urea) involve the deposition of a gold(III) species on the TiO2 surface, but the nature of these species is different. For the DP NaOH method, [AuCl(OH)3]−, the main species present at pH 8 of the preparation, reacts with the hydroxyl groups of the TiO2 surface, and forms a grafted hydroxy-gold compound. This explains the limited amount of gold deposited on TiO2 by this method. For the DP urea method, all the gold present in the solution is deposited on the TiO2 surface as a gold(III) precipitate, which is not gold(III) hydroxide, but an amorphous compound containing nitrogen, oxygen and carbon. This compound is obtained from a reaction between the gold precursor and the products from the decomposition of urea. The metallic gold particles obtained after calcination exhibit a decreasing size as the DP urea method progresses over time. The authors proposed that the progressive increase in the pH, due to the decomposition of urea at 80 °C, results in changes in the surface charge density of the gold precipitate particles, and leads to fragmentation of the particles.
The preparation of Au–TiO2 catalysts by the DP method has been recently studied in detail by Moreau et al.239 They observed that the method involves the close control of many experimental variables, as succinctly summarized by Hashmi and Hutchings as follows:222
• The concentration of HAuCl4 solution,
• The ratio of the volume and concentration to the mass of the support,
• The type of TiO2 (Degussa P-25 is the most commonly chosen),
• The base chosen to neutralize the HAuCl4 solution,
• The temperature,
• The pH value, both at the time when TiO2 is added and in the subsequent reaction,
• The time and the temperature allowed for the deposition to occur,
• The method of filtration, washing, and drying,
• The conditions for calcination, if performed,
• The apparent sensitivity of the precursor to light.
Although significant advances in catalyst synthesis and characterization have been achieved, many questions remain concerning the relatively simple CO oxidation reaction; for example, what is the reaction mechanism and what is the nature of the active site? In 2000, Bond and Thompson proposed a model, where Au atoms at the interface between the Au particle and the metal oxide substrate were the active oxidation centers.244 As schematically illustrated in Fig. 28, they suggested that the peripheral atoms could be cationic gold, and it is these atoms that are responsible for the activation of dioxygen in the catalytic process. Later, Kung et al. also used this as the basis for their discussions on the mechanisms.245 However, it should be noted that although there has been a large number of studies using model systems, a definitive study has not yet been published concerning the relative roles of Au0 and Aun+ in the catalytic oxidation of CO.
 Fig. 28  A representation of the early stages of the oxidation of carbon monoxide at the periphery of an active gold particle. On the left-hand side, a carbon monoxide molecule is chemisorbed on a low coordination number gold atom, and a hydroxyl ion moves from the support to an Au3+ ion, creating an anion vacancy. On the right-hand side, they have reacted to form a carboxylate group, and an oxygen molecule occupies the anion vacancy as O2−; this then oxidizes the carboxylate group by abstracting a hydrogen atom, forming carbon dioxide, and the resulting hydroperoxide ion HO2− then oxidizes a further carboxylate species forming another carbon dioxide and restoring the two hydroxyl ions to the support surface. This completes the catalytic cycle. No attempt is made to suggest the charges carried by the reacting species. Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from Springer. 
Goodman and coworkers prepared gold clusters ranging in diameter from 1 to 6 nm on single crystalline surfaces of titania in ultrahigh vacuum to investigate their unusual size dependence for the low-temperature catalytic oxidation of carbon monoxide. They used a combination of scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) with elevated pressure reaction kinetics measurements to determine whether the unusual reactivity could be due to a quantum size effect in the fine gold particles.212 The answer was positive, and the authors showed that the structure sensitivity of the CO oxidation reaction on gold clusters supported on titania is related to a quantum size effect with respect to the thickness of the gold islands, and they further found that the islands with two layers of gold are the most effective for catalyzing the oxidation of carbon monoxide. Their results suggest that supported gold clusters, in general, may have unusual catalytic properties as one dimension of the cluster becomes smaller than three atomic spacings.
Later, Chen and Goodman designed well-ordered monolayers and bilayers of gold atoms that completely cover the TiO2 support to address the role played by these peripheral atoms.213 Their design eliminated the particle shape and direct TiO2 support effects on the catalytic property of gold for CO oxidation. High-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy and carbon monoxide adsorption confirmed that the gold atoms bonded to the titanium atoms. The authors found that the bilayers were significantly more active than the monolayers; thus, indicating that the catalysis could proceed on the extended gold surface that was created. Subsequently, Chen and Goodman concluded that the atoms at the periphery in both the model and real catalysts were metallic in nature.246 However, in these studies, the techniques used could not distinguish between cationic or metallic gold, and consequently an influence of the TiO2 support on the electronic state of the gold could not be ruled out. Indeed the electronic nature of very small gold particles could be expected to be significantly influenced by the nature of the support, especially the availability of defect sites.
Recently, the conclusions drawn from model systems were confirmed by Hutchings and coworkers.224 They employed aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy to analyze several iron oxide-supported gold catalyst samples, ranging from those with little or no activity to others with high activity. The authors observed that at higher magnification, the actual Au particle size distribution and morphology in FeOx–Au samples are considerably different. All the samples contained larger (2 to 15 nm) Au particles and a considerable number of individual Au atoms dispersed on the iron oxide surface, as displayed in Fig. 29. They found that the high catalytic activity for carbon monoxide oxidation was correlated with the presence of bilayer clusters that were ∼0.5 nm in diameter and contained only ca. 10 gold atoms; this result is in accordance with that demonstrated previously with the use of model catalyst systems.
 Fig. 29  High-magnification aberration-corrected STEM-HAADF images of (A and B) the inactive and (C and D) the active Au–FeOx catalysts acquired with the aberration-corrected JEOL 2200FS. The white circles indicate the presence of individual Au atoms, whereas the black circles indicate subnanometer Au clusters consisting of only a few atoms. Note the presence and image intensity difference of the two distinct cluster-types: in (C), there are 0.5 nm higher-contrast clusters, whereas in (D) 0.2–0.3 nm low-contrast clusters dominate. This difference indicates that bilayer and monolayer subnanometer Au clusters are present in the active catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from Science. 
7.3 Dumbbell-like metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites
Nanocomposites with two different functional domains sharing an intimate contact are referred to as dumbbell-like structures.226 The interfacial interactions that originate from electron transfer across the nanometer contact at the interface of the two domains in the nanocomposites can induce new properties that are not present in the individual components. Sun's group at Brown University made a significant contribution in the synthesis and application of nanocomposites consisting of magnetic metal oxides and optical or catalytic noble metals. In contrast to conventional impregnation or deposition–precipitation methods, Sun and coworkers employed a wet-chemistry based approach to generate dumbbell-like nanocomposites consisting of metal oxide and noble metals. The wet-chemistry method, although complicated by many factors, e.g., metal precursors, solvent, surfactants, reducing agent, reaction temperature, and pH value, might offer more space to control and tune the final products in terms of their size, morphology, and structure.2 As a first example, in 2005, Sun's group demonstrated the synthesis of dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites via the decomposition of Fe(CO)5 on the surface of Au nanoparticles, followed by oxidation in 1-octadecene solvent.87 By varying the experimental conditions, e.g., the seed particle size or the injection mode, the size of the particles could be tuned from 2 to 8 nm for Au and from 4 nm to 20 nm for Fe3O4 (Fig. 30). The authors found that the nanocontact between Au and Fe3O4 resulted in a red-shift of the surface plasmon of the Au and slowed the increase in the magnetization of the small Fe3O4. The dumbbell structure was formed through the epitaxial growth of iron oxide on the Au seeds, and the growth could be affected by the polarity of the solvent because the use of more polar solvent, e.g., diphenyl ether, led to the formation of flower-like Au–Fe3O4 composite particles. Moreover, Au–Fe3O4 could be readily converted into Au–Fe2O3 (γ-Fe2O3 or α-Fe2O3), making it possible to use it in the systematic studies of nanoscale interactions and their effects on the physical and chemical properties of the Au–iron oxide nanocomposites.
 Fig. 30  TEM and STEM images of dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles: (A) TEM image of the 3–14 nm Au–Fe3O4 particles; (B) TEM image of 8–14 nm Au–Fe3O4 particles; (C) HAADF-STEM image of 8–9 nm Au–Fe3O4 particles; and (D) HRTEM image of an 8–12 nm Au–Fe3O4 particle. The specimens for TEM and STEM analyses were prepared by the room-temperature deposition of the hexane dispersions of the particles on carbon-coated copper grids. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, in 2005, Sun and coworkers reported the enhanced magneto-optical response in dumbbell-like Ag–CoFe2O4 nanocomposites.88 They first prepared CoFe2O4 nanoparticles using the method they had established before247 and further treated the CoFe2O4 nanoparticles with 1-hexadecanethiol in phenyl ether. Then, the treated CoFe2O4 nanoparticles were mixed with AgNO3 and tetrahydronaphthalene and heated at 100 °C for 1 h for the formation of dumbbell-like Ag–CoFe2O4 nanocomposites. The magneto-optical characterization demonstrated that at short wavelengths, the magnitude of the rotation and the shape of the hysteresis loops were considerably comparable for the two types of particles with a common particle concentration, with coercivity values below 50 Oe and with a saturation field of approximately 500 Oe. The authors interpreted this similarity to be originating from the dominant effects of the CoFe2O4 interband transitions to the magneto-optical tensor (diagonal and off-diagonal terms) in the highly absorptive violet/blue wavelength regime.
While a dramatic contrast was observed between the magneto-optical response for the Ag–CoFe2O4 dimers and CoFe2O4 monomers at longer wavelengths, these were outside the CoFe2O4 interband transition-dominated regime. Although the overall magnitude of the Faraday rotation decreased away from the absorption edge of CoFe2O4, the rotation became significantly enhanced for the dimers relative to the monomers by nearly an order of magnitude near 633 nm. This approximate wavelength range also corresponds to a “crossover” regime, where the sign of the Faraday effect changes for the monomer nanoparticles, while the dimers remain unaffected in this regard. Sun and coworkers hypothesized that this strong contrast in the spectral behavior was due to the dielectric contribution of the Ag-nanoparticle component in the Ag–CoFe2O4 dimer. In particular, the crossover behavior for the CoFe2O4 monomer, which was absent in the dimer case, occurs in the Ag nanoparticle plasmon tail, where the dielectric contribution by Ag to the dimer appears to produce a significant additive contribution to the overall magneto-optical response of the composite nanoparticle Ag–CoFe2O4 particle pairs.
Magnetically and optically active dumbbell-like nanocomposites containing two different chemical surfaces are particularly suitable for selected nanoparticle functionalization with both targeting agents and drug molecules, which facilitates their application as multifunctional probes for target-specific imaging and delivery.15 Specifically, dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites contain both Au and Fe3O4 nanoparticles, which are known to be biocompatible, and have been used extensively for optical and magnetic applications in biomedicine.249–258 Compared with conventional single-component Au or Fe3O4 nanoparticles, dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 composite systems have distinct advantages: (i) the structure contains both a magnetic (Fe3O4) and an optically active plasmonic (Au) unit and is suitable for simultaneous optical and magnetic detection; (ii) the presence of Fe3O4 and Au surfaces facilitates the attachment of different chemical functionalities for target-specific imaging and delivery applications; and (iii) the size of either of the two nanoparticles can be controlled to optimize the magnetic and optical properties, while the small particle is only capable of accommodating a few DNA strands, proteins, antibodies, or therapeutic molecules; thus, facilitating kinetics studies in cell targeting and drug release. Upon successful synthesis, Sun and coworkers extended their dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites toward their application as dual-functional probes and for target-specific platin delivery.218,259 By functionalizing the surface of Fe3O4 and Au domains in dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites with the epidermal growth factor receptor antibody (EGFRA) and HS–PEG–NH2, respectively, the dumbbell-like nanocomposites could remain stable against aggregation in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or PBS containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) at 37 °C for 12 h.248 In addition, the magnetic and optical studies revealed that the dumbbell-like nanocomposites were both magnetically and optically active and could be used as dual functional probes for cell imaging applications. As a typical in vitro test, Sun and coworkers demonstrated that the dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites were suitable probe for A431 (human epithelial carcinoma cell line) cell imaging, as shown in Fig. 31.
 Fig. 31  (a) T2-weighted MRI images of (i) 20 nm Fe3O4, (ii) 3–20 nm Au–Fe3O4, (iii) 8–20 nm Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles, and (iv) A431 cells labeled with 8–20 nm Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles. (b) Reflection images of A431 cells labeled with 8–20 nm Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles. (c and d) Images of A431 cells labeled with 8–20 nm dumbbell particles, floating in the medium before (c) and after (d) an external magnetic field was applied (the field gradient in the sample area was in the range 500–100 G). The dashed circles denote individual cells; the numbers label the same cells in (c) and (d); the arrow and H indicate the direction of the applied magnetic field. Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Sun's group investigated the mechanical property of dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites from a synthetic point of view by overgrowing additional Au (Au2) on the preformed Au–Fe3O4 composite particles (Au1–Fe3O4).260 The Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites were first synthesized following the procedure they had published previously.87 The Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites were prepared by overgrowing Au2 onto the Au1–Fe3O4 composite particles in octadecene at 80 °C in the presence of HAuCl4 and oleylamine. The authors found that under the experimental conditions, the growth of Au2 did not enlarge Au1 in Au1–Fe3O4; instead, it led to a new nucleation and epitaxial growth of Au2 on Au1, forming ternary structured nanocomposites. As shown in Fig. 32b–e, the TEM images of Au1–Fe3O4 seeds and various nanocomposites obtained after the overgrowth at 80 °C for 1, 3, and 6 h, the Au1–Fe3O4 seeds have average sizes of 5 nm for Au1 and 12 nm for Fe3O4. The size of Au2 was controlled by the reaction time, with 7–9 nm Au2 formed after 1 h (Fig. 32c) and 12 nm after 3 h (Fig. 32d). A careful examination of the ternary Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites after 3 h growth revealed that some composite particles exhibited cracks between Au1 and Fe3O4, which appeared to suggest that Au2 was trying to extract Au1 out of its conjugation with Fe3O4. At longer growth times, Au2 won over Fe3O4 for binding to Au1, and Au1 thus detached from Fe3O4 to form new Au2–Au1 dumbbells, which dented the Fe3O4 nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 32e. The particle size-controlled growth and modeling analysis of the stress and strain distribution across the composite particles indicated that this “tug-of-war” was due to the stress accumulated at the heterogeneous interface in Au1–Fe3O4. This work by Sun's group is helpful for understanding the structural stability at the nanoscale and for the rational design of composite nanostructures for multifunctional applications.
 Fig. 32  “Tug-of-war” in Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites. (a) Schematic of the Au2 overgrowth on the Au1 domain and the Au1 domain detachment from Fe3O4 domain, forming the new dumbbell-like Au1–Au2 and dented Fe3O4 nanoparticles. (b–f) TEM images of Au–Fe3O4 seeding particles (b), and Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites collected at 1 h (c), 3 h (d), and 6 h (e) in the synthesis. The gaps between Au1 and Fe3O4 in the Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites have been labeled with red arrows in (d). Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
In a subsequent research, Sun's group developed a unique protocol to understand the synergetic effect in dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites for catalyzing the reduction of H2O2.261 The strategy started with the synthesis of dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites, and then single component Au and Fe3O4 nanoparticles were formed from the dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites by a controlled etching of the composite particles (Fig. 33), which ensured that the individual Au and Fe3O4 nanoparticles have the same structural features as their corresponding domains in the dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites. Catalytic examinations were carried out, which demonstrated that the dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites had a higher catalytic activity than that of either Au or Fe3O4 nanoparticles for H2O2 reduction. The enhanced activity of the dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites for H2O2 reduction reaction was attributed to the electronic interaction between Au and Fe3O4 domains in the composite nanoparticles.
 Fig. 33  Schematic illustration showing the selective etching of Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites for the preparation of Au and dented Fe3O4 nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Sun and coworkers also developed various approaches to prepare dumbbell-like nanocomposites consisting of Fe3O4 and noble metals other than gold. Typically, monodisperse dumbbell-like Pt–Fe3O4 nanocomposites were synthesized by the epitaxial growth of Fe onto Pt nanoparticles, followed by Fe oxidation.262 The nanoparticle size in the structure was tunable from 2 to 8 nm for Pt and from 6 to 20 nm for Fe3O4. The Pt nanoparticles in the Pt–Fe3O4 nanocomposites showed a 20-fold increase in mass activity toward the oxygen reduction reaction compared with the single component Pt nanoparticles and the commercial 3 nm Pt particles. This work proves that it is possible to maximize the catalytic activity of the Pt nanoparticle catalyst through control over not only the Pt size and shape, but also by controlling its interaction with Fe3O4 nanoparticles.
In recent years, Sun's group has still been very active in the synthesis and application of metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites. By exploring advanced synthetic strategies, they have been able to greatly enrich the noble metal domains in dumbbell-like nanocomposites, e.g., AuAg,263 FePd,264 and PtPd,265 which has significantly enhanced the applications of the dumbbell-like nanocomposites in catalytic, biological, and biomedical areas, as well as they have provided more physical insights in this field.265–267
Moreover, the contribution from other research groups in metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites cannot be ignored. Xu and coworkers reported the formation of dimeric Ag–Fe3O4 nanocomposites at the liquid–liquid interface.268 As schematically shown in Fig. 34, the synthetic route for making the dimeric nanocomposites was easy and straightforward. The as-prepared nanoparticles of Fe3O4 were dissolved in a proper organic solvent (e.g., dichlorobenzene, dichloromethane, hexane, or dioctyl ether), and then a solution of the nanoparticles was added into an aqueous solution of silver nitrate. Ultrasonic emulsification then afforded a stable emulsion of the two solutions. After a 30 min reaction period, the organic layer containing the well-dispersed dimeric Ag–Fe3O4 nanocomposites was collected by centrifugation. The authors suggest the following mechanism is responsible for generating the dimeric nanocomposites. Ultrasonication provides the necessary energy to mix the organic phase and the aqueous phase to form the microemulsion, which is stabilized by the nanoparticles that self-assemble at the liquid–liquid interface. The imperfect coverage or labile nature of the surfactant molecules on the surface of the nanoparticles allows a few Fe(II) sites to act as the catalytic center for the reduction of Ag+ ions and for the seeding of the Ag nanoparticles. Once the nucleation sites of the silver are formed, the subsequent reduction of Ag+ proceeds only at the pre-existing nucleation sites until the reaction stops.
 Fig. 34  Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of dimeric Ag–Fe3O4 nanocomposites at the liquid–liquid interface. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The protocols developed by Xu's group were used by Jiang and coworkers to fabricate a noble metal nanocrystal-based two-photon fluorescence indicator combined with magnetic nanoparticles as a new class of bifunctional nanocomposite.269 The resulting hydrophobic Ag–Fe3O4 heterodimer nanocomposite was then rendered hydrophilic by the functionalization of the iron oxide surface with hydroxyl groups, and the Ag surface with carboxyl- and amine-bearing thiol molecules. The live cells labeled with the heterodimer nanoparticles were successfully imaged by two-photon fluorescence microscopy, and manipulated using an NdFeB permanent magnet.
7.4 High-order nanocomposites
High-order nanocomposites refer to those with multiple (three or more) nanoscale domains fused together by solid-state interfaces, as schematically shown in a number of examples in Fig. 35. Composite nanomaterials are currently emerging as an important family of multifunctional nanoscale materials,226,270,271 which can facilitate diverse applications in solar energy conversion,45,46 cancer therapy,259 Suzuki cross-coupling reactions,272 fuel cell catalysis,60,210,211,262,273–275 biological imaging,24,80,276 electronics,42 and magnetism.277 However, more sophisticated architectures beyond binary nanocompositites are needed as the applications of these materials continue to expand and the growing disconnection between design and synthesis becomes a critical limitation in their application. Analogous to the semiconductor–noble metal or dumbbell-like metal oxide–noble metal nanocomposites, these unique hybrid lab-on-a-particle systems are also characterized by their interfacial contacts, which support direct electronic and magnetic communication between components that can lead to synergistic effects not observed for physical mixtures or nanostructures assembled using molecular or biological linkers.
 Fig. 35  Schematic illustration showing high order nanocomposites, in which the multiple nanoscale domains are fused together by solid-state interfaces. 
Early in 2006, Swihart, Prasad and coworkers reported a general strategy capable of engineering high-order nanocomposites based on a spontaneous epitaxial nucleation and growth of a third component onto seed nanoparticles in high-temperature organic solutions.43 In particular, magnetic (Fe3O4)–metallic (Au)–semiconductor (PbSe or PbS) ternary nanocomposites were prepared using Au–Fe3O4 peanut-like nanoparticles, with 12 nm Fe3O4 and 3–4 nm Au domains as the seeds. The authors found that the heating strategy and seed particle dimensions were important for the formation of ternary nanocomposites. If the gold domain was less than 3 nm in diameter, then the nucleation of PbS or PbSe was difficult presumably because of the small amount of gold surface area exposed. For Fe3O4–Au–PbS, if the temperature of the reaction mixture was quickly increased to 150 °C after sulfur injection, both dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 composite nanoparticles and Fe3O4–Au–PbS ternary nanocomposites were formed. This suggests that some Au–Fe3O4 peanut-like particles aggregated to form dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 particles in the presence of sulfur before PbS could nucleate and grow on Au–Fe3O4. When the temperature was held at 100 °C after sulfur injection, Fe3O4–Au–PbS was formed and no dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 particles were observed.
Schaak's group made a significant contribution to the synthesis of high-order nanocomposites by demonstrating that known chemical reactions can be applied in a predictable and stepwise manner to build complex composite nanoparticle architectures including M–Pt–Fe3O4 (M = Au, Ag, Ni, Pd) heterotrimers, MxS–Au–Pt–Fe3O4 (M = Pb, Cu) heterotetramers and higher-order oligomers based on the heterotrimeric Au–Pt–Fe3O4 building block.278 As a typical example, the authors studied the reduction of a 1-octadecene solution of HAuCl4 with oleylamine in the presence of Pt–Fe3O4 dumbbell-like nanocomposites at mild (60–90 °C) temperatures. Although the heterogeneous nucleation of Au on Pt–Fe3O4 seeds might be expected to yield four primary products: Au on Pt, Au on Fe3O4, Au on both the Fe3O4 and Pt ends, and Au at the interface of both Fe3O4 and Pt (Fig. 36a), the authors observed only Au–Pt–Fe3O4 as the exclusive heterotrimer product (Fig. 36d), which was formed in an approximately 85% yield. The remainder of the product consisted of either unreacted Pt–Fe3O4 or higher-order structures that were formed from a small number of Fe3O4–Pt–Fe3O4 seeds present in the original Pt–Fe3O4 sample. In the same manner, Ag–Pt–Fe3O4 (Fig. 36e), Ni–Pt–Fe3O4 (Fig. 36f) and Pd–Pt–Fe3O4 (Fig. 36g) could also be synthesized by reducing Ag(I) acetate (Ag(OAc)), Ni(acac)2 and Pd(acac)2, respectively, in the presence of the Pt–Fe3O4 seeds. Analogous to the Au–Pt–Fe3O4 system, each reaction resulted in the heterogeneous nucleation of Ag, Ni or Pd exclusively onto the Pt domain of the Pt–Fe3O4 seeds. The authors did not observe the nucleation of Au, Ag, Ni or Pd on the Fe3O4 domain or across the Pt–Fe3O4 interface. This result demonstrates that the chemoselective deposition of a variety of metals occurs exclusively onto the Pt ends of the Pt–Fe3O4 heterodimers, with no observable side products.
 Fig. 36  Stepwise construction of M–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers (M = Ag, Au, Ni, Pd) (a), schematic showing the multistep synthesis of M–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers, along with the most significant possible products and their observed frequencies (expressed as the percentage of observed heterotrimers, not total yield). Representative TEM images showing the Pt nanoparticle seeds (b), Pt–Fe3O4 heterodimers (c) and Au–Pt–Fe3O4 (d), Ag–Pt–Fe3O4 (e), Ni–Pt–Fe3O4 (f) and Pd–Pt–Fe3O4 (g) heterotrimers. All the scale bars are 25 nm. (h), Images of a vial that contains Au–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers in hexane (left), which respond to an external Nd–Fe–B magnet; the same vial with Au–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers in a larger volume of hexanes (middle); and the same vial after precipitation of the heterotrimers with ethanol (right). The precipitated heterotrimers collect next to the external magnet. Reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
The high electron density around the Pt domain, which was attributed to the electron transfer from Fe3O4 to Pt,262 helps to rationalize the observed chemoselectivity. The electron-rich Pt domain may help to anchor and reduce the cationic Au, Ag, Ni and Pd reactants, as well as enhance the polarizability of the Pt domain to help facilitate greater surface interaction with the small nuclei of these metals. This could be considered as a nanocrystal analogue of a molecular substituent effect, in which the enhanced reactivity at a specific site is driven by the electron-transfer phenomenon, which is a well-known phenomenon in the studies related to heterogeneous catalysis.279–284 The presence of Fe3O4 and the electronic interactions across the Fe3O4–Pt interface modify the reactivity of the Pt domain, which makes it behave differently to isolated Pt nanoparticles in a manner that facilitates the chemoselective nucleation and a regiospecific M–Pt–Fe3O4 connectivity.
This synthetic framework, suggested by Schaak's group, conceptually mimics the total-synthesis approach used by chemists to construct complex organic molecules. The reaction toolkit applies solid-state nanoparticle analogues of chemoselective reactions, regiospecificity, coupling reactions, and molecular substituent effects for the construction of exceptionally complex composite nanoparticle oligomers. Moreover, the emerging advances in nanoparticle separation and purification could further improve yield and homogeneity,285–288 and the continued development of new classes of reactions, including orthogonal reaction schemes,289,290 could further expand these synthesis-by-design capabilities.
7.5 RuO2-based nanocomposites
Instead of the commonly used seed-mediated growth method, we developed a solvothermal strategy and a mutual oxidation–reduction approach for the fabrication of ruthenium oxide (RuO2)-based nanocomposites including RuO2 and RuO2–Au supported on commercial carbon supports (RuO2–C and RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites).291 The novelty of the nanocomposites lies in their synthetic approaches, which are based on the thermal decomposition of metal complexes formed by RuCl3 and dodecylamine at room temperature (for RuO2–C) and the mutual oxidation–reduction phenomenon between RuCl3 and HAuCl4 at elevated temperatures (for RuO2–Au–C) in the presence of carbon supports. As indicated in Fig. 37, the RuO2 and RuO2–Au particles in RuO2–C and RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites are nearly monodispersed, and have average sizes of 1.8 nm and 1.62 nm, respectively. The as-prepared RuO2–C and RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites used for supercapacitors adopting the H2SO4 electrolyte exhibit high specific capacitances of 537.7 F g−1 and 558.2 F g−1, respectively, at a current density of 50 mA g−1. The specific capacitance maintains 350.1 F g−1 for RuO2–C nanocomposites and 478.5 F g−1 for RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites at a current density of 200 mA g−1 with good cycling stability. In addition, comparison of the electrochemical measurements of the RuO2–C and RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites demonstrates that the presence of Au in the nanocomposites is favorable for an enhancement of the capacitive behavior of RuO2. Considering the remarkable simplicity of the synthetic approaches, the strategies might be promising for creating RuO2-based nanocomposites on a large scale for application in electrochemical capacitors.
 Fig. 37  TEM (a and c) and HRTEM images (b and d) of RuO2–C (a and b) and RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites (c and d) as-prepared by a solvothermal strategy and a mutual oxidation–reduction approach, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 291 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8 Nanocomposite-related scientific issues
Nanomaterials are proving to be fertile grounds for scientific discoveries and explorations because materials at the nanoscale often exhibit properties that are significantly different from those of single atoms and their bulk counterparts.292–294 For instance, the confinement or collective oscillation of electrons in the conduction band by a nanoscale particle provides a powerful means to manipulate the electronic, optical, magnetic and catalytic properties of a solid material.2,35,295–299 For example, although bulk gold does not exhibit catalytic properties, Au nanoparticles have been demonstrated to usually be excellent low temperature catalysts. Another typical examples are the optical properties of Ag–Au nanoparticles arising from surface plasmon resonance (SPR),300 where the size- and shape-dependent optical properties make gold and silver at nanometer scale useful as sensors, biomarkers, and as building blocks for photonic, optical, and optoelectronic devices.296,301
In this section, we introduce a number of interesting scientific phenomena observed during the syntheses and characterizations of composite nanomaterials, including the room temperature synthesis and growth mechanism of Ag2S nanocrystals in a nonpolar organic solvent, the diffusion of gold from the inner core to the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals, the coalescence of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals at room temperature, a facile solution route for the synthesis of PbSe–Au nanocomposites with different morphologies, and selective electrocatalysts toward a prototype of the membraneless direct methanol fuel cell. The mechanisms behind these scientific issues and their potential applications will also be discussed in this section regarding the specific features of these discoveries. These interesting scientific phenomena or physical/chemical processes not only satisfy our everlasting human curiosity, but also promise new advances in technology, e.g., the design of sophisticated composite nanomaterials and highly efficient electrocatalysts with superior selectivity.
8.1 Room temperature synthesis and growth mechanism of Ag2S nanocrystals
Ag2S nanocrystals have become one of the most commonly studied semiconductor nanocrystals (or quantum dots) for their excellent photoelectric and thermoelectric properties and their significant roles in optics, electronics, and near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence probes (e.g., in biological labeling).302–306 In addition, Ag2S nanocrystals can be fabricated into semiconductor–metal nanocomposites, which are effective for the catalysis of methanol oxidation at room temperature.60 Therefore, the synthesis of Ag2S nanocrystals with uniform sizes and controlled shapes using easily accessible precursors under mild reaction conditions has become an important subject of research. To date, various methods have been developed for the synthesis of Ag2S nanocrystals. These preparative approaches are usually carried out in organic solvents at high temperatures using expensive and unstable organometallic precursors (e.g., Ag(SCOPh),302 (C2H5)2NCS2Ag,304–306 and CH3COOAg307). The reaction between Ag inorganometallic precursors (e.g., AgNO3) and S powders in a coordinating solvent, e.g., octadecylamine, provides an improved route to produce Ag2S NCs,49,308,309 while the temperature of the reaction system is still maintained at 150 °C or higher. A specific method based on cation exchange has also been used for the synthesis of Ag2S NCs.144,310–312 In this method, the dissolved Ag+ ions displace the Cd2+ or Cu2+ cations from previously formed CdS nanorods or CuS hollow spheres, and the size and shape of the final Ag2S products are controlled by the CdS or CuS templates.
Alternatively, Yang and coworkers described a simple and facile room-temperature approach derived from the general phase transfer protocol for the synthesis of uniform Ag2S nanocrystals, which involved the transfer of Ag+ ions from water to toluene using an ethanol-mediated method, and by reaction with elemental sulfur in toluene at room temperature.48,313 This protocol allows Ag2S nanocrystals to be synthesized in an organic medium using aqueous soluble metal salts as the starting materials, which are relatively inexpensive and can be easily obtained. The growth mechanism of Ag2S nanocrystals in nonpolar organic solvents was found to be remarkably different from the commonly accepted LaMer nucleation-growth model consisting of a nucleation step and growth step.314,315 As demonstrated in Fig. 38, during the initial stage of the reaction, Ag2S nanoclusters formed on the surface of the massive S powders and then coalesced to form an extensive network of nanowires, which later fragmented into quasi-spherical particles due to the inside-out diffusion of S in the nanowires. The quasi-spherical particles finally grew into uniform Ag2S nanocrystals through a ripening process. It was found that the reaction temperature and the molar ratio of Ag/S have a significant influence on the growth process and on the size/morphology of the Ag2S nanocrystals. The shape of the final Ag2S products could be easily tuned by varying the molar ratio of the starting precursors. This “coalescence-fracture-ripening” growth mechanism could also be applied for the synthesis of uniform Ag2S nanocrystals using previously formed Ag nanoparticles as starting materials.
 Fig. 38  TEM images of Ag2S nanocrystals obtained by reacting DDA–Ag+ complexes with elemental sulfur in toluene at 283 K at different times: (a) 1 h, (b) 2 h, (c) 5 h, (d) 15 h, (e) 25 h, (f) 40 h, (g) 80 h, and (h) 1 month. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The room-temperature approach for the synthesis of Ag2S nanocrystals could be easily extended to the preparation of dimeric Ag2S–Au nanocomposites.28 After aging a mixture of Ag2S and HAuCl4, which was then transferred into toluene using the ethanol-mediated general phase transfer protocol, dimeric Ag2S–Au nanocomposites were found to be the dominant product (Fig. 39a and b). It is noteworthy that in the absence of Ag2S nanocrystals, the reduction of Au(III) ions by dodecylamine would require several days; this suggests that the Ag2S NCs could catalyze the reduction of Au3+ ions, as indicated in the PbS–Au system.44 When the order of nanocrystal synthesis was reversed, i.e., when Ag2S nanocrystals were generated in the presence of Au nanoparticles, Ag2S grew homogeneously on the existing Au nanocrystals, resulting in a core–shell Au@Ag2S structure (Fig. 39c and d, Au:Ag2S molar ratio = 1:2).48 The thickness of the Ag2S shell could be controlled by varying the Au:Ag2S molar ratio in the synthesis. Fig. 39e and f illustrate the core–shell Au@Ag2S nanocrystals synthesized at Au:Ag2S molar ratios of 2:1 and 1:1, respectively. Moreover, the thickness of the Ag2S shell could be varied, as shown by comparing Fig. 39c, e and f.
 Fig. 39  TEM (a, c, e and f) and HRTEM images (b and d) of Ag2S–Au heterodimers (a and b), core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles at Ag2S–Au molar ratios of 2:1 (c and d), 1:1 (e), and 1:2 (f), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As we will describe in the subsequent section, the core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles are not thermodynamically stable, and at room temperature, Au could diffuse from the core of the particle to the surface, giving rise to the formation of dimeric Ag2S–Au nanocomposites.
8.2 Diffusion of gold from the inner core to the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals
The diffusion of metals in semiconductors has been extensively investigated in bulk materials due to its technological importance for applications in doped materials, catalysts, and functional spintronic devices.316–321 In contrast, relatively little has been reported on the diffusion in nanostructured materials, which exhibit physical and chemical properties distinctively different from bulk materials.322–324 Recently, Banin and coworkers reported the diffusion of Au in InAs nanoparticles at room temperature, which resulted in a Au core coated by an amorphous InAs shell.85 Manna et al. also described the diffusion of Au in PbTe nanocrystals at elevated temperatures.325 In a later study, Yang and Ying discovered an interesting diffusion phenomenon of noble metals in semiconductor nanocrystals. They found that Au could diffuse in Ag2S nanocrystals from the core to the surface, giving rise to dimeric Ag2S–Au heteronanocomposites.53 The TEM and high-angle scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) images of the core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 40a and c, respectively, in which the core and shell components can be easily differentiated by the contrast in brightness. The diffusion of Au in Ag2S from the core to the surface was completed after 72 h of aging (Fig. 40b and d). The resulting dimeric Ag2S–Au nanocomposites (heterodimers) are clearly distinct from the starting core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles. Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyses (Fig. 40e and f) of an arbitrary single particle before and after 72 h of aging under STEM mode show that gold moved from the core of the Au@Ag2S nanoparticle to the surface of the Ag2S nanocrystal, forming Ag2S–Au heterodimers. The Ag2S domain remains crystalline after the diffusion of Au from the core to the surface. This is different from the InAs–Au and PbTe–Au systems, in which an amorphous shell of InAs or PbTe, respectively, is left behind after the diffusion of Au from the surface to the core.85,325
 Fig. 40  Diffusion of Au from the inner core to the surface of core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles: (a and b) TEM images, (c and d) STEM images, and (e and f) elemental profiles of the core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles (a, c and e) as-prepared and (b, d and f) after 72 hours of aging. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
This reverse diffusion of Au, which could be interpreted by the substitutional–interstitial mechanism, not only has a scientific significance, but also could be used to synthesize complex semiconductor–metal nanocomposites that might not be obtained by direct synthesis. In particular, the synthesis of heterogeneous nanocomposites of core–shell Pt@Ag2S and Au nanoparticles was demonstrated based on the diffusion of Au in Ag2S nanocrystals. Ostwald ripening was observed during the characterization of the nanocomposites by TEM (Fig. 41). This elucidated the mechanism of the formation of semiconductor–metal heterostructures as a consequence of the diffusion of Au in Ag2S nanocrystals. Initially, Au atoms might have diffused in all directions within Ag2S. However, nanocrystals of Au were later formed on the Ag2S surface, and grew steadily due to Ostwald ripening.
 Fig. 41  Ostwald ripening observed during the diffusion of Au in Ag2S. Initially, Au homogeneously diffused in Ag2S but then evolved as growing nanocrystals on the Ag2S surface due to Ostwald ripening. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
8.3 Coalescence of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals at room temperature
Materials at the nanometer scale may possess new physical/chemical properties or exhibit new physical/chemical phenomena. For example, as mentioned in the previous section, in InAs–Au nanocomposites, Au could diffuse into InAs nanocrystals at room temperature, resulting in a Au core coated by an amorphous InAs shell.85 In this section, another interesting phenomenon occurring in nanoscale materials, i.e., a dissolution–renucleation process leading to the coalescence of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals at room temperature was observed in an organic medium. Individual Ag2S and Au nanocrystals in their physical mixture were eventually fused with each other to yield the dimeric Ag2S–Au nanocomposites, as confirmed by the TEM images taken at different time (Fig. 42).53
 Fig. 42  Coalescence of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals: (a–e) TEM images of the physical mixture of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals taken at 0 h, 7 h, 12 h, 24 h, and 36 h, respectively; (f) HAADF-STEM image of Ag2S–Au heterodimers; (g) Au, Ag, and S elemental distributions across a single Ag2S–Au heterodimer (white line indicated in (f)); (h) HRTEM image of a single Ag2S–Au heterodimer. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The coalescence between Au and Ag2S nanocrystals at room temperature could be interpreted by an equilibration of the Fermi levels in the two different types of particles, which has also been observed in a colloidal mixture of lead and silver nanoparticles.326 As illustrated in Fig. 43c, initially, Au and Ag2S nanocrystals undergo Brownian encounters in their physical mixture, and then the electrons may tunnel from the Au atoms on the surface of Au nanocrystals to their neighbouring Ag2S nanocrystals due to the energy level alignment (Fig. 43b). Simultaneously, Au ions are emitted from the Au nanocrystals into the solution. Finally, these Au ions capture the electrons on the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals, resulting in the renucleation of Au on Ag2S nanocrystals. In this process, the Au dissolution and renucleation could have occurred around the surface of Ag2S nanocrystals, and then segregated patches of Au form on each Ag2S surface due to Ostwald ripening.50
 Fig. 43  (a) Au 4f XPS spectra of the original Au nanocrystals and the resulting Ag2S–Au heterodimers; (b) Energy level diagram for Ag2S–Au heterodimers, which predicts the intraparticle charge transfer from Au to Ag2S; (c) Schematic for the coalescence between Au and Ag2S nanocrystals at room temperature via the equilibration of the Fermi levels in the two different types of particles. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A common coalescence process usually occurs in the homogeneous nanoparticle dispersion and is terminated by the formation of well-confined morphologies such as rods, wires, dendrites and 2-D or 3-D arrays.327–329 Usually, the coalescence is induced by annealing, drying, or ultrasonic treatment.330,331 The coalescence between heterogeneous nanocrystals may promise new research techniques. For example, this coalescence process could be applied to extract Au from quantum dot–Au hybrids or from Au-containing alloys; thus, providing an effective strategy to investigate the influence of Au on the properties of Au-containing hybrids or alloys.
8.4 PbSe–Au nanocomposites with different morphologies
Because the final morphology of nanocomposites depend on whether the surface of the substrate particles allow for only a single nucleation site or multiple ones, the use of different semiconductor substrates may generate new and insightful results. When depositing gold (Au) on lead selenide (PbSe) semiconductor substrates, Yang's group reported an interestingly experimental observation and understanding of the growth process of gold on the surface of PbSe nanocrystals.54 They found that the molar ratio of PbSe–Au had a great influence on the morphology of the PbSe–Au nanocomposites. The evolution from nanocomposites with multiple Au deposition on the particle surface to those with a single Au domain, and further to pineapple-like morphologies was observed with the increasing molar ratio of Au–PbSe during the synthesis, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 44. Surprisingly, the experimental observations showed that the growth of Au on the surface of PbSe had an upper limit size. Upon the achievement of this size, the addition of more Au precursors only resulted in the deposition of Au on extra sites over the surface of PbSe instead of a continuous growth of the Au domain; these were termed ‘pineapple-like’ nanocomposites. Therefore this process extends the opportunities available for the fabrication and control of nanostructures, in particular for nanocrystals composed of different materials.
 Fig. 44  Schematic of the fabrication of PbSe–Au nanocomposites at different PbSe–Au molar ratios. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8.5 Selective electrocatalysts toward a prototype of the membraneless direct methanol fuel cell
The strong growing interest in using direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs) as portable and mobile power sources is rooted in their desirable features of a relatively small environmental footprint, compact system design, and higher volumetric energy densities compared with existing technologies.190,332 The anode and cathode catalysts of DMFCs are commonly based on Pt.333–338 These catalysts are not selective to methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) at anode or oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at cathode, and thus any methanol crossover from the anode to the cathode through the proton exchange membrane can be oxidized by the cathode catalyst. This results in the creation of a mixed potential at the cathode, which degrades the fuel cell performance.191,339,340 Although a number of research studies have been devoted toward the modification on the proton exchange membrane to overcome this key obstacle for the commercialization of DMFCs, it is generally considered that the commonly used Nafion membrane still has an unacceptably high rate of methanol crossover.341–347 In this sense, the synthesis of electrocatalysts with high selectivity for MOR and ORR represents an alternative for solving this problem in DMFCs.
With a deep understanding of the mechanisms of the electrocatalytic reactions, Yang's group reported the design and fabrication of Pt-based nanomaterials with enhanced catalytic activity and a high selectivity towards DMFC reactions by making sufficient use of the structural uniqueness and electronic coupling effects between the different domains of the electrocatalysts, so that DMFCs could be efficiently operated without, or at least with little, dependence on the proton exchange membrane.274 In particular, they reported ternary Au@Ag2S–Pt nanocomposites that displayed a superior methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) selectivity due to the electronic coupling effect between the different domains of the nanocomposites (Fig. 45a), while cage-bell-structured Pt–Ru nanoparticles exhibited excellent methanol tolerance for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode because of the differential diffusion of methanol and oxygen in the porous Ru shell of the cage-bell nanoparticles (Fig. 45b). The good catalytic selectivity of these Pt-based nanomaterials via structural construction enabled a DMFC to be built without a proton exchange membrane between the fuel electrode and the oxygen electrode (Fig. 45c).
 Fig. 45  Schematic illustration of the construction of ternary Au@Ag2S–Pt nanocomposites and the energy level alignment in Ag2S–Au–Pt nanocomposites (a), schematic illustration of the differential diffusion and reaction of methanol and oxygen in CBS Pt–Ru nanoparticles (b), and schematic illustration of the membraneless DMFC (c). Reproduced from ref. 274 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
The performance of the membraneless DMFC was evaluated in terms of the open circuit voltage (OCV), the current–voltage (I–V), and the current–power (I–P) characteristics under ambient conditions. It was found that the membraneless DMFC with the selective MOR catalyst at the anode and the ORR catalyst at the cathode could maintain an open-circuit voltage of ca. 0.38 V for more than 120 min. It is of great importance that a reasonable power with the maximum value of ca. 15 μW was obtained without a separate membrane. However, the OCV of the membraneless DMFC was still rather low, at only ca. 32% of the theoretical cell voltage of DMFC (ca. 1.18 V).348 The performance of the prototype might have been limited by the use of dissolved oxygen as the source of oxygen. However, despite the limited performance, the prototype did demonstrate the viability of using selective MOR and ORR catalysts to construct a DMFC without the proton exchange membrane. Because the exemption of a proton exchange membrane not only reduces the cost and volume of the DMFC, it also provides more flexibility and allows for miniaturization of the cell design. Its implementation is also simpler than membraneless fuel cells that depend on non-mixing laminar flows349,350 or a 3D anode.351–353 The performance of the membraneless fuel cell could be improved using the on-chip fuel cell developed by Osaka's group, which can directly make use of the oxygen from the air.354
9 Applications of noble metal-based composite nanomaterials
The valuable technological applications of composite nanomaterials envisaged in disparate fields, including photocatalysis, optoelectronics, sensing, and biomedicine, have been recently reviewed by a number of research groups.61,226,271,355–359 In addition, discussions on the catalytic applications of Pt-containing noble metal-based nanocomposites in direct methanol fuel cell reactions are scattered around in related sections of this review work. Therefore, in this section, we emphasize the catalytic applications of noble metal-based nanocomposites in organic syntheses.
Propargylamines are useful and versatile precursors for the synthesis of various nitrogen-containing biologically active compounds such as natural products and therapeutic drug molecules.360–364 In comparison with the classical methods involving the nucleophilic addition of an alkynyl–Li or Mg reagent to an imine or other similar CN electrophiles,365 a more attractive and atom-efficient strategy for propargylamine synthesis is through a one-pot three-component coupling reaction of an aldehyde, amine and alkyne via C–H activation catalyzed by a transition metal. Catalytic multicomponent reactions are highly atom-efficient processes that can enable the implementation of several transformations in a single manipulation. These reactions also produce less side-products compared to classical stepwise methodologies. A number of homogeneous systems, such as iron salts and366 copper salts367 and their complexes,368 silver salts369–372 and gold salts373,374 and their complexes,375,376 iridium complexes,377 Hg2Cl2,378 and a Cu/Ru379 bimetallic system, have been reported for the preparation of propargylamine via this three-component coupling protocol. Although these catalysts were highly effective, the homogeneous systems could not be recovered for reuse.
Heterogeneous catalysts, on the other hand, would be able to overcome this recyclability issue. Heterogeneous systems, such as silica- or hydroxyapatite-supported Cu+ complexes,380–382 CuO nanoparticles,383 Ag+ salts in ionic liquids,384 unsupported385 and supported gold nanoparticles on CeO2 and ZrO2,386 and layered double hydroxide,387 have been reported to display high activities for the three-component coupling reaction of an aldehyde, amine and alkyne. In those reports, some of the heterogeneous catalysts have been recovered and reused for a number of cycles with nearly consistent activity. Referring to the abundant accumulation of semiconductor–gold nanocomposites in recent years, which creates great opportunities but also a tremendous challenge to apply these materials, Chng and coworkers investigated the application of semiconductor–gold nanocomposites for the synthesis of propargylamines via a three-component coupling reaction of an aldehyde, amine and alkyne in water. Their process is simple and applicable to a diverse range of aromatic and aliphatic aldehydes, amines and alkynes. Furthermore, the catalyst was stable in air and water, and could be easily recovered and reused.388
They prepared three different types of semiconductor nanocrystals for gold deposition via solution-based methods. Fig. 46 shows the TEM images of the CdS, CdSe and PbS semiconductor nanocrystals and their nanocomposites with gold. Because gold has a strong imaging contrast, it can be easily identified in the semiconductor–gold nanocomposites. Gold was deposited at multiple sites on each semiconductor. EDX analyses confirm that the heterogeneous structures are composed of the semiconductor and gold components. The gold loading on the semiconductor nanocrystals ranged from 17.1 to 25.4 wt%, and the gold nanoparticles were 1–2 nm in diameter (Fig. 46).
 Fig. 46  TEM images of (a) CdS, (b) CdSe and (c) PbS semiconductor nanocrystals, and (d) CdS–Au, (e) CdSe–Au, and (f) PbS–Au nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 388 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
The three semiconductor–Au nanocomposites were tested for their catalytic activities in the three-component coupling reaction for the model substrates: benzaldehyde, piperidine, and phenylacetylene in water at 100 °C, and the results showed that with a catalyst loading of 0.3 mol% Au and a reaction time of 6 h at 100 °C in air, the PbS–Au nanocomposites provided the highest activity, giving rise to the desired propargylamine product by up to 85% in an isolated yield, while the CdS–Au and CdSe–Au nanocomposites gave lower isolated yields of 43% and 53%, respectively. The XPS measurements demonstrated that the oxidized ratio of Au in the PbS–Au nanocomposites was higher than in the CdS–Au and CdSe–Au nanocomposites, which may account for the highest catalytic activity of the PbS–Au nanocomposites in the three-component coupling reaction.
Chng and coworkers also proposed a tentative mechanism for the three-component coupling reaction catalyzed by PbS–Au nanocomposites, as demonstrated by the scheme in Fig. 47. They suggested that the reaction mechanism of the PbS–Au catalyst could proceed via the activation of the Csp–H bond of the terminal alkyne by the PbS–Au nanocomposite. The alkynyl–Au intermediate generated would then react with the immonium ion generated in situ from the aldehyde and the secondary amine to produce the corresponding propargylamine product, and would regenerate the active PbS–Au species for further reactions. By optimizing both the composition and the domain sizes for the nanocomposite system through varying the composition and the ratio of the metal precursor to the semiconductor seeds in the synthesis, a further enhancement in the catalytic activity could be expected. In addition, the noble metal-based nanocomposites could also be of interest as advanced functional materials, and as catalysts for other organic and pharmaceuticals synthesis reactions.
 Fig. 47  Schematic illustration showing the tentative mechanism of the PbS–Au catalyzed three-component coupling of an aldehyde, amine and alkyne in water. Reproduced from ref. 388 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Another important application of noble metal-based nanocomposites is environmental remediation, particularly for the catalytic oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), e.g., benzene, toluene, and formaldehyde, which have been recognized as major contributors to air pollution, especially in developing countries, and are known to cause the irritation of eyes and respiratory tract, headache, pneumonia, and even cancer.389,390 Catalytic oxidation is the most effective technology for VOC abatement because VOCs can be oxidized to CO2 over certain catalysts at considerably lower temperatures than in thermal oxidation.391–393 A large number of noble metal catalysts (Pt, Pd, Rh, Au, Ag) supported on different metal oxide supports have been used for the catalytic oxidation of VOCs. However, the most commonly used strategies for fabricating these noble metal–metal oxide nanocomposites are traditional impregnation methods or flame spray pyrolysis, but the solution-based approaches have not yet been used. Therefore, the applications of the nanocomposites in environmental remediation are not presented in this review work, partly to save space. One can refer to the related literatures to find out the recent advances in this field.394–399
10 Conclusion and perspectives
The efforts of many leading research groups have led to a rich variety of composite nanomaterials, and their accumulation has created great opportunities but also presented tremendous challenge to apply these materials in various areas, e.g., structure design, energy conversion, and environmental remediation. In addition, to promote charge separation, an interesting feature for a composite nanoparticle should include electronic coupling between the different domains in the nanocomposites. Future research challenges in composite nanomaterials may include: (1) the phase transfer of semiconductor–metal oxide nanocrystals from organic media to an aqueous medium. Generally, high quality semiconductor–metal oxide nanocrystals are usually synthesized in organic solvents at high temperatures. Their lack of native water solubility severely limits their applications in preparing nanocomposites including noble metals. An effective phase transfer method would circumvent such a deficiency. Future work may begin with the construction of an efficient approach for transferring the semiconductor–metal oxide substrate nanocrystals from organic solvents to aqueous solvent. (2) The deposition of noble metals on different semiconductor substrates. A number of environmental factors, such as initial reactant concentrations, reducing agents, metal precursors, reaction time, reaction temperature, and pH of the reaction medium, systematically affect the deposition of noble metals on different semiconductor substrates. The characterization techniques, including TEM, HRTEM, HAADF-STEM, XRD, XPS, and UV-vis spectroscopy might focus on addressing the following critical issues: (i) the deposition behavior of metals on semiconductor nanocrystals (wrap around, or only at single/multiple sites); (ii) the morphology change of semiconductor substrates after metal deposition; (iii) the size and morphology of the metal domains; and (iv) the physical and chemical properties of the nanocomposites. (3) Understanding the underlying chemistry for the nanocomposite systems. The systematic identification of the behaviors of the nanocomposites should include the strain or tensile effect of semiconductor substrate particles on the metal components, the relationship between the physical/chemical properties and the particle features, and the coupling effects between the different nanocomposite domains. The mechanistic understanding of the underlying chemistry of the nanocomposite systems might be valuable for the development of more metal-based nanocomposites with interesting architectures and tailored functionalities. (4) Exploration of the catalytic activity of the nanocomposites for energy conversion. The as-synthesized noble metal-based nanocomposites may possess superior properties for highly efficient energy conversion due to their ultrafine size, high stability, ideal morphology, and interesting energy level alignment, some of which are difficult or impossible to achieve by commercial catalysts. The application of these nanocomposites toward direct methanol fuel cells and photocatalysis will accordingly become hot topics. Specific future goals should include the evaluation of the nanocomposites as catalysts for energy conversion, the devices designed with improved performance, efficiency, durability and reduced costs, and the realization of the commercialization of the catalysts as a long-term objective. Furthermore, the catalytic activity of these composite nanomaterials in pharmaceutical syntheses, e.g., in hydrogenation, reductive amination, transfer hydrogenation, hydroamination, might be tested in terms of yield, enantioselectivity, TON (turnover numbers) and recyclability. (5) Exploration of other scientific-related issues. Many interesting scientific findings might be derived from the nanocomposites synthesis and their characterization. For example, the Ostwald ripening process was dynamically observed during the diffusion of Au in Ag2S nanocrystals. This observation could be used to interpret why the diffusion process does not lead to a homogeneous distribution of Au across the particle. These interesting scientific issues or physical/chemical processes would not only satisfy everlasting human curiosity, but also promise new advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Human being is at the interface of the number of forefront research areas in this period of technological development. Through this research effort, researchers aim to establish a general materials synthesis methodology to influence a rethinking of the current processing technologies: to move towards molecular-level control and regulation, and away from the “top-down” approach and the stringent and expensive control, inherent in conventional manufacturing processes.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the 100 Talents Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, National Natural Science Foundation of China (no.: 21173226, 21376247), and State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Complex Systems, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (MPCS-2012-A-11) is gratefully acknowledged.
Notes and references
Y. Xiong and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wiley, T. Herricks, Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1733 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4065 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gole and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3633 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Ha, H. J. Koo and B. H. Chung, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1123 CAS .
Y. Sun, B. Mayers and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 675 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Wiley, Z. Wang, J. Wei, Y. Yin, D. H. Cobden and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, S. Dong and E. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Xie, J. Y. Lee, Y. P. Ting and J. P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu and V. W.-W. Yam, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Seo, J. C. Park and H. Song, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem., 2006, 16, 649 CAS .
F. Caruso, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 413 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Caswell, C. M. Bender and C. J. Murphy, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 667 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kim and J. H. Song, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, B. Ankamwar, A. Singh, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Kim, M. Kim, W. Y. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Toshima and T. Yonezawa, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1179 RSC .
R. Davies, G. A. Schurr, P. Meenan, R. D. Nelson, H. E. Bergna, C. A. S. Brevett and R. H. Goldbaum, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1264 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 4329 CrossRef .
T. A. Taton, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, Science, 2000, 289, 1757 CrossRef CAS .
N. Krasteva, I. Besnard, B. Guse, R. E. Bauer, K. Mullen, A. Yasuda and T. Vossmeyer, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 551 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy and N. R. Jana, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 80 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Habas, H. Lee, V. Radmilovic, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, L. Wang, D. Mott, P. N. Njoki, Y. Lin, T. He, Z. Xu, B. N. Wanjala, I. S. Lim and C. Zhong, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4342 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, J. Y. Park, C.-K. Tsung, Y. Yamada, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, X. Yang, M. B. Vukmirović, B. E. Koel, J. Jiao, G. Peng, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adžič, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. E. Hu, Q. Wang, K. Gaskell, A. I. Frenkel, G. S. Jackson and B. Eichhorn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, K. Sasaki and R. R. Adžič, Science, 2007, 315, 220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Dong and E. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2389 CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Hung and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. C. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, J. W. Hong, Y. W. Lee, M. Kim, D. Kim and W. S. Yun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 122, 10395 CrossRef .
F. Ye, H. Liu, W. Hu, J. Zhong, Y. Chen, H. Cao and J. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 2898 RSC .
T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg, I. Popov, R. Costi and U. Banin, Science, 2004, 304, 1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Shi, H. Zeng, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, M. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, L. Levina, E. H. Sargent and S. O. Kelley, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4025 RSC .
R. Costi, A. E. Saunders, E. Elmalem, A. Salant and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Elmalem, A. E. Saunders, R. Costi, A. Salant and U. Banin, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4312 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Habas, P. D. Yang and T. Mokari, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3187 RSC .
J. Yang, E. H. Sargent, S. O. Kelley and J. Y. Ying, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhao, L. Li, T. Huang and L. Qi, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2418 RSC .
M. Li, X. F. Yu, S. Liang, X. N. Peng, Z. J. Yang, Y. L. Wang and Q. Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1788 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, H. Liu, Y. Wei, X. Wu, R. Yue, Y. Chen and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11750 RSC .
W. Hu, H. Liu, F. Ye, Y. Ding and J. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 7049 RSC .
K. K. Haldar, G. Sinha, J. Lahtinen and A. Patra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6266 CAS .
X. Ding, Y. Zou and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23169 RSC .
N. E. Motl, J. F. Bondi and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1552 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, X. Li, H. Li, L. Li, X. Hong, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1587 CAS .
J. Yang, X. Chen, F. Ye, C. Wang, Y. Zheng and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9088 RSC .
J. Yang and J. Y. Ying, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 4637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Carbone and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin and X. Gao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Lee and M. Ouyang, Nature, 2010, 466, 91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jakob and H. Levanon, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 353 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Salant, E. Amitay-Sadovsky and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ma, J. He, K. Rajiv, S. Tang, Y. Yang and M. Nogami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Chen, J. Wang, D. Wang and C. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 161911 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Dawson and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 96 CrossRef .
E. Formo, E. Lee, D. Campbell and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gong, X. Wang, Y. Du and Q. Wang, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 024707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Lee, E. V. Shevchenko and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kraeutler and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 4317 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baba, S. Nakabayashi and A. Fujishima, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1902 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pastoriza-Santos, D. S. Koktysh, A. A. Mamedov, M. Giersig, N. A. Kotov and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2731 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chandrasekharan and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10851 CrossRef CAS .
V. Subramanian, E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11439 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirakawa and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mokari, C. G. Sztrum, A. Salant, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Nat. Mater., 2005, 14, 855 CrossRef .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Fan, Y. Ding, D. Y. Liu, Z. Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Saunders, I. Popov and U. Banin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Menagen, D. Mocatta, A. Salant, I. Popov, D. Dorfs and U. Banin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6900 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mokari, A. Aharoni, I. Popov and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Casavola, V. Grillo, E. Carlino, C. Giannini, F. Gozzo, E. F. Pinel, M. A. Garcia, L. Manna, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, M. Chen, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang, R. L. White and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Q. Zhang, A. V. Nurmikko and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, H. I. Elim, Q. Zhang, J. Y. Lee and W. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, H. Yu, E. V. Shevchenko, A. Lobo and C. B. Murray, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14049 CAS .
H. Gu, R. Zheng, X. Zhang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jen-La Plante, S. E. Habas, B. D. Yuhas, D. J. Gargas and T. Mokari, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3662 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhou, J. C. Bao and Z. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 384 RSC .
G. Carotenuto and L. Nicolais, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1038 RSC .
W. Wang, S. Efrima and O. Regev, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 602 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lala, S. P. Lalbegi, S. D. Adyanthaya and M. Sastry, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 3766 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sastry, Curr. Sci., 2003, 85, 1735 CAS .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1672 RSC .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cushing, V. L. Kolesnichenko and C. J. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801 RSC .
M. Brust, J. Fink, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and C. Kiely, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 1655 RSC .
K. Meguro, M. Torizuka and K. Esumi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1988, 61, 341 CrossRef CAS .
K. Meguro, T. Tano, K. Torigoe, H. Nakamura and K. Esumi, Colloids Surf., 1988/1989, 34, 381 Search PubMed .
M. J. Hostetler, J. E. Wingate, C. J. Zhong, J. E. Harris, R. W. Vachet, M. R. Clark, J. D. Londono, S. J. Green, J. J. Stokes, G. D. Wignall, G. L. Glish, M. D. Porter, N. D. Evans and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 17 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Donkers, Y. Song and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 4703 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Jimenez, D. G. Georganopoulou, R. J. White, A. S. Harper, A. J. Mills, D. Lee and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Terrill, T. A. Postlethwaite, C. H. Chen, C. D. Poon, A. Terzis, A. Chen, J. E. Hutchison, M. R. Clark, G. Wignall, J. D. Londono, R. Superfine, M. Falvo, C. S. Johnson Jr, E. T. Samulski and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 12537 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Johnson, S. D. Evans and R. Brydson, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 6639 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Porter Jr, D. Ji, S. L. Westcott, M. Graupe, R. S. Czernuszewicz, N. J. Halas and T. R. Lee, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 7378 CrossRef .
R. L. Whetten, J. T. Khoury, M. M. Alvarez, S. Murthy, I. Vezmar, Z. L. Wang, P. W. Stephens, C. L. Cleveland, W. D. Luedtke and U. Landman, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, A. C. Templeton and R. W. Murray, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 3543 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Schaaff, M. N. Shafigullin, J. T. Khoury, I. Vezmar, R. L. Whetten, W. G. Cullen, P. N. First, C. Gutierrez-Wing, J. Ascensio and M. J. Jose-Yacaman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7885 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Schaaff and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9394 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Horswell, C. J. Kiely, I. A. O'Neil and D. J. Schiffrin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 5573 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Leff, L. Brandt and J. R. Heath, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 4723 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wikander, C. Petit, K. Holmberg and M. P. Pileni, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Selvakannan, S. Mandal, R. Pasricha and M. Sastry, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 279, 124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Grace and K. Pandian, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 2278 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen and X. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 2215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, S. Sun, W. Zhang and Z. Yin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 273, 463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demortiere and C. Petit, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 8575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Schaaff and A. J. Rodinone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10416 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, X. Fu, X. Zhou and H. Zhengshui, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 2097 RSC .
W. Song, C. Wu, H. Yin, X. Liu, P. Sa and J. Hu, Anal. Lett., 2008, 41, 2844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee, T. C. Deivaraj and H.-P. Too, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 277, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and H.-P. Too, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2007, 588, 34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee, H.-P. Too, G.-M. Chow and L. M. Gan, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee, H.-P. Too and S. Valiyaveettil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. V. Sarathy, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 1997, 537 RSC .
K. V. Sarathy, G. Raina, R. T. Yadav, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9876 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Huang, J. M. Huang, J. A. Yang, J. J. Peng, Q. B. Zhang, F. Peng, H. J. Wang and H. Yu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 5920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Koch, A. Kahn, J.-J. Pireaux, J. Schwartz, R. L. Johnson and A. Elschner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao and L. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 359 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zhu, Y. H. Shen, A. J. Xie and L. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8871 RSC .
I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2465 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Z. Yang, J. Zhou, M. H. Yeung, W. Ni, H. Wu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Tang, K. Lee and M. Ouyang, Science, 2010, 327, 1634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. D. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 306, 1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Robinson, B. Sadtler, D. O. Demchenko, C. K. Erdonmez, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2007, 317, 355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, F. Ye, X. Ma, H. Cao and J. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 7740 RSC .
W. F. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem., 1897, 22, 289 CAS .
D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12278 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dukovic, M. G. Merkle, J. H. Nelson, S. M. Hughes and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4306 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Harbour, R. Wolkow and M. L. Hair, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 4026 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Reber and M. Rusek, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 824 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Frank, Z. Goren and I. Willner, Chem. Commun., 1986, 1029 Search PubMed .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher, L. S. Li and A. P. Alicisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. Bard, IUPAC, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1985 Search PubMed .
L. Carbone, S. Kudera, C. Giannini, G. Ciccarella, P. D. Cozzoli and L. Manna, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3952 RSC .
L. Motte and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4104 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Q. Lu and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Raveendran, Z. Shervani and Y. Ikushima, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2582 RSC .
X. Wang, W. Liu, J. Hao, X. Fu and B. Xu, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1664 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Q. Lu and S. Komarneni, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 856 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Brelle, J. Z. Zhang, L. Nguyen and P. K. Mehra, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 10194 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, R. Xing, Q. Shen, K. Jiang, J. Wang and Q. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Mo, M. P. Krebs and S. M. Yu, Small, 2006, 2, 526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Tan, J. Yang, J. Y. Lee and D. I. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14084 CAS .
D. E. Eastman, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 2, 1 CrossRef .
H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 4729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yeager, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1527 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Aricò, S. Srinivasan and V. Antonucci, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 133 CrossRef .
N. M. Marković and P. N. Ross, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 45, 117 CrossRef .
W. Chen, J. Kim, S. Sun and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3891 CAS .
I. Toda, H. Iqarashi, H. Uchida and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3750 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirović, K. Sasaki, A. U. Nilekar, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adžič, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. B. Vukmirović, Y. Xu, M. Mavrikakis and R. R. Adžič, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. R. Stamenković, B. Fowler, B. S. Mun, G. F. Wang, P. N. Ross, C. A. Lucas and N. M. Marković, Science, 2007, 315, 493 CrossRef PubMed .
V. R. Stamenković, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. F. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Marković, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu and D. W. Goodman, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 245 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baldauf and D. M. Kolb, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 11375 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Kibler and D. M. Kolb, Z. Phys. Chem., 2003, 217, 1265 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Chorkendorff and J. W. Niemantsverdriet, Concepts of modern catalysis and kinetics, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed.
L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz, R. Hoyer and D. M. Kolb, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar and S. Zou, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Naohara, S. Ye and K. Uosaki, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 3305 CrossRef CAS .
H. Naohara, S. Ye and K. Uosaki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 500, 435 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. El-Aziz and L. A. Kibler, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2002, 534, 107 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Kibler, A. M. El-Aziz and D. M. Kolb, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 199, 57 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yang, C. H. Cheng, W. Zhou, J. Y. Lee and Z. Liu, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 907 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yang, W. Zhou, C. H. Cheng, J. Y. Lee and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 119 CAS .
J. H. Yang, J. Y. Lee, Q. Zhang, W. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakrabortty, G. Xing, Y. Xu, S. W. Ngiam, N. Mishra, T. C. Sum and Y. Chan, Small, 2011, 7, 2847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Gasteiger, S. S. Kocha, B. Sompalli and F. T. Wagner, Appl. Catal., B, 2005, 56, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Song, L. Zhang, J. Zhang, H. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Antolini, T. Lopes and E. R. Gonzalez, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 461, 253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Adžič, J. Zhang, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirović, M. Shao, J. X. Wang, A. U. Nilekar, M. Mavrikakis, J. A. Valerio and F. Uribe, Top. Catal., 2007, 46, 249 CrossRef .
V. R. Stamenković, T. J. Schmidt, P. N. Ross and N. M. Narković, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 11970 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, A. V. Ruban and M. Mavrikakis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Allen, C. Lim, L. X. Yang, K. Scott and S. Roy, J. Power Sources, 2005, 143, 142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Gasteiger, N. M. Marković, P. N. Ross and E. J. Cairms, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 12020 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wang, S. R. Branković, Y. Zhu, J. C. Hanson and R. R. Adžič, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Antolini, J. R. C. Salgado and E. R. Gonzalez, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 580, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sheldon, P. E. Trudeau, T. Mokari, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shemesh, J. E. Macdonald, G. Menagen and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Shaviv, O. Schubert, M. Alves-Santos, G. Goldoni, R. D. Felice, F. Vallée, N. D. Fatti, U. Banin and C. Sönnichsen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, P. Zhou, Z. Dai, Z. Hu, P. Sun and J. Bao, New J. Chem., 2006, 30, 832 RSC .
F. Cheng, H. Ma, Y. Li and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, S. B. Hartono and G. Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, G. Liang, B. Zhang, Y. Kuang, X. Zhang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, H. Chen, Y. Li, L. Li, M. Lang and J. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2780 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, T. Ikoma, N. Hanagata and S. Kaskel, Small, 2010, 6, 471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Liang, H. M. Zhang, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, L. J. Wan and C. L. Bai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, J. Qu, Y. Chen, J. Li, F. Ye, J. Y. Lee and J. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, F. Ye, H. Cao, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6901 RSC .
Y. Feng, H. Liu, P. Wang, F. Ye, Q. Tan and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6204 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Valden, X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, Science, 1998, 281, 1647 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chen and D. W. Goodman, Science, 2004, 306, 252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Milone, R. Ingoglia and S. Galvagno, Gold Bull., 2006, 39, 54 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Liu, X. Q. Gong, J. Kohanoff, C. Sanchez and P. Hu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 266102 CrossRef .
N. Zheng and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Comotti, W. C. Li, B. Spliethoff and F. Schuth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Grunwaldt and A. Baiker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Molina and B. Hammer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 206102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, T. Kobayashi, H. Sano and N. Yamada, Chem. Lett., 1987, 2, 405 CrossRef .
M. Haruta, N. Yamada, T. Kobayashi and S. Iijima, J. Catal., 1989, 115, 301 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. K. Hashmi and G. J. Hutchings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7896 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, N. Na, S. Zhang, Y. Wu and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 129, 6062 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely, A. F. Carley, P. Landon and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2008, 321, 1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laursen and S. Linic, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 026101 CrossRef .
C. Wang, C. Xu, H. Zeng and S. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Brittan, H. Bliss and C. A. Walker, AIChE J., 1970, 16, 305 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Bond, L. R. Molloy and M. J. Fuller, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1975, 796 RSC .
J. P. Dauchot and J. P. Dath, J. Catal., 1984, 86, 373 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Desai, J. B. Butt and J. S. Dranoff, J. Catal., 1983, 79, 95 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Finch, N. A. Hodge, G. J. Hutchings, A. Meagher, Q. A. Pankhurst, M. R. H. Siddiqui, F. E. Wagner and R. Whyman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 485 RSC .
S. Golunski, R. Rajaram, N. Hodge, G. J. Hutchings and C. J. Kiely, Catal. Today, 2002, 72, 107 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kahlich, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Catal., 1999, 182, 430 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiao and Y. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2192 RSC .
G. Avgouropoulos, T. Ioannides, C. Papadopoulou, J. Batista, S. Hocevar and H. K. Matralis, Catal. Today, 2002, 75, 157 CrossRef CAS .
G. Avgouropoulos, T. Ioannides, H. K. Matralis, J. Batista and S. Hocevar, Catal. Lett., 2001, 73, 33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Landon, J. Ferguson, B. E. Solsona, T. Garcia, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely, S. E. Golunski and G. J. Hutchings, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3385 RSC .
P. Landon, J. Ferguson, B. E. Solsona, T. Garcia, S. Al-Sayari, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, C. J. Kiely, M. Makkee, J. A. Moulijn, A. Overweg, S. E. Golunski and G. J. Hutchings, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 199 RSC .
F. Moreau, G. C. Bond and A. O. Taylor, J. Catal., 2005, 231, 105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zanella, S. Giorgio, C. R. Henry and C. Louis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7634 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zanella, L. Delannoy and C. Louis, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 291, 62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zanella and C. Louis, Catal. Today, 2005, 107–108, 768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Li, M. Comotti and F. Schueth, J. Catal., 2006, 237, 190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Bond and D. T. Thompson, Gold Bull., 2000, 33, 41 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Kung, M. C. Kung and C. K. Costello, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 425 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chen and D. W. Goodman, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, H. Zeng, D. B. Robinson, S. Raoux, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang and G. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, J. Xie, D. Ho, C. Wang, N. Kohler, E. G. Walsh, J. R. Morgan, Y. E. Chin and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sokolov, M. Follen, J. Aaron, I. Pavlova, A. Malpica, R. Lotan and R. Richards-Kortum, Cancer Res., 2003, 63, 1999 CAS .
D. A. Schultz, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2003, 14, 13 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. El-Sayed, X. H. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Gupta, R. R. Naregalkar, V. D. Vaidya and M. Gupta, Nanomedicine, 2007, 2, 23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Lee, N. Lee, H. Kim, J. Kim, S. H. Choi, J. H. Kim, T. Kim, I. C. Song, S. P. Park, W. K. Moon and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cheng, S. Peng, C. Xu and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Xu, J. Xie, Z. Yang and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, R. Zou, Z. Chen, S. Yang, R. Li, Q. Su, Y. Han and X. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Lee, H. R. Cho, M. H. Oh, S. H. Lee, K. Kim, B. H. Kim, K. Shin, T. Y. Ahn, J. W. Choi, Y. W. Kim, S. H. Choi and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, K. Chen, H. Y. Lee, C. Xu, A. R. Hsu, S. Peng, X. Chen and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Wang and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Wei, H. Jiang and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, M. A. Garcia, N. A. F. Huls and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Daimon and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Yin, S. Dai and S. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, K. Sun, Y. Tian, X. Z. Li, M. J. Kramer, D. J. Sellmyer, J. E. Shield and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, S. Guo, Y. Lu and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, F. Zhang, M. Aronova, L. Zhu, X. Lin, Q. Quan, G. Liu, G. Zhang, K. Y. Choi, K. Kim, X. Sun, S. Lee, S. Sun, R. Leapman and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, N. A. F. Huls, M. H. Phan, S. Srinath, M. A. Garcia, Y. Lee, C. Wang, S. Sun, Ò. Iglesias and H. Srikanth, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 055702 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Gu, Z. Yang, J. Gao, C. K. Chang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, H. Gu, H. Shao, E. Devlin, G. C. Papaefthymiou and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4403 CrossRef CAS .
R. Costi, A. E. Saunders and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cozzoli, T. Pellegrino and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1195 RSC .
Y. Jang, J. Chung, S. Kim, S. W. Jun, B. H. Kim, D. W. Lee, B. M. Kim and T. Hyeon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2512 RSC .
H. Yin, C. Wang, H. Zhu, S. H. Overbury and S. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4357 RSC .
Y. Feng, J. Yang, H. Liu, F. Ye and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3813 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Feng, H. Cao and J. Yang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2014, 6, 252 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Choi, Y.-W. Jun, S.-I. Yeon, H. C. Kim, J.-S. Shin and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Figuerola, A. Fiore, R. D. Corato, A. Falqiu, C. Giannini, E. Micotti, A. Lascialfari, M. Corti, R. Cingolani, T. Pellegrino, P. D. Cozzoli and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Buck, J. F. Bondi and R. E. Schaak, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tauster, S. C. Fung, R. T. K. Baker and J. A. Horsley, Science, 1981, 211, 1121 CAS .
S. J. Tauster, Acc. Chem. Res., 1987, 20, 389 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Goodman, Catal. Lett., 2005, 99, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Horsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 2870 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohyama, A. Yamamoto, K. Teramura, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 187 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Qin, M. Lewandowski, Y.-N. Sun, S. Shaikhutdinov and H. J. Freund, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10209 CAS .
J. S. Beveridge, M. R. Buck, J. F. Bondi, R. Misra, P. Schiffer, R. E. Schaak and M. E. Williams, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Latham, R. S. Frietas, P. Schiffer and M. E. Williams, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77, 5055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Beveridge, J. R. Stephens, A. H. Latham and M. E. Williams, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 9618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, Y. Wang, L. H. Tan, M. Yang, L. S. Tan, Y. Chen and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, G. Chen, M. Yang, G. Silber and S. Xing, A systems approach towards the stoichiometry-controlled heteroassembly of nanoparticles, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 83 Search PubMed .
B. M. Leonard, M. E. Anderson, K. D. Oyler, T.-H. Phan and R. E. Schaak, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, H. Liu, Q. Tan and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 42839 RSC .
C. Burda, X. B. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Laurent, D. Forge, M. Port, A. Roch, C. Robic, L. V. Elst and R. N. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Cao, Synthesis properties and applications, Imperial College Press, London,  2004 Search PubMed .
P. C. Anderson and K. L. Rowlen, Appl. Spectrosc., 2002, 56, 124A CrossRef .
E. Hutter and J. H. Fendler, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1685 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Lim, Z. Zhang, H. Y. Low and W. S. Chin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Lou, X. B. Wang, M. Chen, W. M. Liu and J. C. Hao, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 225607 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Du, B. Xu, T. Fu, M. Cai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Peng, Y. Du and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. Hong, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, F. Li, H. Dai and Q. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, Z.-Q. Tian, C.-N. Zhu, Z.-L. Zhang and D.-W. Pang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, T. Xie, Q. Peng and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhu and Z. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Demchenko, R. D. Robinson, B. Sadtler, C. K. Erdonmez, A. P. Alivisatos and L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peng, B. Sadtler, A. P. Alivisatos and R. J. Saykally, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5879 CAS .
M. Pang, J. Hu and H. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, W. Hu, F. Ye, Y. Ding and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 616 RSC .
V. K. LaMer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1950, 72, 4847 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Saraiva and J. F. de Oliveira, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2002, 23, 837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Svoboda, F. D. Fischer, P. Fratzl and A. Kroupa, Acta Mater., 2002, 50, 1369 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsukawa, K. Shirai, H. Yamaguchi and H. Katayama-Yoshida, Phys. B, 2007, 401–402, 151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Höglund, C. W. M. Castleton and S. Mirbt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 113201 CrossRef .
V. I. Baykov, P. A. Korzhavyi and B. Johansson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 177204 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Yu, A. Van der Ven and K. Thornton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 091908 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Van der Ven, H.-C. Yu, G. Ceder and K. Thornton, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2010, 55, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schmid, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 1709 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13226 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. R. Franchini, G. Bertoni, A. Falqui, C. Giannini, L. W. Wang and L. Manna, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1357 RSC .
A. Henglein, A. Holzwartb and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 8700 CrossRef CAS .
A. Courty, A.-I. Henry, N. Goubet and M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ramirez, L. Eradès, K. Philippot, P. Lecante and B. Chaudret, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2219 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Johnson, C. L. Johnson, S. J. May, S. Hirsch, M. W. Cole and J. E. Spanier, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 439 RSC .
M. Grouchko, I. Popov, V. Uvarov, S. Magdassi and A. Kamyshny, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 2501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Radziuk, W. Zhang, D. Shchukin and H. Möhwald, Small, 2010, 6, 545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Antolini, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 78, 563 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Perry and T. F. Fuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, S59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. H. Steele and A. Heinzel, Nature, 2004, 414, 345 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Waje and Y. Yan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A2183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, B. Lim, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng and H. Yang, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Xia, H. B. Wu, Y. Yan, X. W. Low and X. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, G. Lu and C.-Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Du, T. S. Zhao and W. W. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jia, M. C. Lefebvre, J. Halfyard, Z. Qi and P. G. Pickup, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gurau and E. S. Smotkin, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 339 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Kim, K.-W. Park, J.-H. Choi, I.-S. Park and Y.-H. Sung, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 571 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Sahu, S. Pitchumani, P. Sridhar and A. K. Shukla, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2009, 32, 285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Huang and P. K. Shen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 6875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Cai, F. Si, J. Ge, L. Liang, C. Liu and W. Xing, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2870 RSC .
C. Beauger, G. Lainé, A. Burr, A. Taguet, B. Otazaghine and A. Rigacci, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 130, 167 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Cameron, G. A. Hards, B. Harrison and R. J. Potter, Platinum Met. Rev., 1987, 31, 173 CAS .
R. Ferrigno, A. D. Stroock, T. D. Clark, M. Mayer and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Jayashree, D. Egas, J. S. Spendelow, D. Natarajan, L. J. Markoski and P. J. A. Kenis, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lam, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lam, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Lam, M. S. Dara, D. P. Wilkinson and K. Fatih, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 17, 22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tominaka, S. Ohta, H. Obata, T. Momma and T. Osaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cheng and S. Sun, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sitt, I. Hadar and U. Banin, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu and S. Sun, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Banin, Y. Ben-Shahar and K. Vinokurov, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 2014, 24, 33 CrossRef CAS .
N. Miyachi, F. Kanada and M. Shibasaki, J. Org. Chem., 1989, 54, 3511 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Huffman, N. Yasuda, A. E. Decamp and E. J. J. Grabowski, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 1590 CrossRef CAS .
M. Miura, M. Enna, K. Okuro and M. Nomura, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 4999 CrossRef CAS .
T. Naota, H. Takaya and S.-I. Murahashi, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 2599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Fleming and J. Du Bois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zani and C. Bolm, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4263 RSC .
P. Li, Y. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, Y.-Q. Tu, M. Wang, F.-M. Zhang and C.-A. Fan, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gommermann and P. Knochel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, Z. Li and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 4473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao and C.-J. Li, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 4395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Reddy, N. S. Babu, I. Suryanarayana, P. S. S. Prasad and N. Lingaiah, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 7563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, A. M. Santos, E. Herdtweck, J. Mink and F. E. Kühn, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 366 RSC .
C. Wei and C.-J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Huang, X. Yao and C.-J. Li, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2006, 348, 1528 CrossRef CAS .
V. K.-Y. Lo, Y. Liu, M.-K. Wong and C.-M. Che, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K.-Y. Lo, K. K.-Y. Kung, M.-K. Wong and C.-M. Che, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Fischer and E. M. Carreira, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 4319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-H. Li and L. Wang, Chin. J. Chem., 2005, 23, 1076 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Li and C. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2002, 268 RSC .
B. M. Choudary, C. Sridhar, M. L. Kantam and B. Sreedhar, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 7319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, P. Li and L. Wang, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2008, 2255 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li and L. Wang, Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 5455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Kantam, S. Laha, J. Yadav and S. Bhargava, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 3083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, C. Wei, L. Chen, R. S. Varma and C.-J. Li, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 2443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kidwai, V. Bansal, A. Kumar and S. Mozumdar, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 742 RSC .
X. Zhang and A. Corma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Kantam, B. V. Prakash, C. R. V. Reddy and B. Sreedhar, Synlett, 2005, 2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Chng, J. Yang, Y. Wei and J. Y. Ying, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2887 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Collins, R. Ness, R. W. Tyl, N. Krivanek, N. A. Esmen and T. A. Hall, Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2001, 34, 17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Jones, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 4535 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Spivey, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1987, 26, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scirè, S. Minicò, C. Crisafulli and S. Galvagno, Catal. Commun., 2001, 2, 229 CrossRef .
S. Scirè, S. Minicò, C. Crisafulli, C. Satriano and A. Pistone, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 40, 43 CrossRef .
T. Garcia, W. Weng, B. Solsona, E. Carter, A. F. Carley, C. J. Kiely and S. H. Taylor, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1367 CAS .
B. Solsona, E. Aylón, R. Murillo, A. M. Mastral, A. Monzonís, S. Agouram, R. E. Davies, S. H. Taylor and T. Garcia, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 187, 544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, F. Liu, Y. Zhai, H. Ariga, N. Yi, Y. Liu, K. Asakura, M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos and H. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Taylor, W. Zhou, T. Garcia, B. Solsona, A. F. Carley, C. J. Kiely and S. H. Taylor, J. Catal., 2012, 285, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, K. Yang, J. Li, W. Tang, J. Xu, H. Liu, R. Yue and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22719 CAS .
Z. Li, K. Yang, G. Liu, G. Deng, J. Li, G. Li, R. Yue, J. Yang and Y. Chen, Catal. Lett., 2014, 144, 1080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Hui Liu	Hui Liu studied Environmental Engineering at South-Central University for Nationalities (B.S. 2008) and Organic Chemistry at the University of Science and Technology, Beijing (M.S. 2010). She received her PhD with Prof. Jun YANG at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS) in 2014 and started as an Assistant Professor of the Materials for Energy Conversion and Environmental Remediation (MECER) Group at IPE-CAS in the same year. Her research interests focus on the synthesis of novel composite nanomaterials for energy conversion and environmental remediation, electrocatalysis, and the phase transfer-based extraction of heavy metals.
Yan Feng	Yan Feng received her BSc in Applied Chemistry in 2012 from the University of Jinan. She is currently a PhD student at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS). Her research focuses on the study of Pt-based nanocomposites as selective catalysts in direct methanol fuel cell reactions.
Dong Chen	Dong Chen received his Master's degree from the College of Environmental and Energy Engineering in 2013 at the Beijing University of Technology. He is currently a PhD student at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS). His research focuses on the design and synthesis of Pd-based electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction and formic acid oxidation in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs).
Chengyin Li	Chengyin Li received his BSc in Chemical Engineering in 2013 from Nanjing University of Science and Technology. He is currently a Master's student at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS). His research focuses on the study of phase transfer-based extraction for the recovery of metal ions and its application in nanocrystal synthesis.
Penglei Cui	Penglei Cui received her PhD in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2013, and then became an Assistant Professor at the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences (IPE-CAS) in 2014. Her research interests focus on ionic liquid-based synthesis and the structural tuning of multi-metallic heterogeneous nanomaterials.
Jun Yang	Jun Yang received his PhD in Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering in 2006 from the National University of Singapore (with Professor Jim Yang LEE). After completing postdoctoral research at Boston College and the University of Toronto, he joined the Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, Singapore in 2007. In 2010, he moved to the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as the leader of the Group of Materials for Energy Conversion and Environmental Remediation (MECER). His main research interests include (i) applied catalysis, (ii) nanocomposites for energy conversion, (iii) the synthesis and application of novel nanocrystalline materials, and (iv) separation techniques.
AuCl4−(aq) + N(C8H17)4+(C6H5Me) → N(C8H17)4+AuCl4−(C6H5Me)	(1)
mAuCl4−(C6H5Me) + nC12H25SH(C6H5Me) + 3me− → 4mCl−(aq) + (Aum)(C12H25SH)n(C6H5Me)	(2)

 	Fig. 1  TEM images of platinum nanocrystals obtained by phase-transfer method using different alkylamines as stabilizing agents: (A) C6NH2, (B) C7NH2, (C) C8NH2, (D) C9NH2, (E) C10NH2, (F) C12NH2, (G) C16NH2, and (H) C18NH2. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Images showing the successful transfer of Co(II), Os(III), Rh(III), Ru(III), Au(III), and Ir(III) metal ions from an aqueous phase to toluene. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of metal nanoparticles. (a) Ag derived with HDD. (b) Au, (c) worm-like Pd, and (d) Pt from Pt(IV) derived with TBAB. Alloy nanoparticles of (e) Ag–Au, (f) Pd–Pt, (g) Pt–Rh, and (h) Pt–Ru synthesized by co-reduction of the metal precursors with TBAB. Core–shell nanoparticles of (i) 7.4 nm Au@Ag, (j) 12.7 nm Au@Ag, (k) 3.9 nm Pt@Ag, and (l) 9.2 nm Pt@Ag synthesized by seed-mediated growth. Semiconductor nanocrystals of (m) Ag2S, (n) CdS, (o) HgS, and (p) PbS. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  Effect of increasing Au/rod molar ratio on growth. The top panels show the experimental results. (a) Original rods of dimension 25 × 4 nm2. (b) NDBs after adding 1.3 μmol of gold precursors to (a). (c) NBTs after adding 1.3 μmol of gold precursors to (b). The lower panels show the theoretical results. (d) Presentation of the system on a two-dimensional lattice. (e) Image of the final morphology at a low gold concentration (the two-dimensional gold density is ρg = 0.001) yielding a two-sided growth. (f) Image of the final morphology at a high gold density (ρg = 0.01) showing a one-sided growth. Reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the growth process of Au nanocrystals onto CdS nanorods. Without oxygen, gold grows only at one tip. In the presence of oxygen, the Cd-terminated end is etched, providing a second high-energy site for gold growth, followed by a side growth. With long reaction times, the gold growth ceases and electrochemical ripening leads to the migration of gold from the smallest nanocrystals to the largest nanocrystal. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of a light-induced charge separation mechanism in a CdSe–Au composite particle in which the photogenerated electron–hole pair separates so that the electron resides at the gold tip and the hole at the CdSe nanorod. The scheme also depicts the transfer of the hole to the scavenger and the reduction of the methylene blue molecule upon electron transfer from the gold tip. The inset shows the energy band alignment between CdSe and Au. (b) TEM image of CdSe–Au nanocomposites synthesized in aqueous solution. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of InAs nanocrystals after treatment with gold in toluene solution as a function of increasing gold concentration: (a) after adding 2.75 × 10−6 mol of gold; (b) after adding 5.5 × 10−6 mol of gold. Reproduced from ref. 85 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of the ordered array of PbS–Au4 heterogeneous nanostructures; (c and d) TEM images of a typical PbS–Au4 nanostructure; (e) HRTEM image of a typical PbS–Au4 nanostructure; (f) SAED pattern; and (g) FFT pattern obtained from the ordered array of PbS–Au4 heterogeneous nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM images (a, c, and d) and HRTEM image (b) of Fe3O4–Au–PbSe (a and b) and Fe3O4–Au–PbS (c and d) ternary hybrid nanoparticles. The scale bars are 20 nm in (a), (c), and (d) and 4 nm in (b). Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of PbS nanostars. (b), (c) TEM images. (d), (e) HRTEM images and (f) XRD pattern of PbS–Au nanostar-nanoparticle heterodimers formed with [PbS] = 0.48 mM at 27 °C. The HRTEM images shown in (d) and (e) correspond to the framed areas 1 and 2 in (c), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  TEM images of (a) PbS nanocrystals and (b–d) Au–PbS nanostructures. (c) Cubic Au–PbS nanostructures synthesized at 150 °C. (d) Representative high-resolution TEM image of an Au–PbS core–shell nanostructure. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Growth scheme of Au@CdS core–shell nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  TEM images of CdS–Au nanocomposites synthesized after physically mixing CdS nanocrystals and Au3+ precursors in toluene for 1 min (a), 5 min (b), 10 min (c), and 30 min (d). Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM (a, c, e, g, and i) and HRTEM images (b, d, f, h, and j) of CdS–Au nanocomposites at CdS/Au molar ratio of 9:1 (a and b), 3:1 (c and d), 1:1 (e and f), 1:3 (g and h), and 1:6 (i and j), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM (a, c, e, g, and i) and HRTEM images (b, d, f, h, and j) of Ag2S–Au (a and b), CuS–Au (c and d), CdS–Au (e and f), PbS–Au (g and h), and HgS–Au nanocomposites (i and j), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 145 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Photodeposition of Pt on CdS nanorods. (a) TEM images of CdS nanorods before irradiation and (b) the photodeposition product. After exposure to light, Pt nanoparticles appear along the length of the nanorods. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–d) Transmission electron microscopy images of Pt growth on CdSe nanorods in aqueous solutions under different pH conditions (scale bars: 50 nm). (a) Isolated nanorods after Pt growth at pH 10. The inset shows the original rod sample with dimensions of 70 nm × 8 nm. (b) An intermediate state is obtained at pH 7. (c and d) pH 4 produces a nanonet structure in which Pt grows along the rod surface. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Selective growth of Pt nanoparticles with different sizes on CdS nanorods, (A) CdS rods (120 nm × 4 nm), (B) CdS with small single Pt tips (4.3 nm), (C) CdS with larger double Pt tips (5.7 nm), (D) XRD patterns of CdS rods and Pt–CdS hybrid structures with corresponding CdS and Pt bulk patterns (the stick patterns shown above and below, respectively), and (E) selected area EDS spectrum of a single Pt tip, with the inset showing an HRTEM image of two Pt–CdS hybrids. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the as-prepared Ag2S nanocrystals.  = 7.2 nm, σ = 0.6 nm,  = 8.4%. σ and  are the standard derivation and the relative standard derivation, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  TEM images of binary Ag2S–Au (a), Ag2S–Pt (b), Ag2S–Os (c), Ag2S–Pd (d), multiple Ag2S–Au–Pt (e), Ag2S–Au–Os (f), Ag2S–Pt–Os (g), and Ag2S–Au–Pt–Os (h) nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  Energy level diagram for Ag2S–noble metal nanocomposites predicting the intraparticle charge transfer between different domains. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  Core–shell CdSe–Pt nanocomposites synthesized in an aqueous phase using 10 nm CdSe cores: (a) TEM image, (b) STEM image, (c) elemental profile, and (d) HRTEM image of core–shell CdSe–Pt nanocomposites at a CdSe–Pt molar ratio of 1:1; (e and f) HRTEM images of core–shell CdSe@Pt nanocomposites at a CdSe–Pt molar ratio of 2:1 and 1:2, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  Inside-out diffusion of Ag in core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles. (a) TEM and (b) HRTEM images of the original core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles; (c) TEM and (d) HRTEM images of the core–shell Ag–Pt nanoparticles after aging in toluene for seven months at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration showing the formation of nanocomposites consisting of Ag2S and metal nanoparticles with a hollow interior based on the inside-out diffusion of Ag+ in Ag-containing core–shell nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 210 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  TEM images of core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt (a), Ag2S–cage-bell Au–Pt (b); HRTEM images of the nanocomposites of Ag2S–cage-bell Au–Pt (c); UV-visible spectra of core–shell–shell Au–Ag–Pt nanoparticles before and after treatment with elemental sulfur (d). Reproduced from ref. 210 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  TEM image (a), HRTEM image (b), STEM image (c), line-scan analysis (d), and elemental mapping (e–i) of a single particle (c) of the ternary Ag2S–Au–hPt nanocomposites as prepared by depositing Au on the Ag2S–hPt heterodimers in toluene at room temperature. Reproduced from ref. 211 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 27  Oxidation efficiency of CO as a function of duration time. ○ 5 atom% Au/α-Fe2O3; Δ 5 atom% Au/Co3O4; □ 10 atom% Au/NiO; ◇ hopcalite catalyst; Catalysts 0.20 g, CO 1 vol% air 66 mL min−1. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from the Chemical Society of Japan.	 

 	Fig. 28  A representation of the early stages of the oxidation of carbon monoxide at the periphery of an active gold particle. On the left-hand side, a carbon monoxide molecule is chemisorbed on a low coordination number gold atom, and a hydroxyl ion moves from the support to an Au3+ ion, creating an anion vacancy. On the right-hand side, they have reacted to form a carboxylate group, and an oxygen molecule occupies the anion vacancy as O2−; this then oxidizes the carboxylate group by abstracting a hydrogen atom, forming carbon dioxide, and the resulting hydroperoxide ion HO2− then oxidizes a further carboxylate species forming another carbon dioxide and restoring the two hydroxyl ions to the support surface. This completes the catalytic cycle. No attempt is made to suggest the charges carried by the reacting species. Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from Springer.	 

 	Fig. 29  High-magnification aberration-corrected STEM-HAADF images of (A and B) the inactive and (C and D) the active Au–FeOx catalysts acquired with the aberration-corrected JEOL 2200FS. The white circles indicate the presence of individual Au atoms, whereas the black circles indicate subnanometer Au clusters consisting of only a few atoms. Note the presence and image intensity difference of the two distinct cluster-types: in (C), there are 0.5 nm higher-contrast clusters, whereas in (D) 0.2–0.3 nm low-contrast clusters dominate. This difference indicates that bilayer and monolayer subnanometer Au clusters are present in the active catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from Science.	 

 	Fig. 30  TEM and STEM images of dumbbell-like Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles: (A) TEM image of the 3–14 nm Au–Fe3O4 particles; (B) TEM image of 8–14 nm Au–Fe3O4 particles; (C) HAADF-STEM image of 8–9 nm Au–Fe3O4 particles; and (D) HRTEM image of an 8–12 nm Au–Fe3O4 particle. The specimens for TEM and STEM analyses were prepared by the room-temperature deposition of the hexane dispersions of the particles on carbon-coated copper grids. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) T2-weighted MRI images of (i) 20 nm Fe3O4, (ii) 3–20 nm Au–Fe3O4, (iii) 8–20 nm Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles, and (iv) A431 cells labeled with 8–20 nm Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles. (b) Reflection images of A431 cells labeled with 8–20 nm Au–Fe3O4 nanoparticles. (c and d) Images of A431 cells labeled with 8–20 nm dumbbell particles, floating in the medium before (c) and after (d) an external magnetic field was applied (the field gradient in the sample area was in the range 500–100 G). The dashed circles denote individual cells; the numbers label the same cells in (c) and (d); the arrow and H indicate the direction of the applied magnetic field. Reproduced from ref. 248 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  “Tug-of-war” in Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites. (a) Schematic of the Au2 overgrowth on the Au1 domain and the Au1 domain detachment from Fe3O4 domain, forming the new dumbbell-like Au1–Au2 and dented Fe3O4 nanoparticles. (b–f) TEM images of Au–Fe3O4 seeding particles (b), and Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites collected at 1 h (c), 3 h (d), and 6 h (e) in the synthesis. The gaps between Au1 and Fe3O4 in the Au2–Au1–Fe3O4 nanocomposites have been labeled with red arrows in (d). Reproduced from ref. 260 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic illustration showing the selective etching of Au–Fe3O4 nanocomposites for the preparation of Au and dented Fe3O4 nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic illustration showing the synthesis of dimeric Ag–Fe3O4 nanocomposites at the liquid–liquid interface. Reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic illustration showing high order nanocomposites, in which the multiple nanoscale domains are fused together by solid-state interfaces.	 

 	Fig. 36  Stepwise construction of M–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers (M = Ag, Au, Ni, Pd) (a), schematic showing the multistep synthesis of M–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers, along with the most significant possible products and their observed frequencies (expressed as the percentage of observed heterotrimers, not total yield). Representative TEM images showing the Pt nanoparticle seeds (b), Pt–Fe3O4 heterodimers (c) and Au–Pt–Fe3O4 (d), Ag–Pt–Fe3O4 (e), Ni–Pt–Fe3O4 (f) and Pd–Pt–Fe3O4 (g) heterotrimers. All the scale bars are 25 nm. (h), Images of a vial that contains Au–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers in hexane (left), which respond to an external Nd–Fe–B magnet; the same vial with Au–Pt–Fe3O4 heterotrimers in a larger volume of hexanes (middle); and the same vial after precipitation of the heterotrimers with ethanol (right). The precipitated heterotrimers collect next to the external magnet. Reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 37  TEM (a and c) and HRTEM images (b and d) of RuO2–C (a and b) and RuO2–Au–C nanocomposites (c and d) as-prepared by a solvothermal strategy and a mutual oxidation–reduction approach, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 291 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 38  TEM images of Ag2S nanocrystals obtained by reacting DDA–Ag+ complexes with elemental sulfur in toluene at 283 K at different times: (a) 1 h, (b) 2 h, (c) 5 h, (d) 15 h, (e) 25 h, (f) 40 h, (g) 80 h, and (h) 1 month. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 39  TEM (a, c, e and f) and HRTEM images (b and d) of Ag2S–Au heterodimers (a and b), core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles at Ag2S–Au molar ratios of 2:1 (c and d), 1:1 (e), and 1:2 (f), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 40  Diffusion of Au from the inner core to the surface of core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles: (a and b) TEM images, (c and d) STEM images, and (e and f) elemental profiles of the core–shell Au@Ag2S nanoparticles (a, c and e) as-prepared and (b, d and f) after 72 hours of aging. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  Ostwald ripening observed during the diffusion of Au in Ag2S. Initially, Au homogeneously diffused in Ag2S but then evolved as growing nanocrystals on the Ag2S surface due to Ostwald ripening. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 42  Coalescence of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals: (a–e) TEM images of the physical mixture of Ag2S and Au nanocrystals taken at 0 h, 7 h, 12 h, 24 h, and 36 h, respectively; (f) HAADF-STEM image of Ag2S–Au heterodimers; (g) Au, Ag, and S elemental distributions across a single Ag2S–Au heterodimer (white line indicated in (f)); (h) HRTEM image of a single Ag2S–Au heterodimer. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 43  (a) Au 4f XPS spectra of the original Au nanocrystals and the resulting Ag2S–Au heterodimers; (b) Energy level diagram for Ag2S–Au heterodimers, which predicts the intraparticle charge transfer from Au to Ag2S; (c) Schematic for the coalescence between Au and Ag2S nanocrystals at room temperature via the equilibration of the Fermi levels in the two different types of particles. Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 44  Schematic of the fabrication of PbSe–Au nanocomposites at different PbSe–Au molar ratios. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 45  Schematic illustration of the construction of ternary Au@Ag2S–Pt nanocomposites and the energy level alignment in Ag2S–Au–Pt nanocomposites (a), schematic illustration of the differential diffusion and reaction of methanol and oxygen in CBS Pt–Ru nanoparticles (b), and schematic illustration of the membraneless DMFC (c). Reproduced from ref. 274 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 46  TEM images of (a) CdS, (b) CdSe and (c) PbS semiconductor nanocrystals, and (d) CdS–Au, (e) CdSe–Au, and (f) PbS–Au nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 388 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 47  Schematic illustration showing the tentative mechanism of the PbS–Au catalyzed three-component coupling of an aldehyde, amine and alkyne in water. Reproduced from ref. 388 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
