Efficient perovskite solar cells by combination use of Au nanoparticles and insulating metal oxide  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR09972F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR09972F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2852-2864Efficient perovskite solar cells by combination use of Au nanoparticles and insulating metal oxide

        
          
            Chenxi 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Luo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Shi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Liyang 
            Yue
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zengbo 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohong 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Sumei 
            Huang
          
        
      *a
aEngineering Research Center for Nanophotonics & Advanced Instrument, Ministry of Education, School of Physics and Materials Science, East China Normal University, North Zhongshan Rd. 3663, Shanghai 200062, P. R. China. E-mail: smhuang@phy.ecnu.edu.cn
bNew Energy Technology Center, Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, 865 Chang Ning Road, Shanghai 200050, P. R. China
cSchool of Electronic Engineering, Bangor University, Bangor LL57 1UT, UK
Received 
      29th December 2016
    , Accepted 26th January 2017First published on 27th January 2017AbstractAchieving high open-circuit voltage and high short-circuit current density simultaneously is a big challenge in the development of highly efficient perovskite solar cells, due to the complex excitonic nature of hybrid organic–inorganic semiconductors. Herein, we developed a facile and effective method to fabricate efficient plasmonic PSC devices. The solar cells were prepared by incorporating Au nanoparticles (NPs) into mesoporous TiO2 films and depositing a MgO passivation film on the Au NP-modified mesoporous titania via wet spinning and pyrolysis of magnesium salt. The PSCs obtained by combining Au NPs and MgO demonstrated a high power conversion efficiency of 16.1%, with both a high open-circuit voltage of 1.09 V and a high short-circuit current density of 21.76 mA cm−2. The device achieved a 34.2% improvement in the power conversion efficiency compared with a device based on pure TiO2. Moreover, a significant improvement of the UV stability in the perovskite solar cell was achieved due to the combined use of Au NPs and insulating MgO. The fundamental optics and physics behind the regulation of energy flow in the perovskite solar cell and the concept of using Au NPs and MgO to improve the device performance were explored. The results indicate that the combined use of Au NPs and a MgO passivation film is an effective way to design high performance and high stability organic–inorganic perovskite photovoltaic materials.
1. Introduction
Photovoltaic devices have the potential to be prime candidates for future energy conversion and may make a large contribution towards solving the problem of climate change. In particular, inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have made a lasting impression on the scientific community because of their rapid progress as a highly efficient and low cost technology. The first well-known PSCs exploited the device structure of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), by replacing dye molecules with perovskite crystals in 2009. In only seven years since then, power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) above 22% have already been reported and certified.1–4 The latest certified PCE value of 22.1% is approaching that of commercial monocrystalline silicon solar cells.4 Even though this progress has been rapid and unprecedented compared with other photovoltaic (PV) materials, for instance, silicon, GaAs, CIGS and CdTe, further improvements are required for PSCs in order to completely surpass the performances of other PV technologies and fully realize their potential as solar cells.
In the past seven years, various perovskite absorber materials have been developed, forming a large family of crystalline materials. The most commonly used materials for PV devices have an ABX3 chemical composition containing an organic cation A, such as methylammonium (MA)2 or formamidinium (FA),5 a divalent metal B, such as Pb2 or Sn,6 and a halide X, such as Br or I. These perovskites are fabricated using a large number of techniques ranging from spin coating,2 dip coating,7 two-step interdiffusion,8 chemical vapor deposition,9 thermal evaporation,10 solvent engineering,11,12 and intramolecular exchange processing.13 Much of the work in the field of inorganic–organic hybrid photovoltaics to date has been focused on developing new materials, technological process innovations and device structures to maximize the light absorption, charge separation and collection and voltage output. While researchers possess a basic understanding of PSC devices as an optical system, there have been limited attempts to exploit the optical design to manage light in-coupling and propagation, as a means to enhance the overall device performance.
One possible method for optical management and achieving fundamental efficiency enhancements in PSC devices is to utilize localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) in metallic nanostructures. Surface plasmons (SPs) are electron oscillations excited by either photons or electrons at the metal–dielectric interfaces, associated with well-confined surface electromagnetic waves.14,15 With proper engineering of the metal structures, such confinement can lead to an enhanced electromagnetic field at the metal–dielectric interfaces, which may be utilized for the improvement of PV device efficiencies, helping to approach or even surpass the Shockley–Queisser limit without any exotic operating principles.15,16 The use of metal NPs and arrangements of them has been explored for almost all types of solar cells, for example, dye-sensitized,17,18 organic,19 silicon,20,21 and perovskite solar cells.22,23 As reported by Lee et al., Au NPs were doped in the PEDOT:PSS layer of a P3HT:PCBM device to induce plasmonic enhancement in the active layer.19 The PCE for the device containing a low concentration of Au NPs was improved from 3.04% to 3.65%. Slight plasmonic enhancements in the device PV performance have been reported in many previous studies. In recent studies, Snaith and co-workers demonstrated that metal oxide (SiO2, TiO2) coated metal (Au, Ag) NPs incorporated into mesoporous Al2O3 scaffolds induced significant photocurrent enhancements in methylammonium lead iodide based devices.22,23 However, these enhancements could not be attributed to increased solar light absorption in the spectral regime of the metal nanoparticle LSPRs. The origin of the enhancement observed in plasmonic PSCs remains unknown. The presence of metal NPs may favor the radiative decay of excitons, photon recycling, nonradiative photocarrier generation and light trapping, and may help to reduce the perovskite film thickness and hence decrease of the amount of lead present in the device.15,22–26 On the other hand, incorporated metal nanoparticles can act as sites for electron recombination. These factors can competitively have an impact on the performance and development of the PSC device. Although there has been some experimental evidence for plasmonic PSCs, many fundamental physical mechanisms are not systematically understood.
In this work, we report a facile and effective method to fabricate efficient plasmonic PSC devices. Our investigation is very different from previous reports. Au NPs were incorporated into mesoporous TiO2 films, chiefly on their top surfaces. Then, MgO passivation films were prepared on the Au NP modified mesoporous titania via wet spinning and pyrolysis of magnesium salt. Our results show that combined use of Au NPs and MgO significantly enhances both the current density and the photovoltage of the perovskite solar cells. The energy conversion efficiency of the perovskite solar cell modified with both Au NPs and MgO was increased from 12.0% to 16.1%, compared to the unmodified device. The fundamental optics and physics behind the plasmonic perovskite solar cell based on Au NPs and insulating MgO were also studied.
2. Experimental
All materials were purchased from either Alfa Aesar or Sigma-Aldrich, unless otherwise stated. CH3NH3I (MAI) was synthesized according to a previous study.12
Au NPs were prepared according to a method published previously with slight modification.18 A 381 μl portion of hydrogen tetrachloroaurate(III) (HAuCl4·3H2O) aqueous solution (0.1 M) was added into 150 ml DI water and brought to a rolling boil with stirring, and then 2 ml of 2% (wt%) trisodium citrate dehydrate solution was added. After continuous boiling for about 5 min, the reduction of gold chloride was almost complete. The solution was removed from the heat source and allowed to cool naturally and sit overnight. The obtained solution was used as a seed solution for the preparation of the Au NPs. 40 μl HAuCl4·3H2O solution, 24.9 μl hydroquinone and the seed solution were mixed in 50 ml DI water at room temperature under vigorous stirring over 30 min to obtain colloidal gold solutions with particle sizes of around 40 nm.
Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated slides (Pilkington TEC 15) were patterned by etching with Zn powders and 2 M HCl. The etched slides were then cleaned with liquid detergent, acetone, ethyl alcohol and de-ionized water for 15 min, sequentially, to remove the organic or inorganic residues, and were finally dried in a vacuum oven. Isopropyl titanate (200 μl) and 5 ml of ethanol were mixed to prepare a clear precursor sol. The precursor sol was spin-coated onto the Zn/HCl-etched FTO substrate at 4500 rpm, followed by annealing at 500 °C to form a compact TiO2 layer. A mesoporous TiO2 (p-TiO2) layer with a thickness of about 0.4 μm was deposited on the c-TiO2 layer by spin-coating TiO2 paste (Dyesol 18NR-T) diluted in anhydrous ethanol (weight ratio: 1:3.5) at 2000 rpm for 50 seconds. The layers were then sintered at 500 °C for 30 min in air. After cooling down to the room temperature (RT), the samples were treated using a TiCl4 aqueous solution at 70 °C for 30 min and dried at 500 °C for 30 min. After the mesoporous film sample was cooled down to RT, 80 μl of Au NP solution (0.19 mg ml−1) was first spin-coated onto the mesoporous film surface, and the samples were heated at 100 °C for 30 min on a hotplate in air. Then, a MgO precursor solution of Mg(CH3COO)2 in deionized water was spin-coated on the Au NP-treated p-TiO2 layer at 3000 rpm for 30 seconds, and was then heated at 400 °C for 1 h to form a MgO overlayer. The concentration of the magnesium salt used was 90 mM. The perovskite layer was grown via a spin-coating process using a γ-butyrolactone (GBL) and dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) solution of PbI2 and CH3NH3I.11,12 The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by mixing CH3NH3I (0.1975 g) powder and lead iodide PbI2 (0.5785 g) in GBL (700 μl) and DMSO (300 μl) at 60 °C for 12 h. The formed precursor solution was deposited onto the MgO/Au NPs/p-TiO2/c-TiO2/FTO sample via a successive two-step spin-coating process, at 2000 rpm for 30 seconds and at 3500 rpm for 50 seconds, respectively. Anhydrous chlorobenzene was dripped onto the center of the sample in the second spin-stage during the spin-coating process. The perovskite-precursor coated sample was heated and dried on a hot plate at 120 °C for 30 min. Notably, at the present perovskite solution concentration, a capping layer of solid-perovskite film was formed on top of the mesoporous titanium dioxide.12 The hole-transport layer (HTL) was deposited by spin-coating a spiro-OMeTAD solution at 4000 rpm for 30 seconds. The spin-coating solution was prepared by dissolving 0.0723 g spiro-MeOTAD, 28.8 μl 4-tert-butylpyridine, 17.5 μl of a stock solution of 0.520 g ml−1 lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide in acetonitrile and 29 μl of a stock solution of 0.300 g ml−1 tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)cobalt(III) bis(trifluoromethylsulphonyl)imide in acetonitrile in 1 ml chlorobenzene. Finally, a 100 nm thick Ag film with an active area of 0.1 cm2 was formed via evaporation on the Spiro-OMeTAD-coated film.27 In order to investigate the possible degradation and enhancement mechanisms associated with incorporating Au NPs in the active layers of the PSC devices, we designed and fabricated four types of PSC device: without Au NPs or MgO modification, with only Au NPs, with only a MgO coating and with both Au NPs and a MgO coating. The four kinds of device were named S1, S2, S3 and S4, respectively.
The morphology of the p-TiO2 films modified with Au NPs and/or MgO was characterized using a high-resolution field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, Hitachi S4800). Optical spectra of the perovskite films on the differently structured mesoporous TiO2 were obtained and characterized using an ultraviolet–visible light (UV–vis) spectrometer (Hitachi, U-3010). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded at RT using a HORIBA Jobin Yvon fluoromax-4 fluorescence spectrophotometer with an excitation wavelength of 507 nm. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of the PSCs were recorded with a galvanostat (PG30.FRA2, Autolab, EcoChemie B. V Utrecht, Netherlands). Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) measurements were performed using an AM 1.5 solar simulator equipped with a 1000 W xenon lamp (Model no. 91192, Oriel, USA). The solar simulator was calibrated by using a standard silicon cell (Newport, USA). The light intensity was 100 mW cm−2 on the surface of the test cell. J–V curves were measured using a computer-controlled digital source meter (Keithley 2440) with the reverse direction. During the characterization of device photovoltaic performance, a metal aperture mask with an opening of about 0.09 cm2 was used. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements (74125, Oriel, USA) were also carried out for these cells.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1(a) shows the current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the four types of fabricated PSC device (S1–S4). The corresponding PV parameters including short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), PCE and fill factor (FF) are summarized in Table 1. Fig. 1(b) shows the FESEM image of the top surface morphology of the formed p-TiO2 layer containing Au NPs. Fig. 1(c) shows a cross-sectional FESEM image of the glass/FTO/c-TiO2/Au NP-modified p-TiO2 layer. As observed in both SEM images, the Au NPs (white spheres) are about 40 nm in diameter, most of the Au NPs are distributed on the top surface of the p-TiO2 layer, and the thickness of the porous TiO2 layer is about 400 nm. The absorbance spectrum of the prepared Au NPs in ethanol is shown in Fig. 1(d). As can be seen in the spectrum, the SPR absorbance peak is at 526 nm. Fig. 1(e) displays an energy diagram of the materials in the PSC devices modified with Au NPs and MgO.
 Fig. 1  (a) J–V curves of devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO. (b) FESEM image of the top surface morphology and (c) cross-sectional FESEM picture of the p-TiO2 layer containing Au NPs. (d) Absorbance spectrum of Au suspension. (e) Energy diagram of the materials in the PSC devices with Au NPs and MgO. 
Table 1 Parameters of the PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without Au NPs and/or MgO




Device

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η (%)




S1
19.49
0.94
0.66
12.0


S2
18.21
0.95
0.62
10.7


S3
20.82
1.08
0.67
15.1


S4
21.76
1.09
0.68
16.1




From Table 1, the reference device (S1) without Au NPs or a MgO coating exhibits a VOC of 0.94 V, JSC of 19.49 mA cm−2 and FF of 0.66, resulting in a total PCE of 12.0%. After incorporating bare Au NPs between mesoporous TiO2 and semiconductor perovskite, the performance of the device (S2) became poorer, exhibiting a PCE of 10.7%. The addition of only Au NPs significantly decreased both the short-circuit current density and the fill factor. The device (S3) with MgO modification alone displayed a PCE of 15.1%. Compared with the TiO2 only device (S1), the VOC value obtained for S3 was considerably increased from 0.94 to 1.08 V. The best cell performance was obtained for the cell containing both Au NPs and a MgO coating. This cell exhibited a short-circuit current density of 21.76 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage of 1.09 V and a fill factor of 0.68, yielding the highest efficiency (η) of 16.1%. Compared with the TiO2-only device (S1), the power conversion efficiency (PCE) enhancement for the device with both Au NPs and MgO incorporated mainly arises due to the greatly improved short-circuit photocurrent JSC (19.49 to 21.76 mA cm−2) and the open-circuit voltage VOC (0.94 to 1.09 V), whilst the fill factor is only slightly changed.
From Table 1, it can be seen that incorporating only Au NPs between the mesoporous TiO2 layer and the perovskite layer greatly degraded the PV performance of the PSC device, especially its JSC and FF values. The PV variance and degradation may be due to two reasons. First, the Au NPs can be etched by the halide during processing of the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber, and gold diffusion and migration into the perovskite material may take place during the thermal annealing of the perovskite precursor films, causing detrimental and irreversible changes in the absorber.27–29 Au migration into perovskite material has been found for PSC devices with metal contacts under thermal stress even at 70 °C.28 This metal migration has been observed to cause irreversible changes to devices and in turn severely affect the device performance metrics. Second, the bare Au NPs can act as charge recombination or trapping sites for light generated charge carriers due to the lower conduction energy level of the Au NPs than that of the TiO2, as shown in Fig. 1(e).30,31 Compared with the reference device (S1), device S3 with only MgO modification exhibited enhanced JSC, FF and VOC values. At the interface between the TiO2 NPs and the perovskite material, the injected photo-induced electrons may recombine with holes. This would cause deterioration of the JSC and the VOC in PSC devices. The coating of n-type p-TiO2 with ultrathin MgO dielectric shells is a general route towards enhancing the efficiency of solar cell devices. The introduced nanometer thick MgO interlayer acted as a “surface passivation layer” between the absorber and TiO2 to obstruct the recombination between photo-induced electrons and holes across the interface. Improved photocurrent, photovoltage and fill factor in photovoltaic devices employing an ultrathin MgO layer has been well documented for DSSCs.32,33 Recently, MgO was successfully used as a blocking layer between compact or mesoporous TiO2 and perovskite to improve the cell performance.34–37 The increase in the open-circuit voltage of device S3 compared to device S1 can be mainly attributed to the much higher conduction band of MgO than that of TiO2, which causes the conduction band of TiO2 to shift towards MgO, resulting in a higher quasi-Fermi level under illumination and a higher VOC.34,38 Additionally, the ultrathin layer of MgO can act as a tunneling barrier that retards the back recombination from TiO2 to the hole transport material (HTM) in PSCs, thus leading to a high JSC and FF.34 Retardation of electron–hole recombination was also confirmed by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) results. By incorporating both Au NPs and MgO in the PSC device, the PV performance was further improved. As a result, device S4 containing both Au NPs and MgO is superior to the other three types of PSC. The insulating MgO layer protected the Au NPs coated on the p-TiO2 from corrosion and migration during the processing of the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber. The MgO film also prevented direct contact between Au and the perovskite semiconductor, or the hole conductor spiro-OMeTAD in device S4, inhibiting an unwanted charge recombination pathway within the perovskite solar cell. MgO was found to change the surface state of TiO2 and worked as an insulating layer to reduce charge recombination as reported in ref. 34–37. In our work, the MgO coating possesses even more functions. In addition to the roles reported in ref. 34–37, the MgO coating in our devices acts as an insulating shell to protect the Au NPs, to keep them intact and maintain their structural and thermal stability during the processing of the perovskite absorbers. Furthermore, compared with device S3 which possesses only MgO modification, device S4 exhibits similar VOC and FF values, but a significantly higher photocurrent. The increase of photocurrent in device S4 compared to device S3 suggests that the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) and electrical effects of the Au NPs enhance the photovoltaic response of the PSCs.39,40
To investigate the effects of the Au NPs and MgO in the PSCs in detail, we measured the optical absorption spectra and photoluminescence spectra of the samples. As the PSC devices have different structures, which influence the interface between the perovskite absorber and porous TiO2, the devices are expected to exhibit different defect densities. The PL spectra were effective in exploring the recombination properties of light-excited electrons and holes in defected semiconductors. Fig. 2 shows the UV-Vis and PL spectra of the FTO/c-TiO2/p-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 samples without and with modification with Au NPs and/or MgO. At a glance, it is clear that there are no significant differences in the absorption spectra of the four kinds of absorber samples. This may be due to the extraordinarily high absorption coefficient of hybrid perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 and the small amount of Au NPs or MgO loaded on p-TiO2. In Fig. 2(b), all absorber samples show emission peaks at about 762 nm (excitation wavelength 507 nm), corresponding to an absorption onset at ∼760 nm.41 The peak position of the emission is almost consistent across the four samples; however, the PL intensity is quite different. Compared to the case of the reference absorber without any modification, the PL intensity of the absorber incorporating bare Au NPs exhibits an obvious increasing tendency, whilst the PL intensity displays a more and more intensely decreasing tendency from the sample with only MgO to the one modified with both Au NPs and MgO. Notably, the perovskite absorber sample containing bare Au NPs exhibits the highest PL signal, and the corresponding PSC device is expected to show a higher recombination rate of carriers than the cells based on the other samples. In contrast, a significantly stronger degree of PL quenching was observed for both perovskite samples with the MgO coating using magnesium salt, confirming that electron extraction from perovskite to TiO2 NPs with MgO modification is significantly higher than that from perovskite to pristine TiO2. The perovskite sample modified with both Au NPs and MgO shows the lowest peak intensity and the most intense degree of PL quenching, indicating the fastest charge transfer, the most effective electron extraction and the lowest charge accumulation, and thus prospectively the highest short-circuit current and the best PV performance.42,43 Therefore, the inclusion of Au NPs and MgO is unambiguously helpful for improving the charge separation and collection, charge transport and photocurrent in the PSC device.
 Fig. 2  (a) UV-Vis absorption and (b) PL spectra of perovskite absorbers based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating. 
The retardation of the charge recombination in the formed PSC cells was studied by measuring their dark J–V curves. Fig. 3 shows the measured dark J–V curves of the four structured PSC devices. As expected for device S3 and S4, the MgO overlayer suppressed current at almost all biases, especially the dark cathodic recombination current at negative bias, compared to the case of the reference device (S1) without any modification. Device S2 containing bare Au NPs showed the highest dark current value at almost all bias voltages, particularly at negative bias, because it exhibits the most intense charge carrier recombination. Recombination is one of the main factors limiting the cell performance. Device S4 modified with both Au NPs and MgO showed the lowest dark current value at negative bias, demonstrating that the combined use of Au NPs and MgO to modify porous TiO2 in the CH3NH3PbI3 absorber materials is crucial in preventing leakage. The incorporation of both and Au NPs and MgO effectively and significantly blocked charge carrier recombination, thus promisingly enhancing the PV performance of the perovskite solar cells. The bias voltage at the minimal current density for the device is possibly attributed to the accumulation of space charges at the interface, due to mobile ions in the MgO@p-TiO2 based perovskite solar cells.27,44
 Fig. 3  Dark J–V curves of devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating. 
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to characterize the internal resistance and charge transfer kinetics of the p-TiO2 based perovskite solar cells without and with modification with Au NPs and/or MgO. EIS measurements were performed for the four kinds of device at a bias voltage of 0.9 V and in the dark. The measured Nyquist plot is shown in Fig. 4(a). The structure of the PSC device can be considered as a leaking capacitor.45 The semicircle visually represents the recombination resistance at the interface of the TiO2/perovskite layer and the TiO2/hole transport layer. The larger the diameter of the semicircle is, the less electron recombination at the interface. Moreover, the specific EIS results of the PSCs can be estimated according to a simple equivalent circuit model as shown in Fig. 4(b), which has been widely applied for analyzing the impedance spectra of perovskite solar cells.45 It is characterized by the recombination resistance, Rrec, in parallel with the chemical capacitance, Crec, and the hole transport resistance, RHTL, in parallel with the chemical capacitance, CHTL. The results of the impedance data are shown in Table 2. As can be seen in Fig. 4(a) and Table 2, the device (S2) containing bare Au NPs has the smallest semicircle, and therefore a minimal Rrec (83.9 Ω cm2), which indicates the lowest recombination resistance. The reference cell (S1) has the second lowest recombination resistance (116.0 Ω cm2). With just MgO coated on the TiO2 NP layer (S3), the diameter of the semicircle dramatically increases, which indicates an overwhelmingly higher recombination resistance (375.0 Ω cm2) in the device with only MgO modification compared with devices S1 and S2. The Rrec value (292.0 Ω cm2) of the PSC device containing both Au NPs and MgO is also much larger than the case of device S1 and S2, but a little smaller than that of device S3 with only MgO. Our EIS measurement results indicate that the recombination resistance was increased by 2.5–3.2 times after Au@MgO or pure MgO modification, leading to a significant decrease in current loss through recombination, increased photocurrent and enhanced FF for both devices S3 and S4, as shown in Table 1. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 4(a) and Table 2, the four structured PSC devices exhibit different series resistance, Rs, due to contact effects. Device S4 and S2 exhibit the lowest and second lowest series resistance Rs, respectively, indicating that the addition of Au NPs increases the conductivity and improves the charge transport properties. Accordingly, the JSC value of device S4 is higher than that of S3, and hence device S4 shows the highest efficiency.
 Fig. 4  (a) Nyquist plots of the devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating under dark conditions at 0.9 V applied bias. (b) Simplified equivalent circuit to fit the impedance spectra. 
Table 2 EIS results of the PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without Au NPs and/or MgO




Device

R
s (Ω cm2)

R
rec (Ω cm2)

C
rec (mF cm−2)

R
HTL (Ω cm2)




S1
72.1
116.0
0.258
5.9


S2
57.0
83.9
0.255
2.9


S3
87.5
375.0
0.250
11.2


S4
34.5
292.0
0.254
5.4




EQE is more pertinent than photocurrent–voltage measurements for studying optical and electrical responses of PSCs. EQE can be a product of the light-harvesting efficiency, electron injection efficiency from excited perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 to the TiO2 nanoparticles, and electron collection efficiency at the cathode in a mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction solar cell. The corresponding EQE spectra of the four types of fabricated PSC devices (S1–S4) are shown in Fig. 5(a). EQE depends on the absorption of light, the electron injection efficiency and the collection of charges. In order to emphasize the positive contribution of the Au NPs and MgO to the photocurrent, the EQE data for the PSCs modified with Au NPs and/or MgO were normalized by dividing that of the reference device, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The EQE of the PSC with only MgO modification was significantly higher in the short wavelength region (320–600 nm) when compared with that of the pure TiO2 based device. This result corresponds well with the increase in the JSC values given in Table 1. However, the EQE of the device with only MgO modification basically decreased with an increase in the wavelength from 320 nm, and the EQE value at wavelengths longer than about 750 nm was even lower than that of the reference cell. For an absorber semiconductor, the absorption coefficient, α, is related to the extinction coefficient, k, by α = 4πk/λ, where λ is the wavelength. The absorption depth, l, is given by l = λ/(p4πk), where p is the porosity, which is ∼0.5 for the mesoporous CH3NH3PbI3 layer and 1.0 for the perovskite capping layer. The light absorption depth of the absorber as a function of the light wavelength is shown in Fig. 5(c). Photon capture is not as high in the range of 600 nm < λ < 800 nm as it is for shorter wavelengths, because the extinction coefficient rapidly decays at red frequencies. The thickness of the mesoporous layer in our devices is about 400 nm. The incident light at longer wavelengths (>650 nm) is partially absorbed in the perovskite capping layer and the generated electron–hole pairs have to travel a greater distance to the surface of the networked TiO2 NPs in the mesoporous layer, which makes electron injection into the insulator MgO coated TiO2 more difficult. As a result, the EQE of the device covered by MgO was lower than that of the reference cell in the long wavelength region (>750 nm). In contrast, the EQE of the cell incorporating bare Au NPs was considerably decreased in the short wavelength region (320–600 nm), as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). However, the PSC containing both Au NPs and MgO achieved significant EQE enhancement across the whole UV-Vis-near infra-red (NIR) region (320–800 nm) than the cell based on pure TiO2. The EQE enhancement in the whole UV-Vis–NIR regime induced a prominent increase in JSC for device S4. As shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b), the trend in EQE enhancement for the differently structured PSC devices is also consistent with that from the J–V measurements and the analysis shown in Fig. 1 and Table 1.
 Fig. 5  (a) EQE spectra and (b) normalized EQE curves of the devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating. (c) Calculated absorption depth of the absorber as a function of wavelength. 
Compared to bare Au NPs, Au NPs with insulating MgO shells have better structural and thermal stability, and in particular can retard the corrosion of Au NPs by halide, preventing charge trapping site formation or Oswald ripening46 and enabling the thermal processing of high-quality perovskite absorbers during device fabrication. More importantly, from the standpoint of Au NPs, the insulating MgO coating prevents direct contact between Au and the perovskite, or the hole conductor spiro-OMeTAD, inhibiting an unwanted charge recombination pathway within the device. Furthermore, from the standpoint of porous TiO2, an ultra-thin MgO coating on porous TiO2 effectively blocks the charge recombination at the TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 interface in the perovskite solar cell, thereby extending the carrier lifetime and improving the JSC and VOC values of the PSC device.34,35 As a result, incorporating both Au NPs and MgO in CH3NH3PbI3 absorbers effectively and significantly enhances the JSC, VOC and EQE values of perovskite solar cells.
Generally, metal nanoparticles can enhance light energy capture in the solar cell by scattering light enabling a longer optical path-length, by dipole–dipole interactions and resonant energy transfer or by near-field coupling between the surface plasmon polariton and the absorber excited state. Two classic processes, i.e., light absorption increase by LSPRs15–21,26 and hot-electron injection,25,47–49 have been widely reported for plasmon-enhanced solar energy harvesting. In the field of perovskite solar cells, Snaith and co-workers first reported plasmonic enhancement in perovskite solar cells in 2013.22 They mixed core–shell Au@SiO2 NPs into Al2O3 paste to prepare a mesoporous Al2O3 scaffold, resulting in a CH3NH3PbI3−xClx device efficiency of up to 11.4%. Compared to the control device, the photocurrent density of the device containing the Au@SiO2 NPs was improved by 14.5%. The authors systemically carried out time-resolved and steady state photoluminescence (PL) measurements of the perovskite absorber with and without Au@SiO2 NPs. The obtained enhancement in device performance was attributed to a three-fold reduction in exciton binding energy (EB) of the perovskite in the presence of Ag LSPR. Two years later, Snaith and co-workers blended core–shell Ag@TiO2 NPs into Al2O3 paste to prepare a mesoporous Al2O3 scaffold, boosting the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx device efficiency by 12.4%.23 Their photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements revealed a broad-band enhancement over the entire absorption spectrum, rather than only in the spectral region of the Ag NP LSPR. Small changes in the exciton EB cannot be expected to result in significant changes of photocurrent generation in the solar cell. The authors developed a theoretical model, which predicts that the presence of highly polarizable nanoparticles enhances the radiative decay of excitons and increases the reabsorption of emitted radiation, presenting a novel photon recycling scheme for enhancing the PSC performance. In another study,25 Au NPs were inserted into a compact TiOx layer, resulting in a 20% increase in the efficiency of a Spiro-OMeTAD HTM based planer heterojunction CH3NH3PbI3−xClx solar cell. Improvements in JSC, VOC and FF were attributed to plasmon-mediated hot carrier injection from the Au NPs to TiOx. In a recent study,26 Au decorated TiO2 nanofibers prepared by an electro-spinning technique were incorporated in the assembly of mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells. The PSC with pure TiO2 nanofibers showed an efficiency of 11.16%, while the device containing Au decorated TiO2 nanofibers achieved an efficiency of 14.92%. This improvement was attributed to the enhancement of light absorption by LSPR and reduced charge recombination in the Au@TiO2 nanofiber electrodes. Therefore, the type of metal nanostructures used (shape, size, composition, shell control) and their precise location with respect to the perovskite in the solar cells, as well as the kind of perovskite, impact device performance enhancements. Moreover, the spontaneous polarization of perovskite crystals adds both complexity and potential for energy harvesting. A deeper understanding of the fundamental interactions between plasmonic nanostructures and perovskite materials is required for the future optimization of both light harvesting abilities and charge transport mechanisms in PSCs.
In our work, no significant differences were observed in the absorption patterns of the four types of fabricated PSC devices, as shown in Fig. 2(a). Nevertheless, EQE enhancement was achieved over the whole wavelength range, including the UV-Vis (320 nm to 500 nm) and NIR ranges (500 to 800 nm), for the device doped with Au and MgO, rather than only the spectral region of the Au NP localized surface plasmon resonance, as shown in Fig. 1(d). Therefore, the EQE and PV performance enhancements for the Au@MgO devices cannot be directly associated with the optical spectrum of the Au@MgO nanoparticles. To investigate the roles of the Au NPs and MgO shell in the observed EQE, photocurrent, photovoltage and PCE improvements in the plasmonic PSC cells, finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) numerical simulations were performed for the geometry shown in Fig. 6(a). The PSC has the structure glass(50)/FTO(100)/c-TiO2(40)/p-TiO2 + Au spheres + MgO + MAPbI3(300)/spiro-MeOTAD(100)/Ag(30). The numbers in the parentheses indicate the layer thicknesses in nanometers. The thickness of MgO is 2 nm. The size of TiO2 spheres (yellow color) in the p-TiO2 layer is 10 nm in diameter, the spacing between the TiO2@MgO spheres is 1 nm, and the gaps are filled with MAPbI3. In order to see the TiO2 spheres, the colors of both MAPbI3 (light blue color) and MgO shell (light green color) are semi-transparent. There is a single Au@MgO sphere positioned at the top of p-TiO2@MgO and embedded in the MAPbI3 capping layer. The diameter of the Au sphere (red color) is 40 nm. The optical properties (refractive index, n and extinction coefficient, k) of the materials were obtained from the data in previous publications.50,51 A commercial FIT software package (CST Microwave Studio 2006) was used with a Cartesian grids system (FDTD module).21,52,53
 Fig. 6  (a) Model of the device modified with both Au NPs and MgO. 2D field |E| enhancement distribution image in the xz planes at (b) y = 0 nm, λ = 560 nm, (c) y = 0 nm, λ = 730 nm. Power flow diagrams within the xz planes at (d) y = 0 nm, λ = 560 nm, (e) y = 10 nm, λ = 560 nm, (f) y = 0 nm, λ = 730 nm, (g) y = 10 nm, λ = 730 nm. Power flow diagrams within the xy planes at (h) z = 0 nm, λ = 730 nm, (k) z = 18 nm, λ = 730 nm. 
The boundary conditions along the x and y axis were set to be ‘periodic’. Upon choosing a periodic boundary setting and a suitably refined computational grid (the maximum grid length was chosen as wavelength/300 in the paper) in the simulation software, the corresponding numerical solution gives an accurate representation of the dynamics of the electromagnetic field. The Au@MgO sphere was placed along the z coordinate as shown in Fig. 6(a). The origin of the coordinates was taken at the center of the Au sphere. The xy plane was set parallel to the surface of the glass substrate. The plane-wave electromagnetic field of the wave vector k was taken to be incident from the bottom surface of the glass substrate. The wave propagates along the z coordinate, the electric vector is along the x coordinate, and the magnetic vector is along the y coordinate.

Fig. 6(b) and (c) show the calculated local amplitude enhancement distribution of the electric field |E| in the xz plane at y = 0 for an incident wave with wavelengths of 560 nm and 730 nm, respectively. The maximal EQE value was obtained at 560 nm, and the maximal EQE enhancement was achieved at 730 nm as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). The circumferences of the Au@MgO and p-TiO2@MgO spheres can be seen clearly from the calculated figures. The electric field is only slightly enhanced and localized around the Au sphere, and the maximum |E| enhancement factor is only about 1.5 at 560 nm. In contrast, the electric field is significantly enhanced and localized around the Au sphere, and the maximum |E| enhancement factor is up to 22.8 at 730 nm.

Fig. 6(d)–(g) show the simulated power flow within the xz planes at y = 0, 10 nm for the wavelengths of 560 nm and 730 nm, respectively. The positions of the Au@MgO and p-TiO2@MgO spheres can be observed clearly from the figures. For the incident visible light with a wavelength of 560 nm, the power flow successively passes through the TiO2@MgO NPs, the filled perovskite semiconductor, Au@MgO and the perovskite capping layer, with some deflections from the z coordinate around the surface of the Au sphere, as shown in Fig. 6(d) and (e). When light with a wavelength of 730 nm is normally incident on the PSC device, the wave almost passes straight through the TiO2@MgO NPs and the filled perovskite semiconductor along the z coordinate. However, after the porous layer, the straight propagation of light power flow is replaced by complex whirls and circulates around the Au spheres and the perovskite in the capping layer, as shown in Fig. 6(f) and (g). The simulated power flow within the xy plane at z = 0, 18 nm is shown in Fig. 6(h) and (k) for the wavelength of 730 nm. The relative positions of the p-TiO2@MgO spheres can be seen in the background. The red circle indicates the position of the Au@MgO sphere. For the incident red light along the positive z coordinate, the Au@MgO sphere array manipulates the flow of the red energy and partially guides the red light into the xy plane of the absorber film in the nanoscale and near-field regions. As a result, some red energy flows parallel to the xy plane, as is more clearly shown in Fig. 6(k). The light energy passing through the absorber perovskite surrounding the Au sphere is redirected toward the Au sphere, absorbed by the sphere, and then, the light energy is transferred back to the perovskite material, as is clearly shown in Fig. 6(f) and (g). The Au NP absorbs lights via some portion of its surface, and then re-radiates energy into the absorber via other parts of the surface. Light power flows can circulate the near-field areas for multiple rounds, due to interference of scattered and incident light.54
The above calculation results indicate that the Au@MgO sphere array in the PSC device can modulate and deflect the energy flow direction in dipole–dipole coupling. This energy flow regulation can open a process which is different from the widely reported light absorption enhancement by LSPRs15–21,26 or hot-electron injection25,47–49 for plasmon-enhanced solar energy harvesting. In this case, the plasmonic metal absorbs sunlight, converts the absorbed energy into localized surface plasmon resonance oscillations and transfers the plasmonic energy to the perovskite semiconductor via resonant energy transfer, which generates electron–hole pairs below and near the perovskite band edge55,56 and enhances the efficiency of the incident photon-to-electron conversion process for red frequencies in perovskite solar cells, as shown in Table 1 and Fig. 5(a) and (b). Furthermore, we think that the photon management achieved by using Au NPs and MgO shells to minimize photonic and energy losses in the PSC devices also offers promising scenarios for employing photon recycling to improve the photoconversion efficiencies of perovskite solar cells.23,57–59 In our plamonic PSC device, energy transport is not limited by diffusive carrier transport, but can occur over long distances through multiple absorption–emission events. Photons are reabsorbed and re-emitted many times before an electron–hole pair is collected or a luminescent red photon escapes. Pazos-Outón et al. showed that lead halide materials have luminescence properties similar to those of GaAs57 and may therefore reach the super high conversion efficiencies of GaAs semiconductor materials. The presence of Au NPs enhances the radiative decay of excitons in the perovskite absorber.23 Furthermore, the Au@MgO nanoparticles can work as antennas for the excitonic dipoles. The radiated photons from exciton decay would then have a dramatically prolonged optical path length, due to the energy flow regulatory benefit of the Au nanospheres, as shown in Fig. 6(f)–(k). In this way, the reabsorption from re-emitted light is enhanced, essentially enabling photon recycling with a much greater efficiency, leading to enhanced EQE and photocurrent in perovskite solar cells containing Au NPs and MgO, compared to the cells modified only with pure MgO.23,57–59 Higher photon densities also lead to higher internal luminescence and a buildup of excited charges, which increase the split of quasi-Fermi levels and enhance the achievable open-circuit voltage in a solar cell.57,60 Finally, introducing Au NPs into the TiO2 photoanodes of PSCs can increase the charge transport capability, as demonstrated in Fig. 4(a) and Table 2. As a result, the incorporation of both Au NPs and MgO in the CH3NH3PbI3 absorbers effectively and significantly enhances EQE, JSC and therefore the PCE values of perovskite solar cells, compared to the cell modified only with pure MgO, as shown in Table 1.
The stability of perovskite solar cells is a major issue restricting their terrestrial application. We investigated the stability of unsealed PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without modification with Au NPs and/or MgO under UV irradiation. The PSCs were exposed to 365 nm UV illumination with an intensity of 90 mW cm−2, and were removed at certain time intervals to measure the J–V curves under simulated AM1.5 100 mW cm−2 irradiance. In Fig. 7 we observe that device S3 and S4 exhibit significantly improved stability. Their PCEs retain more than 85%–90% of their initial value, even after 15 min UV irradiation in air. By contrast, device S2 containing bare Au NPs cannot endure the UV irradiation test and shows a PCE of almost zero after just 1 min UV irradiation, and the control device (S1) exhibits only 35% of its initial value after 9 min UV illumination under the same UV testing conditions. When TiO2 based PSCs are exposed to UV light, photo generated holes in the mesoporous TiO2 react with oxygen absorbed at surface oxygen vacancies, which then become deep traps leading to charge recombination, resulting in a drop off in the PV performance of the device.61 Additionally, the UV light absorbed by TiO2 can catalyze the decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3 into PbI2, forming non-radiative defect sites within the perovskite and especially at the TiO2/perovskite interface, degrading the PV performance of the device.62,63 The presence of bare Au NPs in the PSC device dramatically accelerated the UV degradation, and the device with bare Au NPs deteriorated to an efficiency of zero in 2 min. These UV light effects can be avoided by depositing a nanometer thick passivation layer onto the TiO2 to prevent contact between TiO2 and CH3NH3PbI3, decrease the photocatalytic properties of TiO2 and reduce the electronic defect density at the TiO2/perovskite interface. It has been reported that the light stability of PSC devices was obviously improved by using CsBr as an interface modifier for c-TiO262 or employing Sb2S3 as the insulating layer between mesoporous TiO2 and the perovskite layer.63 In our work, we have demonstrated that by incorporating both Au NPs and insulating MgO onto mesoporous TiO2, a significant improvement of the UV stability in the perovskite solar cell is achieved.
 Fig. 7  Power conversion efficiency variation of unsealed PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without Au NPs and/or MgO at ∼55% humidity after various UV exposure (90 mW cm−2 at 365 nm) durations. 
4. Conclusions
A facile and effective method has been developed to achieve efficient perovskite devices with simultaneously high open-circuit voltage and high short-circuit current density, by combining the use of Au NPs and insulating MgO. Incorporating only Au NPs between the mesoporous TiO2 layer and perovskite capping layer greatly degraded the PV performance of the PSC device from 12.0% to 10.7%. By employing a pure MgO nanolayer only, the power conversion efficiency was increased from 12.0% to 15.1%. By combining Au NPs and MgO in the passivation layer, a high power conversion efficiency of 16.1%, with both a high open-circuit voltage of 1.09 V and high short-circuit current density of 21.76 mA cm−2 was obtained. The photovoltage, photocurrent and efficiency values were 16.0%, 11.6% and 34.2% higher than those of the pure TiO2 based perovskite solar cells, respectively. This enhancement may be associated with the effective photon management as a result of the Au NPs and MgO shell. This would minimize photonic and energy losses for the generation of carriers, leading to high charge transport capability and low charge recombination losses in the perovskite solar cells. Moreover, combined use of Au NPs and MgO in the passivation layer effectively enhanced the stability of the PSC devices under UV light irradiation.
The fundamental optics and physics behind the regulation of energy flow in perovskite solar cells and the concept of using Au NPs and MgO to improve the device performance was also explored. Theoretical electromagnetic calculations support the experimental plasmon-enhanced energy conversion efficiency results for the perovskite solar cells incorporating both Au NPs and a MgO coating.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11274119 and 61275038) and the Large Instruments Open Foundation of East China Normal University.
Notes and references
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Supporting Material: Efficient hybrid solar cells based on meso-superstructured organometal halide perovskites, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and I. S. Sang, Compositional engineering of perovskite materials for high-performance solar cells, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, In retrospect: Twenty-five years of low-cost solar cells, Nature, 2016, 538, 463–464 CrossRef PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Formamidinium lead trihalide: a broadly tunable perovskite for efficient planar heterojunction solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, C. Wehrenfennig, S. Guarnera, A.-A. Haghighirad, A. Sadhanala, G. E. Eperon, S. K. Pathak and M. B. Johnston, Lead-free organic–inorganic tin halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3061–3068 CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Sequential deposition as a route to high-performance perovskite-sensitized solar cells, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Efficient, high yield perovskite photovoltaic devices grown by interdiffusion of solution-processed precursor stacking layers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, Planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells via vapor-assisted solution process, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 136, 622–625 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent engineering for high-performance inorganic–organic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Luo, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Sun and S. M. Huang, Effective Improvement of the Photovoltaic Performance of Carbon-Based Perovskite Solar Cells by Additional Solvents, Nano–Micro. Lett., 2016, 8, 347–357 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Cesium-containing triple cation perovskite solar cells: improved stability, reproducibility and high efficiency, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
S. M. Huang, M. H. Hong, B. S. Luk'Yanchuk and T. C. Chong, Direct and subdiffraction-limit laser nanofabrication in silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4809–4811 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Plasmonics for improved photovoltaic devices, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, Detailed balance limit of efficiency of p-n junction solar cells, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ding, B. J. Lee, M. Yang, H. S. Jung and J. K. Lee, Surface-Plasmon Assisted Energy Conversion in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 415–421 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, M. Wang, A. G. Brolo, J. Shen, X. Li and S. M. Huang, Enhanced performance of dye-sensitized solar cells using gold nanoparticles modified fluorine tin oxide electrodes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 46, 32–44 Search PubMed .
J. H. Lee, J. H. Park, J. S. Kim, D. Y. Lee and K. Cho, High efficiency polymer solar cells with wet deposited plasmonic gold nanodots, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 416–420 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Schaadt, B. Feng and E. T. Yu, Enhanced semiconductor optical absorption via surface plasmon excitation in metal nanoparticles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063106 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Z. Li, X. Chen, C. Liu, X. Ye, Z. Wang, Z. Sun and S. Huang, Improved performance of flexible amorphous silicon solar cells with silver nanowires, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 124320 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Enhancement of perovskite-based solar cells employing core–shell metal nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, J. M. Ball, M. B. Johnston, A. Goriely, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Plasmonic-Induced Photon Recycling in Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5038–5046 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, E. M. Talbert and R. Bardhan, Light trapping in mesoporous solar cells with plasmonic nanostructures, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1577–1601 CAS .
Z. Yuan, Z. Wu, S. Bai, Z. Xia, W. Xu, T. Song, H. Wu, L. Xu, J. Si, Y. Jin and B. Sun, Hot-Electron Injection in a Sandwiched TiOx–Au–TiOx Structure for High-Performance Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 150038 Search PubMed .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. Kim, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, In situ processed gold nanoparticle-embedded TiO2 nanofibers enabling plasmonic perovskite solar cells to exceed 14% conversion efficiency, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2664–2677 RSC .
Z. Jiang, X. Chen, X. Lin, X. Jia, J. Wang, L. Pan, S. M. Huang, F. Zhu and Z. Sun, Amazing stable open-circuit voltage in perovskite solar cells using AgAl alloy electrode, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 146, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Not All That Glitters is Gold: Metal Migration-Induced Degradation in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, X. Chen, C. Zhang, J. Li, J. Shi, Z. Sun, Z. Wang and S. Huang, AgAl alloy electrode for efficient perovskite solar cells, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56037–56044 RSC .
M. Gratzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 1982, 414, 338 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, Catalysis with TiO2/gold nanocomposites. Effect
of metal particle size on the Fermi level equilibration, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung, J.-K. Lee, M. Nastasi, S.-W. Lee, J.-Y. Kim, J.-S. Park, K. S. Hong and H. Shin, Preparation of nanoporous MgO-coated TiO2 nanoparticles and their application to the electrode of dye-sensitized solar cells, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10332–10335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Taguchi, X. T. Zhang, I. Sutanto, K. Tokuhiro, T. N. Rao, H. Watanabe, T. Nakamori, M. Uragami and A. Fujishima, Improving the performance of solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell using MgO-coated TiO2 nanoporous film, Chem. Commun., 2003, 19, 2480–2481 RSC .
J. Wang, M. Qin, H. Tao, W. Ke, Z. Chen, J. Wan, P. Qin, L. Xiong, H. Lei and H. Yu, Performance enhancement of perovskite solar cells with Mg-doped TiO2 compact film as the hole-blocking layer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 591 Search PubMed .
X. Guo, H. Dong, W. Li, N. Li and L. Wang, Multifunctional MgO Layer in Perovskite Solar Cells, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1727–1732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, X. Yang, Y. Wu, N. T. Salim, A. Islam, T. Noda and L. Han, Selective Deposition of Insulating Metal Oxide in Perovskite Solar Cells with Enhanced Device Performance, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2625–2629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gouda, R. Gottesman, A. Ginsburg, D. A. Keller, E. Haltzi, J. Hu, S. Tirosh, A. Y. Anderson, A. Zaban and P. P. Boix, Open circuit potential build-up in perovskite solar cells from dark conditions to 1 sun, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4640–4645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and C. Ducati, SnO2-Based Dye-Sensitized Hybrid Solar Cells Exhibiting Near Unity Absorbed Photon-to-Electron Conversion Efficiency, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1259–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Dong, D. Y. Kim, K. W. Choi, J. H. Seo, S. H. Im, J. H. Park, O. O. Park and A. J. Heeger, Rücktitelbild: Enhancement of Donor–Acceptor Polymer Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cell Power Conversion Efficiencies by Addition of Au Nanoparticles, Angew. Chem., 2011, 50, 5519–5523 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Catchpole and A. Polman, Plasmonic solar cells, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793–21800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, 6.5% efficient perovskite quantum-dot-sensitized solar cell, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
G. Zhu, T. Lin, X. Lü, W. Zhao, C. Yang, Z. Wang, H. Yin, Z. Liu, F. Huang and J. Lin, Black brookite titania with high solar absorption and excellent photocatalytic performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9650–9653 CAS .
C. Huang, C. Liu, Y. Di, W. Li, F. Liu, L. Jiang, J. Li, X. Hao and H. Huang, Efficient Planar Perovskite Solar Cells with Reduced Hysteresis and Enhanced Open Circuit Voltage by Using PW12–TiO2 as Electron Transport Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8520–8526 CAS .
H. Zhang, C. Liang, Y. Zhao, M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Liang, D. Li, F. Zhang and Z. He, Dynamic interface charge governing the current–voltage hysteresis in perovskite solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9613–9618 RSC .
P. P. Boix, G. Larramona, A. Jacob, B. Delatouche, I. Mora-Seróand and J. Bisquert, Hole transport and recombination in all-solid Sb2S3-sensitized TiO2 solar cells using CuSCN as hole transporter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 1579–1587 Search PubMed .
M. D. Brown, T. Suteewong, R. S. S. Kumar, V. D'Innocenzo, A. Petrozza, M. M. Lee, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Plasmonic Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells Using Core−Shell Metal−Insulator Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 438–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, Ultrafast plasmon-induced electron transfer from gold nanodots into TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852–14853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Giugni, B. Torre, A. Toma, M. Francardi, M. Malerba, A. Alabastri, R. P. Zaccaria, M. I. Stockman and E. D. Fabrizio, Hot-electron nanoscopy using adiabatic compression of surface plasmons, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 845–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan and D. L. Phillips, Efficiency enhancement of perovskite solar cells through fast electron extraction: the role of graphene quantum dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball, S. D. Stranks, M. T. Hörantner, S. Hüttner, W. Zhang, E. J. W. Crossland, I. Ramirez, M. Riede, M. B. Johnston and R. H. Friend, Optical properties and limiting photocurrent of thin-film perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 602–609 CAS .

          E. D. Palik, Handbook of optical constants of solids, Academic Press,  1999 Search PubMed .
W. Fan, B. Yan, Z. Wang and L. Wu, Three-dimensional all-dielectric metamaterial solid immersion lens for subwavelength imaging at visible frequencies, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600901 Search PubMed .
Q. Luo, Y. Chen, Z. Li, F. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Wei, H. Guo, Z. B. Wang and S. M. Huang, Large enhancements of NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd nanorod upconversion emissions via coupling with localized surface plasmon of Au film, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 185401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bashevoy, V. Fedotov and N. Zheludev, Optical whirlpool on an absorbing metallic nanoparticle, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 8372–8379 CAS .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Brristow and N. Q. Wu, Photocatalytic activity enhanced by plasmonic resonant energy transfer from metal to semiconductor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Plasmon-induced photonic and energy transfer enhancement of solar water splitting by a hematite nanorod array, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 Search PubMed .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vrućinić, M. Alsari and H. J. Snaith, Photon recycling in lead iodide perovskite solar cells, Science, 2016, 351, 1430–1433 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, Analysis of Multivalley and Multibandgap Absorption and Enhancement of Free Carriers Related to Exciton Screening in Hybrid Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11566–11572 CAS .
Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, Electro-optics of perovskite
solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, Lead halides join the top optoelectronic league, Science, 2016, 351, 1401–1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Overcoming Ultraviolet Light Instability of Sensitized TiO2 with Meso-superstructured Organometal Tri-halide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
W. Li, W. Zhang, S. Van Reenen, R. J. Sutton, J. Fan, A. A. Haghighirad, M. B. Johnston, L. Wang and H. J. Snaith, Enhanced UV-light Stability of Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells with Caesium Bromide Interface Modification, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 490–498 CAS .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, Effects of Surface Blocking Layer of Sb2S3 on Nanocrystalline TiO2 for CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995–17000 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) J–V curves of devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO. (b) FESEM image of the top surface morphology and (c) cross-sectional FESEM picture of the p-TiO2 layer containing Au NPs. (d) Absorbance spectrum of Au suspension. (e) Energy diagram of the materials in the PSC devices with Au NPs and MgO.	 

S1	19.49	0.94	0.66	12.0
S2	18.21	0.95	0.62	10.7
S3	20.82	1.08	0.67	15.1
S4	21.76	1.09	0.68	16.1

 	Fig. 2  (a) UV-Vis absorption and (b) PL spectra of perovskite absorbers based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating.	 

 	Fig. 3  Dark J–V curves of devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Nyquist plots of the devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating under dark conditions at 0.9 V applied bias. (b) Simplified equivalent circuit to fit the impedance spectra.	 

S1	72.1	116.0	0.258	5.9
S2	57.0	83.9	0.255	2.9
S3	87.5	375.0	0.250	11.2
S4	34.5	292.0	0.254	5.4

 	Fig. 5  (a) EQE spectra and (b) normalized EQE curves of the devices based on p-TiO2 without and with Au NPs and/or MgO coating. (c) Calculated absorption depth of the absorber as a function of wavelength.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Model of the device modified with both Au NPs and MgO. 2D field |E| enhancement distribution image in the xz planes at (b) y = 0 nm, λ = 560 nm, (c) y = 0 nm, λ = 730 nm. Power flow diagrams within the xz planes at (d) y = 0 nm, λ = 560 nm, (e) y = 10 nm, λ = 560 nm, (f) y = 0 nm, λ = 730 nm, (g) y = 10 nm, λ = 730 nm. Power flow diagrams within the xy planes at (h) z = 0 nm, λ = 730 nm, (k) z = 18 nm, λ = 730 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  Power conversion efficiency variation of unsealed PSCs based on mesoporous TiO2 with and without Au NPs and/or MgO at ∼55% humidity after various UV exposure (90 mW cm−2 at 365 nm) durations.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
