Recent developments in II–VI and III–VI semiconductors and their applications in solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B512182E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B512182E
(Application)
J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1597-1602Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent developments in II–VI and III–VI semiconductors and their applications in solar cells

        
          
            Mohammad 
            Afzaal
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Paul 
            O'Brien
          
          
        
      *
      The School of Chemistry and The School of Materials, The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK M13 9PL. E-mail: paul.obrien@machester.ac.uk;  Fax: +44 (0)161 275 4616;   Tel: +44 (0)161 275 4652
Received 
      30th August 2005
    , Accepted 18th October 2005First published on 22nd November 2005AbstractCompound semiconductors formed from II–VI or III–VI elements are key materials in plans to harvest energy directly from sunlight in photovoltaic devices. This review summarises the recent advances in thin film deposition and nanocrystallite synthesis. Current work has significant potential for low-cost, scalable solar cells. The close interplay between the properties of the materials and their utility in solar cells is also briefly discussed.Mohammad AfzaalMohammad Afzaal graduated from Aston University, Birmingham in 2000 and moved to University of Manchester to carry out his PhD with Prof. Paul O'Brien studying growth of semiconductor thin films using single-source precursors. After completing his PhD in 2003, he remained with Prof. Paul O'Brien and took his current post-doctoral position, studying nanoparticles and thin film deposition.Paul O'BrienPaul O'Brien has been since 1999 Professor of Inorganic Materials Chemistry in the School of Chemistry and the School of Materials at University of Manchester and is at present Head of the School of Chemistry. He was Research Dean in the Faculty of Science and Engineering at University of Manchester from 2001–2003. In 2002, he founded Nanoco Ltd to commercialize quantum dot synthesis. He graduated from Liverpool University in 1975, obtained his PhD from the University of Wales, Cardiff in 1978 and was immediately appointed as a lecturer at Chelsea College of Science and Technology, University of London. During re-structuring of the University, he moved to Queen Marry and Westfield College in 1984 and was promoted to a chair in 1994. In 1995, he moved to Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine as a Professor of Inorganic Chemistry and subsequently as Sumitomo/STS Professor of Materials Chemistry (1997–2003). He was Regents appointed visiting Professor at Georgia Institute of Technology (1996–1999).
Introduction
Solar cells convert sunlight directly into electricity and are often used in calculators and watches. Solar cell technology, as a sustainable source of energy, has enjoyed a tremendous growth in recent years and production of solar cells increases at an annual average of ∼40%.1 This development is due to both improved materials and processing technologies as well as public awareness of the benefits of solar energy.
Thin film solar cells consist of sub-micron thick semiconductor layers. When sunlight is absorbed by the active material it loses electrons which flow through the material to produce electricity. The process of converting light to electricity is termed the photovoltaic effect. The most widely used commercial solar cells are made from single crystalline silicon and efficiencies up to 26.5% are reported for commercial products.2 However, such single crystalline solar cells are relatively expensive with the silicon itself making up 20–40% of the final cost.3 Amorphous silicon solar cells can be produced at lower temperatures and deposited on low-cost flexible substrates such as plastics or metal foils.3 Ultimately, the amorphous cells tend to degrade when exposed to sunlight and their efficiency decreases by 10–20%.
In the search for low-cost alternatives to crystalline silicon, thin film compound semiconductor materials are commonly used which offer advantages over silicon. It is more efficient to create an electric field at an interface between two different semiconductor materials, known as a heterojunction. A typical polycrystalline thin film has a thin (ca. 0.1 µm) layer on top known as a “window” material which lets most of the light through the interface (heterojunction) to the absorbing layer. The absorbing layer (ca. 1–2 µm thick) has to have a high absorption to be effective in the generation of current and a suitable band gap to provide good voltage. This review will focus on II–VI and III–VI materials, and emphasize their potential in solar cells and highlight challenges still to be met.
II–VI Materials
Thin films
Most group II–VI materials are direct band gap semiconductors with high optical absorption and emission coefficients (the exceptions are HgSe and HgTe which are semimetals). Cadmium telluride (CdTe) is a leading candidate for solar cell applications. Two key properties of CdTe are its band gap (1.45 eV) and its high optical absorption coefficient. A thin film of CdTe with thickness of ca. 2 µm will absorb nearly 100% of incident solar radiation.4 Another advantage of CdTe is that several methods are available for deposition including vacuum evaporation, electrodeposition, chemical vapour deposition (CVD) and closed space sublimation (CSS). The highest efficiency (16.5%) solar cells have been prepared by CSS.5 Other methods such as physical vapour deposition (PVD), electrodeposition and sputtering have also demonstrated potential to achieve high performance levels.6 The most common solar cell configuration is p-CdTe and n-CdS (Fig. 1). A key reason for the use of CdTe/CdS heterojunctions is the fact that both are miscible and a reaction between these two materials leads to the formation of an interfacial layer of CdS1−xTex.7 This thin layer is responsible for lowering the density of interfacial defects; leading to high efficiency in the resultant devices. This interfacial layer can be created with high deposition temperatures (>550 °C in CVD or CSS) or during a post-deposition heat treatment of CdTe/CdS structure in the presence of CdCl2. The enhanced efficiencies achieved through the heat treatment are due to (a) formation of interfacial layer, (b) recrystallization and grain growth in CdTe film and (c) defect passivation/carrier lifetime improvement in the absorber.8
 Fig. 1  A schematic layout of a conventional p–n junction thin-film solar cell. 
As a window material CdS imposes intrinsic limitations on the maximum achievable performance of the cell. A significant amount of the solar spectrum falls below 515 nm. Photons absorbed in CdS (Eg = 2.50 eV) will recombine and not contribute toward the final photocurrent. The potential photocurrent lost due to absorption by CdS can be ca. 7 mA cm−2.4 In CdTe/CdS solar cells, a thin layer of CdS is used to reduce absorption and enhance the output current. However, the possibility of the formation of pinholes in the CdS films is greater in such films; pinholes cause the CdTe layer to be in contact with the transparent contact (usually SnO2) leading to the formation of CdTe–SnO2 microjunctions. These CdTe–SnO2 microjunctions are not as efficient as CdTe/CdS and act as micro-shunts reducing the efficiency of the device. It is possible to take advantage of the different properties of two transparent conducting oxides (TCOs) by forming a bilayer. High efficiency CdTe/CdS cells are generally fabricated with such bilayer structures. These consist of a highly conducting layer with a low-resistance contact and lateral current collection, and a much thinner high-resistivity layer of suitable materials. This structure minimises forward current through pinholes in the window layer, therefore eliminating the formation of shunting microjunctions. By incorporating a 50 nm thick resistive SnO2, In2O3 or ZnO layer, the CdS layer can be reduced to <20 nm, which significantly improves the response of the CdTe devices. The presence of the smoother, highly resistive layer also improves the CdS film morphology by providing large grains during chemical bath deposition (CBD).9
There are no low-cost metals available with an appropriate work function (>4.5 eV) to form ohmic contact on CdTe, as a result gold has been used in most cases.10 Nickel based contacts have also shown promising results.11,12 In an alternative approach, a pseudo-ohmic contact has been developed in which a highly doped semiconductor is formed on the CdTe surface followed by a thin film metal contact. Semiconductors such as HgTe or ZnTe can be deposited between CdTe and contact metal to achieve a good ohmic contact. A critical step in the formation of the back contact is the use of a cleaning/surface modification solution, typically Br2/methanol or nitric–phosphoric (NP) acid mixture.13,14 The NP etch is preferential leaving the CdTe surface Te-rich therefore increasing the surface conductivity and aiding the formation of a tunnelling junction.13 In most cases, the formation of the back contact includes copper, which has been found to form a thin Cu2Te layer on the surface of CdTe, which also appears to be critical to the formation of an effective back contact.15
Ternary cadmium zinc sulfide (Cd1−xZnxS) in conjunction with CdS is a good candidate for wide band gap window material for traditional CdTe/CdS contact. Its band gap can be tuned between 2.42 eV (CdS) to 3.6 eV (ZnS). It improves the wavelength spectral response of the cell at the same time, without compromising the transport properties and the shunt resistances of the cell. Cd1−xZnxS is a suitable alternative window material to ZnS because an efficient cell is only possible when ZnS is heavily n-doped which is difficult. As a result, Cd1−xZnxS is used as the doped form of ZnS. However, the use of CdZnS film in CdTe device presents some challenges. Lattice parameter changes linearly with Zn content in the compound. The electrical resistivity increases from <1 Ω cm to >1010
					Ωcm as x increases from 0 to 1.16
In CdTe solar cells, any significant gains are unlikely without a breakthrough in the improvement of open-circuit voltage. So, an alternative approach is the development of two-junction tandem-cell devices.17 A modelling approach used by Coutts et al., has indicated that the band gap of the top cell should be 1.6–1.8 eV in order to achieve a high performance.18 Ternary systems such as CdxZn1−xTe alloy is one of a few semiconductor material which has a tunable band gap and allows tandem solar cell to absorb a larger fraction of the solar spectrum energy. CdxZn1−xTe thin films have been deposited by several different techniques, and depending on the growing parameters used, either epitaxial19 or polycrystalline thin films with different grain sizes, lead to variations of their optical and electrical properties.20
Nanomaterials
Semiconductor nanocrystals are regarded as useful materials for building hybrid organic–inorganic so-called third-generation solar cells. This utility is due to the fact that their optical band can be tuned by both material selection and quantum confinement and because advances in synthesis allow control over nanocrystal size and shape to optimize performance.21 Other advantages of using structured layers in thin film solar cells are (a) the optical path for photon absorption is increased than the actual thin film thickness due to multiple reflections and (b) light generated from electrons and holes need to travel over a short path therefore, recombination losses are greatly reduced and consequently, the absorber layer thickness in nano-structured solar cells can be as thin as 150 nm instead of several microns in traditional solar cells.22 To obtain high efficiencies, it is necessary to have an interpenetrating network of electron-accepting and hole-accepting components within the device which are achieved using polymer blends23 or a mixture of conjugated polymers with C60 derivatives.24 For many conjugated polymers, electron mobilities are extremely low, typically below 10−4 cm2 V−1 S−1 due to the presence of electron traps such as oxygen.25 Therefore, polymer photovoltaic devices rely on the introduction of another material for electron transport. The presence of a second material also provides an interface for charge transfer and therefore, small conjugated molecules have been blended with polymers at a concentration that enables the formation of percolation pathways for electron transport.26
Cells based on cadmium selenide (CdSe) quantum dots with organic semiconducting polymers have been reported to show photovoltaic effects. There are well-established routes for the synthesis of high quality, monodispersed CdSe nanomaterials such as using air-stable, single-source precursor e.g. [Cd(Se2CNMenHex)2]27 (Fig. 2) or pyrolysis of organometallic precursors in a hot liquid containing a mixture of surfactants.28 Alivisatos and co-workers have reported the formation of rod-shape CdSe nanoparticles resulting from extended growth along the c-axis of the hexagonal wurtzite structure, which is achieved by varying the surfactant mixture (particularly by including alkylphosphonic acids) or the concentration of the precursors.29 CdSe tetrapods comprising four limbs have also been reported at a central core.30
 Fig. 2  Synthesis of CdSe nanoparticles from [Cd(Se2CNMenHex)2].27 
In one type of cell, 5 nm CdSe nanoparticles are dispersed in a hole-conducting polymer poly(2-methoxy,5-(2′-ethyl)-hexyloxy-p-phenylenevinylene),31 upon optical excitation of the quantum dots, photogenerated holes are injected to the polymer phase and are collected via an electrical contact to the polymer phase. The electrons remain in the CdSe particles and are collected by the diffusion and percolation in the nanocrystalline phase to an electrical contact in the quantum dot network. Initial results show a relatively low conversion efficiency31 which is attributed to the poor transport of electrons, which hop between nanocrystals and are terminated in the polymer–nanocrystal network. Improvements have been made to create charge transfer junctions with high interfacial area by combining CdSe nanorods with poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).32 CdSe was used as the electron transport material; P3HT is an effective hole transport material (in its regioregular form) demonstrating the highest field effect hole mobilities observed in polymers so far. The nanorods have a tendency to lie in the plane of the film, which is not the optimum arrangement for electron extraction, and the best cells showed 1.7% power conversion efficiency (PCE) and an external equilibrium efficiency (EQE) of 55% under simulated solar light (AM1.5) (Fig. 3). Branched CdSe structures have potential advantages because it is possible for them to lie flat within the film. Sun et al., have reported higher efficiencies (PCE = 2.4% and EQE = 52%) obtained from branched CdSe nanocrystals blended with a poly(phenylene vinylene) derivative.33 These hybrid solar cells are currently the best performing hybrid solar cells.
 Fig. 3  (A) EQEs of 7 nm diameter nanorods with lengths 7, 30, and 60 nm. (B) The current–voltage characteristics of the 7 nm by 60 nm nanorod device. (C) Solar cell characteristics of this 7 nm by 60 nm nanorod device illuminated with simulated AM 1.5 Global light. (D) Photocurrent spectra for two devices with 60 nm long nanorods with diameters 7 and 3 nm. Reproduced with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, ref. 32. 
The performance of solar cells can be improved by extending nanocrystal absorption into the IR region by using three-dimensional CdTe tetrapods.34 Additionally, CdTe possess much higher electron mobility than CdSe and hence expected to give a better performance. Solar cell based on composites of CdTe nanocrystals–poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] had an efficiency of 0.052%, suggesting that the photogeneration of charges and subsequent transfer of charges from polymer to nanoparticles has taken place.34 The low level of power conversion as compared to CdSe tetrapods–poly(phenylene vinylene) may be a result of the incomplete percolation network for the charge transfer. So, there is scope for development of novel organics or novel inorganic materials.
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is another material which can be both used in thin films or as nanoparticles in photovoltaic applications. ZnO thin films are useful as TCO electrodes in copper indium diselenide (CuInSe2) and copper indium gallium diselenide Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells because of their high conductivity and high transmittance in the visible part of the radiation spectrum.35 An attractive property of ZnO for use as a TCO is the chemical and thermal stability under hydrogen plasma processing (necessary in the production of many thin film Si solar cells). Nanophase ZnO has attracted a great deal of interest as an alternative to TiO2 in dye-sensitised Grätzel-type applications36 and extremely thin absorber (ETA) solar cells.37 ZnO nanoparticles within a conjugated polymer–matrix has also been shown to make bulk heterojunction solar cells.38 These cells can be processed from solution and exhibit an incident photon to current efficiency up to 40%. The relatively easy synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles does not need the use of additional surface modification to create solubility in common organic solvents and is considered advantageous as compared to methods based on CdSe.
III–VI Materials
The combination of a group III (13) metal and a chalcogenide in materials show great diversity and many different stoichiometries are observed for the binary combinations of a Group 13 (Ga, In, TI) and a Group 16 chalcogen (S, Se, Te). Several structural types are found for these compounds including a defect wurzite structure for Ga2E3, a defect spinel for In2E3 and layered structures for compounds of stoichiometries ME.39 These chalcogenides are direct gap semiconductors with wide band gaps like the II–VI compounds. However, their polytypism and the variety of stoichiometries accessible present problems, not found in the simple II–VI materials.
There is a largely politically driven drive to replace cadmium with other elements. The replacement of n-type CdS layers in polycrystalline heterojunction thin film solar cells employing copper indium diselenide (CuInSe2) or copper indium gallium diselenide Cu(In,Ga)Se2 absorber layers is of particular interest. In addition to “environmental issues” another factor for prompting a search for other materials is that light absorbed by CdS is lost for the current generation and therefore a higher band gap material allows more short-wavelength photons to reach the absorber and generate photocurrent.
The III–VI semiconductor materials such as indium sulfide (In2S3) have received a considerable attention for application in solar cells. With optimal physical properties, In2S3 can meet the requirement to be used as a window material or buffer layer for photovoltaic structures. It is a n-type semiconductor which can be successfully deposited by soft techniques like CBD40 and it has band gap that can be varied between 2.0 and 2.45 eV depending upon the composition. Thin films of In2S3 have been suggested as window material in Cu(In,Ga)Se2 based cells. It has also been reported that there is no conduction band discontinuity at the interface Cu(In,Ga)Se2/β-In2S3.41 Efficiencies of 15.7% have been obtained for devices employing In(OH,S) layers, comparable to 16% obtained for the more standard CBD CdS buffer layers.42 Hariskos et al. observed that the fill factor of these cells dropped with time when the cells were kept in the dark whereas upon illumination the degradation was reversed. It has been suggested that the degradation is due to absorption of some species (e.g., oxygen, water) that reacts with the photogenerated electrons and holes. Similarly, heterostructures based on In2Se3/CuGaSe2/SnO2 and their photovoltaic effects have been studied.43
Indium selenide (InSe) is another III–VI layered semiconductor material. It is particularly suitable for photovoltaic use because of its band gap (1.3 eV), optical and transport properties. Its cleaved surfaces do not need any additional treatment for p–n junction formation and are chemically inert under ambient conditions. The problem with the deposition of InSe is the coexistence of several In–Se phases. Segura et al. have studied InSe films on GaSe single crystals by van der Waals epitaxy from independent In and Se sources.44 The current–voltage characteristics of InSe films were measured under simulated AM2 conditions. The solar conversion efficiency of these devices was lower than 0.6% (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  
I–V characteristic under dark and simulated AM2 conditions of an ITO/InSe/GaSe/In device with a 2500 Å thick InSe epilayer, measured at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from the American Institute of Physics, ref. 44. 
Cadmium indium selenide (CdIn2Se4) is a group II–III–VI semiconductor material which has potential applications in solar energy conversion due to interesting tailored properties. The deposition of CdIn2Se4 thin films has been carried out on amorphous glass substrates using spray pyrolysis.45 The electrical resistivity shows that the films are semiconducting and the resistivity is found to be minimum at optimised substrate temperature (285 °C). Photovoltaic output characteristics study reveals that the fill factor and efficiency to be 69% and 3%, respectively.
There has been relatively little work carried out on the synthesis and applications of III–VI nanoparticles in solar cells. Xie and co-workers have successfully synthesized In2S3 nanoparticles, short whiskers, nanorods and finger-type crystals with stoichiometric composition. It was established that the reagent concentration, solvent and reaction temperature have a profound effect in controlling the morphology.46 Our group has also reported the synthesis of InS and InSe nanoparticles capped with TOPO and nanoparticles of InSe capped with 4-ethylpyridine by a single-source route using tris(diethyldithiocarbamato)-indium(III) or tris(diethyldiselenocarbamato)indium(III) as precursors47 (Fig. 5). Our recent efforts have included the formation of 1D nanostructural In2S3 thin films by aerosol-assisted chemical vapor deposition (AACVD) using [Et2In(S2CNMenBu)] as a single-molecule precursor.48 The rods were ca. 20 nm in diameter and ca. 0.4–0.5 µm in length (Fig. 6). GaSe is another important material which has a direct band gap of 2.11 eV. The GaSe nanoparticles (2–6 nm) have been prepared from Me3Ga and trioctylphosphine selenium in a high boiling solution of trioctylphosphine (TOP) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO).49 Recent studies have been devoted to the synthesis of colloidal ternary chalcopyrite materials such as CuInS2 (Eg = 1.5 eV) nanoparticles from (PPh3)2CuIn(SEt)4.50 These offer the possibility of increased solar cell efficiency. However, better synthetic and reproducible methods have to be investigated for controlled morphologies and stoichiometries before their exploitation in photovoltaic devices is possible.
 Fig. 5  4-Ethylpyridine capped InSe nanoparticles (a) TEM micrograph (b) size distribution histogram.47 
 Fig. 6  (a) A typical TEM image of synthesized In2S3 nanorods at 375 °C and (b) a HR-TEM image showing a segment of a single straight In2S3 nanorod. Interplanar spacing d = 0.66 nm is consistent with the (103) plane.48 
Other photovoltaic systems
Dye-sensitized solar cells, also known as photoelectrochemical cells are alternative to p–n junction photovoltaic devices.51 In such cells, dye molecules are chemisorbed most typically onto the surface of 10–30 nm TiO2 particles that have been sintered into highly porous nanocrystalline 10–20 µm TiO2 film. Upon photoexcitation of the dye molecules, electrons are very efficiently injected from the excited state of the dye into the conduction band of the TiO2, affecting charge separation and producing a photovoltaic effect. Other wide band gap oxides such as ZnO, SnO2 and Nb2O5 have been investigated which are all relatively easy and cheap to process.52
Conclusions
Group II–VI materials (as thin films or as nanocrystals) are good candidates for use in solar cells. Thin film solar cells (CdTe/CdS) at present offer one of the best possibilities of producing solar cells at relatively low costs but there are increasing concerns associated with the toxicity of cadmium. The use of nanocrystals is particularly attractive in hybrid nanocrystal–polymer cells because different sizes and different shapes can be used to improve charge transport and energy conversion. In addition to binary compounds, there are some important ternary and quaternary phases of group III–VI such as CuInE2 and CuIn1−xGaxE2 (E = S, Se) with uses in solar cells and their commercial exploitation has been explored. Future developments in solar cell technology depend on the development and application of new materials towards the ultimate goal of cost-effective solar power.
Acknowledgements
POB would like to thank EPSRC (UK) for funding that has made much of the described work possible.
References
A. Jäger-waldau, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 667 CrossRef .

          http://www.amonix.com/Technology/technology.htm
         .

          http://www.pv.unsw.edu.au/FutureStudents/thinfilm.asp
         .
C. S. Ferekides, U. Balasubramanian, R. Mamazza, V. Viswanathan, H. Zhao and D. L. Morel, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 823 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Wu, J. C. Keane, R. G. Dhere, C. Dehart, D. S. Albin, A. Duda, T. A. Gessert, S. Asher, D. H. Levi and P. Sheldon, Proceedings of the 17th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and Exhibition, Munich, Germany,  2001, p. 531 Search PubMed .

          X. Wu, R. G. Dhere, Y. Yan, M. J. Romero, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, C. Dehart, A. Duda, C. Perkins and B. To, Conference Record of the 29th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, IEEE, New York, USA,  2002, p. 531 Search PubMed .
C. S. Ferekides, D. Marinskiy, V. Viswanathan, B. Tetali, V. Palekis, P. Salvaraj and D. L. Morel, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361–362, 520 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burgelman, J. Verschraegen, S. Degrave and P. Nolt, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 392 CrossRef CAS .

          R. W. Birkmire and B. E. McCandless, Conference Record of the 28th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, IEEE, New York, USA,  2000, p. 491 Search PubMed .
A. Niemegeers and M. Burgelman, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 2881 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2004, 12, 69 CAS .
O. Rorlevi, K. D. Dobson, D. Rose and G. Rodes, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 155 CrossRef .

          D. H. Levi, L. M. Woods, D. S. Albin, T. A. Gessert, D. W. Niles, A. Swartzlander, D. H. Rose, R. K. Ahrenkiel and P. Sheldon, Conference Record of the 26th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, IEEE, New York, USA,  1997, p. 351 Search PubMed .
B. E. McCandless and K. D. Dobson, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 839 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Hagedus and B. E. McCandless, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 75 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, X. Wu, G. Teeter, B. To, Y. Yan, R. G. Dhere and T. A. Gessert, Phy. Status Solidi B, 2004, 241, 775 Search PubMed .
R. Dhere, T. Gessert, J. Zhou, J. Pankow, S. Asher and H. Moutinho, Phy. Status Solidi B, 2004, 241, 771 Search PubMed .
T. J. Coutts, J. S. Ward, D. L. Young, K. A. Emery, T. A. Gessert and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2003, 11, 359 .
Z. Z. Zhang, D. Z. Shan, C. X. Shan, J. Y. Zhang, Y. M. Lu, Y. C. Liu and X. W. Fan, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 429, 211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Becerril, O. Zelaya-Angel, R. Fragoso-Soriano and L. Tirado-Mejia, Rev. Mex. Fis., 2004, 50, 29 Search PubMed .
D. J. Milliron, L. Gur and A. P. Alivisatos, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 41 CAS .
K. Ernst, A. Belaidi and R. Konenkamp, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, 475 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, F. Padinger, T. Fromherz and J. C. Hummelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 841 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bozano, S. A. Carter, J. C. Scott, G. G. Malliaras and P. J. Brock, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1132 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Dittmer, E. A. Marseglia and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1270 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien and N. Revaprasadu, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 913 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murry, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickman, C. K. Ham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Greenham, X. G. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 17628 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) B. E. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Sun, H. J. Snaith, A. S. Dhoot, S. Westenhoff and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 14941 .
S. Kumar and T. Nann, Chem. Commun., 2003, 19, 2478 RSC .
S. A. Alagappan and S. L. Mitra, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2005, 116, 293 CrossRef .
H. Rensmo, K. Keis, H. Lindstrom, S. Sodergren, A. Solbrand, A. Hagfeldt, S. E. Lindquist, L. N. Wang and M. Muhammed, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 2598 Search PubMed .
C. Lévy-Clément, A. Katty, S. Bastide, F. Zenia, I. Mora and V. Muñoz-Sanjose, Physica E (Amsterdam), 2002, 14, 229 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beck, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 12, 1009 CrossRef CAS .

          N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the Elements, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1984, ch. 7, p. 286 Search PubMed .
K. Govender, D. S. Boyle and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2242 RSC .
J. C. Bernede, N. Barreau, S. Marsillac and L. Assmann, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2002, 195, 222 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hariskos, M. Ruckh, U. Ruble, T. Walter, H. W. Schock, J. Hedstorn and L. Stolt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 41–42, 345 CrossRef .
K. Djessas, S. Yapi, G. Masse, M. Ibannain and J. L. Gauffier, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 4111 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Sánchez-Royo, A. Segura, O. Lang, E. Schaar, C. Pettenkofer, W. Jaegermann, L. Roa and A. Chevy, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 2818 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Nikale and C. H. Bhosale, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 82, 3 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Xiong, Y. Xie, G. A. Du and X. B. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 98 RSC .
N. Revaprasadu, M. A. Malik, J. Carstens and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2885 RSC .
M. Afzaal, M. A. Malik and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2004, 334 RSC .
V. Chikan and D. F. Kelley, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 141 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Castro, S. G. Bailey, R. P. Raffaelle, K. K. Banger and A. F. Hepp, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 23 CAS .
B. O'Regan, D. T. Schwartz, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1263 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
Mohammad Afzaal	Mohammad Afzaal graduated from Aston University, Birmingham in 2000 and moved to University of Manchester to carry out his PhD with Prof. Paul O'Brien studying growth of semiconductor thin films using single-source precursors. After completing his PhD in 2003, he remained with Prof. Paul O'Brien and took his current post-doctoral position, studying nanoparticles and thin film deposition.
Paul O'Brien	Paul O'Brien has been since 1999 Professor of Inorganic Materials Chemistry in the School of Chemistry and the School of Materials at University of Manchester and is at present Head of the School of Chemistry. He was Research Dean in the Faculty of Science and Engineering at University of Manchester from 2001–2003. In 2002, he founded Nanoco Ltd to commercialize quantum dot synthesis. He graduated from Liverpool University in 1975, obtained his PhD from the University of Wales, Cardiff in 1978 and was immediately appointed as a lecturer at Chelsea College of Science and Technology, University of London. During re-structuring of the University, he moved to Queen Marry and Westfield College in 1984 and was promoted to a chair in 1994. In 1995, he moved to Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine as a Professor of Inorganic Chemistry and subsequently as Sumitomo/STS Professor of Materials Chemistry (1997–2003). He was Regents appointed visiting Professor at Georgia Institute of Technology (1996–1999).

 	Fig. 1  A schematic layout of a conventional p–n junction thin-film solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis of CdSe nanoparticles from [Cd(Se2CNMenHex)2].27	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) EQEs of 7 nm diameter nanorods with lengths 7, 30, and 60 nm. (B) The current–voltage characteristics of the 7 nm by 60 nm nanorod device. (C) Solar cell characteristics of this 7 nm by 60 nm nanorod device illuminated with simulated AM 1.5 Global light. (D) Photocurrent spectra for two devices with 60 nm long nanorods with diameters 7 and 3 nm. Reproduced with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, ref. 32.	 

 	Fig. 4  
I–V characteristic under dark and simulated AM2 conditions of an ITO/InSe/GaSe/In device with a 2500 Å thick InSe epilayer, measured at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from the American Institute of Physics, ref. 44.	 

 	Fig. 5  4-Ethylpyridine capped InSe nanoparticles (a) TEM micrograph (b) size distribution histogram.47	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A typical TEM image of synthesized In2S3 nanorods at 375 °C and (b) a HR-TEM image showing a segment of a single straight In2S3 nanorod. Interplanar spacing d = 0.66 nm is consistent with the (103) plane.48	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
