A chemistry and material perspective on lithium redox flow batteries towards high-density electrical energy storage  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00289C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00289C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7968-7996A chemistry and material perspective on lithium redox flow batteries towards high-density electrical energy storage

        
          
            Yu 
            Zhao†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Ding†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yutao 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lele 
            Peng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hye Ryung 
            Byon
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            John B. 
            Goodenough
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Guihua 
            Yu
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science and Engineering Program and Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. E-mail: ghyu@austin.utexas.edu
bInstitute of Functional Nano & Soft Materials (FUNSOM), Soochow University, 199 Ren-Ai Road, Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215123, China
cByon Initiative Research Unit (IRU), RIKEN, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan
Received 
      7th April 2015
    First published on 12th August 2015AbstractElectrical energy storage system such as secondary batteries is the principle power source for portable electronics, electric vehicles and stationary energy storage. As an emerging battery technology, Li-redox flow batteries inherit the advantageous features of modular design of conventional redox flow batteries and high voltage and energy efficiency of Li-ion batteries, showing great promise as efficient electrical energy storage system in transportation, commercial, and residential applications. The chemistry of lithium redox flow batteries with aqueous or non-aqueous electrolyte enables widened electrochemical potential window thus may provide much greater energy density and efficiency than conventional redox flow batteries based on proton chemistry. This Review summarizes the design rationale, fundamentals and characterization of Li-redox flow batteries from a chemistry and material perspective, with particular emphasis on the new chemistries and materials. The latest advances and associated challenges/opportunities are comprehensively discussed.
1. Introduction
The increasing need for greater amounts of electrical energy storage is driven by the need to provide greater flexibility and stability to cope with the increasing production of renewable energy. Electrical energy storage via potential energy, such as pumped hydro and compressed air storage, can be an attractive option for bulk energy storage with a low life cycle cost, though they are limited by site selection and require a large initial investment and lengthy construction. Electrical storage via kinetic energy, such as flywheels, offers high power but low energy. The largest group of technologies for electrical storage is electrochemical storage technologies that can efficiently store electricity in chemicals and reversibly release it on demand. As predicted by Joint EASE/EERA recommendations for European Energy Storage Technology Development Roadmap towards 2030,1 electrochemical energy storage technologies represent one of the most promising potential for development to market-based deployment in a time horizon of 10–20 years. In general, electrochemical energy storage possesses a number of desirable features, including pollution-free operation, high round-trip efficiency, and flexible power and energy characteristics to meet different functions, long cycle life, and low maintenance. As one of the most widely used technologies for electrochemical energy storage, rechargeable batteries stand out as the most important candidate in many industrial and household applications for the new energy economy from sustainable sources.2
Batteries are inherently simple in concept, but have not yet departed substantially from the discovery of the first galvanic battery developed by Alessandro Volta in the 1800s. Till now, battery development has progressed incrementally mainly due to the limitation of electrode materials and battery design, together with other difficulties in developing suitable electrolytes and mastering the interfaces between the electrode materials and the electrolytes.3–6 The number of commercially available rechargeable battery systems is relatively small, with aqueous electrolyte (lead/acid, redox flow, alkaline nickel/metal hydride) and lithium batteries dominating the market. Table 1 summarizes key performances of major commercialized conventional and advanced batteries. Lead/acid battery which uses lead redox couples in both electrodes was the first and the least expensive one developed so far, and though as the most commonly used secondary batteries, its utilization of the active material is far from 100%. Rechargeable alkaline batteries are the most used electrochemical storage devices after lead–acid systems. Like primary alkaline cells, they have a relatively high internal resistance, making them unsuitable for high-rate discharging. They also have limited cycling life if deeply discharged, and the available energy on each cycle decreases. Sodium–sulphur battery must have insulation and active heating to maintain a 300 °C operating point, or the resulting freeze thaw cycles and thermal expansion can lead to mechanical stresses, damaging seals and other cell components and possibly causing an explosion and fire. Conventional redox flow batteries based on aqueous-chemistry are of interest for stationary applications due to their modular design and potentially low cost. However, the limitations are obvious: low energy density originated from low working potential limited by electrolysis to ca. 1.5 V cell voltage, and low ion concentrations (typically 1–2 M), yielding only ∼40 W h L−1 energy density for the fluids alone.7 Even the prominent battery technologies such as the Li-ion battery still show large gaps between expected and practical performances.8
Table 1 Key performances of major commercialized conventional and advanced batteries




Battery type
Energy density
Specific power
Cycle life at
Efficiency
Working temperature


W h kg−1
W h L−1
W kg−1
80% DODa
(%)
(°C)





a Depth of discharge.





Lead–acid
Flooded
25–40
60–100
140–350
200–1500
70–75
20–40


Valve-regulated
30–40
80–100
140–300
300–1500
80–85
20–40


Compressed
40–50
100
140–250
800–1500
70–85
20–40


Alkaline
Ni–Cd (high power)
25–40
130
500
800–1500
70–75
−40–50


Ni–Cd (high capacity)
40–50
130
120–350
800–1500
70–75
−40–50


Ni–Zn
60–80
200–300
500–1000
200–1000
60–65
0–40


NiMH (high power)
40–55
80–200
500–1400
500–2000
70–80
0–45


NiMH (high capacity)
60–80
200–350
200–600
500–2000
70–80
0–45


High temperature
Sodium–sulphur
103
150
100
4500
89
−20–45


Lithium
Li-ion (high power)
70–130
150–450
600–3000
800–3000
90–95
−20–60


Li-ion (high capacity)
110–220
150–450
200–600
800–3000
90–95
−20–60


Li Polymer
100–180
100
300–500
300–1000
90–95
−20–110


Flow batteries
High capacity
60–80
75–80
50–150
10000
70–75
0–40


Electrochemical capacitors
High power
3–5
3–10
2000–10000
>500000
95–100
−20–90


High capacity
12–20
3–6
2000–10000
>500000
95–100
−20–90




Breakthroughs in rechargeable battery technologies have been regarded as perhaps the most crucial need for future electrical energy storage, which wouldn't be realized with incremental improvements in existing technologies, but rather by the development of novel energy storage concepts incorporating new materials and chemical processes.9–12 Li-redox flow battery represents such a new trend towards the design of next-generation alkali-ion battery with lower cost than conventional Li-ion batteries, and a voltage greater than conventional redox-flow battery based on proton chemistry. A Li-redox flow battery uses lightweight Li+-ion as its charge carrier, and liquid phase redox reaction from redox molecule with relatively high redox potential as active material in the cathode, metallic lithium or soluble redox molecule with relatively low redox potential as active material in the anode. The amount of energy stored is determined by the amount of redox molecules, while power density is determined by redox kinetics of redox molecules and the rate of mass/charge transport inside the cell. Li-redox flow battery represents a promising electrical energy storage system for large-scale energy storage due to its modular design that provides flexible operation, transportability, and moderate manufacturing cost. In this Review, following an introduction of the operation principles and smart features of the Li-redox flow battery systems, recent advances, challenges, and possible solutions to this new battery system are discussed in detail.
2. Architecture and electrochemistry of Li-redox flow batteries
A battery cell is typically composed of two electrodes, which have different chemical potentials, and connected by an electrolyte. When these electrodes are connected by external circuit, electrons spontaneously flow from the more negative to the more positive potential. Ions are transported through the electrolyte, maintaining the charge balance, and electrical energy can be tapped by the external loading. The cell converts stored chemical energy into electrical energy via redox reactions at the redox centre of the anode and cathode. A variety of cells, primary and secondary, based on different redox chemistry have been realized though they are essentially the same technology.
One of the most important secondary batteries is redox-flow battery, which is designed to store energy on the medium to large scale, particularly in applications such as load levelling, power quality control and facilitating renewable energy deployment.13 Unlike other secondary batteries that store electrical energy in solid electrode materials, the rechargeability of a redox-flow battery is provided by two chemical components with reversible redox behaviour dissolved in liquids contained within the system and external reservoirs.7,14–17 The typical structure of a redox-flow battery, vanadium redox battery for instance (Fig. 1a), has two chambers, a positive chamber and a negative chamber, separated by an ion-exchange membrane. These two chambers are circulated with aqueous electrolytes containing active species in different valence states. The modular design distinguishes redox-flow battery from other solid-electrode-based electrochemical energy storage systems: decoupled energy capacity owing to the external circulating sub-system, and quick response arising from fast mass/charge transfer between the electrodes and intimate liquid–solid interface between active species and current collector.18 The limitations of the redox-flow batteries are also obvious: low energy density and efficiency resulted from limited solubility of active species/internal shuttle effect, highly corrosive electrolytes, and low operating potential limited by water electrolysis. From the thermodynamic point of view, water can be directly used as electrolyte. The decomposition potential of water is dependent on its acidity (Fig. 1b). In theory, the potential window of water is only 1.23 V regardless of the acidity. However, the electrolysis would not generally proceed beyond this potential window since the electrical input must provide the full amount of enthalpy of oxygen and hydrogen evolution reaction, which broadens the threshold of water electrolysis to ca. −0.75–1.25 V vs. SHE at neutral pH environment. Therefore, a regular cell provides a relatively low operating voltage in the range of 1.2–1.6 V.19
 Fig. 1  Principles of secondary batteries based on aqueous and aprotic electrolytes. (a) Schematic of a vanadium redox-flow battery. The active species are dissolved in a strong acid. During charge process, VO2+ is oxidized to VO2+ at the positive electrode and V3+ is reduced to V2+ at the negative electrode. The protons transport across the ion-exchange membrane to balance the charge. (b) Potential window of water at room temperature. (c) Schematic of a typical Li-ion battery. Upon charging, Li ions are deintercalated from the Li-intercalation compound and intercalated into the graphite layers. The process is reversed on discharge. The electrodes are separated by an aprotic electrolyte that transports Li ions between the electrodes. (d) Schematic energy diagram of organic electrolyte. Eg is the window of the electrolyte for thermodynamic stability. 
Another important category of rechargeable batteries is the Li-ion battery and Li-ion polymer batteries. In a Li-ion battery (Fig. 1c), the positive electrode is a Li-intercalation compound, typically transition metal oxides or chalcogenides with stable crystal lattices that allow Li+-ion to diffuse within their layer or tunnel structures,20,21 whereas the anode is made of graphite in most commercialized Li-ion batteries.22 The cathode and the anode are separated by aprotic electrolyte that allows Li+-ions to move freely between the cathode and anode.23 By injecting or extracting electrons, the redox reactions occur on the host lattice while mobile Li+-ions reversibly intercalate into or deintercalate from the host matrix to compensate for electroneutrality. The adoption of organic electrolyte or solid electrolyte greatly broadens the potential window of a cell. The electrolyte should be electrochemically inert within the potential between the LUMO and the HOMO (Fig. 1d). An anode/cathode with redox potential below/above the LUMO/HOMO would reduce/oxidize the electrolyte unless a passivation layer (so-called solid electrolyte interface, SEI) creates a barrier to block electron transport from the anode/cathode to the electrolyte.24 Therefore, thermodynamic stability requires locating the electrode redox potentials within the window of the electrolyte. Typically, carbonates show an oxidation potential at ca. 4.7 V25 and a reduction potential near 1.0 V.26 It's found that EC provides a stable SEI layer on the surface of a carbon anode that protects the electrolytes from further decomposition after SEI formation. Therefore, the commercial Li-ion cells based on LiCoO2 cathode and graphite anode can reach an average operating potential of 4 V.10 Li-ion batteries and Li-ion polymer batteries presently have dominated the market of portable electronics, and possibly would be used in other areas where high energy density are needed, such as electric vehicles. However, it's difficult to increase the energy capacity in a packaged cell limited by the insertion chemistry of electrode materials. In addition, the power density is relatively low because of slow diffusion of Li+ ions in the bulk electrode. Besides, the relatively high material cost might also be a critical obstacle for large-scale applications.
Li-redox flow battery is an emerging battery technology that combines the advantage of a redox-flow battery and a Li-ion battery. The structure of a Li-redox cell (Fig. 2) inherits the smart features of conventional redox-flow batteries: soluble cathode-active redox couple dissolved in a proper solvent to form the catholyte, and metallic Li as the anode or soluble anode-active redox couple dissolved in a proper solvent to form the anolyte. The catholyte and the anolyte can be stored in external reservoirs and circulated with the assistance of external circulating sub-system. Therefore, the energy capacity can be independently scaled up. The chemistry of a Li-redox cell shifts from proton-mediated redox reaction to a Li+-mediated one, which provides sufficiently high operating voltage that is comparable to the Li-ion batteries. The charge transport inside the battery is based on the transport of Li ions between anode and cathode, and certain Li-ion conducting membranes are adopted to prevent the crossover of redox couples in either side of electrodes.
 Fig. 2  Structure and working principle of a Li-redox flow cell. 
In a typical charge process, the reduced form of one redox species (Red1) in the catholyte is oxidized to its oxidized form (Ox1) at the positive electrode, and Li+ or the oxidized form of another redox species (Ox2) in the anolyte is reduced to metallic Li or its reduced form (Red2) at the negative electrode, respectively. Li+ ions diffuse across the Li+-ion conducting membrane to balance the charge. This process usually proceeds until the redox species are exhausted in the electrolyte. General electrochemical reactions during charge process at the electrodes are shown below:Positive electrode: Cx+ − ye− → C(x+y)+Negative electrode: Li+ + e− → Lior Am+ + ne− → A(m−n)+Overall reaction: Cx+ + yLi+ → C(x+y)+ + yLior nCx+ + yAm+ → nC(x+y)+ + yA(m−n)+where C(x+y)+/Cx+ and Am+/A(m−n)+ stand for the redox couple in the catholyte and the anolyte, respectively. The process is reversed on discharge.
Depending on the anode structure, Li-redox flow cells can be categorized into two types: full-flow Li-redox cell and semi-flow Li-redox cell. The former uses redox-active liquid or slurry as the catholyte and the anolyte.19,27 The latter, which dominates current Li-redox flow battery research, uses redox-active liquid or slurry as the catholyte and Li metal as the anode.18 Depending on the electrolyte used, Li-redox-flow cell can be divided into two categories: one uses aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte configuration, and the other uses aprotic electrolyte configuration. The basic set-up of the prototype Li-redox flow cell with aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte is essentially similar with conventional redox flow battery (Fig. 3). In the cathode or anode compartments, a porous conductive layer, usually made from graphitic materials, is applied as the diffusion layer and the current collector, and the catholyte or anolyte in the external reservoir can be pumped into the flow frame, and circled via eternal circuit. The thickness of the flow frame is usually about 1–3 mm, and the electrolyte flows through the electrode is normally laminar.28 The Li-ion conducting glass ceramic or polymeric solid electrolyte can be used as separator to block the crossover between the catholyte and the anolyte. Particularly, metallic Li can be directly used as the anode taking advantage of its high energy density. In such a configuration, a buffer layer and conventional organic electrolyte are usually used to prevent corrosion of solid electrolyte by metallic Li and to facilitate Li+-ion transport between metallic Li and solid-electrolyte separator.
 Fig. 3  Schematic structure of a Li-redox flow cell. 
3. Li-redox flow batteries in aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte system
From the thermodynamic point of view, water can be directly used as the cathode in a lithium battery and demonstrates the overall reaction as shown in eqn (1).29,30 The first patented primary Li-redox battery in aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte system was proposed by PolyPlus Battery Company in 2007,31 and several other primary Li-redox cells based on the similar chemistry have also been reported.32,33 The first rechargeable Li-redox flow battery based on aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte system was proposed by Goodenough's and Zhou's groups,34,35 and further investigated by several other groups. In the initial proof-of-concept studies, iron-based redox couples, such as Fe3+/Fe2+ and Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−, were used to construct rechargeable Li-redox flow batteries with metallic Li as the anode. Li + H2O → LiOH + ½H2(g)(1)
One of the key principles for construction of the Li-redox flow cells is the selection of cathode-active materials, which must satisfy a number of requirements: (i) both oxidized and reduced forms must be highly soluble to minimize the storage volume and mass and to allow high mass transfer rates and current densities; (ii) the formal potential of one couple must be highly positive, and the other highly negative to maximize the cell voltage and energy density; (iii) the heterogeneous reaction rate for the charging and discharging reactions at the inert electrodes should be rapid so that the electrode reactions occur at their mass transfer controlled rates; (iv) oxidized and reduced form should be stable, and this stability pertains to reaction with solvent, electrolyte, atmosphere, and electrode materials; (v) the materials should be safe, inexpensive, and abundant; (vi) the couple should not be corrosive and reactive with cell materials, or the storage vessel. Successful attempts have been achieved by using several reversible redox couples in aqueous phase, such as I3−/I−,36 Br3−/Br−,37 Cu2+/Cu,38 O2/OH−,39 and S42−/S2−.40 In principle, Na may be a better choice for such cell system in consideration of a lower cost. The challenge is that Na+ ionic conductors at present are not stable in aqueous phase, and do not exhibit the exclusive selectivity for Na+ ions. Redox-active materials suitable for constructing Li/Na-redox batteries with hybrid electrolyte system are summarized in Fig. 4.41
 Fig. 4  Redox potential of various reversible redox couples suitable for constructing Li/Na-redox cells with aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte system. 
The other key lies in the separator membrane. Li-ion conducting NASICON-type Li1+x+3zAlx(Ti,Ge)2−xSi3zP3−zO12 glass ceramic, in most cases, is used to isolate the aqueous electrolyte and aprotic electrolyte. Such glass ceramic shows reasonable ionic conductivity (∼10−4 S cm−1) at room temperature. Such glass ceramic is stable against the organic electrolyte or aqueous electrolyte from weak acidic to weak alkalic (pH 3–10). However, the reduction of TiIV at low potential (occurs below 1.6 V vs. Li+/Li) makes it unstable when in direct contact with metallic lithium. Therefore, a buffer layer usually is required to separate the glass ceramic from Li in long-term operation. Currently, the development of a suitable solid electrolyte with emphasis on ionic conductivity and stability of the solid electrolyte is still ongoing.
3.1 Iron-based Li-redox flow batteries
The Li-redox flow battery in aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte system was first studied with FeIII/FeII redox couple, because iron is an abundant and inexpensive element with many highly soluble compounds. In the proof-of-concept study, Goodenough and co-workers used an aqueous solution containing Fe3+ and Li salt as the catholyte to construct the static Li-redox cell.34 At a relatively low current density, the cell could be discharged from 3.7 V to 3 V to reach the normalized capacity (Fig. 5a). However, the Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple only showed partial reversibility, mainly due to the hydrolysis of Fe3+ and Fe2+ in neutral pH environment that resulted in the formation of FeO(OH) and Fe(OH)3 precipitates. To solve this problem, they used another redox couple, Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−, which undergoes reversible redox reactions in aqueous phase under neutral pH environment, and entails no making or breaking of Fe–C bonds. The cell could be galvanostatically discharged and charged with good Coulombic efficiency in the potential range of 3–3.75 V (Fig. 5b). The discharge voltage was stable between 3.3–3.5 V though slightly affected by the concentrations of the redox couple in the catholyte and the chelate effect of cyanide ligands. They further constructed the cell with a flow-through cathode,42 offering a higher capacity and rate capability than its static counterpart. The discharge behaviour of the cell operating at cathode-flow mode was obviously improved compared to the static mode in terms of the stability of time-dependent discharge potential and energy density. Nevertheless, due to the limited solubility of Fe(CN)63− and Fe(CN)64−, the energy density was too small to challenge the conventional redox-flow batteries.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of iron-based Li-redox flow batteries with aqueous catholyte. Charge/discharge profile of a Li-redox cell operated via Fe3+/Fe2+ redox reaction (a), and Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64− redox reaction under different Fe(CN)63− concentration (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. A demonstration of electric charging via Fe3+/Fe2+ redox reaction (c) and chemical charging using (NH4)S2O8 as oxidizer to chemically oxidize Fe2+ back to Fe3+ after fully discharge (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2011, Wiley. 
Table 2 Electrochemical parameters and solubility of FeIII/FeII redox couples in aqueous phase




Ligands

ϕ
0 (V, vs. SCE)

k
0 (cm s−1)
Concentration (M)
Energy density (W h L−1)




2,9-Dimethyl-o-phenanthroline
0.82
2.5 × 10−2
1.0
109.9


Bipyridine
0.82
5.6 × 10−2
0.7
76.9



o-Phenanthroline
0.82
5.8 × 10−2
0.8
87.9


Terpyridine
0.82
6.0 × 10−2
0.3
33.0


Triethanolamine
−1.0
6.3 × 10−2
0.6
35.1


Citrate
−0.21
N/A
1.8
148.1


Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
−0.10
4 × 10−3
0.4
34.1


Cyanide
0.12
6.7 × 10−2
1.0
91.1




Zhou and co-workers also introduced a Li-redox flow cell based on Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple. The cell used an acidic aqueous solution as catholyte (pH 1.7) to avoid the hydrolysis of ferric/ferrous ions.35 In their strategy, the cell could be charged either through electric charging (Fig. 5c) or chemical charging by means of adding strong oxidizing agents to oxidize Fe2+ ions back to Fe3+ once the latter exhausted (Fig. 5d). They demonstrated that external oxidizing agents, such as (NH4)2S2O8 through eqn (2) and (3), could be utilized to oxidize the Fe2+ to Fe3+, and the oxygen in the air might also be used to oxidize the discharge-product Fe2+ back to Fe3+, despite the reaction was not fast enough to maintain a continuous discharge. In addition, the strong acidity/alkalinity of the catholyte would potentially destructure the solid electrolyte.43 Thus the sustainability of this system need be further addressed. S2O82− + 2H+ + 2e− → 2HSO4− ϕ0 = 2.123 V vs. SHE(2) Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+ ϕ0 = 0.771 V vs. SHE(3)
The advantages by using Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple for Li-redox flow battery rely in the proper redox potential and rich elemental abundance of iron. Challenges still remain such as the relatively low solubility of Fe-precursors compared with conventional redox-flow batteries,16,44 the instability of solid electrolyte in strong acidic/alkalic catholyte,45,46 and the sluggish kinetics of Fe3+/Fe2+ redox couple (∼10−5 cm s−1).15 Complexation of Fe3+ and Fe2+ may be a suitable solution to increase the redox potential of FeIII/FeII couple and fasten the redox kinetics since the chemical principles related to the formation and properties of metal complexes are well developed and many new and potentially useful ligands have been reported. It can be seen from Table 2 that by using proper organic ligands, the redox potential of FeIII/FeII redox couples can be tuned in a broad range between −1–0.8 V vs. SCE, and the redox kinetic constants also show orders of magnitude enhancement.47–50
3.2 Halogen-based Li-redox flow batteries
Halogen-based redox couples such as Br3−/Br− and I3−/I− show great potential in rechargeable Li-redox flow batteries owing to their relatively low molecular weight, highly reversible redox reaction, and proper redox potential. The reaction between metal halides and iodine, as well as the increased solubility of iodine in different solvents on addition of potassium iodide also attracted early attention in polyiodide chemistry. The solubility of iodine in aqueous phase is reasonably high when reacting with other iodides, which transform iodine to polyiodides (I2n+1−) with the triiodide ion (I3−) being the predominant specie (eqn (4)).51 To date, a large number of polyiodide ions have been structurally characterized and anions in the range from I2− to I293− have been established. Particularly, molten polyiodides show high electrical conductivity even at room temperature, and the reason for this behaviour is suggested to be similar with Grotthuss mechanism for protons in water. These properties suggest potential applications in a variety of areas, including fuel cells, batteries, solar cells, etc.52 Bromine behaves similar with iodine in aqueous phase. Bromide ions can combine with bromine molecules to generate the tribromide ion (eqn (5)),53 thus relatively high concentrations of Br− and Br2 can be utilized, leading to the enhancement of energy density. Br3−/Br− redox couple shows rapid redox kinetics with good reversibility as a charge carrier, and it's potentially applicable in dye-sensitized solar cells, hydrogen–bromine fuel cell, zinc–bromine redox flow batteries, and alkali-ion batteries.37,54–57 I2(s) + I−(aq.) → I3−(aq.) Keq = 752 (25 °C)(4) Br2(aq.) + Br− → Br3−(aq.) Keq = 14 (25 °C)(5)
The feasibility by using Br3−/Br− and I3−/I− redox reactions in aqueous phase relies on the proper redox potential that lies in water electrolysis window: only the reversible conversion between the valence state of −1 and 0 is allowed (Fig. 6a). In addition, good solubility that easily exceeds 1.5 M warrants a reasonable energy density several times higher than conventional redox flow batteries. Besides, the halogen-based catholyte undergoes rapid redox reactions with rate constant in the order of 10−3–10−2 cm s−1 at room temperature,37,58 considerably higher than those in conventional redox-flow batteries (10−3–10−7 cm s−1).15 Furthermore, two electrons are transferred in Br3−/Br− or I3−/I− redox reaction, which means at a given concentration of the active materials, higher energy density can be achieved compared with those undergo single-electron transfer redox reaction. It can be seen that by using a 1.5 M bromine or iodine catholyte, the energy density exceeds 200 W h L−1 (Fig. 6b). In contrast, the energy densities for iron-based Li-redox flow battery with active-material-saturated catholyte and conventional vanadium redox flow batteries are 60–70 and 50–90 W h L−1, respectively (energy densities are calculated based on the catholyte and anolyte only).
 Fig. 6  (a) Redox potential of iodine and bromine at various valence states. All the redox potentials are standard values with respect to SHE. (b) Cell voltage, effective molarity and energy density of halogen-based Li-redox flow batteries. The corresponding parameters of conventional vanadium redox-flow batteries (VRBs) and iron-based Li-redox flow batteries are also included for comparison. The effective molarity stands for the concentration multiplied by the number of electrons involved in the redox reactions. 
The first iodine-based catholyte was first reported by Byon and co-workers.36 The I3−/I− redox couple based catholyte was prepared with 1 M of aqueous KI solution by the addition of I2 to adjust the I3− concentration. Galvanostatic measurements showed ∼80% Coulombic efficiency at room temperature on the first cycle of charge/discharge, and the initial Coulombic efficiency could be increased to ∼100% either by preloading traces of lithium salt into the catholyte or increase the iodine concentration.59,60 Both the cells with 0.08 M and 1 M I2 showed impressive cyclability without capacity fading in 100 and 20 cycles, respectively. They demonstrated that a considerably high energy density could be achieved by using I2-saturated catholyte, which delivered an energy density of 350 W h kg−1 (volumetric energy density of 700 W h L−1) based on the total weight of the catholyte and the corresponding Li.
In the subsequent work, they further tailored the electrode structure by using nanostructured 3D current collector and equipped the cell with flowable cathode to improve the cycling stability and power density, and accelerate the diffusion of electroactive materials.61,62 The 3D electrode architecture was constructed from a highly conductive, millimetre-thick vertically-aligned-carbon-nanotube mat (Fig. 7a).62 The tailored cell exhibited stable cycling performance so that no capacity fading was observed for 200 fully charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 7b). The specific energy density reached ∼330 W h kg−1 or ∼650 W h L−1, suggested the great potential for applications where high energy density are needed. In the flow cathode design, they used LiI aqueous solution to function as both the active material and supporting electrolyte.61 The as-assembled Li-redox flow cell showed reasonably high power density of ∼110 mW cm−2 at a current density of 40 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7c). Note that the current density is just comparable to most of conventional redox-flow batteries,7 however, the power density should be at least twice higher considering the high discharge voltage around 2.8 V.
 Fig. 7  Iodine-based Li-redox flow batteries. (a) Left panel: The vertically aligned carbon-nanotube mat grown on quartz (top) and transferred to Ti supporting substrate (bottom). Right panel: SEM images showing the microstructure of the 3D current collector. (b) Room-temperature charge/discharge profiles of a static Li-redox cell based on I3−/I− catholyte at a current rate of 2.5 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Potential and power density graphs using 1 M of LiI at 328 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2013, Wiley. (d) Representative charge/discharge profiles of the Li-redox cell based on Br3−/Br− catholyte with pH 4.5–5 at a current density of 0.1 C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It's worth noting that I3−/I− catholyte could be operated in natural pH environment, beneficial to maintain the structural stability of the solid electrolyte. The proper redox potential of 3.5 V vs. Li+/Li and small polarization helped circumvent the electrolysis of water-based electrolyte. A critical issue of this Li-redox flow cell is the relatively small elemental abundance of iodine. Bromine may be another promising choice since the elemental abundance of bromine is three orders of magnitude higher than that of iodine.41 Moreover, bromine tends to coordinate with other halides to form polybromide or hybrid polybromide in solution, significantly increasing its solubility. However, using Br− directly as active material would result in quick fading of capacity and quick dropping of the discharge potential, which is attributed to the irreversible reaction between Br− and BrO−. Because the standard electrode potential of Br2/Br− is 1.09 V vs. SHE, only 0.24 V lower than that of BrO−/Br− if operated in natural pH environment. This is different from the iodine case, in which the standard electrode potential of I3−/I− (0.54 V vs. SHE) is ca. 0.45 V lower than that of IO−/I−. Possible solutions to exclude the reaction between BrO− and Br− include controlling the acidity of the catholyte to restrain the formation of BrO−, and forming bromine complexes, such as tetrabutylammonium bromine, and N-methyl-N-ethyl morpholinium bromide to stabilize bromine during operation.63
Yu and co-workers first demonstrated a Li-redox cell with discharge potential at 4 V-level by using LiBr/KBr aqueous solution as the catholyte.37 They found a proper acidity, pH 4.5–5 or lower, would effectively suppress the formation of BrO−, therefore, the redox reaction between Br2 and Br− became the sole or dominant reaction in the catholyte. The practical threshold of O2 evolution reaction potential was observed to be higher than 4.4 V vs. Li+/Li while H2 evolution reaction could only take place below 3 V vs. Li+/Li in the catholyte. The typical discharge potential was ∼4 V vs. Li+/Li and the reversible capacity reached ∼290 mA h g−1 (Fig. 7d). The capacity retention was stable with average capacity decay <0.1% per cycle, and the Coulombic efficiency was ∼100% after the first few cycles. Wu and co-workers also used Br3−/Br− redox couple to construct a Li-redox cell.57 In their design, a gel-type polymeric electrolyte composed of a sandwiched PVDF/glass fibre mat/PVDF membrane saturated by 1 M LiClO4 EC/DEC/DMC solution was used as the buffer layer between Li metal and ceramic electrolyte.64 The energy density was estimated to be ∼500 W h kg−1 assuming the catholyte weight up to 40–50% of the total weigh of a packaged cell.
Compared with other Li-redox flow batteries based on other catholyte chemistries, the catholytes using halogen-based redox couples show high discharge potential with large specific capacity. Iodine shows very high solubility in iodide aqueous solution, and I3−/I− redox couple shows reliable reversibility, which in turn contribute to energy density and life-span of the Li-redox flow batteries. Moreover, the I3−/I− redox reaction can proceed with good redox rate kinetics (∼10−2 cm s−1) in neutral pH environment,58 which is critical to maintain the structural stability of most water-stable ceramic electrolytes. The most critical issue with iodine-based catholyte lies in the low abundance of iodine elements. Bromine exhibits higher abundance and essentially provides higher redox potential than iodine. The redox rate kinetics (∼10−3 cm s−1),37 though an order of magnitude lower than that of iodine, still higher than those of conventional redox-flow batteries, and may be enhanced by surface treatments/functionalization of the current collector and assistance of catalytic species.65,66 The cycling stability need be enhanced, and the side reactions or water electrolysis should be avoided. The toxicity of Br2 and the highly complexing/corroding character of concentrated Br− may pose limitation. The toxicity of Br2 can be mitigated by proper use of complexing agents, but the effect of complexing agents on kinetics has not yet been studied quantitatively, particularly in acidic supporting electrolyte.
3.3 Chalcogen-based Li-redox flow batteries
Chalcogens such as oxygen and sulfur have gained considerable research interest owing to their high energy density and low cost. The rechargeable non-aqueous Li–O2 cell was first reported by Abraham and co-workers,67 and interest has expanded rapidly in recent years.11 However, significant challenges remain such as dendrite formation and cycling efficiency of the Li anode, O2 solubility, diffusivity and stability of the aprotic electrolyte, and the cathode that needs a membrane to block CO2 and H2O, while allowing O2 to pass. Beyond the knowledge of Li–O2 ad Li–S chemistry in aprotic electrolytes, pioneering work by Visco and coworkers opened up opportunity of the rechargeable O2-based Li-redox flow batteries with aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte.68 It is generally understood that the battery chemistry consists of the reversible four-electron reduction/evolution of O2 at the cathode and the Li+/Li redox couple at the anode.69 Compared with non-aqueous Li–O2 cell which generally yields a discharge voltage around 2.7 V via a 2-electron process (eqn (6)), such a cell is capable to deliver higher discharge potentials, ca. 3.4 V and 4.2 V in alkaline and acidic catholyte, respectively (eqn (7) and (8)) via a 4-electron process. In addition, such cell is unnecessary to avoid ingress of H2O from the atmosphere, which is one of the most critical factors to achieve stable cyclability of the non-aqueous Li–O2 cells. Besides, the discharge product, primarily LiOH, is highly soluble in water, thus the cell does not need a current collector with large enough spare volumes to support solid Li2O2 formation as in non-aqueous Li–O2 cells. O2(g) + 2Li+ + 2e− → Li2O2 ϕ ≈ 2.7 V vs. Li+/Li(6) O2(g) + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−(aq.) ϕ0 = 0.401 V vs. SHE(7) O2(g) + 4H+(aq.) + 4e− → 2H2O ϕ0 = 1.229 V vs. SHE(8) For the Li-redox flow cell with alkaline catholyte, the most utilized supporting salts is LiOH with the co-existence of LiClO4, LiNO3 or LiCl, which in turn provides alkaline environment to facilitate the ORR reaction and proper Li+ conductivity. One key challenge in such cell is CO2 ingression, resulting in the formation of Li2CO3, which is hard to decompose below the upper threshold potential range of the alkaline catholyte. As a result, it is necessary to apply a protective membrane to the outer surface of the cathode that permits O2 diffusion while blocking CO2, or to remove the latter from the atmosphere around the cell. Another key challenge is strong alkali environment in which the solid electrolyte becomes unstable. Imanishi and co-workers found that by using LiCl-saturated LiOH–H2O solution, the dissolution of LiOH could be greatly suppressed owing to the high concentration of Li+.70 Such a solution showed moderate pH value of 7–9, suitable for the NASICON-type glass ceramic membrane. From the point view of a practical Li-redox flow cell, the use of concentrated LiCl in the catholyte may suffer from Cl2 evolution or ClO− formation during the high voltage charge process, and decreases the available amount of LiOH for the electrochemical process in the catholyte. The third key challenge would be the exploration of OER/ORR catalysts that are truly effective, long-lasting and inexpensive. Some non-noble catalysts, such as carbon-based materials, transition-metal oxides, etc., have shown the capability to catalyze the OER and/or ORR in alkaline catholyte. Zhou and co-workers utilized graphene oxide nanosheets as ORR catalyst and the air-electrode, and showed a high discharge voltage close to that of the 20 wt% Pt-loaded carbon black.39 Due to the absence of effective OER catalyst, the cell only showed some rechargeability with large polarization similar to that of the Li–O2 batteries with aprotic electrolyte. In addition, the corrosion on the air-electrode due to carbon oxidation in the charge process became more seriously during repeated charge, thus resulting in gradually increased polarization of the charge/discharge potentials.71
For the Li-redox flow cell with acidic catholyte, weak acid with high dissociation constant, such as HOAc/LiAc and H3PO4/LiH2PO4 buffer solution, is preferred to serve as the active material.33,72,73 Strong acidic solution with proton-trapping additives such as imidazole, a small molecule with a strong ability to absorb the protons in water, may also serve as acidic catholyte for the Li-redox flow cell.74 Though CO2 ingression becomes less severe in the acidic catholyte, challenges still remain, such as acid concentration-dependent energy density of the catholyte, and the instability and low activity of non-noble metal catalysts as well as NASICON-type glass ceramic membrane in an acidic environment. Currently, the most widely used catalyst in Li-redox flow cell with acidic catholyte is Pt/C, which serves as both OER and ORR catalyst. Other promising non-noble metal catalysts include heterocyclic N compounds and compounds with transition metals coordinated to heterocyclic N for ORR,75 and Ru, Sn, and Ir mono and bimetallic oxide materials for OER in acidic environment.76
Promising strategies to promote the performance of O2-based Li-redox flow batteries either with acidic or alkali catholyte would be to develop bi-functional OER/ORR catalysts,77,78 or decouple the ORR and OER electrodes.79,80 Shao-Horn and co-workers used bi-metallic noble metal nanoparticles as a bi-functional catalyst to reduce the voltage gap between the ORR and OER with Au to enhance the ORR and Pt to lower the OER voltages.81 They also showed that transition-metal oxoperovskites containing surface cations with an eg1 electron configuration and good bulk electronic conductivity give a fast ORR or OER in alkaline solution.82,83 Perovskite Sr0.95Ce0.05CoO3−δ loaded with copper nanoparticles could also serve as a bi-functional catalyst for ORR and OER in aqueous solution.84 Dai and co-workers reported a hybrid material composed of Co3O4 nanocrystals grown on reduced graphene oxide (Fig. 8a) as a high-performance bi-functional catalyst for OER and ORR in alkali environment.85 In their investigation, it was found that Co3O4 or graphene oxide alone has little catalytic activity. However, their hybrid exhibits similar ORR catalytic activity that could be further enhanced by the nitrogen-doping of graphene, but superior stability compared to Pt in alkaline solutions (Fig. 8b). The same hybrid was also found to shown highly active for the OER. They supposed such an enhancement was resulted from the synergetic chemical coupling effects between Co3O4 and graphene.
 Fig. 8  Bi-functional OER/ORR catalysts. (a) TEM images of Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid (N-rmGO: N-doped reduced mildly oxidized graphene oxide). (b) Oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential window of Co3O4/Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4 nanocrystal and Pt/C catalysts dispersed on carbon fibre paper in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
The concept of decoupling the ORR and OER electrodes has been demonstrated previously in metal hydride–air batteries,80 and, in principle, can be applied in O2-based Li-redox flow batteries. Manthiram and co-workers reported an O2-based Li-redox cell using mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanoflakes grown on nickel foam and N-doped mesoporous carbon loaded onto a hydrophobic carbon paper, respectively, as the decoupled ORR and OER electrodes (Fig. 9). The Co4+/Co3+ couple is known to be a good OER catalyst, while the large surface area of mesoporous carbon along with N-doping provides a large number of catalytic sites, which lower the overpotential of ORR. Therefore, the cell showed stable cyclic performance with only 0.08 V increase in round-trip overpotential in alkali catholyte.86 3S42− + 2e− → 4S32− ϕ0 = 2.563 V vs. Li+/Li(9) 2S32− + 2e− → 3S22− ϕ0 = 2.535 V vs. Li+/Li(10) S22− + 2e− → 2S2− ϕ0 = 2.516 V vs. Li+/Li(11)
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the decoupled electrodes loaded with mesoporous nanocatalysts. The upper-right SEM and TEM images showing the mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanoflakes directly grown onto nickel foam (NCONF@Ni) as the OER catalyst; the lower right SEM and TEM images shows the N-doped mesoporous carbon (N-MC) as the ORR catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The rechargeable non-aqueous Li–S cell have many attractive features such as natural abundance and low cost of sulfur, and high theoretical energy capacity. A critical problem inherent in the cell chemistry would be the formation of soluble polysulfides, which results in shuttle effect thus decreases the efficiency and cycling stability. Sulfur-based Li-redox flow battery, taking advantage of the redox reactions between S42− and S2− in aqueous phase as reported recently by Zhou and co-workers,40 has shown its potential due to its high energy density up to 650 W h kg−1. The reversible capacity based on the reaction between Li2S4 and Li2S (shown in eqn (9)–(11)) could reach 1000 mA h g−1 with an average discharge voltage of 2.5 V. It's necessary to point out that the catholyte should be a strong alkali solution in order to lower the hydrogen evolution potential; the solubility of the oxidized form of S22−, S32− and S42− in aqueous phase should also be considered.
3.4 Dye-sensitized photoelectron-synthetic Li-redox flow cell
The sun provides nearly unlimited energy. In order to serve as a primary energy source, solar energy has to be paired with an energy storage capability. This leads to the concept of “solar fuels” that targets water splitting into H2 and O2, and/or water reduction of CO2 into almost any form of reduced carbon. Inspired by “dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC)” as an energy generation device,87 the concept of “solar fuels” has been achieved by a “dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthesis cell (DSPEC)” (Fig. 10a).88–90 In such a cell, one electrode compartment of such cell is a spatially separated photoanode for water oxidation and the other electrode compartment is a physically separated cathode for CO2 reduction. The two electrode compartments are separated by a proton exchange membrane, which allows for proton diffusion and charge balance. Such a device convert the solar energy into primary energy source, but lack the functionality to convert the formed solar fuels into electrical energy.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of a dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthesis cell (DSPEC). A DSPEC combines a molecular light absorber (chromophore C), bound to a semiconductor surface, with catalysts for water oxidation and carbon dioxide reduction, in an electrochemical cell. Light absorption gives a localized molecular excited state, which injects an electron into the conduction band of the semiconductor. This triggers a sequence of electron transfer events, which subsequently activate the catalysts. The bridge is an intervening electron transfer spacer that may be necessary to increase the distance between Catox and the electrode to slow down back electron transfer. PEM is a proton exchange membrane for equilibrating protons between the two half reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, Copyright 2011, IUPAC. (b) General structure and working principle of a DPLFC. 
Li-redox flow cell with proper structural modification, namely a “dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthetic Li-redox flow cell (DPLFC)” can serve as a multifunctional device that combines energy generation, storage and conversion as a whole. It utilizes the photoanode of a conventional DSSC to generate current flow inside the cell from the solar irradiation, and two redox couples to store the generated energy as chemical energy, and converse the stored chemical energy into electrical energy through a Li-redox flow cell design. The general structure of a DPLFC is composed of three major parts: a photoanode responsible for solar energy capture, the catholyte/anolyte that converts the captured solar energy into chemical energy via the cathode/anode-active redox couples, and an ion-selective membrane for charge balance (Fig. 10b). Two independent processes are involved in the DPLFCs: the photoelectrochemical charging process and the electrochemical discharging process. During the photoelectrochemical charging process, taking a conventional TiO2-based photoanode as example, electrons are excited from the HOMO to the LUMO of the dye molecules and the excited dye molecules oxidize the reduced form of the cathode-active redox mediator (Red1 − e− → Ox1). Then the electrons are injected to the conduction band (CB) of the TiO2 photoanode, and move through external circuit into the counter electrode to reduce the oxidized form of anode-active redox mediator (Ox2 + e− → Red2). Simultaneously, Li+-ions move from the photoanode side to the counter electrode side through the Li+ ionic conductor to balance the charge and sustain a continuous current flow. During the electrochemical discharge process, the reduced form of anode-active redox mediator is oxidized (Red2 − e− → Ox2) on the counter electrode, and the electrons move back to the photoanode side through the external circuit to reduce the oxidized form of cathode-active redox mediator (Ox1 + e− → Red1), either at the photoanode or through the third electrode. Meanwhile, Li+-ions move back from the counter electrode side through the Li+ ionic conductor.
The discharge potential of the DPLFC is determined by the potential difference between the anode-active and cathode-active redox mediators, and the potential of both the anode-active and cathode-active redox mediators should be located between the conduction band of TiO2 and the HOMO of the dyes. The most widely used redox mediator in the photoanode side is I3−/I−,91 other redox mediators such as Br3−/Br−, (SCN)3−/SCN− and (SeCN)3−/SeCN− have been tested with some success.92 Generally, the conduction band of TiO2 and the redox potential of cathode-active redox mediator, usually I3−/I−, is −0.5 V and 0.3–0.4 V vs. SHE, respectively. Therefore, a potential with theoretical limitation of ∼0.8 V can be expected from the DPLFC.
Gao and co-workers demonstrated a DPLFC using I3−/I− propylene carbonate solution/Li2WO4 aqueous solution as the catholyte and anolyte, respectively.93 Two pairs of redox peaks at 0.21/−0.27 V and −0.19/−0.58 V vs. Ag+/Ag were observed for the cathode-active LiI in propylene carbonate electrolyte. While only one pair of redox peaks was observed for the anode-active Li2WO4 at 0.26 V/−0.16 V vs. Ag+/Ag. The different redox potentials yielded a sloped discharge profile with the average working potential of ∼0.45 V, corresponding to the average potential difference between the I3−/I− and WO42−/WO4(2+x)− redox couples. With the same cell configuration, they further used quinoxaline as anode-active material in aqueous phase, and obtained a total energy conversion efficiency about 1.2%.94
To further understand the photoelectrochemical and electrochemical processes related to the device performance, reaction kinetics should be viewed based on the energy level diagram of the photoanode proposed by Hupp and co-workers95 together with the reaction kinetics in the counter electrode. The kinetic processes on energy level diagram in DPLFC is proposed in Fig. 11. It appears that the most critical parameter to enhance the overall efficiency of a DPLFC is to use anode-active redox mediator with faster response time for charge injection from the counter electrode than the competing process, the charge injection from the TiO2 CB into the conducting oxide substrate. Also, it's necessary to use cathode/anode-active redox mediator with higher/lower redox potentials that locate between the TiO2 CB and the HOMO of the dyes to maximize the operating potential during electrochemical discharge. Other factors should be also considered such as developing new super chromophores that can collect light more efficiently than existing ones, new shuttles that can regenerate dyes at low driving force yet exhibit slow interception of injected charges, or new photoelectrode materials and architectures. The current generated by the photoanode is in the order of 10 mA cm−2, which is several times higher than the maximum current density provided by the solid electrolyte without serious polarization. Therefore, the structural stability of the solid electrolyte under such a high current polarization needs further investigation. The DSSC usually yield an open circuit voltage around 0.7 V and the concentration of the redox species in the electrolyte usually below 0.2 M, which are the main obstacle to achieve reasonable energy density.
 Fig. 11  Kinetic processes on energy level diagram in DPLFC. 
4. Li-redox flow batteries in aprotic electrolyte system
Li-redox flow batteries based on aqueous catholyte is potentially advantageous owing to the low cost of aqueous electrolytes and good solubility of redox-active inorganic or organometallic complexes. Aside from water electrolysis within a small potential window, most of current Li-redox flow batteries use strong acidic or alkaline catholytes, which raises serious concern about the durability of the glass ceramics. Employing aprotic electrolytes is considered as the primary advantage of Li-redox flow batteries over their aqueous counterpart, and also increases choices of available redox couples. Besides, employing aprotic electrolytes would potentially alleviate the corrosion on battery components, such separator and current collector in addition to a wider electrochemical window provided by the aprotic electrolytes. Moreover, the safety concern on the reaction between metallic Li and water resulted from the possible perpetration of aqueous electrolyte can also be alleviated since metallic Li was found to be stable in a number of aprotic solvents despite its reactivity.25 Note that challenges still remain in employing aprotic electrolyte. It's necessary to address the relatively lower diffusion efficiency of the active materials and higher costs compared to their aqueous counterpart, and other unfavourable physical properties including moisture sensitivity, flammability, toxicity and solvent-dependent redox behaviours.96
The majority of the reported non-aqueous redox flow batteries are from anion-exchange systems where the active materials are usually composed of metal complexes with transition metals being the redox centre.97 Bipyridine98,99 and acetylacetonate100–102 coordinated transition metal complexes are the most intensively studied active materials in non-aqueous redox flow batteries. The major problems of non-aqueous redox flow batteries are the poor rate capability which arises from the poor redox kinetics, low energy efficiency due to the limited capability of the membrane to avoid the crossover of the electroactive materials, and significant capacity degradation over cycling. Recently emerging aprotic Li-redox flow batteries have attracted considerable research interest owing to their greatly enhanced characteristics over non-aqueous redox flow batteries, such as high discharge voltage, good round-trip efficiency and stable cyclability. Some new approaches have been proposed. For example, the semi-solid lithium rechargeable flow battery uses conventional Li-ion battery electrode materials in a form of suspension flowing through the flow battery configuration.27 Properly protected Li anode is used to construct a membrane-free Li-redox flow battery with highly soluble polysulfides as cathode-active material.103 Li-redox flow battery based on hybrid aprotic electrolytes provides the capability to maximize the redox potential and kinetics of metallorganic compounds.104 These approaches take advantage of Li-ion battery in an attempt to inherit its high energy density, while adopt a flow battery configuration to decouple the power and energy. The synergy between the non-aqueous redox flow battery configuration and Li-ion battery chemistries has offered a fascinating new area for scientific research and has attracted more and more interest and effort.
4.1 Metallocene-based Li-redox flow batteries
Metallocene is a compound typically consisting of two cyclopentadienyl anions (Cp, C5H5−) bound to a metal centre in the valence state of +2, with the resulting general formula MII(C5H5)2. With the MCp2 structure, they are sandwich complexes in which the two Cp rings are parallel. The sandwich MCp2 structure is very robust with variable number of d electrons of 18 (Fe, Ru, Os). The neutral metallocenes of the 1st-row with 15 to 20e− (V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) correspond to the filling of the 5d orbitals split in three molecular orbital levels (e1g: bonding, double; a1g: non-bonding, simple; e*1g; antibonding, double) under the influence of the pseudo-octahedral field of the two Cp ligands.105 A key property of metallocene is their ability to exist in the form of various oxidation states with sandwich structure and a variable number of d electrons between 14 and 20, even if the stability decreases as the variable number of d electrons is further away from 18. The oxidation or reduction is reversible and occurs without structural change. The redox potential of metallocenes and their derivatives is solvent-dependent, and certain metallocenes and their derivatives exhibit reversible or quasi-reversible redox behaviours. Table 3 lists the redox potential and reversibility of certain metallocenes.106–112
Table 3 Redox behaviours of certain metallocenes




Compounds
Redox reaction
Redox potential
Supporting electrolyte
Reversibility




Titanocene dichloride
TiCp22+ + e− ↔ TiCp2+
−0.80 V vs. Ag+/Ag
0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile
Quasi-reversible


Vanadocene
VCp2+ + e− ↔ VCp2

ca. −0.7 V vs. Pt electrode
0.3 M Bu4NPF6 in THF
Reversible


Chromocene
CrCp2 + e− ↔ CrCp2−

ca. −2.3 V vs. Pt electrode
0.3 M Bu4NPF6 in THF
Reversible


CrCp2+ + e− ↔ CrCp2

ca. −0.53 V vs. Pt electrode


Reversible


Decamethylmanganocene
MnCp*2 + e− ↔ MnCp*2−
−2.5 V vs. SCE
Bu4NBF4 in acetonitrile
Reversible


MnCp*2+ + e− ↔ MnCp*2
−0.56 V vs. SCE


Reversible


Ferrocene
FeCp2+ + e− ↔ FeCp2
0.505 V vs. Ag+/Ag
0.1 M Bu4NClO4 in acetonitrile
Reversible


Cobaltocene
CoCp2 + e− ↔ CoCp2−
−1.88 V vs. SCE
0.3 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile
Reversible


CoCp2+ + e− ↔ CoCp2
−0.94 V vs. SCE


Reversible


Nickelocene
NiCp2+ + e− ↔ NiCp2
−0.50 V vs. FeCp2+/0
0.05 M Bu4NBF4 in acetonitrile
Reversible


NiCp22+ + e− ↔ NiCp2+
0.49 V vs. FeCp2+/0


Reversible


Rhodocene
RhCp2+ + e− ↔ RhCp2
−1.41 V vs. SCE
0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile
Reversible


RhCp2 + e− ↔ RhCp2−
−2.18 V vs. SCE


Quasi-reversible




Among various metallocenes and their derivatives, ferrocene and its derivatives are the most widely studied in Li-ion batteries. Golovin and co-workers found ferrocene and its derivatives to be an effect electrolyte additives for overcharge protection of Li-ion batteries.113 Ferrocene and its derivatives gave cell overcharge voltages that match closely with their redox potentials, and the cycle life of cells containing such additives generally was not adversely affected. Park and co-workers proposed to use chemically and/or physically attached ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple to polypyrrole, which is electrochemically active as Li-ion battery cathode materials, to promote its capacity and alleviate the ohmic/concentration polarization.114 Astruc and co-workers demonstrated dendritic molecular electrochromic batteries based on redox-robust metallocenes.115
One of the most appealing characteristics of ferrocene as active material for Li-redox flow battery is the prompt redox kinetics.116 The activation energy required for the two orbital electronic structure conversion is low (∼10 kJ mol−1) in most organic solvents with high rate constant (10−2–10−3 cm s−1),117,118 which is orders of magnitude greater than those of the redox couples used in conventional redox-flow batteries. These properties together with good thermal stability and solubility promise ferrocene a potential material for Li-ion redox flow battery capable of providing maximized energy density and power density. It's found that the rate variations for ferrocenium/ferrocene redox reaction was only affected moderately by the electrolyte concentration and the presence of substituents on the Cp rings.119–121 Nevertheless, the redox potential and redox reaction reversibility exhibit more obvious solvent-dependence possibly via interactions between the hydrogen-bonding acid and base moieties of the solvent and the members of the ferrocene/ferrocenium.109
Yu and co-workers investigated the solvent-dependent redox behaviour of ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple, and found that the ferrocenium could be reduced at a high potential ∼3.6 V vs. Li+/Li in LiPF6/DMF supporting electrolyte with good reversibility and small polarization.104 In comparison, the ferrocenium/ferrocene redox couple showed lower redox potential or higher polarization in other supporting electrolyte such as DMA, THF and EC/DEC organic electrolyte. The kinetic rate constant in DMF was determined to be 1.4 × 10−2 cm s−1 for ferrocene oxidation reaction and 6.8 × 10−3 cm s−1 for ferrocenium reduction reaction, both of which are considerably high compared to those of redox couples used in conventional aqueous or non-aqueous redox-flow batteries.15 Owing to the rapid redox kinetics, the power density of this cell at room temperature reached 155 W kg−1 based on the total weight of the catholyte while maintaining a discharge potential of 2.4 V (Fig. 12a). The capacity retention was rather stable, and approximately 90% of the theoretical capacity could be maintained after 250 fully charge/discharge cycles (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  Rate capability and cyclability of the Li-redox cell using ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple. (a) Room temperature polarization curve. (b) Capacity retention with corresponding Coulombic efficiency over cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014, Wiley. 
Another important characteristic of ferrocene is the possibility to further tune the physical/chemical properties of ferrocene molecule, such as redox potential and solubility by means of functionalization with different function groups on the Cp ring through many well-established electrophilic reactions (Fig. 13). Formylation and carboxylation reactions give only monofunctionalization, because the functional group strongly deactivates the ferrocenyl group. On the other hand, metallation and acylation reactions can be followed by an identical reaction on the other ring leading to 1,1′-disubstituted derivatives, because the deactivation of the second Cp ring by the substituent is only modest.105 The redox potential of ferrocene derivatives were found to vary in a relatively broad range, from ca. +0.5 V when functionalizing pristine ferrocene with acetyl group on both Cp rings to ca. −0.5 V when the hydrogen atoms were substituted by methyl group.122 Chemically modified ferrocene molecules with short carbon–carbon tethering arm composed of ethyl, vinyl and ethynyl groups showed difference in redox potentials about 0.2 V, following the increasing trend of the extent of unsaturation in the tethering arm.123
 Fig. 13  Representative strategies to functionalize the ferrocene molecule with different function groups. Note that the as-obtained ferrocene derivatives can be used as precursors for further functionalization. 
Wang and co-workers demonstrated a semi-solid Li-redox flow cell using LiFePO4 nanoparticles as the Li+-storage material, and binary ferrocene and its derivative as the mediator for redox targeting of the LiFePO4 nanoparticles.124 The general principle of the redox targeting method (Fig. 14a) is based on the chemical lithiation/delithiation of electro-active materials with poor electronic conductivity, which allows fast charge transport thus may enhance the power density of the cell.125 They used 1,10-dibromoferrocene and ferrocene as the redox mediators, of which the half-wave potentials are 3.55 and 3.25 V vs. Li+/Li, respectively (Fig. 14b). They demonstrated a similar cell using bis(pentamethylcyclopentadienyl)cobalt and cobaltocene as the redox mediator, and anatase TiO2 as Li+-storage material.126 Such “semi-solid” electrode configuration might overcome solubility issue of the redox-active species. To alleviate the solid particle aggregation and promote the diffusivity of the redox mediators in concentrated viscose catholyte suspension, the deleterious effects of solid-electrolyte interface formation on electron transport, and system stability after long-term operation still remain challenging.
 Fig. 14  (a) The principle of redox targeting of an insulating electrode material such as LiFePO4 by a freely diffusing molecular shuttle S. Upon charging, the molecular shuttle is oxidized into S+ at the current collector, and delivers the charge to the solid particles LiFePO4. S+ will be reduced back to S if the redox potential matches the Fermi level of LiFePO4. During this process, FeII is oxidized into FeIII, and Li+ ions will be released. Upon discharge, S+ is reduced at the current collector to S so electrons can be delivered to FePO4 to form LiFePO4 with the simultaneous immigration of Li+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2006, Wiley. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the redox shuttles Fc and FcBr2, as well as a cathodic Li+-storage material LiFePO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Proper functionalization may also improve the solubility of ferrocene. Wang and co-workers used functionalized ferrocene molecule with an ionic charged tetraalkylammonium pendant arm and a TFSI− counter anion to serve as the active material for Li-redox flow cell application.127 Through the density functional theory calculation, they found that the preferential sites for the solvent molecules were near and around the ionic region due to its higher positive charge density around the functionalized ferrocene cation. The ionic pendant intensifies the interactions between the solvent molecules and the functionalized ferrocene, resulting in a greatly enhanced solubility up to 0.85 M in the electrolyte of 1.2 M LiTFSI in EC/PC/EMC. The volumetric energy density thus reached ∼50 W h L−1 with good cyclability and energy efficiency.
As another type of metallocene analogue, cyclopentadienyl–metal–arene complexes show the advantage of robustness, the same type of redox properties, offering new possibilities to develop redox-active materials for Li-redox flow cells but yet to be demonstrated. For example, the redox couple of [(η5-C5H5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)2]+/0 show redox potentials of −2 V vs. FeCp2+/0 in THF,128 which might be used as anolyte for Li-redox flow cell to yield a cell voltage around 2 V if configured with FeCp2+/0 catholyte. The redox couple of [(η5-C5Me5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)2]+/0 has a redox potential of −1.85 V vs. SCE that is independent on the nature of the solvent and electrolytes. [(η5-C5Me5)FeIII(η6-C6Me6)2]2+ is an excellent oxidant that can be reversibly converted to [(η5-C5Me5)FeII(η6-C6Me6)2]+ at a high potential of ∼1 V vs. FeCp2+/0.105 These complexes together with metallocenes and their derivatives can be regarded as an important new class of materials for Li-redox flow batteries. Nevertheless, the general rules for rational design and functionalization of targeted molecules with preferred characteristics need to be addressed before the technology could compete with current aqueous redox flow batteries, especially on the solubility and redox behaviour in concentrated solutions and that will eventually make a further step towards the practical application for the future electric grid.
4.2 Polysulphide-based Li-redox flow batteries
The Li–S battery system received considerable research interest in the past decades owing to its high gravimetric capacity and low cost and high abundance of elemental sulphur. In practice, the cell performance is plagued by poor cyclability mainly arising from the low ionic and electronic conductivity of sulphur, the sluggish reaction kinetics, large volume change during phase transformation between S and Li2S2/Li2S, and the formation of soluble polysulphides,129–132 among which >10 M S as ∼Li2S9 can be dissolved by the reaction of Li2S and S8.133 The polysulphide-based catholyte instead of the solid sulphur-based electrode is an alternative choice to alleviate these problems. The catholyte can also enhance the reaction kinetics of electrode because of fast ion diffusion in liquid, and can be circulated in a flow system, showing promise as large-scale storage system.
The charge/discharge of Li–sulphur battery is a complex multistep process. XANES detects Li2S formation near the middle of the second plateau, and this formation increases at the end of discharge.134 Whereas, in situ synchrotron-based techniques indicate the formation of crystalline Li2S on the positive electrode at the very beginning of the lower discharge.135In situ NMR spectroscopy study also suggested that sulphur is reduced to soluble polysulfide species during the first discharge plateau concurrently with the formation of Li2S.136In situ XRD and transmission X-ray microscopy study suggests that crystalline Li2S is not formed at the end of discharge and most of the intermediate polysulfides are retained inside the cathode matrix.137 While experimental result shows that the lithiation/delithiation for S2–4 occurs as a solid–solid process if the micropores of carbon are small enough to prevent the penetration of the solvent molecules.138
Direct evidence for these proposed mechanisms is difficult to obtain due to multistep reactions that are further complicated by the formation of a variety of transient species. A plausible explanation indicated that the sulphur reduction consisting of three steps:139 long polysulphide chains such as S82− and S62− are produced during the first reduction step (2.4–2.2 V vs. Li+/Li),; S42− is produced during the second reduction step (2.15–2.1 V vs. Li+/Li); finally, short polysulphide species such as S32−, S22−, and S2− are produced at the end of the reduction process (2.1–1.9 V vs. Li+/Li). Very recently, Lu and co-workers employed the rotating-ring disk electrode technique and a lithium ion conducting solid electrolyte for elimination of the loss of active material to probe the reaction kinetics and reaction mechanism of lithium–sulphur redox reactions in DMSO and DOL/DME electrolytes.140 They proposed that the electrochemical steps of sulphur reduction in liquid phase exhibited fast reaction kinetics and only accounted for approximately one-quarter of the total capacity within the short reaction time. The complete conversion of sulphur to Li2S could only be accomplished via chemical polysulfide recombination/dissociation reactions that generated electrochemically reducible polysulfides with long reaction time in a closed cell (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Proposed sulphur reduction mechanism in liquid phase. The elemental sulphur is first reduced to S82−via reaction (I), followed by the formation of S84−via reaction (II). A subsequent dissociation of S84−via reaction (III) leads to the formation of S42−, or a disproportionation reaction via reaction (IV) to form S8 and S62−; the latter may dissociate to S3˙− through reaction (V). An overall 2.67e−/S8 process is established through reactions (I) and (IV). Reactions (I), (II), and (III) occur in both DMSO and DOL/DME, while reactions (IV) and (V) occur only in DMSO. The formed S42− undergoes various subsequent chain-growth and disproportionation reactions to generate reducible species such as S82−via reactions (VI.1)–(VI.4). Reactions (II), (III) and (VI) lead to a total 14e−/S8 process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The first polysulphide Li-redox cell was proposed by Rauh and co-workers.141 They used metallic Li as anode, polysulphide dissolved in THF/LiAsF6 as the catholyte, and Teflon bonded carbon as current collector. The cell achieved a high utilization of 1.83 Li+ per sulphur in the initial discharge owing to the high reactivity of soluble polysulfides compared to solid sulphur particles. The efficiency of the cell reached 90% with discharge depth of 0.5 Li+ per sulphur at 50 °C, but deteriorated quickly after 10–20 cycles, which probably raised from the lack of the lack of effective protection method to block the shuttle effect between soluble polysulfides and Li.
To make practical polysulphide-based Li-redox flow cells, one strategy is to passivate the Li anode to inhibit the electron hopping to polysulfide anions. Zhang and co-workers used LiNO3 to promote Li anode passivation and improve the cycling performance with a good capacity retention over 70 cycles.142 Their electrochemical analyses on Li2S9 catholyte with LiNO3 additive revealed the formation of a highly resistive passivation film on the Li metal surface, thus effectively alleviated the shuttle effect. Cui and co-workers adopted a similar LiNO3-passivated Li-anode to construct a membrane-free Li-redox cell.103 In contrast to aforementioned polysulphide-based Li-redox cells, the catholyte is designed to cycle only between Li2S8 and Li2S4 by narrowing the potential window to 2.15–2.8 V. Despite the theoretical capacity limit being restricted to 418 mA g−1, the cell could still reach an energy density of 97 W h kg−1 or 108 W h L−1, owing to the high solubility of Li2Sx (4 ≤ x ≤ 8).
Another strategy is to optimize the composition of electrolytes. Conventional carbonate-based electrolytes may not be as promising as in Li-ion batteries, because the polysulfides can react with carbonate-based electrolyte via nucleophilic addition or substitution to form thiocarbonates and other small molecules.143,144 The charge/discharge behaviour of polysulfide catholyte is very sensitive to the polarity of the supporting electrolyte. The poor stabilization of polysulfides in low-dielectric solvents such as THF and DOL seems beneficial to achieve high reversible capacity (Fig. 16). In general, solvents with high dielectric constant such as amides, sulfoxides, nitriles etc. exhibit stronger ability to stabilize charged species compared to solvents with low dielectric constant such as ethers, furans, amines, ionic liquids, etc.145 Rauh and co-workers showed that polysulphide intermediate is not formed in imidazolium ionic liquid during extended bulk electrolysis, but clear S3˙− formation observed in DMSO.146 Tobishima and co-workers suggest that the stability of polysulfide intermediates increases with the dielectric constant of the solvents.147 Lu and co-workers show that only part of the sulphur reduction capacity is obtained through direct electrochemical steps, and that the rest of the capacity is achieved via subsequent chain-growth and disproportionation reactions.140
 Fig. 16  Stabilized charge/discharge behaviour of polysulfide catholyte in DOL and THF. The catholyte is isolated from the Li anode in a cylinder cell by a NASICON-type Li1+x+3zAlx(Ti,Ge)2−xSi3zP3−zO12 glass ceramic. Carbon black/PVDF composite casted on Ti foil is used as current collector, and 0.5 M LiTFSI is used as lithium salt. The current rate is 0.1 C. 
An additional strategy is to improve the cell design such as choosing proper separator membrane and designing effective electrode architecture, which could prevent the polysulphides from emigrating to the anode side and provide conductive matrices to promote the redox kinetics of polysulphides.148–151 Polymeric and glass-ceramic separator membranes are more effective than liquid electrolytes to block the shuttle effect and dissolution of polysulfides in solid-state Li–S batteries as well as alleviate the dendrite formation on Li anode. The practicability for polysulphide catholyte needs further investigation. Polymeric membranes are easily penetrated by polysulphides and solvent molecules owing to the large gap between the polymer chains. Glass-ceramic membranes such as thio-LISICONs152,153 and Li2S–P2S5 glasses154,155 are yet to be demonstrated in the polysulphide-based Li-redox flow cell. The NASICON-type Li1+x+3zAlx(Ti,Ge)2−xSi3zP3−zO12 glass ceramic seems promising to polysulphide catholyte (Fig. 16).
Rationally designed electrode architecture would help improve the performance of the polysulphide catholyte. Electrodes made from conductive porous materials have been investigated and turned out to be promising.156–161 Porous current collector architectures as polysulfide reservoir show the capability for efficient conversion among the polysulfide species,156,162,163 but the diffusion of polysulphides cannot be totally inhibited. Introducing a bi-functional interlayer (Fig. 17a) between the separator and the current collector as a polysulfide-diffusion inhibitor seems a plausible strategy to promote the cyclability of the polysulfides.164,165 Manthiram and co-workers proposed a compound-sandwiched electrode architecture that includes a bi-functional interlayer on the top, the active material in the middle, and a porous current collector at the bottom.166 Such a cell configuration showed good electrochemical performance both in polysulfide catholyte and regular sulphur cathode. Cheng and co-workers demonstrated a high-performance solid-state lithium–sulphur batteries by using the compound-sandwiched electrode architecture consisting of a sulphur electrode in between a porous graphene free-standing film and a commercial polymer separator that is coated with another porous graphene free-standing film (Fig. 17b).167 The cyclability of the cell was greatly enhanced due to the electrode architecture that served as effective polysulfide reservoir to localize the dissolved polysulfides. However, these electrode configurations can only partially localize the migrating polysulfides within the cathode region. Though the formation of insoluble species would not seriously affect the performance of a static cell, these insoluble species may not reversibly convert to polysulphides when away from the electrode region in a flow cell configuration. Chiang and co-workers proposed a nanoscale flowable “embedded current collector” (Fig. 17c) applicable to redox flow chemistries which undergo precipitation–dissolution reactions.168 In their design, the percolating networks of conductive carbon were incorporated within fluid electrodes, allowing the polysulfide catholyte to be reversibly cycled into composition regimes where Li2S precipitation occurs. Very recently, Zhou and co-workers report a prototype of a solar-driven chargeable lithium–sulphur battery, in which the capture and storage of solar energy was realized by oxidizing S2− ions to polysulfide ions in aqueous solution with a Pt-modified CdS photocatalyst.169 Such a device realized simultaneous electrochemical energy storage and hydrogen production by introducing a photocatalyst into a lithium–sulphur battery, thus providing a new thread towards direct conversion between chemical energy and solar energy.
 Fig. 17  Electrode architectures for polysulphide-based Li-redox flow cells. (a) Bi-functional interlayer electrode architecture. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Compound-sandwiched electrode architecture. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2014, Wiley. (c) Conventional flow cell architecture using stationary carbon fibre current collector (top) and nanoscale flowable “embedded current collector” (bottom) providing electronically conductive flowing redox electrodes based on nanoscale percolating networks of carbon black particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Organic-based Li-redox flow batteries
Depending on the reduction of the neutral state, organic redox molecules can be generally categorized into three types (Fig. 18a):170 n-type organics, of which the redox reaction is between the neutral state and the negatively charged state;171 p-type organics, of which the redox reaction is between the neutral state and the positively charged state;172 and bipolar organics, of which the neutral state can be either reduced to a negatively charged state or oxidized to a positively charged state.173,174 In the electrochemical reduction reaction of n-type organics or oxidation reaction of p-type organics, the corresponding cations (e.g. Li+ or Na+) or anions (e.g. PF6−, ClO4− or TFSI−) are needed to neutralize the charge. In the reverse redox process, cations or anions will migrate back from the electrode to the electrolyte. For many n-type organics, Li+ can be substituted by other alkali metals, which will not affect significantly their redox behaviour in general. In principle, these redox-active organic molecules could be also used in Li-redox cells with advantages such as overcoming the dissolution problem of small organic molecules in conventional rechargeable solid batteries, and increasing the solubility by adding proper function groups or using proper non-aqueous electrolyte.
 Fig. 18  (a) Redox reaction of n-type (N), p-type (P) and bipolar (B) redox-active organics and metallorganics. A− stands for anion of the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. Corresponding redox mechanism for redox-active organics: (b) carbonyl compounds, (c) thioethers, and (d) organic free radical compounds. 
For n-type redox-active organics, considerable research interest has been focused on carbonyl compounds. Carbonyl is a common organic functional group that shows oxidative ability. In presence of appropriate stabilizing groups, the carbonyl group undergoes reversible one-electron reduction to form a radical monoanion (Fig. 18b). The redox centre of conjugated carboxylates locates in the weakly electron-withdrawing carboxyl groups, and the redox process involves the resonance of conjugated bonds in the carbon chain and regrouping the electrons into a set of conjugated bonds.
Tarascon and co-workers demonstrated that Li terephthalate and Li trans–trans-muconate were respectively capable of reacting with two and one extra Li per formula unit at potentials of 0.8 and 1.4 V vs. Li+/Li.175 They also demonstrated that 4,4′-tolane-dicarboxylate could also be used as a negative electrode material in Li+-ion batteries with discharge potential of 0.65 V vs. Li+/Li and minimal discharge/charge polarization.176 The solubility of lithium salts of these highly conjugated molecules is usually low if directly used as anode materials in Li-redox flow cells. Quinones and their derivatives show good solubility in certain aprotic electrolytes. The discharge process of quinones and their derivatives is driven by two-electron disproportionation: the formation of a radical anion in the first stage followed by dianion formation in the second stage. Siroma and co-workers examined the electrochemical performance of 1,4-benzoquinone and its derivatives in a Li-redox cell, and showed that the cyclability was inversely proportional to its concentration in the catholyte177 They suggested that sublimation of 1,4-benzoquinone, instability of the radical anion, low reactivity of reduction products were responsible for the concentration-dependent cyclability. They also suggested that to introduce peripheral substituents into the 1,4-benzoquinone moiety might suppress sublimation and stabilize the intermediate radical species, which was successful in their subsequent attempts by using 2,5-dipropoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (Fig. 19a). Wang and co-workers used a modified anthraquinone, 1,5-bis(2-(2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy)ethoxy)anthracene-9,10-dione, with improved solubility to the anthraquinone counterpart to serve as the energy bearing redox active agent.178 The introduction of two triethylene glycol monomethyl ether groups into the anthraquinone molecular structure had a large effect on the solubility, and the resulting molecule was soluble in most polar solvents and aprotic electrolytes. Jansen and co-workers reported an organic Li-redox flow cell using 2,3,6-trimethylquinoxaline as anode-active material and 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-bis(2-methoxyethoxy)benzene as cathode-active material.19 The cell charged and discharged from 1.8–2.4 V and 1.7–1.3 V, respectively, after an initial acclimatization period (Fig. 19b). The cell showed a relatively low Coulombic efficiency of ∼70% and an energy density of ∼12 W h L−1, which revealed one of the major difficulties by using n-type redox-active organics in increasing the solubility while harvesting the full potential of this design.
 Fig. 19  Representative examples of n-type redox-active organics for Li-redox flow cell. (a) Relation between the total amount of 2,5-dipropoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DPBQ, molecular structure shown on the right) in the catholyte and capacity in the 10th discharge. The dotted line indicates the solubility of DPBQ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (b) Charge/discharge profiles of the all-organic Li-redox flow cell using 0.05 M 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-bis(2-methoxyethoxy)benzene and 0.05 M 2,3,6-trimethylquinoxaline (molecular structure shown on the right) as the high- and low-potential active species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
Till now, redox-active p-type organics have not yet been explored for Li-redox flow batteries. Perspective candidates are organosulfur compounds, such as thioethers, thioesters, sulfuranes, and anthracene or naphthalene derivatives bearing dithiol ring and/or methylsulfide. For instance, thioethers undergo reversible electron-extraction to form stable cationic radical species (Fig. 18c), and the reversible redox reaction at room temperature via one-electron oxidation per sulphur is kinetically fast.
For bipolar redox-active organics, nitroxide-based polymers are the most studied radical compounds for electrode application.179 While many organic molecules experience a significant structural rearrangement upon oxidation, nitroxides benefit from the localization of the electron density at the N–O centre and only slight structural changes.180 Chemical stability of both the radical and the doped forms is essential for durability of the charging and discharging processes of the battery. Besides, the electron-transfer rate constant for the nitroxide radicals in solution is estimated to be on the order of 10−1 cm s−1,181 which is the most important feature when compared to the slow rates for other organic redox reactions. One of the best known stable nitroxide is TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl piperidine-1-oxyl). Theoretical investigation suggests that TEMPO and its certain derivatives can be reversibly n-doped to aminoxy anion and p-doped to oxoammonium cation in cathodic and anodic reactions, respectively (Fig. 18d).182 In aprotic phase, the TEMPO and TEMPO-base radicals usually show reversible redox reaction between the neutral state and oxidized state with redox potential in the range of 3.4–3.9 V vs. Li+/Li.183 Other stable radicals (shown in Fig. 20) with proper redox potentials may be worthy investigating but yet to be developed in Li-redox flow cells, such as spirobisnitroxide (∼0.8 V vs. Ag+/Ag),184 arylnitroxide (ca. 0.7 V vs. Ag+/Ag),185 arynitroxide (ca. −0.7 V vs. Ag+/Ag),185 nitronylnitroxyl (ca. 0.7 V vs. Ag+/Ag upon oxidation, ca. −0.6 V vs. Ag+/Ag upon reduction),186 galvinoxyl (ca. 0.06 V vs. Ag+/Ag),172 and PROXYL (2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-2,5-dihydro-1H-pyrrol-1-oxyl-3-yl, ca. 0.5 V vs. Ag+/Ag)187etc.
 Fig. 20  Representative free radicals might be used in Li-redox flow batteries. 
The first demonstration using TEMPO radical as cathode-active materials for non-aqueous redox flow battery was achieved by Liu and co-workers.188 The cell was constructed from a TEMPO/NaClO4/acetonitrile catholyte, N-methylphthalimide/NaClO4/acetonitrile anolyte, and a Nepem-117 cation-exchange membrane as the separator with Na+ as the charge carrier. TEMPO and N-methylphthalimide showed a redox potential around 0.4 V and −1.3 V vs. Ag+/Ag, respectively (Fig. 21a). The cell showed a discharge potential of 1.4 V with 0.3 V overpotential during charge, and the Coulombic efficiency reached 90% for the demonstrated 20 cycles. Wang and co-workers further verified the reversibility of TEMPO radical.189 They found that TEMPO concentration exhibited a linear relationship with the charge time revealed by electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy (Fig. 21b), indicating that the redox reaction between TEMPO free radical and oxoammonium cation was totally reversible in LiPF6/EC–PC–EMC supporting electrolyte.
 Fig. 21  (a) The Cyclic voltammograms of 0.02 M TEMPO/1.00 M NaClO4/acetonitrile, 0.02 M N-methylphthalimide/1.00 M NaClO4/acetonitrile and 1.00 M NaClO4/acetonitrile (dotted line) under the scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2011, The Electrochemical Society. (b) The ESR-measured TEMPO concentration and state-of-charge (SOC) of the flow cell with respect to the charge time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
The energy density of present organic Li-redox batteries is far behind their inherent capability with the major bottleneck being the low solubility of electroactive materials. Meanwhile, metallic Li could be replaced by proper redox-active molecules with low redox potential for the better safety and total modular design of the cell. The use of electroactive organic species may offer the opportunities for the design and synthesis of novel organic molecules with tailorable redox potential, solubility, and electrochemical activity. Some redox-active organic compounds that, with proper modification to address the solubility issue, would show potential for Li/Na-redox cells are summarized in Fig. 22.19,104,126,170,172,175,176,188–198
 Fig. 22  Redox potential of representative redox-active organic and organometallic compounds with potential for organic-based Li/Na-redox cells. 
5. Separator membranes for Li-redox flow batteries
The separator membrane is one of the most critical components in the Li-redox batteries. There are two general classes of materials used for separator membranes in Li-redox batteries depending on the cell configuration: inorganic ceramics (solid electrolyte) and organic polymers (polymeric electrolyte). The most obvious difference between these classes is the mechanical properties. The high elastic moduli of ceramics make them more suitable for rigid cell designs. Conversely, the low elastic moduli of polymers are useful for flexible cell designs.
Common requirements of the solid Li+ electrolyte for battery applications includes: (i) a Li+ conductivity >10−4 S cm−1, a low resistance to Li+ transfer across its interfaces at the operating temperature, and no electronic conductivity, (ii) chemical stability in its working environment, (iii) containing only low-cost, non-toxic elements, and (iv) ease of fabrication into a mechanically robust, thin, and high-density membrane, especially for solid separators. Some characteristics such as stability and ionic conductivity of certain solid and polymeric electrolytes suitable for Li-redox flow battery application is summarized in Table 4. Here we review oxide Li+ electrolytes and their stability on contact with metallic lithium and also with water and moist air. We conclude that the oxides containing mobile Li+ will react with water unless the oxygen in the framework forms a strong covalent bond with a framework cation. Polymeric electrolytes are also briefly discussed.
Table 4 Summary of the stability and ionic conductivity of certain solid and polymeric electrolytes for Li-redox flow batteries




Electrolytes
Stability in water
Stability against Li/Na
Ion selectivity
Bulk conductivity (S cm−1, at 25 °C)
Demonstrated conductivity (S cm−1, at 25 °C)




NASICON-type LATP
Stable
Unstable
Li+
1.3 × 10−3
10−4–10−3


NASICON-type LZP
N/A
Stable
Li+
2 × 10−4
10−5–10−4


Garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12
Unstable
Stable
Li+
1 × 10−3
10−4–10−3


Perovskite (Li,La)TiO3
Unstable
Unstable
Li+
1 × 10−3
10−5–10−3


Perovskite (Li,Sr,Zr,Ta)TiO3
Unstable
Unstable
Li+
3.5 × 10−4
10−5–10−4


Anti-perovskite Li3OX
Unstable
Stable
Li+
2 × 10−3
10−6–10−3


Polymeric electrolyte
Stable
Stable
Li+, Na+
N/A
10−6–10−4




5.1 NASICONs
The B2(XO4)3 NASICON crystal structure consists of a B2(XO4)3 three-dimensional rigid framework with BO6 octahedra sharing corners with XO4 tetrahedral (Fig. 23a);199 the B2(XO4)3 units may form a rhombohedral or an orthorhombic array; the rhombohedral phase provides better conduction pathways for a guest A+ cation but realizing the rhombohedral phase is more difficult with a Li+ guest ion than with a Na+ guest. Moreover, the interstitial space of the rhombohedral framework contains one MI to three MII sites; the MI site is occupied first, so an x > 1 is needed to obtain a fast A+-cation conductivity. Presently, the best commercially available solid oxide Li+ electrolyte is rhombohedral Li1.3Ti1.7Al0.3(PO4)3 (LATP), with a Li+ conductivity of (1–4) × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C.200,201 Substitution of a trivalent Al3+ or Sc3+ for some Ti4+ increases x of AxB2(XO4)3 and, therefore, also the Li+ conductivity 10−6 S cm−1 at 25 °C of LiTi2(PO4)3. To realize a commercial product, low-cost fabrication of a dense membrane is also needed. In addition, to the higher x or a higher bulk Li+ conductivity, a higher density membrane increases Li+ transport across the grain boundaries. Strong covalent bonding in the XO4 units prevents attack by water. A high Li+ conductivity in the bulk and across grain boundaries has also been obtained by sintering LiTi2(PO4)3 with a lithium salt (Li3BO3, Li3PO4, and/or Li2O);202,203 the enhancement of Li+ conductivity was attributed to a higher membrane density and Li+-ion concentration in the grain boundaries. LATP glass with a Li+ conductivity of 1.3 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C was shown to be unstable on contact with metallic lithium owing to TiIV reduction;62,86 and on exposure to water, LATP can only be used in a limited pH range.37 Therefore, NASICON-type LiZr2(PO4)3 (LZP), has been explored as ZrIV in an isolated octahedron can be expected to be chemically more stable than TiIV.204,205 Substitution of Ca2+ or Y3+ for Zr4+ in LZP can stabilize the rhombohedral phase; it also increases the Li+ conductivity to above 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C. The Li+ conductivity of LZP may be improved by optimizing the doping element and its content and/or by increasing the density of the electrolyte membrane.
 Fig. 23  Crystal structure of (a) NASICON-type AxB2(PO4)3, (b) Garnet-type A3B3C2O12, and (c) perovskite AMO3. 
5.2 Garnets
The cubic A3B3C2O12 garnet structure consists of an A3C2O12 framework with an interstitial space containing B3 in tetrahedral sites that are bridged by empty octahedral sites sharing opposite faces with the tetrahedral sites (Fig. 23b).206 This interstitial space is similar to that of the cubic M2O4 framework of the AM2O4 spinels. Fast Li+ transport in the interstitial space of the spinel framework has been exploited for Li-insertion electrodes. Li-rich garnets have been studied extensively as Li+ solid electrolytes since the observation of a Li+ conductivity in exceed of 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C in Li7La3Zr2O12, which is stable on contact with a lithium anode.207 Since Coulomb repulsions between Li+-ions prevent occupancy of an octahedral site with its two near-neighbor tetrahedral sites occupied, x = 7.5 is the upper limit of x that can be tolerated in the LixB3C2O12 garnet framework, and this limit requires the 1.5 vacancies per formula unit to be long-range ordered in the tetrahedral sites.208 Therefore, substitution of ZrIV by TaV or NbV has been used to increase the number of empty interstitial sites and to realize a Li+ conductivity of 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C.207,209 However, samples were commonly fired in an alumina boat, and incorporation of adventitious Al3+ stabilized the cubic phase with 6 < x < 7. Al2O3 was also used as a sintering aid to obtain ceramics with a high bulk Li+ conductivity.210,211 Control of the sintering conditions by using a dry O2 atmosphere also leads to the formation of a dense ceramic and avoids degradation from the exchange of Li+ by an H+ of atmospheric moisture; a highest Li+ conductivity of 1.2 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C has been reported.212 Reaction with the H2O of LixB3C2O12 garnets having an x > 3 has prevented use of the garnet Li+ solid electrolytes. With x ≤ 3, the Li+ occupy only the tetrahedral sites and the ceramic is stable in water, but Li+ conductivity is low.213 With x > 3, the octahedral-site Li+ exchange with H+ from water, and a strong hydrogen bond distorts the octahedral site.214
5.3 Perovskites and antiperovskites
The MO3 framework of an AMO3 perovskite (Fig. 23c), accepts Li+ ions into the large empty A sites of an A-site-deficient perovskite. The La2/3MIVO3 perovskite is an example, and La3xLa2/3−x□1/3−2xTiO3 (0 < x < 0.16) has been reported to have a bulk Li+ conductivity ∼10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C with x ≈ 0.1.215 The Li+ are displaced off center of their large A-site cavity to either distorted tetrahedral sites or the square planar face of the MO3 framework that does not face a La3+ ion. This electrolyte is unstable on contact with metallic lithium owing to TiIV reduction, and a large grain-boundary resistance to Li+ conductivity at 25 °C lowers the conductivity to 10−5 S cm−1. A Li3/8Sr7/8Zr1/4Ta3/4O3 with a room-temperature Li+ conductivity of 2 × 10−4 S cm−1 has been reported to have a better grain-boundary conductivity and a better stability against metallic Li,216,217 but the sensitivity of these perovskites to water was not reported. A nominal Li3OCl with the cubic antiperovskite structure with Li+ conductivity >10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C with an activation energy of 0.2 to 0.3 eV has been reported.218 However, the Li3OX (X = Cl, Br, or I) antiperovskites are extremely hygroscopic; an H+ of water exchanges for one Li+ per formula unit.219 Moreover, calculations have reported that an Li3OX electrolyte could only be used in a low-voltage all-solid-state Li-ion battery.220
5.4 Polymeric electrolytes
Polymeric electrolyte, generally divided into solid and gel ones, have been extensively explored in lithium ion batteries because of their structural flexibility, excellent mechanical strength and improved operation safety. However, certain challenges still exist that obstruct the application of polymeric electrolytes in Li-redox flow batteries. The ionic conductivity of polymeric electrolytes is still low and should be improved to at least 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature in order to meet the requirements of practical applications. Gel polymer electrolytes, having the characteristics of both solid and liquid electrolytes, provide a promising strategy towards satisfied ionic conductivity, wide electrochemical window, and good compatibility with electrodes. The favorable polymer matrixes for gel polymer electrolytes include PEO,221 poly(acrylonitrile),222 poly(methyl methacrylate),223 PVDF,224 and PVDF based copolymers, such as PVDF-co-trifluoroethylene and PVDF-co-hexafluoropropylene.225,226 The typically micrometer-sized pores in these polymer matrixes ensure facile pathways of lithium ions, but lack the ability to prevent soluble redox species from crossing over the membrane. The concentration difference of anolyte and catholyte would induce osmosis that leads to the rapid fade of capacity and increased polarization. Polypropylene separator coated with a thin film of a conducting polymer, i.e., PEDOT:PSS, has been proved efficient to prevent the crossover of redox-active ferrocene molecule from the catholyte to the anode. When coupled with cross-linked PEO polymer electrolytes, the Li-redox flow cell exhibited stale cycle life without capacity fade after 50 charge/discharge cycles.227
The rate capability and life-span of the cell largely depend on the development of superior Li+-ion conducting membranes. Currently, the thermal evolution of ionic conductivity of the solid electrolytes and polymeric solid electrolytes suitable for Li-redox flow battery application are summarized in Fig. 24.25,58,95,228–243 Polymeric solid electrolytes combine the advantages of solid-state electrochemistry with the ease of processing inherent to plastic materials. However, it's necessary to overcome their relatively poor mechanical integrity and temperature endurance, which in turn might be enhanced by using polymers with supramolecular architectures,244 and by using thermally stable polymer matrix and lithium salts.245 The crystallinity of polymer should be suppressed and segmental motion should be maximized to achieve a sufficiently wide potential window and a Li+ conductivity >10−3 S cm−1 yet to be demonstrated.246 Also, they should be able to block dendrites growth on Li anode or block soluble redox species in the cathode side from crossing over to the anode. Crystalline ionic conductors, in general, are advantageous over the polymeric solid electrolytes in terms of conductivity and stability. Material design of crystalline ionic conductors are based on certain structural criteria: mobile ions should have a suitable size for conduction pathways in the lattice, there should be disorder in a mobile ion sublattice, and highly polarizable mobile ions and anion sublattices are preferable. In general, oxide materials are believed to be superior to polymeric materials for reasons of handling and mechanical, chemical, and electrochemical stability.229,236 These materials include perovskite oxides based on (La,Li)TiO3, garnet oxides based on Li5La3Ta2O12,215,247,248 crystalline sulfides such as Li2S–P2S5 glass or glass-ceramic,249–252 and phosphates similar to the Na+-ion conducting NASICON compounds such as Li1+xAlxGe2−x(PO4)3, Li1+xTi2−xAlx(PO4)3, and Li1+x+yTi2−xAlxSiy(PO4)3−y.232,253–256 All these materials exhibit bulk ionic conductivity of 10−3 S cm−1. However, it is of utmost importance to decrease the grain-boundary resistivity of the oxide- or phosphate-based solid electrolytes. The instability of perovskite- and NASICON-type solid electrolytes against metallic Li and the solid/liquid interface need to be improved as well.257–259 It's reported that using polymeric solid electrolyte as a buffer layer could alleviate the instability of NASICON-type solid electrolytes,64,243,260–262 the long-term stability, however, needs further confirmation.58 The development of solid electrolytes with superior conductivity and electrochemical stability will undoubtedly stimulate the development of Li-redox flow batteries together with a deep understanding of the fundamentals on ionic mobility in the bulk material.
 Fig. 24  Thermal evolution of ionic conductivity (σ) of the solid electrolytes and polymeric solid electrolytes. As a reference, the organic electrolyte adopted in Li-ion batteries is also included. The grey region indicates the ionic conductivity and temperature range suitable for Li-redox flow battery applications. 
6. Conclusion and future perspective
Li-redox flow batteries are still in their infancy, offering many exciting opportunities. The known redox couples and their electrochemical parameters in Li-redox flow batteries are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5 Reported redox couples and their electrochemical parameters in Li-redox flow batteries




Cell chemistry
Cell type
Cell voltage (V)
Redox media of the catholyte
Bulk energy densitya (W h kg−1)
Demonstrated energy densityb
Ref.





a Based on the active material only.
b Based on the total weight or volume of the catholyte and anode/anolyte.





Fe(NO3)3|Li
Flow
3.3
Aqueous, strong acidic
∼1105
8–9 W h kg−1

35



K3Fe(CN)6|Li
Static
3.4
Aqueous, weak alkaline
∼276
8–9 W h kg−1

34



Flow
3.5
8–9 W h kg−1

42



I2|Li
Static
3.5
Aqueous, neutral
∼726
330 W h kg−1

36 and 62



Flow
280 W h kg−1

61



LiBr|Li
Static
4.0
Aqueous, weak acidic
∼1320
30 W h kg−1

37



KMnO4|Zn
Static
2.8
Aqueous, strong acidic
∼450
N/A

32



Cu|Li
Static
3.2
Aqueous, weak alkaline
∼2440
30 W h kg−1

38



Li2S|Li
Static
2.5
Aqueous, strong alkaline
∼650
14 W h kg−1

40



Fc1N112-TFSI|Li
Flow
3.3
EC/PC/EMC
∼160
50 W h L−1

127



Ferrocene|Li
Static
3.6
DMF
∼520
9–10 W h kg−1

104



BQ|Li
Static
2.5–2.8
γ-Butyrolactone
∼1240
5–6 W h kg−1

177



2,5-Diethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone|Li
Static
2.6–2.8
γ-Butyrolactone
∼510
18 W h kg−1

177



2,5-Dipropoxy-1,4-benzoquinone|Li
Static
2.5–2.7
γ-Butyrolactone
∼560
13 W h kg−1

177



Polysulfide|Li
Static
2.3
DOL/DME
∼260
97 W h kg−1

103



15G3DAQ|Li
Static
2.1–2.4
PC
∼210
25 W h L−1

178



TiO2 (suspension)|Li
Flow
1.0–1.7
PC
N/A
0.8 W h kg−1

126



LiFePO4 (suspension)|Li
Flow
3.2
EC/DMC
N/A
3.5 W h L−1

124



DBBB|2,3,6-trimethylquinoxaline
Flow
1.3–1.7
PC
∼80
12 W h L−1

19



Polysulfide (suspension)|Li
Static
1.9–2.4
Tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether
∼2560
234 W h L−1

168



Flow
34 W h L−1


TEMPO|N-methylphthalimide
Static
1.0–1.4
Acetonitrile
∼120
15 W h kg−1

188



TEMPO|Li
Flow
2.7–3.2
EC/PC/EMC
∼510
126 W h L−1

189





Currently, metallic lithium has been employed as the anode in most cells because it has the highest specific capacity and the lowest anode potential of all. However, the lithium anode forms dendritic and mossy metal deposits, leading to serious safety concerns and low Coulombic efficiency during charge/discharge cycles.21 Recent investigations to improve the stability of lithium anode involve interfacial engineering, surface passivation and integration of a buffer layer between lithium and electrolyte.58,243,263–269
The practical application of Li-redox flow batteries also depends on the development of redox-active materials, particularly the redox-active materials for the anolyte.24 The choices of inorganic redox-active materials are rather limited. In contrast, the choices of organic materials should be rich enough to provide sufficient redox-active molecules in a broad potential window. Conjugated dicarboxylates have been widely studied in organic Li-ion batteries.176,270,271 Conjugated polymeric Schiff base, thiophenes and multi-ring aromatics emerged recently have provided other clues for Li-redox flow battery anode application.272–274 Suspensions of electroactive species with multiple redox moieties are also of great interest.27,126,275 The structure diversity of organic electrode materials may further allow the tailoring of redox potential, solubility and electrochemical activity by introducing proper electron-donating/accepting functional groups. Other choices would rely on metallorganic compounds, of which the transition metal ions can reversibly transform their valence state with desired redox potential while maintaining structural stability. Metallocenes and electron-reservoir complexes might be good choices for both cathode and anode. For instance, the electron-reservoir complexes of [(η5-C5H5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)] and [(η5-C5Me5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)] show a redox potential of 1.5 and 1.2 V vs. Li+/Li, respectively;128 and the colbaltocene and decamethylcobaltocene also show a relatively low redox potential about 1.9 V and 1.3 V vs. Li+/Li, respectively,276,277 considerably lower than those used in Li-redox flow cells,19,170,193,278 thus contributing to achieve optimized cell voltage. Potential candidates for redox-active anode material are summarized in Table 6.
Table 6 Potential redox active materials for the anolyte of Li-redox cells




Compound
Examples
Redox potential (V vs. Li+/Li)
Bulk capacity (A h kg−1)
Ref.




Conjugated dicarboxylate
Di-lithium trans–trans-muconate
∼1.4
348.1

175



Di-lithium terephthalate
∼1
301.1

175 and 270



2,5-Dihydroxyterephthalic acid
∼0.8
241.6

271



4,4′-Tolane-dicarboxylate
∼0.7
202.9

176



Conjugated polymeric Schiff base
Poly-[N,N′-p-(benzylidene)-p-phenylenediamine]
∼1
324.7

272



Thiophene
n-Type poly(3,4-dihexylthiophene)
∼0.5
117.3

273



Multi-ring aromatic
Naphthalene
0–1
1687

274



Metallocene
Cobaltocene
∼1.8
141.7

276



Decamethylcobaltocene
∼1.3
81.4

277



Electron-reservoir complex
[(η5-C5H5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)]
∼1.5
94.7

128



[(η5-C5Me5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)]
∼1.2
81.5

128



Suspension
Anatase TiO2
1.5–2
N/A

126



Li4Ti5O12
∼1.5
175

27





Improvements in energy density and redox kinetics may be realized by increasing the solubility via molecular design and electrolyte choice. A facile redox reaction in catholyte or anolyte also depends on the current collector design. The general criteria for an ideal current collector are that it should provide good electric conductivity, exhibit good stability towards the interfacial redox reaction, and facilitate the diffusion of active species within the electrode.62 Since most of the redox reactions adopted in Li-redox flow cells are facile, graphitic carbon materials meet such basic requirement.15 Nevertheless, the physical properties of current collector, such as morphology, surface area and porosity do affect the final electrochemical performance of the cell. Particularly, for those redox reactions with poor redox kinetics, the assistance of catalysts or post-treatments of an optimized current collector will be necessary to facilitate the reaction process.279–281
Alike conventional redox flow batteries, Li-redox flow batteries should be more durable than conventional battery systems based on solid electrode configuration since the redox reactions proceed at solid (current collector)/liquid (electrolyte) interface, thus should not be accompanied by morphological/structural changes which is common in bulk electrodes due to the insertion or removal of electroactive species. Li-redox flow batteries should also be more scalable without sacrificing energy density and power density than conventional solid state batteries because the former may be readily modulated by varying the external circulating sub-systems. Moreover, Li-redox flow batteries are more flexible in design than conventional redox flow batteries since the cell can be configured with aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolytes, or aprotic/aprotic hybrid electrolytes, or single component aprotic electrolytes, which enables great flexibility in choosing redox couples and supported electrolytes. Additionally, Li-redox flow batteries are not restricted to the existing inorganic redox couples. The cooperation of aprotic electrolytes and the structural diversity of organic and organometallic electrode materials would provide a number of choices for the cathode and the anode. It is expected that this new battery technology would stimulate the development of new electrochemical storage systems, as well as interdisciplinary collaborations that bring physics, chemistry, materials science and engineering, and computational science to the electrochemical arena.
Abbreviations

DECDiethyl carbonate
DMA
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
DMEDimethoxyethane
DMF
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DMSODimethyl sulfoxide
DOL1,3-Dioxolane
ECEthylene carbonate
EMCEthyl methyl carbonate
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
LiTFSILithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
LISICONLi+ superionic conductor
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
NASICONNa+ superionic conductor
OEROxygen evolution reaction
ORROxygen reduction reaction
PCPropylene carbonate
PVDFPoly(vinyldifluoride)
SCESaturated calomel electrode
SHEStandard hydrogen electrode
TCNQ7,7,8,8-Tetracyanoquinodimethane
THFTetrahydrofuran

Acknowledgements
G.Y. acknowledges the financial support of faculty start up grant from the University of Texas at Austin and the Welch Foundation grant (F-1861). J.B.G. acknowledges the support by the Welch Foundation (F-1066). H.R.B. acknowledge the financial support from RIKEN. Y.Z. acknowledges the support from National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2012CB932400) and the Major Research Plan of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 91333208).
Notes and references

          http://www.ease-storage.eu/Technical_Documents.html, accessed: 2015.
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand and J.-M. Taraascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2019–2029 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ponce de León, A. Frías-Ferrer, J. González-García, D. A. Szánto and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716–732 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Palacín, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacín, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Taraascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y.-K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994–10024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Leung, X. Li, C. P. De Leon, L. Berlouis, C. T. J. Low and F. C. Walsh, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10125–10156 RSC .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. KLu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Z. Webber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137–1164 CrossRef .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. H. Chakrabarti, S. A. Hajimolana, F. S. Mjalli and M. Saleem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R55–R79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Taraascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 770–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Brushett, J. T. Vaughey and A. N. Jansen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1390–1396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4217–4302 Search PubMed .
S. Flandrois and B. Simon, Carbon, 1999, 37, 165–180 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arora and Z. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419–4462 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 14–18 CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, R. Kostecki, T. J. Richardson, J. K. Pugh and J. P. N. Ross, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A1341–A1345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Duduta, B. Ho, V. C. Wood, P. Limthongkul, V. E. Brunini, W. C. Carter and Y.-M. Chiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 511–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Shah, H. Al-Fetlawi and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1125–1139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Urquidi-Macdonald, J. Flores, D. D. Macdonald, O. Pensado-Rodrguez and D. Van Voorhis, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 3069–3077 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Littauer and K. C. Tsai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 771–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. J. Visco, B. D. Katz, Y. S. Nimon and L. D. Dejonghe, US Pat., 7282295 2007 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. Guo, Y. Xia and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2204–2206 RSC .
P. He, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10701–10703 RSC .
Y. Lu, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5756–5759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang and H. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1087–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Wang and H. R. Byon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1896 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Ding, J. Song, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1990–1995 CAS .
Y. Wang and H. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1834–1837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Weng, Y. Wang, F. Li, H.-M. Cheng and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3307–3312 CAS .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 3rd edn,  2000 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 11, 10113–10117 RSC .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegava, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A965–A969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S. Kim, W. Wang, M. Vijayakumar, Z. Nie, B. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Xia, J. Z. Hu, G. L. Graff, J. Liu and Z. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ding, W. Xu, Y. Shao, X. Chen, Z. Wang, F. Gao, X. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 292–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hasegawa, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, J. Xie, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 371–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. D. Chen, K. S. V. Santhanam and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 128, 1460–1467 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Iwasita, W. Schmickler, J. Herrmann and U. Vogel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 2026–2032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Wen, H. M. Zhang, P. Qian, H. T. Zhou, P. Zhao, B. L. Yi and Y. S. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3769–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Wen, H. M. Zhang, P. Qian, H. T. Zhou, P. Zhao, B. L. Yi and T. S. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A929–A934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Ramette and R. W. J. Sandford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1965, 87, 5001–5005 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Svensson and L. Kloo, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 1649–1684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Mader and R. E. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1297–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kreutzer, V. Yarlagadda and T. V. Nguyen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F331–F337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lai, H. Zhang, X. Li, L. Zhang and Y. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 1–4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Teng, X. C. Yang, C. Z. Yuan, C. Y. Li, R. K. Chen, H. N. Tian, S. F. Li, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 5542–5545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Gao, M. Li, L. Liu and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19444–19450 CAS .
Y. Zhao, N. B. Mercier and H. R. Byon, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 344–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kjeang, R. Michel, D. A. Harrington, N. Djilali and D. Sinton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4000–4006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kjeang, J. McKechnie, D. Sinton and N. Djilali, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 379–390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and H. R. Byon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1630–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, M. Hong, N. B. Mercier, G. Yu, H. C. Choi and H. R. Byon, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1085–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, G. Kazacos, G. Poon and H. Verseema, Int. J. Energy Res., 2010, 34, 182–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu and R. Holze, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1401 Search PubMed .
C. P. De Leon, G. W. Reade, I. Whyte, S. E. Male and F. C. Walsh, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 5815–5823 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, X. Wang, M. Engelhard, C. Wang, S. Dai, J. Liu, Z. Yang and Y. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4375–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. J. Visco, B. D. Katz, Y. S. Nimon and L. C. De Jonghe, US Pat., 20070117007,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Manthiram and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 201401302 Search PubMed .
Y. Shimonishi, T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, D. Im, D. J. Lee, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5128–5132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ohkuma, I. Uechi, M. Matsui, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Imanishi, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 947–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shimonishi, T. Zhang, P. Johnson, N. Imanishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6187–6191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Fu and A. manthiram, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 47, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Byon, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3421–3428 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu and X.-B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
R. Cao, J.-S. Lee, M. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 816–829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Y. Wang, H. Li and P. He, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 1009–1019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakai, T. Iwaki, Z. Ye and D. Noréus, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 4040–4045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, Z. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Salim, S. Li, C. Sun, L. Chen, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18902–18907 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S.-H. Chai, S. Dai and A. Manthiram, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2630–2636 CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Alstrum-Acevedo, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6802–6827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, Z. Chen, M. K. Brennaman, J. J. Concepcion, A. O. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha and T. J. Meyer, Pure Appl. Chem., 2011, 83, 749–768 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Meyer, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 757–758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Boschlii and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef PubMed .
N. F. Yan, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7012–7015 CAS .
N. F. Yan, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A736–A741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. F. Martinson, T. W. Hamann, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4458–4467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Chakrabarti, R. A. W. Dryfe and E. P. L. Roberts, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2189–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Shin, S.-H. Yun and S.-H. Moon, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9095–9116 RSC .
Y. Matsuda, K. Tanaka, M. Okada, Y. Takasu and M. Morita, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 909–914 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Kim, K. J. Kim, M.-S. Park, N. J. Lee, U. Hwang, H. Kim and Y.-J. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 997–1000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, A. A. Shinkle, Y. Li, C. W. Monroe, L. T. Thompson and A. E. S. Sleightolme, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1634–1637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, A. E. S. Sleightolme, A. A. Shinkle, Y. Li and L. T. Thompson, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2312–2315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. S. Sleightolme, A. A. Shinkle, Q. Liu, Y. Li, C. W. Monroe and L. T. Thompson, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5742–5745 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1552–1558 CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Ding, J. Song, G. Li, G. Dong, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11036–11040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Astruc, Organometallic chemistry and catalysis, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. A. Vorotyntsev, M. Casalta, E. Pousson, L. Roullier, G. Boni and C. Moise, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 4017–4033 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Geiger Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1974, 96, 2632–2634 CrossRef .
D. Chong, J. Slote and W. E. Geiger, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 630, 28–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Noviandri, K. N. Brown, D. S. Fleming, P. T. Gulyas, P. A. Lay, A. F. Masters and L. Phillips, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6713–6722 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Smart and J. L. Robbins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1978, 100, 3936–3938 CrossRef CAS .
N. El Murr, J. E. Sheats, W. E. Geiger Jr. and J. D. L. Holloway, Inorg. Chem., 1979, 18, 1443–1446 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. L. Holloway, W. L. Bowden and W. E. Geiger Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 7089–7090 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Golovin, D. P. Wilkinson, J. T. Dudley, D. Holonko and S. Woo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 5–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Park, S. B. Schougaard and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 848–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, C. Ornelas and J. Ruiz, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 8936–8944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4108–4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Baranski and K. Winkler, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 313, 367–375 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, E. I. Rogers and R. G. Compton, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 648, 15–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Nielson, G. E. McManis, L. K. Safford and M. J. Weaver, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 2152–2157 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Yang, M.-S. Chan and A. C. Wahl, J. Phys. Chem., 1975, 79, 2049–2052 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Yang, M.-S. Chan and A. C. Wahl, J. Phys. Chem., 1980, 84, 3094–3099 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Hultgren, A. W. A. Mariotti, A. M. Bond and A. G. Wedd, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 3151–3156 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Marrani, F. Cattaruzza, F. Decker, P. Galloni and R. Zanoni, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5733–5740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, L. Li, M. Grätzel and Q. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1793–1797 RSC .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Wang, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8197–8200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, J. Yang, Q. Huang, X. Wang, H. Huang and Q. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 5, 1400567 Search PubMed .
X. Wei, L. Cosimbescu, W. Xu, J. Z. Hu, M. Vijayakumar, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, X. Deng, J. Xiao, J. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400678 Search PubMed .
D. Astruc, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1191–1206 RSC .
N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S. S. Moganty, A. Corona and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5904–5908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zhao, M. L. Thomas and H. R. Byon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2248–2252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Z. Yang, Y. Yu, H. D. Abruña and L. A. Archer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 763–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, W. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P.-C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2012, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Rauh, F. S. Shuker, J. M. Marston and S. B. Brummer, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1977, 39, 1761–1766 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cuisinier, P.-E. Cabelguen, S. Evers, G. He, M. Kolbeck, A. Garsuch, T. Bolin, M. Balasubramanian and L. F. Nazar, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3227–3232 CrossRef CAS .
S. Waluś, C. Barchasz, J.-F. Colin, J.-F. Martin, E. Elkaïm, J.-C. Leprêtre and F. Alloin, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7899–7901 RSC .
K. A. See, M. Leskes, J. M. Griffin, S. Britto, P. D. Mathews, A. Emly, A. Van der Ven, D. S. Wright, A. J. Morris, C. P. Grey and R. Seshadri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16368–16377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, S. Misra, Y. Yang, A. Jackson, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Dai, J. C. Andrews, Y. Cui and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6337–6343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Li, L. Yuan, Z. Yi, Y. Y. Sun, Y. Liu, Y.-B. Jiang, Y. Shen, Y. Xin, Z. Zhang and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301473 Search PubMed .
C. Barchasz, F. Molton, C. Duboc, J.-C. Leprêtre, S. Patoux and F. Alloin, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 3973–3980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu, Q. He and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5733–5741 CAS .
R. D. Rauh, K. M. Abraham, G. F. Pearson, J. K. Surprenant and S. B. Brummer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 523–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang and J. A. Read, J. Power Sources, 2012, 200, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yim, M.-S. Park, J.-S. Yu, K. J. Kim, K. Y. Im, J.-H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. N. Jo, S.-G. Woo, K. S. Kang, I. Lee and Y.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132–25137 CAS .

          F. Carey and R. Sundberg, Advanced Organic Chemistry, Springer, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
R. D. Rauh, F. S. Shuker, J. M. Martston and S. B. Brummer, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1977, 39, 1761–1766 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Tobishima, H. Yamamoto and M. Matsuda, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 1019–1029 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .
T. Kobayashi, Y. Imade, D. Shishihara, K. Homma, M. Nagao, R. Watanabe, T. Yokoi, A. Yamada, R. Kanno and T. Tatsumi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 621–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nagao, Y. Imade, H. Narisawa, T. Kobayashi, R. Watanabe, T. Yokoi, T. Tatsumi and R. Kanno, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 237–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 701–705 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hakari, M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Fu, Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6930–6935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, G. Zheng, P.-C. Hsu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, W. Li, Z. W. Seh, M. T. McDowell, K. Yan, Z. Liang, V. K. Narasimhan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3943 CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, Gangulibabu, A. Guéguen, R. Dedryvère and J.-M. Taraascon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 176–182 CAS .
S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zu and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400897 Search PubMed .
X. Ji, S. Evers, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 325 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zu, Y. Fu and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10362–10367 CAS .
X. Han, Y. Xu, X. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, N. Weadock, J. Wan, H. Zhu, Y. Liu, H. Li, G. Rubloff, C. Wang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8817–8819 RSC .

          A. Gorkovenko, T. A. Skotheim and Z.-S. Xu, Cathodes Comprising Electroactive Sulfur Materials and Secondary Batteries Using Same, US Pat., 6,878,488, 812,  2005 Search PubMed .
Y. Fu, Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300655 Search PubMed .
G. Zhou, S. Pei, D.-W. Wang, S. Wang, K. Huang, L.-C. Yin, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 625–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Fan, W. H. Woodford, Z. Li, N. Baram, K. C. Smith, A. Helal, G. H. McKinley, W. C. Carter and Y.-M. Chiang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2210–2218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Wang, D. Tang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9271–9274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2280–2301 CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Suga, H. Ohshiro, S. Sugita, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1627–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. G. Aurich, Nitrones, Nitronates and Nitroxide, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .

          L. B. Volodarsky, V. A. Reznikov and V. I. Ovcharenko, Synthetic Chemistry of Stable Nitroxides, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  1994 Search PubMed .
M. Armand, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, P. Ribière, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Walker, S. Grugeon, H. Vezin, S. Laruelle, M. Armand, F. Wudl and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1615–1620 RSC .
H. Senoh, M. Yao, H. Sakaebe, K. Yasuda and Z. Siroma, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10145–10150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Xu, L. Cosimbescu, D. Choi, L. Li and Z. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6669–6671 RSC .
H. Nishide, K. Koshika and K. Oyaizu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 1961–1970 CrossRef CAS .
T. Janoschka, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6397–6490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Suga, Y. J. Pu, K. Oyaizu and H. Nishide, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 2203–2204 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Hodgson, M. Namazian, S. E. Bottle and M. L. Coote, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 13595–13605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Buhrmester, L. M. Moshurchak, R. L. Wang and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1800–A1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nesvadba, L. Bugnon, P. Maire and P. Novák, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 783–788 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, Y. J. Pu, S. Kasatori and H. Nishide, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 3167–3173 CrossRef CAS .
T. Suga, S. Sugita, H. Ohshiro, K. Yoyaizu and H. Nishide, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 751–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qu, T. Fujii, T. Katsumata, Y. Suzuki, M. Shiotsuki, F. Sanda, M. Satoh, J. Wada and T. Masuda, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 5431–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. Li, S. Liu, K. Huang, D. Fang, F. Wang and S. Peng, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A171–A173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, W. Xu, M. Vijayakumar, L. Cosimbescu, T. Liu, V. Sprenkle and W. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7649–7653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nokami, T. Matsuo, Y. Inatomi, N. Hojo, T. Tsukagoshi, H. Yashizawa, A. Shimizu, H. Kuramoto, K. Komae, H. Tsuyama and J.-i. Yoshida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19694–19700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Oyama, T. Tatsuma, T. Sato and T. Sotomura, Nature, 1995, 373, 598–600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, T. Xu, M. Gordin, Y.-B. Jiang, I.-T. Bae, Q. Xiao, H. Zhan, J. Liu and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2205–2211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, C. Suh, S. Er, M. R. Gerhardt, C. J. Galvin, X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adachi, K. Tanaka and K. Sekai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 146, 1256–1261 CAS .
J. R. Dahn, J. Jiang, L. M. Moshurchak, M. D. Fleischauer, C. Buhrmester and L. J. Krause, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1283–A1289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Dantsin, K. Jambunathan, S. V. Ivanov, W. J. Casteel, K. Amine, J. Liu, A. N. Jansen and Z. Chen, 208th ECS Meeting Abstracts, Los Angeles, CA, 2005 (Abstract No. 2223).
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1379–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Gale and R. Job, Inorg. Chem., 1981, 20, 40–42 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Y. H.-P. Hong and J. A. Kafalas, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 203–220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Aono, Acc. Chem. Res., 1994, 27, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
H. Aono and E. Sugimoto, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 590–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-y. Adachi, N. Imanishi and H. Aono, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 127–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aono, E. Sugimoto, Y. Sadaoka, N. Imanishi and G.-y. Adachi, Chem. Lett., 1990, 331–334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. Liu, K. Liu and C.-A. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 240, 50–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7760–7762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J.-T. Han, C.-A. Wang, S. C. Vogel, H. Xie, M. Xu and J. B. Goodenough, J. Power Sources, 2012, 209, 278–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J.-T. Han, C.-A. Wang, H. Xie and J. B. Goodenough, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15357–15361 RSC .
H. Xie, J. A. Alonso, Y. Li, M. T. Fernández-Díaz and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3587–3589 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohta, T. Kobayashi and T. Asaoka, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3342–3345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C.-A. Wang, H. Xie, J. Cheng and J. B. Goodenough, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1289–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin and P. J. McGinn, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8683–8687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bernuy-Lopez, W. Manalastas, J. M. Lopez del Amo, A. Aguadero, F. Aguesse and J. A. Kilner, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3610–3617 CrossRef CAS .
C. Galven, J. Dittmer, E. Suard, F. Le Berre and M.-P. Crosnier-Lopez, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3335–3345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Truong, M. Howard, O. Clemens, K. S. Knight, P. R. Slater and V. Thangadurai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13469–13475 CAS .
S. Stramare, V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3974–3990 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chen, S. Xie, E. Sperling, A. S. Yang, G. Henriksen and K. Amine, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 167, 263–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Inada, K. Kimura, K. Kusakabe, T. Tojo and Y. Sakurai, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 261, 95–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and L. L. Daemen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15042–15047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Schroeder, A. A. Hubaud and J. T. Vaughey, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 49, 614–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Emly, E. Kioupakis and A. Van der Ven, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4663–4670 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Morford, D. T. Welna, C. E. Kellam III, M. A. Hofmann and H. R. Allcock, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 721–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Cho, M. Tanaka, H. Onishi, Y. Kondo, T. Nakamura, H. Hiroaki, S. Tanase and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 155–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Zhang, P. Zhang, Z. H. Li, M. Sun, Y. P. Wu and H. Q. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1700–1703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Buonomenna, P. Macchi, M. Davoli and E. Drioli, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 1557–1572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Costa, J. L. Gomez Ribelles, S. Lanceros-Méndez, G. B. Appetecchi and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 779–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Kim, J.-C. Kim and K. S. Ryu, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 1495–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Park, J. H. Cho, K. Shanmuganathan, J. Song, J. Peng, M. Gobet, S. Greenbaum, C. J. Ellison and J. B. Goodenough, J. Power Sources, 2014, 263, 52–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mizuno, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 918–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Murugan, V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7778–7781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kanno and M. Maruyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A742–A746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Song, Y. Y. Wang and C. C. Wan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 3219–3225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Tockchom, N. Gupta and B. Kumar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A915–A920 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sahu, E. Rangasamy, J. Li, Y. Chen, K. An, N. Dudney and C. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10396–10403 CAS .
L. Edman, A. Ferry and M. M. Doeff, J. Mater. Res., 2000, 15, 1950–1954 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, K. Minami, F. Mizuno and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 1885–1889 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4554–4569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, K. Xie, X. Hong, Z. Hu and X. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 218, 163–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takada, N. Aotani and S. Kondo, J. Power Sources, 1993, 43, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and B. Scrosati, Nature, 1998, 394, 456–458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuhn, O. Gerbig, C. Zhu, F. Falkenberg, J. Maier and B. V. Lotsch, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14669–14674 RSC .
I. Yoshiyuki, L. Chen, I. Mitsuru, N. Tesuro, U. Takashi, I. Hiromasa and W. Masataka, Solid State Commun., 1993, 86, 689–693 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, Y. Shiminishi, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1661–1663 RSC .
W. H. Meyer, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 439–448 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, S. Madhavi and H.-K. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14326–14346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ibarra, A. Várez, C. León, J. Santamaría, L. M. Torres-Martínez and J. Sanz, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 134, 219–228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Inaguma and M. Itoh, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 86–88, 257–260 CrossRef CAS .
J. Trevey, J. S. Jang, Y. S. Jung, C. R. Stoldt and S.-H. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1830–1833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Minami, A. Hayashi, S. Ujiie and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tatsumisago, F. Mizuno and A. Hayashi, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 193–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Minami, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2715–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barré, F. Le Berre, M.-P. Crosnier-Lopez, C. Galven, O. Bohnké and J.-L. Fourquet, Ionics, 2009, 15, 681–687 CrossRef .
N. V. Kosova, E. T. Devyatkina, A. P. Stepanov and A. L. Buzlukov, Ionics, 2008, 14, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, D. Thomas and J. Kumar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A506–A513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, Z. Wen, Z. Gu, X. Yang, J. Zhang and Z. Gu, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2611–2615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, E. Rangasamy, C. Liang, J. Sakamoto and K. L. More, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 129–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Jackman and R. A. Cutler, J. Power Sources, 2013, 230, 251–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, X. Liu, L. Sang and F. Ding, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 43–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Qu, Y. Hou, F. Wang and Y. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6179–6181 RSC .
Z. Chang, Y. Yang, M. Li, X. Wang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10739–10755 CAS .
Y. Hou, X. Wang, Y. Zhu, C. Hu, Z. Chang, Y. Wu and R. Holze, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14713–14718 CAS .
F. Ding, W. Xu, G. L. Graff, J. Zhang, M. L. Sushko, X. Chen, Y. Shao, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie, J. Xiao, X. Liu, P. V. Sushko, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4450–4456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zu and A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2522–2527 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, S. W. Lee, Z. Liang, H.-W. Lee, K. Yan, H. Yao, H. Wang, W. Li, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 618–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, E. Pollak, R. Elazari, G. Salitra, C. S. Kelley and J. Affinito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A694–A702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 961–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, J. Xiao, Y. Shao, J. Zheng, W. D. Bennett, D. Lu, L. V. Saraf, M. Engelhard, L. Ji, J. Zhang, X. Li, G. L. Graff and J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3015 Search PubMed .
M. Buonaiuto, S. Neuhold, D. J. Schroeder, C. M. Lopez and J. T. Vaughey, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 363–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Sun, S. X. Du, H.-J. Gao and S. B. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 091905 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4404–4409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Castillo-Martínez, J. Carretero-González and M. Armand, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5341–5345 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Zhu, W. Shi, R. R. Zhao, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai, A. W. Lei and H. X. Yang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 688, 118–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, G. Qing, J. Sun and T. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5147–5151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Si, L. Wang, P. Tang and H. Cao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A330–A335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Stojanovic and A. M. Bond, Anal. Chem., 1993, 65, 56–64 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Connelly and W. E. Geiger, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 877–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gu, K. Gong, E. Z. Yan and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2986–2998 CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Luo, B. Li, X. Wei, L. Li and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 970–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, J. Ryu, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3727–3735 CAS .
P. F. Driscoll, E. Deunf, L. Rubin, J. Arnold and J. B. Kerr, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, G3152–G3158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:



Lead–acid	Flooded	25–40	60–100	140–350	200–1500	70–75	20–40
Valve-regulated	30–40	80–100	140–300	300–1500	80–85	20–40
Compressed	40–50	100	140–250	800–1500	70–85	20–40
Alkaline	Ni–Cd (high power)	25–40	130	500	800–1500	70–75	−40–50
Ni–Cd (high capacity)	40–50	130	120–350	800–1500	70–75	−40–50
Ni–Zn	60–80	200–300	500–1000	200–1000	60–65	0–40
NiMH (high power)	40–55	80–200	500–1400	500–2000	70–80	0–45
NiMH (high capacity)	60–80	200–350	200–600	500–2000	70–80	0–45
High temperature	Sodium–sulphur	103	150	100	4500	89	−20–45
Lithium	Li-ion (high power)	70–130	150–450	600–3000	800–3000	90–95	−20–60
Li-ion (high capacity)	110–220	150–450	200–600	800–3000	90–95	−20–60
Li Polymer	100–180	100	300–500	300–1000	90–95	−20–110
Flow batteries	High capacity	60–80	75–80	50–150	10000	70–75	0–40
Electrochemical capacitors	High power	3–5	3–10	2000–10000	>500000	95–100	−20–90
High capacity	12–20	3–6	2000–10000	>500000	95–100	−20–90

 	Fig. 1  Principles of secondary batteries based on aqueous and aprotic electrolytes. (a) Schematic of a vanadium redox-flow battery. The active species are dissolved in a strong acid. During charge process, VO2+ is oxidized to VO2+ at the positive electrode and V3+ is reduced to V2+ at the negative electrode. The protons transport across the ion-exchange membrane to balance the charge. (b) Potential window of water at room temperature. (c) Schematic of a typical Li-ion battery. Upon charging, Li ions are deintercalated from the Li-intercalation compound and intercalated into the graphite layers. The process is reversed on discharge. The electrodes are separated by an aprotic electrolyte that transports Li ions between the electrodes. (d) Schematic energy diagram of organic electrolyte. Eg is the window of the electrolyte for thermodynamic stability.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structure and working principle of a Li-redox flow cell.	 
Positive electrode: Cx+ − ye− → C(x+y)+
Negative electrode: Li+ + e− → Li
or Am+ + ne− → A(m−n)+
Overall reaction: Cx+ + yLi+ → C(x+y)+ + yLi
or nCx+ + yAm+ → nC(x+y)+ + yA(m−n)+

 	Fig. 3  Schematic structure of a Li-redox flow cell.	 
Li + H2O → LiOH + ½H2(g)	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Redox potential of various reversible redox couples suitable for constructing Li/Na-redox cells with aqueous/aprotic hybrid electrolyte system.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of iron-based Li-redox flow batteries with aqueous catholyte. Charge/discharge profile of a Li-redox cell operated via Fe3+/Fe2+ redox reaction (a), and Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64− redox reaction under different Fe(CN)63− concentration (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. A demonstration of electric charging via Fe3+/Fe2+ redox reaction (c) and chemical charging using (NH4)S2O8 as oxidizer to chemically oxidize Fe2+ back to Fe3+ after fully discharge (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2011, Wiley.	 

2,9-Dimethyl-o-phenanthroline	0.82	2.5 × 10−2	1.0	109.9
Bipyridine	0.82	5.6 × 10−2	0.7	76.9

o-Phenanthroline	0.82	5.8 × 10−2	0.8	87.9
Terpyridine	0.82	6.0 × 10−2	0.3	33.0
Triethanolamine	−1.0	6.3 × 10−2	0.6	35.1
Citrate	−0.21	N/A	1.8	148.1
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid	−0.10	4 × 10−3	0.4	34.1
Cyanide	0.12	6.7 × 10−2	1.0	91.1
S2O82− + 2H+ + 2e− → 2HSO4− ϕ0 = 2.123 V vs. SHE	(2)
Fe3+ + e− → Fe2+ ϕ0 = 0.771 V vs. SHE	(3)
I2(s) + I−(aq.) → I3−(aq.) Keq = 752 (25 °C)	(4)
Br2(aq.) + Br− → Br3−(aq.) Keq = 14 (25 °C)	(5)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Redox potential of iodine and bromine at various valence states. All the redox potentials are standard values with respect to SHE. (b) Cell voltage, effective molarity and energy density of halogen-based Li-redox flow batteries. The corresponding parameters of conventional vanadium redox-flow batteries (VRBs) and iron-based Li-redox flow batteries are also included for comparison. The effective molarity stands for the concentration multiplied by the number of electrons involved in the redox reactions.	 

 	Fig. 7  Iodine-based Li-redox flow batteries. (a) Left panel: The vertically aligned carbon-nanotube mat grown on quartz (top) and transferred to Ti supporting substrate (bottom). Right panel: SEM images showing the microstructure of the 3D current collector. (b) Room-temperature charge/discharge profiles of a static Li-redox cell based on I3−/I− catholyte at a current rate of 2.5 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Potential and power density graphs using 1 M of LiI at 328 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2013, Wiley. (d) Representative charge/discharge profiles of the Li-redox cell based on Br3−/Br− catholyte with pH 4.5–5 at a current density of 0.1 C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
O2(g) + 2Li+ + 2e− → Li2O2 ϕ ≈ 2.7 V vs. Li+/Li	(6)
O2(g) + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−(aq.) ϕ0 = 0.401 V vs. SHE	(7)
O2(g) + 4H+(aq.) + 4e− → 2H2O ϕ0 = 1.229 V vs. SHE	(8)

 	Fig. 8  Bi-functional OER/ORR catalysts. (a) TEM images of Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid (N-rmGO: N-doped reduced mildly oxidized graphene oxide). (b) Oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential window of Co3O4/Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4 nanocrystal and Pt/C catalysts dispersed on carbon fibre paper in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2011, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 
3S42− + 2e− → 4S32− ϕ0 = 2.563 V vs. Li+/Li	(9)
2S32− + 2e− → 3S22− ϕ0 = 2.535 V vs. Li+/Li	(10)
S22− + 2e− → 2S2− ϕ0 = 2.516 V vs. Li+/Li	(11)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the decoupled electrodes loaded with mesoporous nanocatalysts. The upper-right SEM and TEM images showing the mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanoflakes directly grown onto nickel foam (NCONF@Ni) as the OER catalyst; the lower right SEM and TEM images shows the N-doped mesoporous carbon (N-MC) as the ORR catalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86, Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of a dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthesis cell (DSPEC). A DSPEC combines a molecular light absorber (chromophore C), bound to a semiconductor surface, with catalysts for water oxidation and carbon dioxide reduction, in an electrochemical cell. Light absorption gives a localized molecular excited state, which injects an electron into the conduction band of the semiconductor. This triggers a sequence of electron transfer events, which subsequently activate the catalysts. The bridge is an intervening electron transfer spacer that may be necessary to increase the distance between Catox and the electrode to slow down back electron transfer. PEM is a proton exchange membrane for equilibrating protons between the two half reactions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, Copyright 2011, IUPAC. (b) General structure and working principle of a DPLFC.	 

 	Fig. 11  Kinetic processes on energy level diagram in DPLFC.	 

Titanocene dichloride	TiCp22+ + e− ↔ TiCp2+	−0.80 V vs. Ag+/Ag	0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile	Quasi-reversible
Vanadocene	VCp2+ + e− ↔ VCp2	
ca. −0.7 V vs. Pt electrode	0.3 M Bu4NPF6 in THF	Reversible
Chromocene	CrCp2 + e− ↔ CrCp2−	
ca. −2.3 V vs. Pt electrode	0.3 M Bu4NPF6 in THF	Reversible
CrCp2+ + e− ↔ CrCp2	
ca. −0.53 V vs. Pt electrode	
	Reversible
Decamethylmanganocene	MnCp*2 + e− ↔ MnCp*2−	−2.5 V vs. SCE	Bu4NBF4 in acetonitrile	Reversible
MnCp*2+ + e− ↔ MnCp*2	−0.56 V vs. SCE	
	Reversible
Ferrocene	FeCp2+ + e− ↔ FeCp2	0.505 V vs. Ag+/Ag	0.1 M Bu4NClO4 in acetonitrile	Reversible
Cobaltocene	CoCp2 + e− ↔ CoCp2−	−1.88 V vs. SCE	0.3 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile	Reversible
CoCp2+ + e− ↔ CoCp2	−0.94 V vs. SCE	
	Reversible
Nickelocene	NiCp2+ + e− ↔ NiCp2	−0.50 V vs. FeCp2+/0	0.05 M Bu4NBF4 in acetonitrile	Reversible
NiCp22+ + e− ↔ NiCp2+	0.49 V vs. FeCp2+/0	
	Reversible
Rhodocene	RhCp2+ + e− ↔ RhCp2	−1.41 V vs. SCE	0.1 M Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile	Reversible
RhCp2 + e− ↔ RhCp2−	−2.18 V vs. SCE	
	Quasi-reversible

 	Fig. 12  Rate capability and cyclability of the Li-redox cell using ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple. (a) Room temperature polarization curve. (b) Capacity retention with corresponding Coulombic efficiency over cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2014, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  Representative strategies to functionalize the ferrocene molecule with different function groups. Note that the as-obtained ferrocene derivatives can be used as precursors for further functionalization.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) The principle of redox targeting of an insulating electrode material such as LiFePO4 by a freely diffusing molecular shuttle S. Upon charging, the molecular shuttle is oxidized into S+ at the current collector, and delivers the charge to the solid particles LiFePO4. S+ will be reduced back to S if the redox potential matches the Fermi level of LiFePO4. During this process, FeII is oxidized into FeIII, and Li+ ions will be released. Upon discharge, S+ is reduced at the current collector to S so electrons can be delivered to FePO4 to form LiFePO4 with the simultaneous immigration of Li+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2006, Wiley. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of the redox shuttles Fc and FcBr2, as well as a cathodic Li+-storage material LiFePO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Proposed sulphur reduction mechanism in liquid phase. The elemental sulphur is first reduced to S82−via reaction (I), followed by the formation of S84−via reaction (II). A subsequent dissociation of S84−via reaction (III) leads to the formation of S42−, or a disproportionation reaction via reaction (IV) to form S8 and S62−; the latter may dissociate to S3˙− through reaction (V). An overall 2.67e−/S8 process is established through reactions (I) and (IV). Reactions (I), (II), and (III) occur in both DMSO and DOL/DME, while reactions (IV) and (V) occur only in DMSO. The formed S42− undergoes various subsequent chain-growth and disproportionation reactions to generate reducible species such as S82−via reactions (VI.1)–(VI.4). Reactions (II), (III) and (VI) lead to a total 14e−/S8 process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Stabilized charge/discharge behaviour of polysulfide catholyte in DOL and THF. The catholyte is isolated from the Li anode in a cylinder cell by a NASICON-type Li1+x+3zAlx(Ti,Ge)2−xSi3zP3−zO12 glass ceramic. Carbon black/PVDF composite casted on Ti foil is used as current collector, and 0.5 M LiTFSI is used as lithium salt. The current rate is 0.1 C.	 

 	Fig. 17  Electrode architectures for polysulphide-based Li-redox flow cells. (a) Bi-functional interlayer electrode architecture. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Compound-sandwiched electrode architecture. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2014, Wiley. (c) Conventional flow cell architecture using stationary carbon fibre current collector (top) and nanoscale flowable “embedded current collector” (bottom) providing electronically conductive flowing redox electrodes based on nanoscale percolating networks of carbon black particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Redox reaction of n-type (N), p-type (P) and bipolar (B) redox-active organics and metallorganics. A− stands for anion of the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. Corresponding redox mechanism for redox-active organics: (b) carbonyl compounds, (c) thioethers, and (d) organic free radical compounds.	 

 	Fig. 19  Representative examples of n-type redox-active organics for Li-redox flow cell. (a) Relation between the total amount of 2,5-dipropoxy-1,4-benzoquinone (DPBQ, molecular structure shown on the right) in the catholyte and capacity in the 10th discharge. The dotted line indicates the solubility of DPBQ. Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (b) Charge/discharge profiles of the all-organic Li-redox flow cell using 0.05 M 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-bis(2-methoxyethoxy)benzene and 0.05 M 2,3,6-trimethylquinoxaline (molecular structure shown on the right) as the high- and low-potential active species. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  Representative free radicals might be used in Li-redox flow batteries.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The Cyclic voltammograms of 0.02 M TEMPO/1.00 M NaClO4/acetonitrile, 0.02 M N-methylphthalimide/1.00 M NaClO4/acetonitrile and 1.00 M NaClO4/acetonitrile (dotted line) under the scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2011, The Electrochemical Society. (b) The ESR-measured TEMPO concentration and state-of-charge (SOC) of the flow cell with respect to the charge time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 22  Redox potential of representative redox-active organic and organometallic compounds with potential for organic-based Li/Na-redox cells.	 

NASICON-type LATP	Stable	Unstable	Li+	1.3 × 10−3	10−4–10−3
NASICON-type LZP	N/A	Stable	Li+	2 × 10−4	10−5–10−4
Garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12	Unstable	Stable	Li+	1 × 10−3	10−4–10−3
Perovskite (Li,La)TiO3	Unstable	Unstable	Li+	1 × 10−3	10−5–10−3
Perovskite (Li,Sr,Zr,Ta)TiO3	Unstable	Unstable	Li+	3.5 × 10−4	10−5–10−4
Anti-perovskite Li3OX	Unstable	Stable	Li+	2 × 10−3	10−6–10−3
Polymeric electrolyte	Stable	Stable	Li+, Na+	N/A	10−6–10−4

 	Fig. 23  Crystal structure of (a) NASICON-type AxB2(PO4)3, (b) Garnet-type A3B3C2O12, and (c) perovskite AMO3.	 

 	Fig. 24  Thermal evolution of ionic conductivity (σ) of the solid electrolytes and polymeric solid electrolytes. As a reference, the organic electrolyte adopted in Li-ion batteries is also included. The grey region indicates the ionic conductivity and temperature range suitable for Li-redox flow battery applications.	 


Fe(NO3)3|Li	Flow	3.3	Aqueous, strong acidic	∼1105	8–9 W h kg−1	
35

K3Fe(CN)6|Li	Static	3.4	Aqueous, weak alkaline	∼276	8–9 W h kg−1	
34

Flow	3.5	8–9 W h kg−1	
42

I2|Li	Static	3.5	Aqueous, neutral	∼726	330 W h kg−1	
36 and 62

Flow	280 W h kg−1	
61

LiBr|Li	Static	4.0	Aqueous, weak acidic	∼1320	30 W h kg−1	
37

KMnO4|Zn	Static	2.8	Aqueous, strong acidic	∼450	N/A	
32

Cu|Li	Static	3.2	Aqueous, weak alkaline	∼2440	30 W h kg−1	
38

Li2S|Li	Static	2.5	Aqueous, strong alkaline	∼650	14 W h kg−1	
40

Fc1N112-TFSI|Li	Flow	3.3	EC/PC/EMC	∼160	50 W h L−1	
127

Ferrocene|Li	Static	3.6	DMF	∼520	9–10 W h kg−1	
104

BQ|Li	Static	2.5–2.8	γ-Butyrolactone	∼1240	5–6 W h kg−1	
177

2,5-Diethoxy-1,4-benzoquinone|Li	Static	2.6–2.8	γ-Butyrolactone	∼510	18 W h kg−1	
177

2,5-Dipropoxy-1,4-benzoquinone|Li	Static	2.5–2.7	γ-Butyrolactone	∼560	13 W h kg−1	
177

Polysulfide|Li	Static	2.3	DOL/DME	∼260	97 W h kg−1	
103

15G3DAQ|Li	Static	2.1–2.4	PC	∼210	25 W h L−1	
178

TiO2 (suspension)|Li	Flow	1.0–1.7	PC	N/A	0.8 W h kg−1	
126

LiFePO4 (suspension)|Li	Flow	3.2	EC/DMC	N/A	3.5 W h L−1	
124

DBBB|2,3,6-trimethylquinoxaline	Flow	1.3–1.7	PC	∼80	12 W h L−1	
19

Polysulfide (suspension)|Li	Static	1.9–2.4	Tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether	∼2560	234 W h L−1	
168

Flow	34 W h L−1
TEMPO|N-methylphthalimide	Static	1.0–1.4	Acetonitrile	∼120	15 W h kg−1	
188

TEMPO|Li	Flow	2.7–3.2	EC/PC/EMC	∼510	126 W h L−1	
189


Conjugated dicarboxylate	Di-lithium trans–trans-muconate	∼1.4	348.1	
175

Di-lithium terephthalate	∼1	301.1	
175 and 270

2,5-Dihydroxyterephthalic acid	∼0.8	241.6	
271

4,4′-Tolane-dicarboxylate	∼0.7	202.9	
176

Conjugated polymeric Schiff base	Poly-[N,N′-p-(benzylidene)-p-phenylenediamine]	∼1	324.7	
272

Thiophene	n-Type poly(3,4-dihexylthiophene)	∼0.5	117.3	
273

Multi-ring aromatic	Naphthalene	0–1	1687	
274

Metallocene	Cobaltocene	∼1.8	141.7	
276

Decamethylcobaltocene	∼1.3	81.4	
277

Electron-reservoir complex	[(η5-C5H5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)]	∼1.5	94.7	
128

[(η5-C5Me5)Fe(η6-C6Me6)]	∼1.2	81.5	
128

Suspension	Anatase TiO2	1.5–2	N/A	
126

Li4Ti5O12	∼1.5	175	
27

DEC	Diethyl carbonate
DMA	
N,N-Dimethylacetamide
DME	Dimethoxyethane
DMF	
N,N-Dimethylformamide
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide
DOL	1,3-Dioxolane
EC	Ethylene carbonate
EMC	Ethyl methyl carbonate
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
LiTFSI	Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide
LISICON	Li+ superionic conductor
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
NASICON	Na+ superionic conductor
OER	Oxygen evolution reaction
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
PC	Propylene carbonate
PVDF	Poly(vinyldifluoride)
SCE	Saturated calomel electrode
SHE	Standard hydrogen electrode
TCNQ	7,7,8,8-Tetracyanoquinodimethane
THF	Tetrahydrofuran
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
