On biosafety of Sn-containing halide perovskites   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02510H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02510H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 2120-2132On biosafety of Sn-containing halide perovskites†

        
          
            Lian 
            Xiao‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Tingting 
            An‡
bc, 
      
        
          
            Chuxia 
            Deng
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoling 
            Xu
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Handong 
            Sun
          
        
      *ad
aDivision of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 21 Nanyang Link, 637371, Singapore. E-mail: HDSUN@ntu.edu.sg
bCancer Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China. E-mail: xiaolingx@umac.mo
cMOE Frontier Science Centre for Precision Oncology, University of Macau, Macau SAR, China
dMajuLab, International Joint Research Unit UMI 3654, CNRS, Université Côte d’Azur, Sorbonne Université, National University of Singapore, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Received 
      5th August 2022
    , Accepted 22nd February 2023First published on 15th March 2023AbstractLead based halide perovskites have made great progress in various fields especially optoelectronic devices, but the health risk caused by heavy metal lead strongly blocks their widespread applications. Therefore, Pb free perovskites such as Sn based halide perovskites have been proposed and are expected to address the toxicity issue. However, until now, the toxicity and environmental impact of tin-based halide perovskites are still debated. This even raised a critical question about whether it is still worth deploying tin-containing halide perovskites which needs to be answered urgently but has so far remained elusive. In this work, we carefully analyse the practical application conditions of tin-based halide perovskites e.g., solar cells and conduct a comprehensive toxicity evaluation under these realistic situations. Our results including the organ weight index, blood analysis, immunohistochemistry (IHC) tests and next generation sequencing (RNA sequencing) demonstrated that even in the worst condition of large-scale applications of Sn based halide perovskites, neither obvious acute toxicity nor risk at a gene level can be observed. Thus, we conclude that Sn based halide perovskites are bio safe and substituting lead with tin in halide perovskites is applicable.

Broader context
Lead halide perovskite-based optoelectronics have achieved great success in recent years, but the long term and comprehensive clinical investigations conducted by the World Health Organization (WHO) demonstrated that lead is extremely dangerous to human beings. The WHO stated that the safety threshold does not exist for lead exposure, that is, it always causes toxicity as long as the quantity of lead is nonzero. Alternatively, tin containing perovskites have been proposed to replace lead-based halide perovskites. While Bert Conings et al. claimed that Sn based perovskites are even more toxic than Pb based perovskites. On the other hand, Li et al. stated that lead based halide perovskites are more dangerous than tin containing ones in terms of plant uptake ability. The ongoing intense debate about the toxicity of tin containing halide perovskites confuses the community and raises a critical question: Is it worth deploying tin containing halide perovskites? Here, we carefully analyse the practical application conditions of tin-based halide perovskites e.g., solar cells and our comprehensive in vivo toxicity evaluation and next generation sequencing analysis demonstrated that under practical application conditions, Sn based perovskites are bio safe and it's valuable to deploy Sn based perovskites.

Introduction
The ambitious target of realizing a net zero carbon emission society (https://eciu.net/netzerotracker) has been proposed by many countries. This is possible only if clean energies such as solar energy, wind power, geothermal energy etc. are widely developed and utilized to replace fossil fuel-based energy. Among them, solar energy1 has drawn much attention due to the advantages of reduced carbon emissions, lower electric bills etc. Therefore, it is highly demanded to develop novel cost effective solar cells in which lead halide perovskite based solar cells2–7 become one of the most promising candidates by virtue of their combined merits such as solution processibility,8 ease of mass production, and excellent power conversion efficiency. As a matter of fact, the power conversion efficiency of lead halide perovskite based solar cells has already outperformed traditional Si-photovoltaic devices.5,6 However, it is well known that the utilization of lead will contaminate the environment and may cause serious issues for human health.
As reported by the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME),9 in 2017, lead exposure led to more than 1 million deaths and 20 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). Various severe effects9 such as neurological impairment, kidney damage, liver damage, or gastrointestinal disturbances etc. have been caused by lead exposure. Children and pregnant women10,11 are extremely susceptible to lead damage and even a tiny amount of lead intake may generate critical or even irreversible neurological impairment to them. Therefore, the Committee suggested9,12,13 that a safe threshold does not exist for lead exposure. This implies that, although dose and compound dependent, lead induced risk always exists as long as the quantity is nonzero. Thus the European Union14 is urging elimination or even full replacement of lead from various electrical and electronic products. The reports and data based on the long term and comprehensive clinical trial investigations and global surveys provided by the WHO (World Health Organization) ambiguously demonstrated the dangerous nature of lead, which also indicated that the commercialization of lead containing perovskites will encounter giant obstacles. Recently Li et al.15 reported that the lead in halide perovskites can be absorbed by plants ten times more effectively compared to conventional lead pollutants, which incurs more efficient accumulation of lead in the human body via the food cycle. As such, it is extremely challenging to make policy makers and the public accept lead-based halide perovskites.
Alternatively, lead free halide perovskites16–22 have been proposed to overcome lead toxicity related issues. So far, the most promising lead substitute has been tin23–34 due to its analogous electronic structures. Although the power conversion efficiency of tin-based halide perovskite solar cells is not as high as that of lead halide perovskites, it is increasing very fast and has reached 14.03%.35 Very recently, tin halide perovskite solar cells with an operational stability greater than 1300 h36 were also reported. From the beginning, the motivation for developing tin-based halide perovskite solar cells rested on the following statement: JECFA suggested a provisional maximum tolerable daily intake (PMTDI)37,38 of tin to be 2 mg kg−1 body weight, which is currently regarded as the generally safe threshold of tin. With such a high threshold, it seems that there is no health issue with tin-based perovskite materials. However, the safety of tin containing perovskites was questioned by Conings et al.39,40 They found that when zebrafish were exposed to PbI2 and SnI2, the LC50 (lethal concentration for 50% of the population) of PbI2 and SnI2 is 0.83 mM and 0.09 mM nominal concentration respectively.39,40 As SnI2 manifest a lower LC50 value, they claimed that tin-based halide perovskites are even more toxic than lead containing halide perovskites. This dilemma raises an important question of whether developing tin-based halide perovskites is practically the right direction, given that more and more research work23–28,30,32,33 on tin containing halide perovskites is appearing.
Tin based halide perovskite toxicity revisit and leakage analysis in real scenarios
It is noticed that the conclusion from Conings et al.39,40 was made from the comparative observations in the cases of exposure to Pb- or Sn-based perovskites with unrealistically high doses by using zebrafish as the model organism, which cannot reflect a practical application situation. The LC50 (lethal concentration for 50% of the population) concentrations of PbI2 and SnI2 are 0.83 mM and 0.09 mM respectively, which reside in the extremely high concentration condition region39,40 (>10−1 mM). In such a case, both PbI2 and SnI2 can generate a large amount of toxic HI (hydrogen iodide) and the health risk is mainly determined by the HI. Compared to PbI2, SnI2 will generate much more HI which leads to a greater decrease in pH value and contributes to the more toxic acidic condition. However, in practical applications, these high concentration conditions (>10−1 mM) of halide perovskite will never happen and must be strictly prohibited. Let's take lead as an example to clarify the statement since the health risk data for lead are well documented. 10−1 mM of PbI2 equals a concentration of 20.72 mg L−1 of Pb. If a person drinks 2 L of water, even if we do not consider lead ingestion and accumulation via the food cycle, it results in 41.44 mg lead intake per day. According to the World Health Organization's report,9,12,13 this extremely high (41.44 mg per day) lead intake will cause very serious public health issues such as gastrointestinal disturbances, kidney and liver damage, neurological impairment and even death! Therefore, even if the authors’ claim39,40 is valid in the condition of an extremely high concentration of tin and lead containing halide perovskite, it is practically meaningless.
Let's consider a more realistic condition. The worst situation (the accumulative effects of solar cell replacement over time will be discussed later) is that all the lead and tin in halide perovskites is released into the environment in one year. A halide perovskite solar module would contain 0.4–0.8 g15,41 lead or tin per square meter depending on the perovskite layer thickness (in the following estimation we use the maximum value of 0.8 g). We assume that the average annual rain precipitation is 600 mm (actually, this value is lower than most countries’ annual precipitation) which will result in a concentration of about 1.3 mg L−1 (<10−2 mM) of lead or tin in water. Besides, in a real-world scenario, the worst utilization situation (all the lead and tin in halide perovskites is released into the environment in one year) cannot occur as it would be impossible for all the halide perovskite solar cells to be broken in one year. Instead, it's reasonable to assume that 5% of the solar modules could be broken per year, then the concentration of halide perovskite would reside in the <10−3 mM range. Thus, only a toxic evaluation conducted under low concentration conditions (<10−3 mM) is practically meaningful since it represents the real application situation of halide perovskites. Compared to under a high concentration (>10−1 mM), the toxicity behaviour of PbI2 and SnI2 under low concentration conditions (<10−2–10−3 mM) becomes totally different: the generated HI become negligible, instead the heavy metals (such as Pb and Sn) dominate the toxicity. Currently, lead toxicity has been fully uncovered and exposed by the WHO, and well accepted, while the health impact of tin especially in halide perovskite is still absent. Consequently, the safety concern for Sn-containing halide perovskites must be revisited and investigated, especially for a health risk under practical application situations. However, a comprehensive and in-depth in vivo toxicity evaluation of tin containing halide perovskites under realistic conditions remains unavailable, which may defer the outbreak of tin-based halide perovskites.
To ensure reliability and applicability, we start our analysis from the worst situation: the lead and tin in halide perovskites are released into the environment in one year. In such a condition, the corresponding daily intake is about 45 μg kg−1 (assuming a 60 kg person drinks 2 L of water per day) body weight. The total uptake should be ∼90 μg kg−1 body weight if the ingestion via water and food are similar. Daily intake of lead of 90 μg kg−1 body weight will result in disaster for human beings, and current observation shows that even 9 μg kg−1 body weight (1/10 of the concentration) can lead to severe health issues.9,12,13 The associated enrichment effect by plants15 makes the lead-based halide perovskite more dangerous. In contrast, what is the health impact of a daily tin intake of 90 μg kg−1 of tin-based halide perovskite? To date, there has been no data to answer this query and determine whether it is really valuable to develop Sn-containing halide perovskites.
In this work, we employ the organ weight index, hematology analysis, blood biochemistry test, RNA sequencing and immunohistochemistry (IHC) to evaluate the health impact of tin-based halide perovskites on mice. Since the toxicity is directly related to the total amount ingested (via the water drink and food cycle), we used the daily intake of tin-based halide perovskites to assess their health risk. Besides, to give more insight and complement the database for tin toxicity in halide perovskites, the dose dependent toxicity evaluation is presented. Our results show that the safe dose for tin-based halide perovskites is 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin per day, which is well above the dose in the worst utilization condition (∼90 μg kg−1 of tin per day) and much higher than the practical application situation (<5 μg kg−1 of tin per day) of tin containing halide perovskite. In other words, large scale deployment of Sn based halide perovskite solar cells shall not incur a risk to health, thus it's worthwhile to develop tin containing halide perovskites. The health impacts of tin and lead based halide perovskites under different conditions are summarized in Table 1. Besides, we also find that the current general tin safe threshold (daily intake of tin of 2 mg kg−1 body weight) cannot be adapted in the case of tin containing halide perovskites, because it could cause health risks including splenomegaly, liver and kidney damage, and inflammation. We believe our results will rebuild the pillar of tin-based halide perovskite technologies.
Table 1 Summary of health impact caused by halide perovskites under different conditions. The toxicity data of Pb and Sn halide perovskites under high concentrations are from ref. 39 and 40, lead perovskite toxicity data under low and worst situation conditions are obtained from a WHO report,9,12,13 tin perovskite toxicity data under low and worst situation conditions are presented in this work. Worst application situation: all the halide perovskite solar cells are broken in one year and all the lead and tin in halide perovskites are released into the environment. Practical utilization situation: 5% of the solar module will be broken per year, then the concentration of halide perovskite would reside in a low concentration (<10−3 mM) range, which is much lower than the safe dose of tin-based halide perovskites. Therefore, we can conclude that tin-based halide perovskites are bio safe in practical application situations




Condition
Pb perovskites toxicity
Sn perovskites toxicity
Comparison
Results




High concentration (>10−1 mM)39,40
Toxic, the toxicity is dominated by the HI
Toxic, the toxicity is dominated by the HI
Sn perovskite is more toxic than Pb perovskite
Sn perovskite is meaningless


Low concentration (<10−3 mM)
Toxic,9,12,13 the toxicity is dominated by the heavy metal Pb. The effect of HI is negligible.
Bio safe, the health risk caused by both heavy metal Sn and HI become negligible.
Sn perovskite is bio safe.
Sn perovskite is valuable


Practical utilization situation
Pb perovskite is toxic


Worst application situation
Toxic,9,12,13 the toxicity is dominated by the heavy metal Pb.
Bio safe, the health risk caused by both heavy metal Sn and HI become negligible.
Sn perovskite is bio safe.
Sn perovskite is valuable


(All the lead and tin in halide perovskites are released into the environment in one year)


Pb perovskite is toxic




Results

In vivo toxicity evaluation
According to our analysis, the worst situation of tin-based halide perovskite utilization will result in a daily intake of tin of about 90 μg kg−1. Therefore, the determination of the safe threshold of tin especially in halide perovskites becomes the most critical subject. Since JECFA suggested a provisional maximum tolerable daily intake (PMTDI)37,38 of tin of 2 mg kg−1 body weight, we started our assessment with this dose level to see whether this safe threshold is applicable to Sn based halide perovskites. To explore the influence of organic cations which are utilized in almost all halide perovskite compounds, we tested comparatively tin precursor SnI2 and MASnI3. Mice (BALB/c, 7 mice each group) were intraperitoneally injected with 2 mg kg−1 of tin from halide perovskite (MASnI3) or from SnI2 every day and were continuously observed for up to 30 days. The group of mice grown normally without any injection is regarded as the control sample. For the toxicity generated by chemicals, the most severe outcomes are weight loss and death of the mice. During the experimental period, all the mice survived, and we did not observe any obvious weight change induced by tin (from both MASnI3 and SnI2) injection as shown in Fig. 1a. However, the toxicity was further validated by observing the impact of Sn inception on organs. The main organs (heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen) of mice were collected on the 30th day after injection. We did not observe obvious accumulation of tin in the main organs (the details of the accumulation analysis can be seen in the ESI†). As presented in Fig. 1b–e, the organ weight index (organ weight/mice weight) of the heart, kidney, liver, and lung from the halide perovskite and SnI2 group manifested no significant difference compared to the control group. However, an increased spleen organ weight index (splenomegaly, Fig. 1f) was observed from the halide perovskite and SnI2 group, which is associated with many factors such as inflammation and liver damage, etc. and indicates the activated immune response as spleen is one of the important parts of the lymphatic system. Since splenomegaly implies an abnormal response of the immune system and to further investigate the immune response caused by halide perovskite and SnI2, the white blood cells, an important part of the immune system, including neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes were examined via hematology analysis. As illustrated in Fig. 1g, the number of white blood cells from the halide perovskite and SnI2 groups are increased significantly. Specifically, the injection of halide perovskite results in an increased count of neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, and monocytes, which indicates activation of the immune system, consistent with the splenomegaly observation. On the contrary, the decreased population of lymphocytes indicates damage of the immune cells. Therefore, all splenomegaly and hematology analysis data signify that both halide perovskite and SnI2 at the Sn dose of 2 mg kg−1 cause obvious damage to the immune system. Compared to the SnI2 group, the halide perovskite group demonstrated more remarkable changes in both spleen enlargement and immune cell population (Fig. 1f and g), indicating a stronger toxicity toward the immune system. Besides the immune system, daily ingestion of 2 mg kg−1 of Sn based perovskite caused toxicity toward red blood cell, as presented in Fig. S7 (ESI†). As the elimination of the inorganic materials from the body is mainly via the kidney and liver (two major clearance organs), the influence of Sn intake on the kidney and liver was assessed by means of blood biochemistry analysis. The results for typical liver function indicators including alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), albumin blood (ALB), total protein (TP), and kidney function indicator uric acid (UA) are presented in Fig. 1h. It can be clearly seen that halide perovskite and SnI2 lead to a significant increase in ALT concentration. Normally, ALT mostly resides in the liver and it is released into the blood only when the liver is damaged. Moreover, an increased concentration of AST and decreased concentration of ALB and TP in halide perovskite and SnI2 treatment groups also indicate impairment of the liver. The ingestion of halide perovskite and SnI2 results in a higher concentration of uric acid (UA) in blood, which means kidney dysfunction. Thus, our blood biochemistry analysis implies that both the halide perovskite and SnI2 cause injury to the liver and kidney even though their organ weight index does not manifest a significant difference compared to the control group. Similarly, halide perovskites exhibit stronger damage to the liver and kidney than SnI2. In short, our results demonstrate that both Sn based halide perovskite (MASnI3) and SnI2 (2 mg kg−1 of tin per day) treatment can induce kidney damage, liver impairment, and immune toxicity.
 Fig. 1  Toxicity evaluation after daily injection of tin of 2 mg kg−1 from SnI2 or perovskite (MASnI3). (a) Mice body weight, (b–f) organ weight index (organ weight/mice weight) for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, (g) hematology analysis, and (h) blood biochemistry analysis. WBC: white blood cells, Neu: neutrophils, Lym: lymphocytes, Mon: monocytes, Eos: eosinophils, Bas: basophils. ALT: alanine aminotransferase, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALB: albumin blood, TB: total protein, UA: uric acid. Liver indicators: ALT, AST, ALB, TP. Kidney indicator: UA. (n = 7 mice per group). For plots (a–f) statistical analysis was performed using a one-sided Student's T-test. For plots g and h: Error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate significance. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference. 
RNA sequencing for global gene expression profiling
Although the above-mentioned measurements have apparently demonstrated the health damage due to tin-based halide perovskites at a daily intake of 2 mg kg−1 of tin, the potential biophysicalchemical interplay between the Sn-containing compounds (MASnI3 and SnI2) and an organism needs more profound quantitative investigation in view of the intricacy of the biological responses to the heavy metal. As suggested by the US National Academy of Sciences,42 the predictive, mechanistic, and quantitative characterization which provide more insight for the toxicity assessment are preferred when considering a material's biological impact. Therefore, RNA sequencing (RNA Seq),43–47 which can determine the global gene expression profiling and yield high throughput screening and high-volume data production, was utilized to uncover the mechanism of biological interaction of tin containing halide perovskites and SnI2. RNA sequencing also provides a useful and powerful tool to assess the health risk of tin containing halide perovskites and SnI2 at the gene level, which is inaccessible using traditional methods.
The main organs (heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen) of mice from control, SnI2 and halide perovskite groups (daily intake: 2 mg kg−1 of tin) were collected on the 30th day for the subsequent RNA sequencing. Differentially expressed genes (DEG) analysis uncovered that both the halide perovskite and SnI2 induced transcriptional responses/impairment for kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, as displayed in Fig. 2. To evaluate the accuracy of our RNA sequencing results, for each organ (kidney, liver, lung, spleen) from the halide perovskite treatment, we randomly picked out 5 differentially expressed genes for real-time qPCR (quantitative polymerase chain reaction) validation. As presented in Fig. S9 (ESI†), for all organs, the gene expression changes measured using real-time qPCR are consistent with the results determined by the RNA sequencing, thus authenticating the reliability of the RNA sequencing data.
 Fig. 2  RNA sequencing results demonstrated the gene expression changes caused by SnI2 or perovskite (MASnI3). Differentially expressed genes (DEG) analysis for heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen under SnI2 injection (a–e) and perovskite uptake (f–j). All kidney, liver, lung, and spleen exhibit significant gene expression changes by DEseq2 (v1.34.0) analysis. Besides, even the heart displays several differentially expressed genes, our qPCR experimental results show that these tiny amounts of differentially expressed genes are induced by measurement error. Daily intake: 2 mg kg−1 of tin from SnI2 or perovskite. 
Next, we focused on the analysis of the heart. Although the ultra-high sensitivity of RNA sequencing enables precise measurement of gene expression profiling, it also results in measurement fluctuation (Novaseq 6000 system) and errors. The numbers of differentially expressed genes (26 genes for halide perovskite group vs control group and 20 genes for the SnI2 group vs control group) from the heart are very small, compared to those detected from the kidney, liver, lung, and spleen (>3500 genes). We thus speculated that the exhibited gene expression alteration from the heart resulted from the measurement fluctuation. To verify our hypothesis, the top two changed genes (Otud1 & mt-Atp8 gene for halide perovskite vs control and Angptl4 & Txnip gene for SnI2 vs control) of the heart determined by the RNA sequencing were selected for real-time qPCR evaluation. The results in Fig. S10a and b (ESI†) show that there is no significant difference for both the Otud1 and mt-Atp8 gene (Angptl4, Txnip gene) expression between the tin-based halide perovskite (SnI2) treatment and the control group. The incompatible results between the RNA sequencing and qPCR data corroborate our assumption, that is, the observed tiny amount of differentially expressed genes from RNA sequencing of heart is caused by the measurement error. From these observations, we concluded that daily intake of tin of 2 mg kg−1 from halide perovskite or SnI2 leads to obvious alteration in the gene expression for the kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, but does not generate significant gene expression changes for the heart. In agreement with the previous observation that Sn-containing halide perovskites are more toxic than SnI2, for organs kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, halide perovskite manifests more gene expression changes, as illustrated in Fig. 2.
To better reveal and categorize the transcriptional response caused by Sn-containing halide perovskite, we conducted GO (Gene Ontology) pathway enrichment analysis using the clusterProfiler package. Here, we present the top activated and suppressed pathways caused by the halide perovskite in Fig. S11 and S12 (ESI†), respectively. It can be clearly seen that the kidney, liver, lung, and spleen all display various pathway alterations, indicating the corresponding damage and toxicity. To validate the biological interaction predicted by GO (Gene Ontology) pathway enrichment analysis, qPCR and immunohistochemistry (IHC) tests were performed. As can be seen in Fig. S11 (ESI†), immune related pathways appear in the top activated pathways for all of the organs, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, thus have been utilized for our experimental verification.
We employed the S100 proteins for our analysis, as they play an important role in mediating both the innate and acquired immune responses and account for the development of chronic inflammatory diseases.48 Differentially expressed gene analysis shows that the kidney, lung, and spleen all manifest the upregulated expression of S100a8 and S100a9 genes. S100a6,49 the promotor of inflammation and infiltration of mononuclear/macrophages in acute liver damage, is found to be upregulated in the liver when treated with halide perovskite. qPCR measurement shows that expressions of S100a8 and S100a9 in the kidney, lung, and spleen (see Fig. 3a, c and d) and S100a6 in the liver (Fig. 3b) are elevated, consistent with the RNA sequencing results. The activated immune response caused by the halide perovskite predicted by the RNA sequencing is further confirmed by the immune cells (e.g. T cells, neutrophils, and macrophage) infiltration via immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis. As presented in Fig. 3e and f, the increased T cell and macrophage populations have been observed from the kidney and liver by means of immunohistochemistry with antibodies against CD3 (T cell marker) and F4/80 (macrophage marker). Meanwhile, the spleen displays decreased T cell and increased macrophage populations (Fig. 3h). Besides, neutrophil populations are elevated in the lung and spleen as determined by immunohistochemistry with antibodies against Ly6G (marker of neutrophil) as depicted in Fig. 3g and h. All these data demonstrate the activated immune responses in the organs from the tin-based halide perovskite treatment group. The consistent results between the immunohistochemistry test of immune cells (T cells, neutrophils, and macrophages) and GO pathway enrichment analysis further demonstrated the reliability of our RNA sequencing results. Besides the activated immune response, tin-based halide perovskites also induce other biological process changes, as predicted by the GO pathway enrichment analysis (see Fig. S11 and S12, ESI†), which can be explored in detail in the future.
 Fig. 3  Immune damage generated by daily intake of tin with 2 mg kg−1 from perovskite (MASnI3) is verified by the qPCR and IHC (immunohistochemistry) analysis. (a–d) mRNA expression levels of S100a8 & S100a9 gene for kidney (a), lung (c), spleen (d), and S100a6 gene for the liver (b), measured by qPCR, which is consistent with the RNA sequencing results, (e–h) IHC staining of the kidney, liver, lung, and spleen against immune related markers (CD3: T cell marker; F4/80: macrophage marker; and Ly6G: neutrophil marker) (n = 3 mice/per group). For plots (a–h), the error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate significance. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference. 
In summary, our results demonstrate that tin-based halide perovskites under the daily intake of 2 mg kg−1 (of tin) body weight lead to damage of the kidney, liver, spleen, and lung. The global gene profiling and related biological pathway changes caused by the tin intake from halide perovskite is revealed by RNA sequencing. Here, we want to underline the important influence of organic cations for tin-based halide perovskite toxicity. Both blood analysis (Fig. 1) and RNA sequencing (Fig. 2) data indicate that the presence of organic cations in halide perovskites increases toxicity compared to SnI2. Therefore, the behaviour of different organic cations for the toxicity of halide perovskite needs to be studied systematically. Moreover, as suggested by Haque et al.50 and McGehee et al.,51 under an O2 and water atmosphere, tin(II) will be oxidized to tin(IV). Therefore, the finial state of tin should be tin(IV) since all biological systems are water and O2 rich systems. Apparently, the detailed interactions between the tin from the halide perovskite and biological systems e.g., mice are very complex, and require further studies.
Safe threshold for tin-based halide perovskites
The above investigation uncovered that the current generally safe threshold of daily intake of 2 mg kg−1 body weight of tin is not applicable for tin-based halide perovskites. We then decreased the ingestion level of tin from halide perovskite to 0.5 mg kg−1 per day. As presented in Fig. 4a–f, both the body weight and organ weight index of mice did not exhibit significant differences. Compared to 2 mg kg−1 of tin daily intake, the splenomegaly disappears (Fig. 4f), but the activated innate immune response exists as revealed by the slightly increased count of neutrophils, basophils, and monocytes (Fig. 4g). The decreased count of lymphocytes implies the impairment of the adaptive immune response (Fig. 4g). Blood biochemistry (Fig. 4h) uncovered that 0.5 mg kg−1 of tin from the halide perovskite could not lead to acute kidney damage since the kidney function indicator UA displays a similar concentration compared to the control group. However, liver damage has been observed as determined by the increased concentration of ALT and AST, as presented in Fig. 4h. The RNA sequencing data corroborates our observations. As shown in Fig. 5c and e, both the spleen and liver manifested a large number of changes in gene expression under 0.5 mg kg−1 of tin ingestion, in line with the blood analysis results. Again, these data indicate that a daily intake of tin from halide perovskite with 0.5 mg kg−1 still causes health risks to animals, especially for the liver and spleen, although to a lesser extent. Thus, we further decreased the injection amount of tin to 0.1 mg kg−1 per day and conducted a similar investigation. As expected, the body weight and organ weight index data presented in Fig. 4a–f indicate that the daily intake of 0.1 mg kg−1 tin would not affect the mice growth. The blood hematology analysis (Fig. 4g) and blood biochemistry (Fig. 4h) measurements did not exhibit white blood cell alteration as well as kidney and liver damage. Fig. S8 (ESI†) implies that daily intake of 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin could not induce a significant difference in red blood cells compared to the control group. Moreover, we conducted RNA sequencing analysis and the results are presented in Fig. 5. Even though the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen all displayed a tiny amount of differentially expressed genes (DEG) (Fig. 5f–j), our qPCR validation uncovered that these changes in gene expression are caused by measurement error, as shown in Fig. S13 (ESI†). The top three changed genes (see Fig. S13f–j, ESI†) obtained from the RNA sequencing for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen have been selected for the qPCR measurement. The results in Fig. S13a–e (ESI†) demonstrate that all three genes do not manifest a significant difference in all organs. A comparison between the RNA sequencing and qPCR results (Fig. S13k–o, ESI†) demonstrated that the observed tiny amount of differentially expressed genes from the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen is indeed caused by measurement error. Moreover, as exhibited in Fig. 5k–o, compared to the control group, all the T cells, neutrophils, and macrophage populations from the halide perovskite ingestion group (0.1 mg kg−1 of tin per day) do not manifest a significant difference, as determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) with antibodies against CD3, Ly6G, and F4/80, thus further confirming their bio safety. In summary, our data demonstrate that at a daily tin intake of 0.1 mg kg−1 body weight, neither acute toxicity nor a change in gene expression in mice could be observed, thus proving the bio safety of tin-based halide perovskites at this dose level. To better compare the Sn and Pb based halide perovskites, we also evaluated the toxicity of lead-based halide perovskites (MAPbI3) at a daily Pb intake of 0.1 mg kg−1 body weight. The results demonstrate that a daily intake of 0.1 mg kg−1 body weight of lead from halide perovskites will cause apparent damage to the kidney and liver (Fig. S14–S17, ESI†). Considering that the new safe threshold (0.1 mg kg−1 body weight) of tin containing halide perovskites is well above the level even in the worst situation of large scale application of tin containing halide perovskites (90 μg kg−1), we conclude that the toxicity risk from deploying tin containing halide perovskite solar cells shall be negligible, thus replacing Pb with Sn in halide perovskites is viable.
 Fig. 4  Toxicity evaluation after a daily intake of tin of 0.5 mg kg−1 or 0.1 mg kg−1 from perovskite (MASnI3). (a) Mice body weight, (b–f) organ weight index (organ weight/mice weight) for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, (g) hematology analysis, and (h) blood biochemistry. Daily intake of tin of 0.1 mg kg−1 from perovskite does not generate any significant difference for mice weight, organ weight index, hematology, and blood biochemistry. WBC: white blood cells, Neu: neutrophils, Lym: lymphocytes, Mon: monocytes, Eos: eosinophils, Bas: basophils. ALT: alanine aminotransferase, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALB: albumin blood, TB: total protein, and UA: uric acid. Liver indicators: ALT, AST, ALB, and TP. Kidney indicator: UA. (n = 6 mice per group). For plots (a–f): Statistical analysis was performed using a one-sided Student's T-test. For plots g and h: Error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate significance *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference. 
 Fig. 5  RNA sequencing results for the mice injected with perovskite (MASnI3) with 0.1 mg kg−1 or 0.5 mg kg−1 of tin per day and IHC analysis. Differentially expressed genes (DEG) by DEseq2 (v1.34.0) analysis for heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen under 0.5 mg kg−1 of tin injection (a–e) and under 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin ingestion (f–j). qPCR validation indicates that the tiny amount of differentially expressed genes obtained from RNA sequencing (0.1 mg kg−1 of tin) are induced by measurement error. All the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen do not display any differentially expressed genes at a daily intake of tin of 0.1 mg kg−1. (k–o) IHC (immunohistochemistry) analysis against CD3, F4/80 and Ly6G for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen. The IHC analysis does not show any significant difference for immune related markers in all organs treated with 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin from perovskite, thus further verifying the bio safety of perovskite. Daily intake: 0.5 mg kg−1 or 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin from halide perovskite (n = 3 mice per group). For plots (k–o), the error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate the significance. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference. 
Discussion
Currently, many researchers assess the environmental and human health impact of halide perovskites based on various analysis models.14,52–56 Although these models can provide useful information, we want to emphasize that environmental and human health impact cannot only be determined by simple extrapolation because of the intricacy of the interaction between chemicals and organisms (and/or the environment), otherwise very serious public health consequences might be incurred. As a typical example,9,12,13 based on theoretical analysis without enough clinical data, the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) published in 1993 a guideline which states that a weekly intake of lead of 25 μg kg−1 body weight per week (equivalent to a daily intake of lead of 3.56 μg kg−1 body weight) is safe. Later clinical observations showed that a daily intake of lead of 3 μg kg−1 body weight might cause many health issues such as ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular stroke, and IQ decrease, etc. Consequently, in 2011, the Committee had to withdraw the previous safety standard and stated that a safe threshold does not exist for lead exposure. Obviously, the most effective method of evaluating the impact of Sn-containing halide perovskites is to directly expose mammals to it, just as we have done in this work.
In this context, it is necessary to re-evaluate the conclusion “Sn based perovskites may not be the ideal Pb surrogate” made by Bert Conings et al.39,40 In their work, they evaluated lead and tin containing halide perovskite toxicity using a zebra fish model. They observed that the lethal concentrations for 50% of the population of zebra fish for SnI2 and PbI2 are 0.09 mM and 0.83mM nominal concentrations, respectively. The authors39,40 suggested that tin-based halide perovskites display a stronger acidification effect, and they concluded that tin-based halide perovskites are even more toxic than lead based halide perovskites due to the decreased pH value. This conclusion has been extensively referred to and cited by many researchers working on lead-based halide perovskites. The exposure of tin to zebra fish can provide some insight, while the toxicity evaluation based on mammal model organisms e.g., mice are also necessary and can give more information about the health impact of tin containing halide perovskites. Besides, the practical impact of Sn-based halide perovskites on human health shall be assessed under realistic concentration conditions and inception dose.
In practical applications, even the worst case (all tin in halide perovskites is released to the environment in one year) of tin-based halide perovskite solar cell utilization could only lead to a daily tin intake of ∼90 μg kg−1, which is still below the safe threshold (0.1 mg kg−1 per day) of tin containing halide perovskites. In reality, the annual damage ratio of solar cell modules should be less than 5%, which results in a tin concentration of about ∼10−4 mM. The corresponding daily intake via water drinking is about ∼2.2 μg kg−1 (assuming a 60 kg weight person drinks 2 L water per day) body weight. The total daily uptake should be ∼4.4 μg kg−1 body weight if the ingestion via water and food are similar, which is much lower than the daily safe dose (0.1 mg kg−1) of tin containing halide perovskites. Then let's consider the accumulative effects of solar cell replacement over time and leakage of tin over decades. In other words, in every year, 5% of the solar modules shall be broken and release tin into the soil, which results in a tin concentration of ∼0.065 mg L−1 (0.8 g tin per square meter, average annual rain precipitation is 600 mm). The following two factors must be considered: (1) the rain/water will take some tin away from the soil under the solar cell modules, and (2) the plants can absorb some tin.15 We estimate that ∼1/5 to 1/3 of the tin can be retained by the soil after the rain wash and plants absorption, corresponding to a tin concentration of ∼0.013 mg L−1 to 0.022 mg L−1. Still assuming a 60 kg weight person drinks 2 L water per day, the corresponding extra daily intake of tin caused by one year of cumulative effect is about 0.43 μg kg−1 to 0.72 μg kg−1 body weight. Considering the safe threshold of tin from halide perovskite is 100 μg kg−1 (0.1 mg kg−1) body weight per day, we believe that the cumulative effect could not cause serious health issues even though the tin-based halide perovskite solar modules are continuously used and replaced for 100 years. Hence, we conclude that the pollution and toxicity caused by tin-based perovskites can be fully resolved by the environment itself. Our results demonstrate that tin-based halide perovskites are safe in practical application situations, and it is valuable to develop tin containing perovskite photovoltaic technology.
Experimental
Tin/lead intake
Female BALB/c mice aged 4–6 weeks were randomly divided to three groups of 6–7 mice each. The SnI2 or halide perovskite (MASnI3: SnI2 + MAI (Methylammonium iodide); MAPbI3: PbI2 + MAI (Methylammonium iodide)) were dissolved into water and intraperitoneally injected into the BALB/c mice every day. After 30 days, the mice were sacrificed, and organs and blood samples were collected for the further analysis. All the mice experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committees of the Faculty of Health Science, University of Macau (Protocol ID: UMARE-AMEND-100).
RNA isolation and real-time qPCR analysis
RNA was isolated from the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen following the vendor's protocol, and reverse transcription was performed by adopting a QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (QIAGEN #205314). Real-time qPCR was performed using SYBR-Green ER Master Mix (Roche, 24759100) and a QuantStudio 7 Flex Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher). The primers utilized in Real-time qPCR are listed in Table S1 (ESI†).
RNA sequence
Heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen tissues were homogenized via a Precellys Evolution tissue homogenizer. RNA was isolated following the manufacturer's protocol. The integrity of RNA was examined using an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent RNA 6000 Kit). RNA was reversely transcribed into cDNA and followed by library construction. RNA libraries were sequenced on a Novaseq 6000 platform. The obtained raw RNA sequencing data were aligned to mouse genome reference mm10 by utilizing hisat2 (v2.1.0) with default parameters. FeatureCounts (v1.6.3) was used to count the number of reads which mapped to each gene. DEseq2 (v1.34.0) and clusterProfiler (v4.2.2) were employed to differentially expressed genes (DEG) and GO pathway enrichment analysis respectively.
IHC staining
Slides containing paraffin-embedded sections were put in a sample holder. Then deparaffinization and rehydration were performed, followed by antigen retrieval, which is conducted in Antigen Unmasking R-buffer using a pressure cooker with the temperature set at 95 °C for 30 min (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Cat# 62706-10). Next, the sections were blocked with PBS encompassing 3% bovine serum albumin and 1X animal-free blocker (Vector Laboratory, Inc. Cat# SP5030) for 60 min at room temperature. The following primary antibodies were utilized: Rabbit anti-CD3 (Abcam, Cat# ab16669), Rabbit anti-F4/80 (Cell Signaling Technology (CST), mAb #70076S) and Rabbit anti-Ly6G (Cell Signaling Technology (CST), mAb #87048S). The sections were incubated with Biotinylated Goat anti-Mouse & Rabbit IgG (H+L) (Abcam, Cat# 64257) for 10 minutes at room temperature, washed with PBS three times for 5 minutes each time, incubated with Streptavidin HRP (ready-to-use) (Abcam, Cat# ab64269) for 20 minutes at room temperature, washed with PBS three times for 5 minutes each time, incubated with DAB Substrate Kit (Vector Laboratories, Cat# SK-4100) for 1–5 minutes at room temperature, counterstained with hematoxylin, and dehydrated. Permount and a coverslip were added, and the images were captured with Olympus BX53.
Statistical analysis
Images with IHC staining were studied via ImageJ software. One tailed distribution and two sample unequal variance Student's T test were employed for the comparison between two groups. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. The fold change >1 or <1 with adjusted p (padj.) value <0.05 were utilized as the filter threshold for up regulated and down regulated genes respectively.
Author contributions
H. D. Sun, X. L. Xu and C. X. Deng initialized this research. L. Xiao and T. T. An designed and conducted the experiments. X. L. Xu, C. X. Deng and T. T. An contribute to the animal study. All authors help to analyze the data. L. Xiao and T. T. An drafted the manuscript. H. D. Sun and X. L. Xu, C. X. Deng supervised this work and revised the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by A*STAR under project AME-IRG-A20E5c0083, The Science and Technology Development Fund (FDCT) grants (0065/2022/A2, 0097/2021/A2, 0045/2021/AFJ, and 0092/2020/AMJ) of Macau SAR, China, and the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC): 82030094. We thank the FHS Animal Research Core facility for providing the animal housing. We acknowledge the RNA sequencing support from BEIJING YOUJI KEJI YOUXIAN GONGSI.
References
P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 269–285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Qiu and Q. Peng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4700–4709 RSC .
Z. Dai, K. Yadavalli Srinivas, M. Chen, A. Abbaspourtamijani, Y. Qi and P. Padture Nitin, Science, 2021, 372, 618–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shen, Q. Han, X. Luo, Y. Shen, T. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Chen, X. Yang, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1078–1085 RSC .
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Byranvand, W. Zuo, R. Imani, M. Pazoki and M. Saliba, Chem. Sci., 2022, 13, 6766–6781 RSC .
Z. Saki, M. M. Byranvand, N. Taghavinia, M. Kedia and M. Saliba, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5690–5722 RSC .
World Health Organization, Preventing disease through healthy environments: exposure to lead: a major public health concern, World Health Organization, 2019, https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329953.
World Health Organization, Childhood lead poisoning. World Health Organization, 2010, https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/136571.
United States Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment. “Integrated Science Assessment for Lead.” ( 2013).
T. Vorvolakos, S. Arseniou and M. A. Samakouri, Psychiatrike = Psychiatriki, 2016, 27(3), 204–214 CrossRef PubMed .
Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives. Meeting & World Health Organization. Safety evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants: prepared by the Seventy-third meeting of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA), World Health Organization, 2011, https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/44521.
S. Maranghi, M. L. Parisi, R. Basosi and A. Sinicropi, Open Research Europe, 2021, 1, 44 Search PubMed .
J. Li, H.-L. Cao, W.-B. Jiao, Q. Wang, M. Wei, I. Cantone, J. Lü and A. Abate, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, X. Liu, X. Luo, X. Lin, D. Cui, Y. Wang, H. Segawa, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Joule, 2021, 5, 863–886 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 965 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, T. Wu, X. He, X. Meng, J. Barbaud, H. Chen, H. Segawa, X. Yang and L. Han, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Z. Deng, F. Auras, H. Goodwin, Z. Zhang, J. C. Walmsley, P. D. Bristowe, F. Deschler and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 696–702 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abate, Joule, 2017, 1, 659–664 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Goetz, A. D. Taylor, Y. J. Hofstetter and Y. Vaynzof, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Ju, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Dai, L. Ma, N. P. Padture and X. C. Zeng, Joule, 2018, 2, 1231–1241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. Wu, J.-Y. Chen, X. Meng, X. He, T. Noda, H. Chen, X. Yang, H. Segawa, Y. Wang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2896–2902 RSC .
X. Jiang, F. Wang, Q. Wei, H. Li, Y. Shang, W. Zhou, C. Wang, P. Cheng, Q. Chen, L. Chen and Z. Ning, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao and F. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1286–1325 RSC .
L. Rao, X. Meng, S. Xiao, Z. Xing, Q. Fu, H. Wang, C. Gong, T. Hu, X. Hu, R. Guo and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14693–14700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, X. Feng, W. Jia, W. Lv, A. Mei, Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, R. Chen and W. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4292–4317 RSC .
D. Song, S. Narra, M.-Y. Li, J.-S. Lin and E. W.-G. Diau, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4179–4186 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Lim, A. Hagfeldt and D. Bi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3256–3300 RSC .
M. Pitaro, E. K. Tekelenburg, S. Shao and M. A. Loi, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2105844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Tian, C. Wang, J. Jin, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhou, J. Zhu, J. Xu, R. He, Y. Huang, S. Ren, C. Chen, P. Gao, R. Long and D. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 5274–5283 RSC .
T. Wu, X. Liu, X. Luo, H. Segawa, G. Tong, Y. Zhang, L. K. Ono, Y. Qi and L. Han, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, I. Spanopoulos, L. Mao, M. Chen, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14800–14806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, A. K. Jena, G. M. Kim and T. Miyasaka, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3171–3222 RSC .
B.-B. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, B. Han, G. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Du and Z. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2102055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sanchez-Diaz, R. S. Sánchez, S. Masi, M. Kreĉmarová, A. O. Alvarez, E. M. Barea, J. Rodriguez-Romero, V. S. Chirvony, J. F. Sánchez-Royo, J. P. Martinez-Pastor and I. Mora-Seró, Joule, 2022, 6, 861–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. P. O. F. Additives, N. S. A. T. Food, M. Younes, P. Aggett, F. Aguilar, R. Crebelli, B. Dusemund, M. Filipič, M. J. Frutos, P. Galtier and D. Gott, EFSA J., 2018, 16, 5295 Search PubMed .
S. Blunden and T. Wallace, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2003, 41, 1651–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Babayigit, D. Duy Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H.-G. Boyen and B. Conings, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hailegnaw, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nel, T. Xia, H. Meng, X. Wang, S. Lin, Z. Ji and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 607–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Feliu, P. Kohonen, J. Ji, Y. Zhang, H. L. Karlsson, L. Palmberg, A. Nyström and B. Fadeel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 146–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Mitchell, L. M. Markillie, W. B. Chrisler, M. J. Gaffrey, D. Hu, C. J. Szymanski, Y. Xie, E. S. Melby, A. Dohnalkova, R. C. Taylor, E. K. Grate, S. K. Cooley, J. E. McDermott, A. Heredia-Langner and G. Orr, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10173–10185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fadeel, L. Farcal, B. Hardy, S. Vázquez-Campos, D. Hristozov, A. Marcomini, I. Lynch, E. Valsami-Jones, H. Alenius and K. Savolainen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 537–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Paunovska, D. Loughrey, C. D. Sago, R. Langer and J. E. Dahlman, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Curtis, N. J. Niemuth, E. Bennett, A. Schmoldt, O. Mueller, A. A. Mohaimani, E. D. Laudadio, Y. Shen, J. C. White, R. J. Hamers and R. D. Klaper, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2022, 17, 661–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, Z. Braunstein, A. C. Toomey, J. Zhong and X. Rao, Frontiers in Immunology, 2018, 8, 1908 CrossRef PubMed .
T. He, W. Li, Z. Kefan, S. Jing, W. Yongshuai, B. Yulong and W. Changshan, Research Square, 2022 DOI:10.21203/rs.3.rs-1161048/v1 .
L. Lanzetta, T. Webb, N. Zibouche, X. Liang, D. Ding, G. Min, R. J. E. Westbrook, B. Gaggio, T. J. Macdonald, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, A. Gold-Parker, M. F. Toney and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2159–2165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Serrano-Lujan, N. Espinosa, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. Abad, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501119 CrossRef .
J. Gong, S. B. Darling and F. You, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1953–1968 RSC .
I. Celik, Z. Song, A. J. Cimaroli, Y. Yan, M. J. Heben and D. Apul, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 156, 157–169 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vidal, J.-A. Alberola-Borràs, S. N. Habisreutinger, J.-L. Gimeno-Molina, D. T. Moore, T. H. Schloemer, I. Mora-Seró, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Sustain., 2021, 4, 277–285 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, Y.-J. An, J. I. Kwak, H. J. Kim, H. S. Jung and N.-G. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 1154–1177 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02510h‡ These two authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Lead halide perovskite-based optoelectronics have achieved great success in recent years, but the long term and comprehensive clinical investigations conducted by the World Health Organization (WHO) demonstrated that lead is extremely dangerous to human beings. The WHO stated that the safety threshold does not exist for lead exposure, that is, it always causes toxicity as long as the quantity of lead is nonzero. Alternatively, tin containing perovskites have been proposed to replace lead-based halide perovskites. While Bert Conings et al. claimed that Sn based perovskites are even more toxic than Pb based perovskites. On the other hand, Li et al. stated that lead based halide perovskites are more dangerous than tin containing ones in terms of plant uptake ability. The ongoing intense debate about the toxicity of tin containing halide perovskites confuses the community and raises a critical question: Is it worth deploying tin containing halide perovskites? Here, we carefully analyse the practical application conditions of tin-based halide perovskites e.g., solar cells and our comprehensive in vivo toxicity evaluation and next generation sequencing analysis demonstrated that under practical application conditions, Sn based perovskites are bio safe and it's valuable to deploy Sn based perovskites.


High concentration (>10−1 mM)39,40	Toxic, the toxicity is dominated by the HI	Toxic, the toxicity is dominated by the HI	Sn perovskite is more toxic than Pb perovskite	Sn perovskite is meaningless
Low concentration (<10−3 mM)	Toxic,9,12,13 the toxicity is dominated by the heavy metal Pb. The effect of HI is negligible.	Bio safe, the health risk caused by both heavy metal Sn and HI become negligible.	Sn perovskite is bio safe.	Sn perovskite is valuable
Practical utilization situation	Pb perovskite is toxic
Worst application situation	Toxic,9,12,13 the toxicity is dominated by the heavy metal Pb.	Bio safe, the health risk caused by both heavy metal Sn and HI become negligible.	Sn perovskite is bio safe.	Sn perovskite is valuable
(All the lead and tin in halide perovskites are released into the environment in one year)
Pb perovskite is toxic

 	Fig. 1  Toxicity evaluation after daily injection of tin of 2 mg kg−1 from SnI2 or perovskite (MASnI3). (a) Mice body weight, (b–f) organ weight index (organ weight/mice weight) for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, (g) hematology analysis, and (h) blood biochemistry analysis. WBC: white blood cells, Neu: neutrophils, Lym: lymphocytes, Mon: monocytes, Eos: eosinophils, Bas: basophils. ALT: alanine aminotransferase, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALB: albumin blood, TB: total protein, UA: uric acid. Liver indicators: ALT, AST, ALB, TP. Kidney indicator: UA. (n = 7 mice per group). For plots (a–f) statistical analysis was performed using a one-sided Student's T-test. For plots g and h: Error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate significance. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference.	 

 	Fig. 2  RNA sequencing results demonstrated the gene expression changes caused by SnI2 or perovskite (MASnI3). Differentially expressed genes (DEG) analysis for heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen under SnI2 injection (a–e) and perovskite uptake (f–j). All kidney, liver, lung, and spleen exhibit significant gene expression changes by DEseq2 (v1.34.0) analysis. Besides, even the heart displays several differentially expressed genes, our qPCR experimental results show that these tiny amounts of differentially expressed genes are induced by measurement error. Daily intake: 2 mg kg−1 of tin from SnI2 or perovskite.	 

 	Fig. 3  Immune damage generated by daily intake of tin with 2 mg kg−1 from perovskite (MASnI3) is verified by the qPCR and IHC (immunohistochemistry) analysis. (a–d) mRNA expression levels of S100a8 & S100a9 gene for kidney (a), lung (c), spleen (d), and S100a6 gene for the liver (b), measured by qPCR, which is consistent with the RNA sequencing results, (e–h) IHC staining of the kidney, liver, lung, and spleen against immune related markers (CD3: T cell marker; F4/80: macrophage marker; and Ly6G: neutrophil marker) (n = 3 mice/per group). For plots (a–h), the error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate significance. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference.	 

 	Fig. 4  Toxicity evaluation after a daily intake of tin of 0.5 mg kg−1 or 0.1 mg kg−1 from perovskite (MASnI3). (a) Mice body weight, (b–f) organ weight index (organ weight/mice weight) for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen, (g) hematology analysis, and (h) blood biochemistry. Daily intake of tin of 0.1 mg kg−1 from perovskite does not generate any significant difference for mice weight, organ weight index, hematology, and blood biochemistry. WBC: white blood cells, Neu: neutrophils, Lym: lymphocytes, Mon: monocytes, Eos: eosinophils, Bas: basophils. ALT: alanine aminotransferase, AST: aspartate aminotransferase, ALB: albumin blood, TB: total protein, and UA: uric acid. Liver indicators: ALT, AST, ALB, and TP. Kidney indicator: UA. (n = 6 mice per group). For plots (a–f): Statistical analysis was performed using a one-sided Student's T-test. For plots g and h: Error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate significance *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference.	 

 	Fig. 5  RNA sequencing results for the mice injected with perovskite (MASnI3) with 0.1 mg kg−1 or 0.5 mg kg−1 of tin per day and IHC analysis. Differentially expressed genes (DEG) by DEseq2 (v1.34.0) analysis for heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen under 0.5 mg kg−1 of tin injection (a–e) and under 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin ingestion (f–j). qPCR validation indicates that the tiny amount of differentially expressed genes obtained from RNA sequencing (0.1 mg kg−1 of tin) are induced by measurement error. All the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen do not display any differentially expressed genes at a daily intake of tin of 0.1 mg kg−1. (k–o) IHC (immunohistochemistry) analysis against CD3, F4/80 and Ly6G for the heart, kidney, liver, lung, and spleen. The IHC analysis does not show any significant difference for immune related markers in all organs treated with 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin from perovskite, thus further verifying the bio safety of perovskite. Daily intake: 0.5 mg kg−1 or 0.1 mg kg−1 of tin from halide perovskite (n = 3 mice per group). For plots (k–o), the error bars show mean ± SEM and the one-side Student's T-test was used to calculate the significance. *P < 0.05, **P ≤ 0.01, ***P ≤ 0.001, ****P ≤ 0.0001. ns: no significant difference.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee02510h
‡ These two authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
