Large scale assembly of nanomaterials: mechanisms and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR04156D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR04156D
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 17571-17589Large scale assembly of nanomaterials: mechanisms and applications

        
          
            Jifan 
            Yin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuxin 
            Huang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Saima 
            Hameed
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ruiyun 
            Zhou
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lijuan 
            Xie
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Yibin 
            Ying
          
        
      abc
aCollege of Biosystems Engineering and Food Science, Zhejiang University, 866 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou 310058, P.R. China. E-mail: ljxie@zju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of on Site Processing Equipment for Agricultural Products, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, P.R. China
cZhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311300, P.R. China
Received 
      30th May 2020
    , Accepted 14th August 2020First published on 17th August 2020AbstractThe large scale assembly of nanomaterials is the crucial factor contributing to the creation of high-performance devices based on nanotechnology, which have flourished in an unprecedented manner. In this review, we summarize the main methods for the large-scale integration of nanomaterials, including the bubble blown assembly, capillary-force-assisted assembly, electric-field-assisted assembly, and Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. Assembly principles and general procedures of these methods are described in detail. Then, instances of nanomaterials assembled at a large scale with different dimensional orders are introduced. The alignment and precise location of nanomaterials in a large area are emphasized here, which is the prerequisite for further applications. Additionally, we also focused on the recently advanced, efficient, and versatile devices that are mainly assembled using the aforementioned methods, including sensors, photovoltaic devices, field-effect transistors, and photodetectors. Finally, prospective and potential opportunities are presented.
1. Introduction
In the material world, size matters.1,2
Nanomaterials have fundamentally changed the structure of macro materials and attracted the attention of numerous scientists in various fields.3–5 Due to their surface effect, quantum size effect, and macro quantum tunneling effect,6–8 nanomaterials have shown unique electronic and optical properties.9,10 Furthermore, combined with large-scale assembly techniques, these nanomaterials are expected to meet the demand for high-performance devices, which are widely utilized in various fields, such as sensing,11,12 photovoltaics,13,14 field-effect transistors and photodetectors.15,16
Various types of nanomaterials have been developed and are categorized into zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, depending on their confined size.17 Typical nanomaterials are shown in Fig. 1. The 0D nanomaterials refer to the nanomaterials with the size of three dimension in the nanoscale range (1–100 nm), such as quantum dots (QDs) and nanoparticles. QDs have been used in emerging fluorescent dyes because they exhibit better brightness and photostability, and these nanomaterials have impacted various scientific fields, including the physical, chemical, and biological sciences.18–20 In the biology field, 0D nanomaterials are generally utilized as optical probes for biological sensing. Nanoparticles have been investigated in many areas, such as cosmetics,21 medicine,22 and environmental research.23 A particular notable type of nanoparticles is gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), which appeal to researchers due to their favorable chemical stability and low toxicity towards biological organisms.24,25 The 1D nanomaterials denote materials with the sizes of two dimensions in the nanoscale range, including nanotubes, nanowires, and nanorods with unidirectional anisotropy.26 Their selective geometric properties, nanosized diameter, and microscale height endow them with a high surface to volume ratio.27 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been extensively analyzed by scientists in many fields due to their exceptional charge transport efficiency,28,29 the ability to tune their bandgaps over a broad wavelength range,30 semiconducting and metallic properties depending on the chiral vector, and high optical transparency values with lower resistivity.31 CNTs are seamless cylinders composed of layers of graphene32 and are categorized into single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs).33,34 Cylindrically shaped nanowires and nanorods also play an essential role in nanotechnology, such as organic nanowires,35 and possess metallic or semiconducting properties. Regarding the 2D nanomaterials, graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are the predominant nanomaterials. Graphene shows a remarkably high carrier mobility36 due to the sp2 hybridization of carbon electrons to form conjugated π bond, which has been studied widely in DNA probe hybridization and tunable plasma.37,38 The most extensively studied graphene materials include graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (rGO), and graphene nanosheets (GNS), which will be introduced in the next few sections. The emerging 2D nanomaterials in the family of TMDs, such as molybdenum dioxide (MoS2), tungsten disulfide (WS2) and molybdenum selenide (MoSe2), are persistently attracting the attention of researchers due to their intriguing features, such as an ultrathin thickness that is correlated with their appealing optical properties,39,40 2D morphology and large interlayer spacing.41–43 Additionally, the natural layered structure of perovskite facilitates the preparation of 2D nanomaterials by ligand regulation, which has been extensively applied to electronic devices due to the properties of tunable luminous performance.44
 Fig. 1  An illustration of nanomaterials categorized according to size. 
The intrinsic properties of nanomaterials are essential for the development of high-performance devices. Moreover, the array, including the alignment and predetermined location of nanomaterials, plays an indispensable role in the fabrication of high-performance devices.45,46 The controlled placement of nanomaterials is desired,47 and the best advantage of controlling the orientation of nanomaterials is to take advantage of their anisotropy, which is positively correlated with the charge carrier mobility. In contrast, disordered nanomaterials may adversely affect electron transport. Therefore, assembling nanomaterials as desired at a large scale is required to manufacture more powerful devices. However, to date, a preset location with a highly ordered alignment of nanomaterials at a large scale is still one of the main challenges that has limited the applications of nanomaterials in advanced devices.48,49 Two techniques have been developed to integrate nanomaterials, top-down (TD) and bottom-up (BU) fabrication,50 as illustrated in Fig. 2. In TD fabrication, materials with larger sizes, such as micron and centimeter dimensions, are cut into nanostructures through photolithography, including electron beam lithography, nanoimprint lithography, helium ion beam lithography, and chemical oxidation.51 The TD technique efficiently processes nanomaterials into extraordinary macrostructures.52,53 However, the drawbacks are the limited control of its micromorphology, high cost, time-consuming nature, and low production.54 In addition, undesirable residual chemicals also affect the subsequent process in fabrication.55,56 Hence, the geometric merit of these anisotropic nanomaterials is unable to be completely exploited using this approach. The bottom-up approach is more moderate and fabricates large-scale nanomaterials from the nanoscale to micron and even centimeter size. It mainly consists of in situ growth, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and self-assembly. Self-assembly utilizes the weak interactions between materials to produce relatively large nanoscale systems with complex structures under ambient and mild conditions, and thus it is a potential candidate technology to assemble nanomaterials at a large scale.
 Fig. 2  The illustration of TD and BU fabrication. Nanoimprint lithography, electron beam lithography, and self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. Helium ion beam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. Site-selective growth. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2009 Springer Nature. Plasma enhanced CVD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
Previous reviews describing the assembly of nanomaterials are mainly focused on one type of dimensional nanomaterials or no more than three types of applications. Fan et al. reviewed methods for integrating nanowires (1D) and their applications in flexible electronics.60 Cao et al. reviewed the methods for fabricating patterned 2D nanomaterials and electromagnetic functional devices. A detailed description of BU methods was not provided.50 Cao et al. summarized the most widely studied assembly approaches and highlighted their roles in aligning 1D nanomaterials.61 Hersam et al. presented an overview of advances in the assembly of colloidal nanomaterials for field-effect transistors, including the assembly methods for achieving desired thin films or patterned substrates.62 O. Osuji et al. reviewed the directed assembly of nanomaterials and their applications in photovoltaics, piezoelectric energy, and catalysis, while the section of our review on application also focuses on other high-performance devices.63 Our review comprehensively focuses on a comprehensive description of common methods for assembling large-scale nanomaterials with various sizes and new advances to provide a guide for future development. The cutting-edge methods for the large-scale assembly of distinct dimensional nanomaterials are summarized, and nanomaterials are precisely loaded onto designated regions to achieve the desired morphology. These methods are categorized into the bubble blown assembly, capillary-force-assisted assembly, electric-field-assisted assembly, and Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) assembly, based on diverse intermolecular forces, including shear force, capillary force, electric field force and surface tension. We analyze the principles and general procedures of each method and summarize its unique advantages and limitations. Additionally, we further introduce high-performance gas sensors, biosensors, photovoltaic devices, and field-effect transistors based on these nanomaterials fabricated using large-scale assembly methods with a controlled location and orientation.
2. Methods for large-scale nanomaterials assembly
In this section, the main methods for assembling nanomaterials on a large scale are discussed, and assembly is a primary step in the further development of high-performance optical-electronic devices. A detailed overview of assembly methods is presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Overview of the major assembly methods




Assembly methods
Force
Conditions
Nanomaterials
Advantages
Disadvantages




Bubble blown assembly
shear force
(1) Bubble size
(1) Te nanowires and carbon nanotubes
Assembled both in rigid and flexible substrates
Poor control of the density of nanomaterials, dimension limitation (0D)


(2) Duration of the bubble
(2) Reduced oxide graphene


(3) Cu nanoblocks


Capillary-force-assisted assembly
Capillary force
(1) Temperature control
(1) Au and Ag nanoparticles, perovskite quantum dots, and nanospheres
Nanomaterials guided into a special location
Nonreusable template, dimension limitation of LBIA (2D)


(2) Motion speed
(2) Nanorods, Si nanowires, InAs nanowires, and Ag nanowires


Electric-field-assisted assembly
Electric field force
(1) Electric field intensity
(1) CdSe/CdS quantum dots and Au nanoparticles
Assembled without dimension limitations, high stability
Contaminated with extra electrodes


(2) Duration of the electric field
(2) Carbon nanotubes and Cu nanowires


(3) Density of nanomaterials
(3) Graphene


Langmuir–Blodgett assembly
Surface tension
(1) Compression
(1) Quantum dots
Simple, but powerful method for the formation of nanodimensional ultrathin films
Surfactants added, nanomaterials are assembled randomly


(2) The stability of nanomaterials
(2) Organic nanowires


(3) Dipping speed
(3) MoS2 and graphite oxide




2.1 Bubble blown assembly
Bubble blown assembly is one of the promising candidate techniques for the large-scale integration of nanomaterials. Nanomaterials may orient uniformly towards the fluid direction, which is related to the shear force of hydrodynamics.64 During the process of bubbling, nanomaterials tend to remain in the path of minimum resistance, which is determined by the flow velocity, the bubble depth of the edge, and fluid viscosity.65 Generally, the bubble blown assembly consists of several steps,66 as shown in Fig. 3. First, a homogeneous polymer solution containing the target nanomaterials is prepared. Here, the polymer has the function of dispersing nanomaterials and generating shear forces during bubble flow. Originally, epoxy resin was commonly used in this process,65,66 although it is associated with some drawbacks, such as difficult removal, which hampers the next step of the fabrication process. The polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) polymer system is used widely because of the advantage of easy removal from nanomaterials using acetone and solidification.68,69 Second, a circular tie is used to blow a properly size bubble with a gas. Third, nanomaterials are transferred onto new rigid or flexible substrates. Last but not least, the polymer is removed by chemical or physical methods, such as an organic solvent.
 Fig. 3  Illustration of the steps in the bubble blown assembly method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Currently, Cao and colleagues at Peking University, who has promoted the application of nanoelectronic and photovoltaic devices, are the main group analyzing the assembly of nanomaterials using the bubble blown method. Various nanomaterials are being integrated using bubble blown assembly over a large area, including nanowires, CNTs, graphene, and nanohybridized blocks, and nanomaterials are formed with a distinct shape to achieve extraordinary photoelectronic properties.
Cao and colleagues fabricated aligned and crossed single-crystalline Te arrays using bubble blown assembly,69 as shown in Fig. 4(a). Notably, straight Te nanowires were transformed into springs in situ during the assembly process and with permanent deformation. This assembly method has been combined with layer-by-layer assembly to obtain multilayered nanostructures, which have been further fabricated into a high-performance gas sensor due to the electric property of Te nanomaterials. Additionally, CNTs were aligned using bubble blown assembly, as illustrated in Fig. 4(b), and then hybridized with graphene on a large scale.70 Interestingly, the PMMA used in this experiment is responsible for the dispersion of nanomaterials, also providing shear force and a solid carbon source of graphene.73 In SWCNTs coupled with graphene, the prominent properties of nanomaterials are visible, such as improved electrical conductivity and structural integrity. Based on this structure, a solar cell with the MWCNT-graphene electrode was fabricated and displayed remarkably higher electrical conductivity than its counterparts. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 4(c), Cao's group adopted the bubble blown method to assemble MWCNTs and improve the performance of solar cells.71 The PMMA bubble was stacked vertically to obtain multilayer films and then processed into functional solar cells.74 Regarding 2D nanomaterials, flat GO sheets were also uniformly assembled using the bubble blown method to obtain high optical transparency,67 which is shown in Fig. 4(d). Additionally, nano blocks were also integrated using this approach. This group designed a delicate heterostructure called sausage-like graphene nanotubes containing Cu nanoblocks,72
 Fig. 4  The assembly of nanomaterials using the bubble blown assembly method. (a) Illustration of various configurations obtained using this assembly method; photos of a PMMA bubble and Te nanowires transferred to a plastic sheet are shown. (a) Illustration of various configurations obtained in this assembly method, photo of a PMMA bubble, and Te nanowires transferred to a plastic sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of direct fabrication of MWCNTs networks and MWCNT-graphene hybrid films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Illustration of the assembly of MWCNT or MWCNT-Pt networks, an optical image of the 8-layer stacked MWCNT arrays embedded in PMMA matrix and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photo of a water bubble and a bubble film with assembled GO sheets transferred to a Si wafer, Cu foil before and after annealing, and a hybrid film annealed on a Cu foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) Illustration of the process including bubble assembly and thermal annealing growth of GNT@CuNB sausages and SEM images of the sausage-like GNT@CuNB nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
and the Cu nanowire arrays assembled in the bubble film are shown in Fig. 4(e). The researchers achieved the large-scale fabrication of assembled graphene coupled with Cu, which increased the oxidation stability of Cu and reduced the linear resistance of graphene.
In summary, the bubble blown assembly method is an innovative alternative approach to integrate nanomaterials over a large area that has been used to assemble various nanomaterials. Using this simple approach, intriguing structures have been established that also possess particular photoelectric properties to yield versatile devices with both rigid and flexible substrates. However, the limitation is the poor control of the density of nanomaterials, including its homogeneity and value, which is limited by the size and intrinsic attributes of the bubble. Moreover, due to the smaller size and lower anisotropy of 0D nanomaterials, 0D nanomaterials with a homogeneous dispersion are not easily assembled using this method.
2.2 Capillary-force-assisted assembly
Capillary-force-assisted assembly is a potential method for the areal integration of nanomaterials. Many familiar examples of capillary interactions exist on the microscale. Capillary forces occur in narrow channels between fluid and solid walls of the tube. A meniscus is generated at the solid–liquid interface, which is concave when the fluid level increases to wet the solid fence but convex when the liquid level drops and does not wet the solid walls. This feature has been described as capillary phenomena. The minimized surface of liquid is termed the capillary bridge. Two principles are utilized, one is that nanomaterials assemble due to a process driven by the liquid bridge, and the other is driven by the meniscus motion. The key difference in these two methods is the domain force. For the former, the domain force is commonly named liquid bridge-induced assembly (LBIA),75 as shown in Fig. 6(a). The basic mechanism of LBIA is the selective wetting of liquids on the substrates.76 The hydrophilic template cooperates with hydrophobic substrates, and a liquid bridge is generated between neighboring pillars. Due to the different qualities between the pillars and grooves that formed, the liquid evaporates, nanomaterials are compressed into a confined space and then spontaneously set. Throughout the process, the mechanical strength of the liquid bridge and the structural cohesive force dominate. For the latter, the formation of the array of nanomaterials is mainly determined by the direct capillary forces between substrates and the nanomaterial suspension. Nanomaterials are assembled in the same direction as the motion of the meniscus, as shown in Fig. 5(b).
 Fig. 5  Illustration of the principles of capillary force-assisted assembly (dimensions are not to scale). (a) The mechanism of assembly induced by the motion of the meniscus and templates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The mechanism of the LBLA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 6  The assembly of nanomaterials using LBIA. (a) Perovskite quantum dots are located within precise positions at the corners between microgroove sidewalls and the supporting substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Preparation of oriented Ag/polymer nanowire arrays and SEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram of the process patterning the nano-crystals, and microphotographs of various nano-crystal arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Perovskite QDs are assembled using LBIA in one direction at a large scale,78 as shown in Fig. 6(a). The silicon substrate coated with metal electrodes was covered by a suspension of QDs, and the microgrooves were placed on the top of the solution. Following the evaporation of solvent, the liquid bridge was broken, and nanomaterials were deposited in a precise location. A coaxial Ag/polymer nanowire array has also been assembled using LBIA,79 as shown in Fig. 6(b). Two processes have been developed for assembling Ag/polymer nanowires. The first stage is to assemble Ag nanoparticles. A silicon substrate with structured pillars is immersed into the solution of Ag nanoparticles and then removed at a constant speed. Neighboring pillars form liquid bridges to disperse Ag nanoparticles. After water evaporation, Ag NPs are closely packed into 1D assemblies. The second stage was to assemble Ag nanoparticles@polymer. The method is the same as the first coating method. As shown in Fig. 6(c), nanocrystals have also been assembled precisely using this method.80 A common sandwich structure is formed, namely, a substrate, the nanomaterial solution, and the patterned template. Instead of a random spatial configuration, nanocrystals are highly aligned, enabling the complete realization of its further applications.
Besides, the method driven by capillary force is subdivided into two categories. One is an assembly in topographical templates to predefine the locations of nanomaterials.81 The shape of the templates determines the assembly of the shape and distance between nanomaterials. The other method is to assemble nanomaterials in flat substrates to produce films or a specific alignment. In both methods, the velocity of the suspension moving on the ground surface is an essential factor affecting the integration of nanomaterials. For the former method, nanomaterials are swept into the prepositioned trap through the meniscus movement to achieve their alignment. The shape of alignment is determined by the traps to some extent, i.e., the topographical templates. Therefore, the process of fabricating templates with precisely varying geometric structures is vital. Considering the cost, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is a competitive choice, which would reduce the collapse of nanomaterials due to its high elasticity.82 It may also be useful for fabricating flexible devices. For this technique, it is mainly applied to the assembly of Au,77 Ag nanoparticles, and nanorods, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Using this method, these nanomaterials with designed orientations are stable in large-area substrates. For the latter method, capillary-force-assisted assembly is applied to the large-scale assembly of nanowires. Collet and colleagues coupled the capillary-force-assisted assembly with dielectrophoresis (DEP) and observed a remarkable improvement in the capture efficiency of silicon nanowires,83 which is illustrated in Fig. 7(b). Silicon nanowires are fastened to the substrate by the DEP force coupled with the capillary force to achieve the precise placement of nanowires. Furthermore, the authors separated silicon and InAs nanowires from a mixed suspension by altering the proper DEP frequency. Additionally, aligned Ag nanowires were deposited on the substrate at a large scale by building a wedge-shaped meniscus.84 Zhang and colleagues have also developed a general and effective approach for the large-scale assembly of organic nanorods via the capillary assisted method combined with an external electric field. Microplates and nanorods were precisely positioned on different shape-patterned substrates using this method,85 with a capture yield of up to 95% in 1 mm2. Meanwhile, this method has customarily been used to produce large-area ordered films, such as the rGO sheet. The general steps include the preparation of an rGO suspension and vertically immersing the substrate into this suspension. After the evaporation of the suspension, rGO deposits on the surface of substrates. Due to the highly ordered structure, the anisotropic film shows good electrical conductivity. Compared with directly immersing glass, Sheath et al. (2016) coated a layer of a hydrophilic nylon polymer onto the glass for better wetting, and then transferred the film onto a new substrate.86 Sheath and colleagues also compared films fabricated using capillary-force-assisted assembly with films fabricated using traditional vacuum filtration. Vacuum filtration is also able to align nanomaterials depending on their gravity, but it is a time-consuming process and an uneven film will be produced. The authors confirmed that the top surface of films fabricated using capillary-force-assisted assembly exhibited a smoother morphology and the flow of water within the graphene channels was improved, which provided a foundation for the pressure-driven fabrication of membranes, as illustrated in Fig. 7(c).
 Fig. 7  The fabrication of nanomaterials using capillary-force-assisted assembly (induced by the motion of the meniscus). (a) Examples of two-dimensional patterns of Au nanoparticles and nanorods fabricated through topographically templated capillary assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (b) 3D view of the assembly setup at wafer scale that couples capillary assembly with external field and the schematic cross-sectional view of the liquid meniscus (triple line) at the evaporation front on the buried electrodes(the first row), comparing the capture yield of DEP alone and coupled with convective assembly, large-scale assembly of single NWs shown by tilted SEM images and SEM views of NWFETs made on aligned NWs of Si with PtSi contacts and InAs with NiInAs S/D contacts – reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (c) SEM images of RGO membranes manufactured by vacuum filtration and CAS (four figures on the left), pure water flux variation with pressure, and the rejection character for three organic dyes for CAS and vacuum filtration membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society. 
In conclusion, this simple and universal method can integrate nanomaterials on a large scale. With the assistance of capillary forces and structural cohesive forces, nanomaterials are guided into shapes with the desired orientation, which is the foundation for the fabrication of excellent devices. When combined with the assistance of templates, however, the obvious drawback is that the fabrication process is complex and the template is nonreusable. Assembly without templates produces highly ordered nanomaterials, but a precise position of nanomaterials is not readily achievable. In addition, because the sizes of grooves in two or three dimensions are in the nano range, LBIA cannot be used to assemble 2D nanomaterials. Moreover, even the fabricated macro grooves could depose 2D nanomaterials. However, the structure of single 2D nanomaterial on the micro scale is difficult to tailor. When coupled with another method, such as electric field-assistance assembly, the performance of LBIA might be improved.
2.3 Electric-field-assisted assembly
The electric-field-assisted method has stimulated continuous interest in nanomaterial integration at an industrial scale. Using an external electric field, nanoparticles with dielectric properties are polarized. The positive charge in the particle moves along the direction of the electric field. In contrast, the negative charge moves in the opposite direction of the electric field, causing the formation of an inverse electric field (leading to dipole–dipole interactions between nanoparticles) inside the particles. When the applied electric field is not uniform, the induced dipole moment interacts with the electric field to create a DEP force, and the nanoparticles move to the one side of the electric field. These nanoparticles begin to align in the direction of the applied electric field. Therefore, based on this principle, nanomaterials might drift into the preset desired location with directional ordering in the inhomogeneous electric field, as shown in Fig. 8. During the process, the electric field intensity and the duration of the electric field play a crucial role in the integration of aligned nanomaterials. The optimal nanomaterials are only produced under the proper conditions.
 Fig. 8  Illustration of the principles of electric-field-assisted assembly. 
A conductive electrode is needed to produce an electric field. Alternating current (AC) is frequently used and its intensity is tuned for better control of the nanomaterials. The conventional electrode is composed of a metallic material, such as Ag and indium tin oxide (ITO),87 which is difficult to remove, and the process of eliminating electrodes might alter the electronic and photonic properties of nanomaterials; additionally, the thickness of electrodes might deform the nanomaterials. The drawbacks mentioned above would subsequently affect the performance of devices. Hersam et al. first used graphene as an alternating current electrode to overcome the aforementioned limitations of metallic electrodes.88 Graphene is deposited on the substrate, which shows better performance of bonding with nanomaterials than metallic electrode. It is also easily removed without leaving any residue after the etching process (shown in Fig. 9(a)). Meanwhile, the design of graphene has been used to control the shape and location of nanomaterials, which may no longer require the assistance of grooves.
 Fig. 9  The fabrication of nanomaterials using electric-field-assisted assembly. (a) Electric-field-assisted placement of nanomaterials from solutions with patterned graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (b) SEM false-color image of a CdSeS/ZnS quantum dot assembly. (b) SEM false-color image of a CdSeS/ZnS quantum dot assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (c) Schematic of the electrophoretic deposition process of nanospheres and large area assembly of single gold nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of confined assembly of polymer-tethered Au nanorods (AuNRs) with the assistance of electric field and TEM images of AuNRs assemblies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Alignment of SWCNTs on the graphene-based, electric-field-assisted placement method – reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (f) SEM images of NWs grown on different substrates and direction of the electric field. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 
Here, CdSeS/ZnS-alloyed quantum dots, which are zero-dimension nanomaterials, are assembled using electric-field-assisted method.88 As shown in Fig. 9(b), these quantum dots exhibit good deposition. Kaur and colleagues have also attempted to align large-area CdSe/CdS quantum rods (QRs), with the aim of fabricating functional films because of its unique polarized light emission characteristic.91 Additionally, 1D nanomaterials, such as single gold nanorods, have been assembled in a broader area using this method. Combined with templates composed of PMMA, gold nanorods are guided into a preset location in an external electric field,87 as shown in Fig. 9(c) and (d). Anisotropic gold nanorods are confined in anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) channels with the external electric field. Thus, nanorods are aligned along the desired direction by adjusting the direction of the electric field.89 Assisted by adjusting the pore size and molecular weight of polystyrene tethered under external electric field, hybrid assemblies with various structures, e.g., linear chain, side row, single-helix, triple-helix, and hexagonally packed structures, have been obtained, which have been processed into excellent functional devices. In addition to nanorods, a CNT solution is covered on a Si/SiO2 substrate with graphene electrodes. When the current is on, CNTs are deposited between gaps,88 as shown in Fig. 9(e). Notably, the electric field is a crucial element for assembly, and, as shown in Fig. 9(f), the morphology of CuO nanowires shows obvious differences when assembled in the presence of different electric field intensities.90 For 2D nanomaterials, graphene oxide film and MoS2 nanosheets have been assembled by applying an external electric field.88 Wang et al.92 assembled GO films coupled with layer-by-layer assembly and obtained a high-performance nanofiltration membrane.
As discussed above, the electric-field-assisted assembly, a completely physical process,93 has been applied to assemble nanomaterials without dimension limits. Another significant advantage of this method is the integration of nanomaterials with high stability. The type of electrode and voltage intensity, substrates, and the integration of additional types of nanomaterials integration can be explored further. One point that particularly requires further investigation for nanomaterials is that the method may prevent the bundling of 1D nanomaterials and align each of them across the source–drain electrodes.94 However, the limitation of this method is the contamination of the electrode, which would adversely affect the performance of devices. Meanwhile, this method has been used to control the placement and direction of nanomaterials at a high density, and the challenge is to achieve the manipulation of single nanoparticles, nanorods and other nanostructures.
2.4 Langmuir–Blodgett assembly
LB assembly is the fastest growing approach among all the methods used for industrial-scale production, the features of which are unable to be replaced by any other methods. This method, with a great development foreground, has increasingly fascinated researchers. Its principle is to modify nanoparticles with surfactants that alter the interfacial state of the solution system to achieve nanoparticle with ordered structures. Three procedures are necessary for LB assembly. An aqueous solution of nanomaterials is mixed with volatile organic solvents containing modified groups to align nanomaterials. Then, most of the water and redundant ligands are removed through centrifugation. The nanomaterials with ligands are dispersed in a dropwise manner into a trough containing water to generate a film after the evaporation of the solvent. Finally, the films are transferred onto substrates. Using this process, the density of the monolayers is able to be tightly controlled due to the effect of alignment. A device has been developed to monitor the degree of compression of a film over the trough and to determine under which conditions the film must not have a low density or be overweight. Throughout the process, some core elements, such as compression, the stability of nanomaterials, and dipping speed, also exert a significant effect on the film structure (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Illustration of basic procedures of LB assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 
Here, silica-encapsulated semiconducting colloidal quantum dots, sandwiched between two layers of graphene to generate large-area heterostructures, are assembled using the LB method, as shown in Fig. 11(a).96 This successful integration builds the foundation for the fabrication of novel optoelectronic devices. Through LB assembly, the large size of AuNPs, with a diameter of approximately 50 nm around, has the potential to obtain maximum near-field effects.97 In this study, polyethylene glycol (PEG), an amphiphilic agent, plays a vital role in forming densely packed membranes. Meanwhile, 1D nanomaterials such as organic nanotubes, which are formed through supramolecular gel formation in organic solvents, have been fabricated using this method.98 Through repeated compression and expansion cycles, the nanotubes are aligned to a certain extent, as in Fig. 11(b). Additionally, quasimonolayer films of aligned manganese dioxide (MnO2) nanowires99 have been assembled to directly probe Zn-ion batteries (ZIBs) in real time. The LB approach has also been applied to assemble large-scale 2D nanomaterials. MoS2 nanosheets and a thermally exfoliated graphite oxide (TEGO) film are reported to be integrated by LB assembly within large areas,100,101 as illustrated in Fig. 11(c) and (d), respectively. In the process of preparing single MoS2 layer, an aggregation phenomenon is observed, which formed films without the use of surfactants or significant material loss into the aqueous subphase. Finally, a transparent and densely packed MoS2 monolayer with a large area is prepared with high stability.
 Fig. 11  The fabrication of nanomaterials using LB assembly. (a) Top panel: Graphene-sheet-transfer process, showing the components of the material and the structure of the assembled heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the assembling processes of MnO2 nanowires and SEM images (the top). Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. The well-aligned organic nanotube films were constructed by Langmuir–Blodgett film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph of a stable MoS2 thin film floating on the water surface by the LB method – reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Barrier-free deposition and continuous film coating of thermally exfoliated graphite oxide (TEGO) – reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Overall, LB assembly is a simple but powerful tool used to produce nanomaterials and fabricate ultrathin films at a large scale. At the same time, the main drawback is that surfactants are added to the solution containing nanomaterial, which exert an unfavorable effect. Hence, the main achievement of this method is whether further advances in the techniques will eliminate the need for surfactants. Additionally, LB assembly promotes the fabrication of nanomaterials with a random orientation. Therefore, the challenge is whether this method will achieve global alignment and a precise location of nanomaterials. A feasible approach would be to combine LB assembly combine with another technique, such as template assistance, to overcome these limitations.
3. Applications of oriented and predefined nanomaterials
3.1 Sensors for gas detection
Given the tremendous attention paid to environmental protection and safety supervision, extensive research on gas sensors has been conducted. Gas sensors must possess three elements: high sensitivity with wide line range, good selectivity and stability. Two parameters are considered to achieve these goals. On the one hand, the surface condition of sensors is of vital importance, including cleanness, surface treatment, and functionalization. On the other hand, intrinsic properties are crucial. Therefore, 1D nanomaterials play a primary role.102 One of the significant advantages of nanomaterials is the prominently increased surface area due to their aspect ratio.103 Nanomaterials provide a sufficient surface area for the gas adsorption–desorption, and lead to superior gas sensing performance. Additionally, 2D nanomaterials have also been applied to fabricate gas sensors due to their large membrane area. The alignment of nanomaterials is the premise to maximize the use of their unique characteristics in gas sensors.104 In this section, we mainly outline the applications of oriented nanomaterials in gas sensors, and hydrogen (H2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and ammonia (NH3) are the main gases analysed.
H2, an indispensable industrial gas, is widely used in the petrochemical industry, electronic industry, metallurgical industry, aerospace, and other fields. Nevertheless, once a hydrogen leak occurs, the accident might cause an explosion or asphyxiation in an enclosed space. Therefore, devices for the fast, simple, and real-time detection of hydrogen gas are urgently needed. Single-crystal-line ultrathin W18O49 nanowires have been fabricated in an ordered structure using LB assembly. As shown in Fig. 12(a) and (d), W18O49 nanowires are processed into ten layers of homogeneous and compact films oriented over a large area and show remarkable sensitivity at room temperature.105 Pd nanodot-modified In2O3 has also been designed in sensors that quickly respond to H2.108 Additionally, Pd@Pt core–shell nanocrystals show a high sensitivity for H2.109 Meanwhile, Kathiravan et al. designed a novel nanostructured interface of ZnO nanotubes/graphene (ZNT/G) to fabricate hydrogen sensors, which shows excellent repeatability and long-term reliability and stability.110
 Fig. 12  Illustration of a gas sensor based on nanomaterials. (a) and (d) The assembly of W18O49 nanowires and the sensitivity to H2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (b) and (e) are the assembly of WO3 and the results of selectivity to NO2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) and (f) are the structure of the NH3 gas sensor fabricated with organic nanotubes and the results of sensitivity to NH3, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
NO2, an atmospheric pollutant, is mainly derived from industrial and automobile exhaust. Its excessive emission is harmful to the respiratory systems of humans and animals.37 Hence, a detector for this gas is necessary, which might ensure the safety of living creatures.111 Many studies have been published on NO2 sensors. Suzi and colleagues generated a high-performance NO2 gas sensor based on rGO conjugated Cu2O nanowires in oriented mesocrystals.112 Meanwhile, the flow of NO2 at different concentrations has been monitored by Te nanowires aligned using bubble blown assembly.69 In recent years, sensors fabricated with aligned CNTs using electric-field-assisted assembly have been placed in an NO2 chamber to detect this gas. The sensitivity depends on the various parameters of the electric field instead of being related to the numbers of formed CNT chains.113 Vertically aligned MoS2 also showed superior performance in detecting NO2.114 Tungsten oxide (WO3) with a well-aligned morphology is a promising candidate for NO2-detecting sensors,106 as shown in Fig. 12(b) and (e).
NH3, which is produced mainly by industries and agriculture, is also one of the most versatile industrial gases and is widely used in the chemical industry for synthesizing nitrogen fertilizer and nitric acid. Meanwhile, liquid ammonia is often used as a refrigerant, and ammonia has also been used as a biofuel to provide energy.115 However, this gas is a toxic and unstable compound that is harmful to living creatures.116 Hence, monitoring the ammonia gas concentration is very important. Electric-field-assisted assembly has been utilized to readily integrate ZnO nanowires that are aligned on the wafer and fabricate an NH3 gas sensor. The device is highly sensitive, with a significant increase in the NH3 sensing performance observed at low temperatures.117 Core–shell structured organic nanofibers have also been fabricated as highly sensitive NH3 sensors, and the thickness of the sensing shell is tuned by controlling the mass ratio of core and shell components. Furthermore, these sensors exhibit high sensitivity to low concentrations of NH3 with high stability and reversibility,107 as illustrated in Fig. 12(c) and (f). The rGO–CuFe2O4 nanocomposite has also been used as a novel sensor for ammonia. The structural modification of graphene oxide by Cu ferrite became an excellent platform for NH3 sensing applications.118
The application of large-scale assemblies with excellent nanomaterials in gas sensors has been discussed above. These devices show high sensitivity, exceptional selectivity, and reversibility towards H2, NO2, and NH3, with excellent responses and recovery times. The design of suitable nanomaterials and superior processing technology are required to overcome several drawbacks of sensors, such as the low sensitivity at room temperature, poor selectivity, and high power consumption.
3.2 Biosensors
Nanomaterials are appealing to researchers to achieve high-performance biosensors with excellent biocompatibility, selectivity, and sensitivity. These properties are attributed to their desirable features, mainly including plasmonic coupling effects, optical band gaps, and metamaterials effects. The 0D nanomaterials are suitable for labeling biomolecules, promoting electron transfer in biomolecules by constructing an electrochemical interface and responding to light to achieve a surface plasma effect. In 1D nanomaterials, the sensing channel exhibits absorption and high anisotropy to produce superior charge transport characteristics. These materials also provide sufficient space for the modification of other particles. Molecules pass through the inside of nanotubes, which should not be substituted with other nanomaterials. For 2D nanomaterials, their combination with biomolecules would endow the complex with new biological functions due to their circuit of electron transfer. Additionally, the weak intermolecular forces and strong intramolecular forces are also crucial. Meanwhile, the consistency of the orientation and precise location have significantly improved the properties of nanomaterials, while irregular, disordered nanomaterials would disrupt the specific properties of assembled nanostructures.
Recently, researchers have mainly focused on the synergistic effect of the hybrid nanostructure. Experiments examining the alignment of CNTs decorated with magnetic nanoparticles and Au were conducted in 2017 by Park and colleagues,119 and they magnetically aligned CNTs on the surface of a Pt-interdigitated electrode as a biosensing channel. After alignment, the probe DNA was conjugated to CNTs as the biosensor to capture the target DNA of two types of viruses, norovirus and influenza virus, for which the limits of detection were 8.4 pM and 8.8 pM, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 13(a). Experiments performed by Zou and colleagues were designed to align magnetoplasmonic (MadPlas) nanoparticles and develop a novel sensing platform for detecting tuberculosis (TB) antigen,120 as shown in Fig. 13(b). Fe3O4@Au particles were integrated into 1D nano chains upon exposure to an external magnetic field, which was used as the substrate for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). Here, graphene quantum dots were hybridized with the nanowires to improve detection signals for achieving dual-mode SERS. With these structures, immunoreaction results were monitored with high sensitivity, and a limit of detection of 0.0511 pg mL−1 was achieved. Meanwhile, ZnO nanowires were aligned vertically in combination with CdS and rGO; compared with its pure counterparts, the hybridized structure exhibited the lowest charge transfer resistance and highest photocurrent density. Hence, this structure was applied to the bioanalysis of glutathione (GSH) and obtained satisfactory sensing performance with a comprehensive detection in the linear range from 0.05 to 1 mM and an acceptable detection limit of 10 μM.121
 Fig. 13  Illustration of the biosensor applications of nanomaterials. (a) The process of assembling nanomaterials, the fabrication of the DNA probe, and the electrical signal obtained when monitoring the target DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) The process of fabrication of the biosensor. Principles of dual-mode detection and the results of detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
3.3 Photovoltaic devices
Versatile electronic devices have been fabricated by harnessing these unique nanomaterials and delicate assembly approaches described above. The remarkable development of photovoltaic solar cells has been reported.122,123 Photovoltaic solar cells are devices that directly convert light energy into electricity through photoelectric effects, and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) is the primary factor to measure in terms of the function. When the energy of sunlight is beyond the bandgap of a semiconductor, these photons would yield free electrons and holes, further generating a p–n junction that contributes to the electrical current.124 Hence, for photovoltaic devices, the ideal conditions are a proper bandgap, high optical absorption coefficient, low exciton bind energy, balanced carrier mobility, and long carrier life time.63 These properties are mainly determined by the inherent properties of nanomaterials. 1D nanomaterials, particularly nanotubes, are also potential candidates for this type of device because of their ability to form a channel for fast electron transmission. One type of 2D nanomaterial, perovskite, meets almost all of the requirements of photovoltaic solar cells.
As shown in Fig. 14(a), nanoporous coatings exploit optimized chemistries and proper assembly processes and reach an approximately 98% transmission efficiency with negligible scattering losses over the broad wavelength range of the solar spectrum from 350 nm to 1.5 μm on both flat and curved glass substrates.125 CNTs have been applied to improve the performance of silicon solar cells decorated with Pt nanoparticles, as shown in Fig. 14(b). CNTs, assembled using the bubble blown method were fabricated into a transparent and conductive network71 and further applied to construct heterojunction solar cells with n-type silicon. The cell achieved a final PCE of up to 7.4% with chemical doping. In addition to these applications, graphene is often combined with n-type silicon to construct heterojunctions.127 Here, silicon functions as an electron transfer layer, while the graphene layer serves as a transparent electrode to collect and transport charge carriers to external circuits, as shown in Fig. 15. Berry and colleagues attribute the low PCE to the CVD process for assembling graphene.127 The authors concluded that contaminants, including metallic particles and residual polymers, would multiply the interfacial carrier recombination, thus reducing the photovoltaic performance. Meanwhile, higher linear resistance is observed in this device. However, graphene assembled using the methods we have discussed in detail, such as electric-field-assisted assembly, may overcome these problems. Perovskite organic–inorganic hybrid materials have been assembled in an external electric field to control the ion polarization and orientation of perovskite, as shown in Fig. 14(c), to obtain a film with good crystallization and enhance the built-in electric field. The PCE was improved to 19.18% after assembly was controlled by the external electric field.126 The assisted assembly methods facilitate the effective promotion of charge separation and transport.128
 Fig. 14  Illustration of photovoltaic solar cells fabricated from nanomaterials. (a) The performance of nanoporous coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (b) The structure of solar cells manufactured by MWCNTs decorated with Pt nanoparticles and its performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) The schematic diagram of the change of MA+ and inorganic octahedral cages before and after EEF assisted treatment and the representative J–V curves – reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 15  Schematic of a graphene-on-semiconductor (Si) heterojunction photovoltaic cell. Top panel: Top view of the heterojunction. Bottom panel: Side view of the heterojunction (left panel) and charge-carrier transport across the surface junction (right panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. 
3.4 Field-effect transistors and photodetectors
In addition to photovoltaic devices, nanomaterials have also been utilized to fabricate field-effect transistors129 and photodetectors, which are promising components in future electronic devices. 0D nanomaterials display a better optical absorption efficiency than nanomaterials with other dimensions, mainly due to the quantum confinement effect and the increase in exciton oscillation. QDs are ideal nanomaterials for light-emitting transistors because of their high brightness, tunable color and narrow emission bandwidth. For 1D nanomaterials, the highly aligned structure might increase electron mobility. The 1D structure also substantially reduces the scattering phase space, and the scattering probability is low. These unique properties of 1D nanomaterials are required for field-effect transistors. 2D nanomaterials exhibit unconventional characteristics, as π–π stacking is induced to yield a high field-effect mobility. Notably, only the regular arrays, including molecular structures, functional groups, and alignment would achieve good field-effect transistors. However, TD techniques are still hampered by the relatively low patterning resolution and efficiency. Recently, some achievements have been reported through the fine-tuning of manipulating molecules for large-area processability.85,130,131
It could be shown in Fig. 16(a) that nanometer-thick monolayers were constructed by the LB methods, which were further fabricated into light-emitting transistors.130 Also, a mixture of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone and deoxygenated water was employed as a subphase in LB trough for assembling the nanosheets followed by their deposition on substrates and electron microscopy revealed the presence of densely aligned, crystalline, ultra-thin sheets of pristine phosphorene. Furthermore, these assembled nanosheets retained their electronic properties and showed a high current modulation of 104 at room temperature in field-effect transistor devices,131 shown in Fig. 16(b). Zhang's group constructed high-sensitivity, and visible-blind UV photodetectors based on the capillary assisted coupled with electric field assembled nanorods shown in Fig. 16(c).85 Also, a localized electric field was produced to accumulate charge for semiconductor, and a flexible photodetector based on assembled the hybrid ZnO/rGO films was fabricated. It can be seen in Fig. 16(d) that the photodetector displayed the remarkable noise-reduction effect, enhanced sensitivity, and low detection limit.132
 Fig. 16  The illustration of field-effect transistors and photodetectors fabricated by nanomaterials. (a) The schematic diagram of the photodetector assembled by the LB method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Field effect transistor with LB assembled phosphorene as a conducting channel material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the assembly of Alq3 microcrystals through the capillary-assisted coupled with electric field method, I–V curves of the Alq3 nanorod and temporal responses of the devices based on Alq3 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic illustrated that reagent-free electrophoretic assembled ZnO/rGO film and current–time curves of ZnO/rGO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
4. Conclusion and outlook
The methods described above to assemble nanomaterials on a large scale provide new approaches to fabricate high-performance devices with substantial commercial value. Using these methods, nanomaterials are precisely placed at a predetermined position and oriented neatly at a large scale. Furthermore, remarkable and outstanding devices have been fabricated and widely applied as gas sensors, biosensors, and electronic devices, all of which exhibit excellent performance due to their unique optical, electronic, and absorption properties. However, some problems remain to be solved. Nanomaterials are assembled spontaneously, and the conditions under which forces are generated between nanomaterials and other materials must be controlled in each method. Each method possesses unique features, which are beneficial to the whole process and must not be substituted with other methods because of some flaws that remain to be resolved. Both the advantages and limitations of the methods have been discussed in the second section.
Nanomaterials with unprecedentedly diverse and controlled nanostructures have attracted broad scientific interest, and solutions to the problems mentioned above may promote the development of additional orientations in the future. First, the fabrication of compound nanomaterials using combinations of these methods is a trend. Due to the synergistic effects of these nanomaterials, the sausage-like structure is beneficial to the fabrication of Cu nanowires and graphene. Second, an understanding of the various factors that affect the whole process is needed for the controllable manipulation of methods for assembling these versatile nanomaterials. The best assembly results will only be obtained when these factors are thoroughly understood and optimized. Many elements must be considered for a better assembly of nanomaterials. For instance, graphene electrodes may replace traditional electrodes in electric-field-assisted assembly. Last but not least, by harnessing the unique characteristics of nanomaterials and adopting suitable bottom-up assembly methods, various shape-controlled, mono-dispersed nanomaterials are generated, which have been employed as sensitive gas sensors, biosensors, and multifunctional electronic devices. Nevertheless, the capabilities of bottom-up methods and their applications have not been extensively explored. Furthermore, additional types of high-performance devices with multiple prospective applications will be developed using innovative approaches. Moreover, we eagerly anticipate the integration and fabrication of various nanomaterials using facile methods to produce additional versatile devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 31972161).
References
A. Mélanie, R. Jérôme, B. Jean-Yves, G. V. Lowry, J. Jean-Pierre and M. R. Wiesner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 634 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Emil, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 583–592 RSC .
H. G. Dehsheikh, S. Ghasemi-Kahrizsangi, E. Karamian and A. Nemati, J. Nanoanalysis, 2019, 6, 1–20 Search PubMed .
Y. Qi, T. Zhang, C. Jing, S. Liu, C. Zhang, P. J. J. Alvarez and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Feng, L. Tang, G. M. Zeng, Y. Zhou, Y. C. Deng, X. Ren, B. Song, C. Liang, M. Y. Wei and J. F. Yu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 267, 26–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Zhan, X. Song, S. Si, R. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Wang, J. He and X. Xiao, Small, 2019, 15, 1901820 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Campos, N. Troc, E. Cottancin, M. Pellarin, H.-C. Weissker, J. Lermé, M. Kociak and M. Hillenkamp, Nat. Phys., 2018, 15, 275–280 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Chen, Y. Xu, Y. Du and C. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, G. Lin, C. Clarke, J. Zhou and D. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1901430 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Sangwan and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 517–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, R. Paul, T. B. Tis, A. C. Saville, J. C. Hansel, T. Yu, J. B. Ristaino and Q. Wei, Nat. Plants, 2019, 5, 856–866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, C. Liu, H. Xu, D. Yao, K. Yan, H. Zheng, H. J. Chen, X. Gui, S. Chu and C. Liu, npj Flexible Electron., 2018, 2, 16 CrossRef .
Y. J. Zhang, T. Ideue, M. Onga, F. Qin, R. Suzuki, A. Zak, R. Tenne, J. H. Smet and Y. Iwasa, Nature, 2019, 570, 349–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, J. Jie, Q. Wei, Z. Lu, R. Jia, W. Deng, X. Zhang and X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902494 CrossRef .
T. Deng, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Su, S. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Li, H. Chen, Z. Zhao, Y. Li and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1494–1503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72–88 RSC .
A. M. Wagner, J. M. Knipe, G. Orive and N. A. Peppas, Acta Biomater., 2019, 94, 44–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hildebrandt, C. M. Spillmann, W. R. Algar, T. Pons, M. H. Stewart, E. Oh, K. Susumu, S. A. Díaz, J. B. Delehanty and I. L. Medintz, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 536–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yuan, T. Meng, P. He, Y. Shi, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6820–6835 RSC .
M. B. Haddada, E. Gerometta, R. Chawech, J. Sorres, A. Bialecki, S. Pesnel, J. Spadavecchia and A. L. Morel, Colloids Surf., B, 2020, 189, 110855 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, T. Huang, X. Li and Z. Huang, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2020, 177, 112895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, V. Jaswal and K. N. Yogalakshmi, Chemosphere, 2020, 246, 125676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, X. Huang, Y. Chen, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Nat. Protoc., 2017, 12, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dykman and N. Khlebtsov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2256–2282 RSC .
E. Garnett, L. Mai and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 8955–8957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Momparler, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2015, 40, 177–187 Search PubMed .
G. J. Brady, A. J. Way, N. S. Safron, H. T. Evensen, P. Gopalan and M. S. Arnold, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601240 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Maier, Science, 2019, 365, 1245–1246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, N. Wei, W. Cheng, B. Shen, S. Sun, J. Gao, Q. Wen, R. Zhang, J. Xu, Y. Wang and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4467 CrossRef PubMed .
E.-X. Ding, A. Hussain, S. Ahmad, Q. Zhang and E. I. Kauppinen, Nano Res., 2019, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. F. Lu, Y. Zhu, R. Bai, Z. S. Wu, W. C. Qian, L. Y. Yang, R. Cai, H. Yan, T. Li, V. Pandey, Y. Liu, P. E. Lobie, C. Y. Chen and T. Zhu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 719–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, L. Xie, S. Hameed, C. Wang and Y. Ying, Carbon, 2018, 132, 42–58 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santhosh, V. Velmurugan, G. Jacob, S. K. Jeong, A. N. Grace and A. Bhatnagar, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 1116–1137 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Zhuo, J. J. Wu, X. D. Wang, Y. C. Tao, Y. Yuan and L. S. Liao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3839 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, J. Li, Q. Yuan, Q. Li, J. Zhang, L. Sun, D. Rui, Z. Chen, K. Jia, M. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. H. Rummeli, N. Kang, H. Q. Xu, F. Ding, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw8337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Yuan, Y. Jiang, Y. Su, J. Ma and H. Tai, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 295, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Huang, X. W. Zhao, H. Y. Huang, Z. D. Wang, J. Li, Z. H. Li, X. Ji, Y. H. Cheng and J. Y. Zhang, Carbon, 2019, 154, 402–409 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ping, Z. Fan, M. Sindoro, Y. Ying and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605817 CrossRef .
A. Koitzsch, A.-S. Pawlik, C. Habenicht, T. Klaproth, R. Schuster, B. Büchner and M. Knupfer, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 41 CrossRef .
X. Cao, C. Tan, Z. Xiao, Z. Wei and Z. Hua, Adv. Mater., 2016, 47, 6167–6196 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Mayorga-Martinez, A. Ambrosi, A. Y. S. Eng, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 56, 24–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lin, T. Y. Li, J. Zhang, Z. Y. Chiao, P. C. Wei, H. C. Fu, L. Hu, M. J. Yu, G. H. Ahmed, X. Guan, C. H. Ho, T. Wu, B. S. Ooi, O. F. Mohammed, Y. J. Lu, X. Fang and J. H. He, Nano Energy, 2020, 104801 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, K. S. Lee, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7238–7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e15–e15 CrossRef .
N. Liu, F. Wang, L. Liu, H. Yu, S. Xie, J. Wang, Y. Wang, G.-B. Lee and W. J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhou, H. Yu, W. Zou, Z. Wang and L. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900912 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Han, N. J. Kybert, C. H. Naylor, B. S. Lee, J. Ping, J. H. Park, J. Kang, S. Y. Lee, Y. H. Lee, R. Agarwal and A. T. Johnson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, X. X. Wang, W. Q. Cao, J. Yuan and M. S. Cao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900689 CrossRef CAS .
L. Đorđević, F. Arcudi and M. Prato, Nat. Protoc., 2019, 14, 2931–2953 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, J.-A. Pan, H. Wu and D. V. Talapin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13917–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, I. Fedin, H. Zhang and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2017, 357, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, J. Cai, X. Zhang, W.-D. Li, H. Ge and Y. Hu, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2018, 132, 169–187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Merkel, K. P. Herlihy, J. Nunes, R. M. Orgel, J. P. Rolland and J. M. DeSimone, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13086–13096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Tran, K. Clark, W. Ma and A. Mulchandani, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 147, 111766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Cybart, E. Y. Cho, T. J. Wong, B. H. Wehlin, M. K. Ma, C. Huynh and R. C. Dynes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 598–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fang, I. Levchenko, T. van der Laan, S. Kumar and K. Ostrikov, Carbon, 2014, 78, 627–632 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y.-Z. Long, L. Liao, X. Duan and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1888–1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, Y. Shang and A. Cao, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1191–1204 CrossRef .
J. Zhu and M. C. Hersam, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603895 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. I. Pelligra, X. Feng and C. O. Osuji, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705794 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yu, X. Li, C. M. Lieber and A. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 728–734 RSC .
E. K. Hobbie and D. J. Fry, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 124907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, A. Cao and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, Y. Yang, Y. Li, C. Wang, W. Xu, E. Shi, M. Zou, L. Yang, X. Yang, Y. Li and A. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28330–28336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Her, R. Beams and L. Novotny, Phys. Lett. A, 2013, 377, 1455–1458 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, S. Wu, E. Shi, W. Xu, Y. Fang, Y. Yang and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3522–3530 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wu, E. Shi, Y. Yang, W. Xu, X. Li and A. Cao, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1746–1754 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, L. Yang, H. Wu, Y. Yuan, Z. Ji and A. Cao, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 9736–9742 CrossRef .
S. Wu, L. Yang, M. Zou, Y. Yang, M. Du, W. Xu, L. Yang, Y. Fang and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4917–4924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Yan, J. Yao, E. Beitler, Y. Zhu and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2010, 468, 549–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, D. Chen, Y. Yuan and A. Cao, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 395601 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yan, B. Su, Y. Shi and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 13–26 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Li, K. Luan and X. Bai, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 23986–23993 RSC .
V. Flauraud, M. Mastrangeli, G. D. Bernasconi, J. Butet, D. T. Alexander, E. Shahrabi, O. J. Martin and J. Brugger, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 73–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dai, Q. Ou, C. Wang, G. Si, B. Shabbir, C. Zheng, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Dong, J. J. Jasieniak, B. Su and Q. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5954–5961 RSC .
X. Jiang, X. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Li, J. Pang, H. Zhang and L. Jiang, Small, 2019, 15, 1900590 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Kan, C. Xiao, X. Li, B. Su, Y. Wu, W. Jiang, Z. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18978–18984 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ni, L. Isa and H. Wolf, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 2978–2995 RSC .
M. Geissler, H. Wolf, R. Stutz, E. Delamarche, U. W. Grummt, B. Michel and A. Bietsch, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 6301–6311 CrossRef CAS .
M. Collet, S. Salomon, N. Y. Klein, F. Seichepine, C. Vieu, L. Nicu and G. Larrieu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1268–1273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, H. Xu, S. Wu, X. Li, J. Yu, C. Huang, Z. Zhang, H. Sun, L. Han, M. Li, A. Cao, Z. Pan and Y. Li, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 758–766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Jie, Y. Sun, S. G. Jeon, X. Zhang, G. Dai, C. J. Lee and X. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1604261 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sheath and M. Majumder, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2016, 374, 1604261 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Cadusch, C. Kinnear, T. James, A. Roberts and P. Mulvaney, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7529–7537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Engel, D. B. Farmer, J. T. Azpiroz, J. T. Seo, J. Kang, P. Avouris, M. C. Hersam, R. Krupke and M. Steiner, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4095 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, S. M. Jin, J. Xu, R. Liang, K. Shezad, Z. Xue, X. Xie, E. Lee and J. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4954–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Ş. Ţălu, S. Solaymani, M. Bramowicz, S. Kulesza, A. Ghaderi, S. Shahpouri and S. M. Elahi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 9272–9277 CrossRef .
S. Kaur, G. Murali, R. Manda, Y. C. Chae, M. Yun, J. H. Lee and S. H. Lee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800235 CrossRef .
T. Wang, J. Lu, L. Mao and Z. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 515, 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong and N. Wu, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 5769–5776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ramnani, N. M. Saucedo and A. Mulchandani, Chemosphere, 2016, 143, 85–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ariga, Y. Yamauchi, T. Mori and J. P. Hill, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6477–6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Black, J. Roberts, M. Acebron, R. Bernardo-Gavito, G. Alsharif, F. J. Urbanos, B. H. Juarez, O. V. Kolosov, B. J. Robinson, R. Miranda, A. L. Vazquez de Parga, D. Granados and R. J. Young, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6805–6809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishida, Y. Tachikiri, T. Sako, Y. Takahashi and S. Yamada, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 404, 350–356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, H. Cao, D. Yang, L. Zhang, L. Jiang and M. Liu, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 13065–13072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Hao, X. Liao, X. Pan, S. Li, L. Xu and L. Mai, Small, 2019, 15, e1902141 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Xu, W. R. Walker, C. M. Tittle, C. J. Backhouse and M. A. Pope, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11275–11287 RSC .
L. Xu, A. R. Tetreault, H. H. Khaligh, I. A. Goldthorpe, S. D. Wettig and M. A. Pope, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 51–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Jun, J. W. Seo, J. O. Sang and J. Cheon, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1766–1775 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Hasan, S. Maity, A. Sarkar, C. T. Bhunia, D. Acharjee and A. M. Joseph, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 46, 1–8 Search PubMed .
D. Koziej, A. Lauria and M. Niederberger, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 235–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, Y. Ju, P. Payamyar, D. Primc, J. Rao, C. Willa, D. Koziej and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 340–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shendage, V. L. Patil, S. A. Vanalakar, S. P. Patil, N. S. Harale, J. L. Bhosale, J. H. Kim and P. S. Patil, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Q. Shi, S. Jin, Y. Shao and J. Huang, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ying, P. Xu, X. Li, R. Yuan and Y. Deng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 267, 83–92 CrossRef .
A. S. M. Uddin, U. Yaqoob, K. Hassan and G. S. Chung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 15399–15410 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kathiravan, B. R. Huang and A. Saravanan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12064–12072 CrossRef CAS .
R. Atkinson, Atmos. Environ., 2000, 34, 2063–2101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Suzi, T. Verawati, F. H. Ming, T. H. Ru, D. C. Sayle, O. Malini, M. Subodh, W. Jun and H. S. Chorng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4905–4917 CrossRef .
M. V. Gorshkov, A. S. Moskalenko and M. V. Shcherbak, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1989, 030008 CrossRef .
R. Kumar, P. K. Kulriya, M. Mishra, F. Singh, G. Gupta and M. Kumar, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 464001 CrossRef PubMed .
X. f. Yu, Y. C. Li, J. B. Cheng, Z. B. Liu, Q. Z. Li, W. Z. Li, X. Yang and B. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13707–13713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. M. Licyayo, A. Suzuki and M. Matsumoto, Mycoscience, 2007, 48, 20–28 CrossRef .
F. Shao, J. D. Fan, F. Hernández-Ramírez, C. Fàbrega, T. Andreu, A. Cabot, J. D. Prades, N. López, F. Udrea, A. De Luca, S. Z. Ali and J. R. Morante, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 226, 110–117 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. K. Achary, A. Kumar, B. Barik, P. S. Nayak, N. Tripathy, J. P. Kar and P. Dash, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 272, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, M. Morita, K. Takemura and E. Y. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 102, 425–431 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zou, H. Zhou, T. V. Tan, J. Kim, K. Koh and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12168–12175 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, X. Yan, Y. Gu, Z. Kang, Z. Bai, S. Cao, Y. Liu, X. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Bronstein, L. Li, L. Xu, Y. Yao, V. E. Ferry, A. P. Alivisatos and R. G. Nuzzo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 44–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Chang, R. R. Lunt, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 994–999 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Nayak, S. Mahesh, H. J. Snaith and D. Cahen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 269–285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, K. T. Lee, X. Sheng, N. A. Batara, N. Hong, J. He, L. Xu, M. M. Hussain, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis, R. G. Nuzzo and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601992 CrossRef .
C.-C. Zhang, Z.-K. Wang, M. Li, Z.-Y. Liu, J.-E. Yang, Y.-G. Yang, X.-Y. Gao and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1161–1170 RSC .
S. K. Behura, C. Wang, Y. Wen and V. Berry, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 312–318 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vijayan, K. Swathi and K. S. Narayan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19436–19445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, J. Cho, H. Jhon, J. Jeon, M. Kang, C. E. Park, J. Lee and T. K. An, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 205304 CrossRef PubMed .
E. V. Agina, A. A. Mannanov, A. S. Sizov, O. Vechter, O. V. Borshchev, A. V. Bakirov, M. A. Shcherbina, S. N. Chvalun, V. G. Konstantinov, V. V. Bruevich, O. V. Kozlov, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Y. Paraschuk and S. A. Ponomarenko, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18078–18086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kaur, S. Yadav, A. K. Srivastava, N. Singh, J. J. Schneider, O. P. Sinha, V. V. Agrawal and R. Srivastava, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 34095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Luo, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 113–117 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  An illustration of nanomaterials categorized according to size.	 

 	Fig. 2  The illustration of TD and BU fabrication. Nanoimprint lithography, electron beam lithography, and self-assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. Helium ion beam. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature. Site-selective growth. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2009 Springer Nature. Plasma enhanced CVD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59 Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

Bubble blown assembly	shear force	(1) Bubble size	(1) Te nanowires and carbon nanotubes	Assembled both in rigid and flexible substrates	Poor control of the density of nanomaterials, dimension limitation (0D)
(2) Duration of the bubble	(2) Reduced oxide graphene
(3) Cu nanoblocks
Capillary-force-assisted assembly	Capillary force	(1) Temperature control	(1) Au and Ag nanoparticles, perovskite quantum dots, and nanospheres	Nanomaterials guided into a special location	Nonreusable template, dimension limitation of LBIA (2D)
(2) Motion speed	(2) Nanorods, Si nanowires, InAs nanowires, and Ag nanowires
Electric-field-assisted assembly	Electric field force	(1) Electric field intensity	(1) CdSe/CdS quantum dots and Au nanoparticles	Assembled without dimension limitations, high stability	Contaminated with extra electrodes
(2) Duration of the electric field	(2) Carbon nanotubes and Cu nanowires
(3) Density of nanomaterials	(3) Graphene
Langmuir–Blodgett assembly	Surface tension	(1) Compression	(1) Quantum dots	Simple, but powerful method for the formation of nanodimensional ultrathin films	Surfactants added, nanomaterials are assembled randomly
(2) The stability of nanomaterials	(2) Organic nanowires
(3) Dipping speed	(3) MoS2 and graphite oxide

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of the steps in the bubble blown assembly method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The assembly of nanomaterials using the bubble blown assembly method. (a) Illustration of various configurations obtained using this assembly method; photos of a PMMA bubble and Te nanowires transferred to a plastic sheet are shown. (a) Illustration of various configurations obtained in this assembly method, photo of a PMMA bubble, and Te nanowires transferred to a plastic sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Illustration of direct fabrication of MWCNTs networks and MWCNT-graphene hybrid films. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) Illustration of the assembly of MWCNT or MWCNT-Pt networks, an optical image of the 8-layer stacked MWCNT arrays embedded in PMMA matrix and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Photo of a water bubble and a bubble film with assembled GO sheets transferred to a Si wafer, Cu foil before and after annealing, and a hybrid film annealed on a Cu foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) Illustration of the process including bubble assembly and thermal annealing growth of GNT@CuNB sausages and SEM images of the sausage-like GNT@CuNB nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of the principles of capillary force-assisted assembly (dimensions are not to scale). (a) The mechanism of assembly induced by the motion of the meniscus and templates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The mechanism of the LBLA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  The assembly of nanomaterials using LBIA. (a) Perovskite quantum dots are located within precise positions at the corners between microgroove sidewalls and the supporting substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Preparation of oriented Ag/polymer nanowire arrays and SEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic diagram of the process patterning the nano-crystals, and microphotographs of various nano-crystal arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  The fabrication of nanomaterials using capillary-force-assisted assembly (induced by the motion of the meniscus). (a) Examples of two-dimensional patterns of Au nanoparticles and nanorods fabricated through topographically templated capillary assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (b) 3D view of the assembly setup at wafer scale that couples capillary assembly with external field and the schematic cross-sectional view of the liquid meniscus (triple line) at the evaporation front on the buried electrodes(the first row), comparing the capture yield of DEP alone and coupled with convective assembly, large-scale assembly of single NWs shown by tilted SEM images and SEM views of NWFETs made on aligned NWs of Si with PtSi contacts and InAs with NiInAs S/D contacts – reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (c) SEM images of RGO membranes manufactured by vacuum filtration and CAS (four figures on the left), pure water flux variation with pressure, and the rejection character for three organic dyes for CAS and vacuum filtration membranes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2016 the Royal Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Illustration of the principles of electric-field-assisted assembly.	 

 	Fig. 9  The fabrication of nanomaterials using electric-field-assisted assembly. (a) Electric-field-assisted placement of nanomaterials from solutions with patterned graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (b) SEM false-color image of a CdSeS/ZnS quantum dot assembly. (b) SEM false-color image of a CdSeS/ZnS quantum dot assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (c) Schematic of the electrophoretic deposition process of nanospheres and large area assembly of single gold nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of confined assembly of polymer-tethered Au nanorods (AuNRs) with the assistance of electric field and TEM images of AuNRs assemblies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (e) Alignment of SWCNTs on the graphene-based, electric-field-assisted placement method – reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018 Springer Nature. (f) SEM images of NWs grown on different substrates and direction of the electric field. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustration of basic procedures of LB assembly. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  The fabrication of nanomaterials using LB assembly. (a) Top panel: Graphene-sheet-transfer process, showing the components of the material and the structure of the assembled heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the assembling processes of MnO2 nanowires and SEM images (the top). Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. The well-aligned organic nanotube films were constructed by Langmuir–Blodgett film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph of a stable MoS2 thin film floating on the water surface by the LB method – reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017 the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Barrier-free deposition and continuous film coating of thermally exfoliated graphite oxide (TEGO) – reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of a gas sensor based on nanomaterials. (a) and (d) The assembly of W18O49 nanowires and the sensitivity to H2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (b) and (e) are the assembly of WO3 and the results of selectivity to NO2, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) and (f) are the structure of the NH3 gas sensor fabricated with organic nanotubes and the results of sensitivity to NH3, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Illustration of the biosensor applications of nanomaterials. (a) The process of assembling nanomaterials, the fabrication of the DNA probe, and the electrical signal obtained when monitoring the target DNA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (b) The process of fabrication of the biosensor. Principles of dual-mode detection and the results of detection. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of photovoltaic solar cells fabricated from nanomaterials. (a) The performance of nanoporous coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016 John Wiley and Sons. (b) The structure of solar cells manufactured by MWCNTs decorated with Pt nanoparticles and its performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (c) The schematic diagram of the change of MA+ and inorganic octahedral cages before and after EEF assisted treatment and the representative J–V curves – reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018 the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic of a graphene-on-semiconductor (Si) heterojunction photovoltaic cell. Top panel: Top view of the heterojunction. Bottom panel: Side view of the heterojunction (left panel) and charge-carrier transport across the surface junction (right panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 16  The illustration of field-effect transistors and photodetectors fabricated by nanomaterials. (a) The schematic diagram of the photodetector assembled by the LB method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (b) Field effect transistor with LB assembled phosphorene as a conducting channel material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. (c) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for the assembly of Alq3 microcrystals through the capillary-assisted coupled with electric field method, I–V curves of the Alq3 nanorod and temporal responses of the devices based on Alq3 nanorods. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematic illustrated that reagent-free electrophoretic assembled ZnO/rGO film and current–time curves of ZnO/rGO film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
