Akin solid–solid biphasic conversion of a Li–S battery achieved by coordinated carbonate electrolytes   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA02877C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA02877C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 12498-12506Akin solid–solid biphasic conversion of a Li–S battery achieved by coordinated carbonate electrolytes†

        
          
            Feifei 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lujie 
            Gao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yiping 
            Zou
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guoqiang 
            Ma
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Junjie 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shiqing 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            ZhuXin 
            Li
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xiao 
            Liang
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, 310018, P. R. China. E-mail: maguoqiang@sinochem.com
bState Key Laboratory of Chem/Bio-Sensing and Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: xliang@hnu.edu.cn
Received 
      16th March 2019
    , Accepted 23rd April 2019First published on 24th April 2019AbstractLithium–sulfur batteries are of significant interest because their theoretical energy density exceeds that of Li-ion batteries and they can be fabricated at much lower costs. Although significant efforts have been devoted towards improving sulfur electrodes, the battery requires a “flooded” electrolyte for the dissolution–precipitation chemistry to achieve acceptable energy efficiency (the electrolyte/sulfur ratio, E/S ratio, is typically much higher than 5:1 μl mg−1). Herein, we report a complex electrolyte of LiTFSI salt with widely used carbonate solvents (EC and DEC) other than ether (DOL and DME) for use in Li–S batteries based on S8 as the active material. By tuning the electrolyte coordination structure, we demonstrated that the sulfur speciation pathway was fundamentally altered from the conventional dissolution–precipitation category to an akin solid–solid biphasic conversion, leading to low E/S ratios and no shuttle effect. Furthermore, the reduced reactivity of the fully coordinated solvents mitigates Li dendritic formation and related electrolyte consumption. These combined merits allow us to demonstrate that a S8/Ketjenblack electrode can achieve a capacity close to theoretical capacity (1600 mA h g−1) and high coulombic efficiency (above 99%) with a stable cycling performance at an ultralow electrolyte/sulfur ratio (1.5:1 μl mg−1); hence, our study defines a new pathway towards the fabrication of highly robust Li–S batteries for high-density energy storage.
A clean energy revolution involving the exploration of wind and solar energies and the development of electric vehicles has been recently pursued globally. Effective integration of renewable energy sources and their applications necessitates cost-effective energy storage devices having high energy density and longer cycling life.1,2 The current Li-ion battery technology based on intercalation chemistry has met with formidable success in mobile power supply industry, but does not meet the high energy and power requirements for large-scale applications.3 Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries represent a system with high theoretical energy density that can be produced at lower costs, which have been widely studied in the past two decades.4–6 The fundamental obstacle impeding the applications of this high energy system originates from the multistep conversion chemistry with a wide variety of oxidation states during charge/discharge. The polysulfide intermediates (Li2Sn, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8) – readily dissolvable in polar organic solvents commonly used in electrolytes (such as ethers) – create a redox “shuttle” in the cell that leads to poor coulombic efficiency and loss of active material from the sulfur electrode.4,5 Various strategies, including physical confinement using highly porous carbons,7,8 chemical restrictions by metal oxides/carbides/sulfides,9–11 decorated carbons,12,13 and MXenes,14 have been employed to address this polysulfide shuttle by trapping polysulfides within the cathode structure. These approaches have shortened the gap between theoretical and practical aspects involving Li–S batteries.15
However, the research community has gradually realized that the physi-/chemisorption approaches involving such polysulfides can only partially alleviate the shuttling effect because of the relatively low fraction of electrochemically inert host material in the electrode.16,17 The state-of-the art Li–S batteries are usually operated in the catholyte mode (dissolution–precipitation) with fully dissolved polysulfide in a large amount of electrolyte (typically 1 M lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) in 1,2-dimethoxy ethane (DME) and 1,3-dioxolane (DOL)). To ensure fast redox kinetics, an electrolyte/sulfur ratio (E/S) of higher than 5 μl mg−1 is necessitated for this conventional electrolyte, particularly for higher sulfur loading cases.18,19 Inevitably, the volumetric energy density of Li–S batteries is sacrificed, which is a critical, but less recognized, challenge related to the performance at low E/S ratios.20,21 It is predicted that an E/S ratio between 1.3 and 1.9 μl mg−1 is desirable for Li–S batteries in the marketplace.22 Moreover, the highly active solvents accelerate reactions with Li metal, which, in turn, result in the depletion of electrolyte and Li metal anodes – more pronounced at lower E/S ratios, leading to faster degradation.23 In this respect, long-term cycling of Li/S cells at lower E/S ratios requires a fundamental shift in the electrolyte from fully solvating polysulfides to sparingly solvating or even non-solvating polysulfides.20
The design principle of such an electrolyte system is driving the solution into a solvate regime, where the entire solvent coordinates to the Li salt (i.e., LiTFSI), leaving nothing left to coordinate with the polysulfide molecules.22 Meanwhile, the reactivity toward Li could be considerably suppressed by the reduced activity of the coordinated solvent.24,25 Only a few reports have recently emerged; however, they have shown promising performance improvements for Li–S batteries. These electrolyte complexes have been reported to have higher concentrations of LiTFSI in polar solvents, such as DME,26 G2,27 and ACN,28 demonstrating marginal polysulfide solubility. Although they are normally accompanied with high viscosity, the assistance of less viscous and non-solvating diluents (hydrofluorinated ether (HFE) or hexafluoroisopropyl methyl ether (HFME)), which are too fluorinated to participate in Li+ ion solvation, could maintain the non-solvating merits of polysulfides along with improving the performance by lowering the electrolyte viscosity.28,29 Blending a nonpolar sulfonamide solvent (polysulfide nonsolvent) and a low ion-pairing salt represents another avenue to inhibit polysulfide dissolution, exhibiting enhanced performance.30 In particular, solid electrolytes neither dissolve polysulfides nor generate polysulfides, promising a stable cycling performance in Li–S batteries, although they suffer from relatively low conductivity and interfacial stability.5,31,32 Such systems that sparingly solvate and non-solvate polysulfide electrolyte systems offer promising potential to fabricate Li–S batteries that are competitive to Li-ion technology with respect to energy densities (i.e., volumetric); however, no one has achieved a real lean electrolyte condition with E/S ratio between 1.3 and 1.9 μl mg−1 so far.
Here, we aimed to design an electrolyte for Li–S batteries with low E/S ratios; we reported a complex of LiTFSI salt with a widely used carbonate solvent (namely, ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC)). We demonstrated that by increasing the LiTFSI concentration, the tunable coordination structure led to a transition of the electrolyte complex from a polysulfide-soluble and polysulfide-reactive system to a polysulfide-nonsolvent system with a considerably enhanced chemically stable system. While the concentrated electrolyte exhibited a polysulfide non-solvating characteristic, the minimum dissolved polysulfides reacted with the limited accessible carbonate at the beginning of the first cycle, forming a robust SEI layer on the sulfur electrode. This SEI layer not only impedes polysulfides dissolution in the subsequent cycles, but also alters the sulfur speciation pathway from the conventional dissolution–precipitation category to become more akin to solid–solid biphasic conversion. This represents the essential distinction to the aforementioned concentrated electrolyte; the latter inevitably takes the responsibility of solvating polysulfides. At the same time, the dendritic formation of Li anode and the related electrolyte consumption are tackled due to the considerably reduced solvent reactivity, further paving the way for achieving Li–S batteries with lower E/S ratios. With the concentrated electrolyte, we demonstrate a capacity close to the theoretical capacity with stable cycling performance by using a simple S/Ketjenblack (KB) electrode without optimization, even at an E/S ratio of as low as 1.5:1 μl mg−1.
Properties of carbonate electrolytes
The merit of using a high LiTFSI concentration is the tunability of solvation of the carbonate in the electrolyte. We studied the electrolyte structure with varied LiTFSI concentrations, ranging from 1 to 6 M LiTFSI per liter of EC/DEC (denoted as x M carbonate; x = 1–6). Fig. 1a shows the Raman spectroscopy of the solution. Free DEC and EC molecules exhibit stretching vibration bands at 892.9 and 716.1 cm−1, respectively. These bands systematically shift up to 905.8 and 729.2 cm−1, respectively, with the introduction of LiTFSI salt.33 The solvent molecule coordinates with the dissociated Li+ ion to form a “solvation sheath,” thereby exhibiting a higher wavenumber.29,34 While the solvent-to-salt molar ratio (10:1) is much higher than the typical coordination number of a solvated Li+ ion (i.e., 4), 34 free carbonates are still observed in the dilute electrolyte (i.e., ≤4 M). However, it is absent in the concentrated electrolyte (i.e., ≥5 M), indicating the full coordination of the carbonate molecules. The Raman band of the TFSI− anion shifts up to a higher wavenumber from the free state (742.4 cm−1) with an increase in the LiTFSI concentration, further illustrating stronger coordination with Li+. As these strongly coordinated TFSI− anions further pack the solvation sheath, we expect reduced solvent reactivity toward Li metal and polysulfide species for the electrolyte with high LiTFSI concentrations.
 Fig. 1  Physicochemical investigation of the carbonate electrolyte. (a) Raman spectra of the electrolytes showing the coordination structure. (b) TGA curves of the electrolyte in a nitrogen atmosphere (5 °C min−1). (c) Conductivity and viscosity of the carbonate electrolytes at 20 °C. 
The extensive solvent coordination in the concentrated electrolytes has a dramatic influence on the volatility, as revealed by the TGA curves shown in Fig. 1b. The ether-based electrolyte begins to lose mass at 25 °C, confirming its high volatility. While the 1 M carbonate electrolyte shows less volatility as compared to the ether electrolyte, it can be further enhanced by adding more LiTFSI salt. The mass loss of the 6 M carbonate is negligible even at 100 °C. The Li-coordinated carbonates clearly show much higher evaporation temperature over the pure solvent, as marked by the dashed lines shown in Fig. 1b. The low solvent volatility, in turn, leads to considerably suppressed flammability under ignition as compared to the diluted electrolyte (Fig. S1†). This indicates favorable thermal stability of the electrolyte at high LiTFSI concentrations.24,25
The pronounced coordination of the concentrated electrolyte also results in high viscosity, which is the main parameter that governs the ionic conductivity.24,33 The conductivity reaches the maximum for the 2 M electrolyte and then decreases (Fig. 1c), owing to the increased viscosity and decreased Li+ ion mobility at high LiTFSI concentrations.24 The 6 M electrolyte has viscosity of 114 mPa s and ionic conductivity of 2.54 mS cm−1, which is comparable to Li-salt-based nonaqueous solutions24,33 and the “salt-in-water” hydrate electrolytes.35,36 The viscosity decreases to 12 mPa s by using HFME as the diluent (Fig. S2†). Due to the strong electron-withdrawing effect of F atoms around the O atoms, HFME cannot participate in ion solvation;29 therefore, the electrolyte coordination structure is maintained (Fig. S3†). Accordingly, the ionic conductivity of the HFME–6 M carbonate increases to 3.82 mS cm−1, guaranteeing reasonable ion transference. Moreover, the HFME additive also promotes wettability with the separator, as indicated by the considerably smaller contact angle (Fig. S4†).
One challenge to use the carbonate electrolyte for Li–S batteries is its reactivity with polysulfides. It has been well established that polysulfides react with carbonate solvents via a nucleophilic addition or substitution reaction, leading to extensive degradation of the electrolyte.37,38 Therefore, the S8 electrode cannot work in conventional dilute carbonate electrolytes (i.e., 1 M LiPF6 in carbonate electrolyte), despite of the various inherent advantages.34,39 The strategy of embedding small sulfur molecules (Sn, n ≤ 4) in the microspores is an exception, where the formation of high-order polysulfides can be avoided; therefore, a dilute electrolyte can be used.40 However, it suffers from low sulfur ratio in the electrode, deviating from the high-energy-density basis. Li2S8 was used as the reprehensive high-order polysulfide to investigate the chemical stability of our carbonate electrolytes. Fig. 2a shows the photograph of the mixture of Li2S8 in the carbonate electrolytes. Brown-colored Li2S8 immediately changed into a white powder upon mixing with the dilute electrolyte, indicating a fast reaction with the carbonate. The supernatants were characterized by NMR spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 2b. Both ethylene glycol and thiocarbonate are clearly formed when the LiTFSI concentration is less than 4 M. In contrast, the chemical stability of the concentrated electrolyte is considerably enhanced against polysulfides, with the presence of only trace impurities. The stability was further proven by gas chromatography (GC) analysis of the supernatant (Fig. 2c). This demonstrates the formation of ethanol in the dilute electrolyte, which is negligible in the concentrated electrolyte. The unique chemical stability of the concentrated electrolyte lies in the fact that all the carbonate molecules participate with Li+ ion coordination; therefore, “free” carbonates barely exist, as discussed above.25,33 The strong Li–O coordination shields the electrophonic carbon present on the carbonate, thereby further protecting it from nucleophilic attack. It should be noted that the reaction is not completely eliminated, which will be discussed in the next section (related to SEI formation on sulfur electrodes).
 Fig. 2  Solubility and chemical stability of polysulfides in carbonate electrolytes. (a) Images show the mixtures of Li2S8 with various electrolytes. (b) NMR analysis of the supernatants. High-resolution spectra (inset) show the NMR analysis of 5 M and 6 M carbonates, as marked by the squares. (c) Gas chromatography (GC) of the supernatant. (d) UV-vis test of the electrolytes recovered from the 10-cycled Li–S batteries. 
While the enhanced chemical stability toward LiPS species guarantees a stable environment for cell operation, designing an electrolyte for long-life Li–S batteries relies on polysulfide solubility. We conducted the UV-vis analysis involving the electrolyte after cycling to investigate polysulfide solubility. Due to the high solubility in ethers, the UV-vis curve clearly shows LiPS adsorption for cells using the DOL–DME electrolyte (Fig. 2d).26,37 However, no adsorption peak is observed for the 6 M electrolyte, indicating no generation of polysulfides or negligible polysulfide solubility in the concentrated electrolyte. It is similar to other electrolyte complexes with high Li salt concentration, where all the solvents are coordinated to the Li salt, leaving none for polysulfide solvation, thereby engendering a nonsolvent behavior.27,28
Sulfur electrochemistry in carbonate electrolytes
The sulfur electrochemistry in these electrolytes was investigated by galvanostatic charge/discharge using a simple S/KB mixture (see Experimental†). For the “reference” cell containing DOL–DME electrolyte, it exhibits a typical catholyte-type discharge profile with two plateaus (Fig. S5†).6 The “dissolution–precipitation” process (solid–solution followed by solution–solid conversion) is effectively reflected in a two-step voltage profile. In contrast, the discharge profiles in the carbonate electrolytes are vastly different from a catholyte process (Fig. 3a–f). Thermodynamically, the only visible plateau (2.3 V) during discharge in 1 M carbonate represents the equilibrium between sulfur and high-order Li2Sx (6 ≤ x ≤ 8).38,41 It delivers a capacity of about 200 mA h g−1 by this plateau (Fig. 3a), which is perfectly equivalent to the conversion from S8 to Li2S8. However, the cell completely failed after the first discharge. It is understood that the rapid reaction with carbonate molecules leads to the fast decomposition of Li2S8 once formed, and therefore, cell failure.38,39 This plateau shortens with increased LiTFSI concentrations, and it transits into having a bi-plateau characteristic with another plateau at 1.75 V (Fig. 3a–f), which can be attributed to the suppressed parasitic reaction between the polysulfides and carbonate by the coordination structure – the chemical stability of the electrolyte is enhanced. Therefore, the sulfur chemistry could proceed to form Li2S at a higher LiTFSI concentration. Accordingly, the cells exhibit a transition from non-rechargeable to rechargeable feature with increasing LiTFSI concentrations.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical properties of the carbonate electrolyte in Li–S battery at 0.1C (1C = 1675 mA g−1). (a–f) Voltage profiles show the first three cycles with different electrolytes: (a) 1 M, (b) 2 M, (c) 3 M, (d) 4 M, (e) 5 M, and (f) 6 M. (g) Galvanostatic intermittent titration (GITT) voltage profiles in 6 M carbonate; the equilibrium voltage is shown as the dark-yellow line. (h) Pictures of the electrodes partially discharged in 6 M carbonate and then extracted with tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME). (i) Different cutoff voltages to determine the reversibility of cells in 6 M carbonate; the discharge curves represent the corresponding second discharge processes, except for the one marked in black. 
The first discharge profiles of the concentrated electrolytes (concentration ≥ 4 M) are basically identical, with one tiny slope beginning from 2.25 V followed by a plateau at 1.75 V. This initial electrochemical signature is similar to these electrolytes with limited polysulfide solubility, which is described as polysulfide formation.26–28 In general, this slope contributes to a capacity of about 50 mA h g−1, independent of the LiTFSI concentration (Fig. 3d–f). We carefully cycled the cell at different rates to exclude the dynamic contribution (Fig. S6†), yielding identical capacities for this process. However, this sloping process is irreversible; it disappears in the subsequent cycles showing solely one discharge plateau at 1.75 V. The significant difference in the voltage profiles in the concentrated electrolyte indicates a different sulfur speciation pathway from a typical catholyte mode. In particular, the only discharge plateau at 1.75 V from the second cycle is fairly similar to an all-solid-state Li–S cell, implying a process akin to solid–solid biphasic conversion (S8 to Li2S) in the concentrated electrolyte.42 To confirm that this one-plateau profile (including the resting 1.75 V plateau during the first cycle) in the 6 M carbonate electrolyte is dominated by thermodynamics, we conducted galvanostatic intermittent titration (GITT) studies, as shown in Fig. 3g. Here, constant current was delivered in short pulses, and the system was allowed to relax to equilibrium (see Experimental†). The distinct two-plateau profiles at the electrochemical equilibration in the DOL–DME electrolyte can clearly characterize the dissolution–precipitation process for sulfur reduction (Fig. S7†). On the contrary, the flat profile of the 6 M electrolyte is reminiscent of one-step conversion, akin to that in all-solid-state batteries.
To confirm that polysulfides are not involved in the 1.75 V discharge process, a simple colorimetric experiment is reported, as shown in Fig. 3h. Sulfur electrodes that were partially discharged were recovered and soaked in tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME). The TEGDME solution immediately exhibited a color upon polysulfide extraction when the sulfur electrode was cycled in the DOL–DME electrolyte (Fig. S8†), whereas it maintained a colorless form for the electrode that was operated using the 6 M electrolyte. Since polysulfides exhibit distinct colors in the TEGDME solution, we simply ascribe this to the absence of polysulfides in the 6 M electrolyte. The separators recovered from the partially discharged cells do not change in color, which is contrary to the yellow separators that were used in the DOL–DME electrolyte, again implying no polysulfide formation (Fig. S9†). These visual tests indicate a process akin to solid–solid biphasic conversion of S8 into Li2S, distinguishing from these nonsolvent systems such as glyme-LiTFSI ionic liquid and ACN-LiTFSI blends that provide LiPS formation, although in a somewhat limited solubility and mobility.24,25 X-ray diffraction patterns were collected from electrodes at different depths of discharge to determine the phase transformation, as shown in Fig. S10.† While Li2S only starts to precipitate at the second plateau in the ether electrolytes in the typical catholyte mode, the nucleation of Li2S at the beginning of the discharge in our concentrated carbonate indicates that the sulfur speciation has changed. The one-step solid–solid conversion at 1.75 V is further supported by the ex situ XPS analysis. Fig. 4g shows the S2p XPS spectrum of the partially discharged electrode. At 200 mA h g−1, the partially discharged electrode in the 6 M electrolyte only shows the signature of S8 and Li2S.14 Although earlier nucleation of Li2S has been reported in electrolytes with high salt contents,28 the absence of polysulfides again renders the biphasic electrochemistry in our concentrated electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  Characteristic of the SEI layer on sulfur electrode. Voltage profiles of the reassembled cell with (a) 1 M carbonate and (b) 1 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME; electrodes were recovered from the 6 M carbonate. (c) Cycling performance of the reassembled cell in 1 M carbonate. (d–f) SEM images of the sulfur electrode from the 10-cycled battery in (d) pristine sulfur electrode, (e) 1 M carbonate, and (f) 6 M carbonate. (g, h) XPS analysis of the sulfur electrode in 6 M carbonate was partially discharged at 200 mA h g−1 capacity (upper) and after 10 cycles (below). (g) S 2p spectrum and (h) F 1s spectrum. 
The transition of sulfur chemistry after the tiny “slope” feature in a concentrated electrolyte is correlated to the SEI formation on sulfur active materials, which blocks electrolyte penetration. This is elucidated by reassembling the cycled sulfur electrode in the diluted electrolyte, including the conventional DOL–DME electrolyte and 1 M carbonate. Sulfur electrodes were recovered from cells with 6 M carbonate after the first cycle. The reassembled Li–S battery in 1 M carbonate shows similar voltage profiles to those in the 6 M carbonate, namely, one plateau at about 1.75 V (Fig. 4a). This distinguishes it from the non-rechargeable feature of a fresh sulfur electrode in 1 M carbonate electrolyte (Fig. 3a), implying the robustness of the SEI formed in the concentrated electrolyte. The reassembled cell in the DOL–DME electrolyte shows a one-plateau profile for the first cycle, but it transits to a typical bi-plateau characteristic for the subsequent cycles, indicating the incompatibility of the SEI layer with the ether electrolyte (Fig. 4b). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the sulfur cathode after SEI formation show a dramatic morphological difference than that of the pristine electrode (Fig. 4d–f and S11a–d†). A smooth layer of protective film covers the S/KB cathodes in the 6 M carbonate electrolyte. In sharp contrast, heavy condensed precipitation that hides the S/KB composite is observed in the 1 M carbonate (Fig. 4f, S11e and f†). XPS analysis confirms the composition of the SEI layer, as shown in Fig. 4g. The S 2p spectrum clearly shows two pairs of spin orbits at 168.1 and 162 eV, which are assigned to the OC–S bond and sulfur chain of thiocarbonates, respectively (Fig. 4g, upper).43 We speculate that the polysulfide formed during the “slope” process reacts with the coordinated carbonate, leading to the accommodation of thiocarbonates on the sulfur cathode. The XPS spectrum of the sulfur electrode after 10 cycles shows a similar surface species (Fig. 4g, below), implying the thiocarbonate is long-term stable. LiF is also observed, as revealed by the F 1s spectrum (Fig. 4h), which can be attributed to the decomposition of the TFSI− anion. The SEI layer blocks polysulfide dissolution and controls the thickness of the SEI layer in a mild mode due to the reduced solvent activity, which, in turn, endows self-healing functions to the SEI during cell operation. However, the fast dissolution and reaction of polysulfides in the dilute electrolyte consumes both components, resulting in progressive degradation.
Further, we evaluated the concentrated LiPF6 carbonate (4 M, due to solubility limits) as a control battery (Fig. S12†). This shows similar voltage profiles to those of the concentrated LiTFSI carbonate, but with a much longer SEI formation process (180 vs. 50 mA h g−1 in LiTFSI carbonates). This may due to the fact that PF6− anions only form monodentate coordination with Li+ cation, but TFSI− anion exhibits both mono- and bidentate coordination formations. Therefore, LiTFSI salt has a higher Li+ solvation number,44 providing a more stable chemical environment for the concentrated LiTFSI carbonate toward polysulfide species. Moreover, the SEI formation in the concentrated LiPF6 carbonate is continuous during the entire cycle life, as demonstrated by the appearance of the “tiny slope” at the beginning of each discharge process. This is different from the concentrated LiTFSI carbonate, where this only occurs during the first discharge, leading to much poor cycling performance for concentrated LiPF6 carbonates.
Cycling performances of Li–S batteries
The electrolyte formula proposed by us has the advantages of polysulfides non-solvation and reduced activity at higher concentrations, which creates unique sulfur electrochemistry with a direct S8 to Li2S conversion after SEI formation at the beginning of the first discharge. Remarkably, a discharge capacity of 1590 mA h g−1, close to the theoretical capacity, could be achieved by using these concentrated electrolytes, even without cathode optimization. Capacity retention of 83% from the 2nd to the 100th cycle could be achieved with almost 100% coulombic efficiency in 6 M carbonate (Fig. S13†). In contrast, cells with a dilute electrolyte are either non-rechargeable or decay quickly. The full utilization of sulfur in these electrolytes can be attributed to the eliminated polysulfide disproportionate reactions, which is usually observed in ether electrolytes; therefore, a capacity that is much less than the theoretical capacity is achieved,37 as exemplified by the DOL–DME electrolyte (Fig. S5†). We note there is an irreversible capacity during the first cycle in the concentrated electrolyte, which exceeds the capacity required for SEI formation. Our post-mortem XPS analysis clearly shows residual Li2S in the charged sulfur electrode (3.0 V), as shown in Fig. 4g. This might be attributed to the detachment of Li2S from the electrical conductor due to volume expansion during lithiation or the formation of large Li2S crystals that require higher activation energy for oxidation. We applied a higher cutoff voltage to extend oxidation, as shown in Fig. 3i. Apparently, the reversible capacity is increased at higher cutoff voltages, i.e., 1340 mA h g−1 for 4.0 V and 1120 mA h g−1 for 3.5 V. However, the SEI starts to decompose at 4.0 V, as indicated by the reappearance of the “slope” feature at the second discharge, which is assigned to the reconstitution of the SEI layer. The high reversible capacity achieved at a higher cutoff voltage could be effectively maintained for the subsequent cycles, as exemplified by the cycling performance at 3.75 V (Fig. S14†). Our experiment furthermore highlights the importance of an integrated structure for maintaining electronic conductivity of the sulfur electrode during cycling.
Manipulating the sulfur speciation pathway to avoid polysulfide formation via our approach results in an expected increase in cell polarization (Fig. 3g and 5a). This can be understood as the slower kinetic of the biphasic conversion of S8 to Li2S. High polarization was also reported for electrolytes with limited polysulfide solubility, where Li2S nucleation occurred much earlier than that in conventional systems.28 The high viscosity of the concentrated electrolyte further aggravates ion mobility in this respect. However, this can be countered by adding HFME as a diluter, which decreases the viscosity of the complex. Accordingly, the polarization is significantly decreased, resulting in much higher discharge potential in the HFME–6 M carbonate at 0.2C (1.85 V vs. 1.75 V), as shown in Fig. 5a. The HFME–6 M electrolyte not only shows an enhanced cycling performance when using the 6 M electrolyte at 0.2C (Fig. S15†), but also significantly promotes the rate capability (Fig. 5b and S16a†). The cell only delivers a discharge capacity of 365 mA h g−1 for the second cycle at a moderate rate of 0.5C in the 6 M carbonate; however, it is increased to about 680 mA h g−1 with enhanced cycling ability over 300 cycles in the HFME–6 M electrolyte under the same conditions. At a slow rate of 0.1C, a higher capacity of 820 mA h g−1 over 300 cycles can be delivered in HFME–6 M (Fig. S16b†). We determine that the electrode architecture is particularly important for the proposed carbonate electrolyte, which relies on the structural integrity during cycling and ion–electron transport pathway for faster kinetics. Formulating alternatively optimized electrode architecture is our future goal.
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries. (a) Voltage profiles at 0.2C show the polarization is decreased by the HFME diluent. (b) Influence of HFME diluent on the cycling performance; the rate is 0.5C. (c, d) Self-discharge performances of (c) 1 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME and (d) HFME–6 M carbonate; the tip during the 6th cycle corresponds to one week of storage. (e–h) Cycling performance of Li–S batteries under different E/S ratios at the rate of 0.2C: (e, f) 1 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME and (g, h) HFME–6 M carbonate. 
Self-discharge is one of the most critical parameters for energy storage systems, determining the performance after intermittent application or storage.21 Conventional Li–S batteries with DOL–DME electrolytes are plagued by serious self-discharge issues owing to the pronounced chemical activities of soluble polysulfide species.45 By preventing the formation of polysulfides, we anticipate superior anti-self-discharge properties in our concentrated electrolyte. We quantified such self-discharge by testing the retained capacity after storage using a cycled (activated) Li–S cell at the open-circuit voltage (OCV). Indeed, the cell in the DOL–DME electrolyte shows a 30% irreversible capacity after one week of storage (Fig. 5c). In sharp contrast, the charge/discharge profiles of the concentrated electrolyte before and after the storage test are virtually identical (Fig. 5d), implying greatly suppressed self-discharge and a stable chemical environment in the cell. The zero self-discharge feature also indicates a steady interface on the surface of the Li anode, which will be discussed in the next section.
Since the catholyte nature of conventional Li–S batteries requires a “flooded” electrolyte with high E/S ratios for polysulfide dissolution to achieve an acceptable rate capability and energy efficiency, the high energy density of the cell is analyzed.31 We systematically evaluated the electrolyte volume dependence of conventional DOL–DME electrolytes and HFME–6 M carbonate electrolyte, with E/S ratios ranging from 12:1 to as low as 1.5:1 μl mg−1. Apparently, there is a pronounced capacity decay accompanied by high polarization upon a decrease in DOL–DME electrolyte content (Fig. 5e). In contrast, the 6 M-carbonate-concentrated electrolyte delivers a constant initial discharge capacity of about 1600 mA h g−1 independent of the electrolyte volume (Fig. 5f). This, again, highlights the advantage of the biphasic conversion in ensuring high sulfur utilization. A stable cycling performance could be achieved even at an ultralow E/S ratio of 1.5:1 μl mg−1 (Fig. 5h). To the best of our knowledge, this represents the lowest E/S ratio for Li–S batteries with a liquid electrolyte. We note that the DOL–DME electrolyte exhibits extraordinarily low sulfur utilization and high polarization at E/S ratios lower than 5:1 μl mg−1 (Fig. 5e and f). We also evaluated the E/S dependence of the 7 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME electrolyte as a control experiment (Fig. S17†). The E/S ratio of the concentrated ether electrolyte could not surpass the limit of 4.5:1 μl mg−1, identical to other reported polysulfides that sparingly solvate the electrolyte. Apparently, the DOL–DME electrolyte is saturated or even supersaturated with LiPS at low E/S ratios, resulting in blockage of the ion transportation path and exacerbated detrimental reactions with Li anodes. However, the concentrated electrolyte only provides ion flux for the redox reaction; its performance solely depends on the accessibility of Li+ ions to the active material. In this respect, our concentrated electrolyte shows the advantage of flow ability as compared to solid electrolytes, facilitating interfacial ion exchange.
Stability of Li anodes
Controlling the polysulfide solvation/dissolution tendency is the main challenge for Li–S batteries regarding the shuttling effect. The solid–solid conversion enabled by our concentrated electrolyte fundamentally alters the sulfur speciation pathway, which avoids the detrimental polysulfide shuttle in the Li–S batteries. Nonetheless, the stability of the Li anode is equally important for designing an advanced Li–S battery, particularly for systems with lower E/S ratios.29
The critical problem of a Li metal anode is that the detrimental reactions with the electrolyte not only give rise to corrosion but also consume the electrolyte, leading to cell “dry-out” and premature failure.46,47 The dendritic growth of Li during electrodeposition further aggravating these parasitic reactions. While it is not obvious in the cell with a large amount of electrolyte, it is crucial for Li–S batteries with low E/S ratios. Importantly, the electrolyte can considerably modify the microstructure during Li electrodeposition. It exhibits a needle-like dendrite with a width of a few hundred nanometers in the 1 M carbonate (Fig. 6a), which could easily pierce through the separator, resulting in a short-circuit.48 On the other hand, in the 6 M carbonate, a nodule-like microstructure with mellow edges is observed (Fig. 6b), implying suppressed dendritic formation. This is due to the fact that the concentrated electrolyte provides more Li+ transference number and bulk ion concentration, resulting in enhanced tolerance in ion depletion according to the space-charge model.26,49 The Li plating/stripping of the symmetric cell clearly shows flat voltage profiles in 6 M carbonate vs. the rugged curves in 1 M carbonate (Fig. 6c), further indicating smooth Li electrode position, as reported recently.50 Moreover, the cell with the 1 M electrolyte shows significant voltage fluctuations after 150 h – characteristic of dendritic formation, whereas the cell using 6 M carbonate achieves stable cycling of over 1000 h (Fig. 6d). The Li plating/striping coulombic efficiency in the Li|Cu cells facilitates the evaluation of the degree of parasitic reactions. The electrolyte with a lower LiTFSI concentration shows rapidly diminishing coulombic efficiency (Fig. 6e and S18†), implying severe consumption of Li (and electrolyte). This represents the normal trend of Li electrodeposition in the carbonate electrolyte, which is well known for its chemical incompatibility with Li metal. In contrast, the concentrated electrolyte with reduced solvent activities exhibits considerably enhanced cycling stability with an average coulombic efficiency above 99.5% for 400 cycles, demonstrating a favorable interface for electrodeposition (Fig. 6e and S18†). As a result, dendrite-related safety issues are resolved as well as electrolyte depletion is considerably suppressed; this deters electrolyte dry-out and significantly extends the cycling life of the battery.
 Fig. 6  Li electrode deposition behavior in 6 M carbonate. (a, b) SEM images of plated Li in (a) 1 M carbonate and (b) 6 M carbonate. (c) Voltage profile of Li–Li symmetric cells (1 mA cm−2, 1 h). (d) Long-term plating/stripping profile to evaluate the durability of Li–Li cells. (e) Li plating/stripping coulombic efficiency of Li|Cu cells with different electrolytes to evaluate interfacial stability (1 mA cm−2, 1 h). 
Conclusions
In summary, a fully solvated carbonate electrolyte has been introduced for Li–S cells to reduce the E/S ratio and prevent polysulfide formation. The electrolyte has considerably suppressed solvent reactivity to ensure stable cell operation. In particular, the polysulfide is (and only) formed at the beginning of the first discharge process. Its moderate reaction with the coordinated carbonate forms a SEI layer on the sulfur active materials, which transits the subsequent sulfur electrochemistry from a typical catholyte type to that akin to a solid–solid biphasic conversion. At the same time, the reduced solvent activity also mitigates Li dendritic formation and related electrolyte consumption. In contrast to the catholyte-type cell that relies on complete polysulfide solvation, these aforementioned merits collectively lead to exceptional electrochemistry under lean electrolyte operation. By using a simple S8/KB electrode in the absence of optimization, we demonstrate a discharge capacity close to the theoretical capacity in the concentrated carbonate electrolyte, even at an ultralow E/S ratio (1.5:1 μl mg−1). The excellent cycling performance with more than 99.5% Coulombic efficiency signifies the significant potential of our approach for fabricating high-energy-density Li–S batteries. However, we realize that electronic/ionic conductivity becomes more critical to promote the first cycle's reversibility in the concentrated electrolyte. Strategies for integrating the cathode with continuous electron/ion pathways upon lithiation is essentially important to bring the technology to practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Xiangfeng Duan from UCLA for the discussions during the manuscript preparation process. We thank the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities from Hunan University and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) No. 51802300 and the Innovative Research Groups of Hunan Province (Grant number 2019JJ10001).
Notes and references
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334(6058), 928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Larcher and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(23), 11751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, T. Lei, C. Wu, M. Deng, C. Gong, K. Hu, Y. Ma, L. Dai, W. Lv, W. He, X. Liu, J. Xiong and C. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702348 CrossRef .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, X.-B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1700260 CrossRef .
Z. Li, H. Bin Wua and X.-W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3061 RSC .
X. L. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Hart, Q. Pang, A. Garsuch, T. Weiss and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5682 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Cai, G. Li, K. Zhang, G. Xiao, C. Wang, K. Ye, Z. Chen, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704865 CrossRef .
Q. Pang, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 130–136 RSC .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Song, Y. Zhang and E. J. Cairns, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(12), 5891–5899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rosenman, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, A. Garsuch and F. F. Chesneau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500212 CrossRef .
J. Scheers, S. Fantini and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 204–218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, Z. Wen, R. Qian, J. Jin, Q. Wang, M. Wu and S. Zhuo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(50), 34379–34386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, M. Gu, C. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A2288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500117 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, L. A. Curtiss, K. R. Zavadil, A. A. Gewirth, Y. Shao and K. G. Gallagher, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 503–509 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705951 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Eroglu and K. G. Gallagher, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162(6), A982 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, H. Teller, Y. Cohen, G. Salitra, H. Yamin, P. Dan and E. Elster, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149(10), A1267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2406–A2423 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, J. A. Lochala, A. Kwok, Z. D. Deng and J. Xiao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 1700032 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Suo, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Pang, A. Shyamsunder, B. Narayanan, C. Y. Kwok, L. A. Curtiss and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(9), 783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cuisinier, P. E. Cabelguen, B. D. Adams, A. Garsuch, M. Balasubramanian and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2697–2705 RSC .
F. Huang, G. Ma, Z. Wen, J. Jin, S. Xu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1612 RSC .
A. Shyamsunder, W. Beichel, P. Klose, Q. Pang, H. Scherer, A. Hoffmann, G. K. Murphy, I. Krossing and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., 2017, 56, 6192–6197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, S. Gu, X. Hong, K. Rui, X. Huang, J. Jin and Z. Wen, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 16–23 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, X. Huang, Z. Song, K. Rui, Q. Wang, S. Gu and Z. Wen, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 282–290 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Yamada, K. Sodeyama, C. H. Chiang, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, K. Usui, K. Sodeyama, S. Ko, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16129 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Park, K. Yamauchi, E. Takashima, N. Tachikawa, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4431–4440 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yim, M.-S. Park, J.-S. Yu, K. J. Kim, K. Y. Im, J.-H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. N. Jo, S.-G. Woo, K. S. Kang, I. Lee and Y.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 454–460 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132–25137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xin, L. Gu, N.-H. Zhao, Y.-X. Yin, L.-J. Zhou, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18510–18513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barghamadi, A. Kapoor and C. Wen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160(8), A1256 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, N. Huang, F. Han, Q. Zhang, H. Wan, J. P. Mwizerwa, C. Wang and X. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1602923 CrossRef .
H.-s. K. Sunhyung Jurng, J. G. Lee, Ji H. Ryu and S. M. Oh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(2), A223 CrossRef .
N. Chapman, O. Borodin, T. Yoon, C. C. Nguyen and B. L. Lucht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2135–2148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yin, J. Wang, F. Lin, J. Yang and Y. Nuli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6966 RSC .
D. Aurbach and Y. Gofer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1606–1610 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, Q. Pang, I. R. Kochetkov, M. S. Sempere, H. Huang, X. Sun and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2017, 6, 17119 CrossRef .
Q. Lu, Y. B. He, Q. Yu, B. Li, Y. V. Kaneti, Y. Yao, F. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604460 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Zheng, D. Mei, K. S. Han, M. H. Engelhard, W. Zhao, W. Xu, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(21), 1706102 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Wood, E. Kazyak, A. F. Chadwick, K. H. Chen, J. G. Zhang, K. Thornton and N. P. Dasgupta, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 790–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and supplementary Fig. S1–S18. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02877cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Physicochemical investigation of the carbonate electrolyte. (a) Raman spectra of the electrolytes showing the coordination structure. (b) TGA curves of the electrolyte in a nitrogen atmosphere (5 °C min−1). (c) Conductivity and viscosity of the carbonate electrolytes at 20 °C.	 

 	Fig. 2  Solubility and chemical stability of polysulfides in carbonate electrolytes. (a) Images show the mixtures of Li2S8 with various electrolytes. (b) NMR analysis of the supernatants. High-resolution spectra (inset) show the NMR analysis of 5 M and 6 M carbonates, as marked by the squares. (c) Gas chromatography (GC) of the supernatant. (d) UV-vis test of the electrolytes recovered from the 10-cycled Li–S batteries.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical properties of the carbonate electrolyte in Li–S battery at 0.1C (1C = 1675 mA g−1). (a–f) Voltage profiles show the first three cycles with different electrolytes: (a) 1 M, (b) 2 M, (c) 3 M, (d) 4 M, (e) 5 M, and (f) 6 M. (g) Galvanostatic intermittent titration (GITT) voltage profiles in 6 M carbonate; the equilibrium voltage is shown as the dark-yellow line. (h) Pictures of the electrodes partially discharged in 6 M carbonate and then extracted with tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME). (i) Different cutoff voltages to determine the reversibility of cells in 6 M carbonate; the discharge curves represent the corresponding second discharge processes, except for the one marked in black.	 

 	Fig. 4  Characteristic of the SEI layer on sulfur electrode. Voltage profiles of the reassembled cell with (a) 1 M carbonate and (b) 1 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME; electrodes were recovered from the 6 M carbonate. (c) Cycling performance of the reassembled cell in 1 M carbonate. (d–f) SEM images of the sulfur electrode from the 10-cycled battery in (d) pristine sulfur electrode, (e) 1 M carbonate, and (f) 6 M carbonate. (g, h) XPS analysis of the sulfur electrode in 6 M carbonate was partially discharged at 200 mA h g−1 capacity (upper) and after 10 cycles (below). (g) S 2p spectrum and (h) F 1s spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries. (a) Voltage profiles at 0.2C show the polarization is decreased by the HFME diluent. (b) Influence of HFME diluent on the cycling performance; the rate is 0.5C. (c, d) Self-discharge performances of (c) 1 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME and (d) HFME–6 M carbonate; the tip during the 6th cycle corresponds to one week of storage. (e–h) Cycling performance of Li–S batteries under different E/S ratios at the rate of 0.2C: (e, f) 1 M LiTFSI in DOL–DME and (g, h) HFME–6 M carbonate.	 

 	Fig. 6  Li electrode deposition behavior in 6 M carbonate. (a, b) SEM images of plated Li in (a) 1 M carbonate and (b) 6 M carbonate. (c) Voltage profile of Li–Li symmetric cells (1 mA cm−2, 1 h). (d) Long-term plating/stripping profile to evaluate the durability of Li–Li cells. (e) Li plating/stripping coulombic efficiency of Li|Cu cells with different electrolytes to evaluate interfacial stability (1 mA cm−2, 1 h).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Experimental details and supplementary Fig. S1–S18. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta02877c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
