Prospective advances in MXene inks: screen printable sediments for flexible micro-supercapacitor applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA09334G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA09334G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4533-4557Prospective advances in MXene inks: screen printable sediments for flexible micro-supercapacitor applications

        
          
            Jalal 
            Azadmanjiri†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Thuniki Naveen 
            Reddy†
b, 
      
        
          
            Bahareh 
            Khezri
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lukáš 
            Děkanovský
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abhilash Karuthedath 
            Parameswaran
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bhupender 
            Pal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Saeed 
            Ashtiani
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shuangying 
            Wei
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zdeněk 
            Sofer
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic. E-mail: jalal_azad2000@yahoo.com; jalal.azadmanjiri@vscht.cz; zdenek.sofer@vscht.cz
bDepartment of Freshman Engineering, Geethanjali College of Engineering and Technology, Cheeryal, Keesara, Hyderabad, Telangana 501301, India
cDepartment of Physical Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic
Received 
      31st October 2021
    , Accepted 24th January 2022First published on 24th January 2022AbstractAdditive manufacturing industries have been focusing on the development of novel ink formulation strategies that can incorporate functional materials to print highly efficient electronic patterns for flexible devices. Such printed micropatterns were found to miniaturize the device components and their mechanical deformability offers wearability. In this regard, key issues like the selection of functional materials, the choice of an appropriate sediment ink, its effective formulation, and the selection of appropriate printing technology provide a rational trajectory towards the fabrication of high-performance devices. Recently, MXene based screen printable inks have been gaining attention due to their unique mechanical, electronic, and rheological properties and their printed architectures have shown potential viability as charge storage components in flexible devices. Herein, we report the recent advancements in screen printable transition metal carbide and nitride (MXene) ink formulations and their challenges for flexible micro-supercapacitor (MSC) applications. This review work focuses on (i) efficient MXene based ink formulation strategies for screen-printing applications, (ii) the strategies to improve the substrate and ink interactions, (iii) methods to address the issues like the oxidative and deformation stability of screen printed MXene MSCs, and (iv) challenges in the integration of these MXene MSCs as energy storage components in device architectures.Jalal AzadmanjiriJalal Azadmanjiri received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, followed by a postdoctoral research fellowship at the Swinburne University of Technology. Recently he succeeded in getting the CZ Marie Curie (CHEMFells IV) fellowship to work on 2D nanomaterials, and their synthesis, characterization, and applications. His research interests include nanomaterials and nanotechnology, focusing on the design, synthesis, functionalization, and characterization of nanomaterials with 0D, 1D, and 2D structures. He is also interested in the development of hybrid materials with layered nanostructures for energy storage, energy conversion, and biomedical applications, and the study of their surfaces and interfaces.Thuniki Naveen ReddyDr Naveen Reddy Thuniki has completed graduation (BSc) in Industrial Chemistry from Osmania University, post-graduation (MSc) in Analytical Chemistry from the National Institute of Technology, Warangal (NITW), and PhD from the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (CSIR-IICT), in the field of chemical sciences. Presently he is working as an assistant professor in chemistry at GCET, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.Lukáš DěkanovskýLukáš Děkanovský obtained his material chemistry diploma from the University of Chemistry and Technology Prague in 2019. In 2021, he joined Prof. Sofer's group at the University of Chemistry and Technology working on 2D materials and composites with conductive polymers. His present research is focused on the synthesis of nanocatalysts for energy conversion and energy storage devices, relevant in environmental fields.Abhilash Karuthedath ParameswaranDr Abhilash Karuthedath Parameswaran did his PhD in the field of all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, at Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. He also worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the Advanced Battery Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore. Also, he worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the NEMs Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology (NJUST), Nanjing, China. Currently, he is working as a post-doctoral researcher (CHEMFELLs IV) in the Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology (UCT), Prague. His research interests include all-solid-state batteries, nano-energy materials (NEMs), and novel 3D and 2D energy storage systems.Saeed AshtianiSaeed Ashtiani graduated in the field of Chemical Engineering-Polymer Science from the Sahand University of Technology and is currently working on novel hybrid materials for energy applications at the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague. His research focuses on the molecular level engineering, synthesis, characterization, and application of 3D/2D magnetic and conductive crystal materials incorporated into organic matrices.Zdeněk SoferProf. Zdenek Sofer has been a tenured professor at the University of Chemistry and Technology Prague since 2019. He received his PhD from the same university in 2008. During his PhD he spent one year in Forschungszentrum Jülich (Peter Grünberg Institute, Germany) and had a postdoctoral stay at University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. His research interests concern 2D materials including graphene, layered chalcogenides, and their crystal growth, chemical modifications, and derivatization. His research covers various applications of 2D materials including energy storage and conversion, electronic, catalysis, and sensing devices. He has published over 500 articles, which received over 18600 citations (h-index of 67).
1 Introduction
1.1 Overview of screen-printed electronic devices
The micro-architecture development of electronic components on flexible substrates is increasing the demand for wearable electronics.1–3 However, the key components required for the fabrication of wearable electronic devices are high-performance, flexible, and micro-sized energy-storage systems, in terms of either generating required power characteristics (i.e., high-energy-density, long cycle life, and high-rate capability) or mechanical performances (i.e., folding, bending, and twisting). Therefore, screen-printing of micro-architectures for flexible micro-sized energy-storage devices like micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) has attracted a lot of interest in recent years.2–5 The formulation of functional inks for the screen-printing of MSCs with high-performance nanomaterials in the fabrication of next-generation flexible electronic devices is necessary. In this context, conductive and semi-conductive two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials with a high surface area and unique physicochemical properties have been more focused on in the last decade as functional material inks for this purpose.6–10 2D nanomaterials (2DNMs) such as graphene,6,11 MoS2,12,13 MoSe2,9,12,14 g-C3N4,15 h-BN,16etc., are well studied as active ingredients in ink formulation for the printing of high-quality electronic devices in varieties of applications such as MSCs,2 micro-batteries (MBs),17 sensors,18 photodetectors,19 electromagnetic interference shielding,20,21 and solar cells.22 However, the involvement of costly synthetic and processing strategies, a significant amount of active component wastage, utilization of a large quantity of fillers, the poor performance of screen-printed components, and 2DNM stability issues are the major drawbacks that hinder the practical viability of these inks for the printing of such micron-sized devices on flexible substrates.
Thus, new ink formulations containing MXene sediments have recently received a lot of attention due to the MXene's excellent viscoelastic, mechanical, and conductive properties.23 Unlike the 2D carbon allotrope graphene, MXenes are found to have good rheological properties, and some of their other characteristics like negative surface zeta potential, low sheet resistance, and high mechanical strength have made us choose these MXenes as potential candidates for making micro-electronic components on flexible substrates24 (Table 1).
Table 1 Overview of the obtained diverse Ti3C2Tx inks and their performances




Ink type
MXene size
MXene concentration
Rheological properties
Zeta potential
Conductivity/resistivity
Areal capacitance
Energy density
Application
Ref.




Organic (PEDOT:PSS)
∼142 nm
30 mg mL−1

ρ = 1.067 g cm−3, γ = 55.64 mN m−1, η = 19.71 cP, Z = 1.81
−40.5 mV
615 S cm−1
22.6 mF cm−2
9.4 mW h cm−3
MSCs

25



Organic (ethanol)
2.4 μm
0.7 mg mL−1

ρ = 0.791 g cm−3, γ = 22.1 mN m−1, η = 7.3 mPa s, Z = 2.6
−40 mV
2770 S cm−1 (510 S cm−1 after 6 months)
12 mF cm−2
0.32 μW h cm−2
MSCs

26



Aqueous (water)
1.1 μm
20 and 30 mg mL−1

η = 1–10 Pa s
−30 mV
0.15 Ω cm−1
5 mF cm−2
—
MSCs

27



Aqueous (water)
350 nm
22.4 mg mL−1

γ = 68.8 mN m−1, η = 1.5 cP, Z = 18.9
−40 mV
450 Ω cm−1
60 mF cm−2
12.36 μW h cm−2
MSCs

28



Aqueous (water)
2 μm
18 mg mL−1

γ = 76.5 mN m−1, η = 1.5 cP, Z = 19.9
−40 mV
9.8 Ω cm−1
32 mF cm−2
—
MSCs

28



Aqueous (water)
—
4.5 mg mL−1

γ = 80.3 mN m−1, η = 1.4 mP s, Z = 30
—
5.9 Ω sq−1
9.8 mF cm−2
0.49 μW h cm−2
MSCs

29



Aqueous (water)
200 nm
5 mg mL−1

ρ = ∼1100 kg m−3, γ = 73 mN m−1, η = 1 mP s, Z = 19.4
−42.3 ± 4.1 mV
119 S cm−1
108.1 mF cm−2
100.2 mW h cm−3
MSCs

30



Organic (dimethylsulfoxide, DMSO)
3–6 μm
2.25 mg mL−1

γ = 40 mN m−1, η = 3.4 cP, Z = 21.3
—
1080 ± 175 S cm−1
—
—
Electromagnetic shielding

20



Organic (DMSO)
10–30 μm
∼2 mg mL−1

ρ = 0.8 g cm−3, γ = 23 mN m−1, η = 2.4 mPa s, Z = 8.3
—
—
—
—
Photonics

31





Printable MXene sediment inks for MSCs are gaining constant attention because of their capability to store and deliver high power densities.32 Moreover, the utilization of atomic size thin MXenes 2D layers in ink formulation for MSCs offers the maximum areal capacitance compared with their bulk states. However, the fabrication of these MXene based MSCs involves the thin layer printing of conductive electrodes on substrates as current collectors and sandwiching these electrodes between an insulating material and electrolyte. The performance of such fabricated MSCs is dependent on the charge accumulation around the electrical double layer (electrode and insulating layer interfaces), the conductivity of the active materials, and the quality of the print. The improvement in printing quality has challenges in ink preparation such as (i) scalable production of exfoliated 2D MXenes,33 (ii) efficient ink formulation techniques,33 and (iii) adoption of efficient printing techniques. Besides, patterning micro-electronic architectures on flexible substrates for mechanically deformable MSCs brings about other challenges like (iv) low-temperature processing,33 (v) deposition of a high amount of active material per unit area with good surface adhesion,26 and (vi) stability under deformation.34
The fabrication of MXene based micro-architectures on flexible substrates is carried out by various methodologies like spray coating, spin coating, lithography, etc.5,31 However, these methodologies offer poor performance with high material wastage and poor control over the thickness of the printing area. In this regard, the screen-printing of MXenes is found to be an impressive route to fabricate low-cost and large-scale structures on any flexible substrate.5,31 Moreover, screen-printing allows the layer-by-layer printing of complex heterostructures for multiple functionalities, with improved performance and high precision. However, the ink formulation reported using an MXene through liquid-phase exfoliation is still far from ideal for inkjet or screen-printing applications. Additionally, the ink formulation methodologies reported till now involve harsh synthetic strategies, time-consuming processes, and utilization of expensive materials. Moreover, the composition of printable inks with good rheological properties requires a large quantity of additives and expansive solvents.26 The formulation of novel MXene printable inks by considering these challenges requires MXene dispersion in an aqueous medium with specific physical properties (surface tension and density) that satisfy the requirements of screen-printing applications. On the other hand, the materials like MXenes show moderate dispersibility in an aqueous medium and get agglomerated at higher concentrations, leading to obstacles for achieving these physical properties.35 Theoretical and experimental investigations have demonstrated that the addition of a large quantity of surfactants would resolve some of these issues. Although a high percentage of additive surfactants reduces the active components per unit area after printing, it requires additional steps to remove such components.
The surface interaction of screen-printing inks with flexible substrates is another important consideration for getting flexible MSCs that can withstand deformation and inks with good wetting behavior. The selection of suitable binders is reported as an effective strategy to improve these interactions.36 However, the addition of a large quantity of binders again led to a decreased print resolution, which eventually reduces the efficiency of devices. On the other hand, the inappropriate wetting behavior of printed patterns may lead to a non-uniform distribution (coffee ring effect, CRE) of active components and this leads to cracks in patterns. Hence, a new alternative solution for high-performance MXene based jetting inks with good rheological properties and good wetting charcateristics is required for potentially viable flexible MSCs via the screen-printing method.
1.2 Chemical characteristics of MXenes
Transition metal nitrides, carbides, and carbonitrides are called MXenes. They are synthesized from MAX phase materials with a hexagonal crystal structure and P63/mmc symmetry, using wet chemical etching of A-layers. The parent MAX phase materials possess layered array with atomic structures consisting of alternating layers of Mn+1Xn (M denotes a transition metal and X denotes either nitrogen or carbon, n = 1 to 4), and mono-layers of A-atoms (p-element of III-A or IV-A groups in the periodic table) (Fig. 1a). The chemical etching process offers relatively strong chemical bonding (metallic bonding) between MX layers after the removal of A elements from the MAX phase.37 The strong bonding helps in etching of A-sheets from the stacked layers of the MAX phase and retains the sheet resistance of the resultant MXene phase by lowering the surface defects. However, the exfoliation of these MX layers after chemical etching of A-layers from their MAX phase requires mechanical agitation that again leads to the generation of surface defects.38 To date, MXene nanosheets have been available in four molecular structures M2X, M3X2, M4X3, and M5C4 with hydrophilic surfaces and with tunable properties, which can be used in diverse applications (Fig. 1a). The A-layer selective etching from the initial MAX phase results in the substitution of A atoms with surface termination species (Tx) or intercalated compounds (ICs). After terminal group substitution of intercalation, the chemical formula of the resultant MXene can be written as Mn+1XnTx or Mn+1XnTx-IC. The nature of Tx and IC depends on the etchant used and etching process parameters (i.e., etching time, etching temperature, etc.), and generally Tx and ICs could be –F, –OH or O, –Cl, and NH3 or NH4+ groups.39,40 These functional groups of Tx and ICs are found to be responsible for the hydrophilicity of MXene sheets. The exchanged Tx functionalities weaken the electrostatic interactions between the interlayers and develop the exfoliation process. For instance, the Ti–Al bonds of Ti3AlC2 are substituted by Ti–F, Ti–OH, and Ti–O bonds upon etching of the MAX phase, and subsequently the –F, –OH, and O surface functional groups terminate the MXene surface. Additionally, the Tx or IC functionalities are capable of changing the nature of a MXene. For example, it has been illustrated that the full functionalization of Ti2C MXene nanosheets with O can convert the metallic nature of Ti2C to a semiconductor state with a bandgap of 0.34 eV and a great Seebeck coefficient of ∼1140 μV K−1 at 100 K.41 This phenomenon is due to the strong hybridization of Ti-d and O-p orbitals.41
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the elements used to make MXenes and four typical structures of MXenes. The M layers in a MAX phase are approximately close-packed and octahedral sites have been occupied by X (C and N) atoms. The adjacent M–X layers also interleaved with A layers. The MXene nanosheets obtained after etching and delamination processes have four atomic structures M2X, M3X2, M4X3, and M5X4 with hydrophilic surfaces. The MXene phase structures show polar surface terminated ends that can interact with other polar molecules like DMSO and water. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) show the layer structures of the MAX (top) and MXene (bottom) phases. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 44 and 45, Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society and Elsevier. (b) XRD characterization of Ti3C2 MXenes obtained after HF/H2O2 treatment of (i) Ti3SiC2 (MAX phase) before HF treatment, (ii) after 50 wt% HF treatment, (iii) after complete etching of Si from the MAX phase with HF/H2O2 solution and (iv) after intercalation with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH). The shift of the (002) peak [MAX (Ti3SiC2) to MXene-TMAOH] observed from 6.1° to 8.9°, which corresponds to a d-spacing enhancement from ∼9.95 Å to 14.43 Å due to the intercalation of TMA+ ions. A stable colloidal solution of Ti3C2 can be collected after liquid delamination of Ti3C2 powder with and without pre-intercalation of TMAOH. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 43, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Among the different MXene families, the nitride-based ones are found to be difficult to synthesize because of the generation of higher formation energy from their MAX phase parents.42 This causes poor stability of the nitride MXene layers during the etching process. Hence, a mixture of appropriate etching substances is usually utilized instead of a typical common hydrofluoric acid. Similarly, the silicon-based MAX phase has significant resistance to such common acids and is difficult to etch due to the strong chemical bonding between the transition metal and silicon elements. Therefore, an oxidant-assisted selective etching strategy has been employed to facilitate the etching of silica as silicon from its MAX phase via a mixture of an appropriate acid with an oxidant (i.e., H2O2, HNO3, persulfate, etc.).43 In this oxidant assisted method, a two-step method is followed: (i) the oxidation of silicon with a selective oxidant in step-1 and (ii) dissolution of the generated silicon oxides with an appropriate acid in step-2. The delamination of such produced MXene stacks (after chemical etching) was carried out using mechanical agitation. However, the extraction of high quality MXene layers with mechanical agitation depends on the affinity of interlayer interactions and the adopted mechanical process. In order to reduce the affinity of stacked layer intercalation, a typical ion between the layers usually is chosen as an effective strategy, and in some cases a simultaneous etching and intercalation strategy is used as the applicable method. For example, the diverse intercalated alkylammonium [(NRxH4−x)+] and tetramethylammonium hydroxide (C4H13NO) have been traced by X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization in Ti3C2 MXene powders, which were extracted from Ti3AlC2 and Ti3SiC2, respectively (Fig. 1b).43 However, experimental investigations demonstrate that the strong interlayer interaction between the synthesized MXene nanosheets using these methods hinders the complete separation of 2D nanolayers, leading to a larger amount of wastage or requiring an additional method for the redispersion of unexfoliated sediments and creating unwanted surface defects. These unwanted surface defects may reduce the quality of 2D MXene layers. Hence, the development of alternate exfoliation and etching strategies that can lead to high-quality 2D-MXene dispersion is necessary for full exploitation of MXene properties in functional ink formulation.
1.3 The scope of this review
The micro-components that could be integrated in the fabrication of wearable electronics require the printing of efficient charge transport channels on flexible substrates. In this regard, the printing of functional micro-devices such as MBs and MSCs as charge storage components in wearable device architectures has been under focus in recent years. MXene based MSCs are raising the hope for direct printing as efficient charge transport channels with low temperature processability. However, the performance of the printed component with MXenes was found to be much lower compared to their theoretical expectations and failed to achieve the desired outcome. This may be due to the utilization of a large number of resistive materials as additives and binders; this eventually leads to low conductivity of the printed area and a low quality of the MXene ink. On the other hand, the low surface interactions of the MXene layer with the polymeric flexible substrate could lower mechanical stability and more importantly, the lower oxidation stability of MXene sheets led to the unsatisfactory cycling stability of printed electronic components. Hence, it is very important to concentrate on efficient formulation strategies that can address these issues. The present review is wrapped up with a discussion on recent advancements and challenges in MXene based ink formulations that are suitable for screen printable MSCs on flexible substrates. The progress of additive-free printable ink formulations and the effect of surface modification on MXene properties like dispersity, stability, and rheological properties are discussed. Following this, challenges and some future prospects related to printing high-performance MSCs using cost-effective MXene ink formulation strategies have been demonstrated.
2 Functionalization of MXenes for efficient purposes in screen printable sediment inks
MXenes and their family have demonstrated moderate rheological properties at high volume concentrations in water. The surface zeta potential (ξ) values of MXenes are between – 30 mV and −80 mV.46,47 A clay-like behavior at high volume concentrations has made MXenes self-resilient for formulating additive-free inks by spray coating, spin coating, and electrophoretic deposition with a low resolution. However, the rheological properties of current MXenes do not meet the desired requirements for ultrafast printing technologies like inkjet printing, where the fabrication of desirable electronic micro-components on flexible substrates practically requires a high quality ink, with high-resolution printing.36 Therefore, it is urgent to understand screen printable ink qualities.
A desirable inkjet printable ink also requires a stable MXene solution. The quality of a screen printable ink is measured using the inverse Ohnesorge number (Z) value parameter. The Z value with the equation of  depends on the viscosity (γ), the density of solution (ρ), the nozzle diameter (D), and the surface tension (η). The Z value is expected to be between 1 and 14 for a suitable printable ink. An ink with a lower Z value can be favorable to avoid nozzle blocking and developing stable droplets. However, this value for an aqueous solution of MXenes is higher than 14, and hence, its direct utilization may lead to the blocking of printing nozzles.28 To reduce the Z value, some costly procedures like the addition of additives, surfactants and binders in ink formulations are required. The removal of such components after printing on flexible substrates makes the process hectic. Hence, some innovations in the preparation of an efficient aqueous solution with an additive-free ink formulation are essential. Uzun's group has reported an additive-free aqueous Ti3C2Tx ink for thermal inkjet printing on textiles.28 To do so, two types of inks were formulated with a MXene flake particle size of ∼4 μm (called L-MXene ink) and <500 nm (called S-MXene ink). The reason for formulating two solutions is to achieve dynamic viscosity at a high shear rate with a high filler loading. The MXene flake size distributions were measured using dynamic light scattering (DLS). The DLS results revealed an average particle size of 2 μm and ∼350 nm for L-MXene and S-MXene inks. The change in the dynamic viscosity of the dispersion with these modifications was found to be 5.1 cP and 1.5 cP at an 18 mg mL−1 active component loading, respectively (Fig. 2b). The Z value is also found to be 19.9 for L-MXene and 18.9 for S-MXene formulated inks. These nearly close Z values to the inkjet printable ink range indicate the viability of aqueous Ti3C2Tx suspension as a functional ink. However, a large flake size may cause the blocking of the nozzle. However, the nozzle size could be adjusted, so that the ink can produce stable droplets without blocking.28 Hence, it is clear that the Z value can be tuned by changing the rheology of the MXene dispersion via adjusting the concentrations of fillers, resizing and surface modifications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Rheological properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes with diverse concentrations; the measured viscosity against the shear rate of (i) single-layer MXene flake suspensions with concentrations ranging from 0.18 mg mL−1 to 3.6 mg mL−1 and (ii) multi-layer MXene dispersions with concentrations ranging from 10 wt% to 70 wt%, and (iii and iv) relative viscosity versus volume fraction and concentration plots for single- and multi-layer Ti3C2Tx dispersions. Also, the experimental data from selected publications have been superimposed for better comparison between Ti3C2Tx, Kaolin clay, and polystyrene. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 48, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Digital photograph (∼50 mL of an additive-free aqueous Ti3C2Tx ink, 22.4 mg mL−1), TEM, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and line profile images of L-Ti3C2Tx flakes. The viscosity, Ti3C2Tx flake size, ink concentration, flake intensity distribution-diameter, and ink concentration viscosity of L-Ti3C2Tx and S-Ti3C2Tx inks during inkjet printing. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 28, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) TEM and the corresponding HR-TEM images of (i) fresh delaminated Ti3C2Tx, and after exposure to air for (ii) 7 days and (iii) 30 days [the insets show the corresponding SAED and fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns], (iv) Raman spectra of fresh and air-exposed MXenes, and (v) XPS results of fresh and (vi) air-exposed MXenes after 25 days. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 50, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
MXene ink rheological behavior and its rheological response vary with the quality, size, and concentration of MXenes and also with the type of solvent utilized. It is observed that the rheological properties of single- and multi-layer MXenes are different. For instance, Ti3C2Tx with a particle size of ∼300 nm and 5 μm in aqueous dispersions showed variation in viscosity as a function of shear rate, and also viscosity can be varied with the concentration of MXene sheets in the ink (Fig. 2a).48,49 The diagrams of viscosity versus shear rate in Fig. 2ai and 2aii of single- and multi-layer dispersions in water show the behaviors of the MXene ink. The dispersion with a single-layer MXene, initially, at the lowest concentration (0.18 mg mL−1) displayed a viscosity of 0.005 Pa s. However, the viscosity increased to 7.5 Pa s once the amount of single-layer MXene in the suspension rose to 3.6 mg mL−1 (Fig. 2ai). These results suggest that the single-layer Ti3C2Tx solution in water has displayed versatile rheological properties and it can be tuned by varying the concentration and shear rate. However, at higher concentration the viscosity changes of such solutions are negligible. This proposes that the rheology of MXene inks prepared with single layers can only be varied at lower concentrations. This is whilst that MXene with the multi-layer structure is showing a significant change in viscosity at higher concentrations, however, restacking of layers at higher concentrations leading to blocking of printing nozzles. Moreover, the viscosity of even such as-synthesized MXene solutions is not enough to be used as a desirable printable ink in inkjet printing.48
In addition to good rheological behavior and an optimal Z value, a high-demand inkjet printable ink should also have adjustable characteristics for advanced screen printers with low material wastage. The interaction of ink with the substrate at some post-deposition processes like spreading, drying, stabilizing and assembling are also additional important phenomena for consideration in the formulation of a favorable ink. The main requirement for this effective post-printing process is to formulate precise MXene inks with high filler concentrations (MXene sheets) for achieving high-resolution printing patterns with good efficacy and with improved solvent evaporation kinetics and also improved adhesion characters with flexible substrates. The viscosity of inks for inkjet printing must be within the range of 1–20 mPa s to generate suitable droplets that can deposit on the flexible substrate based on pre-programmed patterns. Besides, the surface tension of printable inks has to be in accordance with the surface energy and texture of the substrate to control solvent evaporation kinetics and reduce the CRE. However, the MXene dispersion typically suffers from quick precipitation in low-boiling-point solvents; this phenomenon directly affects the printing process leading to clogging and non-uniform deposition. After jetting on a suitable substrate, wetting and drying are important for effective interfacial interactions between the MXene layers. It is suggested that an ink with surface tension between 7 mN m−1 to 10 mN m−1 is preferred and the surface energy of ink droplets must be less than the surface energy of substrates.26 Although an MXene in aqueous solvents with a small concentration can show good viscosity at a high shear rate,48 the surface tension of the solution is not suitable for printing on flexible substrates. This obstacle leads to a compromise in the utilization of the direct printing method, or can be resolved by changing the surface of the substrate. Hence, an ink with suitable surface tension and viscosity is preferred.
The low stability of MXene inks in the presence of air is another issue for long-term cycles. Most of the MXenes were found to react with atmospheric oxygen and tend to form their oxidation products. For instance, the quick reaction of Ti3C2Tx in air resulted in the formation of TiO2, and thus the formed TiO2 reduces the conductance of printed patterns (due to the relatively low conductivity of TiO2 compared to that of Ti3C2Tx at room temperature). Moreover, the formed TiO2 tends to change the rheological behavior of the formulated ink. In this context, the formulation of MXene inks with high oxidative stability is necessary.
We believe that surface modification with suitable organic and inorganic functionalities is an efficient strategy for improving the cohesiveness in the dispersed MXene layers. This has a direct influence on the physical parameters of inks such as surface tension, density, and viscosity of the solution. For instance, Liu et al.51 developed an aqueous Ti3C2 MXene ink functionalized with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS). The rich surface functional groups on the MXene tend to interact with PEDOT:PSS and facilitate re-dispersity and improvement in ink properties such as viscosity, moduli, and shear yield stress. Moreover, the surface functional groups are found to be capable of reducing the corrosion (surface oxidative reaction) of many inorganic materials. Thus, this section focuses on the recent advances in improving the chemical and dispersion stability of inks based on the surface modification of MXene layers and assessing the effect of surface modification of MXenes for improving their ink qualities.
2.1 Functionalization of MXenes as an efficient delamination strategy
Bare MXene sheets with surface terminal (Tx, formed during chemical etching processes) groups have shown negative surface zeta potential charges, which can interact with positively charged ions and molecules and lead to increases in the interlayer spacing. As a result, ion intercalation and surface functionalization are found to be effective strategies for separating the MXene layers from their stacked layers. The chemical etching process of A-layer atoms from MAX phases generally helps in the separation of elementary MXenes by forming terminal groups. However, this separation of layers is not enough to overcome the weak van der Waals (vdW) interlayer attraction. Hence, mechanical methods are utilized to increase the separation. Usually, c-lattice parameters in the X-ray diffraction analysis of MAX phases are compared with those of the intercalated MXene layer to study the effects of surface modification. Therefore, the c-lattice variation value (Δd = dMX − dMAX; dMX = the position of the c-lattice parameters in XRD of the functionalized MXene and dMAX = the position of the c-lattice parameter of the MAX phase) is a direct measurement of the change in interlayer spacing with surface modifications. For instance, the variation of the c-lattice parameter for the produced Ti3C2Tx with hydrochloric acid (HCl) and lithium fluoride (LiF) solution was found to be 27 Å to 28 Å, which is reported as the interlayer separation. Similar to HCl and LiF, the MXene interlayer spacing is improved by HF solution (c = 20 Å) during the etching process.52 In addition to this, a MXene produced with HCl and LiF in water was found to show clay like behavior due to the hydration of Ti3C2Tx, sheets which indicates that the interlayer spacing has a direct effect on the rheological behavior of MXenes. The shift in the c-lattice parameter (∼40 Å) was observed for this hydrated Ti3C2Tx sediment. This increment in the interlayer spacing was attributed to the intercalation of the water molecule in MXene layers.52 Because it has been found that the intercalated water molecules in MXene act as a lubricant and allow a facial sharing which results in imparting the clay-like behavior. In another case, the etching of A-layers from the MAX phase by using HCl and LiF was found to improve the swelling of MXene layers by intercalation of Li+ and H+ ions.52 The interlayer spacing of such Li+ intercalated ions can also be further improved by the exchange of Li+ by bigger size cations like Na+, K+, Cs+, and Mg2+. Additionally, these types of cations can also improve the energy storage capacity (Fig. 3a).53
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of cation (Li+, Na+, K+, Cs+, and Mg2+) distributions in MXene interlayers and their intercalations with water (dark grey stands for C, light blue for Ti, red for O, and light pink for H. Note: data have been obtained by ab initio molecular dynamics simulations). The cation-oxygen in water (cation-Ow) distances corresponding to the positions of the maxima of radial distribution functions of Ow, demonstrating a clear correlation with values in bulk solutions. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 53, Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) XRD patterns (i), structural illustration (ii), XPS survey (iii), and high-resolution spectra (iv) for the Ti 2p and C 1s regions of the Ti3AlC2 samples before and after reaction in aqueous TMAOH. The schematic showing an expansion of the basal spacing from the origin of 0.92 nm to 1.50 nm. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 55, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Molecular dynamic simulations of Ti3C2 with OH termination intercalated with N2H4: (i) variation in the c-lattice parameter as a function of the number of N2H4 intercalated molecules. (ii) Molecular dynamic scheme of N2H4 intercalated Ti3C2 for a N/C ratio of 0.375 (6 hydrazines per 4 × 2 × 1 Ti3C2 supercell) displaying a nearly complete mono-layer of N2H4. (iii) Comparison of the XRD patterns of Ti3C2 with OH termination intercalated with N2H4 (black color stands for simulated and blue color for experimental results). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 54, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Similar to inorganic materials (i.e., H2O, HCl, and LiF), organic molecules (i.e., hydrazine, urea, dimethyl sulfoxide, and amino acids) also are found to increase the interlayer spacing of MXenes.54 For instance, the organic base tetramethylammonium hydroxide (C4H13NO and TMAOH) could be found to react with the Al-layer of Ti3AlC2 and cleave the Ti–Al metallic bonds through the hydrolysis of Al.55Fig. 3b shows the structural characterization of the Ti3AlC2 sample before and after TMAOH intercalation. It demonstrates a basal spacing expansion from 0.92 nm to 1.50 nm due to the intercalation of TMAOH.55 Similarly, the intercalation and delamination process with organic molecules is also found to be an efficient method for synthesizing MXene nanosheets (i.e., Ti3C2) from the MAX phase parent with Si-layer atoms (i.e., Ti3SiC2). In a research study by Alhabeb et al.,43 delaminated Ti3C2 nanosheets were confirmed by the observation of the c-lattice and the corresponding d-spacing distance variations of the MXene before and after TMA+ ion interaction. The same as what has been observed for the inorganic molecules intercalated with MXenes, molecular dynamic simulation results of Ti3C2 with –OH termination and intercalated hydrazine (N2H4) illustrate an increase in the c-lattice parameter and interlayer spacing with the number of intercalated species (Fig. 3c). The improvement in interlayer spacing was found to weaken the attractive forces in between the layers and it helps in easy delamination of stacked layers of the MXene into mono- or bi-layers upon weak mechanical agitation like sonication and mechanical stirring, which leads to high quality MXene dispersion (low surface defects). Additionally, this simple separation of MXene nanosheets by intercalated species assisted in acquiring a stable MXene dispersion in aqueous solutions.
2.2 Functionalization of MXenes to improve their chemical stability
The stability of MXene colloidal inks is an equally important parameter in formulating stable aqueous inks and fabricating long-lasting devices. In the work by Zhang et al.,50 the degradation mechanism of delaminated Ti3C2Tx in an aqueous solution was explored (Fig. 2c). It was observed that freshly prepared Ti3C2Tx samples in aqueous solution exhibited single crystallinity having a size distribution of ∼600 nm. However, the formation of anatase TiO2 particles of around 2 nm to 3 nm size along with disordered carbon peaks was observed in the same solution after exposure to air for one week. The solution on further aging for 30 days led to the further dissociation of the MXene. As a result, characterization indicates the low chemical stability of Ti3C2Tx in an aqueous solution. To improve the stability of the ink, the air-tight sealing of solution and storing at low temperature are preferred. However, this strategy for improving the stability of printed devices for practical application is not possible. Moreover, the oxidative reaction of MXene sheets is faster in aqueous solvents and a humid environment. For instance, Ti3C2Tx reacts with water and forms the anatase TiO2 phase as a stable product and TixCy (OH)z (hydroxyl functionalized MXene) as an intermediate compound (Fig. 4a). This oxidation reaction could proceed for a few days and drastic changes in the electrochemical behavior of MXenes are observed during the progress of the reaction. The reactivity of Ti3C2Tx in an aqueous environment can be explained by the bond energies of Ti with C and Tx; the bond energy of Ti–O is found to be higher than that of Ti–F, Ti–I, Ti–N and Ti–Cl, and hence the formation of TiO2 from Ti3C2Tx (Tx = –F, –Cl, –I, –OH) is spontaneous and can be activated under ambient conditions.58 Zhang et al.50 studied the oxidative degradation profile of delaminated Ti3C2Tx in water. The freshly synthesized Ti3C2Tx MXene after exposure to the ambient environment has shown 42%, 85%, and 100% degradation from its starting composition after 5, 10, and 15 days, respectively. This degradation caused the formation of a cloudy-white precipitate at the edges of the MXene sheets containing primarily the anatase TiO2 phase. Characterization clearly demonstrated that they started to degrade at the edges initially, and the rate of oxidative degradation was found to follow an exponential decay with time. Hence, the degradation progressed gradually inside the MXene flakes.50 The degradation rate also indicated an inverse relationship with the size of MXene sheets so that smaller sizes attained a quick rate of degradation. The factors like light intensity and temperature were found to enhance the degradation process of the MXene. This rapid destabilization makes the construction of MXene-based components with foreign materials hectic and inhibits full exploitation of the properties of MXenes. Therefore, the integration of MXenes with an effective protection layer represents a promising strategy to overcome this significant drawback. In this context, Chen et al.56 investigated an efficient method to enhance the oxidative stability of Ti3C2Tx MXenes by the chemical surface functionalization strategy with a super hydrophobic protection layer of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane (FOTS, denoted as Ti3C2Tx-F) (Fig. 4b). The stability of the surface modified pristine Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-F films using these protective agents under 5 and 100% relative humidity conditions was characterized by observing the electrical conductance variation of dispersion with time (Fig. 4c). Both of the samples (i.e., Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-F) showed a very small loss in electrical conductivity under 5% humidity conditions, indicating the retention of stability after surface modification. However, a major variation is seen under 100% humidity conditions. After two weeks, the pristine Ti3C2Tx film demonstrated a dramatic decrease to only 2.7% from its original value. On the other hand, the functionalized Ti3C2Tx-F maintained 86.2% of its initial conductance in the same period. Moreover, the Ti3C2Tx-F film showed relatively stable performance after 30 days, and this shows the effective protection of –F ions after surface modification of MXene layers. In other research work, Ti3C2Tx MXenes were functionalized with (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) to discover their adjustable hydrophilicity and oxidative stability. The pristine Ti3C2Tx flakes and the flakes modified with APTES MXene showed the formation of TiO2 after 3 and 21 days of exposure to water, respectively. However, the pristine MXene showed large defects and formation of maximum TiO2 nanoparticles on MXene basal planes after 15 days and was found to show low conductivity in comparison with APTES modified MXenes.57 Additionally, the hydrophobic characteristics of the functionalized MXenes with APTES, FOTS, and hexadecyltrimethoxysilane were examined using contact angle measurements (Fig. 4d) and this hydrophilicity was found to be the protecting agent for MXene layers from oxidation. The contact angles of 136° and 57.9° were obtained Ti3C2Tx-F and Ti3C2Tx respectively after functionalization with FOTS. Hence, these typical superhydrophobic chemicals are employing as a robust route of functionalization that imparts high dispersity and stability to MXenes over the long term in an aqueous water solution. As a result, the functionalized MXenes could be used as a stable ink when printed on a flexible substrate to form planar interdigitated electrodes, which are substantial in energy storage devices.30
 Fig. 4  (a) Oxidative reaction of Ti3C2Tx in water solution and under different humidity conditions. (b) Schematic, XRD patterns, SEM, and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase, Ti3C2Tx MXene, and functionalized Ti3C2Tx-F, along with the corresponding elemental mappings of the functionalized Ti3C2Tx-F nanosheets displaying a uniform distribution of Ti, C, and F. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 56, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Water contact angle, water contact angle variations (for 60 days of storage in air), and electrical conductance change measurements (for 14 days at humidity of 5 and 100%) of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-F. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 56, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Water contact angle measurements of the pristine Ti3C2Tx MXene, and functionalized Ti3C2Tx with APTES, hexadecyltrimethoxysilane, and FOTS. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 57 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
2.3 Functionalization of MXenes to develop their colloidal dispersibility
A high-quality screen-printed pattern requires colloidal dispersion stability in its ink formulation. Therefore, the colloidal stability of MXene suspensions and their environmental stabilities should be systematically investigated. The issues like clogging and the blockage of the nozzle due to low colloidal stability have been encountered with low quality dispersion, as well. Hence, to make MXenes effectively applicable, one substantial aim is to fabricate nanoscale building blocks for a stable colloidal dispersion. In contrast to the usual pigment inks, the colloidal dispersion stability procedure of MXene nanosheets for ink formulation is not straightforward. Here, we demonstrate the recent strategies for enhancing the colloidal dispersibility of MXene nanosheets in both polar and non-polar solvents.
It has been perceived that the surfaces of the as-synthesized MXene flakes are intrinsically functionalized with various functionalized groups (i.e., –OH, –O, and –F), which in turn leads to negative surface zeta potential at neutral pH. Generally, the stability of any colloidal solution such as MXenes is found sensitive to pH. At a neutral pH, some of –OH groups on the surface of a MXene get de-protonated to –O−, which results in a repulsive interaction between the sheets with negative zeta potential and thereby improves the stability of the colloidal suspension.58 Thus, a strategy for the formation of oxygen-rich terminal groups could develop the colloidal dispersion stability of a MXene in water. In this context, Shi et al.59 employed a novel iodine (I2) assisted etching method to synthesize Ti3C2Tx MXenes resulting in plentiful –O, and –OH terminals and a pristine lattice structure (Fig. 5a). The characterization results of this functionalized Ti3C2Tx showed colloidal stability for two weeks (Fig. 5b), which is most probably due to the high density of oxygen functional groups on top of Ti3C2Tx (Tx = –O and –OH).60,61 It should be noted that the study of MXene colloidal dispersion stability is not limited to only polar solvents. Because polar aqueous solutions possess different drawbacks like (i) the degradation of MXenes in the long term (reaction with air), (ii) difficulty in dewetting on low surface energy substrates, and (iii) incompatibility with water-insoluble polymers.62 On the other hand, the colloidal stability of MXene layers in non-polar solvents is poor because of polar terminal groups. Hence, the surface functionalization of MXenes with appropriate materials is another strategy to tune their colloidal dispersion stability in nonpolar solvents. For instance, the precise chemical grafting of Ti3C2Tx MXene nanosheets with organic lipophilic octyltriethoxysilane (OTS) molecules was found to develop the colloidal dispersion stability of the MXene in hexane (C6H14) (Fig. 5c).62 The OTS molecules could react with the Ti atoms of Ti3C2Tx, through Ti–O–Si covalent bonding and create stable charge-transfer complexes that improve the colloidal stability. The grafted MXene with OTS exhibited a remarkable hydrophobicity in comparison with the pristine MXene, whilst the surface charges were negligible (Fig. 5c). The grafted MXene sample in nonpolar hexane showed excellent long-term colloidal stability over four weeks. This developed colloidal dispersion stability in non-polar solvents could be due to the steric effects of the linked octyl groups. Hence, the surface modification of MXenes and developing their colloidal stability in non-polar dispersion could be useful in diverse applications, where a low surface energy and great volatility solvent is essential.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of Ti3AlC2 I2-assisted etching and delamination to obtain MXene nanosheets. (b) The optical and SEM images of the Ti3C2Tx MXenes etched with hydrofluoric acid (left side, with stability <1 week in water) and I2-assisted (right side, with stability 2 weeks in water). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 59, Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with OTS in 2 mg mL−1 hexane dispersion deposited on the water surface. TEM image and EDS mapping for the elements of the grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with OTS. Four-week colloidal dispersion stability of the grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with OTS dispersed in 2 mg mL−1 hexane. The water contact angle droplet dispensed on the macroscopic grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with the OTS surface (measured every ∼10 minutes for 1 hour). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 62, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
3 Formulation of MXene sediment inks
Wafer-scale micro-electronics on soft and flexible substrates demand a screen printable ink, which must produce patterns with a high-quality resolution (∼150 μm), also with an ultra-speed process (a few centimeters per second). To prepare a high-quality MXene ink, the significant focus should be on the (i) ink composition, (ii) ink rheology, and (iii) dying and particle assembly mechanisms. This section is typically limited to consider such parameters to achieve a high-quality screen-printed pattern.
3.1 Screen printable MXene ink configuration
The configuration of screen printable inks commonly involves the active component (pigment), additives (surfactants) to improve the surface wetting character,26 binder (polymers) to improve the adhesion properties of the print,63 and the solvents to keep the ink in a fluidic condition. After the synthesis and delamination of MXenes, their colloidal solution can be formulated into a functional ink by the addition of appropriate amounts of these supplemental materials. The critical components of a screen printable ink required 12–20 wt% pigment, 45–65 wt% binders, 20–30 wt% solvent, and 1–5 wt% additives. At the same time, the viscosity of the ink must be between 1000 and 10000 mPa s.3,64 Therefore, in order to formulate the ink desirable to screen printing one should not only focus on the composition of materials, but also the performance of each individual printed component and tuning of the ink for achieving high performance must be considered. For instance, MXene sheets with high concentrations were found to cause agglomeration and eventually result in the clogging of the nozzle in printers,58 and at a low MXene concentration the printing patter performance gets reduced due low resolution. Likewise, a large quantity of additives will reduce the resolution as well as the removal of these additives on flexible substrates after printing requires additional complicated steps.64 More importantly, MXene nanosheets (i.e., Ti3C2Tx) usually suffer from agglomeration and rapid sedimentation in low boiling point solvents. These characteristics restrict the formulation of MXene inks with high concentrations and utilization in low boiling point solvents.63 On the other hand, MXenes with hydrophilic characteristics and surface termination groups also possess poor adhesion on polymer-based soft substrates.28 Thus, improving the ink adhesion properties by adding suitable binders and retaining the MXene nanosheet colloidal stability in the ink composition are certainly the major challenges.3
The post-printing process of screen-printing, which involves spreading, drying, and particle assembly, is important for getting uniform deposition and reproducible results. For instance, MXene nanosheets in fast volatile solvents like isopropyl alcohol (C3H8O, IPA) that is generally selected for high-speed printing technology possess low colloidal stability. Therefore, the utilization of such rapid volatile solvents may cause clogging of the printing nozzle. On the other hand, the poor binding properties of MXene nanosheets on polymer substrates may have the coffee ring effect (CRE). In this context, the selection of solvent becomes important, for example, at one side the organic solvents are good for dissolving the binders, additive; retain the oxidative stability of MXenes and can evaporate easily after post treatments; and also, can interact efficiently with polymeric flexible substrates. At the same time, the high processing cost, low MXene colloidal stability and the CRE due to a fast evaporation rate are the drawbacks of using these organic solvents. In this regard, aqueous MXene inks are found to possess some advantages like (i) high dispersibility, (ii) a low evaporation rate to mitigate the CRE, and (iii) low formulation cost. Hence, the selection of solvents plays an important role in getting high-quality electrode patterns. In some cases, the direct application of MXenes in water medium as printable inks is noticed. It has been investigated that the MXene sediments in aqueous medium demonstrate excellent intrinsic viscosity without additives.26,28 The interaction of these MXene sediments with the substrate surface is monitored by dropping a liquid droplet of the MXene dispersion on a glass substrate and positioning the substrate at an incline angle of 30° for 30 minutes. The MXene sediments exhibited stability for 30 minutes, and this indicates the self-reliance of MXene nanosheets for ink formulation without additives.35 However, the high surface tension and poor adhesion of aqueous MXene dispersion may affect the spreading, drying and wetting behaviors with hydrophobic substrate surfaces. Accordingly, the development of high-quality aqueous-based sediment inks for the fabrication of micro-components on polymer substrates has been set as a challenge. Moreover, the high oxidation rate of MXenes in aqueous solvents is another obstacle in the development of reliable and reproducible electronic properties in aqueous solvents. Thus, the surface modification of MXene nanosheets with organic and inorganic components is one of the suitable approaches for tuning the liquid properties of MXene inks and controlling the ink rheology and oxidative stability.
3.2 The rheology and surface interaction of screen printable inks
The rheological properties of screen printable inks can be explained by the capability of stable ink droplet formation and its interfacial interaction mechanism. The ink droplet formation during printing with a given nozzle diameter can be influenced by its viscosity. Viscosity (Pa s) is the ratio of shear stress (Pa) and shear strain rate (s) of liquids. The fluidity of a liquid can be explained by the shear stress and shear rate graph, and the viscosity change in the graph is helpful for understanding the liquid behavior under applied stress (Fig. 6a).3 An ideal ink must show shear thinning behavior, with low viscosity to generate stable ink droplets under applied stress. The intermolecular interaction and relative fluid nature of active 2DNMs in the dispersion can be observed from the elastic moduli (G′) and viscous moduli (G′′) of the dispersion as a function of frequency at a constant strain amplitude. The G′ provides information about the rigidity of 2DNMs in the dispersion, indirectly it explains the nature of the ink. For instance, a relatively high G′ value and constant elasticity modulus under the applied strain frequencies suggest that the liquid has a gel-like nature. The paste or gel-like ink causes low-speed printing and clogging.64 On the other hand, the G′′ undergoes relaxation, and the nature of the ink dissipated under the applied stress. Thus, the ink with a high G′′ value shows a liquid-like nature, which may lead to bleeding of the ink from the nozzle (Fig. 6b).48 Hence, the ratio of elastic modulus to viscous modulus (G′/G′′) can be utilized for determining the rheological properties of the formulated ink. In this case, the ink with a G′/G′′ ratio of less than one (<1) indicates the domination of G′′. This condition shows a high intermolecular interaction and the ink tends to have a liquid-like nature with high spreadability that could be useful for spray coating. However, the ink with a G′/G′′ ratio of greater than one (>1) indicates the domination of G′ with a plastic-like nature so that such inks are suitable for extrusion printing requires.48 Hence, the formulation of an ink with optimal G′ and G′′ values is essential to enable high-quality printing. In this context, the screen-printing technique requires a moderately viscous ink with a high solidification rate and an easily movable trough nozzle to avoid the coffee ring and clogging effect, respectively. The solvent and binder's composition in the formulation generally allows the tuning of the viscosity and elasticity of the ink. However, the high amounts of binders in the ink formulation reduce the concentration of active components and may directly influence the quality of the print (reduction in resolution as we discussed in earlier sections). Moreover, the deposition of the formulated ink with binders and additives on soft substrates requires complicated post-printing steps for their removal.
 Fig. 6  (a) Graphical representation of diverse fluids showing the shear stress versus shear rate. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 64, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematics and plots representing the G′ and G′′ of single-layer MXenes with different concentrations (0.90 mg mL−1, 2.70 mg mL−1, and 3.60 mg mL−1) at a constant strain amplitude at different frequencies. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 48, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Optical photos of 2DNM (2D MnO2) ink droplet formation and deposition at different times of printing. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 66, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the contact angle of the ink with substrates according to Young's equation. (e) Schematic representation of the Marangoni effect of solute. (f) Inverted optical micrographs of dried inkjet printed droplets on clean glass for formulated inks using solvent exchange in IPA, IPA-ethanol, IPA-t-butanol, IPA-2-butanol, and IPA-2-butanol (20 v%), and also a schematic demonstration of the drying process for indicating the coffee ring effect. Panels e and f are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 67, Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As discussed earlier, the Z value is a function of viscosity, surface tension, elasticity, and density, and an ideal screen printable ink must have an optimal Z value (between 1 and 14) to produce stable ink droplets. The surface tension of the liquid decides the capillary action of the ink on substrates. To achieve reasonable spreading and drying behavior of the ink after printing on substrates, the surface tension of the screen printable ink must be in the range of 7–10 mN m−1. An ink with high surface tension shows a low capillary action and is found unable to penetrate from ultra-small-sized nozzles. Moreover, it exhibits slow-spreading behavior and leads to the coffee ring effect. Thus, the printable ink must have lower surface tension values than the substrate surface energy and the rate of ink spreading can be enhanced.64 To do so, surfactants [i.e., Triton X-100, t-Oct-C6H4-(OCH2CH2)xOH, x = 9–10] could be added to alter the surface tension during the formulation of the ink.65
The post-printing process which involves the deposition of droplets, spreading, drying and assembly of active components also determines the quality and morphology of the printed patterns (Fig. 6c). The concentration (density) of active components in the ink droplets is the deciding factor for the thickness and quality of the printed pattern (active component per unit area). The contact angle of ink droplets (tuned by altering surface tension by the addition of surfactants) with the interacted surfaces is the measurement factor for the ink spreading behavior (Fig. 6d). It is noted that the perfect spreading of the ink can be seen below the contact angle of 90° and the non-wetting behavior of the ink can be seen above the contact angle of 90°. Drying involves the evaporation of the solvent. The solvents with a low boiling point can lead to a faster drying rate so that it does not give enough time for the ink to flow and the spreading mechanism involves the Marangoni flow, nucleation, and self-assembly of solute.67 On the other hand, a high boiling point solvent may take a longer time for drying and may lead to the settling of particles within the droplet. Hence, solvents with moderate boiling points are generally preferred for ink formulation. Solvents and their mixture are utilized to reduce the coffee ring effect during the drying process.67 Therefore, as can be observed in Fig. 6f, the selection solvents/mixture and their concentrations play an important role in reducing the CRE. The solvents with lower surface tension change the drying mechanism of the ink by directing the mechanism to Marangoni-enhanced spreading in the ink formulation.
3.3 Additive-free MXene inks
A large quantity of additive portion in an ink formulation not only could reduce the print resolution, but also complicates the post-printing removal process, which is an expensive approach. Recently, additive-free inks have been found to possess advantages for high-quality and affordable device fabrication. MXenes with good rheological and mechanical properties could show a remarkable ink in an aqueous solution without the addition of external additives to control their rheological properties. For instance, Ti3C2Tx flakes have shown a high dispersibility in water, where the zeta potential of these flakes is ∼ −40 mV.28 The clay-like behavior of Ti3C2Tx flakes also indicates the dilatant nature without any additives. As a result, the combination of these properties of MXenes has made their use easy in formulating additive-free inks. Previous studies have demonstrated the possibilities of direct utilization of MXene dispersion in water and other aqueous solvents in various applications using spray coating,5,68,69 spin coating,70–72 and extrusion-based 3D printing,73–76 as well as in screen-printing.28 However, the fabrication of flexible micro-electronic devices requires a most reliable and high-quality ink that could be printable on soft substrates. Moreover, the ink rheology must be suitable for inkjet printing, which enables ultrafast printing with low material wastage.
It has been found that the rheological properties of bare MXenes dispersed in an aqueous solution could be tuned by adopting an appropriate exfoliation methodology, tuning the particle size and varying the concentration.48 For instance, a single-layer dispersion of MXenes with a low concentration shows a noticeable G′/G′′ ratio, which is suitable for spray coating and spin coating (Fig. 7b). Meanwhile, the sample in a moderate concentration range exhibits soft solid-like rheology and power-law scaling at low and high applied frequencies, respectively. This indicates that single-layer MXenes at moderate concentrations are suitable for ink-jet printing. However, the post-printing process requires regaining the viscosity and providing rigidity against gravity. In addition, the moderate concentration of MXenes in an aqueous medium failed to provide such rigidity.48 Moreover, these single layers of MXenes at higher concentrations exhibit a gel-like nature with a relatively weak structure that fails to stand with gravitational force. The rheology of multi-layer MXenes has shown similar behaviors to a single-layer dispersion at lower concentrations. However, the stacking of layers reduces the zeta potential values and this causes lower dispersion stability. At a moderate concentration of multi-layer MXenes, the G′/G′′ value was found to be high (gel like nature) (Fig. 7c).48 Multi-layer MXenes at higher concentrations show high G′/G′′ values at lower frequencies that lead to the relaxation of the suspension and maybe the clogging effect.28,48,77 In overall, the optimal G′/G′′ values for aqueous MXene dispersion indicate that MXenes found self-resilience to print directly (i.e., without additives) using screen-printing.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic comparison of the required layer thickness and printing resolution for different printing methods. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 1, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b) and (c) Dependency of the G′/G′′ on frequency for single-layer and multi-layer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets dispersed in water (the bold stars on the plot indicate the estimated processing parameters utilized in supercapacitor (yellow and purple), thin-film (green), and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (light yellow)). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 48, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Optical images displaying MXene patterns on an AlOx-PET substrate. AFM image displays the inkjet-printed line with a homogeneous surface including interconnected nanosheets. The plots illustrate the height versus distance and thickness versus the number of the printed paths. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 26, Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
The surface tension of the ink as a crucial parameter for the post-printing process must be lower (7–10 mN m−1) than the surface energy of the substrates (note: MXene dispersion with a noticeable concentration of 12.5 mg mL−1 in organic solvents has high surface tension values).26 However, each substrate has a specific surface energy and might be higher than the expected value (i.e., glass and polyethylene terephthalate have a surface energy value of ∼36 and ∼48 mN m−1, respectively).26 Hence, the substrate selection and tuning of the ink characteristics according to the desired substrate surface energy are the key steps for achieving high performance patterns. Interestingly, the surface modification of flexible substrates is required to be considered to improve their surface energy and make them suitable for additive-free MXene inks as another way of addressing this issue. In this context, inorganic AlOx coating on the polyethylene terephthalate surface has been found to increase the surface tension value of the substrate to ∼66 mN m−1 (Fig. 7d) and led to decent coating with an additive free ink.26 However, the substrate wetting issues like the CRE still have not been resolved and certainly need to be considered. Likewise, tuning the surface tension by selecting a polar solvent with low boiling points has also been proposed. For instance, a mixture of organic N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone and ethanol has been employed in Ti3C2Tx MXene ink formulation to optimize the surface tension and improve the printing resolution. Another way of reducing the surface tension is by changing the particle size. The surface tension of the ink was found to decrease to 68.8 mN m−1 for MXenes with a particle size of 350 nm from the initial 76.5 mN m−1 with a particle size of 2 μm.28 Nevertheless, this change in the surface area is still found to be higher than the surface energy of the most of the flexible substrate substrates.28
Aqueous MXene inks have displayed a shear thinning behavior for a wide range of concentrations (1.5–150 mg mL−1) in between 0.01 and 103 s−1. However, this range of shear values is not suitable for inkjet printing, where it should be 106 s−1. Therefore, viscosity which is another tunable parameter could help to develop the shear value of additive-free MXene inks, and this could be done by changing the particle size of MXenes. In a research study, a reduced flake size of Ti3C2Tx MXenes from 2 μm to ∼300 nm has indicated a change in viscosity from 5.1 cP to 1.5 cP. This is a benignant method, where such a low viscosity of the ink is preferred for inkjet printing.28 The rheological properties are still unsatisfactory for large-scale printing of high performance electronic components using inkjet using this additive free method. Therefore, either a compromise in the ink resolution with the MXene ink, the usage of additives, or substrate surface modification is still being followed. Hence, the exploration of alternative solutions for ink formulation strategies is required.26,28
3.4 Advents in MXene ink formulations
Inkjet printing has been reported to have good compatibility with various flexible substrates at low operating temperatures.78,79 It also can print a pattern on a large-scale area with low material wastage and high resolution. Moreover, robustness in controlling the material deposition offers micron-size patterns with high precision and the jetting ink formulation is the key step for the full exploitation of this technology. As discussed in the above section, the low viscosity of water-based MXene inks can hamper the stability of the jetting process leading to the formation of satellite droplets and jetting deviation. Furthermore, the high surface tension of water-based MXene inks will not form sufficient droplets that can be generated by jetting nozzles less than 50 μm.5,26,33 As a result, MXene nanosheets in such droplets tend to accumulate at the edges during deposition on the substrates, which causes the CRE. Thus, the addition of binder content in water-based ink formulation can help to increase the viscosity of the ink, facilitating particular interactions with the substrate by reducing the surface tension. For instance, the incorporation of synthetic protein molecules (polypeptides) with MXene nanosheets as a binder was found to facilitate the control of the aggregation of a matrix (Fig. 8a).20 Besides, the generated high viscosity allows the uniform distribution of MXene nanosheets in ink droplets, which eventually reduces the CRE (Fig. 8b). These MXene/protein inks were successfully employed for printing on various flexible substrates such as cellulose paper, polyethylene terephthalate, and polymethylmethacrylate. Tandem repeat units of these protein molecules consist of hydrophobic and polar amino acid functional groups, which can significantly reduce the surface tension and develop the viscosity of the ink. The tandem repeat protein with a molecular weight of 40.5 kDa80 and a concentration of 0.95 mg mL−120 was found to change the surface tension, viscosity, and Z values to 40 mN m−1 (initial value of 51.5 mN m−1), 3.4 cP (initial value of 5.1 cP), and 21.3 (initial value of 27.5), respectively.20 It has been found that the protein functional groups on MXene nanosheets could form strong hydrogen bonding. Nevertheless, this statement could not be seen with the other chemical binders. Although there are several exploration studies about the interaction of proteins and 2DNMs,81 the assembly dynamics and interaction of MXenes with proteins are still unexamined.20 Also, the MXene ink with protein functionalization (2.25 mg mL−1) has shown great stability for ∼6 months, whereas the bare MXene has shown stability for 2 months in DMSO. It should be noted that an increase in the composition of non-conductive protein (binders) ink formulations causes some detriments like (i) reducing the conductivity of MXene and (ii) a complicated degradation methodology after printing patterns on soft substrates for some specific applications like MBs and MSCs.20 In this context, Yu et al.82 examined a crumpled N-doped MXene and employed it as an aqueous ink for screen-printing and extrusion 3D printing with an effective formulation strategy (Fig. 8c). To do so, two different types of inks with and without binders are formulated for screen-printing and extrusion 3D printing, respectively.82 The formulated MXene ink for screen-printing exhibited a significant shear-thinning non-Newtonian fluid behavior, implying the decrease of viscosity with increasing shear rates. It was interesting that the incorporation of conductive carbon into the aqueous MXene ink not only improved the rheological properties but also developed the conductivity of MXene layers after printing (Fig. 8d).82 Although this statement is true, a binder-free ink sample with suitable rheological properties for inkjet printing is more advanced for large-scale production of micro-device components. Similarly, a partially oxidized MXene solution (i.e., with TiO2)83 was found to offer good rheological properties in water compared to the pristine MXene nanosheets. The only drawback of the oxidized MXene sample was an enhancement in sheet electrical resistance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Ti3C2Tx MXene, the tandem proteins with repetitive amino acid units and the fluidic nature of the corresponding ink (n = 11 Tr42), schematic of protein-mediated MXene assembly within inkjet printing, and photos of pristine and protein-based Ti3C2Tx/DMSO dispersions with a diverse concentration of protein. (b) Optical photos of printed samples on cellulose paper with diverse ink solutions during inkjet printing, and high-resolution images of inkjet-printed (i) pristine and (ii) protein-based MXenes on cellulose paper substrates. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 20, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic representation of synthesis of a crumpled N-doped MXene and direct ink printing of MXene-N ink by screen and extrusion printing. (d) Rheological behaviors of the activated carbon/CNT/MXene-N/GO and activated carbon/CNT/GO inks. Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 82, Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
4 MXene sediment inks for screen-printed micro-supercapacitors
In-plane MSCs have an advantage for the fabrication of flexible micro-devices, and they can be utilized in artificial intelligence and the internet of things.2,84 MSCs could store energy by creating an electrical double layer with a few nanometers thickness on the surface of electrodes, which are either separated by a solid insulator or electrolyte solution. The fabrication of in-plane MSCs requires the printing of these electrodes on flexible substrates and sandwiching electrodes with an insulator/electrolyte.4 However, the viability of such printed MSCs depends on the performance; the performance of the device depends on the electrode material selection. In this context, MXene nanosheets have been found to be efficient materials for the fabrication of conductive flexible electrodes.5,85 MXene-based MSCs are found to possess a capacity of high energy density with a long lifetime and great mechanical flexibility (Table 2). However, the processing of MXene nanosheets and printing them on soft substrates represent the major issue.5 The methodologies like laser scribing, spray masking, and lithography are found inefficient in controlling the thickness of 2D nanolayers without damaging the surface of soft substrates. Moreover, these methodologies are found not capable of producing MXene based MSCs on a large scale. In this context, the fabrication of highly efficient MSCs on flexible substrates using low-cost routes is in demand and has advantages.
Table 2 Screen printed MXene and modified MXene-based MSCs and their performances




MXene type
Electrolyte
Areal (CA) or volumetric capacity (CV) or capacitance (C)
Stability
Ref.




Ascorbic acid modified-Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 108.1 mF cm−2 and CV = 720.7 F cm−3
Retention of 94.7% specific capacitance after 4000 cycles

30



Carbon nanotube-Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 317 mF cm−2
Retention of 32.8% (at a scan rate of 100 V s−1)

86



RuO2·xH2O-AgNW incorporated Ti3C2Tx
PVA/KOH electrolyte

C
V = 864.2 F cm−3
90% retention after 10000 cycles

87



N-doped Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 70.1 mF cm−2
92% capacitance retention after 7000 cycles

82



Phenylsulfonic acid functionalized Ti3C2
KOH

C = 160 F g−1
91% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles

82



Mn ion-intercalated Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 87 mF cm−2
82% retention after 5000 cycles

88



Direct printing of Ti3C2Tx (on a textile substrate)
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 294 mF cm−2
98% retention after 10000 cycles

28



Ti3C2Tx
H3PO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 887.5 μF cm−2
85% retention of capacitance after 10000 cycles

89



Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 158 mF cm−2
95.8% of retention of capacitance after 17000 cycles

35



Ti3C2Tx
KOH/PVA

C
A = 28.5 mF cm−2
92% retention capacitance after 10000 cycles

90



Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 25 mF cm−2
92% retention of capacitance after 10000 cycles

90



Ti3C2Tx
H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte

C
A = 43 mF cm−2, and CV = 562 F cm−3
—

26





In pursuit of alternative efficient methodologies, screen-printing,90 spin coating,91 and spray coating92 of 2MXene as electrode patterns have found effective in the production of large-scale flexible thin-film MSCs. However, the thickness of patterns produced and the wastage of materials are considerably high and uncontrollable in the case of spin and spray coating methodologies. On the other hand, screen-printing was found much more efficient in controlling the thickness with relatively low material wastage. The patterning of MXene electrodes on flexible substrates with high efficacy is the key issue for the practical application of MXene-based MSCs. More importantly, MSCs with high areal capacitance require a high-quality screen printable ink, development of printing strategies, and scaling the production to an industrial scale. Ti3C2Tx is the most studied MXene that is known to have high conductivity and demonstrated as an active area for flexible MSCs. However, (i) the low areal capacitance, (ii) high production cost, and (iii) low stability of this 2DNM under natural environmental conditions are the major issues for flexible MSCs. Moreover, MXene-based MSCs are printed on flexible substrates with additive inks leaving the residual surfactant and binders on the substrate surface, which need to be removed after printing using high-temperature annealing or by chemical treatment. Either of the above-mentioned methodologies is not compatible with most soft substrates and may oxidize MXene nanosheets in air. In this regard, it is believed that the production of industrially viable flexible MSCs relies on the direct printing of MXenes with a high active component per unit area that could improve the interfacial interaction of the MXene nanolayer and its composites. This direct printing strategy (additive and binder free) has been found to be an effective solution for improving the areal capacitance. In research work, the direct printing of Ti3C2Tx MXenes dispersed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, C5H9NO) solvent on AlOx-PET substrates was investigated for the purpose of their using in MSCs.26 The line thicknesses during printing were carefully adjusted by the number of coatings and for instance when the number of coatings (〈N〉) = 10 and 100, the thickness was found to be 100 ± 21.5 and 530 ± 120 nm, respectively. An increase in the number of coating layers from 1 to 5 caused an exponential reduction in the sheet resistance (Rs) value. This phenomenon indicates effective charge transportation with the increase in conductive layers. In addition, the areal capacitance of the MSC enhanced from 3.5 to 43 mF cm−2, with the number of coatings. However, this areal capacitance was not enough for practical applications. Moreover, symmetric MSCs made by the direct screen-printing method of MXenes suffer from the generation of limited voltage between just 0 and 0.5 V.26 Hence, the expansion of the operating potential range and a high charge storage capacity are necessary. The fabrication of asymmetric MSCs is found to be an alternative solution to expand the voltage range and improv the charge storage capacity, and it can be achieved by improving the interfacial interactions between MXene layers and concentrating the ink with active components. In this context, the utilization of polymer electrolytes and liquid metals or their gel solutions in ink formulations was found to solve the problem partially. The creation interfacial junctions and expansion of the operating voltage range are achieved by the addition of these materials. However, the compatibility of these electrolytes with planar MSCs bring about other challenges like low life time and complicated fabrication strategies. To address this, Huang et al.92 reported MXene based MSC all solid-state components as an alternative approach to improve the cycle life with gel electrolytes. In this work, flexible patterns on paper are designed and a solid polymer electrolyte is used in the fabrication of MSCs.92 Typical fabrication involves the preparation of electrodes by spray coating of dispersed Ti3C2Tx on paper, followed by UV laser cutting into interdigitated structures. A PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte was then drop-cast on top of these electrodes and the MSCs were sealed after electrolyte casting with poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS, (C2H6OSi)n) glue. Thus, the fabricated MSCs showed a high areal capacitance of 23.4 mF cm−2 with an excellent cycling stability of 92.4% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles. The maximum volumetric energy densities and power density are observed (189.9 mW cm−3, attained at 1.48 mW h cm−3) (Fig. 9a).92 Though the cycle life is increased by the utilization of polymer electrolytes, the capacitance is not up to the mark.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of a flexible all-solid-state MSC with MXenes via spray printing, and its measured areal capacitance, energy density, and capacitance retention. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 92, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of an MXene-based (Ti3C2Tx) flexible solid-state supercapacitor, and its volumetric capacitance comparison with other diverse thin-film systems, as well as its measured areal capacitance compared with other various flexible supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 93 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Recently, despite the delamination of MXene layers, the improvement of charge storage capacity is also observed with intercalation. In this regard, the construction of intercalated layers with a cation/polymer interface is demonstrated as a favorable methodology for improving the charge storage capacity of MSCs. For instance, the intercalation of metal ions like Li+, Na+, K+, NH4+, Cs+, TEA+, Mg2+, Ca2+, and Al3+ in MXenes has been found to be spontaneous in a reversible way. These metal ions after intercalation can improve the energy storage capacity of MSCs by occupying electrochemically active sites on the MXene nanosheets and participate in energy storage. In this context, a flexible Ti3C2Tx film with high volumetric capacitance has been fabricated and showed a larger volumetric capacitance than graphene-based electrodes with the intercalation of H+ (Fig. 9b).93 The simple cation H+ from 1 M H2SO4 in combination with Ti3C2Tx has shown an improved volumetric capacitance 900 F cm−3 compared to bare Ti3C2Tx (300–400 F cm−3). This enhancement in the charge storage mechanism in sulfuric acid intercalated Ti3C2Tx was found to be due to a change in the oxidation state of the Ti atom during the charging and discharging cycles in the presence of H+. It was found that the change is purely pseudocapacitive and there is not any limitation for charge diffusion at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1.93 The rapid protonation and deprotonation process of the terminal oxygen atom of MXene layers with H+ ions was found to boost the pseudocapacitance in MXene based MSCs after H+ intercalation. A similar effect is also shown by some other ions like Li+, NH4+ and Mg2+.93 The improved charge storage capacity and expansion of voltage have been demonstrated with this type of cation/polymer electrolyte interface with printed electrode patterns.
The surface modification of the MXene element in its sediment ink is another approach for improving the capacitance of MSCs. For instance, the doping of N atoms in the MXene lattice has been found to improve the electrochemical performance by increasing the conductivity and redox reactivity.82 The fabrication of an N-dopped MXene MSC involves the printing of electrodes with an N-MXene ink using screen-printing and the application of polyvinyl alcohol/H2SO4 as an electrolyte is demonstrated. Thus, the fabricated quasi-solid-state MSC has shown an improved areal capacitance of ∼70–62 mF cm−2 under the applied potentials 10–100 mV S−1, compared to the undoped MXene sample with ∼25–20 mF cm−2 (Fig. 10a).82 It is also believed that the concentration of the printing medium can also improve the areal capacitance by increasing the resolution. To increase the concentration, the direct/additive-free printing of MXenes over soft substrates is preferred. For instance, the direct printing of clay-like Ti3C2 as an electrode material for MSCs by stamping the patterns was reported to have a concentration of 30 mg mL−1.27 The electrical resistance of such printed Ti3C2 patterns with a 1 mm width was found to vary linearly across the lines. The slope from the graph is 0.16 kΩ cm−1, which is found to be higher than that of the conventional patterns of Ag and Cu and lower than that of carbon inks (∼2.26 kΩ cm−1) (Fig. 10b). MSCs fabricated using this ink without any additional current collectors and in the presence of a PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte have shown much higher areal capacitance (5 mF cm−1) than carbon-based MSCs. These results show the potential viability of additive-free/concentrated MXene inks for high-quality MSC applications.27 In a research effort, the direct printing of MXene sediments on flexible substrates with high concentrations has been reported.35 The screen-printed MSCs using these sediments of MXenes and without additional current collectors and binders were used and the PVA/H2SO4 gel electrolyte was employed for charge mobility. Hence, the fabricated MSC exhibited a pseudocapacitive behavior when its performance is tested. The normalized cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and galvanostatic analysis showed an asymmetric and linear galvanostatic charge discharge (GCD) curve for this assembly. Typical printed MSC performance varied with the number of deposition cycles of the MXene ink; with five consecutive deposition cycles of 〈N〉 = 5 the areal capacitances was found to be maximum (Fig. 10c) (158 mF cm−2 at 0.08 mA cm−2 and 127 mF cm−2 at 2.4 mA cm−2).35
 Fig. 10  (a) The areal capacitance of the N-doped MXene ink MSC in comparison with the other samples studied in different studies at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 82, Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Slope line of resistance dependence on the length of the printed MXene ink with additive-free in water, and its electrical resistivity comparison with silver, copper, and graphite/carbon nanotube inks. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 27, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Different screen-printed patterns of additive-free MXene inks for MSCs, along with their line thickness, sheet resistance, and plots as a function of the number of printed, and areal capacitance of MSCs with a various number of the printed passes. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 35, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Though additive free MXene based MSCs show practically viable performance, their stability and lower cycle life have been found to hinder the development of MSCs on a large scale. To overcome this limitation, the chemical fictionalization and utilization of non-aqueous solvents have been reported as efficient strategies. For instance, the surface modification of Ti3C2Tx nanosheets with sodium ascorbate (SA) in a printable ink was found to remarkably enhance the oxidation resistance.30 In another study, organic molecules such as glucose, glutathione, oxalic acid, sodium borohydride, and hydrazine have been found to have a similar affect to SA. Thus, a modified SA-MXene ink was utilized to fabricate active electrodes for in-plane MSCs using inkjet printing on paper and integrated with a PVA/H2SO4 electrolyte. The double layer formed at the electrode/electrolyte interface has shown a volumetric capacitance of 720.7 F cm−3 with improved stability in its fabricated MSC.30 However, the improvement of the stability and the performance of MXene-based MSCs prepared either by additive or additive-free are not enough for their scalable production and integration with other components that could be equipped in wearable devices such as displays, sensors, and solar cells. Hence, the challenges of these MXene based MSCs in the fabrication of wearable devices should be considered. Moreover, the selection of materials, ink preparation and the deposition process are found to be important in realizing long-lasting high performance wearable devices.
5 Future scope
Reproducibility, scalability, and compatibility are important issues for printable MXenes for MSCs and integrating them with flexible and stretchable devices as charge storage components. In this context, the printing and integration of high electrical performance MSCs with other active components in device engineering are the key approaches for the development of miniaturized devices. For instance, an interesting approach for the development of stretchable and flexible self-charging power devices of MXene-based MSCs has been reported and it is successfully integrated in triboelectric nanogenerators (Fig. 11a).94–98 A triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) is found to be an efficient technology in energy harvesting by converting ambient mechanical energy (i.e., hand tapping motion) to electrical energy for its straightforward usage or accumulation in an electrochemical storage device (Fig. 11b).97 Generally, micro-batteries are used as energy storage units in combination with TENGs. However, low power density, limited cycle life and their incompatibility with TENGs are the major drawbacks of the current micro-batteries. Hence, MSCs have been considered as this work proposes to utilize them in TENGs because of their high-power density and good cycle life. MXene sediment inks with superior fluidity and electronegativity are one of the great candidates for TENGs and they impart long-term reliability and stable electrical output to the fabricated TENGs. For instance, in a recent research study, cellulose nanofibrils and Ti3C2Tx MXenes (as CNFs/MXene liquid electrodes) have been used in a stretchable TENG (CM-TENG).4 The working mechanism and performance of CM-TENG have been shown in Fig. 11c. The output performance of this device demonstrated an open-circuit voltage, a short-circuit current, and a short-circuit transferred charge of 300 V, 5.5 μA, and 120 nC, respectively.94
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the stretchable and flexible CNFs/Ti3C2Tx liquid electrode-based TENG. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 94, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic illustration of a flexible self-charging system. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 97, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the charge distribution and working mechanism of CM-TENG. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 94, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Short-circuit transferred charge, open-circuit voltage, and short-circuit current of the generated TENG. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 97, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In another research study, a TENG was fabricated with a Ti3C2Tx MXene-based solid-state MSC with PVA/H3PO4 gel as an electrolyte in a two-electrode configuration. The device was solidified by cross-linking the hydrogel electrolyte by incorporating glutaraldehyde (C5H8O2). The solidification endowed the MSC components with structural integrity and mechanical stability. The characterization results exhibited excellent cycling stability with a charge storage capacitance retention of ∼76% and a coulombic efficiency of 95% for 10000 cycles.97 The power TENG system could be charged continuously by common human motion with around 5 Hz without having a remarkable current leakage. The capacitance of the MCS and the maximum output power of the fabricated TENG were found to be 23 mF cm−2 and 7.8 μW cm−2, respectively.97Fig. 11d shows the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current, and short-circuit transferred charge of the generated TENG.
Similarly, researchers have tried to fabricate an integrated triple mode sensor equipped with a Ti3C2Tx MXene MSC.99 The sensor is fabricated by sandwiching the three active layers in between Cu foil, a composite made from mixing graphene, cellulose nanofibrils, and MXene components acting as an active component that can show response to pressure, temperature, and light (Fig. 12). In combination with this sensor, an all-solid-state Ti3C2Tx MSC was equipped as a flexible and portable power source. Typical Ti3C2Tx fabrication in that research work involves the utilization of the same composite made using graphene/CNFs/MXene and PVA/KOH as an electrolyte solution. The as-fabricated MSC was found to be efficient in performing the electrochemical cycle and demonstrated a volumetric capacitance of 148.25 F cm−3.99
 Fig. 12  Illustration of synthesizing a stretchable MSC as an energy system, and a sensor from graphene, cellulose nanofibrils, and Ti3C2Tx composite paper. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 99, Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The efficiency of such integrating devices relies on the fabrication approach for individual components. Hence, screen-printed MXene MSCs are found to have a significant effect on providing and delivering such electrical energy performance. However, integrating these MSCs with active components as power storage devices is still under prototype study. Likewise, scaling these devices into commercial size will open new challenges like the reduction of production cost, high functionality and ultra-sensitivity of the devices. More importantly, high performance and combatable MSCs are in high demand for such integrating approaches.
Screen-printing could enable a low material wastage and scalable production of MSCs. Besides, the performance of screen-printed MSCs can be further improved by chemical modification and making the composite of MXenes before the formulation of printable inks.100,101 However, the comparability of the MXene composites with screen printable ink rheology and substrates surface interactions is an important consideration. An additive-free MXene ink on the other hand helps in improving the areal capacitance, but the stability of bare MXenes under moist conditions is to be more focused on for MXene based MSCs with high reproducibility.
6 Conclusions
The present review elaborates the scope of scalable production of integrative MXene based MSCs as a power source for micro-electronic components in the fabrication of flexible miniaturized devices, which can have promising applications in the health, environment, and energy sectors. MXene based MSCs with high theoretical areal capacitance and excellent mechanical properties can be embedded as power sources for flexible miniaturized devices. The issues like (i) chemical and colloidal stability, (ii) low efficiency, (iii) utilization of a high quantity of binders, (iv) utilization of aqueous, and (v) lack of methodologies for scalable production limit their potential viability in flexible electronics fabrication. This review focuses on screen printable MXene MSCs by understanding and developing high-quality inks via looking into novel formulation strategizes that are adaptable to screen-printing. More importantly, since flexible electronics are concerned, the discussion of ink formulation is extended to ink interactions with soft substrates like PET and A4 paper. The substrate interactions and the wetting conditions have been discussed for the efficient printing of high-quality MXene patterns. The low oxidative stability is another important issue with MXene based screen printable inks. The mechanistic discussion for the causes of high-rate oxidation under aqueous conditions and the effect of surface modification of MXene nanosheets and utilization of co-solvents to improve the stability by decreasing the rate of oxidations is discussed. Also, the approaches of MXene patterns for the effective fabrication of MXene printed devices and the effect of utilization of liquid electrolytes with the purpose of utilization of solid electrolytes and asymmetric MSCs are been elaborated. The integration of MXene MSCs with sensors and other components as prototype miniaturized devices on flexible substrates is shown and the challenges in developing such devices require large scale and highly efficient MSC production. The review discussed the hurdles and the large-scale production of MSCs and their integration as electrical components in flexible device fabrication, where it needs to be considered for next-generation electronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results was supported by the European Structural and Investment Funds, OP RDE-funded project ‘CHEMFELLS IV’ (No. CZ.02.2.69/0.0/0.0/20_079/0017899). Z. S. was supported by the Czech Science Foundation (GACR No. 20-16124J).
References
H. Li and J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1805864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Da, J. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Zhu, X. Chen and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802793 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, N. R. Thuniki, F. Guzzetta and Z. Sofer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010320 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Benzigar, V. D. B. C. Dasireddy, X. Guan, T. Wu and G. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002993 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Jiang, J. K. El-Demellawi, H. Kim and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, M. Nikzad, J. Wang and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 702–734 RSC .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, J. Wang and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13509–13537 RSC .
J. Azadmanjiri, J. Wang, C. C. Berndt and A. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3824–3849 RSC .
J. Azadmanjiri, V. K. Srivastava, P. Kumar, Z. Sofer, J. Min and J. Gong, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100600 CrossRef .
A. Khan, J. Azadmanjiri, B. Wu, L. Liping, Z. Sofer and J. Min, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100451 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Secor, P. L. Prabhumirashi, K. Puntambekar, M. L. Geier and M. C. Hersam, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1347–1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Azadmanjiri, P. Kumar, V. K. Srivastava and Z. Sofer, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3116–3143 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. T. Seo, J. Zhu, V. K. Sangwan, E. B. Secor, S. G. Wallace and M. C. Hersam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5675–5681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Blauth, G. Vest, S. L. Rosemary, M. Prechtl, O. Hartwig, M. Jürgensen, M. Kaniber, A. V. Stier and J. J. Finley, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1902–1909 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, T. Lin, L. Lin, S. Lin, F. Fu, X. Wang and L. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2773–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Carey, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, J. Ren, A. Mansouri, J. M. Kim, C. Wang, C. Ducati, R. Sordan and F. Torrisi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1202 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Zheng, F. Zhou, J. Qin, X. Shi, S. Wang, C. Sun, X. Bao and Z.-S. Wu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 7, 64–72 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Tyagi, H. Wang, W. Huang, L. Hu, Y. Tang, Z. Guo, Z. Ouyang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3535–3559 RSC .
J. Yao and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 454–476 RSC .
M. Vural, A. Pena-Francesch, J. Bars-Pomes, H. Jung, H. Gudapati, C. B. Hatter, B. D. Allen, B. Anasori, I. T. Ozbolat, Y. Gogotsi and M. C. Demirel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801972 CrossRef .
X. Wu, T. Tu, Y. Dai, P. Tang, Y. Zhang, Z. Deng, L. Li, H.-B. Zhang and Z.-Z. Yu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Busby, A. Agresti, S. Pescetelli, A. Di Carlo, C. Noel, J.-J. Pireaux and L. Houssiau, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef .
S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, J. Heier and C. Zhang, J. Phys.: Energy, 2020, 2, 031004 CAS .
M. M. Hasan, M. M. Hossain and H. K. Chowdhury, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3231–3269 RSC .
J. Ma, S. Zheng, Y. Cao, Y. Zhu, P. Das, H. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, L. Chi, S. Liu and Z.-S. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100746 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S.-H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Barwich, C. Ó. Coileáin, N. McEvoy, H. C. Nerl, B. Anasori, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1795 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Quain, T. S. Mathis, N. Kurra, K. Maleski, K. L. Van Aken, M. Alhabeb, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800256 CrossRef .
S. Uzun, M. Schelling, K. Hantanasirisakul, T. S. Mathis, R. Askeland, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Small, 2021, 17, 2006376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Mehrali, Y.-Z. Zhang, M. A. Timmerman, B. A. Boukamp, P.-Y. Xu and J. E. ten Elshof, Energy Storage Materials, 2021, 36, 318–325 CrossRef .
C.-W. Wu, B. Unnikrishnan, I. W. P. Chen, S. G. Harroun, H.-T. Chang and C.-C. Huang, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 25, 563–571 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, W. Li, T. Hai, R. Yue, Z. Chen, C. Lao, Y. Ge, G. Xie, Q. Wen and H. Zhang, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 34 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, Y. Lei, H. Liang, K. Xi, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 27, 78–95 CrossRef .
S. P. Sreenilayam, I. Ul Ahad, V. Nicolosi and D. Brabazon, Mater. Today, 2021, 43, 99–131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chae, S. J. Kim, S.-Y. Cho, J. Choi, K. Maleski, B.-J. Lee, H.-T. Jung, Y. Gogotsi, Y. Lee and C. W. Ahn, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8387–8393 RSC .
S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, R. Schneider, A. Verma, J. Heier, F. Nüesch and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, X. Jiang, H. Zhang, J. Qiu and C. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2021, 48, 214–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azadmanjiri, C. C. Berndt, J. Wang, A. Kapoor and V. K. Srivastava, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 109361–109385 RSC .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Å. Persson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4955–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, H. Sheng, W. Lan, A. Pakdel, J. Heier and F. Nüesch, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 29–55 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bafekry, C. V. Nguyen, C. Stampfl, B. Akgenc and M. Ghergherehchi, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2020, 257, 2000343 CrossRef CAS .
B. Soundiraraju and B. K. George, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8892–8900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, T. S. Mathis, A. Sarycheva, C. B. Hatter, S. Uzun, A. Levitt and Y. Gogotsi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5444–5448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and Q. Huang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5775–5780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Alnoor, A. Elsukova, J. Palisaitis, I. Persson, E. N. Tseng, J. Lu, L. Hultman and P. O. Å. Persson, Mater. Today Adv., 2021, 9, 100123 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC .
B. Akuzum, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, N. J. Alvarez, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2685–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Chakraborty, J. Azadmanjiri, C. L. P. Pavithra, X. Wang, S. H. Masood, S. R. Dey and J. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2004900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov, D. Krishnan, C. Morant, X. Liu, G. S. Duesberg, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Mckeon, J. Garcia, S. Pinilla, S. Barwich, M. Möbius, P. Stamenov, J. N. Coleman and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2106253 Search PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, W. Sun, P. Ilani-Kashkouli, A. Tselev, P. R. C. Kent, N. Kabengi, M. Naguib, M. Alhabeb, W.-Y. Tsai, A. P. Baddorf, J. Huang, S. Jesse, Y. Gogotsi and N. Balke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2549–2558 RSC .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xuan, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Liang, L. Cheng, X. Yang, Z. Liu, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and F. Geng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14569–14574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Chen, S.-N. Lai, C.-C. Yen, X. Jiang, D. Peroulis and L. A. Stanciu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11490–11501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, L. Zhao, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, FlatChem, 2019, 17, 100128 CrossRef CAS .
V. Natu, M. Sokol, L. Verger and M. W. Barsoum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27745–27753 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shi, P. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Park, M. R. Lohe, Y. Wu, A. Shaygan Nia, S. Yang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 8689–8693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, S. J. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, Y. Lim, Y. Chae, B.-J. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, H. Han, Y. Gogotsi and C. W. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 573–581 RSC .
Z. H. Fu, Q. F. Zhang, D. Legut, C. Si, T. C. Germann, T. Lookman, S. Y. Du, J. S. Francisco and R. F. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 104103 CrossRef .
S. Lim, H. Park, J. Yang, C. Kwak and J. Lee, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 579, 123648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23301–23336 RSC .
G. Hu, J. Kang, L. W. T. Ng, X. Zhu, R. C. T. Howe, C. G. Jones, M. C. Hersam and T. Hasan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265–3300 RSC .
D. McManus, S. Vranic, F. Withers, V. Sanchez-Romaguera, M. Macucci, H. Yang, R. Sorrentino, K. Parvez, S.-K. Son, G. Iannaccone, K. Kostarelos, G. Fiori and C. Casiraghi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 343–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y.-Z. Zhang, D. Dubbink and J. E. ten Elshof, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 481–488 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hu, L. Yang, Z. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Jin, J. Dai, Q. Wu, S. Liu, X. Zhu, X. Wang, T.-C. Wu, R. C. T. Howe, T. Albrow-Owen, L. W. T. Ng, Q. Yang, L. G. Occhipinti, R. I. Woodward, E. J. R. Kelleher, Z. Sun, X. Huang, M. Zhang, C. D. Bain and T. Hasan, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba5029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sarycheva, A. Polemi, Y. Liu, K. Dandekar, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau0920 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
H. Huang, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Jin, N. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Chu, B. Gu, W. Deng and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104431 CrossRef CAS .
K. Montazeri, M. Currie, L. Verger, P. Dianat, M. W. Barsoum and B. Nabet, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Shen, N. He, J. Zhu, Y. Chen, X. Wan, X. Lian, E. Hu, J. Xu and Y. Tong, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 19467–19472 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. A. W. Dryfe and S. Barg, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902725 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Orangi, F. Hamade, V. A. Davis and M. Beidaghi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 640–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rastin, B. Zhang, A. Mazinani, K. Hassan, J. Bi, T. T. Tung and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16069–16080 RSC .
K. Hassan, M. J. Nine, T. T. Tung, N. Stanley, P. L. Yap, H. Rastin, L. Yu and D. Losic, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19007–19042 RSC .
X. Tang, G. Murali, H. Lee, S. Park, S. Lee, S. M. Oh, J. Lee, T. Y. Ko, C. M. Koo, Y. J. Jeong, T. K. An, I. In and S. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2010897 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sanchez-Romaguera, S. Wünscher, B. M. Turki, R. Abbel, S. Barbosa, D. J. Tate, D. Oyeka, J. C. Batchelor, E. A. Parker, U. S. Schubert and S. G. Yeates, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2132–2140 RSC .
S. Chung, K. Cho and T. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801445 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vural, Y. Lei, A. Pena-Francesch, H. Jung, B. Allen, M. Terrones and M. C. Demirel, Carbon, 2017, 118, 404–412 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Demirel, M. Vural and M. Terrones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704990 CrossRef .
L. Yu, Z. Fan, Y. Shao, Z. Tian, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901839 CrossRef .
R. Cherrington, D. J. Hughes, S. Senthilarasu and V. Goodship, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 866–870 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kurra, B. Ahmed, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601372 CrossRef .
E. Kim, B.-J. Lee, K. Maleski, Y. Chae, Y. Lee, Y. Gogotsi and C. W. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105616 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Li, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803987 CrossRef .
X. Feng, J. Ning, B. Wang, H. Guo, M. Xia, D. Wang, J. Zhang, Z.-S. Wu and Y. Hao, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104741 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wen, X. Wang, L. Liu, C. Hu, C. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Liu and G. Ying, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 17766–17780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Dall'Agnese, G. Wei, C. Zhang, Y. Gogotsi and W. Han, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 479–488 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, S. Wang, F. Wan, Z. Tie and Z. Niu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101302 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. Chu, H. Su, H. Zhang, Y. Xie, W. Deng, N. Chen, F. Liu, H. Zhang, B. Gu, W. Deng and W. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, B. Anasori, A. Seral-Ascaso, S.-H. Park, N. McEvoy, A. Shmeliov, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702678 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-T. Cao, H. Ouyang, W. Xin, S. Chao, C. Ma, Z. Li, F. Chen and M.-G. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004181 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, X. Li, Y. Yao, L. Lan, Y. Shao, F. Zhao, Y. Ying and J. Ping, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, C. Wu, X. Li, Y. Yao, L. Lan, F. Zhao, Z. Ye, Y. Ying and J. Ping, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jiang, C. Wu, Z. Wang, A. C. Wang, J.-H. He, Z. L. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bae, M. S. Kim, T. Oh, B. L. Suh, T. G. Yun, S. Lee, K. Hur, Y. Gogotsi, C. M. Koo and I.-D. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 123–135 RSC .
J. Wei, Y. Teng, T. Meng, X. Bu, H. Du and D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24620–24634 RSC .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, H. Sheng, W. Dou, Q. Su, J. Zhou, E. Xie and W. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 41410–41418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† J. A. and T. N. R. contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Jalal Azadmanjiri	Jalal Azadmanjiri received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, followed by a postdoctoral research fellowship at the Swinburne University of Technology. Recently he succeeded in getting the CZ Marie Curie (CHEMFells IV) fellowship to work on 2D nanomaterials, and their synthesis, characterization, and applications. His research interests include nanomaterials and nanotechnology, focusing on the design, synthesis, functionalization, and characterization of nanomaterials with 0D, 1D, and 2D structures. He is also interested in the development of hybrid materials with layered nanostructures for energy storage, energy conversion, and biomedical applications, and the study of their surfaces and interfaces.
Thuniki Naveen Reddy	Dr Naveen Reddy Thuniki has completed graduation (BSc) in Industrial Chemistry from Osmania University, post-graduation (MSc) in Analytical Chemistry from the National Institute of Technology, Warangal (NITW), and PhD from the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (CSIR-IICT), in the field of chemical sciences. Presently he is working as an assistant professor in chemistry at GCET, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
Lukáš Děkanovský	Lukáš Děkanovský obtained his material chemistry diploma from the University of Chemistry and Technology Prague in 2019. In 2021, he joined Prof. Sofer's group at the University of Chemistry and Technology working on 2D materials and composites with conductive polymers. His present research is focused on the synthesis of nanocatalysts for energy conversion and energy storage devices, relevant in environmental fields.
Abhilash Karuthedath Parameswaran	Dr Abhilash Karuthedath Parameswaran did his PhD in the field of all-solid-state Li-ion batteries, at Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India. He also worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the Advanced Battery Research Laboratory, Department of Physics, National University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore. Also, he worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the NEMs Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology (NJUST), Nanjing, China. Currently, he is working as a post-doctoral researcher (CHEMFELLs IV) in the Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology (UCT), Prague. His research interests include all-solid-state batteries, nano-energy materials (NEMs), and novel 3D and 2D energy storage systems.
Saeed Ashtiani	Saeed Ashtiani graduated in the field of Chemical Engineering-Polymer Science from the Sahand University of Technology and is currently working on novel hybrid materials for energy applications at the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague. His research focuses on the molecular level engineering, synthesis, characterization, and application of 3D/2D magnetic and conductive crystal materials incorporated into organic matrices.
Zdeněk Sofer	Prof. Zdenek Sofer has been a tenured professor at the University of Chemistry and Technology Prague since 2019. He received his PhD from the same university in 2008. During his PhD he spent one year in Forschungszentrum Jülich (Peter Grünberg Institute, Germany) and had a postdoctoral stay at University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. His research interests concern 2D materials including graphene, layered chalcogenides, and their crystal growth, chemical modifications, and derivatization. His research covers various applications of 2D materials including energy storage and conversion, electronic, catalysis, and sensing devices. He has published over 500 articles, which received over 18600 citations (h-index of 67).

Organic (PEDOT:PSS)	∼142 nm	30 mg mL−1	
ρ = 1.067 g cm−3, γ = 55.64 mN m−1, η = 19.71 cP, Z = 1.81	−40.5 mV	615 S cm−1	22.6 mF cm−2	9.4 mW h cm−3	MSCs	
25

Organic (ethanol)	2.4 μm	0.7 mg mL−1	
ρ = 0.791 g cm−3, γ = 22.1 mN m−1, η = 7.3 mPa s, Z = 2.6	−40 mV	2770 S cm−1 (510 S cm−1 after 6 months)	12 mF cm−2	0.32 μW h cm−2	MSCs	
26

Aqueous (water)	1.1 μm	20 and 30 mg mL−1	
η = 1–10 Pa s	−30 mV	0.15 Ω cm−1	5 mF cm−2	—	MSCs	
27

Aqueous (water)	350 nm	22.4 mg mL−1	
γ = 68.8 mN m−1, η = 1.5 cP, Z = 18.9	−40 mV	450 Ω cm−1	60 mF cm−2	12.36 μW h cm−2	MSCs	
28

Aqueous (water)	2 μm	18 mg mL−1	
γ = 76.5 mN m−1, η = 1.5 cP, Z = 19.9	−40 mV	9.8 Ω cm−1	32 mF cm−2	—	MSCs	
28

Aqueous (water)	—	4.5 mg mL−1	
γ = 80.3 mN m−1, η = 1.4 mP s, Z = 30	—	5.9 Ω sq−1	9.8 mF cm−2	0.49 μW h cm−2	MSCs	
29

Aqueous (water)	200 nm	5 mg mL−1	
ρ = ∼1100 kg m−3, γ = 73 mN m−1, η = 1 mP s, Z = 19.4	−42.3 ± 4.1 mV	119 S cm−1	108.1 mF cm−2	100.2 mW h cm−3	MSCs	
30

Organic (dimethylsulfoxide, DMSO)	3–6 μm	2.25 mg mL−1	
γ = 40 mN m−1, η = 3.4 cP, Z = 21.3	—	1080 ± 175 S cm−1	—	—	Electromagnetic shielding	
20

Organic (DMSO)	10–30 μm	∼2 mg mL−1	
ρ = 0.8 g cm−3, γ = 23 mN m−1, η = 2.4 mPa s, Z = 8.3	—	—	—	—	Photonics	
31


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the elements used to make MXenes and four typical structures of MXenes. The M layers in a MAX phase are approximately close-packed and octahedral sites have been occupied by X (C and N) atoms. The adjacent M–X layers also interleaved with A layers. The MXene nanosheets obtained after etching and delamination processes have four atomic structures M2X, M3X2, M4X3, and M5X4 with hydrophilic surfaces. The MXene phase structures show polar surface terminated ends that can interact with other polar molecules like DMSO and water. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) show the layer structures of the MAX (top) and MXene (bottom) phases. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 44 and 45, Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society and Elsevier. (b) XRD characterization of Ti3C2 MXenes obtained after HF/H2O2 treatment of (i) Ti3SiC2 (MAX phase) before HF treatment, (ii) after 50 wt% HF treatment, (iii) after complete etching of Si from the MAX phase with HF/H2O2 solution and (iv) after intercalation with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAOH). The shift of the (002) peak [MAX (Ti3SiC2) to MXene-TMAOH] observed from 6.1° to 8.9°, which corresponds to a d-spacing enhancement from ∼9.95 Å to 14.43 Å due to the intercalation of TMA+ ions. A stable colloidal solution of Ti3C2 can be collected after liquid delamination of Ti3C2 powder with and without pre-intercalation of TMAOH. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 43, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Rheological properties of Ti3C2Tx MXenes with diverse concentrations; the measured viscosity against the shear rate of (i) single-layer MXene flake suspensions with concentrations ranging from 0.18 mg mL−1 to 3.6 mg mL−1 and (ii) multi-layer MXene dispersions with concentrations ranging from 10 wt% to 70 wt%, and (iii and iv) relative viscosity versus volume fraction and concentration plots for single- and multi-layer Ti3C2Tx dispersions. Also, the experimental data from selected publications have been superimposed for better comparison between Ti3C2Tx, Kaolin clay, and polystyrene. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 48, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Digital photograph (∼50 mL of an additive-free aqueous Ti3C2Tx ink, 22.4 mg mL−1), TEM, atomic force microscopy (AFM), and line profile images of L-Ti3C2Tx flakes. The viscosity, Ti3C2Tx flake size, ink concentration, flake intensity distribution-diameter, and ink concentration viscosity of L-Ti3C2Tx and S-Ti3C2Tx inks during inkjet printing. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 28, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) TEM and the corresponding HR-TEM images of (i) fresh delaminated Ti3C2Tx, and after exposure to air for (ii) 7 days and (iii) 30 days [the insets show the corresponding SAED and fast Fourier transform (FFT) patterns], (iv) Raman spectra of fresh and air-exposed MXenes, and (v) XPS results of fresh and (vi) air-exposed MXenes after 25 days. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 50, Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of cation (Li+, Na+, K+, Cs+, and Mg2+) distributions in MXene interlayers and their intercalations with water (dark grey stands for C, light blue for Ti, red for O, and light pink for H. Note: data have been obtained by ab initio molecular dynamics simulations). The cation-oxygen in water (cation-Ow) distances corresponding to the positions of the maxima of radial distribution functions of Ow, demonstrating a clear correlation with values in bulk solutions. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 53, Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) XRD patterns (i), structural illustration (ii), XPS survey (iii), and high-resolution spectra (iv) for the Ti 2p and C 1s regions of the Ti3AlC2 samples before and after reaction in aqueous TMAOH. The schematic showing an expansion of the basal spacing from the origin of 0.92 nm to 1.50 nm. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 55, Copyright 2016, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Molecular dynamic simulations of Ti3C2 with OH termination intercalated with N2H4: (i) variation in the c-lattice parameter as a function of the number of N2H4 intercalated molecules. (ii) Molecular dynamic scheme of N2H4 intercalated Ti3C2 for a N/C ratio of 0.375 (6 hydrazines per 4 × 2 × 1 Ti3C2 supercell) displaying a nearly complete mono-layer of N2H4. (iii) Comparison of the XRD patterns of Ti3C2 with OH termination intercalated with N2H4 (black color stands for simulated and blue color for experimental results). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 54, Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Oxidative reaction of Ti3C2Tx in water solution and under different humidity conditions. (b) Schematic, XRD patterns, SEM, and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) images of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase, Ti3C2Tx MXene, and functionalized Ti3C2Tx-F, along with the corresponding elemental mappings of the functionalized Ti3C2Tx-F nanosheets displaying a uniform distribution of Ti, C, and F. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 56, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Water contact angle, water contact angle variations (for 60 days of storage in air), and electrical conductance change measurements (for 14 days at humidity of 5 and 100%) of Ti3C2Tx and Ti3C2Tx-F. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 56, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Water contact angle measurements of the pristine Ti3C2Tx MXene, and functionalized Ti3C2Tx with APTES, hexadecyltrimethoxysilane, and FOTS. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 57 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of Ti3AlC2 I2-assisted etching and delamination to obtain MXene nanosheets. (b) The optical and SEM images of the Ti3C2Tx MXenes etched with hydrofluoric acid (left side, with stability <1 week in water) and I2-assisted (right side, with stability 2 weeks in water). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 59, Copyright 2021, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with OTS in 2 mg mL−1 hexane dispersion deposited on the water surface. TEM image and EDS mapping for the elements of the grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with OTS. Four-week colloidal dispersion stability of the grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with OTS dispersed in 2 mg mL−1 hexane. The water contact angle droplet dispensed on the macroscopic grafted Ti3C2Tx MXene with the OTS surface (measured every ∼10 minutes for 1 hour). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 62, Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Graphical representation of diverse fluids showing the shear stress versus shear rate. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 64, Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematics and plots representing the G′ and G′′ of single-layer MXenes with different concentrations (0.90 mg mL−1, 2.70 mg mL−1, and 3.60 mg mL−1) at a constant strain amplitude at different frequencies. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 48, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Optical photos of 2DNM (2D MnO2) ink droplet formation and deposition at different times of printing. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 66, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the contact angle of the ink with substrates according to Young's equation. (e) Schematic representation of the Marangoni effect of solute. (f) Inverted optical micrographs of dried inkjet printed droplets on clean glass for formulated inks using solvent exchange in IPA, IPA-ethanol, IPA-t-butanol, IPA-2-butanol, and IPA-2-butanol (20 v%), and also a schematic demonstration of the drying process for indicating the coffee ring effect. Panels e and f are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 67, Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic comparison of the required layer thickness and printing resolution for different printing methods. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 1, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b) and (c) Dependency of the G′/G′′ on frequency for single-layer and multi-layer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets dispersed in water (the bold stars on the plot indicate the estimated processing parameters utilized in supercapacitor (yellow and purple), thin-film (green), and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (light yellow)). Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 48, Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Optical images displaying MXene patterns on an AlOx-PET substrate. AFM image displays the inkjet-printed line with a homogeneous surface including interconnected nanosheets. The plots illustrate the height versus distance and thickness versus the number of the printed paths. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 26, Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Ti3C2Tx MXene, the tandem proteins with repetitive amino acid units and the fluidic nature of the corresponding ink (n = 11 Tr42), schematic of protein-mediated MXene assembly within inkjet printing, and photos of pristine and protein-based Ti3C2Tx/DMSO dispersions with a diverse concentration of protein. (b) Optical photos of printed samples on cellulose paper with diverse ink solutions during inkjet printing, and high-resolution images of inkjet-printed (i) pristine and (ii) protein-based MXenes on cellulose paper substrates. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 20, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic representation of synthesis of a crumpled N-doped MXene and direct ink printing of MXene-N ink by screen and extrusion printing. (d) Rheological behaviors of the activated carbon/CNT/MXene-N/GO and activated carbon/CNT/GO inks. Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 82, Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

Ascorbic acid modified-Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 108.1 mF cm−2 and CV = 720.7 F cm−3	Retention of 94.7% specific capacitance after 4000 cycles	
30

Carbon nanotube-Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 317 mF cm−2	Retention of 32.8% (at a scan rate of 100 V s−1)	
86

RuO2·xH2O-AgNW incorporated Ti3C2Tx	PVA/KOH electrolyte	
C
V = 864.2 F cm−3	90% retention after 10000 cycles	
87

N-doped Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 70.1 mF cm−2	92% capacitance retention after 7000 cycles	
82

Phenylsulfonic acid functionalized Ti3C2	KOH	
C = 160 F g−1	91% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles	
82

Mn ion-intercalated Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 87 mF cm−2	82% retention after 5000 cycles	
88

Direct printing of Ti3C2Tx (on a textile substrate)	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 294 mF cm−2	98% retention after 10000 cycles	
28

Ti3C2Tx	H3PO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 887.5 μF cm−2	85% retention of capacitance after 10000 cycles	
89

Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 158 mF cm−2	95.8% of retention of capacitance after 17000 cycles	
35

Ti3C2Tx	KOH/PVA	
C
A = 28.5 mF cm−2	92% retention capacitance after 10000 cycles	
90

Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 25 mF cm−2	92% retention of capacitance after 10000 cycles	
90

Ti3C2Tx	H2SO4/PVA gel electrolyte	
C
A = 43 mF cm−2, and CV = 562 F cm−3	—	
26


 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of a flexible all-solid-state MSC with MXenes via spray printing, and its measured areal capacitance, energy density, and capacitance retention. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 92, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of an MXene-based (Ti3C2Tx) flexible solid-state supercapacitor, and its volumetric capacitance comparison with other diverse thin-film systems, as well as its measured areal capacitance compared with other various flexible supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 93 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The areal capacitance of the N-doped MXene ink MSC in comparison with the other samples studied in different studies at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 82, Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Slope line of resistance dependence on the length of the printed MXene ink with additive-free in water, and its electrical resistivity comparison with silver, copper, and graphite/carbon nanotube inks. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 27, Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Different screen-printed patterns of additive-free MXene inks for MSCs, along with their line thickness, sheet resistance, and plots as a function of the number of printed, and areal capacitance of MSCs with a various number of the printed passes. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 35, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the stretchable and flexible CNFs/Ti3C2Tx liquid electrode-based TENG. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 94, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (b) Schematic illustration of a flexible self-charging system. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 97, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the charge distribution and working mechanism of CM-TENG. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 94, Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Short-circuit transferred charge, open-circuit voltage, and short-circuit current of the generated TENG. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 97, Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Illustration of synthesizing a stretchable MSC as an energy system, and a sensor from graphene, cellulose nanofibrils, and Ti3C2Tx composite paper. Reproduced with permission from data published in ref. 99, Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† J. A. and T. N. R. contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
