Photonic nanostructures for solar energy conversion  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01182A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01182A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2511-2532Photonic nanostructures for solar energy conversion

        
          
            Xiuzhen 
            Zheng
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liwu 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *
      Shanghai Key Laboratory of Atmospheric Particle Pollution and Prevention, Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, P. R. China. E-mail: zhanglw@fudan.edu.cn
Received 
      22nd April 2016
    , Accepted 20th May 2016First published on 20th May 2016AbstractPhotonic nanostructures, manipulating and confining light on the nanometer scale, provide new opportunities to improve the efficiency of solar energy conversion. Optical microcavities confine light to small volumes by resonant recirculation. Plasmonic metal nanostructures with surface plasmon resonances can act as antennas to localize optical energy and control the location of charge carrier generation. Photonic crystals can enhance the interaction of light with a semiconductor. Integrated photonic crystals and the plasmonic effects of micro-structural materials may have a superposition effect in controlling light. Some applications and practical examples with respect to improving the efficiency of solar energy conversion with photonic nanostructures have been reviewed, demonstrating how such structures can enhance light absorption and improve the generation and separation of photoexcited charge carriers in photocatalytic degradation, solar water splitting, photovoltaic devices and CO2 photoreduction. Distinct from other published reviews, we simultaneously discuss several different types of photonic nanostructures in order to show the similarities and differences of photonic structures for solar energy conversion. Furthermore, the combination of different types of photonic nanostructures for developing more efficient solar energy conversion systems is discussed and explored.
Xiuzhen Zheng
Dr Xiuzhen Zheng is a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Environmental Science and Engineering at Fudan University. She received her PhD degree in the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment from the Fuzhou University in 2015. Currently, she is conducting her postdoctoral studies under the supervision of Prof. Liwu Zhang, with a focus on enhancing the performance of artificial photosynthesis by the incorporation of photonic nanostructures, and is further studying the impact of light manipulation in these systems.
Liwu Zhang
Prof. Liwu Zhang joined the Department of Environmental Science and Engineering at Fudan University in November 2014. Prior to his faculty appointment, he did his postdoctoral work under the supervision of Prof. Jeremy J. Baumberg (FRS) at the Nanophotonics Centre in Cavendish Laboratory and collaborated with Dr Erwin Reisner from the Department of Chemistry at the University of Cambridge. Before that, he was an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow under the supervision of Prof. Detlef Bahnemann in the Hannover University. He received a PhD in Chemistry from Tsinghua University under the supervision of Prof. Yongfa Zhu. He is a recipient of the Marie Curie Intra-European Research Fellow award. He has over a decade of experience in nanophotonics and nanomaterials and a strong background in photocatalysis, and he has published more than 30 highly cited papers in this field. His work has been cited >2500 times, and he has an h-index of 20.

Broader context
Solar energy is a theoretically infinite energy source and can provide sufficient power for our energy demands if it can be efficiently harvested and transformed. Some efficient strategies of solar energy conversion include photocatalysis to degrade and mineralize environmental contaminants, generation of hydrogen by the splitting of water molecules or driving the reduction of CO2 into valuable hydrocarbon fuels. Currently, a number of materials have been demonstrated to be potential candidates for such photocatalytic reactions. However, the solar-to-energy conversion efficiencies are still unable to meet commercial requirements due to the limited light absorption and high recombination rate of charge carriers. Photonic nanostructures (optical microcavities, plasmonic metal nanostructures, and photonic crystals) can enhance light harvesting by manipulating and confining light on the nanometer scale, providing new opportunities to improve the efficiency of solar energy conversion. This review highlights recent progress in improving the efficiency of solar energy conversion with photonic nanostructures, demonstrating how such structures can enhance the generation and separation of photoexcited charge carriers in photocatalytic degradation, photovoltaic devices, solar water splitting and CO2 photoreduction.

1. Introduction
Since photonics was first proposed by L. Poldervaart, photonics and related technology has attracted extensive interest. Photonics is used to study the behavior and applications of photons as information carriers and energy. An exponential growth in research has been seen in photonics and nanomaterials in the past decades.1–3 Since nanomaterials have unique properties, such as size, shape, structure, and confinement effects, they exhibit novel photonic properties. Their properties include strong wide-band absorption and indirect bandgap luminescence. Among the unique properties of photonic nanomaterials, the movement of electrons and holes in semiconductor nanomaterials is primarily governed by quantum confinement, and the transport properties are related to phonons, which are largely affected by the size and geometry of the materials.
Recently, the application of solar energy to solve global energy and environmental issues has attracted more and more attention, and various techniques have emerged.4–7 Photocatalysis using solar energy has been considered as an efficient method to solve both energy and environmental problems.8–10 Photocatalytic materials can not only convert low-density solar energy to high-density storable hydrogen, but take advantage of solar energy to degrade and mineralize environmental contaminants.11–16 However, the efficiency of these processes is still too low to become economically viable.
There are several reasons for the low efficiency of photocatalysis or solar water splitting, such as limited light absorption and a high recombination rate of charge carriers, which hinder their practical applications. For the most commonly used photocatalysts, TiO2 and ZnO, the main challenge is the large bandgap, which limits the solar energy absorption. Another important reason is electron–hole recombination in the bulk of the semiconductor, due to the short diffusion length of photoexcited minority charge carriers. To address this, nanostructuring has been extensively studied in order to reduce bulk recombination by shortening the travel distance for charge carriers.17 However, nanostructuring can also increase surface recombination and lower the surface photovoltage. Photonic nanostructures, which manipulate and confine light on a nanometer scale, provide new opportunities to improve efficiency. Several photonic nanostructures are of particular interest for solar energy conversion. Optical cavities can reduce the thickness of semiconductors without compromising their light absorption by trapping resonant light in ultrathin films. Photonic crystals show great potential in manipulating light, based on photonic band structure concepts, in which near-bandgap resonant scattering and slow photon effects can enhance the interaction of light with a semiconductor. Plasmonic metal nanostructures with surface plasmon resonances can act as antennas to localize optical energy and control the location of charge carrier generation. The interaction of localized electric fields surrounding the plasmonic metal particles with a neighboring semiconductor provides a pathway for the selective formation of electron–hole pairs in the near-surface region of the semiconductor.
Herein, the applications of photonic nanostructures in the field of solar energy conversion have been reviewed. For solar energy conversion applications, three directions are mainly reviewed, including photocatalytic decomposition of organic compounds, photocatalytic water splitting and photovoltaic applications. Focus is placed on several photonic nanostructures that have been previously discussed in the literature, including microcavities, photonic crystals, plasmonic nanostructures and some other promising photonic structures. Although there are several reviews focused solely on one type of photonic nanostructure, such as photonic crystals18–20 or plasmonic structures,21–24 a comprehensive review on progress in photonic nanostructures for solar energy conversion is still not available. In this review, we discuss several different types of photonic nanostructures together in order to show the similarities and differences of photonic structures for solar energy conversion. Furthermore, the combination of different kinds of photonic nanostructures for developing more efficient solar energy conversion systems is discussed and explored.
2. Optical microcavities
An optical microcavity is a structure formed by reflecting faces on the two sides of a spacer layer or optical medium. The term ‘microcavity’ stems from the fact that it is often only a few micrometers thick, the spacer layer sometimes being even in the nanometer range. Optical microcavities are structures that enable the confinement of light to microscale volumes. The universal importance of these structures has made them indispensable in a wide range of fields. For example, microcavities made of active group III–V semiconductor materials control laser emission spectra to enable the long-distance transmission of data along optical fibers; they also ensure narrow spot-size laser read/write beams in CD and DVD players.25 The applications of these remarkable devices are as diverse as their geometrical and resonant properties.
Optical microcavities can be divided into three forms according to the different confinement mechanisms of the cavities to the light field: Fabry–Perot, whispering gallery and photonic crystal. The Fabry–Perot-style microcavity is an optical resonator, in which feedback is accomplished using parallel mirrors. Whispering gallery resonators are typically dielectric spherical structures, in which waves are confined by ‘continuous total internal reflection’. Microcavities based on photonic crystals can provide extremely small mode volumes, and donor-mode cavity geometries have been modeled with a neutral atom suspended within the hole. Based on these microcavities, Vahala et al. reviewed four broad application areas of optical microcavities: strong-coupling cavity quantum electrodynamics, enhancement and suppression of spontaneous emission, novel sources, and dynamic filters in optical communication.25 Substantial additional gains were possible in quantum optical applications with continued improvement in microfabrication techniques and implementation of new low-loss designs. Triggered, single photon sources would benefit from higher Purcell factors for improved fiber coupling, and miniaturization to the submicrometer scale of cavity devices with quantum electrodynamics was feasible. Also, the emergence of new high-quality, wafer-based geometries should provide a platform for efficient solar energy conversion systems.
Yan et al. prepared hierarchical rutile TiO2 microspheres assembled with nanowire bundles, which were subjected to annealing or ultrasonic treatment to investigate the effect of the hierarchical structure on photocatalysis.26 By comparatively characterizing the microstructures, photoluminescence, photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties, it was proven that the existence of microcavities in these TiO2 hierarchical microspheres was crucial to the photoactivity toward methyl orange (MO) degradation. The microcavities could act as microcapacitors for electronic storage and contribute to a high separation efficiency of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. This finding is of great significance for the design of efficient photocatalytic materials with microcavities with regard to solving the worldwide energy crisis and reducing environmental pollution.
Resonant light trapping in optical cavities comprising semiconductor ultrathin films on back-reflector substrates enables efficient light absorption in quarter-wave or, in some cases, deeper subwavelength films, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1. This enhances the absorption by increasing the photon lifetime in the film, reaching maximum absorption in the cavity resonance modes. This approach overcomes the trade-off between light absorption and the collection of photogenerated minority charge carriers, which limits the solar energy conversion efficiency of semiconductors with poor transport properties. Dotan et al. used α-Fe2O3 photoanodes for water splitting as a case study.27 As much as 71% of solar photons of energy above the bandgap energy of α-Fe2O3 could be absorbed, at normal incidence, in ultrathin films thinner than 50 nm, wherein most of the photogenerated holes could reach the surface and oxidize water before recombination took place. The escaped back-reflected photons could be harvested by photon-retrapping schemes, such as using V-shaped cells, thereby further boosting the light-harvesting efficiency. Water photo-oxidation current densities as high as 4 mA cm−2 were obtained under exposure to 100 mW cm−2 white-light illumination using Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 ultrathin films on silver–gold-coated back reflectors. This light-trapping strategy and the underlying physical principles are common to other photoelectrode materials, besides α-Fe2O3, and other types of solar cells employing semiconductors with poor transport properties.
 Fig. 1  Resonant light trapping in quarter-wave films.27 (Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). 
Besides the above described, arranging nanostructured photoconducting materials in a periodic superstructure provides a means of tailoring the spectral response of the photocurrent. Light confinement effects have been designed to match the desired spectral absorption range and thus selectively enhance the photon-to-electron conversion response. Anaya et al. showed experimental evidence of resonant photocurrent generation in dye-sensitized periodically nanostructured photoconductors, which was achieved by spectral matching of the sensitizer absorption band to different types of localized photon modes present in either periodic or broken symmetry structures.28 Resonance effects of different origins (band edge, cavity modes) could be clearly distinguished in the photocurrent spectra of both periodic and broken symmetry optical lattices. These results constituted clear evidence of resonant photocurrent generation in a periodic nanostructure, in which a direct relation between resonant photon modes and photon-to-electron conversion peaks could be established. This type of structure can allow the development of PEC devices with finer spectral control over light absorption.
Cheng et al. presented a novel Cu2O/ZnO solar cell design by electrodeposition of Cu2O into ordered ZnO cavity-like nanopatterns.29 The cavity-like cell showed a high photovoltaic conversion efficiency of 0.51%, obtained with an open-circuit voltage of 0.24 V, a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 6.33 mA cm−2, and a fill factor of 34.5. The increase in open-circuit voltage and photovoltaic conversion efficiency could be assigned to the intercrossed heterojunction interface formed in the novel cavity-like cell, which could effectively increase the p–n heterojunction area and thus enhance the collection ability of the charge carriers.
Liu et al. reported the enhanced performance of dye-sensitized solar cells with microcavity-embedded nanoporous TiO2 photoanodes.30 The photoanodes were prepared using polystyrene microsphere-embedded TiO2 paste. The calcination of polystyrene microspheres during sintering resulted in numerous randomly distributed microcavities in the TiO2 photoanodes. Light scattering in the microcavities and light confinement in the multilayer structure with a high-to-low graded effective index of refraction enhanced the dye absorption, thereby increasing the photocurrent and the cell efficiency.
Organic solar cells offer a promising alternative to inorganic solar cells due to their low cost, easy fabrication, and compatibility with flexible substrates over a large area. Since the photocurrent of a solar cell is directly related to the light intensity, an effective approach to enhancing the efficiency of a thin film organic solar cell is to increase the light absorption of the organic film without having to increase the photoactive layer thickness.31 This constraint mainly comes from the low carrier mobility of organic materials. For this purpose, several light trapping approaches, including a folded configuration,32 diffraction gratings,33 microcavities,34–36 and surface plasmon resonance,37 have been investigated and have demonstrated promising results. An et al. successfully designed and fabricated highly efficient flexible polymer solar cells with a nanopatterned 3D microresonant cavity.38 The cell efficiency was significantly improved (26.4%) by providing a 3D nanopattern on the microresonant cavity, which was due not only to greater absorption but also to electrical enhancement. The capping layer enhanced the transmittance of the transparent electrodes, increasing the electric field intensity in the photoactive layer, and the nanopattern on the rear electrodes of flexible polymer solar cells with 3D cavity structures caused significant enhancement to the Jsc of the flexible cell.
3. Plasmonic nanostructures
Although heterogeneous photocatalysts are almost exclusively semiconductors, it has been demonstrated recently that plasmonic nanostructures of noble metals (mainly Ag, Au) also show significant promise. Plasmonic metallic nanostructures are characterized by their strong interaction with resonant photons through excitation of surface plasmon resonance (SPR). SPR can be described as the resonant photon-induced collective oscillation of valence electrons, established when the frequency of photons matches the natural frequency of surface electrons oscillating against the restoring force of positive nuclei. This effect is an important feature of noble metal nanoparticles, and it has been investigated in order to improve the efficiency of solar energy conversion.
Plasmon resonance can not only suppress light-generated electron–hole recombination, but can also increase the absorption range of the incident light. One key challenge for photocatalysis is photogenerated electron–hole recombination in the bulk, due to the semiconductor depth (in microns) being much larger than the migration distance of the photo-generated carriers (tens of nanometers). Thereby, most of the light-generated carriers cannot reach the surface to react. For noble metal nanoparticles, the plasmon resonance effect can confine light in the semiconductor interface region (∼10 nm), changing the position of generation of the carriers. Such an antenna effect can limit the absorption of light at the surface of the semiconductor, thus effectively promoting photo-generated electron–hole separation. Moreover, the hot electrons produced by the plasmon resonance effect are injected into the conduction band of the semiconductor material, allowing the semiconductor to absorb photons that have an energy lower than their optical bandgap, broadening the light absorption range.
There have been several reviews on plasmonic nanostructures for photovoltaic application and solar water splitting.39,40 Herein, we focus on some new plasmonic structures for solar energy conversion and some new applications of plasmonic structures in the field of CO2 photoreduction.
3.1 Emerging new plasmonic nanostructures
Previous studies on plasmonic nanostructures mainly involve Au or Ag nanoparticles, and many semiconductor photocatalysts were used with added Au or Ag nanoparticles to enhance photocatalytic efficiency, such as TiO2,41–44 ZrO2,45 ZnO,43,46–48 and Cu2O.49–51 Recently, anisotropic morphologies have gained tremendous attention due to their improved absorption and scattering properties, and enhanced spectral tunability. Plasmonic enhancement in solar energy conversion has been observed with nanowire, nanorods, nanocubes, nanoprisms, and core/shell nanostructures. Non-spherical nanostructures with varying levels of symmetry give rise to enhanced polarizability. Increased polarizability results in multiple plasmon resonances, as well as giving rise to red-shifts in the optical resonance.21 Furthermore, non-spherical nanostructures facilitate the localization of a higher concentration of charges at the corners and edges, giving rise to confined near fields. In this section, we focus on some new kinds of plasmonic nanostructures, such as nanowire, nanorod, nanoarray, and nanogap, and their applications in solar energy conversion.

3.1.1 Nanowires. 
Ultrathin nanowires are attractive as electrocatalysts because of their inherent dimensional confinement. Au nanowires have been shown to adopt exotic structures with enhanced chemical reactivity toward oxidation reactions. For instance, Leelavathi et al. developed a method for the synthesis of high density ultrathin Au wires on ZnO nanorods for electrocatalytic applications.52 It was revealed that ZnO/Au nanowire hybrids, upon photoirradiation, accelerated the activity of Au, by interfacial migration of photoelectrons, which suppressed the recombination of photogenerated carriers, thus leading to synergy between electro and photooxidation currents.
Core–shell nanostructures are of great scientific and technological importance owing to their enhanced physical and chemical properties. Dong et al. demonstrated a generic strategy for the successful synthesis of one-dimensional Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanowires.53 A uniform layer of TiO2 shell was coated onto an Ag core (Fig. 2), thus forming 1D Ag core@TiO2 shell semiconductor nanocomposites. This photocatalyst exhibited much higher photocatalytic activities than Ag nanowires and TiO2 anatase nanoparticles in rhodamine B (RhB) degradation under visible-light irradiation. Similarly, Li et al. reported a facile synthesis of unusual Ag/TiO2 hierarchical core–shell nanowires, 200 nm in diameter and tens of micrometers in length, for the first time.54 Each of the hierarchical core–shell nanowires of Ag/TiO2 was comprised of Ag nanowires with a 50–70 nm diameter and a sheath comprised of ultrathin nanosheets of monoclinic TiO2, several nanometers in thickness and with preferential exposure of the (010) facet. The hierarchical core–shell nanostructures exhibited an enhanced photocatalytic performance toward RhB degradation. Moreover, Liu et al. fabricated novel worm-like Ag/ZnO core–shell heterostructural composites with Ag nanowires serving as the core.55 The surface plasmon absorption band of Ag/ZnO composites was distinctly broadened and red-shifted compared to monometallic Ag nanowires. Photocatalytic test results showed that Ag/ZnO core–shell heterostructural composites exhibited higher photocatalytic activities in RhB degradation compared to pure ZnO particles.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM images, and (b) TEM image of Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanowires.53 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Wang et al. prepared hierarchical heteroassemblies made of interwoven Ag core nanowires covered by ZnO branched nanorods on a large scale.56 When evaluated with UV-induced photo-degradation of RhB, the heteroassemblies of Ag nanowires–ZnO branched nanorods exhibited high photocatalytic properties, due to the decisive roles of the synergistic effect of the unique metal–semiconductor heterojunction and the hierarchical fluffy worm-like morphologies as well as the (001) plane-dominant surface of ZnO branched nanorods, which were beneficial for highly efficient photocatalysis.
Zhang et al. successfully fabricated 1D Ag@AgVO3 nanowire/graphene/protonated g-C3N4 nanosheets.57 In this architecture, the semiconductor Ag@AgVO3 nanowires not only acted as photosensitizers to capture visible light, but also promoted photogenerated charge separation and transfer at Ag@AgVO3/protonated g-C3N4 interfaces, while graphene nanosheets served as electron mediators to further promote the separation and transfer of photogenerated charges between Ag@AgVO3 and protonated g-C3N4. By this synergistic effect, the as-prepared Ag@AgVO3 nanowire/graphene/protonated g-C3N4 heteroconjugates exhibited a remarkably high photocatalytic activity for methylene blue (MB) degradation compared to other photocatalysts under simulated sunlight irradiation.
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have been widely studied as alternatives for the generation of electricity from sunlight, due to their efficiency and cost effectiveness. Increasing the electron transport out of the metal oxide is important in achieving higher efficiency. Enhancing light absorption can also improve cell efficiency. The aim of Sahu's work was to synthesize and use Au–TiO2 core–shell nanowires as anode materials in DSSCs in order to increase cell efficiency by enhancing electron transport out of the oxide and/or increasing light collection efficiency.58 The current–voltage behavior for the Au–TiO2 core–shell nanowire-based DSSCs was compared to the current–voltage data for TiO2 nanotube-based DSSCs, indicating substantial improvements upon incorporation of the Au core nanowires.
A series of composite TiO2 photoanodes with different amounts of core–shell Ag nanowire@SiO2 incorporated were prepared and applied in DSSCs by Guo et al.59 The range and strength of light absorption of the TiO2 photoanodes, the photon capturing ability of the dye molecules, and Jsc were significantly increased, while the dark current was decreased due to the incorporation of Ag nanowire@SiO2. The optimal properties were obtained in a DSSC with a Jsc of 11.83 mA cm−2 and an energy conversion efficiency of 6.26% for an Ag nanowire@SiO2 content of 0.60 wt%, which were significantly superior to those of a DSSC with a pure TiO2 photoanode. The enhancement of Jsc and the energy conversion efficiency were attributed to possible enhanced light scattering and increased absorption of dye due to increased effective light coupling by the SPR of the Ag nanowire@SiO2 in the photoanode.
Huang et al. employed metallic Ag nanowires coated with a TiO2 nanolayer as electron conductors in the mesoporous photoanodes of DSSCs.60 The results demonstrated that the Ag nanowires@TiO2 improved the energy conversion efficiency of the DSSC from 4.68 to 5.31%, compared to a DSSC without Ag nanowires@TiO2 (pure P25). Such an improvement could be mainly attributed to the reduced TiO2/dye/electrolyte interfacial charge transfer impedance. The surface plasmon resonance and light-scattering effects of the nanowires were found to substantially boost the incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency of such DSSCs.
As mentioned in Section 2, an effective approach to enhance the efficiency of a thin film organic solar cell is to increase the light absorption of the organic film, without having to increase the photoactive layer thickness. SPR enhancement is naturally suited to increasing the optical absorption of organic semiconductors.61 The simplest way to resonantly excite surface plasmons is to use nanostructures, such as metallic nanoclusters and periodic nanowires. Kang et al. demonstrated organic solar cells with transparent Ag nanowire electrodes that can enhance the power conversion efficiency by surface plasmon resonance and waveguide effects.31 The Jsc was enhanced by as much as 40%, compared to that of the ITO device, and the external quantum efficiency was enhanced 2.5 fold at a wavelength of around 560 nm for an 80 nm thick organic layer. Due to this enhancement, the overall power conversion efficiency of the Ag device was enhanced by about 35% compared to that of the ITO device under unpolarized light illumination. The power conversion efficiency can be further enhanced by choosing organic semiconductors and adjusting the period of the Ag nanograting, such that the surface plasmon-enhanced spectral range matches the peak absorption of the organic semiconductors.
The origins of performance enhancement in hybrid plasmonic organic photovoltaic devices are often embroiled in a complex interaction of light scattering, localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR), exciton plasmon energy transfer and even non-plasmonic effects. To clearly deconvolve the plasmonic contributions from a single nanostructure, Liu et al. investigated the influence of a single Ag nanowire on the charge carriers in bulk heterojunction polymer solar cells using spatially resolved optical spectroscopy, and correlated this to electrical device characterization.62 Polarization-dependent photocurrent enhancements with a maximum of ∼36% over the reference were observed when the transverse mode of the plasmonic excitations in the Ag nanowire was activated. The ensuing higher absorbance and light scattering induced by the electronic motion perpendicular to the nanowire long axis led to increased exciton and polaron densities instead of direct surface plasmon–exciton energy transfer.


3.1.2 Nanorods. 
The different shapes of Au used for fabricating heterocomposites in photoluminescence and photocatalytic studies are very important. Singh et al. signified the importance of different shapes of Au and CdS-nanoparticles used for fabricating Au–CdS heterocomposites, which were prepared by mixing or impregnation of Au-nanospheres, Au-nanorods, CdS-nanospheres, and CdS-nanorods.63 The Au-nanorod–CdS-nanorod interface possessed the highest photoactivity, owing to the longer relaxation lifetime of photoexcited charge species, compared to conventional metal–semiconductor junctions. Moreover, Au-nanorods–CdS-nanorods showed improved stability, and the activity did not decrease significantly even after three recycles. The overall high performances of Au-nanorod–CdS-nanorod composites could be well explained in terms of the beneficial advantages of charge transport kinetics at the coupled nanorod interface.
Qu et al. designed and synthesized a model system to provide a definitive investigation of plasmonic-resonance-enhanced photocatalytic properties by coupling Pt/n-Si/Ag photodiodes with Au nanorods or Au/Ag core/shell nanorods.64 These studies showed that the localized surface plasmon resonance of metal nanostructures could be employed to enhance the light absorption of semiconductor materials, resulting in greatly enhanced photoactivity in nitrobenzene degradation. The overlap between the UV-vis absorption of the metal nanorods and the spectral-dependent enhancement factor for each photocatalyst demonstrated strongly that the enhanced photoactivity could be attributed to the localized surface plasmon resonance of the metal nanorods.
Pu et al. demonstrated that the photoactivity of Au nanostructure-decorated TiO2 nanowire electrodes for PEC water oxidation could be effectively enhanced over the entire UV-visible region by adopting different shapes for the decorating Au nanostructures.65 The samples were prepared by carefully depositing Au nanoparticles (NPs), Au nanorods (NRs), and a mixture of Au NPs and NRs on the surface of TiO2 nanowire arrays (Fig. 3). As compared with bare TiO2, Au NP-decorated TiO2 nanowire electrodes exhibited significantly enhanced photoactivity in both the UV and visible regions. For Au NR-decorated TiO2 electrodes, the photoactivity enhancement was, however, observed in the visible region only, with the largest photocurrent generation achieved at 710 nm. Significantly, TiO2 nanowires deposited with a mixture of Au NPs and NRs showed enhanced photoactivity over the entire UV-visible region. The results of incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurement, photovoltage experiments, and finite difference time domain simulation suggested that the enhanced photoactivity of Au NP-decorated TiO2 nanowires in the UV region was due to effective surface passivation as well as an electric-field amplification effect, while the photoactivity enhancement in the visible region for Au nanostructure-decorated TiO2 samples was mainly caused by the electric-field amplification effect and hot electron generation upon SPR excitation.
 Fig. 3  (a) The mechanism of operation of the autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter, (b) spatial distribution of electric field and (c) IPCE for Au NP-TiO2 and Au NR-TiO2.65 (Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 


3.1.3 Nanoarrays. 
Eom et al. fabricated Ag/TiO2 open core–shell nanowire arrays with various geometries and plasmonic effects.66 The geometrical configuration could be easily controlled to form various Ag nanowire arrays simply by modulating the deposition angle of the Ag layer (Fig. 4). The resultant periodic nanostructures exhibited strong surface plasmonic phenomena at the Ag–TiO2 interface and this provided an enhanced photocatalytic effect on the surface of the TiO2 layer in MB decomposition. The Ag/TiO2 open core–shell nanowire array structure provided a superior photocatalytic performance compared to pristine TiO2 thin films or Ag/TiO2 dual-layer thin-film structures.
 Fig. 4  (a.1 and a.2) Cross-sectional TEM images, (a.3) high resolution TEM image in the Ag layer and (a.4) its selective area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns for periodic Ag nanowire, and (b.1 and b.2) cross-sectional TEM images, (a.3) high resolution image near the Ag–TiO2 interface and (a.4) its SAED pattern for the Ag/TiO2 nanowire array.66 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Plasmonic metal nanostructures offer a promising route to improving the solar energy conversion efficiency of semiconductors. Li et al. showed that incorporation of a hematite nanorod array into a plasmonic gold nanohole array pattern (Fig. 5) significantly improved the PEC water splitting performance, leading to an approximately ten-fold increase in the photocurrent at a bias of 0.23 V versus Ag/AgCl under simulated solar radiation.67 Plasmon-induced resonant energy transfer was responsible for enhancement at energies below the band edge, whereas above the absorption band edge of hematite, the surface plasmon polariton launched a guided wave mode inside the nanorods, with the nanorods acting as miniature optic fibers, enhancing the light absorption. The nanorods acted as miniature ‘fiber optics’, creating confined modes, which trapped the incident light and enhanced the light absorption. The intense local field enhancement of the LSPR overlapped with the absorption band edge of hematite, enhancing solar energy collection at energies below the band edge.
 Fig. 5  Plasmon-enhanced light absorption. (a) Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra for 150 nm long hematite nanorods on bare FTO and on an Au nanohole array pattern. (b) Absorption enhancement for hematite nanorods on an Au nanohole array pattern with the background (hematite on FTO) subtracted.67 (Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group). 
Wang et al. have developed a programmable photocatalyst based on multi-segmented CdS–Au nanorod arrays (CdS–Au NRAs) with a sequential and highly tunable configuration (Fig. 6).68 The controllable arrangement of components and interfaces, and in turn the energy band structure along the electron transfer paths in the composite photocatalysts, played a critical role in promoting and modulating the PEC efficiency of hydrogen evolution. It was important to note that these multi-segmented one-dimensional nanostructures could contain a combination of metallic, semiconducting, and polymeric components. These multiple different components each possessed unique physical and chemical properties that provided these cascade nanostructures with multiformity, programmability, and adaptability.
 Fig. 6  (a) Linear sweep voltammogram curves of multi-segmented CdS–Au NRAs. (b) The linear relationship between the photocurrent intensities and the amount of segments in multi-segmented CdS–Au NRAs and pure CdS NRAs photoanodes. (c) Measured IPCE spectra at a potential of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (d) Stability test of nine segments of multi-segmented CdS–Au NRAs at a potential of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl.68 (Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
Lee et al. reported a plasmonic water splitting cell, in which 95% of the effective charge carriers derive from surface plasmon decay to hot electrons, as evidenced by fuel production efficiencies up to 20-fold higher in the visible range, as compared to the UV range.69 The cell functions, by illuminating a dense array of aligned Au nanorods capped with TiO2, formed a Schottky metal/semiconductor interface, which collected and conducted the hot electrons to an unilluminated platinum counter-electrode, where hydrogen gas evolved. The resultant positive charges in the Au nanorods function as holes and were extracted by an oxidation catalyst, which electrocatalytically oxidized water to oxygen gas.
Solar conversion to electricity or to fuels based on electron–hole pair production in semiconductors is a highly evolved scientific and commercial enterprise. Mubeen et al. reported an efficient, autonomous solar water-splitting device based on an Au nanorod array, in which essentially all charge carriers involved in the oxidation and reduction steps arose from the hot electrons resulting from the excitation of surface plasmons in the nanostructured gold (Fig. 7).70 Each nanorod functions without external wiring, producing 5 × 1013 H2 molecules per cm2 per s under 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5 and 100 mW cm−2), with unprecedented long-term operational stability.
 Fig. 7  Structure and mechanism of operation of the autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter.70 (Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group). 
Ultrathin semiconductor electrodes for water splitting are of particular interest because the optical absorption occurs in the region where photogenerated charge carriers can effectively contribute to the chemical reactions on the surface. It is therefore important to manipulate and concentrate the incident light so that more photons can be absorbed within the thin film. Gao et al. reported an enhanced photocurrent from a thin-film Fe2O3 photoanode coated on arrays of Au nanopillars.71 The enhancement can be attributed primarily to the increased optical absorption originating from both surface plasmon resonances and photonic-mode light trapping in the nanostructured topography. The resonances can be tuned to a desirable wavelength by varying the thickness of the Fe2O3 layer, and a net enhancement as high as 50% was observed over the solar spectrum.


3.1.4 Plasmonic nanogaps for solar water splitting. 
Due to the strong localization of the optical field near plasmonic nanoparticles, the light intensity is channeled to the surface layers of the photocatalyst. However, compared to plasmons occurring in the vicinity of individual nanoparticles, up to 100-fold higher electric field enhancements are sustained in gaps of only a few nanometers between two nanoparticles or a nanoparticle spaced above a flat metallic surface.72,73 Gap plasmons in the nanoparticle-on-mirror (NPoM) geometry exhibit extremely localized electrical fields across the material inside the nanogap (Fig. 8). While the plasmonic enhancement of individual nanoparticles for solar water splitting has been widely studied, very few reports have focused on the enhanced photocatalysis generated in plasmonic nanogaps by using the much higher field intensities available.
 Fig. 8  Au NPs on gold film with atomically thin CdSe sandwiched between them. Charge oscillations in Au NPs induce image charges in the metallic surface and enable plasmonic coupling. Field enhancement at the optical bandgap of CdSe platelets (λ = 548 nm) in an NPoM-nanogap and for an isolated Au NP for comparison.74 (Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
Zhang and coworkers demonstrated for the first time enhanced water-splitting activity in plasmonic nanogaps.74 The CdSe nanoplatelets were sandwiched between a flat gold surface and gold nanoparticles. With this configuration, the coupled plasmons completely penetrated the photocatalytic material, as opposed to previous routes, in which only the surface layers benefited from increased e–h-pair generation. Furthermore, the usual problem of charge recombination inside the catalyst was highly suppressed, as the carrier diffusion length greatly exceeded the thickness of the semiconductor. A five-fold increase in the photocurrent was measured across a device sparsely covered with Au NPs. The local photocatalytic activity in the plasmonic gaps was estimated to be locally increased by almost four orders of magnitude. The use of nanometer-thin semiconductors enabled plasmonic coupling throughout the material, resulting in dramatically higher electromagnetic field enhancements compared to those of single nanoparticles.


3.1.5 Other plasmonic nanostructures and progress. 
Zarick et al. demonstrated enhanced light harvesting in DSSCs with gold nanocubes of controlled shape.75 Silica-coated nanocubes (Au@SiO2 nanocubes) embedded in the photoanodes of DSSCs had a power conversion efficiency of 7.8% relative to 5.8% for reference (TiO2 only) devices, resulting in a 34% improvement in the DSSC performance. The power conversion efficiency achieved with the best performing plasmon-enhanced DSSC was attributed to a combination of intense electromagnetic fields confined at the corners and edges of the nanocubes, due to the lightning-rod effect, and nanocube scattering into the far field. The enhanced light-harvesting characteristics of DSSCs integrated with nanocubes ultimately enabled the design of high-efficiency thin-film solar cells with a thickness <500 nm, with lower costs and better stability.
Baek et al. proposed a metal–metal core–shell nanocube as an advanced plasmonic material for highly efficient organic solar cells.61 They covered an Au core with a thin Ag shell as a scattering enhancer to build Au@Ag nanocubes, which showed stronger scattering efficiency than Au NPs throughout the visible range. The poly[N-9-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazolealt-5,5-(4,7-di-2-thienyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)]:[6,6]-phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester-based organic solar cells embedded with Au@Ag nanocubes showed a 2.2-fold higher external quantum efficiency enhancement compared to Au NP devices at a wavelength of 450–700 nm due to the amplified plasmonic scattering effect.
Zhang et al. demonstrated photocurrent and efficiency enhancement in mesosuperstructured organometal halide perovskite solar cells incorporating core–shell Au@SiO2 nanoparticles delivering a device efficiency of up to 11.4%.76 They attributed the origin of the enhanced photocurrent to a previously unobserved and unexpected mechanism of reduced exciton binding energy with the incorporation of the metal nanoparticles, rather than enhanced light absorption.
While size plays a critical role in the plasmonic performance of Au NPs, its influence on plasmon-assisted water splitting is still not fully understood. This holds especially true for low-band-gap semiconductors, for which interband excitations occur in wavelength regions that overlap with plasmonic resonances. Zhang and coworkers modified BiVO4 films with Au NPs of diameters varying from 10 to 80 nm to study the size dependence of the plasmonic effect.77 Plasmon resonance energy transfer (PRET) was found to be the dominant effect in enhancing the water splitting efficiency of BiVO4. The “hot electron” injection effect was weak in the case of BiVO4/Au NPs. This was attributed to the interband excitation of BiVO4, which was unfavorable for hot electron accumulation in the BiVO4 conduction band. The resonant scattering effect also contributed to the enhanced water splitting efficiency for the larger diameter Au NPs (>60 nm). It was also found that a higher PRET effect could be achieved at larger off-normal irradiation angles.
In their work, the PRET effect with different diameters of Au NPs was understood from plots of the electric field distribution in the Au NP-modified BiVO4 electrodes, which allowed assessment of the extent of electric field amplification at the interface region of the BiVO4 surface and the Au NPs. The simulated spatial distributions of the electric field are shown in Fig. 9. The black lines in these graphs showed the contour where |E/E0| = 1, i.e., the electric field intensity was not amplified. It could be seen that with increasing Au NP diameter, the volume of the enhanced electric field also increased. Under incident light of 550 nm, the electric field intensity at the interface and the surface region of BiVO4 near the Au NP was enhanced by tens of times. The electric field intensity at the surface region of BiVO4 was enhanced by more than 5 times even under incident light of 500 nm. While BiVO4 possessed a hole diffusion length of 100–200 nm, the photogenerated holes in these regions with an enhanced electric field could readily diffuse to the surface of BiVO4. Photogenerated charge carrier separation could benefit from this localized light absorption in the surface region of BiVO4, where the charge carriers could be separated with the assistance of electric forces in the space-charge layer. Apart from the increased volume of the enhanced electric field in BiVO4, the enhancement factor was also higher when the diameter of Au NPs was larger.
 Fig. 9  Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. Electric field distribution in 10 nm, 20 nm, 40 nm, and 60 nm diameter Au-NP-modified BiVO4 for incident light of 500 nm (top) and 550 nm (bottom).77 (Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group). 

3.2 CO2 photoreduction
The conversion of CO2 to produce fuels using solar energy has the potential to reduce anthropogenic CO2 emissions, and lower the consumption of fossil fuels. Since the pioneering work by Inoue et al.,78 there have been many studies on the photo-induced reduction of CO2 (CO2 photoreduction) on various catalysts.79–83 Several types of semiconductors, such as TiO2,84–89 Ga2O3,90 ZnGe2O4,91 ZnGa2O4,92–94 and BaLa4Ti4O15,95 have been reported in the field of CO2 photoreduction. However, the activation of CO2 (a very stable molecule), is one of the biggest challenges in chemistry. In the long term, CO2 photocatalytic conversion using solar energy, that is, artificial photosynthesis, is the most attractive route for the transformation of CO2 to fuels and chemicals.
Surface modification of heterogeneous photocatalysts can greatly enhance CO2 adsorption and activation and lower the barriers for subsequent CO2 reduction. The interface between photocatalyst and cocatalyst is also critical for the separation and transportation of charge carriers, and the cocatalyst may compete with the underlying photocatalyst for light absorption.96 Therefore, the photocatalyst/cocatalyst structure should be properly designed and engineered to enhance the activity for CO2 photoreduction. Noble metal nanoparticles as important cocatalysts, combined with other semiconductors, have been widely studied, as they can strongly interact with light in the visible and infrared regions due to their extraordinary SPR properties and good photostability. Gold and silver are extensively employed to enhance the photocatalytic CO2 conversion,97,98 and their nanoparticles are loaded on TiO2 nanoparticles,99,100 nanowires,101,102 and nanospheres103 to improve photocatalytic CO2 conversion.
Noble metals have implications in multi-electron transfer reactions that are crucial for high-efficiency photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to take place. It has also been found that the size of the noble metal NP is a crucial variable with respect to the conversion rates that can be achieved. Zhang et al. presented the fabrication of TiO2 nanofibers co-decorated with Au and Pt nanoparticles.104 Au and Pt nanoparticles with sizes of 5–12 nm were well-dispersed in the TiO2 nanofibers, as evidenced by electron microscopic analysis. The present design of Au/Pt co-decoration in the TiO2 nanofibers led to remarkably enhanced photocatalytic activities in both hydrogen generation and CO2 reduction. This great enhancement was attributed to the synergy of the electron-sink function of Pt and the SPR of Au nanoparticles, which significantly improved the charge separation of photoexcited TiO2.
Doping of Au or Ag can also extend the sensitivity of the photocatalyst to the visible spectrum due to their LSPR properties. Hou et al. successfully demonstrated a 3D Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O integrated system for highly selective methanol production from CO2 directly.105 The enhancement of the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 was attributed to a synergistic catalytic effect resulting from the interfacial modulation and design of the charge-transfer channels by integrating a graphene layer and Au–Cu nanoalloys.
Jang et al. reported a gold-coupled ZnTe/ZnO-nanowire array as a new photocathode for selective CO2 reduction to CO.106 At −0.7 VRHE under simulated 1 sun illumination, its photocurrent (−16.0 mA cm−2) and incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (97%) represented the highest among reported ZnTe photocathodes for CO2 reduction and a dramatic enhancement from those of a bare electrode (−7.9 mA cm−2, 68%). Interestingly, the Au nanoparticles converted mainly-hydrogen-producing ZnTe/ZnO into mainly-CO-producing photocathodes in CO2 PEC reduction by greatly enhancing CO selectivity. The remarkable effects of the Au co-catalyst originated from the formation of a Schottky junction with ZnTe to improve charge separation and to provide reaction centers for CO2 reduction, suppressing competing water reduction.
The morphology of the noble metal and the architecture of the system could also influence the activity and selectivity for CO2 reduction. An electric field was created in a photocatalytic system consisting of Au@TiO2 yolk–shell hollow spheres to enhance the generation of electron–hole pairs and reduce charge-carrier recombination.107 An LSPR-mediated local electromagnetic field near Au nanoparticles could not only enhance the local generation and subsequent separation of electron–hole pairs in TiO2 shells to improve the photoreduction yield of CO2, but could also facilitate chemical reactions involving multiple e−/H+ transfer processes to allow the formation of high-grade carbon species (C2H6). Additionally, An et al. prepared cube-tetrapod-like AgCl:Ag nanoparticles and AgBr:Ag nanoplates.108 The as-prepared AgX (X = Cl, Br):Ag photocatalysts exhibited strong absorption in the visible region due to the surface plasmon resonance of silver nanoparticles and a strong ability to reduce CO2 to methanol.
4. Photonic crystals
Photonic crystals (PCs) have attracted extensive interest with respect to their potential applications in manipulating light in nontraditional ways, based on photonic band-structure concepts.109 Photonic crystals are very useful in controlling the propagation of light, and they can represent for photonics the same improvement that semiconductors represented in electronics. In a photonic crystal, light with certain frequencies is forbidden to propagate due to a photonic stop band arising from the periodic modulation of the refractive index.110,111 Slow light propagation near this stop band is a unique property of photonic crystals, and is of particular interest with regard to enhancing the solar energy-conversion efficiency. Inverse opals have an ordered arrangement of pores of the same size with a periodic modulation of the refractive index in space, and they are one of the most frequently studied photonic crystals in the application of solar energy conversion and photocatalysis.
4.1 TiO2-based inverse opals
As the most promising photocatalysts, TiO2 materials are expected to play an important role in helping solve many serious environmental and pollution challenges.112–115 TiO2 also bears tremendous hope in helping to ease the energy crisis through effective utilization of solar energy based on photovoltaic and water-splitting devices.116–118 Although continued breakthroughs have been made in the preparation, modification and applications of TiO2 inverse opal in recent years, reviews on this subject are few.20 We believe that a comprehensive review of TiO2 inverse opal would further promote TiO2-based research and development to tackle the environmental and energy challenges we are currently facing. In this section, we focus on recent progress in the applications of TiO2 inverse opal, including photocatalytic applications, water splitting and photovoltaic applications.

4.1.1 Photocatalytic decomposition. 
Photonic crystals with ordered macroporous structures give rise to a photonic stop band for certain frequencies of light.119,120 The application of PC-based ordered macroporous photocatalysts is promising, as photons near photonic stop band edges can be slowed down (termed slow photon) and localized in the active material to increase the photocarrier generation efficiency. Although the unique properties of TiO2 inverse opals and their possible applications for solar energy conversion are many, surprisingly, the first demonstration of better use of light was on back reflectors in dye sensitized solar cells or fundamental studies.121,122 In that seminal work, Ren et al. found that TiO2 inverse opal with photonic pseudo gaps in UV light was more efficient than P25 TiO2 in the photodegradation of 1,2-dichlorobenzene in the gas phase.123
To elucidate the reason of this behavior, Chen et al. demonstrated monochromatic and white light optical amplification of the photo-oxidation of adsorbed MB using an inverse colloidal photonic crystal fashioned from anatase nanocrystals, denoted i-nc-TiO2-o.124 Enhanced photoactivity that drove the oxidation of the dye was attributed to slow photons in i-nc-TiO2-o (Fig. 10). When the slow photon wavelength (370 ± 10 nm) was optimized with respect to the electronic excitation energy of i-nc-TiO2-o, the photo-oxidation rate of the dye was doubled compared to conventional nc-TiO2. This evidence suggested that the better activity arose from the exploitation of slow photons. To clarify the relative importance of slow light, light scattering and improved mass transfer due to the porosity, Sordello et al. performed the photocatalytic degradation of phenol at two different wavelengths on TiO2 inverse opal and TiO2 disordered macroporous powders.20,125 For the TiO2 inverse opal, the slow photon effect was maximized at a wavelength of 365 nm. On the contrary, at 254 nm, the slow light effect was negligible. The key experiment showed that the pristine inverse opal powder was four times more active than inverse opal crushed in a mortar, which had lost its periodicity in three dimensions. These differences vanished on irradiation at 254 nm, as at that wavelength the three powders showed almost the same activity. This evidence suggested that the slow light effect played an important role in increasing the light absorption of TiO2 inverse opals.
 Fig. 10  (a) Reflectance spectra of TiO2 inverse opals with photonic pseudo gaps (black dashed line) and MB (gray dashed line). (b) Logarithmic plot of the photodegradation of MB showing the first-order decay rate for nanocrystalline TiO2 (nc-TiO2) and TiO2 inverse opals with photonic pseudo gaps.124 (Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH) 
In order to extend the absorption of light to the visible, a variety of strategies have been employed to enhance the photocatalytic performance via doping,126–128 modification,129 and semiconductor coupling.130 Wang et al. were successful in synthesizing TiO2, ZrO2, Ta2O5, and Zr or Ta-doped TiO2 inverse opals, which were tested in the photocatalytic degradation of 4-nitrophenol and RhB in aqueous solution.131 They demonstrated a red shift of the absorption edge of doped TiO2, and measured higher photoactivity for the doped TiO2 inverse opal samples. Liu et al. synthesized hierarchically macro-/mesoporous Ti–Si oxide photonic crystals with higher photocatalytic activity than that of TiO2 photonic crystals.132
Additionally, another alternative strategy used to improve photochemistry on TiO2 is dye sensitization, which occurs due to electron injection from the excited dye to the TiO2 conduction band.133 When dye molecules are adsorbed on the internal surfaces of a TiO2 inverse opal with a properly tuned photonic band gap, dye absorption is enhanced and its degradation is improved.20 This mechanism has been hypothesized to account for the degradation of crystal violet on undoped TiO2 inverse opal under visible irradiation.134 The role of the inverse opal is to slow down the photons absorbed by the dye, increasing the interaction of light with organic compounds. Our previous work involved the design of photonic band gaps of TiO2 PCs to match the absorption peaks of dyes (MO, RhB, and MB); the photocatalytic activity of the corresponding sample was improved both under simulated solar light and visible light irradiation.135 This enhancement could be attributed to intensified dye sensitization resulting from the slow photon effect on the edges of the photonic band gaps.


4.1.2 Photocatalytic water splitting. 
Cheng et al. demonstrated a novel nanoarchitectured electrode design through the use of 3D CdS quantum dot-sensitized, optically and electrically active TiO2 inverse opals for PEC hydrogen production.136 A promising photocurrent density of 4.84 mA cm−2 was achieved for the 288 nm inverse opal as photoanode at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl bias under simulated solar-light illumination. The highly ordered and percolated 3D pore structures provide efficient and fast electron-transport pathways.
Liu et al. demonstrated that the hierarchical inverse-opal Pt–TiO2 PC segments could provide effective light harvesting and apparently improve hydrogen evolution.137 PC segments showed a great capability for strong light harvesting due to slow photon enhancement at the stop band edge and multiple scattering among the segments.


4.1.3 Photovoltaic applications. 
The light harvesting efficiency of dye-sensitized photoelectrodes was enhanced by coupling a TiO2 photonic crystal layer to a conventional film of TiO2 nanoparticles. Nishimura et al. demonstrated that the slow group velocity of light in photonic crystals results in enhanced red absorbance of dyes confined to a high-refractive-index medium.121 The photocurrent of solar cells could be increased by coupling a photonic crystal to a conventional photoelectrode, and here the photonic crystal played two roles: as a dielectric mirror for wavelengths corresponding to the stop band, and as a medium for enhancing light absorption on the long-wavelength side of the stop band.
Halaoui et al. investigated the mechanism of enhancement of the light harvesting efficiency of dye-sensitized TiO2 solar cells by coupling TiO2 inverse opals or disordered scattering layers to conventional nanocrystalline TiO2 films.122 The monochromatic IPCE for dye-sensitized TiO2 inverse opals of varying stop band wavelengths and for disordered TiO2 films was compared to the IPCE for bilayers of these structures coupled to nanocrystalline TiO2 films and to the IPCE for nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes. The results showed that the bilayer architecture, rather than enhanced light harvesting within the inverse opal structures, was responsible for the bulk of the gain in IPCE. Several mechanisms of light interaction in these structures, including localization of heavy photons near the edges of a photonic gap, Bragg diffraction in the periodic lattice, and multiple scattering events at disordered regions in the photonic crystal or at disordered films, led ultimately to enhancement of backscattering.
Mihi et al. demonstrated an approach for coupling preformed direct or inverse three-dimensional photonic crystals of different materials (TiO2, Si) with a diverse set of surfaces.138 In particular, they demonstrated enhanced light trapping in DSSCs by coupling a porous photonic crystal film to both nc-TiO2 and ZnO nanowire DSSC electrodes. The transferred photonic films exhibited high optical quality, and the transfer process did not damage or disrupt the porosity of the DSSC electrodes. The films increased the efficiency of a model TiO2 DSSC system from 2.3% to 3.2%. This approach decoupled the processing of the photonic structure from the processing of the DSSC electrode, and thus allowed the incorporation of inverse silicon photonic crystals in these devices.
Seo et al. successfully developed a novel method for the fabrication of inverse-opal TiO2 thin films.139 The photon-to-current conversion efficiency measured on a 10 μm thick TiO2 inverse-opal electrode was as high as 4.2%, which was improved by ∼80% compared to recently fabricated inverse-opal electrodes.

4.2 Non-TiO2 inverse opals
Currently, new challenges are being imposed on the fabrication of novel photocatalysts to satisfy the rising demand for a visible light response and high quantum efficiency. In terms of photonic crystals, this can be generalized according to the following two aspects: firstly, the modification of traditional TiO2 inverse-opal photocatalysts; secondly, the exploration of new photocatalysts, especially non-TiO2 inverse-opal materials. The development of new materials is the key to a breakthrough and progress in photocatalysis. Although a lot of non-TiO2 photonic crystals are prepared, their application needs further exploration.140,141 Some researchers have designed many non-TiO2 inverse-opal photocatalysts, and have made important progress.

4.2.1 Photocatalytic decomposition. 
Meng et al. prepared various metal-oxide photonic crystals, such as ZnO, Ga2O3, Fe2O3, CuO, ZrO2, Co3O4, CeO2, NiO, and In2O3, by facile approaches.142 The resulting ZnO photonic crystals (ZnO PCs) exhibited promising photocatalytic activities and photocorrosion inhibition for photooxidation of environmental pollutants under UV-vis light due to the synergistic effect of the inverse opal structure and the PC effect. Moreover, 3D inverse opal ZnO PCs with a designed photonic bandgap (PBG) were prepared to study the pore size and slow photon effect on photocatalytic dye degradation.143 The PBGs of these ZnO PC films were tuned experimentally by variation of the polystyrene sphere size of the opal templates. ZnO PCs exhibited higher photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation, when the probe molecules were absorbed and well matched with the PBG.
Li et al. synthesized Ga2O3 PCs with well-ordered skeleton structures via a dip-coating infiltration method.144 By changing the pore sizes, the electronic band absorption of Ga2O3 PCs could be made to locate on the red edge, on the blue edge, and away from the edge of their PBGs. The enhancement could be attributed to the slow photon effect on the red edge when the electronic band absorption was on the red edge of its PBG. Furthermore, ZnGa2O4 PCs with a highly ordered skeleton structure were obtained at a relatively low temperature by using acetylacetone-complexed metal ion precursors.145 The as-prepared ZnGa2O4 PCs exhibited higher photocatalytic activity towards the degradation of MO when compared to porous ZnGa2O4 and ZnGa2O4 nanocrystals due to the facilitated mass transport in the highly-ordered channel. By changing the pore diameter of the ZnGa2O4 PCs, the slow photon effect was observed, which enhanced the electronic band absorption and further improved the corresponding photocatalytic activity.


4.2.2 Photocatalytic water splitting. 
Zhou et al. demonstrated a general solution approach to the fabrication of periodically ordered porous architectures with control over dual porosity based on a modified colloidal crystal templating method.146 As a proof of concept, BiVO4 was used as a model material to investigate the influences of geometrical features on charge migration for PEC water splitting. A series of measurements, including PEC characterization, electrochemical impedance measurements, and open-circuit voltage decay, verified that charge migration in the BiVO4 periodically ordered macroporous architectures showed a strong dependence on the relative size of the dual porosity, under conditions of approximately 5.0 mA cm−2 and 1 sun AM 1.5 sunlight. Moreover, BiVO4 has been regarded as a promising material for PEC water splitting, but it suffers from major challenges with respect to charge collection and utilization. In order to meet this challenge, Zhou et al. also designed Mo:BiVO4 inverse opal through a controllable colloidal crystal template method with the help of a sandwich solution infiltration method and an adjustable post-heating time.147 Within expectations, a superior photocurrent density was achieved using this design. This enhancement originated primarily from effective charge collection and utilization according to analysis by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. All the results highlighted the great significance of the 3D ordered macro–mesoporous architecture as a promising photoelectrode model for solar conversion applications.
Zhang et al. have for the first time developed a facile and economical method to synthesize Bi2WO6 inverse-opal photonic-crystal structures, as an example of visible-light-active ternary metal oxides.148 Bi2WO6 inverse opals exhibited much higher photocatalytic activities for the degradation of MB and salicylic acid under visible light illumination, as compared with a reference Bi2WO6 nanofilm. The slow photon effect was observed in the angle-dependent photodegradation of MB under visible-light irradiation. The photon-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies of PEC water splitting under visible-light irradiation exhibited an almost three-fold increase due to the inverse-opal structure. Such enhancements in the H2 production with respect to the photocatalytic activity and the PEC activity were related to the improved light-harvesting properties, as well as the continuous porous structure of the inverse-opal structure.
The short diffusion length of photogenerated charge carriers limits the performance of photoelectrodes for solar water splitting. To reduce the distance between the location of charge generation and that where they are scavenged, a conductive Al-doped ZnO inverse opal network was introduced into a BiVO4 photoanode.17 The conductive inverse opal network served as an electron collector for the BiVO4 film, which suffered from poor electron transport. The combined heterostructure provided a photocurrent of 1.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE, which was threefold higher than a BiVO4 photoanode without any conducting inverse opal network.
Tsang et al. synthesized bulk macroporous Ta2O5, Ta3N5 and, for the first time, TaON, using a polymer templating technique and controlled ammonolysis.149 Bulk anion substitution of mac-Ta2O5 produced mac-TaON with microstructural modification but with preservation of the macrostructure. Furthermore, in contrast to a typical powder, mac-TaON comprised a mixture of β-TaON and the metastable polymorph, γ-TaON. Comparison of the photocatalytic activity showed that mac-TaON exhibited a greater activity than the powder analogue, in contrast to Ta2O5 and Ta3N5.
Chen et al. demonstrated that photonic crystals could be used to improve the performance of PEC devices under visible light irradiation.140 Inverse opal WO3 photoanodes with different stop-bands were prepared (Fig. 11). Considerable enhancement of photocurrent intensity was achieved on the inverse opal photoanode by adjusting the wavelengths of its slow light close to the electronic absorption edge of WO3. The light harvesting and photon-to-electron conversion efficiency at specific wavelengths was remarkably enhanced by utilization of the slow-light effect in the inverse opals. The spectral range at which photon-to-electron conversion efficiency was enhanced moves to shorter wavelengths as the incident angle increases, which resulted from a blue shift in the stop-band centre.
 Fig. 11  (a–c) SEM images of WO3 inverse opals with diameters of 200, 260, and 360 nm, respectively. (d) Light reflectance spectra of the WO3 inverse opals. (e) Photocurrent–potential curves of WO3 electrodes under light irradiation at 300 nm. (f) Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency.140 (Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). 

5. Combination of different photonic nanostructures
In the above sections, we have discussed several different kinds of photonic nanostructures for solar energy conversion. These photonic nanostructures can manipulate and confine light on the nanometer scale, enhancing the light absorption and the interaction between light and the medium to improve the efficiency of solar energy conversion. However, the enhancing mechanisms for different photonic structures are different. Microcavities are optical resonators, which confine the light field in a micron or sub-micron volume. The light oscillates in the medium with discontinuous dielectric constants by reflection, scattering or diffraction at the interface. By extending the photon lifetime and reducing the optical modes, the spontaneous emission of gain medium (dipoles) inside the cavity will be significantly modulated by the local vacuum field, and lasing emission with a low threshold can also occur. Plasmonic nanostructures are characterized by their strong interaction with resonant photons through excitation of the surface plasmon resonance. The SPR effect in metal nanostructures gives rise to a variety of optical and electronic effects, which occur during the excitation and subsequent decoherence of a plasmon and ultimately contribute to enhanced photonic effects in solar energy conversion. A photonic crystal, as one type of microcavity, is a special periodic dielectric material with an ordered arrangement. It shows great potential in manipulating light based on photonic band structure concepts, in which near-bandgap resonant scattering and slow photon effects can enhance the interaction of light with a semiconductor. Integrated microcavities, photonic crystals and the plasmonic effects of micro-structural materials may exhibit a superposition effect in light control. Combinations of different kinds of photonic nanostructures for developing more efficient solar energy conversion systems are reviewed and explored.
5.1 Microcavity + plasmonic
Like its acoustic analogue, the tuning fork, the optical microcavity (or microresonator) has a size-dependent resonant frequency spectrum. The microscale volume ensures that resonant frequencies are more sparsely distributed throughout this spectrum than they are in a corresponding ‘macroscale’ resonator. With appropriate structural design, the microcavity reflects most incident light back to the active organic layers and enhances the optical field distribution in the active materials (high photocurrent), while allowing light of a specific spectral range to pass through the device. SPR provides a way to finely tailor the dispersion relation of light, allowing the wavelength of light to be shrunk to only a few tens of nanometers at optical frequencies, or the creation of materials with a negative index of refraction. Integrated application of microcavities and the SPR effect of micro-structural materials may significantly enhance the light absorption, improving the efficiency of organic solar cells. De Waele et al. reported the plasmon dispersion relation in coaxial waveguides composed of a circular channel separating a metallic core and cladding.150 A plasmon phase shift up to π occurred upon reflection from the end of the cavity and strongly affected the cavity resonance. The phase shift depended greatly on the waveguide geometry and dielectric medium inside and outside the cavity, allowing further tunability of the coaxial cavity resonances and enabling the formation of cavities with ultrasmall mode volumes.
Surface plasmon polariton-induced field enhancement has been believed to be a highly attractive solution to enhancing optical absorption in an organic solar cell without increasing the thickness of its active layers. Surface plasmon polariton-induced resonance has been employed in small-molecule-based double-junction organic solar cells with two identical sub-cells to enhance the optical absorption of the back sub-cell by employing periodical corrugation in the metallic cathode. The optical absorption of the back sub-cell in double-junction organic solar cells was enhanced by strong coupling between the microcavity and propagating surface plasmon polariton-induced modes at the Ag/back sub-cell interface by employing a periodic wavelength-scale corrugation into the device structure.151 The surface plasmon polariton-induced resonance was tuned to the intrinsic absorption wavelength of the photovoltaic material through tuning the period of the corrugation, and coincided with that of the microcavity mode, which resulted in their anti-crossing and led to field enhancement at the absorption region of the boron subphthalocyanine chloride. Therefore, the optical absorption of the back sub-cell was improved and matched to that of the front sub-cell. As a result, the photocurrent was improved by 10.4% and a power conversion efficiency of 6.1% was achieved, which was an 11.3% enhancement.
Zhang et al. compared light trapping schemes based on Tamm states and Fabry–Pérot cavity modes in planar and corrugated organic solar cells, respectively.152 In optical Tamm-state-based organic solar cells, a better absorption performance could be achieved by using photonic crystal bilayers with a higher refractive index contrast, which was a result of the more strongly enhanced field intensity in the active layers. In Fabry–Pérot mode-based organic solar cells, a larger overall absorptivity could be obtained by using an additional dielectric layer with a lower refractive index. Organic solar cells based on these two schemes exhibited comparable absorption performances in aspects of absorption enhancement, field distributions, and the angle effect in the planar case.
Yao et al. achieved a highly efficient ITO-free flexible polymer solar cell by integrating plasmonic effects into microcavity configurations.153 By carefully controlling the sizes of embedded Ag nanoprisms and their doping positions in the stratified device, a significant enhancement in power conversion efficiency was shown from 8.5% (reference microcavity architecture) to 9.4% on flexible substrates. The well manipulated plasmonic resonances introduced by embedded Ag nanoprisms with different LSPR peaks allowed complementary light-harvesting with microcavity resonance in the regions 400–500 nm and 600–700 nm, resulting in a substantially increased photocurrent. This result signified that spectral matching between the SPR peaks of Ag nanoprisms and the relatively low absorption response of the photoactive layer in the microcavity device was an effective strategy to enhance light-harvesting across its absorption region.
5.2 Photonic crystal + plasmonic
With the development of nanotechnology, photonic crystal preparation techniques and engineering methods have made significant progress. Further production, design and preparation of photocatalytic material microstructures based on photonic crystals have a reliable experimental and theoretical basis. The integrated application of photonic crystals and plasmon effects of micro-structural materials may influence photocatalytic processes in the following aspects: (1) increasing the separation efficiency of the photo-generated electrons and holes. SPR can be enhanced by the photonic Bragg resonance. (2) Increasing the interfacial electron transfer rates. The interface potential of heterojunction semiconductor presents an electric field barrier, making the photo-generated carriers in the barrier electric field drift speed, which is conducive to the photocatalytic reaction. (3) The effects of the microstructure and plasmon extend the visible light absorption spectrum, and can effectively improve the utilization of sunlight and the photocatalytic quantum efficiency. Here, we outline some of the advantages of these techniques with respect to improving the solar conversion efficiency by combining the photonic crystal and plasmonic effects of micro-structural materials, which may have a superposition effect in light manipulation.

5.2.1 Photocatalytic applications. 
With the aim of enhancing photocatalysis through intensifying light harvesting, Lu et al. fabricated a new photocatalyst by infiltrating Au nanoparticles into TiO2 photonic crystals (Au/TiO2 PC).154 In photocatalytic experiments involving 2,4-dichlorophenol degradation under visible light (λ > 420 nm) irradiation, the kinetic constant using Au/TiO2 PCs was 2.3-fold larger than that using Au/TiO2 NPs. The excellent photocatalysis benefited from the cooperatively enhanced light harvesting owing to the LSPR of Au NPs, which extended the light-response spectra and the photonic effect of the TiO2 photonic crystals, which intensified the plasmonic absorption by Au NPs.
Dinh et al. demonstrated the construction of a three-dimensional ordered assembly of thin-shell Au/TiO2 hollow nanospheres from SiO2 nanospheres and titanate nanodisks.155 The designed Au/TiO2 hollow nanosphere materials exhibited a high surface area, photonic behavior, and enhanced light-scattering effects. These unique properties permitted Au/TiO2 hollow nanospheres to absorb visible light with great efficiency. As a result, the designed photocatalysts exhibited significantly enhanced visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity compared to conventional Au/TiO2 nanopowders.
Meng et al. successfully synthesized Au/ZnO PCs with an inverse opal structure through a facile template method. By changing the pore size, the PBG of ZnO PCs could be designed to overlap with or move away from the SPR absorption of Au NPs.156 Among these Au/ZnO PCs, the photocatalytic activity could be enhanced maximally when the blue edge of their PBG was located on the SPR absorption of Au NPs. The hybrid Au/ZnO PC showed high photocatalytic activity toward the degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation, and the degradation kinetic constant (1.42 h−1) was ca. 5.6-fold higher than that of the famous N-doped TiO2 (TiO2−xNx, 0.22 h−1) and 24.8-fold higher than that of commercial ZnO NPs (0.05 h−1). The synergistic effects of the SPR of Au, the slow photon effect of the ZnO PC, and the heterostructures between ZnO and Au NPs accounted for the high photocatalytic performance, which could enhance the harvesting of visible light and promote the separation of charge carriers.


5.2.2 PEC water splitting. 
Photonic crystals possess some interesting structural and optical properties, such as a large surface area, multiple scattering, which has been widely used in the field of reflective polarizers,157 sensors,158–161 solar cells, and photocatalysis. For photonic crystals, one of the most intriguing properties with regard to periodic photonic structures is the high surface/volume fractions and interconnected pores, which facilitate mass transport and light harvesting. Cui et al. successfully fabricated a photonic crystal-based CdS–Au–WO3 heterostructure by orderly deposition of Au and CdS onto a framework of structured WO3 inverse opal photonic crystal segments.162 Highly efficient visible-light-driven hydrogen and oxygen evolution were demonstrated relative to that of single-, two-component and unstructured systems, due to good light harvesting of photonic crystals and efficient electron transfer of this heterostructure.
The slow photon effect of a photonic crystal is also a promising characteristic for tuning light–matter interactions through material structure design. Zhang et al. designed a series of Au/TiO2 composite photoanodes by constructing two promising TiO2 functional structures (i.e., NRs and PCs) as scaffolds for Au NPs.163 The extended PEC water-splitting activity in visible light was ascribed to energetic hot electrons and holes that were generated in the Au NPs through the excitation and decay of surface plasmons. By alternating the characteristic pore size of the TiO2 PC layer, the slow photon region at the red edge of the photonic band gap could be purposely tuned to overlap with the strong localized SPR region of Au NPs. The matching slow-photon effect of TiO2 PCs (with a characteristic pore size of 250 nm) intensified the SPR responses (central at 536 nm) of Au NPs. Consequently, more hot electrons were generated in the Au NPs and injected into the conduction band of TiO2, resulting in improved PEC water splitting efficiency in the visible light region. Under simulated sunlight illumination, the photoconversion efficiency of the matching Au/TiO2 photoanode approached 0.71%, which was one of the highest values ever reported in Au/TiO2 PEC systems.
Baumberg and coworkers developed a photonic nano-architecture to improve charge carrier generation and separation by manipulating and confining light absorption in a visible-light-active photoanode constructed from BiVO4 photonic crystals and plasmonic nanostructures.164 The synergistic effects of photonic crystal stop bands and plasmonic absorption were observed to operate in this photonic nanostructure. Within the scaffold of an inverse opal photonic crystal, the surface plasmon resonance was significantly enhanced by the photonic Bragg resonance (Fig. 12). Their nanophotonic photoanodes showed AM 1.5 photocurrent densities of 3.1 ± 0.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE, which was among the highest for oxide-based photoanodes and over 4 times higher than the unstructured planar photoanode.
 Fig. 12  The simulated electric field distribution for gold nanoparticle (in the black dashed circles)-modified BiVO4 inverse opal at λ = 533 nm. The 20 nm gold nanoparticle is either (a) on the inverse opal wall, or (b) in the centre of one of the pores in the inverse opal away from the wall.163 (Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
Photonic crystal segments show great capabilities for strong light harvesting due to slow photon enhancement at the stop band edge and multiple scattering among the segments. Therefore, the photonic crystal structure serves to promote the light absorption of TiO2, which can lead to more photogenerated electron–hole pairs and high hydrogen evolution. Zhang et al. designed a visible-light-responsive plasmonic photocatalytic composite material by rationally selecting Au nanocrystals and assembling them with TiO2 nanotubes with a top seamless photonic crystal layer.165 The Au nanocrystals were selected so that their surface plasmonic resonance (SPR) wavelength matched the photonic band gap of the photonic crystal and thus the SPR of the Au received remarkable assistance from the photonic crystal substrate. The design of the composite material was expected to significantly increase the Au SPR intensity and consequently boost the hot-electron injection from the Au nanocrystals into the conduction band of TiO2, leading to a considerably enhanced water-splitting performance of the material under visible light.


5.2.3 Photovoltaic applications. 
A photonic crystal coupled with plasmonic nanoparticle arrays to form a periodic plasmonic architecture was prepared by loading Au nanoparticles inside an inverse opal TiO2 film. Li et al. showed for the first time that a coupling architecture of PC and a plasmonic nanoparticle array induced synergistic modulation to incident light for resonant enhancement in light harvesting and power conversion.166 For the cell with the coupling architecture, light harvesting in the visible and near infrared range was increased by 62% and the overall light-to-electricity conversion yield was thus increased by 41% in contrast to the control test.
To provide a clearer comparison of different photonic nanostructures for solar energy conversion, we have summarized the photocurrent density or power conversion efficiency, and enhancement factor based on different kinds of photonic nanostructures, in Table 1. Microcavities and photonic crystals can improve the solar energy conversion through improved light absorption, while plasmonic nanostructures can also contribute to charge-carrier generation via hot electrons. A combination of photonic nanostructures brings a synergistic effect and amplifies the corresponding light-manipulation effect.
Table 1 A summary of photonic nanostructures utilized in photocatalytic degradation, PEC water splitting and solar cells to improve their solar conversion efficiencies




Photonic nanostructures
Materials
Photocatalytic degradation
Photocurrent density (mA cm−2)
Power conversion efficiency (%)
Enhancement factor
Ref.




Microcavity
TiO2
MO




2 times

26



Fe2O3


0.35 at 1.23 VRHE


3–4 times

27



Cu2O/ZnO




0.51
2.5 times

29



TiO2




7.02
26%

30



Polymer solar cells 1




4.5
26.4%

38







Plasmonic materials
ZnO/Au
Ethanol




2.2 times

52



Ag@TiO2
RhB




3 times

53



Ag/ZnO
RhB




23 times

55



Ag/ZnO
RhB




10 times

56



Ag@AgVO3/graphene/protonated g-C3N4
MB




11 times

57



Au–TiO2




5.4
2.6 times

58



Ag@SiO2




6.26
15%

59



Ag@TiO2




5.31
13.5%

60



Organic solar cells 1




1.32
35%

31



Polymer solar cells 2




3.59
17%

62



Au–CdS
Salicylic acid




2.25 times

63



Pt/n-Si/Ag
Nitrobenzene




3.2 times

64



Au/TiO2


1.49 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl


1.82 times

65



Au/Fe2O3


0.9 at 0.23 V vs. Ag/AgCl


10 times

67



Au–CdS


10 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl


5 times

68



Au/TiO2/OEC


0.35 at 1 VRHE


20 times

69



Fe2O3/Au


0.4 mV at 1.5 VRHE


50%

71



Au–CdSe


2 × 10−3 at 1.23 VRHE


5 times

74



Au@SiO2




7.8
34%

75



Organic solar cells 2




9.5
2.2 times

61



Au@SiO2




9.2
13%

76



Au/BiVO4


1.05 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl


2 times

77



Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O
CO2 reduction




7.8 times

105



Au/ZnTe/ZnO
CO2 reduction




11 times

106







Photonic crystal
TiO2/Ta2O5
4-Nitrophenol




2.6 times

131



TiO2/ZrO2
4-Nitrophenol




2.1 times

131



TiO2/ZrO2
RhB




35%

131



TiO2/SiO2
RhB




15.6 times

132



CdS/TiO2


4.84 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl


200 times

136



TiO2




3.2
39%

137



TiO2




4.2
80%

138



ZnO
MO




2.5 times

142



Ga2O3
MO




2.2 times

144



BiVO4


1.35 at 1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl


2.25 times

146



Mo: BiVO4


2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl


6.9 times

147



BiWO4
MB




2.2 times

148



BiVO4/Al–ZnO


1.5 at 1.23 VRHE


3 times

17



WO3


2.5 at 1.0 V vs. SCE


2.5 times

140







Microcavity + plasmon
Organic solar cells 3




6.1
11.3%

150



Organic solar cells 4




9.4
10%

152







Photonic crystal + plasmon
Au/TiO2
2,4-Dichlorophenol




4.75 times

154



Au/TiO2
Isopropanol




6.1 times

155



Au/ZnO
RhB




24.8 times

156



Au–TiO2


1.5 at 1.23 VRHE


3 times

163



Au–BiVO4


3.1 at 1.23 VRHE


4 times

164



Au–TiO2


2.25 at 1.23 VRHE


1.8 times

165



TiO2/Au




4.67
29%

166






6. Conclusions
This review article provides a comprehensive overview of progress in photonic nanostructures for improving solar energy conversion efficiency. We have mainly focused on three categories of photonic nanostructures and their combinations. Optical microcavities can reduce the thickness of semiconductors without compromising their light absorption, by trapping resonant light in ultrathin films. Plasmonic metal nanostructures with surface plasmon resonances can act as antennas to localize optical energy and control the location of charge carrier generation. Photonic crystals show promising application in enhancing the interaction of light with a semiconductor. Combinations of different kinds of photonic nanostructures may exhibit a superposition effect in light manipulating. Photonic nanostructures show great promise in improving the efficiency of photocatalytic degradation, photovoltaic devices and solar water splitting through the confinement and manipulation of light.
Applications of photonic nanostructures for improving solar energy conversion efficiency have progressed rapidly in the past decade. We anticipate that in the next decade, new photonic nanostructures will be discovered, and new solar energy conversion architectures will be realized for further advances in efficiency and ultimately in commercial feasibility. Specifically, integrating different types of photonic nanostructures, such as photonic crystals combined with plasmonic nanostructures, to further achieve more efficient light trapping and manipulation is very promising. Furthermore, gap plasmons in the NPoM geometry, exhibiting extremely localized electrical fields across the material inside the nanogap, show the new direction of developing efficient solar energy conversion systems based on plasmonic structures. A combination of optical cavities with gap plasmons may result in a synergistic effect of light trapping. Finally, further understanding of charge-generation, separation and transport processes in photonic nanostructures is necessary from the viewpoint of designing more efficient photonic nanostructures for solar energy conversion applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 21507011), an Eastern Scholar Program (SSH1829002 to L. Z.) and the Thousand Young Talents Program to L. Z.
References
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Saleh, M. C. Teich and B. E. Saleh, Fundamentals of photonics, Wiley, New York,  1991 Search PubMed .

          A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Photonics: optical electronics in modern communications (the oxford series in electrical and computer engineering), Oxford University Press, Inc.,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, S. D. Tilley, L. Steier, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, H. J. Fan and M. Gratzel, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1395–1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, J. Teng, Z. Xiong, Y. Li, Q. Li, X. Lu and X. S. Zhao, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5157–5164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xie, Y. Feng, X. Fu, P. Luan and L. Jing, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 631, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .
B. Coelho, A. C. Oliveira and A. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1398–1405 Search PubMed .
P. S. Kumar, J. Sundaramurthy, S. Sundarrajan, V. J. Babu, G. Singh, S. I. Allakhverdiev and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3192–3222 CAS .
S. G. Kumar and K. S. R. K. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 45–102 CAS .
J. Han, Z. Liu, K. Guo, X. Zhang, T. Hong and B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 179, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, D. Li, Z. Chen, H. Huang, M. Sun, Y. He and X. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14943–14947 CAS .
H. Ahmad, S. K. Kamarudin, L. J. Minggu and M. Kassim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 599–610 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hernández, S. M. Thalluri, A. Sacco, S. Bensaid, G. Saracco and N. Russo, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 504, 266–271 CrossRef .
Y. Li, T. Kunitake and S. Fujikawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13000–13004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, L. Zhang, M. Fan, X. Wang, M. L. Walbridge, Q. Nong, Y. Wu and L. Zhao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, E. Reisner and J. J. Baumberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1402 CAS .
M. E. Calvo, S. Colodrero, N. Hidalgo, G. Lozano, C. Lopez-Lopez, O. Sanchez-Sobrado and H. Miguez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4800–4812 Search PubMed .
V. Rinnerbauer, S. Ndao, Y. X. Yeng, W. R. Chan, J. J. Senkevich, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljacic and I. Celanovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8815–8823 CAS .

          F. Sordello, C. Minero and V. Maurino, Improved photochemistry of TiO2 inverse opals and some examples, INTECH Open Access Publisher,  2012 Search PubMed .
W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, E. M. Talbert and R. Bardhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1577–1601 CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and C. Burda, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5564–5576 CAS .
K. J. Vahala, Nature, 2003, 424, 839–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Yan, R. S. Yuan, W. J. Li and J. M. You, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 478, 204–210 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anaya, M. E. Calvo, J. M. Luque-Raigon and H. Miguez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7803–7806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cheng, Q. Q. Li, J. Meng, X. Han, Y. Q. Wu, S. J. Wang, L. Qian and Z. L. Du, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 116, 120–125 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Liu, I. C. Cheng, J. Z. Chen, H. W. Chen, K. C. Ho and C. C. Chiang, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, A168–A176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kang, T. Xu, H. J. Park, X. G. Luo and L. J. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4378–4383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Rim, S. Zhao, S. R. Scully, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 243501 CrossRef .
C. Cocoyer, L. Rocha, L. Sicot, B. Geffroy, R. de Bettignies, C. Sentein, C. Fiorini-Debuisschert and P. Raimond, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 133108 CrossRef .
F. Pastorelli, P. Romero-Gomez, R. Betancur, A. Martinez-Otero, P. Mantilla-Perez, N. Bonod and J. Martorell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400614 Search PubMed .
H. Choi, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, G. Gao, H. S. Kang, M. S. Kang, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5938–5941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Zuo, C. Y. Chang, C. C. Chueh, Y. X. Xu, H. Z. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 961–968 CAS .
T. D. Heidel, J. K. Mapel, M. Singh, K. Celebi and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 093506 CrossRef .
C. J. An, C. Cho, J. K. Choi, J. M. Park, M. L. Jin, J. Y. Lee and H. T. Jung, Small, 2014, 10, 1278–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
M. Alvaro, B. Cojocaru, A. A. Ismail, N. Petrea, B. Ferrer, F. A. Harraz, V. I. Parvulescu and H. Garcia, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Fouad and M. B. Mohamed, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 1–8 CrossRef .
S. T. Kochuveedu, D.-P. Kim and D. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2500–2506 CAS .
X. Chen, H. Y. Zhu, J. C. Zhao, Z. F. Zheng and X. P. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5353–5356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Lu, C. Y. Tsai, H. A. Chen, Y. T. Liang, K. P. Chen, S. Gradecak, S. Gwo and L. J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 264–271 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Lin, Y. K. Hsu, Y. C. Chen, S. B. Wang, J. T. Miller, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8917–8922 CAS .
S. T. Ren, B. Y. Wang, H. Zhang, P. Ding and Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4066–4074 CAS .
M. A. Mahmoud, W. Qian and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3285–3289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Niu, Y. R. Dai, L. F. Yin, J. Y. Shang and J. C. Crittenden, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 17421–17428 RSC .
Y. L. Pan, S. Z. Deng, L. Polavarapu, N. Y. Gao, P. Y. Yuan, C. H. Sow and Q. H. Xu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12304–12310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Leelavathi, G. Madras and N. Ravishankar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14445–14455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. S. Dong, H. C. Yu, Z. B. Jiao, G. X. Lu and Y. P. Bi, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 59114–59117 RSC .
F. Li, K. Liu, Y. L. Zhao, Y. Y. Cao, Z. Q. Li, H. T. Xu, H. B. Zhang, Y. C. Guo and H. S. Qian, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2015, 26, 5753–5760 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Liu, G. X. Shao, J. F. Zhao, Z. X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Liang, X. G. Liu, H. S. Jia and B. S. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16182–16190 CAS .
S. W. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. H. Zuo, C. Z. Li, J. H. Yang and C. H. Lu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5895–5901 RSC .
S. W. Zhang, J. X. Li, X. K. Wang, Y. S. Huang, M. Y. Zeng and J. Z. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10119–10126 CAS .
G. Sahu, S. W. Gordon and M. A. Tarr, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 573–582 RSC .
K. M. Guo, M. Y. Li, X. L. Fang, X. L. Liu, Y. D. Zhu, Z. Q. Hu and X. Z. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7229–7234 CAS .
P. C. Huang, T. Y. Chen, Y. L. Wang, C. Y. Wu and T. L. Lin, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 70172–70177 RSC .
S. W. Baek, G. Park, J. Noh, C. Cho, C. H. Lee, M. K. Seo, H. Song and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3302–3312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Liu, B. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. N. Yip, G. N. Yu, Q. H. Xiong, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10101–10110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Singh and B. Pal, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2013, 378, 246–254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Qu, R. Cheng, Q. Su and X. F. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16730–16733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. D. Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Eom, J. Y. Jung, Y. Shin, S. Kim, J. H. Choi, E. Lee, J. H. Jeong and I. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 226–234 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 Search PubMed .
X. T. Wang, C. Liow, D. P. Qi, B. W. Zhu, W. R. Leow, H. Wang, C. Xue, X. D. Chen and S. Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3506–3512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5014–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Kramer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Thacker, L. O. Herrmann, D. O. Sigle, T. Zhang, T. Liedl, J. J. Baumberg and U. F. Keyser, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3448 Search PubMed .
J. Mertens, A. L. Eiden, D. O. Sigle, F. Huang, A. Lombardo, Z. Sun, R. S. Sundaram, A. Colli, C. Tserkezis, J. Aizpurua, S. Milana, A. C. Ferrari and J. J. Baumberg, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5033–5038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Sigle, L. Zhang, S. Ithurria, B. Dubertret and J. J. Baumberg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1099–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Zarick, O. Hurd, J. A. Webb, C. Hungerford, W. R. Erwin and R. Bardhan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 806–811 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. O. Herrmann and J. J. Baumberg, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745 CAS .
W. Fan, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2632–2649 RSC .
K. Mori, H. Yamashita and M. Anpo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3165 RSC .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Fuel Process. Technol., 2011, 92, 805–811 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. Wang, W. J. An, B. Ramalingam, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, S. Gangopadhyay and P. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11276–11281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Fan, Z. H. Zhao, L. X. Zhu and Z. Z. Wang, Asian J. Chem., 2014, 26, 667–671 CAS .
K. Y. Lee, A. R. Mohamed and K. Sato, Sensor Mater., 2015, 27, 993–1001 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Lee, K. Sato and A. R. Mohamed, Mater. Lett., 2016, 163, 240–243 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, L. Q. Ye, K. Li, X. H. Zhang, J. Y. Liu, T. Y. Peng and L. Zan, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 855–862 CrossRef CAS .
H.-A. Park, J. H. Choi, K. M. Choi, D. K. Lee and J. K. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5304 RSC .
Q. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Kou, X. Chen, Z. Tian, J. Gao, S. Yan and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14385–14387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Yan, S. X. Ouyang, J. Gao, M. Yang, J. Y. Feng, X. X. Fan, L. J. Wan, Z. S. Li, J. H. Ye, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6400–6404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, H. Su, R. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Yan, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2356–2361 CAS .
N. Y. Wang, S. C. Yan and Z. G. Zou, Curr. Org. Chem., 2013, 17, 2454–2458 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, A. Li and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8356–8359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cronin, Abstr. Paper Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 246, 149 Search PubMed .
Z. Q. He, L. L. Tong, Z. P. Zhang, J. M. Chen and S. Song, Acta. Phys-Chim. Sin., 2015, 31, 2341–2348 CAS .
L. Collado, A. Reynal, J. M. Coronado, D. P. Serrano, J. R. Durrant and V. A. D. O'Shea, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 178, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
E. Z. Liu, L. M. Kang, F. Wu, T. Sun, X. Y. Hu, Y. H. Yang, H. C. Liu and J. Fan, Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, B. Tahir and N. A. S. Amin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 356, 1289–1299 CrossRef CAS .
E. Z. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Li, C. N. Tang, X. Y. Hu, J. Fan, Y. H. Chen and J. J. Bian, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 1049–1057 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Feng, M. Wang, Y. Zhou, P. Li, W. G. Tu and Z. G. Zou, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104416 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, S.-W. Cao and C. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25939–25947 CAS .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8480–8484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, J.-W. Jang, J. Lee, J. H. Kim, H. Kumagai, J. Lee, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3597–3604 CAS .
W. G. Tu, Y. Zhou, H. J. Li, P. Li and Z. G. Zou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14232–14236 RSC .
C. H. An, J. Z. Wang, W. Jiang, M. Y. Zhang, X. J. Ming, S. T. Wang and Q. H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5646–5650 RSC .
K. Ishizaki and S. Noda, Nature, 2009, 460, 367–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Chow, S. Y. Lin, S. G. Johnson, P. R. Villeneuve, J. D. Joannopoulos, J. R. Wendt, G. A. Vawter, W. Zubrzycki, H. Hou and A. Alleman, Nature, 2000, 407, 983–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Chen, G. Freymann, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1196–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Cao, J. Chen, W. Li, Y. Shao, Y. Zheng and D. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136–137, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sordello, V. Maurino and C. Minero, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19144 RSC .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3–14 CrossRef .
K. Sakoda, Opt. Express, 1999, 4, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Imhof, W. L. Vos, R. Sprik and A. Lagendijk, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 2942–2945 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. I. Halaoui, N. M. Abrams and T. E. Mallouk, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6334–6342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ren, R. Ravikrishna and K. T. Valsaraj, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 7029–7033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Chen, G. von Freymann, S. Y. Choi, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1915–1919 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sordello, C. Duca, V. Maurino and C. Minero, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6147–6149 RSC .
Q. Li and J. K. Shang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 660–663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, B. Yang, M. Wu, Z. Fu, Y. Lv and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15251–15259 CAS .
Z. Hu, L. Xu, L. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Xu and J. Chen, Catal. Commun., 2013, 40, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yuan, Z. Yu, C. Li, J. Li, Y. Shen, H. Zhang, C. Wang and A. Xie, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H332–H336 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, D. Li, X. Li, J. Chen, C. Cao, J. Fang, J. Wang, Y. He and Y. Zheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, A. Geng, Y. Guo, S. Jiang, X. Qu and L. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 301, 236–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, M. Li, J. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 9425–9431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, C. Chen, X. Li, J. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5022–5028 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Wang, G. Cheng, X. H. Jiang, Y. C. Li, Y. B. Huang and Z. L. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 212108 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, S. Meng, J. Chen, J. Wang, J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Fu and D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21263–21273 CAS .
C. Cheng, S. K. Karuturi, L. Liu, J. Liu, H. Li, L. T. Su, A. I. Tok and H. J. Fan, Small, 2012, 8, 37–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, G. Liu, M. Li, W. Shen, Z. Liu, J. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Jiang and Y. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1503 CAS .
A. Mihi, C. Zhang and P. V. Braun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5712–5715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Seo, K. Woo, J. Kim, H. Lee and W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3094–3103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Ye, S. Ouyang, T. Kako, Z. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4310–4318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, K. S. Hwang, D. M. Mittleman, J. F. Bertone and V. L. Colvin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11630–11637 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meng, D. Li, X. Zheng, J. Wang, J. Chen, J. Fang, Y. Shao and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2744 CAS .
S. Meng, D. Li, P. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Wang, J. Chen, J. Fang and X. Fu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17021 RSC .
X. Li, X. Zhen, S. Meng, J. Xian, Y. Shao, X. Fu and D. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 47, 9911–9917 CAS .
X. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Shao, M. He, P. Wang, X. Fu and D. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15796–15802 CAS .
M. Zhou, H. B. Wu, J. Bao, L. Liang, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8579–8583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, J. Bao, Y. Xu, J. Zhang, J. Xie, M. Guan, C. Wang, L. Wen, Y. Lei and Y. Xie, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7088–7098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Baumanis, L. Robben, T. Kandiel and D. Bahnemann, Small, 2011, 7, 2714–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Tsang, N. E. Pridmore, L. J. Gillie, Y. H. Chou, R. Brydson and R. E. Douthwaite, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3406–3409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. de Waele, S. P. Burgos, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2832–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, J. Feng, M. Xu, X. L. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. D. Chen, H. Y. Wang and H. B. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 809–813 CrossRef .
X. L. Zhang, J. F. Song, X. B. Li, J. Feng and H. B. Sun, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1577–1585 CrossRef CAS .
W.-N. Wang, Aerosol Air Qual. Res., 2014, 14, 533–549 CAS .
Y. Lu, H. Yu, S. Chen, X. Quan and H. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1724–1730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Dinh, H. Yen, F. Kleitz and T. O. Do, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6618–6623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meng, D. Li, X. Fu and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23501–23511 CAS .
D. R. Solli, C. F. McCormick and J. M. Hickmann, J. Lightwave Technol., 2006, 24, 3864–3867 CrossRef .
D. Tuyen le, A. C. Liu, C. C. Huang, P. C. Tsai, J. H. Lin, C. W. Wu, L. K. Chau, T. S. Yang, Q. Minh le, H. C. Kan and C. C. Hsu, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 29266–29275 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Wu, C. C. Huang, J. S. Jhang, A. C. Liu, C. C. Chiang, M. L. Hsieh, P. J. Huang, D. Tuyen le, Q. Minh le, T. S. Yang, L. K. Chau, H. C. Kan and C. C. Hsu, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 21522–21529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, Y. J. Liu, X. Lu and J. Teng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9440–9445 CAS .
W. Shen, M. Li, B. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Li, L. Jiang and Y. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8127 RSC .
X. Cui, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, Z. Zhao, C. Xu, Y. Wei, A. Duan, J. Liu and J. Gao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15689 RSC .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, S.-T. Lee, S. Yang and Z. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1409 CAS .
L. Zhang, C. Y. Lin, V. K. Valev, E. Reisner, U. Steiner and J. J. Baumberg, Small, 2014, 10, 3970–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. N. Hedhili, H. Zhang and P. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 14–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Hu, W. Hong, F. Cai, Q. Tang, B. Zhao, D. Zhang and P. Cheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14334–14339 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xiuzhen Zheng
	Dr Xiuzhen Zheng is a postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Environmental Science and Engineering at Fudan University. She received her PhD degree in the State Key Laboratory of Photocatalysis on Energy and Environment from the Fuzhou University in 2015. Currently, she is conducting her postdoctoral studies under the supervision of Prof. Liwu Zhang, with a focus on enhancing the performance of artificial photosynthesis by the incorporation of photonic nanostructures, and is further studying the impact of light manipulation in these systems.

Liwu Zhang
	Prof. Liwu Zhang joined the Department of Environmental Science and Engineering at Fudan University in November 2014. Prior to his faculty appointment, he did his postdoctoral work under the supervision of Prof. Jeremy J. Baumberg (FRS) at the Nanophotonics Centre in Cavendish Laboratory and collaborated with Dr Erwin Reisner from the Department of Chemistry at the University of Cambridge. Before that, he was an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow under the supervision of Prof. Detlef Bahnemann in the Hannover University. He received a PhD in Chemistry from Tsinghua University under the supervision of Prof. Yongfa Zhu. He is a recipient of the Marie Curie Intra-European Research Fellow award. He has over a decade of experience in nanophotonics and nanomaterials and a strong background in photocatalysis, and he has published more than 30 highly cited papers in this field. His work has been cited >2500 times, and he has an h-index of 20.

Broader context
Solar energy is a theoretically infinite energy source and can provide sufficient power for our energy demands if it can be efficiently harvested and transformed. Some efficient strategies of solar energy conversion include photocatalysis to degrade and mineralize environmental contaminants, generation of hydrogen by the splitting of water molecules or driving the reduction of CO2 into valuable hydrocarbon fuels. Currently, a number of materials have been demonstrated to be potential candidates for such photocatalytic reactions. However, the solar-to-energy conversion efficiencies are still unable to meet commercial requirements due to the limited light absorption and high recombination rate of charge carriers. Photonic nanostructures (optical microcavities, plasmonic metal nanostructures, and photonic crystals) can enhance light harvesting by manipulating and confining light on the nanometer scale, providing new opportunities to improve the efficiency of solar energy conversion. This review highlights recent progress in improving the efficiency of solar energy conversion with photonic nanostructures, demonstrating how such structures can enhance the generation and separation of photoexcited charge carriers in photocatalytic degradation, photovoltaic devices, solar water splitting and CO2 photoreduction.


 	Fig. 1  Resonant light trapping in quarter-wave films.27 (Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM images, and (b) TEM image of Ag@TiO2 core–shell nanowires.53 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The mechanism of operation of the autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter, (b) spatial distribution of electric field and (c) IPCE for Au NP-TiO2 and Au NR-TiO2.65 (Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a.1 and a.2) Cross-sectional TEM images, (a.3) high resolution TEM image in the Ag layer and (a.4) its selective area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns for periodic Ag nanowire, and (b.1 and b.2) cross-sectional TEM images, (a.3) high resolution image near the Ag–TiO2 interface and (a.4) its SAED pattern for the Ag/TiO2 nanowire array.66 (Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  Plasmon-enhanced light absorption. (a) Ultraviolet-visible absorption spectra for 150 nm long hematite nanorods on bare FTO and on an Au nanohole array pattern. (b) Absorption enhancement for hematite nanorods on an Au nanohole array pattern with the background (hematite on FTO) subtracted.67 (Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Linear sweep voltammogram curves of multi-segmented CdS–Au NRAs. (b) The linear relationship between the photocurrent intensities and the amount of segments in multi-segmented CdS–Au NRAs and pure CdS NRAs photoanodes. (c) Measured IPCE spectra at a potential of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl. (d) Stability test of nine segments of multi-segmented CdS–Au NRAs at a potential of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl.68 (Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure and mechanism of operation of the autonomous plasmonic solar water splitter.70 (Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 8  Au NPs on gold film with atomically thin CdSe sandwiched between them. Charge oscillations in Au NPs induce image charges in the metallic surface and enable plasmonic coupling. Field enhancement at the optical bandgap of CdSe platelets (λ = 548 nm) in an NPoM-nanogap and for an isolated Au NP for comparison.74 (Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. Electric field distribution in 10 nm, 20 nm, 40 nm, and 60 nm diameter Au-NP-modified BiVO4 for incident light of 500 nm (top) and 550 nm (bottom).77 (Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Reflectance spectra of TiO2 inverse opals with photonic pseudo gaps (black dashed line) and MB (gray dashed line). (b) Logarithmic plot of the photodegradation of MB showing the first-order decay rate for nanocrystalline TiO2 (nc-TiO2) and TiO2 inverse opals with photonic pseudo gaps.124 (Copyright 2006 Wiley-VCH)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–c) SEM images of WO3 inverse opals with diameters of 200, 260, and 360 nm, respectively. (d) Light reflectance spectra of the WO3 inverse opals. (e) Photocurrent–potential curves of WO3 electrodes under light irradiation at 300 nm. (f) Incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency.140 (Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  The simulated electric field distribution for gold nanoparticle (in the black dashed circles)-modified BiVO4 inverse opal at λ = 533 nm. The 20 nm gold nanoparticle is either (a) on the inverse opal wall, or (b) in the centre of one of the pores in the inverse opal away from the wall.163 (Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

Microcavity	TiO2	MO	
	
	2 times	
26

Fe2O3	
	0.35 at 1.23 VRHE	
	3–4 times	
27

Cu2O/ZnO	
	
	0.51	2.5 times	
29

TiO2	
	
	7.02	26%	
30

Polymer solar cells 1	
	
	4.5	26.4%	
38



Plasmonic materials	ZnO/Au	Ethanol	
	
	2.2 times	
52

Ag@TiO2	RhB	
	
	3 times	
53

Ag/ZnO	RhB	
	
	23 times	
55

Ag/ZnO	RhB	
	
	10 times	
56

Ag@AgVO3/graphene/protonated g-C3N4	MB	
	
	11 times	
57

Au–TiO2	
	
	5.4	2.6 times	
58

Ag@SiO2	
	
	6.26	15%	
59

Ag@TiO2	
	
	5.31	13.5%	
60

Organic solar cells 1	
	
	1.32	35%	
31

Polymer solar cells 2	
	
	3.59	17%	
62

Au–CdS	Salicylic acid	
	
	2.25 times	
63

Pt/n-Si/Ag	Nitrobenzene	
	
	3.2 times	
64

Au/TiO2	
	1.49 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	1.82 times	
65

Au/Fe2O3	
	0.9 at 0.23 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	10 times	
67

Au–CdS	
	10 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	5 times	
68

Au/TiO2/OEC	
	0.35 at 1 VRHE	
	20 times	
69

Fe2O3/Au	
	0.4 mV at 1.5 VRHE	
	50%	
71

Au–CdSe	
	2 × 10−3 at 1.23 VRHE	
	5 times	
74

Au@SiO2	
	
	7.8	34%	
75

Organic solar cells 2	
	
	9.5	2.2 times	
61

Au@SiO2	
	
	9.2	13%	
76

Au/BiVO4	
	1.05 at 0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	2 times	
77

Au–Cu/graphene/Cu2O	CO2 reduction	
	
	7.8 times	
105

Au/ZnTe/ZnO	CO2 reduction	
	
	11 times	
106



Photonic crystal	TiO2/Ta2O5	4-Nitrophenol	
	
	2.6 times	
131

TiO2/ZrO2	4-Nitrophenol	
	
	2.1 times	
131

TiO2/ZrO2	RhB	
	
	35%	
131

TiO2/SiO2	RhB	
	
	15.6 times	
132

CdS/TiO2	
	4.84 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	200 times	
136

TiO2	
	
	3.2	39%	
137

TiO2	
	
	4.2	80%	
138

ZnO	MO	
	
	2.5 times	
142

Ga2O3	MO	
	
	2.2 times	
144

BiVO4	
	1.35 at 1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	2.25 times	
146

Mo: BiVO4	
	2 at 1.0 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
	6.9 times	
147

BiWO4	MB	
	
	2.2 times	
148

BiVO4/Al–ZnO	
	1.5 at 1.23 VRHE	
	3 times	
17

WO3	
	2.5 at 1.0 V vs. SCE	
	2.5 times	
140



Microcavity + plasmon	Organic solar cells 3	
	
	6.1	11.3%	
150

Organic solar cells 4	
	
	9.4	10%	
152



Photonic crystal + plasmon	Au/TiO2	2,4-Dichlorophenol	
	
	4.75 times	
154

Au/TiO2	Isopropanol	
	
	6.1 times	
155

Au/ZnO	RhB	
	
	24.8 times	
156

Au–TiO2	
	1.5 at 1.23 VRHE	
	3 times	
163

Au–BiVO4	
	3.1 at 1.23 VRHE	
	4 times	
164

Au–TiO2	
	2.25 at 1.23 VRHE	
	1.8 times	
165

TiO2/Au	
	
	4.67	29%	
166


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
