Solution-processed, nanostructured hybrid solar cells with broad spectral sensitivity and stability  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR30210A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR30210A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3507-3514Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSolution-processed, nanostructured hybrid solar cells with broad spectral sensitivity and stability

        
          
            Renjia 
            Zhou
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Zheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Qian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yixing 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Paul H. 
            Holloway
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jiangeng 
            Xue
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-6400, USA. E-mail: jxue@mse.ufl.edu;  Fax: +1-352-846-3355;   Tel: +1-352-846-3775
Received 
      26th January 2012
    , Accepted 16th March 2012First published on 20th March 2012AbstractHybrid organic–inorganic solar cells, as an alternative to all-organic solar cells, have received significant attention for their potential advantages in combining the solution-processability and versatility of organic materials with high charge mobility and environmental stability of inorganic semiconductors. Here we report efficient and air-stable hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells with broad spectral sensitivity based on a low-gap polymer poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) and spherical CdSe nanoparticles. The solvents used for depositing the hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe active layer were shown to strongly influence the film morphology, and subsequently the photovoltaic performance of the resulted solar cells. Appropriate post-deposition annealing of the hybrid film was also shown to improve the solar cell efficiency. The inclusion of a thin ZnO nanoparticle layer between the active layer and the metal cathode leads to a significant increase in device efficiency especially at long wavelengths, due to a combination of optical and electronic effects including more optimal light absorption in the active layer and elimination of unwanted hole leakage into the cathode. Overall, maximum power conversion efficiencies up to 3.7 ± 0.2% and spectral sensitivity extending above 800 nm were achieved in such PCPDTBT:CdSe nanosphere hybrid solar cells. Furthermore, the devices with a ZnO nanoparticle layer retained ∼70% of the original efficiency after storage under ambient laboratory conditions for over 60 days without any encapsulation.
1. Introduction
Solution-processed all-organic solar cells have been intensively investigated in recent years due to their potential for low-cost solar energy conversion, and maximum power conversion efficiencies (ηP) exceeding 8% have been achieved in state-of-the-art devices.1–3 Hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells based on conjugated polymers and colloidal inorganic nanocrystals have also received considerable attention as an alternative to all-organic solar cells.4–8 In addition to complementing the light absorption by the organic components, the incorporation of inorganic semiconductors into these solution-processed solar cells may possess additional advantages due to their intrinsically higher carrier mobility and environmental stability than the organic counterparts.4 Inorganic nanocrystals such as ZnO,7 CdS,9–11 and CdSe with various nanostructures such as spheres,12–15 rods,4,6,16 and tetrapods,5,8 have been used as the electron acceptor materials in these donor–acceptor heterojunction type hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells;17,18 whereas polymers including polyphenylvinylene (PPV) and polythiophene (PT) derivatives function as the donor materials in the cells.4–7,9–14 To date, the most efficient hybrid solar cells based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and CdSe nanorods exhibit up to 2.6% power conversion efficiency.6 However, with an optical gap of ∼1.9 eV, P3HT does not effectively harvest the long-wavelength red and infrared photons abundant in the solar spectrum. Recently power conversion efficiencies exceeding 3% were reported for hybrid solar cells by using a lower gap (1.45 eV) polymer,8 poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]-dithiophene)-alt-4,7-(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT),19 together with CdSe tetrapods. Improved harvesting of the long wavelength photons by the low-gap polymer was attributed as the main reason for the enhanced efficiency.
While the existing studies on hybrid solar cells have mostly focused on highly anisotropic nanocrystals such as nanorods and tetrapods due to their perceived advantages in supporting directional charge transport paths for efficient charge collection, we have found that using mostly spherical nanocrystals (or nanospheres) with certain size (6–7 nm) and proper processing conditions can achieve a level of efficiency similar to that of nanorod or tetrapod-based devices.12 Compared with nanorods or tetrapods, the nanospheres are easier to be synthesized, and can be processed in a wider range of solution processing conditions, which may provide better opportunity to achieve hybrid active layers with optimal morphology.
Here, by combining PCPDTBT [Fig. 1(a)], which harvests red and near-infrared photons, and spherical CdSe nanocrystals with an absorption edge of ∼685 nm [Fig. 1(a)], we have demonstrated hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells with a maximum ηP of 2.8% without a solution-processed ZnO nanoparticle (NP) layer between the active layer and the metal cathode, and 3.7% with the ZnO layer. We show that the PCPDTBT:CdSe hybrid film can be processed from different solvents or solvent mixtures; however the processing condition has a strong impact on the film morphology, which, along with post-deposition annealing, strongly affects the photovoltaic performance of the resulting hybrid solar cells. The inclusion of the ZnO nanoparticle layer leads to more optimal light absorption for the low-gap polymer as revealed by the measured solar cell quantum efficiency and by optical simulation. The measured dependencies of the solar cell photocurrent on applied bias also confirm the ability of the ZnO layer to block leakage of photogenerated holes into the metal cathode. Finally, we show that the ZnO layer also drastically improved the environmental stability of the hybrid solar cell.
 Fig. 1  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of PCPDTBT and spherical CdSe nanocrystals. Inset: chemical structure of PCPDTBT and a transmission electron micrograph of CdSe nanocrystals (scale bar = 10 nm). (b) Schematic energy level diagram of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cell with a ZnO nanoparticle interlayer. The energies (in eV) are all referenced from the vacuum level. 
2. Experimental
Nanoparticle synthesis, purification and hybrid solution preparation
CdSe nanoparticles were synthesized according to the reported method with some modifications.20,21 CdO (Alfa Aesar, 76 mg), oleic acid (OA, Fisher Scientific, 3 mL), and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, Sigma-Aldrich, 3.0 g) were mixed and heated to 285 °C under N2 flow. A trioctylphosphine (TOP, Sigma-Aldrich, 1.0 mL) solution containing 78 mg Se (Sigma-Aldrich) was injected at 285 °C. The reaction mixture was kept for 3–5 min at 280–290 °C to produce CdSe nanoparticles with average sizes of 6 to 7 nm, and then terminated by adding 5 mL toluene into the reaction mixture. CdSe nanoparticles were purified by precipitation with methanol and re-dissolution in toluene for three cycles; and then they were ligand-exchanged in pyridine at room temperature for 24 h. ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized by a sol–gel process using precursors of zinc acetate and tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH).13,22 A stoichiometric amount of TMAH dissolved in ethanol was added dropwise to zinc acetate dihydrate dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and the reaction mixture was kept for 1 hour at room temperature. PCPDTBT was purchased from Luminescence Technology Corp. and has a number-average molecular weight of 6400 g mol−1 with a polydispersity of 1.6 as determined by gel permeation chromatography (tetrahydrofuran as the solvent). A PCPDTBT:CdSe hybrid solution was prepared by dissolving (or dispersing) 3.3 mg PCPDTBT and 30 mg CdSe nanoparticles into co-solvents with 90% chlorinated solvent (chloroform, chlorobenzene, o-dichlorobenzene, or their mixtures) and 10% pyridine in volume (pyridine was added to facilitate dispersion of the nanoparticles).4
Solar cell fabrication
The energy level diagram of the hybrid solar cells is schematically shown in Fig. 1(b). Glass substrates with a patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) anode were cleaned by successive sonication with soap, deionized water, acetone, and isopropanol for 15 min, followed by exposure to UV-ozone for 15 min. A poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer was first spin-coated on the ITO and annealed in air at 150 °C for 15 min. The PCPDTBT:CdSe hybrid active layer and the ZnO NP layer were successively spin-coated in a N2 glove box (H2O and O2 < 0.1 ppm). All the active layer and the ZnO NP layer were co-annealed at 150 °C for 30 min in the glove box, unless otherwise noted. The devices were completed by vacuum-deposition of an Al cathode through a shadow mask at ∼1 × 10−6 Torr, resulting in 16 devices from each batch and each device with an active device area of approximately 4 mm2.
Film and device characterization
The size of the as-synthesized CdSe nanoparticles was characterized using a JEM-2010F transmission electron microscope (TEM) with a 200 keV electron beam energy. The surface morphology of the hybrid thin films was characterized using a Veeco Nanoscope atomic force microscopy (AFM) operated in the tapping mode. Current–voltage characteristics of the hybrid solar cells in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination were measured using an Agilent 4155C semiconductor parameter analyzer. The light intensity from the Xe-arc lamp Oriel solar simulator was measured using a calibrated single-crystalline silicon reference cell with a KG1 filter, and the spectral mismatch factor was corrected according to the ASTM Standard E973. To measure the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of these devices, the white light emission from the Xe-arc lamp was shined through an Oriel monochromator, and the monochromatic light was chopped at 400 Hz by a mechanical chopper prior to incidence onto the device. The photocurrent response was measured using a Stanford Research Systems 830DSP lock-in amplifier and a Keithley 428 current amplifier. The devices were illuminated by a constant white light bias from a halogen lamp with an intensity of approximately 100 mW cm−2 in order to set up the electric field and charge carrier distribution as specified by the ASTM E1021 standard.23 The monochromatic light intensity was measured using a calibrated Newport 818-UV Si detector.
3. Results and discussion
Effect of solvent and thermal annealing on hybrid film morphology and solar cell performance
Phase separation between the donor and acceptor materials is essential for bulk heterojunction solar cells.1,4,24 The processing solvent is one of several important factors that impact the degree of phase separation.2,24–27 For hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells, inorganic nanocrystals need to be ligand-exchanged with short-chain molecules such as pyridine to remove the insulating long-chain surfactants, which makes them difficult to be dispersed in solvents with low polarity, such as chlorinated solvents.4 To prepare the organic–inorganic hybrid dispersion, co-solvents consisting of a good solvent for inorganic nanocrystals and a good solvent for the polymer are usually used.4,5,14,16 Due to the easy processing nature of the nanospheres involved in this work, there is potentially a wider range of solvents we could use for the deposition of the PCPDTBT:CdSe nanosphere hybrid films.
Here we prepared PCPDTBT:CdSe hybrid thin films using co-solvents consisting of chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), or o-dichlorobenzene (DCB) mixed with 10% pyridine (by volume). The AFM topographic and phase images of these films are shown in Fig. 2, which all show sub-100 nm size domains but also present significant differences in the detailed morphology. The hybrid film processed from the CF solvent shows a relatively wide size distribution from 30 nm to 90 nm [Fig. 2(a)] and a high root-mean-square (rms) surface roughness (Rrms) of 9.2 nm due to large clustering of domains. The film from the CB solvent is considerably smoother with an Rrms of 2.7 nm and consists of a somewhat smaller domain of 30–50 nm in size [Fig. 2(c)]. The domain sizes are generally the largest, in the range of 60–100 nm, when DCB is used as the solvent [Fig. 2(e)], though the film with an Rrms of 6.9 nm is smoother than the CF film. It is also noted that the domains seen in the CF and CB films are not pure polymers or pure nanocrystals, but blends of polymer:nanocrystals, as revealed in the phase images [Fig. 2(b) and (d)]. The DCB film shows a considerably higher degree of phase separation with clear domains of high and low phase regions in the AFM phase image [Fig. 2(f)].
 Fig. 2  Tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) topographic (a, c and e) and phase (b, d and f) images of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe films processed from different solvents (all containing 10 vol% pyridine): chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), or dichlorobenzene (DCB). 
The difference in the PCPDTBT:CdSe hybrid film morphologies can be correlated to the different solvent evaporation rates. CB and pyridine have similar boiling points (131 °C and 115 °C), and the more or less even evaporation of the two solvents leads to limited phase separation and smooth film surface. With a much lower boiling point (62 °C) and a faster evaporation rate of CF, while phase separation in the hybrid film is not significantly stronger, the film indeed is rougher with a larger domain. The high boiling point of DCB (180 °C), on the other hand, leads to much slower evaporation of the solvent, which results in significantly more phase separation, large domain sizes and rougher surface.

Fig. 3(a) shows the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells fabricated using different processing solvents, under 1 sun (=100 mW cm−2) AM 1.5G simulated solar illumination. The thicknesses of the active layer and the ZnO NP layer are 80 to 100 nm and 25 nm, respectively, and the size of the CdSe nanospheres is 6.1 ± 0.3 nm. The photovoltaic performance parameters of these devices, including ηP, the short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF), are summarized in Table 1. The CF device shows a short-circuit current of JSC = 3.6 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage of VOC = 0.72 V. Using DCB as the solvent, JSC is increased to 6.2 mA cm−2. When CB was used, a significantly higher JSC = 8.1 mA cm−2 was achieved, in addition to a slight increase in VOC (0.78 V). The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra as a function of the incident light wavelength (λ) as shown in Fig. 3(b) reveals that the DCB device has significantly higher EQE at 400 nm < λ < 600 nm (corresponding to nanocrystal absorption) than the CF device, which together with the difference in FF (46% and 36%) suggests that the increased phase separation in the DCB-processed film leads to better charge carrier extraction through the nanocrystal domain and polymer matrix. On the other hand, the CB film shows the highest EQE contribution from the polymer (600 nm < λ < 800 nm), suggesting a good balance between exciton dissociation (which requires none or limited phase separation) and charge extraction (which requires percolation of the polymer domain).
 Fig. 3  Performance of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells processed from chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), or dichlorobenzene (DCB): (a) current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination; and (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE, ηEQE) as a function of incident light wavelength (λ). 
Table 1 Summary of performance parameters (short-circuit current density JSC, open-circuit voltage VOC, fill factor FF, and power conversion efficiency ηP) of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells processed by different solvents and related active layer properties (surface roughness Rrms and domain size D)




Solventa

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF

η
P (%)

R
rms (nm)

D (nm)





a Containing 10 vol% pyridine; CF = chloroform, CB = chlorobenzene, DCB = o-dichlorobenzene.





CF
3.6 ± 0.2
0.72
0.36
0.93 ± 0.08
9.2 ± 0.8
60 ± 20


CB
8.1 ± 0.4
0.78
0.46
2.9 ± 0.2
2.7 ± 0.4
40 ± 10


DCB
6.2 ± 0.3
0.72
0.46
2.1 ± 0.2
6.9 ± 0.6
70 ± 15




We have previously reported ηP = 2.2 ± 0.2% and JSC = 6.3 mA cm−2 from similar devices based on P3HT:CdSe nanospheres processed with CB.13 The higher photocurrent and efficiency of the PCPDTBT:CdSe hybrid solar cells reported here can be attributed to the better absorption of the red and near-infrared photons by the lower gap polymer PCPDTBT (optical gap ≈ 1.5 eV),19 as compared to P3HT (1.9 eV gap). As shown in Fig. 3(b), the long-wavelength absorption edge of PCPDTBT:CdSe devices is at approximately 800 nm, compared to ∼650 nm for P3HT:CdSe devices.13
We have also used mixed chlorinated solvents for processing the hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe films. As shown in Fig. 4 and Table 1, JSC increases with the volume concentration of CB, VCB, in both solvent mixture systems. Also shown in Fig. 4 are the Rrms values of these films, which monotonically decrease with the increase of VCB in either solvent mixture. While it is empirical, this suggests that the processing condition generating the smoothest films and smallest domain sizes will lead to the highest photocurrent and FF, and ultimately the highest efficiency in hybrid solar cells.
 Fig. 4  Dependencies of the short-circuit current density (JSC) of the hybrid solar cell under 1 sun AM 1.5G illumination and the root-mean-square roughness, Rrms, of the active layer on the volume concentration of chlorobenzene (CB), VCB, in mixtures with chloroform (CF) or dichlorobenzene (DCB). 
Post-deposition thermal annealing has been shown to enhance the performance of both all-organic P3HT:PCBM solar cells and hybrid P3HT:CdSe solar cells, partly due to an increased ordering in P3HT domains.12,13,27 However, for PCPDTBT:PCBM solar cells, it is found that thermal annealing is not effective to enhance device performance due to the amorphous nature of PCPDTBT.19,24,25 Here for the hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells, we see that appropriate thermal annealing can significantly improve the device performance. As indicated by the J–V characteristics shown in Fig. 5 (CB–pyridine was used as the solvent), both JSC and FF increase significantly after annealing at 150 °C for 30 minutes, though they decrease as the annealing temperature is further increased to 180 °C. We hypothesize that the organic and inorganic components further segregate upon annealing. The remaining solvent residues such as pyridine molecules that are weakly bound to the nanocrystal surface are further removed, resulting in the reduction of recombination centers for photogenerated excitons and carriers. Finally, thermal annealing enables the nanocrystals to connect each other more intimately, leading to better electron transport as reflected in the increase of FF.
 Fig. 5  
J–V characteristics under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination for hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe PV cells with a ZnO NP layer annealed at different temperatures. 
Devices with a ZnO NP buffer layer
Hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells typically have a structure of an organic–inorganic hybrid layer sandwiched by an anode and a cathode.4 Modifying the contacts between the active layer and the electrodes has been of great importance for improving the performance of organic-based solar cells. For example, other than using PEDOT:PSS on the transparent ITO anode, some transition metal oxides such as MoOx,28 V2O5,28 and NiOx29 have been used as the anode modification interlayer through the high-temperature and high-vacuum deposition method. On the other hand, thermally evaporating a thin LiF interlayer between the active layer and the cathode has been demonstrated as an effective approach to improve device efficiency due to the formation of a dipole moment across the junction.30 A sol–gel-processed TiOx layer positioned between the active layer and the cathode has also been used in organic solar cells with improved device efficiency and stability.31 Recently, our own work has also shown that inserting a solution-processed ZnO NP layer between the active layer and the metal cathode significantly enhances the efficiency and device stability of hybrid P3HT:CdSe solar cells.13
Here, we have also compared the J–V characteristics of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells with and without a ZnO NP layer as shown in Fig. 6(a). Here CB–pyridine was used as the solvent for processing the hybrid active layer, which was annealed at 150 °C for 30 minutes. For the device without a ZnO NP layer, we obtained JSC = 7.2 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.78 V, FF = 0.48, and ηP = 2.7% under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination. With the introduction of the ZnO NP layer, the photovoltaic performance was improved to JSC = 9.2 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.78 V, FF = 0.49, and ηP = 3.5 ± 0.2%, representing a 30% increase in ηp. Note that the ZnO-containing device shown here has slightly higher efficiency than the CB device discussed in Fig. 3. We attribute this difference to the slightly larger CdSe nanospheres (average diameter of 7.0 ± 0.5 nm) used here, which is consistent with our previous work on P3HT:CdSe nanosphere solar cells.12 Also note that the efficiency of these CdSe nanosphere based devices is comparable to those based on PCPDTBT and CdSe tetrapods.8
 Fig. 6  Comparison of performance of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells with and without a ZnO NP layer: (a) J–V characteristics in the dark and under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination; (b and c) dependencies of the power conversion efficiency (ηP), the ratio of the short-circuit current density (JSC) to the incident optical power intensity (P0), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) on P0. 
Performances of the devices with and without the ZnO layer under differentillumination intensities (P0) are compared in Fig. 6(b) and (c). The device with a ZnO NP layer shows ∼30% higher JSC than that without a ZnO NP layer in the entire P0 range. VOC of these two devices are nearly identical, and increase linearly with the logarithm of P0 as explained by the Shockley diode characteristics.32,33 The FF is in the range of 0.4–0.5 with the device containing the ZnO layer showing a slightly higher FF, especially at high intensities. The relatively low FF is directly related to the low charge carrier mobilities (∼10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) in such hybrid films.12 However, for both devices, the ratio of JSC to P0, corresponding to the external quantum efficiency, decreases by ∼30% as P0 increases from 0.07 sun to 1.3 sun. The loss of photogenerated carriers under higher illumination intensities suggest the presence of a strong bimolecular recombination,34,35 which again is related to the relatively low carrier mobility in the hybrid film.12 This yields a maximum ηP at low P0 for either device, with maximum ηp ≈ 2.8 ± 0.2% achieved at P0 ≈ 10 mW cm−2 for the device without a ZnO layer and ηp ≈ 3.7 ± 0.2% achieved at P0 ≈ 40 mW cm−2 for the device with the ZnO layer, approximately 10% more than that at 1 sun condition.
The EQE spectra for the devices are shown in Fig. 7(a). Both devices show a very broad spectral response ranging from 350 nm to above 800 nm. The device with a ZnO NP layer has a maximum EQE of ∼45% at λ = 520 nm and the EQE is above 30% in the wavelength range of 370 nm to 670 nm. The device without a ZnO NP layer also shows a maximum EQE of ∼45% but at a lower wavelength of λ = 430 nm. In the longer wavelength region (λ > 550 nm), the EQE of the device without a ZnO layer is less than 20%, significantly lower than that for the device with a ZnO layer. Integrating the EQE spectra with the standard 1 sun AM 1.5G yields JSC of 8.7 mA cm−2 (device with ZnO) and 6.6 mA cm−2 (device without ZnO), which are within 5–10% errors of the experimental results. The internal quantum efficiency (IQE), which is the ratio of the numbers of collected electrons to the numbers of absorbed photons, has also been obtained by dividing the EQE by the total light absorption efficiency. As shown in Fig. 7(a), the use of the ZnO layer leads to an increase in IQE in the entire photo-response spectra region. While a maximum IQE of 60% was achieved for the device without a ZnO layer, an 80% maximum IQE was obtained for the device with a ZnO layer.
 Fig. 7  (a) Experimental external and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE, respectively) spectra. (b and c) Calculated optical intensity profiles for the devices without (b) and with (c) a ZnO NP layer. (d) Contour plot of the calculated JSC (in mA cm−2, scale shown to the right) as a function of both the active layer thickness ta and the ZnO layer thickness tZnO. 
The function of the ZnO NP layer in enhancing the hybrid solar cell efficiency could be multi-fold as we hypothesized previously.13 Similar to the study on P3HT:CdSe solar cells,13 coating a ZnO NP layer on top of the PCPDTBT:CdSe active layer reduces the surface roughness of the active layer, which is expected to enhance the electrical contact between the Al cathode and the active layer and may improve the collection of photogenerated electrons. The ZnO layer also prevents active layer damage during Al deposition and cathode quenching on excitons. The transparent ZnO layer also changes the optical field distribution in the active layer, which affects light absorption. The optical density profiles have been calculated for devices with and without the ZnO NP layer based on a transfer-matrix theory using optical constants obtained by ellipsometry measurement.18 As shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c), the optical intensities of the incident light are re-positioned when a ZnO NP layer is included, resulting in more optimal distribution of high optical field within the active layer and overall enhanced light absorption. In particular, this effect is more significant in a longer wavelength region (λ > 600 nm), as the peak optical intensity locates at a distance of approximately λ/4n from the cathode due to optical interference, where n is the refractive index of the active layer. This benefit has been well demonstrated through the red-shifted and significant enhancement in the near-infrared region of the EQE spectrum for the device with a ZnO NP layer [Fig. 7(a)]. Optical simulation further predicts that JSC of the ZnO-containing device under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination depends on both the active layer thickness ta and the ZnO NP layer thickness tZnO. As shown in Fig. 7(d), maximum JSC is obtained with a 20 nm thick ZnO NP layer and an 80 nm thick PCPDTBT:CdSe active layer, which are close to what we have used experimentally.
While the optical effect explains the differences in the EQE behavior of the devices with and without a ZnO layer, the enhancement in IQE with the ZnO layer is more subtle. The IQE for the device without a ZnO layer decreases with increasing wavelength from 400 nm to 800 nm. This means that charge collection is less efficient for charges generated by the absorption of longer wavelength photons, which according to Fig. 7(b), occur closer to the anode on average. This result suggests that electron transport towards the cathode is likely the limiting process. We measured the carrier mobilities in this PCPDTBT:CdSe film using the space charge limited current (SCLC) method and obtained a hole mobility of μh = 1 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an electron mobility of μe = 3 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1, which confirms that electron transport is inferior to hole transport.12
With the inclusion of a ZnO layer, the charge generation zone is shifted slightly closer to the cathode, which improves the electron collection. In addition, the ZnO layer also blocks the leakage of holes to the cathode due to its deep valence band [see the energy level diagram shown in Fig. 1(b)]. To further illustrate the hole blocking behavior, the EQE as a function of the applied bias at given wavelengths has also been measured.36 The incident monochromatic light beam was chopped before shining on the tested devices and only photocurrent from monochromatic light for the devices was obtained in the lock-in amplifier. For the device without a ZnO NP layer [Fig. 8(a)], the EQE collected at all given wavelengths (450, 550, 650, and 750 nm) exhibit a transition point (minimum EQE value) at a voltage around 0.88–0.93 V, where a sharp ∼180° phase change is also observed, suggesting the reversal of photocurrent direction. This phenomenon is similar to the observation in mixed heterojunction organic solar cells,36 which shows that photogenerated holes can freely drift into the cathode at high biases, which in turn suggests the likelihood of hole diffusion into the cathode. However for the device with a ZnO NP layer [Fig. 8(b)], the EQE at any wavelength shows only monotonic decrease with the bias but the photocurrent never changes direction (no 180° phase change). This suggests that in this ZnO-containing device, even at very high bias such that the electrical field points from the anode to the cathode causing holes to drift towards the cathode, no hole collection (and hence a photocurrent) exists at the cathode. The non-existent hole current has to be attributed to the hole blocking characteristics of the ZnO NP layer.
 Fig. 8  EQE and the corresponding phase change for hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells without (a) and with (b) a ZnO NP layer as a function of the applied voltage bias (V) at wavelengths of 450, 550, 650, and 750 nm. 
Finally, the air-stability of the hybrid solar cells was also tracked by measuring the J–V characteristics of the unencapsulated device stored under ambient laboratory conditions (temperature: 21–24 °C; relative humidity: 35–60%). The ηp of devices without a ZnO NP layer typically falls below 10% of the initial value after only several hours' exposure to the air. However, the stability improves dramatically when a ZnO NP layer is included in the device. As shown in Fig. 9, after an initial appreciable decrease during several days' exposure, both JSC and ηp stabilize for the next two months. Both VOC and FF are relatively constant within the full tracking period (a slight increase in VOC was actually observed, which is related to the decrease in dark current for the device during that period). The device retained ∼70% in ηp after >2 months' storage. As suggested in our previous study, the ZnO NP layer makes it less permeable for oxygen and water molecules, which have been considered as the major source of degradation for both all-organic and hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells.13 In addition, the inclusion of the ZnO NP layer physically isolates the active layer from the Al cathode and, this could prevent the chemical reaction of Al with the polymer and retard the degradation of the Al–polymer interface.37,38
 Fig. 9  Evolution of the photovoltaic performance parameters of a hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe/ZnO solar cell upon exposure to the ambient laboratory conditions without encapsulation. 
4. Conclusions
We demonstrated hybrid organic–inorganic solar cells based on spherical CdSe nanoparticles and the low-gap polymer PCPDTBT with broad spectral response. The morphology of the PCPDTBT:CdSe nanosphere hybrid film was shown to be strongly influenced by the solvent used for depositing the hybrid film, which further led to significant differences in the photovoltaic performance of the corresponding solar cells. Appropriate post-deposition annealing was also shown to positively influence the hybrid solar cell performance, likely due to more optimal phase separation and removal of charge/exciton traps. When a solution processed ZnO NP layer was included between the active layer and the metal cathode, the solar cell performance was improved by approximately 30%, leading to a maximum power conversion efficiency of 3.5% under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination or even higher (3.7%) at somewhat lower intensities. The ZnO NP layer mainly serves to block photogenerated hole transporting to the cathode, assist in extracting photogenerated electrons from the active layer, and shift the optical field distribution within the active layer for more optimal absorption. In addition, the ZnO NP layer also results in the drastic improvement in air stability of the hybrid solar cells with ∼70% of the original efficiency retained after storage under ambient laboratory conditions for more than two months, compared to over 90% loss in efficiency within several hours' exposure for similar devices without a ZnO NP layer.
Notes and references
J. Xue, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 411 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 84 CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3557 RSC .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang and D. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 166 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Jiang, D. Qin and Y. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9538 CAS .
X. Jiang, F. Chen, W. Qiu, Q. Yan, Y. Nan, H. Xu, L. Yang and H. Chen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, A. Tang, R. Zhou and J. Xue, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 476 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, J. Yang, R. Zhou, A. Tang, Y. Zheng, T. Tseng, D. Bera, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3814 RSC .
Y. Zhou, F. S. Riehle, Y. Yuan, H.-F. Schleiermacher, M. Niggemann, G. A. Urban and M. Krüger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 013304 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Eck, C. Veit, B. Zimmermann, F. Rauscher, P. Niyamakom, S. Yilmaz, I. Dumsch, S. Allard, U. Scherf and M. Krüger, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer, W. C. Libby, G. L. Whiting and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 73 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693 CrossRef CAS .
D. Muhlbacher, M. Morana, Z. Zhu, D. Waller, R. Gaudiana and C. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2884 CrossRef .
Z. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 543 CrossRef CAS .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2016 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, W. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. Moon, J. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, H. L. Yip, F. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and P. Denk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1288 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. Kim, H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Sze and K. K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, Wiley-Interscience, 3rd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. Xue and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 1859 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, B. P. Rand, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 66 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pivrikas, G. Juska, A. J. Mozer, M. Scharber, K. Arlauskas, N. S. Sariciftci, H. Stubb and R. Osterbacka, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 176806 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Myers, T. Tseng and J. Xue, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1182 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Tang, J. An, F. Xie, J. Chen, S. Zheng, K. Y. Wong, Q. Miao and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2699 CAS .
S. R. Ferreira, P. Lu, Y.-J. Lee, R. J. Davis and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13471 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) UV-vis absorption spectra of PCPDTBT and spherical CdSe nanocrystals. Inset: chemical structure of PCPDTBT and a transmission electron micrograph of CdSe nanocrystals (scale bar = 10 nm). (b) Schematic energy level diagram of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cell with a ZnO nanoparticle interlayer. The energies (in eV) are all referenced from the vacuum level.	 

 	Fig. 2  Tapping mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) topographic (a, c and e) and phase (b, d and f) images of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe films processed from different solvents (all containing 10 vol% pyridine): chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), or dichlorobenzene (DCB).	 

 	Fig. 3  Performance of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells processed from chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), or dichlorobenzene (DCB): (a) current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination; and (b) external quantum efficiency (EQE, ηEQE) as a function of incident light wavelength (λ).	 


CF	3.6 ± 0.2	0.72	0.36	0.93 ± 0.08	9.2 ± 0.8	60 ± 20
CB	8.1 ± 0.4	0.78	0.46	2.9 ± 0.2	2.7 ± 0.4	40 ± 10
DCB	6.2 ± 0.3	0.72	0.46	2.1 ± 0.2	6.9 ± 0.6	70 ± 15

 	Fig. 4  Dependencies of the short-circuit current density (JSC) of the hybrid solar cell under 1 sun AM 1.5G illumination and the root-mean-square roughness, Rrms, of the active layer on the volume concentration of chlorobenzene (CB), VCB, in mixtures with chloroform (CF) or dichlorobenzene (DCB).	 

 	Fig. 5  
J–V characteristics under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination for hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe PV cells with a ZnO NP layer annealed at different temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of performance of hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells with and without a ZnO NP layer: (a) J–V characteristics in the dark and under 1 sun AM 1.5G solar illumination; (b and c) dependencies of the power conversion efficiency (ηP), the ratio of the short-circuit current density (JSC) to the incident optical power intensity (P0), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) on P0.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Experimental external and internal quantum efficiency (EQE and IQE, respectively) spectra. (b and c) Calculated optical intensity profiles for the devices without (b) and with (c) a ZnO NP layer. (d) Contour plot of the calculated JSC (in mA cm−2, scale shown to the right) as a function of both the active layer thickness ta and the ZnO layer thickness tZnO.	 

 	Fig. 8  EQE and the corresponding phase change for hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe solar cells without (a) and with (b) a ZnO NP layer as a function of the applied voltage bias (V) at wavelengths of 450, 550, 650, and 750 nm.	 

 	Fig. 9  Evolution of the photovoltaic performance parameters of a hybrid PCPDTBT:CdSe/ZnO solar cell upon exposure to the ambient laboratory conditions without encapsulation.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
