1D Colloidal chains: recent progress from formation to emergent properties and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00112H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00112H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 4023-40741D Colloidal chains: recent progress from formation to emergent properties and applications

        
          
            Xinlong 
            Fan†
*a and 

        
          
            Andreas 
            Walther
          
          
        
      *b
aInstitute for Macromolecular Chemistry, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 31, 79104, Freiburg, Germany. E-mail: fanniedawnlong@gmail.com
bA3BMS Lab, Department of Chemistry, University of Mainz, Duesbergweg 10-14, 55128 Mainz, Germany. E-mail: andreas.walther@uni-mainz.de
Received 
      5th March 2022
    First published on 3rd May 2022AbstractIntegrating nanoscale building blocks of low dimensionality (0D; i.e., spheres) into higher dimensional structures endows them and their corresponding materials with emergent properties non-existent or only weakly existent in the individual building blocks. Constructing 1D chains, 2D arrays and 3D superlattices using nanoparticles and colloids therefore continues to be one of the grand goals in colloid and nanomaterial science. Amongst these higher order structures, 1D colloidal chains are of particular interest, as they possess unique anisotropic properties. In recent years, the most relevant advances in 1D colloidal chain research have been made in novel synthetic methodologies and applications. In this review, we first address a comprehensive description of the research progress concerning various synthetic strategies developed to construct 1D colloidal chains. Following this, we highlight the amplified and emergent properties of the resulting materials, originating from the assembly of the individual building blocks and their collective behavior, and discuss relevant applications in advanced materials. In the discussion of synthetic strategies, properties, and applications, particular attention will be paid to overarching concepts, fresh trends, and potential areas of future research. We believe that this comprehensive review will be a driver to guide the interdisciplinary field of 1D colloidal chains, where nanomaterial synthesis, self-assembly, physical property studies, and material applications meet, to a higher level, and open up new research opportunities at the interface of classical disciplines.
Xinlong Fan
Xinlong Fan earned his bachelor degree in 2010 and doctoral degree in 2016 at Northwestern Polytechnical University. There he focused on morphology regulation and formation mechanism of functional polymeric particles in emulsion system, and synthesis and application of thermally stable anion exchange resin under the supervision of Prof. Qiuyu Zhang. From 2016 to 2019, he worked as a postdoc in the Walther group at University of Freiburg on spatial and time-programmed dynamic self-assembly of colloids and responsive molecules. In 2019, he joined Stephen Mann group at University of Bristol to integrate dynamic self-assembly into protocells.
Andreas Walther
Andreas Walther is a Gutenberg Research Professor for Macromolecular Materials and Systems at the University of Mainz in Germany. His research interests concentrate on self-assembly concepts inside and outside equilibrium for the design of bioinspired and life-inspired systems with active, adaptive and autonomous behavior. He is a two times ERC grantee, a founding PI of the DFG Cluster livMatS, and a former Fellow of the Freiburg and Strasbourg Institutes for Advanced Studies. He has published ca. 200 publications, and has received the Bayer Early Excellence in Science Award, the Reimund Stadler Award of the GDCh, and the Hanwha-Total IUPAC Award.
1. Introduction
The past decades witnessed vigorous development of colloid science and technology, during which metal,1–3 metallic oxide,4–7 semiconductor,8–10 nonmetallic oxide,11–13 polymer14–24 and their hybrids25–35etc. have been shaped into colloids with a large variety of size, composition, geometry, morphology and surface properties by either bottom-up36–38 or top-down39–41 strategies. Based on practical demands from applications and synthetic methodology, one can design and fabricate colloids with desired properties,42–44 which are extensively applied as excellent models and platforms in numerous fields of theoretical studies and engineering applications. For instance, advances in the preparation of colloids with designed surface patterns enable scientists to validate phoretic motion, which has been theoretically predicted many years ago and is a significant issue in understanding the self-organization of living matter via the dynamic and collective behavior of manmade nonequilibrium systems.45 Semiconductor quantum dots with tunable electronic and optical properties are crucial nanocomponents for flexible and foldable electronic devices. Their chemical and physical properties can be altered by engineering their size, shape, heterostructure, exposed crystal facet and dangling bonds using solution-based synthetic methods.46
There is no doubt that colloids have demonstrated extraordinary performance and gained great success in the nanoscale and submicron world. However, when we look at the larger picture, many phenomena and fascinating properties can be found in microscale and macroscale objects, which do not exist at a single particle level. Co-assembly of multicomponent colloidal nanocrystals into supercrystals not only integrates the properties of each component, but also generates synergistic or antagonistic effects, enhancing or weakening functionalities, respectively.47 A typical stronger-together case of assembled building blocks is the plasmonic antennae enhancement of the electrical field detected in highly organized superlattices of Au nanorods.48 A weaker-together effect is found, for instance, when CdSe and Au nanocrystals are put together to form binary nanoparticle (NP) superlattices, where the fluorescence intensity of the binary superlattices is only 5–15% of pure CdSe superlattices, because of additional nonradiative decay channels in the binary superlattices with energy transfer to Au around CdSe.49 One of the most well-known examples that assembly of building blocks creates new functionality non-existing in building blocks is the colloidal photonic crystal. The color, i.e. the reflection wavelength of photonic crystals, depends on the collective spatial arrangement rather than the color of colloids, although size and refractive index of the building blocks are also important factors influencing the reflected color.50–52 Therefore, assembling colloids into 1D chains, 2D arrays and 3D superlattices continues to be one of the grand goals in colloid and nanomaterial science owing to the inspiring properties found in their microscale and macroscale assemblies.53–55
1D colloidal chains are a bridge connecting 0D colloids and 2D, 3D architectures (Fig. 1), thereby connecting the nanoscale and microscale world. Standing at the connecting point, 1D colloidal chains integrate the advantages of both 0D colloids and higher dimensional structures. Compared to NPs with high specific surface area but easily agglomerating nature, 1D nanochains with nanoscale features on the residual two dimensions usually have more effective and active surface areas because they do not easily aggregate nor form dense agglomerates,56 which makes them attractive carriers for nano-sized catalysts.13,57,58 Similar to 2D arrays and 3D superlattices, periodic arrangement of building blocks in the axial direction of 1D colloidal chains gives them the properties of photonic crystals which interact with electromagnetic waves.52,59–61 Moreover, 1D chains have their own unique anisotropic properties, offering new possibilities for functionalization and applications. For instance, when colloidal chains are given magnetic responsiveness, they become nano-sized magnetic stirrers for highly efficient mixing in microdroplets on an ordinary magnetic stir plate, which is of great importance for lab-on-a-chip applications though very difficult to be realized by other mixing methods.62,63 Consequently, these advanced and unique properties of 1D colloidal chains motivate researchers to develop synthetic methodologies and explore applications, which lead to hundreds of published papers on this topic in the past few years.
 Fig. 1  With higher structural complexity come more properties and functionalities. When 0D colloids self-assemble into hierarchical 1D colloidal chains, and 1D colloidal chains further assemble into higher dimensional arrays and superstructures, more collective and emergent properties will appear, which lead to more functionalities. 
Thanks to their extraordinary properties discussed above, 1D colloidal chains have found diverse applications in the fields of sensors, radiation absorption, catalysts, energy materials and biomedicines. Several excellent reviews summarized the preparations, properties, and applications of 1D inorganic chains,56,64–69 most of which focused on magnetic and nanocrystal chains. However, the rapid development of 1D colloidal chains has already extended far beyond inorganic chains, and patchy NPs and micelles assembled from block copolymers,70–72 DNA origami73,74 and proteins75 have greatly enriched the portfolio of colloidal chains. Hence, a comprehensive review of the progress of design and synthetic strategies, emergent properties, cutting-edge applications, challenges and opportunities of 1D colloidal chains covering inorganic, organic and hybrid building blocks would be necessary and helpful for further development of the field.
In this review, we aim to provide an overview of 1D colloidal chains from different construction approaches to emergent properties and applications. We will start with a comprehensive description of recent progress concerning various synthetic strategies to build 1D colloidal chains, and basic principles underlying the strategies are stressed. Following this, we will highlight the amplified and emergent properties originating from the assembly of the individual building blocks and their collective behavior, and discuss relevant applications in advanced materials that emerged in recent years. In the discussion of synthetic strategies, properties and applications, particular attention will be paid to overarching concepts, fresh trends, recent breakthroughs and potential areas of future research. We hope that this review can drive the interdisciplinary field of 1D colloidal chains, where nanomaterial synthesis, self-assembly, physical property studies and material applications meet, to a higher level, and open up new research opportunities at the interface of classical disciplines.
2. Synthetic strategies for 1D chains
2.1 General overview of building blocks, scales and procedures
In essence, the formation of 1D colloidal chains is a result of a series of interactions occurring between the colloids and the environment, or among the colloids themselves. Therefore, both colloids and external environment have significant influence on the synthetic strategies and final structures, properties and applications of 1D nanochains. As for the colloids, the scope of building blocks has largely broadened owing to the burst of synthetic methodologies of inorganic, organic and hybrid colloids over the last decades. Behind the vast range of colloids, the factors that really matter in the process of assembling chains are the type of materials, surface properties, shapes and geometries. Almost all kinds of colloids made of metal,76–78 metallic chalcogenide,79–81 semiconductor,82–84 nonmetallic oxide (mainly silica),85–87 carbon nanomaterials,88–90 polymer,91–93 biomacromolecules73,94,95 and their hybrids96–99 have been utilized as building blocks. Apart from giving nanochains extraordinary electrical, magnetic, optical, and mechanical properties, the intrinsic nature of building blocks can also be applied to assemble 1D chains. For example, it has long been known that ferromagnetic Co, Ni NPs form linear chains in zero magnetic field in ferrofluids,100–102 while paramagnetic and superparamagnetic NPs only assemble into 1D chains in the presence of external magnetic fields.103–105
The surface of colloids can be modified by coating reactions, ligand exchange, or polymer grafting.106,107 As a result, the surface charge, surface energy, and solvophobicity can be altered. Additionally, the topological distribution of functional groups on the surface can be tailored. Charged surfaces lead to dipole–dipole interactions between colloids in the presence of an electric field. When the attractive dipole–dipole interactions between colloids prevail over steric and electrostatic repulsion and thermal fluctuations, colloidal chains are formed.108–110 Specific surface modifications can expose active lattice planes of inorganic colloids. These exposed lattice planes can fuse adjacent colloids via an oriented attachment mechanism,111 leading to the assembly of 1D nanochains.112
Basically, few colloidal chains are formed automatically, and often external inputs, such as fields, templates and directional forces, are needed to guide the assembly process (see upper part of Fig. 2). However, hierarchical particles with relatively complex shapes and geometries can steer their self-assembly into higher level designated structures. These hierarchical particles include but are not limited to: porous particles,59,113,114 core–shell particles,33,115,116 microcapsules,32,117,118 raspberry- and onion-like particles,119–123 Janus particles,73,124,125 patchy particles,98,126,127 and non-spherical particles including but not limited to ellipsoidal,128–130 bicone,131 dumbbell-shaped,132–134 dimpled,86,135,136 polyhedral,137–139 and branched colloids (lower part of Fig. 2).140–142 These hierarchical particles not only endow 1D colloidal chains with complicated architectures and advanced properties, but also provide new opportunities and strategies for the formation of nanochains, and promote the self-assembly of colloids to a higher level. For isotropic spherical particles, it is not easy to organize them into anisotropic 1D chains via surface interactions of colloids without the aid of an external field or template. However, when the homogeneous particles are toposelectively modified and converted to patchy particles, hydrogen bonds, host–guest or solvophobic interactions between patches can assemble such building blocks into 1D nanochains.143–145 Additionally, depletion interactions can guide non-spherical particles to assemble into 1D and higher dimensional superstructures.95,146
 Fig. 2  Scheme of structure of building blocks and strategies of fabricating 1D colloidal chains in this review. Basically, four main categories of preparing 1D colloidal chains are identified: field-directed assembly based on dipole–dipole interaction, template-directed, ligand-mediated method, and directional self-assembly of shape anisotropic building blocks. The last category is the newly emerged out-of-equilibrium assembly of colloids mimicking living out-of-equilibrium systems. 
Beside taking advantage of the intrinsic properties of the building blocks related to the type of materials, surface properties, shapes and geometries, regulating the surrounding environment and adjusting the interactions among building blocks in a dispersed system are also frequently-used approaches to form 1D colloidal chains. For instance, adding a non-solvent for a selected patch of multicompartment patchy micelles can induce supracolloidal polymerization to form compartmentalized nanochains as the patches gradually turn insoluble.72,92 Surfactants,147–149 polymers,150–152 peptides,153–155 proteins,75,156,157 and DNA74,94,158 are able to assemble into soft or rigid 1D tubular, rodlike, and filiform nanostructures. Using these 1D nanostructures or carbon159,160 and polymer161 fibrils as templates, nanochains can be fabricated by encapsulating, attracting and grafting building blocks to the templates via simple physical embedding, or electrostatic and covalent interactions.108,162,163 An even more direct method to obtain colloidal chains is by capillary-assisted assembly, where colloids are deposited into prefabricated linear confining space, for example, nanochannels.164–166
After quick glancing over the interactions between building blocks and the external environment, and between building blocks themselves in synthetic processes, we identify four main categories of preparing 1D colloidal chains (Fig. 2): (1) field-directed assembly including in situ formed and external magnetic field triggered magnetic interactions, and electric field induced dipole–dipole interactions; (2) template-directed assembly including organic biomolecule templates and confining templates; (3) polymer ligand and small molecule ligand-mediated self-assembly; (4) self-assembling systems with anisotropic building blocks where hydrogen bonds, host–guest interactions, solvophobic interactions and depletion interactions predominate. Recently, learning from out-of-equilibrium living systems, concepts for active, adaptive and autonomous assembly systems start to be applied to man-made materials.167 Several publications have reported on the fabrication of 1D nanochains with the use of out-of-equilibrium self-assembly,168–170 which will also be discussed and summarized in this section. As synthesis methods, shapes, and properties of building blocks keep increasing in number, 1D nanochains assembled from new materials with new geometries and new properties constantly appear. We therefore will comb the venation of synthetic strategies for 1D chains, and at the same time try our best to present newly emerged tendencies. Table 1 compares fabrication strategies of 1D colloidal chains from suitable building blocks, architectural control and scalability of the method, property and application scenario (if discussed) of the obtained 1D nanochains.
Table 1 Comparison of fabricating strategies of 1D colloidal chains




Synthesis strategy
Building block
Architecture control
Scalability
Property
Application scenario
Ref.





In situ formed magnetic dipole–dipole interaction
Monodomain magnetic particles
Nanorings, block co-nanochains
Good
Ferromagnetism
Sensors, catalysts, energy materials

171,172



External magnetic field induced dipole–dipole interaction
Magnetic and non-magnetic particles
Multi-component, helical, zig-zag oriented, branched, kinked chains, nanobundles
Good
Magnetic, thermal, optical and electrochemical properties and activities, reconfiguring self-assembly, field adaptivity
Photonic crystals, anisotropic optics, catalysts, sensors, bioimaging, radiation absorption, energy materials

173–176



Electric field induced dipole–dipole interaction
Universal building blocks
Alternating binary nanochains, 1D tubular and solid filaments, staggered, stretched, helical chains
Good
Reconfiguring self-assembly, dielectric, optical properties, field adaptivity
Photonic crystals, responsive materials, catalysts

177–180



DNA templates
Universal but mostly metal particles
Controlled length, interparticle-distance, sequence, helix, chirality, spatial patterns
Poor
Chiroptical, electronic and plasmonic properties
Tumor sensing

181–183



Peptide and protein templates
Universal but mostly metal and magnetic particles
Controlled spatial periodicity and chirality
Medium
Chiroptical, electronic and magnetic properties
Bioimaging, catalysts

184–187



Nanocellulose templates
Metal particles and quantum dots
Controlled chirality
Good
Chiroptical properties
Bioimaging

188–190



Confining templates
Universal building blocks
Controlled length, width, sequence, helicity and orientation
Medium
Optical, electronic and optoelectronic properties
Sensors, photonic crystals, photoconductivity materials

191–194



Polymer ligands
Universal building blocks
Alternating colloidal chains
Good
Plasmonic properties
Biomedical application, optoelectronic devices, catalysts

195–197



Small molecule ligands
Universal building blocks
Controlled chirality and helicity
Good
Chiroptical, plasmonic properties
Chiroptical materials, catalysts, sensors, photothermal therapy

198–201



Depletion interactions
Universal in principle but usually anisotropic particles
Controlled length
Good
Plasmonic properties
—

202–204



Hydrogen bonds and DNA-mediated bindings
Anisotropic particles
Controlled length, interparticle-distance, sequence, helix, chirality, spatial patterns
Poor
Chiroptical, plasmonic properties
Photothermal therapy

74,205–207



Host–guest interactions
Anisotropic particles
Alternating, zigzag, branched-like chains, reversible structure
Good
Plasmonic properties
—

71,91,208,209



Solvophobic interactions
Anisotropic particles
Reversible structure
Good
Optical, plasmonic properties
Bioimaging

210–213



Out-of-equilibrium self-assembly
Universal building blocks
Dissipative structure
Good
Dissipative properties
—

168,170,214–216





2.2 Field-directed assembly
External fields induced by magnetism,217–219 electricity,220–222 light,223–225 gravity226–228 and acoustics229–231 have been developed to guide the assembly of colloids into hierarchical and ordered structures. Among these methods, magnetic and electric fields stand out because of accessibility, manipulability, and diversity of building blocks and resulted superstructures. In principle, magnetic and electric field-directed assemblies share a very similar mechanism: building blocks suspended in liquid medium are induced to generate dipole–dipole interactions in the presence of either a magnetic or electric field. When the attractive dipole–dipole interactions between colloids surpass repulsive forces, such as Brownian motion and electrostatic and steric repulsions, the building blocks are attracted to each other, thereby producing 1D, 2D and 3D superlattices. Several excellent reviews have comprehensively summarized the interparticle and external forces underlying the self-assembly of NPs.232–234 In this review, we only briefly introduce magnetic and electric field-induced dipole–dipole interactions closely related to the assembly of 1D colloidal chains.
Before we start to discuss the origin of magnetic field induced dipole–dipole interaction, readers are suggested to browse literature68 and master basic concepts about magnetism of materials. Bulk ferromagnetic and ferrimagnetic materials are composed of multiple magnetic domains with well-defined size. Particles with a diameter smaller than the well-defined size (Dcr) are monodomain (Fig. 3a). These single domain particles have a uniform magnetization regardless of the existence of an external magnetic field.235 The magnetic moment of single domain particles can be calculated as m = μ0MV, where μ0 is the permeability of vacuum, M is the saturation magnetization, and V is the volume of particles. Particles with a magnetic moment experience dipole–dipole interaction between each other. Suppose that each dipole has the same magnetic moment, the dipole–dipole energy is −m2/2πμ0r3 for parallel aligned dipoles, and m2/2πμ0r3 for antiparallel aligned dipoles, where r is the distance between dipoles, and the negative sign means the interaction is attractive.236 For contacting monodomain particles in line, the dipole–dipole energy can be simplified to −1/9πμ0a3M2, where a is the radius of the particles. When the dipole–dipole energy is greater than thermal fluctuation energy, monodomain particles may overcome Brownian motion and electrostatic and steric repulsion, and self-assemble without an external magnetic field. In this review we call such interactions between monodomain particles as in situ formed magnetic dipole–dipole interaction.
 Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of size-dependent behavior (superparamagnetic, monodomain, and multidomain) of magnetic NPs. (b) Critical size of single domain (Dcr) and superparamagnetism (Dsp) for common ferromagnetic materials at room temperature. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 235 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 237 Copyright 2006, Springer Science. 
However, when the size of the monodomain particles is further decreased, the magnetic moment becomes unstable and changes spontaneously and rapidly owing to thermal fluctuations in the absence of an external magnetic field. The timescale of the thermal flip of magnetization of monodomain particles known as Néel relaxation238 is given by τ = τ0exp(EB/kBT), where τ0 is a material-related timescale, EB is the energy barrier related to the volume of the particles, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature.232 When the Néel relaxation time τ is much smaller than the measurement time, the measured magnetization is zero in the absence of an external magnetic field. Particles with zero magnetization show superparamagnetic behavior. The critical size of superparamagnetic particles (Dsp) is defined as the size where τ is 100 s at ambient temperature. The Dcr and Dsp of several materials are presented in Fig. 3b. It is worth noting that particles above this critical size may also present superparamagnetic behavior. Since the magnetization of superparamagnetic particles in the absence of an external magnetic field is zero, a net magnetic moment and dipole–dipole interactions between superparamagnetic particles can only be induced in the presence of external magnetic fields.
Compared to an external magnetic field, the behavior of particles in an electric field is much more complicated. This is due to the large variety of dielectric properties of particles and liquid media and the large variety of parameters of electric fields, such as current and voltage strength of a direct current (DC) electric field and magnitude, frequency, and phase wave shape of alternating current (AC) electric fields. Owing to overlying effects of electrophoresis and electroosmosis in DC fields, particles are dragged towards the surface of an electrode with opposite polarity. DC fields as well as low frequency AC fields are often used to deposit 2D and 3D colloidal crystals.239–242 Electric dipole–dipole interactions are induced by the redistribution of positive (+q) and negative (−q) charges in particles in the presence of an electric field. The electric moment p can be calculated as p = qd, where d is the displacement vector pointing from negative charges to positive charges. A dielectrophoretic force is triggered by the interaction of dipoles with an applied AC electric field. The induced dipoles attract each other when the particles are aligned parallel to the applied field, and repel each other when they are aligned perpendicular, irrespective of the permittivity of particles.243 Therefore, the overwhelming majority of 1D particle self-assembly is carried out in AC electric fields. Here, we only introduce fundamental principles of aligning particles in an electric field, the detailed force and energy issues of particle chains are very complex when taking dielectric and conductive particles, and modifications of field intensity around the particles into consideration. The book, “Electromechanics of Particles” written by Jones and co-workers243 is suggested to comprehensively study this subject.
In summary, when the attractive dipole–dipole interactions between particles induced by an external magnetic or an electric field are stronger than the repulsive forces, building blocks dynamically align to form 1D nanochains. Consequently, the apparent viscosity of the fluid rapidly increases within milliseconds, which is known as magnetorheological and electrorheological fluid.244–246 However, the assembly process is dynamically reversible, and nanochains degrade to colloid suspensions once the external field is removed. Additional processes, such as coating and interfacial fusion,99,247,248 are required to obtain stable 1D nanochains when making use of an external magnetic or electric field for their assembly.

2.2.1 
            In situ formed magnetic dipole–dipole interaction. 

In situ formed 1D colloidal chains in the absence of external magnetic field were firstly reported by Thomas in 1966,249 where colloidal Co NPs with a mean diameter of 20 nm prepared in a low dielectric constant medium (toluene) spontaneously assembled into chains. Thomas proposed a formation mechanism where the in-line dipole–dipole interaction energy, resulting from the magnetic moments of ferromagnetic monodomain Co particles, is greater than the thermal energy, thus driving the particles to form linear chains. Then De Gennes and co-workers calculated and proved that spherical ferromagnetic particles could spontaneously form randomly oriented chains in the absence of a magnetic field.101 Short chains of spherical ferromagnetic particles perform as rod, in which all moments align along the rod. On the contrary, long chains are partially flexible, similar to polymers. De Gennes and coworkers predicted that closed rings and particle clusters with lower energy conformations could also exist and compete with chains. Decades later, the spontaneous formation of Co NP chains was “rediscovered” by Alivisatos and co-workers250 in their work of controllable synthesis of Co NPs with defined size, shape and anisotropy. They observed that in a slow evaporation and drying process, Co NPs with diameters of 10 nm self-assembled into 2D and 3D hexagonal arrangements. 16 nm particles with a larger magnetic moment formed nanochains and closed loops. Similar 1D nanoribbons were also found when drying out ferromagnetic Co nanorods (NR) and disks.251
However, conventional TEM used to image the arrangement of NPs may lead to artifacts, as multiple forces such as magnetic moment, van der Waals force and surface tension are involved when drying the sample. Therefore, Philipse and co-workers firstly provided direct observation of the self-assembly of Fe3O4 NPs in ferrofluids without external magnetic field in cryogenic transmission electron microscope (cryo-TEM).81,100,252 Comparing to conventional TEM, cryo-TEM showed that relatively shorter chains, the presence of discrete particles, and inexistence of parallel chains are more representative of spontaneously self-assembled ferromagnetic particles in fluids in the absence of external magnetic fields (Fig. 4a). Philipse and co-workers also found the formation of chains depends on the size of Fe3O4 NPs,100 which is universal to all single domain ferromagnetic NPs. Namely, when the NPs are smaller than their Dsp where the net magnetic moment is zero, or when the moment is so small that dipole–dipole attractions are weak, NPs cannot spontaneously assemble into colloidal chains without the help of an external magnetic field. As the NP size increases, discrete NPs aggregate to produce linear and branched chains.
 Fig. 4  Colloidal chains of magnetic NPs assembled through in situ formed dipole–dipole interactions in the absence of an external magnetic field. (a–a′) Compared to (a) conventional TEM, (a′) the in situ cryo-TEM image shows Fe3O4 NP chains with shorter lengths. (b) Ni7Co3 nanochains assemble into nanorings because of unsaturated magnetic dipoles. (c) Co NP-tipped nanorods and Co NPs co-assemble into block colloidal chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 81 Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society (ACS); (b) ref. 172 Copyright 2008, ACS; (c) ref. 171 Copyright 2014, ACS. 
After the formation of colloidal chains assembled by single domain ferromagnetic NPs in zero magnetic field was theoretically and experimentally confirmed, the synthesis of nanochains thrived. Co,253–255 Ni,256,257 Fe258,259 and their intermetallic compounds,172,260–262 as well as Fe2O3263,264 and Fe3O4265–267 nanochains were prepared by thermal decomposition in organic solvents with high boiling points such as diphenyl ether81,252 and dichlorobenzene.251,253,254,268 Solvothermal methods using ethylene glycol172,260,269 and water265,270,271 as solvent, and milder reduction reactions with strong reductants such as hydrazine hydrate262,272,273 and sodium borohydride258,274 have also been developed. In addition to these artificial chemical methods, researchers also used Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense to acquire 1D ferromagnetic Fe3O4 nanochains, which are called magnetosomes.275–279 Compared to chemically synthesized colloidal chains, magnetosomes have more uniform size and better crystallinity, and most importantly, better biocompatibility.275
The diversification of synthetic methodologies enabled the addition of functional components and novel structures to 1D nanochains. For instance, noble metals including Au, Pt and Ag were introduced by in situ and post-coating and hybridization on nanoscale and atomic scale to endow magnetic nanochains with excellent optical and electrochemical properties.262,268,270,272 This renders 1D nanochains a versatile platform for applications in sensors and catalysts, and so on, which will be discussed in detail in the following sections. Beyond homogeneous colloidal chains, researchers prepared a number of advanced structures. 1D hollow nanochains were realized in order to reduce density and increase specific surface area by the nanoscale Kirkendall effect254 and by utilizing gas microbubbles as soft templates.269 1D core–shell structured Fe@Fe2O3 nanochains with variable shell thickness were also created via controlled oxidation.274 These ferromagnetic nanochains exhibited much higher heating efficiency in magnetic hyperthermia than superparamagnetic Fe3O4 NPs.
When we ponder over the relationship between building blocks and colloidal chains, we can find that these concepts are analogous to monomers and polymers in macromolecular science, where scientists created diversity of topological structures, such as copolymers, block copolymers, branched and crosslinked polymers, and circular polymers. Bracelet-like colloidal rings are one of the most widely researched topological structure based on 1D nanochains. Co,280–283 Ni–Co alloy,172 Ni-coated Au,273 Fe2O3,284 Fe3O4,271 and Ag–Fe3O4270 nanorings have been fabricated and researched in the past decades (Fig. 4b). The basic principle behind the transformation of chains to rings is that stronger magnetic dipoles in larger building blocks can overcome the potential barrier to bend the chains, and the unsaturated dipoles at the end of the chains join each other to reduce the magnetostatic energy.172,271 Beside size, the geometrical shapes of magnetic NPs, the synthesis conditions, and further additives also influence nanoring formation. More information about the self-assembly and properties of magnetic colloidal rings can be found in a dedicated feature article.285 Beyond colloidal rings, Pyun and co-workers reported a breakthrough in block co-nanochains using Co NPs, matchstick-like Pt-activated CdSe@CdS nanorods with different length of nanorods and ferromagnetic Co NPs attached at one tip of the nanorod (Co NP-tipped nanorods) as colloidal monomers.171,286 They found that when mixing Co NPs and Co NP-tipped nanorods, or Co NP-tipped nanorods with different length of nanorods in the absence of a magnetic field at room temperature, these building blocks segregated into their own 1D domains, forming block co-nanochains (Fig. 4c) and a small number of homo-nanochains.171 Random co-nanochains were not observed. A mechanism for the formation of block co-nanochains was proposed: before mixing the building blocks, they already formed their own homo-chain and loops; after mixing, homo-chains with different species coupled due to the temporarily opening of loops, which was attributed to thermal fluctuations. However, when Co NPs were in situ deposited onto the nanorods with different length, only random co-nanochains were obtained. This pioneering work paved the way for constructing colloidal chains with novel topological structures using different materials and co-assembly strategies.
All building blocks discussed above are based on Fe, Co, Ni and their oxides, however, it has been demonstrated that Au, Ag, Pt and Cu, whose bulk materials are diamagnetic, can show ferromagnetism, when they are decreased to nanoscale and capped with organic molecules to change their electronic structure.287–290 For the first time, Yu and co-workers78 reported that Pt NPs spontaneously assemble into colloidal chains driven by in situ induced magnetic dipole–dipole interactions resulting from their ferromagnetic properties, when the Pt NPs were coated with a thin layer of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). Overall, fabricating noble metal NP nanochains with the aid of ferromagnetic properties is still rare, which may be attributed to the small window of ferromagnetic behaviors.291


2.2.2 External magnetic field induced dipole–dipole interaction. 
When the size of the ferromagnetic NPs is reduced, their intrinsic magnetic moment becomes smaller, and the dipole–dipole attraction between NPs becomes insufficient to overcome thermal fluctuations, electrostatic repulsions and other resistances. Additionally, if the size of the magnetic NPs is further decreased below the Dsp, the net magnetic moment turns to zero. In these two situations, an external magnetic field is needed to enhance the dipole–dipole attraction. Alignment of magnetic moments directed by external magnetic field provides a versatile strategy to assemble magnetic and nonmagnetic NPs into 1D, 2D and 3D superstructures. In general, external magnetic fields can be applied either during the fabrication process of magnetic NPs,292–294 or after the generation of the magnetic NPs.295,296
For in situ forming 1D magnetic nanochains during particle synthesis, a magnet or a set of solenoids generating an external magnetic field is coupled with different synthesis apparatuses such as a simple flask, beaker or autoclave,217,292,293,297 a setup of flame synthesis,298 laser ablation294 or pulsed plasma.299 In this in situ synthesis strategy, when the magnetic nuclei are formed and further developed to magnetic NPs, the external magnetic field immediately imposes directional magnetic moments on these NPs and aligns them along the field direction, resulting in 1D nanochains. Then, newly formed particles would add at the end of the chains to extend their length. The chains may also provide nucleation sites for newly produced primary particles, the diameter of the chains is increased. Finally, the 1D structures are fixed in situ by oriented attachment or sintering among adjacent particles.293,298 Applying an external magnetic field during the fabrication of particles can not only induce their self-assembly, but also interfere with the synthesis process which might alter the microstructures and properties of the building blocks. Helmersson and co-workers299 found that introducing a magnetic field in the synthesis of Fe NPs by pulsed plasma resulted in a polydisperse NP distribution (Fig. 5a–a′). Using X-ray magnetic circular dichroism and photoemission electron microscopy, Zhai and co-workers217 demonstrated that the distributions of Fe2+ and Fe3+ in the chains are significantly modified when an external magnetic field is imposed during the synthesis of Fe3O4 particles. This leads to an increase of uniaxial magnetic anisotropy in the saturation field, hysteresis loop, and ferromagnetic resonance with the increase of external field strength.
 Fig. 5  Morphologies and structures of colloidal chains prepared in the presence of an external magnetic field. (a–a′) Comparing to the (a) monodisperse NPs prepared without external magnetic field, (a′) magnetic NPs obtained with an external magnetic field are polydisperse. (b–b′) Longer magnetic-field exposure time leads to longer 1D colloidal chains: (b) 85 min exposure time generates chains with ∼6 clusters, while (b′) longer exposure time prolongs the chain to ∼10–40 clusters. (c–c′) The rate of increasing the strength of the external magnetic field affects the sequence of colloidal chains when using polydisperse magnetic particles as building blocks: (c) slow increase results in block nanochains, and (c′) a fast increase results in statistical nanochains. (d) Cubic magnetic particles assemble into kinked chains in a high magnetic field. (e) Scheme and TEM image of single-stranded helices assembled from Fe3O4 nanocubes. (f–f′) Magnetic cubic chain shows reversible folding behavior programmed by an external magnetic field. (g–g′) Non-magnetic particles (green in scheme and microscope image) and magnetic particles (dark brown in scheme and microscope image) assemble into 1D colloidal chains with (g) binary colloids and (g′) ternary colloids (with third kind of non-magnetic particles shown in red in scheme and microscope image) in ferrofluid under external magnetic field. (h) Non-magnetic particles themselves can assemble into single component chains in ferrofluid in the presence of external magnetic field. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 299 Copyright 2018, ACS; (b) ref. 300 Copyright 2015, ACS; (c) ref. 301 Copyright 2015, ACS; (d) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 3.0 Unported Licence, ref. 302 Copyright 2018, the authors, published by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC); (e) ref. 219 Copyright 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS); (f) the terms of Creative Commons-Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International-CC BY-NC 4.0, ref. 303 Copyright 2017, the authors, published by AAAS; (g) ref. 304 Copyright 2013, ACS; (h) ref. 305 Copyright 2018, Macmillan Publishers. 
Compared to directly growing 1D nanochains during synthesis discussed above, applying external magnetic field after the synthesis of magnetic NPs requires additional permanent fixation to immobilize the 1D structures. Numerous approaches to fixing the 1D structure have been proposed in the past decades. Summarizing these publications, we can conclude that coating field-induced 1D magnetic particle chains with polymer and inorganic components such as TiO2 and SiO2 is the most abundant strategy. For instance, Gökce and co-workers solidified the 1D colloidal chains aligned in polymer solution by removing solvents, leaving nanochain-polymer composite films.306 Landfester, Zhang and co-workers chose thermal sintering of polymeric shells of adjacent core–shell magnetic NPs to permanently link the 1D chains in solution.301,307,308 Directly coating magnetic colloidal chains with polymers by electrostatic adsorption,103 or in situ polymerization296,309–312 and inorganic coatings by a solution reaction process104,300,313–315 have also been developed. Furthermore, the additives coated on the 1D magnetic nanochains endow them with thermal, optical and electrochemical properties and activities.99,295,296,309–311
The configuration and morphology of magnetic colloidal chains induced by an external magnetic field are more diverse than in situ formed ferromagnetic nanochains, because the strength and way of the application of an external magnetic field can be easily tuned, and because the sources, types and geometrical shapes of the building blocks that can assemble in external magnetic fields are far more abundant. Kralj and co-workers found that longer exposure time to a magnetic field leads to longer chains (Fig. 5b–b′), while increasing the ratio of magnetic dipole–dipole attraction to the thermal energy disassembling the chains drives nanochains to nanobundles.300 Landfester and co-workers reported that a slow increase of an external magnetic field results in block nanochains, and a fast increase results in statistical nanochains when using polydisperse magnetic particles as building blocks (Fig. 5c–c′).301 It was also found that in an assembly system of particles with broad size distribution, the larger particles preferentially function as junction points, creating branched chains and networked nanostructures.299,301
More complex 1D colloidal chains formed by an external magnetic field are superstructures assembled from non-spherical and anisotropic building blocks. Förster and co-workers demonstrated that the NP geometry plays a crucial role in the assembly of small iron oxide NPs under an external magnetic field.247 They found that nanocubes with a size down to 7.5 nm can assemble into 1D chains, 2D arrays and 3D cuboids, however, spherical NPs with a diameter of 14.8 nm do not assemble in the same condition owing to a much smaller contact area between spherical NPs compared with cubic ones. When assembling Fe3O4 nanocubes at the hexane-air interface with an external magnetic field, parallel 1D nanobelts and single, double and triple helices were formed by controlling the surface concentration of the NPs.219 Further increasing the size of hematite cubes to hundreds of micrometers, Sacanna and co-workers observed that rings and zig-zag oriented chains assembled from hematite cubes change to straight chains in the Earth's field and kinked chains in a higher magnetic field (Fig. 5d).302 It was demonstrated that the orientation of the magnetic moment is not always aligned along the symmetry axis of non-spherical NPs,219,302,316 therefore, orchestrating van der Waals interaction, magnetic dipole–dipole interactions, and shape anisotropy can generate numerous novel superstructures (Fig. 5d and e).
Taking advantage of the anisotropic geometry of magnetic NPs can also create new 1D chains in the presence of an external magnetic field. For instance, ferromagnetic Fe2O3 cubes encapsulated by a polymer with a single magnetic patch exposed to solvent arrange into zipper-like linear structures when imposing an external magnetic field.317 Velev and co-workers reported that polymer microcubes with only one side coated with Co form linear chains in a uniform magnetic field.303 After removing the field, the chains self-fold into various equilibrium and nonequilibrium states depending on the sequence of the chains (Fig. 5f). These reconfigurable chain-like assemblies can be directionally manipulated by an external magnetic field, acting as a prototype of a microbot. Beyond cubic magnetic particles, ferromagnetic peanut-like NPs with a magnetic moment parallel to the minor axis form 1D superstructures with random crisscrossed configuration in the absence of external magnetic field, whereas they assemble into linear close-packed aggregates containing kinked zigzag structures when an external magnetic field is applied.318 Schurtenberger and co-workers found that by converting α-Fe2O3 to γ-Fe2O3, the orientation of the induced magnetic moment of spindle NPs gradually turned from parallel to the minor axis of the spindle to perpendicular to it.319 As a result, the spindle particles orient their major axis parallel to the direction of an external magnetic field, thereby producing 1D nanobundles.
The building blocks discussed above are magnetic materials showing direct response to an external magnetic field due to an intrinsic or induced magnetic moment. For diamagnetic materials that are not magnetically responsive, one can induce self-assembly by dispersing them in ferrofluids. The basic principle behind this method is negative magnetophoresis, i.e. non-magnetic materials whose magnetic permeability is relatively lower than that of the ferrofluid display diamagnetic response, and their moments align antiparallel to the direction of applied field.320–323 The resulting dipole–dipole interactions drive the self-assembly of diamagnetic particles into 1D colloidal chains, 2D and 3D superstructures with increasing external magnetic field.324–326 1D architectures with multiple configurations assembled from magnetic and nonmagnetic particles were created in ferrofluids by tuning the strength of the magnetic field, the concentration of ferrofluids, and the number of magnetic and nonmagnetic building blocks (Fig. 5g and h).304,305,327 Nevertheless, overall, the research on 1D colloidal chains assembled from nonmagnetic particles in ferrofluids is relatively rare, which is probably because a strong external magnetic field is needed to generate large enough magnetic moment in order to overcome Brownian motion and electrostatic repulsions.324


2.2.3 Electric field induced dipole–dipole interaction. 
When an AC electric field is imposed to particles suspended in a solvent, a dipole moment is generated in each particle as long as the dielectric constants between particles and solvent are different. The dipole–dipole interactions then lead to 1D linear chains, parallel arranged chains, 2D sheets and 3D colloidal crystals.179,328–333
For simple spherical particles, Velev and co-workers proposed a “chaining” force to describe their self-assembly behavior in an AC electric field.334 This “chaining” force originates from the interaction between particles and is proportional to the square of the field strength and the square of particle radius, and also related to the dielectric permittivity and conductivity of solvent and particles. In order to transform from randomly dispersed particles to ordered chains, the “chaining” force has to prevail over the Brownian motion. Furst and co-workers identified a dimensionless factor λchain = πεmr3(CE)2/kBT (where εm is the complex dielectric constant of solvent, r is the radius of particles, C is the polarizability which is related to the complex dielectric constant and conductivity of both solvent and particles, E is the strength of electric field, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature) for better understanding the disorder–order transition.335 Therefore, all experimental conditions that affect λchain, including electrolytes in the solvent, concentration, surface properties and size of particles and strength and frequency of the external electric field, can influence the architectures of colloidal clusters. The self-assembly of colloidal particles in an AC field can thus give rise to a rich phase behavior, which is often illustrated as a phase diagram to capture the relationship between investigated parameters and structure of assemblies. For instance, Schurtenberger and co-workers reported a phase diagram to depict the self-assembly behavior of ionic PNIPAM microgels with different effective volume fractions (Φeff) in an external electric field with various strengths.330 The diagram clearly shows that colloidal strings are only formed in the regime of relatively low Φeff (Fig. 6a). In the phase diagram of hard NaMgF3 nanocubes in an AC field by van Blaaderen and co-workers,336 one can find a similar tendency of 1D strings only being formed at low packing fraction and field strength. Even though there are numerous conditions influencing the 1D assembly of spherical particles that can be tuned, the number of final 1D assembled structures is limited for simple spherical particles.
 Fig. 6  Morphologies and structures of 1D colloidal chains prepared in the presence of an external electric field. (a) Phase diagram of ionic microgel assemblies in an AC electric field shows that the microgel only forms 1D strings in the presence of low effective volume fractions (Φeff). (b) Scheme and microscope image of alternatingly aligned, short binary nanochains after removing the electric field. (c–c′′) The geometry of ellipsoidal colloids influences their 1D superstructure of the assemblies. With increasing aspect ratio of the ellipsoidal colloids, (c) 1D strings, (c′) 1D tubular structures, and (c′′) 1D solid filaments were obtained. (d) Scheme and microscope image of head-to-tail connected 1D chains using Janus particles as building blocks. (e–e′) Salt concentration can control the structures of aligned Janus PS/Au ellipsoids in an AC field, they formed (e) staggered chains with low NaCl concentration (<1.5 mM) and (e′) stretched chain-link structures when the concentration was above 1.5 mM. (f) Optical image and scheme of a double helix chain using multi-patch particles as building blocks. (g) 1D lock-and-key colloidal chains aligned along the direction of the electrical field. (h) Optical image of microparticles aligned perpendicularly to a high frequency AC electric field. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 330 Copyright 2012, RSC; (b) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/), ref. 337 Copyright 2012, the authors, published by Springer Nature; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), ref. 338 Copyright 2014, the authors, published by Springer Nature; (d) ref. 220 Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers; (e) ref. 339 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers; (f) ref. 340 Copyright 2015, ACS; (g) ref. 341 Copyright 2016, ACS; (h) ref. 342 Copyright 2010, RSC. 
One way to enrich the library of 1D colloidal chain architectures formed under an external electric field is to use a mixture of various colloids or introduce anisotropic particles. Placing binary particles with different surface charges in an AC electric field produced 1D chains where two kinds of particles alternatingly aligned (Fig. 6b).337,343,344 When isotropic spherical particles are stretched to colloidal ellipsoids, their self-assembly in an external electric field becomes diversified. Furst and co-workers found that an angle exists between the direction of the applied field and the 1D chains assembled from polystyrene (PS) ellipsoids, and this angle decreases with increasing aspect ratio of the ellipsoids.345 Calculations pointed out that alignment at an angle with respect to the electric field is an energy minimum configuration for ellipsoids. Schurtenberger and co-workers surprisingly found that 1D colloidal chains, which were self-assembled from PS-PNIPAM core–shell ellipsoidal colloids with aspect ratios in the range of 2.2 to 3.3, further assembled into tubular superstructures with a circular cross section and a single-particle wall when increasing the field strength.338 The number of particles in the cross section increased with the aspect ratio. However, when the aspect ratio was increased to 8.8, bundled chains rather than hollow tubes were formed (Fig. 6c).
When two or more components are incorporated into a heterogeneous colloid with an anisotropic structure, each domain has a different dielectric property and frequency-dependent dielectric response. This gives rise to a torque in the presence of an external electric field, which provides opportunity to realize various configurations of superstructures. van Blaaderen and co-workers reported that the orientation of Janus particles composed of a PS domain and a polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)-coated TiO2 domain is frequency dependent.346 The long axis of the particles oriented perpendicular to the direction of a low-frequency electric field, generating 1D chains where Janus particles contact shoulder by shoulder. In contrast, the long axis orients parallel to the direction of a high-frequency field, and the particles form chains in a head-to-head or head-to-tail way. The former perpendicular configuration is dominated by interparticle force, whereas the latter case is dominated by the torque resulting from different dielectric properties. By tuning the frequency of the electric field and coating metal on one hemisphere of SiO2 spheres to adjust their dielectric properties, Granick and co-workers obtained very regular head-to-tail connected 1D chains when the frequency of the electric field was in the megahertz range (Fig. 6d).220
Besides adapting the dielectric properties of the NPs themselves, the properties of the surrounding medium can also be used to enlarge the range of possible assemblies. Zhu and co-workers observed the disruption of 1D chains into aggregates by adding NaCl when investigating the effect of medium conductivity on the self-assembly of Janus PS/Au particles in a nonuniform AC field.347 When the PS/Au particles were stretched into Janus ellipsoids, a range of new 1D assemblies relatively rare in the self-assembly of other building blocks occurred, including ordered colloidal fibers, aligned ordered fibers, stretched chain-link structures and staggered chains (Fig. 6e).339 A very interesting shape memory of stretched chain-link structures returning to original ordered fibers was firstly observed by removing a short-time electric field. Besides relatively simple Janus particles, multi-patch particles with more complicated anisotropic structures were also subjected to external electric fields, generating remarkable double helix chains whose origin remains unknown (Fig. 6f).340
Dimpled particles in which a part of the particles is replaced by a void are a special subtype of anisotropic particles. The superstructures assembled from these particles in an electric field are distinctive from other anisotropic building blocks. The sole symmetry axis of dimpled particles preferentially orients perpendicular to the direction of the electric field. As a result, they form 1D colloidal chains with their long axis parallel to the field and the dimples perpendicular to the field, which is driven by the torque on the particles.348,349 An interesting self-assembly behavior emerges when smaller particles, which can generate a lock-and-key interaction with the dimples, are mixed with dimpled particles. As observed by van Blaaderen and co-workers,341,350 in the presence of an electric field, the key particles captured by lock particles assemble into 1D colloidal chains containing both particles instead of separated chains containing only one specie (Fig. 6g). After removing the field, the key particles in the lock-and-key composite can be either permanently captured or immediately released depending on the lock-and-key interaction. Thus, in turn, the external electric field becomes a new avenue to irreversible bind composite particles.
Similar to magnetic field-induced self-assembly, 1D chains generated in the presence of an electric field also tend to disassemble due to thermal fluctuation and electrostatic repulsion as soon as it is switched off. Taking advantage of attractive interactions among building blocks is the main approach to keeping the linear structure. Granick and co-workers assembled polyhedral metal-organic framework particles into linear chains in ethylene glycol.351 When the facets of particles contacting each other in the chains are flat, the van der Waals attraction is strong enough to overcome electrostatic repulsion and adhere particles together even after turning off the electric field. In contrast, particles with convex facets would disassemble owing to insufficient van der Waals attraction. van Blaaderen and co-workers heated polymer-based colloidal chains to permanently fix them by thermal sintering.352 Snezhko and co-workers reported that the assembly of 1D structures in toluene (using sticky epoxy/hardener particles as building blocks) is reversible when the polymerization degree is low, while increasing the polymerization degree leads to permanent bundled chains.110 Velev and co-workers found that long colloidal chains assembled from oppositely charged particles in the presence of an external AC electric field would break up into permanently-linked short chains when the electric field is switched off (Fig. 6b).337,344 It is worth pointing out that the external electric field is essential here, otherwise the oppositely charged particles would aggregate into either ordered or unordered structures.
There is another regular way, different from the above method, to produce permanent 1D chains, where attractive interactions and physical or chemical changes in solvent are used to produce permanent 1D chains. For instance, Velev and co-workers used photoinitiated-polymerization in a suspension of 1D PS colloidal chains to generate a hydrogel and solidify the assemblies aligned by the AC field.180 In general, the reported strategies to fix 1D colloidal chains in an electric field are not as abundant as in a magnetic field. This is probably because adding additional components to coat the chains directly or indirectly (e.g. through chemical reactions) could change the dielectric constant and conductivity of the solvent, which increases the complexity of orchestrating all parameters to allow controlled 1D chain assembly.
An intuitive knowledge is that particles with either magnetic or electric field-induced dipole moments align parallel to the applied field, and in most cases they indeed do so. However, in 1970, Griffin and co-workers surprisingly found that a mixture of PS particles and Chlorella pyrenoidosa, a unicellular algae, assembled to chains containing alternatingly arranged PS particles and living cells, and they aligned perpendicular to an AC field.353 While chains assembled from only PS particles or living cells aligned along the field. Then Monte Carlo simulations by Sancho and co-workers and further experiments demonstrated that the phase shift between the induced polarizations of building blocks with different electrical properties is the reason for transverse chains.354 Both the simulations and the experiments indicated that the transverse chaining is frequency-dependent: transverse chaining only appeared in a high frequency (larger than 105 Hz) electric field. Velev and co-workers further proved that when integrating components with different electrical properties into single particle, these particles can also form perpendicular chains at high frequency, as well as a new mode that particles align ∼45° to the direction of electric field was found (Fig. 6h).342 Recently, Likos and co-workers observed perpendicular assemblies of single-component ionic microgels in an AC field, which they explained as a mismatch between the polarization of the polymer backbone and the ionizable double layer.328
A variety of superstructures obtained by applying uniaxial magnetic and electric field discussed above inspired researchers to pursue interactions with higher complexity in multi-axial magnetic and electric field. However, even in a multi-axial field, 1D colloidal chains still exist under specific conditions. In a mutually perpendicular biaxial electric field, colloids usually assemble into 2D sheets where building blocks arrange hexagonally, and only short 1D chains are found in a relatively weak field.331 In concurrent electric and magnetic fields, the overlapping of electric dipole–dipole interaction and magnetic dipole–dipole interaction drives magnetic particles to form multidirectional superstructures. The particles assemble into 1D chains aligning along the direction of one field where the moment induced by this field is stronger than the moment induced by the other one.109 In case that the two fields have the same orientation, the relatively weak moment induced by one field helps to densify the packing of chains dominated by the other field.355

2.3 Template-directed assembly
In principle, the assembly of particles into 1D chains is a process of directional alignment of building blocks by all available means. The core issue is how to generate directional interactions driving the alignment. Aside imposing external fields to give rise to directional dipole–dipole interactions, another effective approach is to introduce templates as scaffolds to guide and control the orientational arrangement of particles, especially for isotropic spheres. Basically, the building blocks are confined to templates by electrostatic interaction,356–359 hydrogen bonding,183,360 covalent linkage,361 encapsulation362 or geometric confinement.363–367 Thanks to the enormous availability of templates and their customizable shapes and dimensions, it is possible to control the length and sequence of 1D colloidal chains and the number and density of building blocks, and design the orientation of single particles, helical structures and the chirality. This ultimately realizes precisely regulated properties of 1D chains by tuning the type and shape of templates.
We divide templates into two main categories based on the form they present and the way they act upon building blocks, namely biomolecule templates and confining templates. Biomolecule templates are generally composed of DNA, peptides, and nanocellulose, which exist in the forms of strings, fibrils, cylindrical brushes, and worm-like micelles. Confining templates in this review represent nanotubes, nanochannels and nanogrooves where particles are assembled in the interior space. In this section, we will summarize how templates can be applied to mold 1D colloidal chains and adjust their architectures and properties.

2.3.1 Biomolecule templates. 
Biomolecule templates endow researchers with numerous and flexible possibilities to organize and create 1D colloidal chains due to the diversity and designability of DNA, peptides, proteins, nanocellulose, and filamentous microorganism in structures, functionalities and binding site affinities to building blocks. In particular, DNA templates possess great capability of specifically arranging the sequence, interval, orientation and chirality of NPs and nanochains. Therefore, we will start our review of biomolecule templates with DNA templates, where we will look back how simple DNA chains and thereafter DNA origami serve as scaffolds to program the 1D assembly of NPs and tailor the parameters and properties of 1D nanochains.
DNA templates. 
Braun and co-workers first used electrostatic interaction between metal cation and negatively charged DNA to fabricate Ag NP nanochains.368 They loaded Ag+ onto DNA stretched between two electrodes by an ion-exchange process, then reduced Ag+ to form nanoscale metallic Ag aggregates, which grew to 1D NP chains along the DNA templates (Fig. 7a). After that, Pd and Pt nanochains were also prepared by a similar electrostatic adsorption and reduction process.369,370 However, the early chemical reduction strategy could hardly control the size distribution and spacing between building blocks. To this end, Yoneyama, Ohtani and co-workers proposed to assemble pre-prepared positively charged Au NPs and CdS NPs along either DNA strands in solution or stretched DNA on a surface.357,359 Since one can fabricate NPs with desired size and very narrow size distribution, highly ordered assemblies with controlled particle distance were achieved.371,372 Beyond simple chains, Hutchison and co-workers obtained ribbon- and bundle-like structures comprising parallel chains and branched assemblies based on the multivalency of DNA scaffolds and Au NPs.358 Besides controlling the size and spacing, the length of 1D chains can also be tuned by modulating the electrostatic interaction between DNA strands, or DNA and building blocks. For instance, Kuang and co-workers found that 1D Au nanochains assembled by the thymine–Hg2+–thymine interaction form longer colloidal chains with an increase of Hg2+.373 Admittedly, only taking advantages of electrostatic interactions falls short of making the most of DNA templates.
 Fig. 7  1D noble metal colloidal chains templated by DNA. (a) The first example of Ag NP chains growing along a DNA strand via electrostatic interaction. (b–b′) Scheme and TEM images of alternating colloidal chains growing through step-by-step PCR cycles. (c–c′) Scheme and TEM image of Au colloidal chains assembled on linear DNA origami by complementary ssDNA. (d) Scheme and TEM images of Au nanosphere and nanorod chains with different spatial arrangement on DNA origami hashtag tile chains. (e) Scheme and TEM image of chiral Au helix growing around DNA origami nanorod. (f) Scheme of reconfigurable switch of 1D chiral chains between tightly folded state and an extended state (switch 1), or between two mirror-symmetric structures (switch 2). This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 368 Copyright 1998, Macmillan Publishers; (b) ref. 374 Copyright 2013, ACS; (c) the term of Creative Commons – Attribution 4.0 International – CC BY 4.0, ref. 375 Copyright 2019, the authors, published by Science Partner Journal and AAAS; (d) ref. 183 Copyright 2020, ACS; (e) ref. 376 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers; (f) the term of Creative Commons public use license, ref. 377 Copyright 2018, the authors, published by ACS. 
When we recollect the Watson-Crick base pairing which is the most distinct feature of DNA, it is possible to quickly derive ideas of assembling 1D colloidal chains by taking advantage of complementary DNA strands. Alivisatos and co-workers first assembled Au NPs attaching a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) onto a complementary ssDNA template, where they obtained dimeric and trimeric structures.378 To extend the length of colloid clusters, rolling circle amplification (RCA)379 was adopted to synthesize long ssDNA with periodic sequences consisting of designed repeating units. The long ssDNA is allowed to hybridize metal NPs with a short ssDNA complementary to the periodic sequence, resulting in micrometer-long 1D nanochains with uniform and precise distance between building blocks.380–383 The stably dispersed 1D nanochains further folded to form 2D arrays and 3D islands by adding other ssDNA complementary to the residual ssDNA on the particles, and adding salt to diminish electrostatic repulsion among particles.384,385 Beside RCA, telomerization and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have also been used to create 1D colloidal chains with similar mechanisms.374,386 Specifically, what needs to be emphasized is that the PCR technique is capable of producing alternating colloidal chains with two kinds of building blocks, which is reminiscent of an alternating copolymer (Fig. 7b).374 Other approaches discuss simple mixing protocols of two building blocks with complementary ssDNA as a potential way to prepare alternating nanochains.387 Compared to electrostatic adsorption and metallization discussed above, RCA, PCR and telomerization offer the chance to program the length of the nanochains and fine tune of the distance between their building blocks. Yet, these methods face challenges in controlling hierarchical chain structures, such as precise spatial patterns or sequences of building blocks, which will find a solution by using DNA origami or DNA tile assembly as templates.
DNA origami, generated by folding staple ssDNA and a scaffold ssDNA plasmid in a programmed pathway, has proven to be a versatile platform for guiding the self-assembly of NPs owing to their de novo programmable architectures and addressable functional groups.388,389 The general strategy to assemble 1D colloidal chains using DNA origami templates is that specifically reserved sites on the DNA origami immobilize NPs through metal-thiol bonds or DNA hybridization of ssDNA-functionalized NPs, respectively.390–392 Due to the programmability and dimension control of DNA origami, the space between NPs, the type of NP in a mixtures of NPs, and the position of NPs can be controlled with nanometer precision (Fig. 7c and d).183,375,393–396 3D DNA origami is able to further program the orientation and spatial arrangement of building blocks in 3 dimensions, which opens considerable potential for new optical properties. Liedl and co-workers designed and fabricated Au NP helices by using DNA origami bundles with dangling ssDNA with a left- or right-handed distribution to immobilize Au NPs. The resulting chiral Au NP chains displayed defined circular dichroism (Fig. 7e).376,397,398 Such Au NP chains on DNA origami bundles can further form an origami ring, resulting in stronger chiroptical response.399 Beyond single spirals, Yan and co-workers curled Au NP arrays on 2D DNA origami up to controllable single and double spirals when the diameter of the Au NPs was comparable or larger than the distance between neighboring capture ssDNA.400 The curling is believed to be triggered by the electrostatic and steric repulsions between Au NPs. Most of the current 1D NP chains templated by DNA are static and non-switchable once the structures are formed. However, Lan and co-workers could dynamically reconfigure the 1D chiral plasmonic superstructures of Au nanorods by means of toe-hold-mediated strand displacement reactions to modify the interarm angle and open direction of a V-shaped DNA origami (Fig. 7f),377 such dynamic structures will open exciting avenues for various potential applications, for instance, tunable refraction and intelligent detection.
In short, the development of DNA fabrication and self-assembly technologies allows to easily assemble building blocks (mostly noble metal NPs) into 1D hierarchical structures, to precisely tune the parameters of 1D colloidal chains including length, spacing and orientation (even in 3D space), and eventually achieve the goal of fine control of the properties of nanochains that could hardly be realized by other methods. Nevertheless, to enable a wide-spread application of DNA nanoscience, there are still challenges to overcome, such as the requirement of specialist knowledge and scalability issues.
Peptide and protein templates. 
Similar to DNA, peptides and proteins present another large template toolbox for controllable synthesis of noble metal NPs401–403 and their self-assembly,404,405 because (i) 1D supramolecular nanostructures including filaments, tubes, ribbons and helices are among the most accessible assemblies of peptides and proteins,406,407 (ii) large numbers of native and non-native amino acids are available to design peptides and proteins, and (iii) they are accessible on relatively large scale by solid phase synthesis and expression in host organisms.
The assembly of particles into nanochains using supramolecular peptide nanostructures as scaffolds mostly uses electrostatic interactions and metal-coordination interactions.408 Generally, two strategies exist: one is assembly of prefabricated NPs decorated with charged groups or functional ligands, the other is in situ growth of metal NPs on these templates. Wang and co-workers presented a first example of depositing negatively charged Au and Pd NPs onto positively charged peptide fibrils.409 Then Pochan and co-workers demonstrated the feasibility of precisely modulating the interparticle spacing in peptide fibril/NP chains via controlling the spatial distribution of positively charged histidine groups along the fibril template (Fig. 8a).410 To uptake NPs onto protein and peptide templates, base-pairing between amphiphilic peptide fibrils with thymine moieties and diaminopyridine-functionalized Au NPs,411 specific adherence of metal NPs to protein fibers fused with selected gold-binding peptide sequence,412 and direct covalent bonding between peptide fibrils and NPs413 were also utilized. Even though, directly generating 1D nanochains by various attractions between prefabricated fibrils and NPs can regulate the spatial periodicity and chirality of 1D colloidal chains,410,413 overall, it is less frequently exploited compared to in situ reduction of metal ions, which is likely related to optimization of ratios of both components and separation needs.
The in situ reduction strategy relies on attracting metal ions onto the surface of fibrils via electrostatic interaction or metal-coordination interaction. After attracting, they are reduced by additional reducing agents or reductive groups on the fibrils, such as tyrosine414–416 and aldehyde,417 to form metal NPs along the templates. This requires to design peptides with proper binding sites such as residual carboxy from aspartic acid and glutamic acid, or amine from histidine and cysteine.415,417–420Fig. 8b depicts one example from Rosi and co-workers where they obtained series of 1D twisted nanochains with adjustable fibril width, thickness and pitch by this in situ reduction method (Fig. 8b).153,154,421–424 Whereas, in most cases, electrostatic attraction and complexation work together to capture cations, it is difficult to distinguish which interaction plays a dominant role. Modern combinatorial technology has been able to fabricate peptides with specific binding affinities for inorganic components in their sequence.408 Peptide with such sequences can selectively absorb specific cations, then the cations are reduced to generate 1D metal NPs arrays.153,412,423,424
Structural details of 1D NP chains prepared by the in situ reduction strategy can be modified by designing the sequence and structure of de novo synthesized peptides and thereby of their assemblies. For instance, hydrophilic peptides AYSSGAPPMPPF coupled with an aliphatic dodecanoic tail allowed to form left-handed twisted-ribbon structures, which could be used to grow Au NPs into left-handed double helices (Fig. 8c).421 Controlling the reaction conditions led to a modulation of the density and size of the Au NPs inside the helical superstructures.423 When the thioether of methionine in the hydrophilic peptide was oxidized, the amphiphilic peptide conjugate assembled into a single helix, directing single-helical Au colloidal chains.424 Tuning the length of the aliphatic tail resulted in chiral Au nanochains with controllable helical pitch of the single helices, size and shape of Au NPs.153 Further changes to the number of amino acid and aliphatic tail in the peptide conjugates induced branching and intertwined 1D nanostructures with tailored interchain distance and interparticle spacing.154,422 Such well-defined variations in structural details of 1D metal NP chains generate tailored collective properties of metal building blocks.425,426
As to protein templates, the first thing that comes to mind is amyloid fibrils in which peptide chains in proteins form β-sheets and further aggregate into long fibrils. Proteins in the fibrils can be genetically modified with functional carboxy, amine or thiol groups to load NPs362,405,427 Lindquist and co-workers demonstrated the first example where the amyloid fibrils assembled from prion determinant from Saccharomyces cerevisiae were decorated with cysteine residues, and maleimido Au NPs were covalently linked to the fibrils via thiol-ene click chemistry.427 Afterwards, electrostatic attraction and coordination between amyloid fibrils and noble metal NPs have also been applied to form 1D metallic NP chains.428–433 1D NP chains can also be in situ generated during the formation of amyloid fibrils. Park and co-workers fabricated 1D NP chains by coating Au NPs with α-synuclein, then altering the solution to induce the fibrillation process of α-synuclein (Fig. 8d).434 Beside amyloid fibrils, other protein assemblies such as bacterial flagella435,436 and the capsid of filamentous bacteriophages437–439 have also been introduced to template 1D NP chains (Fig. 8e).
 Fig. 8  1D colloidal chains using peptides and proteins as templates. (a) By properly designing polypeptide and assembling the polypeptide into 1D fibrils, spatially precise repeating, positively charged histidine patches (dark orange bar in scheme) electrostatically attract negatively charged Au NPs, forming Au NP chains with defined interparticle distance. (b) The length of the aliphatic tail in peptide affects the pitch of the helical ribbon assembled from the peptide, therefore, adjusting the aliphatic tail can tune the pitch of chiral Au NP helices templated from the ribbon. (c) Scheme and TEM image of left-handed Au NP double helices, which were obtained by in situ reducing HAuCl4 during the assembly of amphiphilic peptides into 1D fibril templates. (d) Scheme and TEM image of 1D Au@α-synuclein NP chains induced by the amyloid fibrillation of α-synuclein. (e) Scheme and TEM image of highly oriented 1D Au NR chains assembled onto flagella via weak electrostatic interactions. (f) Scheme and TEM image of 1D co-assembly of Hcp1 pore protein and Au NPs via thiol- and dipole-induced self-assembly. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 410 Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 153 Copyright 2017, ACS; (c) ref. 421 Copyright 2008, ACS; (d) ref. 434 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH; (e) ref. 435 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH; (f) ref. 440 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Differing from above amyloid fibrils, flagella and capsids, Schiller and co-workers proposed a concept of co-assembly of protein and NPs,186,440 where they used synthetic bionanotechnology to produce defined geometrically shaped proteins with specifically modified sites binding Au NPs through thiol–Au interaction. Such bindings induce anisotropic ligand distributions, generating dipole formation. As a result, dipole–dipole interactions lead to 1D Au NP chains (Fig. 8f). Based on a similar concept, Kostiainen and co-workers realized 1D NP chains and right-handed NP helices via electrostatic interactions between positively charged Au NPs and negatively charged tobacco mosaic viruses.441,442 However, in general, peptide and protein templates for 1D NP chains offer less precision in structural features, such as sequence of building blocks and length of nanochains, compared to DNA templates.
Nanocellulose templates. 
Cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs) and cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs) show advantages over DNA, peptides and proteins in economic production and sustainability while maintaining diverse functionality. Thus, they have been extensively applied in material science and engineering. CNFs have been applied to template 1D Au NP chains through electrostatic interaction and covalent bonding between CNFs and NPs.190 Ikkala and co-workers firstly demonstrated that utilizing right-handed CNCs as templates can generate 1D chiral assemblies of Au NPs (Fig. 9).189 Afterwards, carbon dots were also generated on chiral CNCs by using sugar moieties on CNCs as carbon source, such 1D carbon dots/CNCs exhibited strong circularly polarized luminescence.443 Nevertheless, nanocellulose templates have not been widely explored to guide 1D NP assembly, one possible reason is that nanocellulose easily forms uncontrollable aggregates during electrostatic attraction-induced assembly.444
 Fig. 9  Scheme and TEM image of positively charged Au NPs electrostatically binding to negatively charged CNCs to form 1D right-handed Au NP chains. Reproduced with permission. ref. 189 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 


2.3.2 Confining templates. 
Compared to biomolecule templates, confining templates provide much more abundant programmability in length, width, sequence, helicity, and other topological properties for colloidal chains. This programmability is realized by elaborately designing the size, cross profile and orientation of confining templates, and their match with building blocks. Confinements in such templates can be traditionally fabricated by top-down processes such as electrochemistry in porous anodized aluminum oxide (AAO),162,364,445,446 optical, imprint, e-beam and atomic force microscopy (AFM) lithography (grooves, nanochannels, pillars),164,165,365,447–449 microcontact printing (microchannels),450,451 and stretching/buckling in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) wrinkles.191 Moreover, bottom-up self-assembly of supramolecules, DNA (nanotubes, microtubes),108,452–454 proteins362 and liquid crystals,455 and phase-separation of block copolymers (cylinders)456,457 can also provide such confinements. For the bottom-up self-assembly strategy, we will however only focus on examples of block copolymer bulk phases, as other structures have been discussed above.
For microfabricated templates, Stone and co-workers were the first to report the synthesis of 1D Ag nanochains in channels patterned by a PDMS mold (Fig. 10a).458 Experiments and theoretical modeling done by Chi and co-workers demonstrated that the electrostatic potential in the channel influences the self-assembly of NPs, which can be regulated to confine particles in high precision.165In situ TEM elucidated that the meniscus between channel walls pushes NPs to the middle of channel, and van der Waals interactions between NPs align particles into chains along the center of channel.164 Beside straight 1D colloidal chains,366,451,459 bracelet-like PNIPAM and SiO2 particles in glass circle grooves,460 V-shaped plasmonic Au nanochains in PMMA templates,448 and 2D micropatterns consisting of several PS colloidal chains in PDMS templates461 have been developed. The rapid development of processing technology of highly precise pattern templates allows to digitally control the length and width of colloidal chains (Fig. 10b and c), and their junctions over millimeter range.365,367 When evolving the straight microfluidic channels into software programmable microfluidics, Solomon and co-workers were able to make particle chains with programmed shape anisotropy including homogeneous, diblock and triblock internal sequences.462 Alternating sequences were also achieved in a Y-type channel where flow rates in both inlets were kept the same.463
 Fig. 10  1D Colloidal structures fabricated in confining templates. (a–a′) Scheme and fluorescent image of array of 1D Ag chain formed on a glass substrate by micromoulding in capillaries. Scheme and microscope images of digital control over the (b–b′) width and (c) length of colloidal chains by adjusting the geometry of confining templates and the size of building blocks. (d–d′′) 1D linear colloidal chains with different sequences (green (G), blue (B), and red (R) in scheme and images) assembled by sequential capillarity-assisted particle assembly. (e) Capillary confinements between micro pillars induced the co-assembly of binary colloids to form 1D colloidal structures. (f) Scheme and SEM image of Au NP chains aligned along 1D PDMS wrinkles. (g) Scheme and TEM images of AuNPs@PS confined in an AAO nanochannel. By adjusting the ratio of channel diameter (Dc) and Au NP diameter (Ds), 1D Au NP chains with different configurations were generated. (h–h′′) Scheme and TEM images of helical Au NP chains templated by helical structures in block copolymer films. The chiral tartaric acid directs the achiral poly(1,4-butadiene)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) to assemble into a microphase separated structure. After removing the tartaric acid, Au NPs fill the residual space and form 1D chiral Au NP chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 458 Copyright 2002, Nature; (b) the term of Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivative Works 4.0 license, ref. 365 Copyright 2020, the authors, published by ACS; (c) ref. 367 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (d) the term of Creative Commons – Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International – CC BY-NC 4.0, ref. 450 Copyright 2016, the authors, published by AAAS; (e) ref. 449 Copyright 2017, ACS; (f) the term of Creative Commons – Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International – CC BY-NC 4.0, ref. 464 Copyright 2021, the authors, published by Springer Nature; (g) ref. 364 Copyright 2020, RSC and the Chinese Chemical Society; (h) ref. 456 Copyright 2017, ACS. 
Beyond block and alternating colloidal chains, Wolf and co-workers realized stepwise growth of colloidal chains by trapping a single particle at the end of the channel at each time.450 In this way, colloidal chains with desired sequences, for instance, barcode chains and block chains could be generated in a step-wise fashion (Fig. 10d). Tuning the depth of the channel and the surface tension affected the capillary force perpendicular to the meniscus and its upward and horizontal components. Also using capillary force, Jiang, Song and co-workers developed a liquid bridge induced assembly strategy, wherein capillary forces moved the meniscus of a colloidal suspension along a pillar, linear or curved template and placed particles into designated positions, thereby generating linear, zigzag, twined zigzag and zipper colloidal chains, binary superstructures and multilayer chains (Fig. 10e).449,465–469
Microchannels fabricated by lithography are usually expensive and time-consuming to prepare. To this end, Fery, Böker and co-workers proposed a relatively low-cost and up-scalable wrinkle template.191,470–475 By uniaxially stretching or compressing a film composed of a relatively stiff upper layer and a relatively soft substrate, 1D wrinkles with a sinusoidal shape cross section and zigzag-based 2D herringbone structures are formed after removing the force (Fig. 10f).464,476 Then, NPs dip- or spin-coated on the film were guided by the wrinkles and assembled into NP chains.191,470–475 By adjusting the geometries of the cross section and its size-match with NPs, NP chains with a controlled number of layers, width and orientation could be obtained.471,472,475 Functional components, for instance, graphene (Fig. 10f), have also been integrated into wrinkle templates to endow 1D NP chains and 2D chain arrays with additional optoelectronic properties.464
Beside nanochannels and wrinkles, porous AAO is also widely used as a confining template, because its pore diameter and length can be uniformly controlled by simple manufacturing and template-removing procedures. SiO2 and hollow carbon sphere chains,477 Ag NP chains and Ag/Bi bimetallic nanowires,446 and PS-b-PDMS peapods445 have been produced within porous AAO by depositing NPs or their precursors, and sequentially removing solvent and AAO templates. Chiral single and double colloidal helices with precisely defined pitch were obtained by phase separation in AAO after either (i) regulating the size and the concentration of the colloids (Fig. 10g)85,364 or (ii) mixing NPs and achiral block copolymers.162,478 Similar to porous AAO, carbon nanotubes,479 halloysite nanotubes,166,480 supramolecular tubes assembled from organic small molecules and proteins,108,362,452–454 and DNA nanotubes363,452,481,482 have also been applied for in situ confined growth of linear particle chains.
Microphase separation of block copolymers is able to generate various structures such as lamellae, cylinders, spheres and bicontinuous microstructures. When NPs are decorated with a polymer identical to the block that forms cylindrical domains in a microphase separation of block copolymers, these NPs mixing homogeneously with the block copolymers would be expelled to the cylindrical domains during the phase separation process. Helical Ag and Au colloidal chains with prescribed handedness were prepared by this method (Fig. 10h).456,457,483 Chen and co-workers demonstrated a similar mechanism of fabricating colloidal chains in the freezing process of an aqueous colloidal suspension.484 During the freezing process, the NPs, seen as impurities, are excluded from the ice grains and are pushed into domains surrounded by three ice grains, generating linear nanochains when the ice melts and evaporates.485

2.4 Ligand-mediated self-assembly
During the synthesis of building blocks, polymer ligands or small molecule ligands are often used to coat building blocks to adjust their surface properties and alter their stability in solutions. However, the homogeneous distribution of ligands on the surface of an isotropic sphere may be varied once its surroundings are disturbed either by changing the solution composition or adding new ligands. The rearrangement or redistribution of ligands will generate an anisotropic distribution of surface charge or produce a hydrophobic (hydrophilic) domain in a hydrophilic (hydrophobic) entity.64,486 This rearrangement/redistribution can be utilized to guide the 1D assembly of isotropic particles, which is quite different from the above-mentioned assembly strategies relying on external directional guides (except for in situ formed magnetic dipole–dipole interaction). In this section, we mainly focus on how synthetic polymers and small molecules or ions can mediate the self-assembly.

2.4.1 Polymer ligands. 
While DNA and peptide/NP chains mainly focus on noble metal NPs, polymer ligands have been used more widely to organize silica,487 metal,195 metal oxide,196 perovskite nanocrystals197 and polymer particles. This difference is due to the fact that (i) polymers have designable components, molecular weight and topological structure, and (ii) they can provide multiple driving forces including van der Waals attraction, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interaction, complexation and simple encapsulation.197,488
Eisenberg and co-workers firstly found that amphiphilic polymer micelles can transform from spheres to cylinders by either adding salt to increase the ion strength or decreasing the hydrophilic moiety.489 Utilizing such sphere-to-1D morphological transition, Taton and co-workers integrated Au NPs into spherical polystyrene-block-poly(acrylic acid) (PS-b-PAA) micelles, which led to organization of Au@PS-b-PAA nanochains by adding salt and acetic acid.490 Chen and co-workers also reported the 1D assembly of Au NP chains assisted by the transition of PS-b-PAA micelles in a mixed solution of dimethyl formamide (DMF) and H2O (Fig. 11a).195,491 They demonstrated that the formation of 1D chains follows a step-growth mode, where building blocks energetically prefer to attach to the ends of a nanochain rather than its lateral sides. Actually, this terminal aggregation mechanism was also applicable to other 1D chains assembled from isotropic particles. By fine tuning the acid concentration during the transition of PS-b-PAA micelles, Chen and co-workers were able to precisely control the aggregation extent of Au NPs, selectively yielding dimers.492 Directly using 1D worm-like polystyrene-block-polyethylene-block-aminated poly(methyl methacrylate) micelles as templates, Schmalz and co-workers prepared 1D ZnO, CuO, Ag and Au NPs strings either by regio-selective introduction of NPs onto functionalized domains of the micelles or by ligand exchange with NPs.493
 Fig. 11  Colloidal chains mediated by polymer ligands. (a–a′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D assembly of Au NP@PS-b-PAA core–shell particles assisted by the sphere-to-cylinder transformation of PS-b-PAA micelles. The core–shell particles energetically prefer to attach to the ends of a nanochain rather than its lateral sides. (b–b′) Scheme and TEM images of alternating colloidal chains by PEG-induced electrostatic self-assembly. (c–c′′) Scheme and SEM images of self-assembly of polymer-grafted nanocubes: (c′) nanocubes modified with PVP–thiol aggregate in an edge–edge (EE) configuration after solvent annealing of PS thin film where the nanocubes were embedded; (c′′) while nanocubes modified with PEG-alkanethiol ligands rearrange into a face–face (FF) configuration after both solvent and thermal annealing. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 195 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 356 Copyright 2018, ACS; (c) ref. 494 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers. 
Even without making use of 1D polymer micelle, surface-coated polymers can still lead to the organization of NPs by polymer rearrangement when carefully balancing their electrostatic interactions and steric repulsions. Okubo and co-workers reported that adding poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(propylene oxide)-block-poly(ethylene oxide), and poly(2-ethox-yethyl vinyl ether)-block-poly(2-methoxyethyl vinyl ether) into a suspension of silica NPs results in 1D nanochains,487,495,496 2D nanorings,497,498 and 3D networks498,499 depending on the polymer structure, pH and temperature. Pozzo and co-workers found that PEG increases the steric hindrance between two kinds of Au NPs with different size and opposite charge, which leads to the formation of linear hetero-assemblies reminiscent of alternating polymers (Fig. 11b).356 Sardar and co-workers produced 1D perovskite nanocrystal chains with controlled inter-nanocrystal distances by van der Waals attractions between surface PEG ligands in a nonpolar solvent.197 Also using PEG as ligand, Nam and co-workers fabricated ultralong and continuous 1D Au nanochains on a hydrophobic surface via anisotropic spinodal dewetting in the presence of dithiothreitol and NaCl.151
Phase separation always happens between two polymers with a relatively large difference in solubility parameters. Tao and co-workers immersed nanocubes grafted with PVP or PEG into PS thin films, whereafter annealing of the film by solvent vapor treatment phase separated the grafted polymers and the matrix, which led to the formation of 1D nanochains (Fig. 11c).494 The propensity for nanocubes to conjugate in edge-edge or face-face form is strongly dependent on the type, length and grafting density of the surface-attached polymers, and the method of thermal treatment. When using anisotropic Au nanorods, Ag triangular nanoprisms, and mixtures of NPs with different sizes or geometries as building blocks, the configuration of colloidal chains can be dictated by the length of grafted polymer, and number and size ratio of the NPs. These configurations of the nanochains result in different plasmonic behaviors.152,500 Yang and co-workers recently also applied phase separation between particles and matrix to assemble Fe3O4, and Au NPs into 2D ring-like superstructures.501


2.4.2 Small molecule ligands. 
One of the most extensively explored and applied category of small molecules is small amphiphilic molecules, which assemble into 1D anisotropic superstructures such as rod-like micelles. Functional groups of the small molecules forming the 1D micelles, for instance carboxyl, coordinate with counterions, usually metal ions.502 Considering that metal ions may disturb the self-assembly of the amphiphilic molecules, a more common scenario is the formation of a 1D coordination complex between metal ions and small molecules, rather than small molecules themselves assembling into 1D structure. The metal ion reacts in situ to generate metal, metallic oxide or sulfide NPs aligning along the 1D soft templates (Fig. 12a).163,503,504 However, directly utilizing templates from small molecules to obtain 1D nanochains is less investigated probably because coordination complexes assembling into a 1D template is a lucky coincidence rather than a general pattern.
 Fig. 12  1D colloidal superstructures induced by small molecules and their assemblies. (a) Scheme of 1D Ag(I)-tiopronin sandwich-like complexes, and (a′) TEM image of Ag NP chains templated from the complexes. (b) Scheme of how isotropic electrostatic repulsion, van der Waals attraction, and anisotropic dipolar attraction regulate the self-assembly of charged particles; and (b′) TEM image of Au NP chains assembled by adjusting the ionic strength and polarity of the solvent. (c–c′′) Scheme and SEM images of Au NP chains assembled by anisotropic Debye length attraction induced by trace amount of water in ethanol. Diffusion-limited colloid aggregation (DLCA) results in branched aggregates, while reaction-limited colloid aggregation (RLCA) leads to more compact aggregates. (d–d′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D protein-jacketed superparamagnetic NPs (SNP) by Mg2+-mediated supramolecular polymerization of a NP-containing chaperonin protein (GroEL). (e–e′′) 1D chiral assemblies of gold nanorods induced by self-association of (e′) L- and (e′′) D-glutathione. (f–f′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D Au double helix triggered by the self-assembly of promesogenic compound (L) and liquid crystal-coated Au NPs. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 163 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 505 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 506 Copyright 2015, ACS; (d) ref. 157 Copyright 2015, ACS; (e) ref. 507 Copyright 2017, ACS; (f) ref. 508 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
It has long been known that adding either organic or inorganic salt into a dispersion of NPs induces instability and aggregation of the NPs. Nevertheless, when the concentration of salt is extremely low, counterions from salt adsorbed on NPs are insufficient to neutralize the local charge. The uneven distribution of counterions leads to an anisotropic surface charging, which as a result brings forth a permanent electric dipole moment on NPs. The electric moment directs the NPs to assemble into well-organized string-like aggregates when it is strong enough to overcome the electrostatic repulsion.509 Following this principle, Na+, Ca2+ and cationic surfactant cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) have been applied to drive the 1D self-assembly of NPs.505,510–515 When CTAB is used, an additional hydrophobic interaction between alkyl chains of adjacent particles may also play a role in the formation of chainlike aggregates.148 Wang and co-workers calculated the details of balancing dipole interaction, van der Waals attraction, electrostatic repulsion, and charge–dipole interaction between NPs during the addition of Na+ and organic solvent. The calculation results gave boundary conditions and provided a generalized elucidation for forming 1D nanochains, 2D and 3D aggregates (Fig. 12b).505 This elucidation also explains the self-assembly of Au NPs into 1D nanochains templated by nonionic small molecule 2-mercaptoethanol,486,516 zwitterionic proteins,440 and water in ethanol solution (Fig. 12c).506
An alternative approach to the formation of 1D colloidal chains mediated by small molecules is using small molecules with bifunctional groups as linkers conjugating adjacent NPs via chemisorption,517–519 electrostatic interaction,520–522 complexation,157,523 hydrogen bonding,493,524 or direct covalent bonds.525 Frequently used molecular linkers are amino acids,520,521,524,526 alkane dithiols,517,518 divalent metal ions such as zinc and magnesium ions,157,523 and other bifunctional small molecules (Fig. 12d and e).507,519 In the aspect of fine tuning the geometrical parameters of 1D superstructures, only a few reports using chiral molecules as linker (for example, glutathione in Fig. 12e) or their assembly as mediator (for instance, liquid crystal in Fig. 12f) can lead to 1D chiral or helical colloidal chains.507,508 Even though the candidates of molecular linkers are abundant, small molecules, similar to polymer mediators, are relatively powerless to regulate the length, sequence, orientation, and configuration of colloidal chains.

2.5 Self-assembling systems with shape-anisotropic and surface-patchy particles
The past decades have witnessed an unprecedented revolution in synthetic and modification methodologies to breaking the isotropy of NPs and precisely controlling their dimensions and regio-selective properties.125,527–530 Nano cubes,531,532 polyhedrons,533,534 rods,529,535 discs,536,537 spindles538,539 and spheres540 with shape anisotropy and surface patches of metals comprising, for instance, Ag, Au, Pd and Pt or metal oxides, such as hematite and boehmite, have been synthesized. These building blocks can self-assemble into directional hierarchical superstructures with minimum energy state owing to their shape anisotropy.541,542 By taking advantage of selectively immobilizing ligands to specific surface areas of different surface energy based on different lattice planes, such shape-anisotropic particles can be endowed with regio-selective interactions. Together with soft polymeric patchy particles, including Janus particles, multicompartment micelles as well as emerging 3D DNA origami colloids, shape-anisotropic and patchy particles team up to form a large category of building blocks with highly directional features.
The key advantage of shape-anisotropic and patchy particles for self-assembly is that the asymmetric structure can be much easier endowed with directional driving forces compared to symmetric building blocks. For symmetric spheres, their pair potential is only a function of their intercentroid separation.543 However, the pair potential of asymmetric particles depends on their geometric parameters,541 which means that anisotropic interactions tend to orient particles to a particular geometry to minimize the free energy during the self-assembly.544 Patchy particles assembling through directional patch–patch interactions is conceptually analogous to the assembly of atoms/molecules through valence orbitals.93 Janus particles with only one functionalized surface patch are similar to monovalent atoms/molecules and assemble into dimers or cap 1D nanochains. Tri-compartment particles work as divalent atoms and conjugate with other divalent particles to generate linear colloidal chains. Chemical patch–patch interactions can be realized via covalent bonds,545 coordination bonds,546 or supramolecular interactions including hydrogen bonding,547 host–guest interactions,548 and solvophobic interactions.549 Moreover, even generic depletion interactions can be used for geometrically defined particles. In this section, we will present how shape-anisotropic and surface-patchy particles apply these interactions to assemble into 1D nanochains.

2.5.1 Depletion interactions. 
Depletion interactions arise from mixing small, nonadsorbing components with large colloids. The small components, for instance, polymers, small colloids, micelles formed by surfactants, and other additives are called depletants. The nonadsorbing feature results in a depletion layer where the concentration of small components close to the large colloids is smaller than that in the bulk solution. Therefore, the osmotic pressure induced by such concentration differences tends to overlap the depletion layers and press large colloids together, triggering the assembly of large colloids.550 At the same time, the depletants experience higher entropy because additional volume for their diffusion is provided by overlapping the depletion volumes of two colloids. In principle, the assembly of colloids driven by depletion interactions is a process where the free energy of the total system is decreased and the total entropy of the system is increased.542,551 We refer to “Colloids and the Depletion Interaction” by Lekkerkerker and Tuinier551 to interested readers for more details.
For shape-anisotropic particles, their assembly adapts to a configuration that minimizes the free energy, hence, it is directional and highly specific to the particle geometry.541,552–555 For example, cylindrical particles,556,557 triangular nanoplates,544 square nanoplates,558 rounded nanoplates,559,560 and discoids561 energetically favor face-to-face configuration where the relatively flatter and smoother surfaces with smaller curvature bind together to maximize the contact area. Since the contact area is related to the surface asperity of the building blocks on the nanoscale, the depletion attraction can be suppressed by orders of magnitude when the height of the nanoscale surface asperities is larger than the depletant,559 even though the depletion attraction will be enhanced when taller asperities interdigitate.560 Other factors, including adsorbed molecules, concentration and size of depletants, also influence the depletion interactions.557,562 Basically, most current building blocks used for depletion-induced self-assembly are single component particles, and only the strength of depletion attraction needs to be considered. In a mixture of two types of single component particles, different depletants may selectively trigger the assembly of one kind of particles or the co-assembly of both particles. When integrating two materials into patchy particles, they may show regioselective self-assembly behavior owing to different depletant-material interactions. Recently, Weck and co-workers demonstrated such a concept using biphasic triblock polystyrene–poly(3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyl methacrylate)–polystyrene particles as models.563 By carefully modulating the depletion conditions, various structures including 1D cross-chains, ladder-like chains, tilted ladder-like chains, and 2D structures were obtained (Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  1D colloidal chains induced by depletion attraction. (a–a′′) Scheme and optical images of (a) cross-chains, (a′) ladder chains and (a′′) tilted ladder chains assembled from particles with different length width ratio. The assembly was triggered by Pluronic F127. (b) Scheme and confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) image of 1D cone-shaped particle chains where PEG 600 kDa was used as depletant. (c) Scheme and TEM images of 1D two-stranded filaments assembled from modified hexagon DNA origami, the assembly resulted from shape complementarity of the DNA origami. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 563 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (b) ref. 203 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 158 Copyright 2015, AAAS. 
A co-assembly system by depletion interactions was obtained by shape recognition of two colloids by Sacanna and co-workers.348 Therein, the radius of the concave part of one particle matched the convex part of the other particle, and 3D controlled assemblies occurred according to a lock-and-key principle.564 When the lock part and the key part were integrated into a single particle, the self-complementarity resulted in 1D colloidal chains and branched chains by varying the feature sizes of the lock and the key.565 An alternative to classical colloid synthesis is provided by high resolution 3D printing. To this end, we fabricated uniform micro-scale cone-shaped particles by direct 3D laser writing and demonstrated that the perfect insertion of one cone into another led to supracolloidal fibrils, that further formed nematic liquid-crystalline domains (Fig. 13b).203 Meanwhile, the quick development of DNA origami technology provides shape complementary building blocks with nanoscale precision and arbitrary programmability. These discrete DNA nano objects specifically self-assemble into 1D filament with long-range order which is cation-dependent reversible (Fig. 13c).158 By ingeniously assembling a hollow cylinder and a rotatable shaft into a DNA building block, Murata and co-workers realized control over the length of 1D homomultimers via a Vernier mechanism.94 Recently, Lee and co-workers proposed another strategy to self-limit the length of DNA origami chains based on strain accumulation using building blocks with flexible allosteric blocking domains.202 Even though depletion interactions are robust and rather universal, depletion attraction-driven self-assembly still lacks control over sequence, heterostructure with multiple building blocks and configuration.


2.5.2 Hydrogen bonds and DNA-mediated binding. 
In the process of breaking the symmetry of a building block, hydrogen bonded molecules can be relatively easily conjugated to site-specific patches. For instance, Xu and co-workers found that thiol ligands functionalized with 2-ureido-4[1H]-pyrimidinone (UPy) prefer to attach to the end of gold nanorods. Multiple hydrogen bonds between UPy allowed to drive nanorods to assemble end-by-end into colloidal chains with low ligand concentration.566 At high concentration of ligands, the number of UPy-ligands attached at the side of nanorods increased, which led to side-by-side aggregations (Fig. 14a). Hydrogen bonds can also result from functional groups of polymers on the surface of building blocks. A typical example is hydrogen bond attraction between carboxyl and pyrrolidone moieties distributed on two hemispheres of polymeric Janus particles.567 These Janus particles assembled into 1D colloidal chains at low pH where the carboxyl is protonated. Hydrogen bonds may also form between partially protonated groups such as protonated and deprotonated pyridines in polystyrene-block-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP) vesicles,568 wherein the interaction was strong enough to transform the shape of vesicles in colloidal chains from spheres to deeply stacked bowls.
 Fig. 14  Hydrogen bond and DNA-mediated binding-directed 1D self-assembly of building blocks. (a) Scheme and TEM image of end-to-end assembly of Au NRs induced by the hydrogen bonding between UPy coated on NRs. (b) Scheme and optical images of step-growth alternating colloidal polymerization of two kinds of building blocks with complementary divalent patches (red and green tips in scheme). (c) Scheme and TEM image of colloidal oligomers formed by two kinds of divalent programmable atom-like NP A and B, where the bonding domains of x and y are complementary to x′ and y′ respectively. (d) Scheme and microscope images of reconfigurable thermally reversible transition among singlets, 1D chains and 2D bilayer structures using DNA-patched Janus particles as building blocks. (e) Scheme and TEM images of switchable 1D DNA origami superstructures: the assembly was induced by the complementary connector pairs at both ends of the DNA origami, while the disassembly can be achieved by thermal and chemical switching. (f–f′) Scheme of 1D DNA origami chain formed with controlled monomer sequence, and Scheme and TEM images 1D Au NP helix by grafting Au NPs on DNA origami chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 566 Copyright 2019, RSC; (b) ref. 93 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, ref. 206 Copyright 2019, the authors, published by Springer Nature. (d) Ref. 569 Copyright 2020, ACS; (e) ref. 74 Copyright 2016, ACS; (f) ref. 207 Copyright 2020, ACS. 
A fine control can be achieved by extending hydrogen bonding to programmable molecular recognition of ssDNA. This helps to achieve more sophisticated superstructures of assemblies. The ssDNA providing attractive interactions can either be a dangling strand of 3D DNA origami,74,570 or be attached to a non-DNA anisotropic building block through e.g. streptavidin-biotin interaction, click reaction, and EDC/NHS coupling chemistry.93,569,571–573 Both cases differ from DNA templates in Section 2.3.1 where DNA templates work as skeletons to immobilize particles without interparticle interactions. However, herein, DNA serves to provide interparticle interactions between anisotropic building blocks. Usually, the ssDNA for gluing colloids is complementary to another strand with different sequence. Therefore, two kinds of colloids bearing these two strands, respectively, form strictly alternating colloidal chains similar to alternating copolymers, showing a mechanism reminiscent of step-growth colloidal polymerization (Fig. 14b).93 If two DNA strands are only partially complementary, a third strand whose sequence is more complementary to one of the formers allows to displace the previous partially complementary structure. As a result the 1D chain is cleaved.571 Of course, the DNA strands can also be designed to be self-complementary, whereupon 1D colloidal chains analogous to homopolymers are generated.96 Feringa and co-workers recently proposed a more delicate strategy that uses a ssDNA encoder to pattern isotropic Au NPs.206 By carefully designing the order and length and sequence, the encoder adsorbed on the surface of Au NPs forms different bonding domains, which essentially segments the isotropic particles into patches with different sequences. Particles with complementary double domains assemble to generate 1D chains with controllable length (Fig. 14c). One more intrinsic characteristic of multi-bonding-involved DNA-mediated attraction is that its strength can be continuously regulated from ∼0 to ∼10kBT by varying temperature over a range of about 10 °C.574,575 By taking this advantage, Yi and co-workers recently realized dynamic control over the formation of 1D colloidal chains, and thermally reversible transitions between 1D chains and 2D bilayer structures using DNA-patched Janus particles as building blocks (Fig. 14d).569,573
We demonstrated the hierarchical self-assembly of divalent 3D DNA origami into fibrillar superstructures by utilizing complementary ssDNA attached to the opposing patches of the building blocks.74 We further showed that the 1D DNA origami chains are thermally and chemically switchable (Fig. 14e).74,576 Beyond divalent DNA origami, Gang and co-workers reported that DNA origami frames with up to four patches self-assemble into linear homogeneous and alternating colloidal chains, and zigzag-shaped chains by selectively activating two of the total four patches.98 When activating three or four patches, 2D square arrays and designed patterns can be formed. Considering the 3D structure of DNA origami, programming the relative location of divalent dangling single strands allows to achieve 1D colloidal chains with more complicated configurations. For instance, Liu and co-workers used V-shaped DNA origami to realize distinct stair-like and coil-like chiral 1D superstructures with tunable handedness by selectively complementing two of four binding domains on the four edges of the V-shape.570 Extra binding sites were programmed and left to load other nano objects such as metal NPs and nanorods for other purposes such as chiral optical properties.98,570
Beside patchy DNA origami and ssDNA decorated non-DNA anisotropic colloids, asymmetric NPs and DNA origami can be in situ conjugated to generate anisotropic building blocks. Lee and co-workers programmed a plate-shaped DNA origami to bind only to one isotropic Au NP. Such conjugated units further self-assembled into 1D chains, whose growth was often terminated by forming a ring cluster when the length exceeded tetramers.577 In short, self-assembly by DNA-mediated binding near-perfectly realizes homogeneous and alternating 1D colloidal chains with precise size and chirality control, especially when using DNA origami as building blocks. By specifically designing the complementary dangling ssDNA on each patch and the 3D structure of DNA origami, it is even possible in principle to control the sequence and configuration of the chain, and encode each building block with a specific size, conformation, loading site and with other properties (Fig. 14f).207 Overall, DNA origami technology endows colloidal chains with desired properties and almost infinite possibilities, however, it still suffers from scalability limitations.


2.5.3 Host–guest interactions. 
Compared to the tremendous success in supramolecular materials through host–guest recognitions,548,578 host–guest interactions receive relatively less attention in guiding the self-assembly of particles.528,579 Researchers only started in the last couple of years to use the toolbox of host–guest interactions with inherent selectivity and controllable reversibility for 1D colloidal chain assembly. We found that by delicately balancing the electrostatic repulsion and host–guest attraction in a binary mixture of isotropic microgels modified with α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) and azobenzene, respectively, initially homogeneous coassemblies reconfigured into string-like superstructures with alternating host and guest microgels (Fig. 15a).91
 Fig. 15  1D colloidal chains assembled by host–guest attraction. (a–a′) Scheme and CLSM image of 1D chains balanced by the electrostatic repulsion and host–guest attraction between α-CD and azobenzene-functionalized microgels. (b–b′) Scheme and CLSM image of 1D alternating colloidal chains of bivalent patchy particles. CB[8] worked as a connector to host viologen (blue pendant motif in the scheme) and azobenzene (red pendant motif in the scheme). (c–c′) Scheme of bivalent 3D DNA origami cuboid functionalized with adamantane and β-CD at the opposite ends, and (c′) TEM image of the assembled 1D fibrils. (d) Scheme and optical images of the reversible self-assembly of CB[7] modified patchy particles mediated by the reversible redox reaction of diphenyl viologen. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 91 Copyright 2017, ACS; (b) ref. 71 Copyright 2017, ACS; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, ref. 208 Copyright 2020, the authors, published by Wiley-VCH; (d) ref. 580 Copyright 2016, ACS. 
For a more advanced assembling method for 1D colloidal chains, host–guest interactions are combined with patchy particles. The building blocks can be either single patchy particles, e.g. Janus particles functionalized with one of the host and guest moieties,581 or biphasic tri-patchy particles where both ends are modified with a host or guest structure.145,209,580 When small molecules, polymers and smaller particles bearing two or more counterparts were added as bridging moieties, such building blocks aggregated to form linear alignments, zigzag chains or branched chainlike structures. Alternatively, the trigger can also be another tri-patchy particle with counterparts at both ends. In this case, alternating colloidal chains were produced (Fig. 15b).71 Furthermore, we integrated host and guest moieties at the opposite ends of a single 3D DNA origami,208 such a 1D colloidal chain system is more concise than that when the host and guest moieties are integrated on different modules (Fig. 15c).
As to the specific host–guest pairs, both CD (either α- or β-) and its guests such as adamantane,208 azobenzene91,209,581 and arylazopyrazole,145 as well as cucurbituril (CB, either CB[7] or CB[8]) and its guests including viologen and azobenzene,71,580 have been applied to assemble 1D colloidal chains so far. A distinct feature of 1D colloidal chains directed by host–guest attractions is that the assemblies are able to reversibly disassemble by the addition of high concentrations of competing host or guest molecules, UV-mediated trans–cis photoisomerization of azo moieties and redox reactions of guest molecules (Fig. 15d). Such light and redox responsiveness of 1D colloidal chains could hardly be obtained by other directing forces.


2.5.4 Solvophobic interactions. 
The main concept behind the 1D assembly of building blocks by solvophobic interactions is that the solubility of a certain moiety on the surface of patchy building blocks deteriorates when the solvent is changed. As a result, the solvophobic part compacts and building block assembly occurs to minimize contact with the solvent. Considering the isotropic feature of solvophobic interactions, the distribution of the solvophobic moieties on the building blocks, or the building blocks themselves have to be anisotropic to allow for directional structures. Kumacheva and co-workers first demonstrated this concept by decorating the ends of Au nanorods with hydrophobic PS segments and the central part of the nanorod with a CTAB bilayer.582 Adding water to DMF in which the nanorods were dispersed, reduced the solubility of the PS segments and triggered the self-assembly of the nanorods into rings and chains depending on the water content (Fig. 16a). The kinetics of the self-assembly of Au nanorods by solvophobic interactions were explained by the theory of step-growth polymerization in polymer science.583 This approach was further extended to the self-assembly of perovskite platelets,584 Mn3O4 nanocuboids,585 Ag nanocubes,586,587 and the random co-assembly of gold and palladium nanorods.77
 Fig. 16  Solvophobic attraction induced self-assembly of building blocks into 1D structures. (a–a′) Scheme and SEM image of self-assembly of Au NRs with PS at both ends by adding water into DMF. (b) Scheme of the formation of divalent building block, which has two sticky patches on opposing sides of the core and a repulsive patch orthogonally surrounding the core, and Janus structure with attractive and repulsive patches on opposing sides by selectively adding solvent; (b′–b′′) TEM images of supracolloidal polymer chains by solvent-induced assembly of divalent particles and Janus particles. (c–c′′′) Scheme and TEM images of 1D superstructures with side-by-side (c–c′) and end-to-end (c′′–c′′′) configuration of triblock co-micelles. The triblock co-micelles contain a nonpolar, hydrophobic central segment and two polar terminal segments. When adding a mixture of hexane and isopropanol, a non-solvent for the central segments, the co-micelles assembled side-by-side. While adding hexane, a non-solvent for the terminal segments, the co-micelles assembled end-to-end. (d–d′) Scheme and TEM image of polymerization-induced particle-assembly of triblock polymers. Grafting a HPMA block onto the PDMA-b-PBzMA colloidal atom generates two patches on opposing side of the colloid. The solvent for the polymerization directly induced the self-assembly. (e–e′) Scheme and TEM image of Au NPs homogeneously functionalized with a mixture of 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid and 1-dodecanethiol assembling to chain-like structures. When dispersing the Au NPs in water, hydrophobic ligands redistributed on the particle surface to minimize their contact with water, and the resulting hydrophobic patches induced the self-assembly. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 582 Copyright 2007, Nature; (b) ref. 72 Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers; (c) ref. 588 Copyright 2015, AAAS; (d) ref. 589 Copyright 2020, RSC; (e) ref. 590 Copyright 2014, ACS. 
More frequently studied cases of solvophobicity-induced self-assembly focus on compartmentalized block copolymers.549 The basic procedure is as follows: diblock or triblock copolymers, in which each segment has a distinct solubility, were first dissolved in a solvent which is a poor solvent for one segment but a good solvent for the other parts, resulting in isotropic micelles with a core and a corona. An annealing step is often used to reorganize the corona into a compartmentalized structure by adding a second solvent to the first solvent or totally replace the first one.591 This compartmentalization process is crucial for further 1D self-assembly because it converts the isotropic corona-core micelles to anisotropic patchy corona-core micelles where repulsive and attractive surface patches provide directional interaction patterns. Afterwards the solvent is exchanged to a poor solvent for a selected patch, whereupon the anisotropic micelles assemble into 1D colloidal chains. Reversing the addition sequence of solvents leads to the disassembly of 1D colloidal chains. We demonstrated this strategy to guide the hierarchical self-assembly of anisotropic patchy micelles and developed a series of triblock copolymers by dividing the compartmentalized soft NPs into inert core, sticky patch and repulsive corona patch (Fig. 16b).72,92,591 The sticky patch provided solvophobic attraction, while the repulsive patch guaranteed that newly added building blocks only attached on the sticky patch, namely the living end of the chain. In order to obtain such divalent patchy NPs, one has to carefully design the volume ratios of all components. When the core volume is larger than the sticky patch volume, it generates divalent building blocks with two sticky patches on opposing sides of the core and a repulsive patch orthogonally surrounding the core. Additionally, A few of three sticky patches will branch the colloidal chain when they are incorporated in the self-assembly. On the other hand, smaller core volumes lead to Janus structures with attractive and repulsive patches on opposing sides. Such monovalent units work as capping agents to regulate the step-growth polymerization, which is very similar to what is known from molecular level step-growth polymerization (Fig. 16b).72,92,592
Sohn and co-workers simplified the building blocks to diblock copolymers PS-P4VP, where the quaternized and crosslinked P4VP functions as both core and repulsive corona, and two and sometimes three separated PS patches bridge colloids together.593,594 Manners and co-workers further developed a selective solvophobic attraction approach to control the configuration of colloidal chains assembled from cylindrical co-micelles.588 The co-micelles prepared by living crystallization-driven self-assembly consist of three segments which could be assigned to be hydrophobic and polar, respectively. By selectively choosing the solvent, the triblock co-micelles self-assembled into 1D superstructures with side-by-side or end-to-end configuration in non-solvents for the central or end segments, respectively (Fig. 16c). Recently, the strategy of solvophobicity-induced self-assembly of compartmentalized micelles has been integrated with polymerization-induced phase separation, where the self-assembly of 1D colloidal chains occurred during the polymerization of attaching a third block to the micelles composed of two other blocks (Fig. 16d).589 pH-143 and temperature-responsiveness,126 and additional cargos such as smaller patchy particles,72 quantum dots,595 metal NPs,70 and fluorescent dyes596 have been added to colloidal chains either by in situ encapsulation or post modification.
Sometimes, the building blocks for solvophobicity-induced self-assembly do not have to be divalent structures. Honciuc and co-workers found that hydrophobic interactions guide amphiphilic Janus particles to form worm-like 1D superstructure where hydrophobic lobes uniformly orient towards the inside of the superstructure.597 Building blocks even can be isotropic. Bishop and co-workers showed that homogeneously mixed hydrophobic and hydrophilic ligands on the surface of gold NPs dynamically rearrange on the surface to form discrete hydrophobic patches under appropriate conditions.590 Neighboring dynamic hydrophobic patches overlap to minimize contact with aqueous surroundings, resulting in chain-like structures (Fig. 16e).
Different from above 1D structures prepared by bottom-up self-assembly utilizing solvophobic interaction, Cheng and co-workers proposed a strategy combining bottom-up and top-down methods.598 PS-capped metal nanocubes dispersed in chloroform were spread on water, and as the organic solvent evaporated, hydrophobic interaction among PS induced the nanocubes to assemble into single layered 2D nanosheet. Then the nanosheet was milled into 1D nanoribbons with defined width by top-down focused ion beam lithography (FIB-L). This approach is inspiring regarding arbitrary architectures accessible by FIB-L, but has received little further attention due to the complexity of the method. Strategies combining bottom-up and top-down can however take advantages of both methods, and create 1D colloidal chains with novel architectures.

2.6 Emerging out-of-equilibrium self-assembly
Comparing to static assembly of particles that leads to a thermodynamic equilibrium state, out-of-equilibrium self-assembly requires continuous energy input to promote building blocks to form dynamic, dissipative, and ordered superstructures which disappear once the energy is removed.599,600 Typical out-of-equilibrium self-assemblies in nature span from microscopic dynamic formation of actin filaments601 to macroscopic fish schooling,602,603 which have inspired researchers to develop artificial dissipative materials systems driven by the consumption of light, external energy fields, oscillating reactions, and chemical fuels.599,600,604–609610 The prescriptive nature of out-of-equilibrium self-assembly systems is that the resulting superstructures can be endowed with higher levels of complexity on spatial and temporal scales because of the interaction between competitive and cooperative processes and instability thresholds of spatiotemporal gradients.611,612 Therefore, the superstructures are reconfigurable and can spontaneously transform in response to the alternation of the spatiotemporal conditions.170 Actually, 1D colloidal chains only occupy a very small portion of numerous out-of-equilibrium superstructures305,613 generated by means of external fields such as light, flow, magnetic and electrical fields. Quite a lot of 1D colloidal chains in Sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 belong to out-of-equilibrium self-assemblies before their transient structures are permanently solidified.614 In this section, we will discuss how light and flow fields can be applied for the formation of out-of-equilibrium 1D chains although the relevant literature is limited.
The out-of-equilibrium self-assembly of particles at fluid-solid boundaries follows a fluid-induced phase separation mechanism, where particles are entrapped in the attractive parts of hydrodynamic flows, and the resultant superstructures are highly controlled by the alternation of hydrodynamic boundary conditions.214 Thutupalli and co-workers demonstrated that metastable and stable 1D droplet lines were formed when the height of the flow channel was comparable to and several times larger than the diameter of the droplets, respectively.214 The attractive entrapment can also originate from centripetal forces of a rotating fluid in a confined space. Grzybowski and co-workers showed that particles whose density is lighter than the fluid crystallize into 1D particle chains around the rotation axis of fluid.168 The chirality of the resultant monocomponent and multicomponent tubular superstructures can be regulated by the orientation of the rotation axis related to gravity, while the symmetry of the tubular particle assemblies is regulated by the particle concentration, rotation rate, as well as the ratio of particle sizes in a multicomponent system (Fig. 17a). Solidifying the fluid fixes the superstructures in out-of-equilibrium states.
 Fig. 17  1D particle chains in out-of-equilibrium self-assembly states. (a–a′) 1D tubular assemblies of (a) mono- and (a′) multi-component building blocks assembled in a rotating fluid. The configuration of mono-component 1D assemblies depends on the normalized particle number and the rotation rate. The configuration of multi-component assemblies also relies on the ratio of particle sizes and particle numbers. (b) Scheme and dark-field images of 1D colloidal oligomer oriented perpendicular to the polarization direction of the light. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 168 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 215 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Light has long been the driving force to trigger and sustain in- and out-of-equilibrium colloidal superstructures through optical trapping592,615 and other effects induced by light such as spatiotemporal temperature gradient and Marangoni flow.616 For instance, Yan and co-workers showed that anisotropic electrodynamic interactions between particles provided by laser irradiation are able to overcome Brownian fluctuations between metal, metallic oxide, polymer, and hybrid colloids, driving them into anisotropic chains oriented perpendicular to the polarization direction of the light (Fig. 17b).215 They presented an example of a light-induced dissipative self-assembly system where complicated inter-particle interactions and interactions between particles and their surrounding cooperate.169 When they illuminated blue light on peanut Fe2O3 colloids in hydrogen peroxide solution, the self-propelled hematite motors propel along their long axis and show phototactic behavior. Meanwhile, the competition of diffusion-osmotic propulsion, phoretic attraction, and magnetic dipole–dipole interaction originating from the inherent magnetic moments of the hematite colloids organized them into colloidal ribbons.
Although out-of-equilibrium self-assembly could generate superstructures with higher level complexity and diversity unavailable in equilibrium conditions, the present lack of fundamental understanding of the design principles limits rational design of out-of-equilibrium self-assembling systems.617 Additionally, there exists a gap between molecular self-assembly systems and fabricating 1D colloidal chains. For example, our group and others have been developing relatively mature out-of-equilibrium chemical and enzymatic reactions networks.599,600,609,618–624610 But, currently these systems are mostly applied to the self-assembly of small molecules and entities. A further coupling to the colloidal domain would tremendously broaden and enrich the structures and properties of colloidal chains in out-of-equilibrium state.
3. Properties and applications
3.1 Emergent and enhanced collective properties through 1D assembly
The alignment of colloids into 1D superstructures gives rise to many emergent optical, electronic, and magnetic properties, which are typically not found in discrete building blocks or their bulk materials. This in particular holds when these properties are highly dependent on spatial arrangement of colloids in close distance. In this section, we will elucidate how these emergent and enhanced collective properties originate from the 1D assembly of colloids.

3.1.1 Interaction with electromagnetic radiation. 
The interaction between electromagnetic waves and 1D colloidal chains exhibits various optical characteristics depending on the wavelength of electromagnetic wave (visible light or microwave), materials (optical responsiveness or non-responsiveness) and spatial structure of colloidal chains (chiral or achiral assembly). For instance, 1D arrays of metal nanocrystals show directional plasmon resonance and a chain-length-dependent shift of the plasmon resonance peak. Another example is that asymmetric building blocks or helical arrangement of even isotropic colloids lead to optical chirality. Additionally, colloidal chains may guide light from one location to another, or enhance the attenuation of electromagnetic waves. In this section, we will emphasize the surface plasmon resonance, chiro-optics, microwave attenuation and waveguide behaviors of 1D colloidal chains in electromagnetic waves.
Surface plasmon resonance. 
Surface plasmon resonance is a light-induced resonant oscillation of conducting electrons at the interface of materials with negative and positive permittivity. When two particles (made of conductive materials, typically) are in proximity to each other and form an asymmetric entity, a surface plasmon resonance hot spot is generated in the gap between two particles. Because of its asymmetric nature, the plasmon resonance divides into a longitudinal mode where polarized light is parallel to the long axis of the entity, and a transversal mode where polarized light is perpendicular to the long axis of the entity. Since such an asymmetric entity is extended in colloidal chains, the longitudinal plasmon resonance shifts to longer wavelength when increasing the length of the colloidal chain, which follows an exponential dependence with number of particles.625 This red shift is highly related to the geometry of the building blocks and their interparticle distance in the chain. Colloidal chains made of flat facet nanocubes have a saturation wavelength shift of ∼1200 nm, almost six times larger than chains with an equivalent configuration of perfectly spherical particles (Fig. 18a).625 Colloidal chains composed of building blocks with other shapes also show a relatively larger red shift than spheres.626,627 Because of the quantitative correlation between the red shift of the plasmon resonance and the structural characteristics of colloidal chains including length and diameter of colloids, and interparticle distance and number of particles in a chain, the red shift can be used to quantitatively characterize the process of step-growth polymerization of colloids.628
 Fig. 18  (a–a′) Normalized extinction cross-section as a function of wavelength for Au NP chains assembled from (a) spherical NPs and (a′) nanocubes with the number of building blocks (Np) increasing from 1 to 16. (b–b′) Electric field profiles of silver unimer, dimer, trimer, and tetramer NPs simulated with an excitation wavelength of 785 nm, (b) for nanospheres and (b′) for face-to-face assembled nanocubes. Numbers above figures show the average electric-field enhancement factors per hot spot volume. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) the term of Creative Commons license, ref. 625 Copyright 2017, the authors, published by Optical Society of America; (b) ref. 629 Copyright 2014, ACS. 
Beside the red shift of the plasmon resonance by increasing the length of 1D colloidal chains, the strength of the surface plasmon resonance is another significant indicator related to sensitivity when applying 1D chains for sensing and detection. The face-to-face attachment of nanocubes provides a bigger interfacial area in the gap compared with spheres. The bigger interfacial area leads to a larger hot spot, a nearly uniform electronic field enhancement and a stronger plasmon resonance (Fig. 18b).629 Another way to enhance the strength of surface plasmon resonance is to increase the density of hot spots by assembling colloids into bundles rather than simple single chains.630 However, what has to be pointed out here is that a higher sensitivity essential for many applications is not only connected with the increasement of hot spot density, a uniform distribution of hot spots across the whole measuring surface is also significant. Hence, colloidal chains are usually assembled into higher ordered 2D arrays by various methods for high-sensitive detection.631–633
Chiroptical properties. 
Chiroptical properties in 1D colloidal chains arise from either chiral building blocks or chiral arrangement of achiral building blocks. However, the preparation of chiral colloids remains a big challenge so far.634,635 A easier way is to assemble achiral colloids into a 1D superstructure with a chiral template. Chiral small molecules such as glutathione,507 chiral nanofibrils assembled from peptides,636,637 DNA chains or origami,374,377 or helices by the phase separation of block copolymers, can serve as such templates. When achiral colloids, usually metal nanocrystals and quantum dots, are arranged in a chiral geometric space, the dynamic Coulomb interaction between the colloids is largely enhanced because of the strong plasmonic dipoles. As a result, it generates a chiral plasmonic resonance (Fig. 19a),376,638 whose intensity increases with increasing the chain length.374 Although there is also a coupling interaction between the plasmonic colloids and the chiral template, such coupling is always very weak.507 One way to characterize such structures is circular dichroism spectroscopy. The shapes of the circular dichroism spectra of chiral colloidal chains is determined by the pitch and radius of the helix, as well as the number of building blocks in a pitch.638 The chiral response initially increases and then decreases with increasing the pitch when the NP amount in each pitch remains constant (Fig. 19b).
 Fig. 19  (a) Circular dichroism (CD) signals of 1D chiral colloidal chains assembled from isotropic Au NPs. (b) Normalized CD extinction as a function of pitch length at a wavelength of maximum CD λ = 552 nm with a constant number of NPs in each pitch. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 376 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers; (b) ref. 638 Copyright 2011, ACS. 
Microwave attenuation. 
Electromagnetic waves reaching a lossy dispersive material can be reflected (surface reflectance and multiple reflectance), absorbed or transmitted. Therefore in order to minimize surface reflectance, a major strategy is to enhance absorption via two aspects: (i) increasing multiple reflectance in the material to extend the transmitted route, and (ii) regulating the electromagnetic parameters. The former way focuses on designing the absorbent materials such as introducing pores and hierarchical structures. The latter is to regulate their complex permeability (μr = μ′ + iμ′′) as well as complex permittivity (εr = ε′ + iε′′) and their match to enhance dielectric loss and magnetic loss.639 The dielectric loss mainly results from polarization loss including ionic polarization, electronic polarization, dipole orientation polarization, interfacial polarization and conductivity loss. The magnetic loss can be enhanced by choosing materials with higher magnetization, however, it is restricted by the Snoek's limit.640 Thus, the electromagnetic attenuation performance is mostly promoted from the aspect of dielectric loss rather than magnetic loss.641,642
Many years ago, Peng and co-workers demonstrated that the shape of the absorbent has a profound effect on the absorption of electromagnetic waves.643 The relatively larger dielectric loss of 1D fibers than that of randomly dispersed particles transfers more electromagnetic energy into heat, promoting the absorption.644 The reason for enhanced dielectric loss is that when electroconductive materials and less conductive components are composited to form a colloidal chain, the heterogeneous interface between the conductive materials is analogous to a conductor-insulator-conductor boundary layer capacitor, gathering charge at the interfacial region, and generating interfacial polarization.645 Both conductor and insulator can be processed into colloids for producing such capacitors.645,646 When the conductor is used as continuous material in a colloidal chain, it will provide a transport path for dissipative current.296 What is more, the chains can form 3D conductive networks and generate microcurrents.647 Both the conductive chain and the 3D network help to enhance the conductive loss, which results in a better microwave attenuation.
Beside dielectric loss, large number of pores and voids have been integrated into 1D colloidal chains by using porous building blocks and creating free spaces between colloids and supporting materials. This tremendously reinforces multiple reflection and scattering, therefore it also enhances the attenuation.296,647,648 It should be noted that electromagnetic wave attenuation is a synergistic result of multiple reflection, magnetic and dielectric loss rather than an individual effect (Fig. 20).296,645,649,650 Comprehensive consideration has to be taken when designing an absorbent material.
 Fig. 20  A representative scheme of the microwave absorption mechanism of colloidal chains based on the synergistic effect of magnetic (natural resonance and eddy current effect) and dielectric loss (conductive loss and interfacial polarization) and their match. The impedance matching of complex permittivity and permeability allows more microwaves to penetrate through the absorbent. 
Optical waveguides. 
Early theoretical calculations based on Mie theory showed that electrodynamic interparticle coupling between metal NPs can be applied to directionally transmit light along metal colloidal chains. Optical constants of metal and interparticle distances are the main attenuation factors for the wave guiding.651 Maier and coworkers were the first to directly observe electromagnetic energy propagating along a colloidal chain consisting of closely spaced silver rods using a near-field optical microscope.652 They confirmed the theoretical prediction that strong damping of the light propagation, reaching up to 6 dB per 200 nm, exists. Different bottom-up and top-down approaches have been used to fabricate colloidal chains with tailored particle size and shape, interparticle distance, and surrounding dielectric environment in order to minimize the damping. So far, the propagation loss has largely decreased to 0.26451 and 0.8 dB653 per 50 nm for Au NP chains. However, the propagation distance is still limited to a couple of micrometers (Fig. 21),654,655 which limits the application of 1D NP chains as optical waveguides.
 Fig. 21  Scheme and optical image of 1D Au NP chain as a plasmonic waveguide. Reproduced with permission.655 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.2 Electronic properties. 
When only considering the conductivity of 1D colloidal chains, it is far worse than continuous nanowires because nanochains have many more defects, in particular, interparticle gaps. Therefore, a lot of efforts have been carried out to reduce defects by converting metal colloidal chains to homogeneous, highly conductive nanowires.452,656 However, when comparing the conductivity of 1D NP chains with densely packed NP layers, for example, 1D Ag NP chains presented 1.5 times higher conductivity, which is attributed to the fact that 1D structure facilitates electron transport (Fig. 22a).657
 Fig. 22  (a) The I–V behavior of one Ag NP chain (circles in curve) and that of a monolayer of dense Ag NPs (triangles in curve). (b) Temperature-dependent I–V characteristics of Au nanochains measured at 10 and 293 K. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 657 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 452 Copyright 2018, ACS. 
Precisely because of the discontinuous structure, 1D colloidal chains possess some unique electronic properties distinguishing them from continuous nanowires and discrete NPs. Braun and coworkers found that Ag NP chains templated from DNA exhibit a highly non-linear current–voltage (I–V) property.368 The chain is conductive at a higher voltage bias (∼10 V), but shows resistance larger than 1013 Ω when the bias is approaching 0. Yang and co-workers presented non-volatile memory properties of Pt NP chains using tobacco mosaic virus as template.658 The resulting 1D structures have a low current with low applied voltage, however, the current abruptly increases when the voltage is higher than 3 V. This high current, conductive state is switched to a low conductive state when a reversed voltage lower than −2.4 V is applied. Charge trapping in NPs is responsible for the conductance switching behavior. Seidel and co-workers discovered temperature-dependent I–V behavior in Au NP chains fabricated in DNA nanomolds, in which higher temperature leads to higher conductance.452 This temperature dependence behavior is attributed to conductance barriers between particles, and an activation energy that needs to be overcome (Fig. 22b).


3.1.3 Enhanced magnetic properties. 
In comparison to discrete magnetic particles and 2D monolayers, 1D magnetic colloidal chains exhibit anisotropic and enhanced collective magnetic properties including larger coercivity, more sensitive magnetic responsiveness, angle-dependent magnetization, and a higher blocking temperature. Decades ago, a “chain-of-sphere” model was already used to explain the larger coercivity of shape-anisotropic, elongated single-domain particles.659 In this model, the collective coercivity can be described as Hc,n = (μ/D3)(6Kn − 4Ln), where μ and D are the dipole moment and diameter of magnetic particles, respectively; n is the number of particles in the chain; Kn is the dipolar interaction between each pair of magnetic particles, while Ln is the dipolar interaction between each even-numbered and odd-numbered pair. The measured coercivity coincides very well with calculated data using this model.660 Because of the elongated magnetic moment, the magnetization of chains increases faster than that of isolated magnetic particles with increasing applied magnetic field (Fig. 23a).661,662 When 1D magnetic chains are organized into higher ordered 2D arrays, the elongated magnetic moment arrays exhibit highly anisotropic magnetization. This anisotropic magnetization shows a maximum when the direction of the external magnetic field is parallel to the axis of the 1D magnetic chains in the arrays, and achieves a minimum when the direction is orthogonal to the axis (Fig. 23b).663,664 This property can be utilized to sense the direction of a magnetic field.
 Fig. 23  (a–a′) Comparative field-dependent magnetization of (a) Fe2O3 colloidal chains (the field applied is in the plane of the chains) show a faster magnetization than (a′) discrete NPs at 300 and 5 K. (b) Scheme of the angle between 1D Fe3O4 NP chains and the direction of applied magnetic field, and (b′) the angle-dependent magnetization of the chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 661 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 664 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Field-cooled magnetization measurements demonstrated that the magnetic coupling between magnetic NPs in chains is stronger than that in aggregations and discrete particle suspensions. Stronger magnetic coupling results in a higher blocking temperature, which increases from ∼80 K of isolated γ-Fe2O3 NPs to ∼120 K of γ-Fe2O3 NP chains.665 Overall, enhanced magnetic properties including larger coercivity and faster magnetic responsiveness than discrete magnetic particles, endow magnetic NP chains with extensive applications in a lot of fields such as catalysis and sensing.


3.1.4 Field-adaptive properties. 
Field-adaptive properties of 1D chains are related to switch between assembly and disassembly state by turning an external field on and off, and transform from one conformation to another in order to adapt to the changing environment. These properties are important requirements for applying 1D colloidal chains in magnetorheological fluid,244 in electrorheological fluid,246 and as biorobot.666,667 The reversible rearrangement of NPs into chain-like structures in an external magnetic or electric field has been extensively studied in experiments and theory in the past decades.668 The dynamic superstructures enable the viscoelastic properties of magnetic or electric fluids to increase several orders of magnitude. Permanent, rigid magnetic nanochains also show a stronger magnetorheological effect than isolated magnetic particles in a relatively weak field (Fig. 24a).669
 Fig. 24  Field-adaptive properties of 1D colloidal chains. (a) Scheme of hollow magnetic chains in shear stress, SEM and TEM images of hollow magnetic chains, and comparison of shear stress between Fe3O4 hollow chains and spheres. (b–b′) Scheme and optical images of 1D liquid magnetic droplets in a (b) circularly and (b′) conically polarized magnetic field. (c–c′) Morphologies of paramagnetic chains in a soft gel under a perpendicular magnetic field by varying the (c) length of chains and (c′) field strength. (d) Optical image of bovine sperm cells coated with maghemite NPs, and (d′) time-dependent deformation of the magnetic sperm under a rotating magnetic field, and (d′′) tracking line of the sperm head and tail. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 669 Copyright 2019, ACS; (b) ref. 670 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence, ref. 671 Copyright 2016, the authors, published by RSC; (d) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial license, ref. 672 Copyright 2020, the authors, published by AAAS. 
Beside reversible assemblies in magnetorheological and electrorheological fluids, many more morphologies can be achieved by applying different external fields or endowing colloidal chains with flexibility.670,671,673–675 For instance, liquid magnetic droplets are able to switch between microstick, microkayak, microtrain, and microrollingpin configurations by changing the external magnetic field from a rotating field to a circularly or conically polarized field (Fig. 24b).670
When the building blocks are connected by soft polymers such as PEG,673,674 PDMS,671 DNA675 and natural flagellum,672 these flexible 1D chains will show more complex morphological transformations. For instance, ferromagnetic chains undergo chain-to-globule-to-chain transformations by varying the direction of the external field.673 They can also display different buckling morphologies when the external magnetic field is perpendicular to the long axis of the chain (Fig. 24c).671 They can even behave like micro-swimmers and generate directional movement in a time-varying or rotating magnetic field (Fig. 24d).672,675 All these field-adaptive properties of transformation and movement make flexible colloidal chains promising candidates for next generation biorobots.

3.2 Applications utilizing new properties
A persistent problem limiting large-scale NP applications is their aggregation and long-term instability brought by their high specific surface area and surface activity. 1D colloidal chains offer a solution to this problem because of their unique structure. Since one dimension is larger than the nanoscale, such chains are able to resist instabilities, meanwhile they do not lose too much surface activity. And compared to discrete NPs, the geometrical nature of 1D nanochains provides multiple docking sites, which is especially helpful for highly sensitive detection and analysis. Together with their above-mentioned enhanced magnetic, optical, and electric properties, 1D colloidal chains find wide applications from catalysis, energy materials to biological and biomedical science. In this section, we will review and summarize how the intrinsic, emergent and enhanced collective properties of 1D colloidal chains can be practically applied in general, rather than focus on how much a specific application is improved.

3.2.1 Sensors. 
High sensitivity, fast responsiveness, and specific selectivity are of paramount importance for sensors. 1D colloidal chains represent an ideal category of candidates for sensors to fulfill these demands because of their multiple docking sites, excellent stability and enhanced collective properties. Any analyte that can alter the assembly/disassembly state, or electrical, magnetic or optical properties of 1D colloidal chains is able to be detected in principle. In previous sections, many kinds of small molecules, ions, and DNA have been used to trigger the self-assembly of noble metal particles. During the assembly process, the near-field coupling results in splitting of a single plasmon band of a single NP into a low energy, longitudinal plasmon band and a high energy, transverse plasmon band, where the intensity of longitudinal and transverse plasmon bands increases and decreases, respectively, as the colloidal chains grow.491,676 Such a colorimetric variation has been used to quantitively detect metal ions, for example, Hg2+ (Fig. 25a),677,678 pesticides,679,680 lysine,681 ractopamine,682 antibiotics,683,684 DNA,685 and enzymes,679 with low detection limits and high selectivity. What is more, the longitudinal plasmon band red shifts until the chain reaches a specific length, which depends on the symmetry, size and shape of the NPs and the interparticle distance. For asymmetric building blocks, the intensity of the longitudinal plasmon band even relies on the angle between adjacent building blocks in a chain. Therefore, the red shift and angle dependence of plasmon bands were used to measure stress and pressure of a composite material where noble metal colloidal chains were embedded.686,687
 Fig. 25  1D colloidal chains as sensors. (a) Scheme of directional self-assembly of Au NRs induced by different concentrations of Hg2+; (a′) Absorbance of Au NRs in the presence of different Hg2+ concentrations; (a′′) Linear plot of the ratio of the absorbance peaks at 1030 and 744 nm vs. the concentration of Hg2+. (b) Scheme of using pH responsive magnetic photonic nanochain cilia arrays to sense local pH variations: (b′) Reflective dark-field microscopic images and (b′′) diffraction peaks of the arrays at different pH values. (c) SEM images of plasmonic arrays of core–shell Au@Ag nanobricks with multiple (M-Array) and single (S-Array) nanobrick width; (c′) SERS sensitivity by comparing 4-aminothiophenol spectra generated with plasmonic arrays (M- and S-array) and commercial Klarite substrate; (c′′) SERS enhancement factors of the plasmonic arrays. (d) Scheme and SEM image of 1D colloidal chain array assembled from SnO2 NPs and Au NRs; (d′) Electrical response of the binary colloidal chain arrays and SnO2 counterpart at 50 ppm acetone: (d′′) Electrical response curve of binary colloidal chain array toward different concentrations of acetone. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 677 Copyright 2017, ACS; (b) ref. 688 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 632 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (d) ref. 689 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
An analyte may cause the change of intrinsic properties of the chains. For instance, the interparticle distance of pH-responsive hydrogel-based nanochains increases or decreases in response to a change in acidity of the surrounding (Fig. 25b).688,690 Attaching analytes such as target ssDNA to 1D Fe3O4@Au NP chains bridging two Au microelectrodes leads to an increase of the electrical resistance of the chains.691 Changes in optical properties have also been applied for detection. For example, a miRNA complementary to the ssDNA linking upconversion luminescent NPs into nanochains causes the release of the NPs from the nanochains, thereby reducing the luminescence intensity.692 When a target pushes a quencher away from upconversion luminescent NPs in the chains, the increase of the luminescence intensity can also be used to detect the target.693
Enhanced and collective properties are categories of advantages of colloidal chains over discrete building blocks in sensing applications. 1D nanochains have better conductivity than discrete NPs because of their continuous structures. This electrical conductivity is especially useful to improve detection limits when a redox reaction is involved in sensing.686,694 When these conductive 1D colloidal chains further physically interlock with each other to form a network, such relatively conductive network will become more resistant to deformation during stretching owing to partial contact loss between adjacent chains. This is the theoretical basis for applying colloidal chains as strain sensors.695
Additionally, for Ag or Au NP chains, the increasing enhanced electromagnetic field (hot spots) between adjacent NPs largely strengthen signal of surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). The SERS enhancement factor can be as high as 106–107, which makes nanogram-scale detection possible (Fig. 25c).630,632,633 Moreover, the high sensitivity of colloidal chains may simply come from geometrically enhanced multiple docking sites or active centers compared to discrete NPs.696,697 This superiority is especially outstanding when two or more components are needed together to accomplish detection because of an increasing number of heterojunctions integrated in the chains of binary building blocks (Fig. 25d).689,698,699


3.2.2 Radiation absorption. 
The wide and rapid spread of electronic devices is accompanied by electromagnetic wave pollution, which causes severe electromagnetic interference as well as potential health issues. Metal,700,701 ferrites,702 conductive polymers,703 carbon materials,704 and ceramics646,705 have been introduced as radiation absorption materials based on their ability to generate magnetic and dielectric loss. 1D ferromagnets and ferrites are typical early stage prototypes to demonstrate that geometric anisotropy has profound influences on the effect of radiation absorption.706 Ni,706 Co,688,707 and Mn ferrite708 NPs assembling into 1D colloidal chains display an excellent absorption performance in the frequency region of gigahertz because of their enhanced magnetic loss. The minimal reflection loss can be nearly −40 dB,644 and the absorption bandwidth with a reflection loss less than −20 dB can be as wide as 10 GHz.708 However, high density of metals and ferrites, and their impedance matching problems between permeability and permittivity inevitably limit their practical application.
One way to overcome these limitations in metals and ferrites is to introduce hollow, porous, and yolk–shell structures into building blocks before or after their self-assembly into 1D colloidal chains in order to reduce their density (Fig. 26a).296,706,708 The other way is to combine metals or ferrites with materials having higher permittivity and dielectric loss. These materials can be in general non-conductive polymers such as PVP and poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), to enhance polarization losses.645,701,709–711 Conductive materials including carbon nanotubes,648,712 carbon nanofibers,296,642 graphene,650,713 and polypyrrole,714 are also commonly used to combine with 1D magnetic colloidal chains to improve their permeability-permittivity matching (Fig. 26b). Their minimal reflection loss can be reduced to −63 dB when coating a carbon layer on ferrite chains,296 and the absorption bandwidth with a reflection loss less than −10 dB can reach 14.8 GHz by embedding Fe/Fe3C chains in carbon nanotubes.648 These radiation absorption properties are remarkably enhanced comparing to non-composite magnetic colloidal chains.
 Fig. 26  1D colloidal chains applied for the absorption of electromagnetic waves. (a–a′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D chains with yolk–shell structure and their radiation absorption performance. (b–b′) Scheme and TEM image of FeCo/PVDF core–shell nanochains@graphene oxide composites and their electromagnetic wave-absorbing bandwidth. (c–c′) Scheme and SEM image of PVDF/MXene/Ni chain composite films and their electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness (EMI SE) with different film thicknesses. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 296 Copyright 2018, Tsinghua University Press and Springer; (b) ref. 701 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 649 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
A recently emerging conductive material worth emphasizing in the radiation absorption field is MXene. MXene is a booming family of 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides, showing efficient electron transport and dipole polarization properties.715 When compositing MXene with Ni chains and PVDF, the shielding effectiveness of the resulting composite can be up to 19.3 and 34.4 dB with a film thickness of only 0.10 and 0.36 mm, respectively (Fig. 26c).649 A Mxene/Co nanochains composite shows a minimal reflection loss of −46.48 dB with a thickness of 1.02 mm.716 Almost all current research of applying 1D nanochains to radiation absorption focus on light weight, impedance matching, and high electromagnetic wave absorption. When 1D colloidal chains come into practical applications, many more complicated factors, for instance, mechanical properties and durability have to be taken into consideration. And sometimes the radiation absorption property needs to be partially sacrificed as a compromise.


3.2.3 Catalysts. 
Excellent catalytic activity, selectivity, long term stability, recyclability and reusability are basic characteristics that must be taken into consideration when designing a catalyst. Commonly used strategies to improve the stability and catalytic activity of catalysts are endowing them with good dispersibility against aggregation, and increasing the number of active facets exposed to a substrate, respectively. 1D colloidal chains can be a versatile platform to immobilize tiny, nanoscale catalysts, thus preventing the catalyst from aggregation.428,715 Either loaded on existing 1D chains58,717,718 or catalysts themselves assembling into colloidal chains,719 the 1D chain-like structures provide more catalytically active sites and hot spots.720
Beside loading catalysts, 1D colloidal chains are also able to accelerate catalytic reactions from the aspects of charge transfer and mass transport. Conductive 1D structures made of carbon nanotubes,721–723 nanofibers,724 metal NPs,520,725–727 and their interlaced 3D networks721,728–730 serve as channels for directional flow of electrons. This facilitates charge transfer during catalytic reactions, thus, promoting the reaction kinetics (Fig. 27a). While the introduction of porous and hollow structures into 1D colloidal chains enhances mass transport and the availability of catalysts for substrates.89,731–733 Actually, the colloidal chains themselves could induce enhancement in chain center-of-mass diffusivity because of phoretic hydrodynamic flows and Brownian fluctuations, and this enhancement is found stronger in flexible chains.57 A more extensive approach to accelerating mass transfer is endowing catalyst-loaded 1D colloidal chains with magnetics properties, as this allows to use magnetic chains as micro stirrer to homogenize the catalysis solution under a rotating magnetic field. Metal NPs,142,312,732,734–737 quantum dots,738 enzymes739 and other catalysts740 have been introduced to such magnetic micro stirrers (Fig. 27b). The magnetic responsiveness also favors a quick recycling of 1D catalysts, leading to an improved reusability.
 Fig. 27  1D colloidal chains as catalysts. (a) Scheme of preparation of Co@Co9S8 chains, and their enhanced charge transfer resulting from 3D networks composed of conductive Co@Co9S8 colloidal chains. Such enhanced charge transfer reduces the overpotential of oxygen evolution. (b) Scheme of magnetotactic bacteria (AMB-1) used as micro stirrers to enhance the epoxidation of cyclooctene catalyzed by phosphotungstic acid in Pickering emulsion. Comparing to Pickering emulsion without AMB-1 stirrers or normal stirrers, AMB-1 can largely promote the conversion. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 725 Copyright 2018, ACS; (b) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence, ref. 278 Copyright 2018, the authors, published by RSC. 
Sometimes, more than one component is needed to catalyze a tandem reaction. 1D colloidal chains are an outstanding platform to integrate and glue multiple components together to perform more complex catalytic reactions.79,255,739,741,742 It has to be pointed out that in an excellent 1D catalyst, enhanced mass/charge transfer, multiple active sites, recyclability, and the synergistic effect of multiple components need to be comprehensively balanced, rather than focusing on only one of the aspects.735,743


3.2.4 Energy materials. 
Energy conversion and storage materials are hot topics in material science and engineering. Even though it is unrealistic to hope that 1D colloidal chain can deal with all challenges in this field, the anisotropic structure and its emergent and enhanced collective properties still provide potential solutions to selected problems encountered in current energy materials. For instance, matching the absorption spectrum of a photoelectrode in a solar cell with the solar radiation spectrum is a crucial way to improve the power conversion efficiency.744,745 Strong electronic coupling between nanocrystals in colloidal chains leads to a tunable alteration of the optical band gaps (Fig. 28a),197 which may better match the solar radiation spectrum.
 Fig. 28  1D colloidal chains used as energy materials. (a) Optical band gap tuned by inter-nanocrystal distance of 1D Perovskite chains, the structures with smaller inter-nanocrystal spacing show a smaller optical band gap. (b–b′′) Scheme and TEM image of a sulfur loaded ZIF-8@carbon nanotube network, and their cycling performance when used as electrodes for sodium-ion batteries. (c–c′) Scheme and SEM image of 1D Zn–Co–S yolk–shell chains embedded in a carbon nanotube/graphene film, and (c′′) their Ragone plot comparison with other materials. (d–d′′) Scheme and TEM image of MoS2 encapsulated in necklaced nanotubes (ANL MoS2@CNFs) to alleviate the volume expansion, and their cycling performance when used in lithium/sodium-ion batteries. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 197 Copyright 2019, ACS; (b) ref. 746 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 747 Copyright 2020, ACS; (d) ref. 748 Copyright 2020, RSC. 
Actually, 1D colloidal chains are more commonly applied as electrode materials for energy storage capacitors and lithium/sodium-ion batteries than applied in solar energy conversion. Typical capacitor materials, for example, transition metal oxides, feature lower energy storage capability than their theoretical capacity because of their poor intrinsic conductivity.313,749 Assembling capacitor materials, or co-assembling them with other conductive components such as CoB alloy and carbon nanofibers into 1D colloidal chains largely improves their practical capacitance.88,313,314,747,750,751
Similar to 1D chains in catalysts, charge transfer has also to be taken into consideration when using 1D colloidal chains as energy materials because electron/ion transport affects the high-rate performance of lithium/sodium-ion batteries.752 Therefore, electrode materials including LiCoO2,753 Fe3O4,297 FeS2754 and Au–Pt755 have been assembled into 1D colloidal chains, or integrated with carbon nanotubes746,756,757 and carbon nanofibers.758–760 These 1D structures further form 3D interconnected, electrically conductive networks to facilitate charge transfer (Fig. 28b). An additional advantage brought by 1D structures is that these materials can be processed to freestanding electrodes without binders, thus increasing the capacity density.305,757,758 Porous structures are also introduced to 1D colloidal chains to shorten the diffusion distance of electrons/ions, to improve exchange kinetics during charge-discharge cycles, and to expose an increasing number of electroactive sites (Fig. 28c).305,364,747,751,754,761
A widespread challenge existing in lithium/sodium-ion batteries is volumetric expansion of electrode materials in the course of lithium/sodium insertion/extraction. Loading nanoscale active materials into/onto 1D colloidal chains to downsize the dimensions of active components,743,759,762 and coating them with another material (usually a layer of carbon film) to suppress the expansion748,763 are two main strategies coupled with 1D colloidal chains to address this challenge (Fig. 28d). Introducing lithiophilic components such as titanium nitride764 and silver765,766 to smoothly deposit lithium/sodium on 1D structures, has been applied to protect electrodes from dendrites and solve short-circuiting problems brought by dendrites.


3.2.5 Biomedical applications. 
Cytotoxicity is a key aspect before putting any material into biomedical applications. Unfortunately, 1D structures with high length-diameter ratio typically reduce cell viability due to damage to the cell membrane as compared to spherical counterparts of the same material.767,768 Therefore, relatively short chains are always used within a cellular context, and a layer of biocompatible polymer,769 carbon770 or SiO2771 is coated on such chains to reduce their cytotoxicity. On the other hand, the cytotoxicity of long 1D colloidal chains can also be applied, for example to kill microbes (Fig. 29a).772 One more interesting property of 1D structure is its longer blood circulation than spherical particles,767,773 which is a dominant advantage when 1D nanochains are utilized to treat blood diseases such as leukemia (Fig. 29b)774 or to highly sensitively detect signal molecules in blood to help early disease diagnosis and prognosis.775
 Fig. 29  1D colloidal chains for biomedical applications. (a) Scheme and TEM image of the interactions of FeO NP@C nanochains with E. coli, and (a′) comparing to the magnetic nanochains without wash steps after each treatment, the nanochains with wash steps have higher loss of E. coli viability. (b) Scheme and TEM image of vincristine-loaded superparamagnetic anisotropic nano-assemblies (VCR-SANs). The VCR-SANs have a much longer mean residence time (MRT) in plasma compared to VCR and VCR-loaded isotropic nano-assemblies (VCR-SINs). (c) Compared to monodisperse spheres (S-MNPs-PPR) and clusters (C-MNPs-PPR) of Mn–Zn ferrite loading Cyclo(RGDyK) (PPR), 1D worm-like structures (W-MNPs-PPR) possess a higher relaxivity coefficient (r2), therefore show better negative contrast effects. (d–d′) Scheme of polydopamine-coated Au NPs and nanochains, and the comparison of intracellular dark field scattering images of HeLa cells incubated for 24 h with unassembled NPs and nanochains. (e) Scheme of Au NP chains coated with SiO2 and the H2O2-induced shift of chain plasmon resonance. (e′) Combined with laser radiation, such Au NP chains can effectively reduce the relative tumor volume, showing better tumor-microenvironment-activated theranostics behavior. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 772 Copyright 2014, ACS; (b) ref. 774 Copyright 2016, RSC; (c) ref. 776 Copyright 2019, ACS; (d) ref. 777 Copyright 2019, ACS; (e) ref. 778 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to utilizing the two above-mentioned characteristics of 1D structures, enhancement in magnetization of 1D magnetic colloidal chains, and red shift of longitudinal surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of 1D noble metal nanochains are two other categories of collective properties, which are most extensively used for biomedical applications. The increased magnetization and local magnetic field strength of 1D magnetic nanochains drive surrounding protons to transversely relax faster than protons around discrete magnetic particles. This results in an improved contrast ability of T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).770 The enhanced magnetization also leads to a faster magnetic responsiveness776 and a higher efficiency of magnetocaloric effect under an alternating magnetic field.275 All these enhanced effects together make Fe3O4, Fe2O3, Mn–Zn ferrite and Co based 1D magnetic colloidal chains an ideal platform for in vivo MRI (Fig. 29c), targeted drug delivery, ultrafast detection and separation of cells and proteins,775,779 and magnetic hyperthermia treatment of diseases such as inflammation and cancer.275,776,780–784 Magnetic nanochains have also worked as micro stirrers to generate shear force inside cells to inhibit cell differentiation under a rotating magnetic field.785
As to 1D noble metal colloidal chains, they can be designed such that the wavelength of their emerging LSPR red shifts to the second near-infrared (NIR-II) window. Combined with deeper penetration depth, lower optical absorption and scattering from biological tissue within NIR-II,786 Ag or Au NP chains with their multiple hot spots of plasmon coupling have served as an efficient photothermal agent for photoacoustic imaging (Fig. 29d), photothermal therapy and as photothermal bactericide.771,777,787–791
Additionally, 1D colloidal chains with multi-binding sites exhibit more binding opportunities to cell membranes compared to their spherical variants,775,777 which is especially useful for targeting low abundant tumor cells and delivering drugs for early diagnosis and treatment.575,792–794 Beside integrating multiple functions such as diagnosis and treatment into a signal chain, the other current focus of 1D colloidal chains for biomedical applications is endowing the platform with responsive and intelligent features. For instance, discrete Au NPs confined in a 1D SiO2 pocket only come in close contact to form Au NP chains when H2O2 is present in a tumor microenvironment. Such 1D Au NP chains show strong NIR-II absorption, which can convert light to heat for tumor-microenvironment-activated theranostics (Fig. 29e).778

4. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, we have comprehensively summarized how low dimensional building blocks can be organized to construct various 1D colloidal chains. The architectures of the 1D chains range from simple single component chains with specific orientation, via bi-/multi-component block chains, to alternating and sequence-controlled structures with defined length, width, interparticle distance, chirality and bundles. These 1D chains can be further assembled to higher hierarchical arrangements such as 2D arrays and 3D assemblies. The underlying strategies to assemble these 1D anisotropic structures mainly fall into two categories. In the first category chains are assembled from isotropic building blocks under directional guidance including field-, template- and ligand-directed assembly. The other category includes chains assembled from shape-/surface-anisotropic building blocks under non-directional force on nano/micro scales. Using the former strategy, except for DNA and confining templates, colloidal chains can be synthesized on a relatively large scale, but with a relatively low competence in controlling the sequence, length, and interparticle distance of the chains. The latter strategy shows better sequence controllability and reversibility of the chains, but lacks the ability to restrict their geometry. DNA and confining templates are able to assemble colloidal chains with precisely defined geometry and hierarchical parameters. Unfortunately, DNA and confining templates also face challenges in the aspect of scalable production. This limits them to the development of synthetic methodologies and exploring emergent and enhanced collective properties, but prevents them to some extent from practical real-life applications. Overall, the challenges and opportunities in terms of preparation of colloidal chains are to develop scalable, practical procedures to assemble 1D colloidal structures with specific orientation, particular sequence and precisely controlled geometric construction. This will lay a solid foundation for following research in properties and applications.
Colloidal chains share very similar growth mechanisms with polymerization in polymer science. Learning new concepts and methods in polymer science, for instance, controlled/“living” radical polymerization795 and sequence controlled polymerization,796 may generate new approaches to controlling the primary structure of colloidal chains. Biological processes in nature, such as protein and DNA/RNA synthesis, protein and DNA folding, may be used as inspiration for assembling nanochains into secondary and tertiary architectures with higher level complexity and hierarchies. Given that current 1D colloidal chains with relatively simple structures have already shown so many emergent properties, colloidal chains with specific secondary and tertiary structures will definitely bring more interesting properties. Thus, it is another exciting area to be explored.
Out-of-equilibrium self-assembly systems endow materials with programmability in the time domain, leading to interactive, adaptive and autonomous behavior. This distinguishes out-of-equilibrium materials from classic stimuli-responsive materials switching among different equilibrium states.600 Current magnetic/electric field, hydrodynamic and light-sustained self-assembly can generate some superstructures with out-of-equilibrium characters. Overall, these superstructures are still far away from natural out-of-equilibrium self-assembly systems in a number of ways. For instance, out-of-equilibrium self-assembly systems in nature mainly rely on enzyme cascades and enzymatic reaction networks rather than relatively simple external fields to realize spatiotemporally controlled self-organization. In these natural systems, complicated signal activation, inhibition, autocatalysis, feedback and feedforward are involved.797–803 Using these enzyme cascades and enzymatic reaction networks, natural out-of-equilibrium self-assembly systems create much more complicated superstructures with high level programmability, reconfigurability and diversity. The gap between current manmade out-of-equilibrium self-assembled 1D structures and natural systems is huge in the aspects of either triggering and sustaining mechanisms or variety of assembly forms. However, this gap also points out the direction where we can discover new land for colloidal assembly.
Predicting and demonstrating emergent and enhanced collective properties, and pursuing new synthetic approaches to novel 1D colloidal chains complement and improve with each other. Early theoretical calculations about monodomain magnetic particles804 foretold the self-assembly of these particles into 1D nanochains by in situ formed magnetic dipole–dipole attractions. Theoretical prediction inspired chemists to develop bottom-up methods to prepare satisfactory NPs and confirm the calculation. After having obtained so many kinds of building blocks and assembling them into colloidal chains with geometric structures, these new geometric structures exhibit emergent and enhanced collective properties, some of them are never found in building blocks or bulk materials. These emergent properties attract scientists to further explore underlying theories to support these new discoveries.
Basically, the relationship between 1D colloidal structures and electromagnetic, electronic and magnetic properties has been relatively well explored and understood. However, the adaptive properties of 1D nanochains are very difficult to describe quantitatively, as these properties involve switching between assembly and disassembly states, transforming from one conformation to another, and multiparameter interactions among colloidal chains, external stimuli and media need to be considered. As a result, current research on adaptive properties of colloidal chains mainly focuses on qualitatively profiling the behavior of nanochains in a specific scenario. Even so, such behaviors and properties are already complicated enough to delineate.670,672
Although we did not outline every detailed aspect of the applications of 1D nanochains, comparing the structures of colloidal chains in the section of synthesis with applications, one can easily find that the structures of chains used for applications are much simpler. Fine structures such as orientation, sequence, and defined geometric construction are rarely taken into consideration in applications. The vast gap implies that these fancy 1D structures need to be connected to practical applications. Many studies stop after obtaining colloidal chains with elegant architectures, and characterizing one of their emergent and enhanced collective properties, which is by no means insignificant. However, maybe it is the time to do it reversely. As colloidal engineers, we can communicate with researchers in the fields of practical material applications, listen to their demands, and design the structure of colloidal chains based on their requirements. Meanwhile, we still need to develop scalable, practical procedures to assemble 1D colloidal chains with precisely controlled structures, and be ready for the challenging demands from practical applications.
Author contributions
Both authors contributed to conceptualisation, investigation, and writing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge funding through the DFGWA-3084/4-2, the ERC Starting Grant “TimeProSAMat” (ID: 677960). X. F. acknowledges financial support from China Scholarship Council (CSC) and Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD). We thank Dr Leonie Driessen for language editing.
Notes and references
H. Zhang, K. Dasbiswas, N. B. Ludwig, G. Han, B. Lee, S. Vaikuntanathan and D. V. Talapin, Nature, 2017, 542, 328–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zalineeva, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and G. Jerkiewicz, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1600542 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Gao, W. Xu, Y. Ponce de León, Y. Bai, M. Gong, K. Xie, B. H. Park and Y. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701070 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Guan, A. Kushima, L. Yu, S. Li, J. Li and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605902 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Gao, Y. Hou, J. Zeng, L. Chen, C. Liu, W. Yang and M. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701095 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, R. Yu, H. Tang, D. Mao, J. Qi, B. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, W. Hu and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700550 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Li, H. Zhang, X. Fan, Y. Liu and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 259, 779–786 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fan, O. Voznyy, R. P. Sabatini, K. T. Bicanic, M. M. Adachi, J. R. McBride, K. R. Reid, Y. S. Park, X. Li and A. Jain, Nature, 2017, 544, 75–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Balazs, K. I. Bijlsma, H. H. Fang, D. N. Dirin, M. Döbeli, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao1558 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Nagaoka, K. Hills-Kimball, R. Tan, R. Li, Z. Wang and O. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606666 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chandra, G. Beaune, N. Shirahata and F. M. Winnik, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 1363–1370 RSC .
P. Shinde, S. S. Gupta, B. Singh, V. Polshettiwar and B. L. Prasad, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14914–14921 RSC .
J. C. Song, F. F. Xue, X. X. Zhang, Z. Y. Lu and Z. Y. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3761–3764 RSC .
Z. Gong, T. Hueckel, G. R. Yi and S. Sacanna, Nature, 2017, 550, 234–238 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fan, Y. Song, H. Liu, Z. Lu, F. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Meng, L. Gu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1603203 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, X. Jia, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, C. Li, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 703–713 RSC .
X. Fan, Y. Liu, X. Jia, S. Wang, C. Li, B. Zhang, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 95183–95190 RSC .
X. Fan, X. Jia, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, C. Li and Q. Zhang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11730–11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, X. Jia, J. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, B. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Eur. Polym. J., 2017, 92, 220–232 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, B. Zhang, J. Tan, X. Fan, Y. Liu, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 2653–2661 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Xue, Y. Ren, X. Fan, R. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 5852–5864 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Tan, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, X. Fan and Q. Zhang, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2015, 293, 993–1001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Fan, Y. Xue, Y. Liu, L. Song, R. Wang, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 6457–6463 RSC .
C. Li, X. Fan, L. Zhou, B. Zhang, D. Yin and Q. Zhang, J. Polym. Res., 2013, 20, 153 CrossRef .
X. Deng, K. Li, X. Cai, B. Liu, Y. Wei, K. Deng, Z. Xie, Z. Wu, P. A. Ma and Z. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701266 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, L. Luo, Y. Chen and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702707 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cargnello, A. C. Johnston-Peck, B. T. Diroll, E. Wong, B. Datta, D. Damodhar, V. V. Doan-Nguyen, A. A. Herzing, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2015, 524, 450–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, B. Zhang, W. Li, X. Li, X. Fan, X. Jia, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 27152–27158 RSC .
B. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Li, X. Lei, C. Li, D. Yin, X. Fan and Q. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2013, 33, 4401–4408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, B. Zhang, W. Li, X. Lei, X. Fan, L. Tian, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 51, 261–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Fan, X. Li, D. Yin and Q. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 398, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Tian, X. Li, W. Li, X. Fan, N. Ali and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 275, 235–244 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, X. Fan, Y. Liu, W. Li, L. Tian, L. Fan, B. Zhang, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60691–60697 RSC .
B. Zhang, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Lei, D. Yin, X. Fan and L. Zhou, J. Polym. Res., 2012, 19, 9986 CrossRef .
B. Zhang, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Fan, D. Yin, X. Li and W. Li, Particuology, 2013, 11, 574–580 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xing, Y. Bai, Y. Bai, L. H. Tan, J. Tao, B. Pedretti, G. A. Vincil, Y. Lu and S. C. Zimmerman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3623–3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, Z. W. Li, Z. Y. Sun and B. Khomami, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5199–5203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sierra-Pallares, T. Huddle, J. García-Serna, E. Alonso, F. Mato, I. Shvets, O. Luebben, M. J. Cocero and E. Lester, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 3377–3387 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, Q. Xue, B. Chen, Y. Xiong, J. Schneider, C. Zhi, H. Zhong and A. L. Rogach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9571–9576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Veneziano, S. Ratanalert, K. Zhang, F. Zhang, H. Yan, W. Chiu and M. Bathe, Science, 2016, 352, aaf4388 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. K. Dong, L. L. Han, J. Yang and X. W. Du, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6699–6703 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Altavilla and E. Ciliberto, Inorganic nanoparticles: synthesis, applications, and perspectives, CRC Press,  2016 Search PubMed .

          T. Cosgrove, Colloid science: principles, methods and applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2010 Search PubMed .

          F. Caruso, Colloids and colloid assemblies: synthesis, modification, organization and utilization of colloid particles, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
P. Illien, R. Golestanian and A. Sen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5508–5518 RSC .
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353, aac5523 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Boles, M. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, A. Agarwal, P. Manna, B. P. Khanal, P. Aldeanueva-Potel, E. Carbó-Argibay, N. Pazos-Pérez, L. Vigderman, E. R. Zubarev and N. A. Kotov, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8157–8161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, M. Ringler, A. Schwemer, D. V. Talapin, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3274–3275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tadepalli, J. M. Slocik, M. K. Gupta, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12705–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, M. Li and Y. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2544–2553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn and R. D. Meade, Photonic crystals: molding the flow of light, Princeton University Press,  2011 Search PubMed .
C. Yan and T. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1483–1509 RSC .
Z. Zhang, C. Geng, Z. Hao, T. Wei and Q. Yan, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 228, 105–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Vogel, M. Retsch, C. A. Fustin, A. del Campo and U. Jonas, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 6265–6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krajewski, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16511–16545 RSC .
B. Biswas, R. K. Manna, A. Laskar, P. B. S. Kumar, R. Adhikari and G. Kumaraswamy, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10025–10031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Kim, I. B. Shim, Z. O. Araci, S. S. Saavedra, O. L. Monti, N. R. Armstrong, R. Sahoo, D. N. Srivastava and J. Pyun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3234–3235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiao, X. Lei, Y. Ma, L. Tian, W. Wang, K. Su and Q. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 693, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, J. Yan, Y. Tan, H. Ma and J. Guan, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9548–9555 RSC .
H. Wang, Q. W. Chen, Y. B. Sun and M. Y. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19660–19666 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Chong, L. K. Chin, R. L. S. Tan, H. Wang, A. Q. Liu and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8570–8573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, Q. Ji, W. H. Chong, W. Xin, X. Liu and H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 18640–18645 RSC .
L. J. Hill, N. Pinna, K. Char and J. Pyun, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 40, 85–120 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuan and L. Cademartiri, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 607–615 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. He and Y. Yin, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kitching, M. J. Shiers, A. J. Kenyon and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6985–6999 RSC .
J. Yuan, Y. Xu and A. H. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 640–655 RSC .
L. Chen, B. Su and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 8–21 RSC .
S. Jang, K. Kim, J. Jeon, D. Kang and B. H. Sohn, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 6756–6760 RSC .
E. Elacqua, X. Zheng and M. Weck, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 1060–1065 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Gröschel, A. Walther, T. I. Löbling, F. H. Schacher, H. Schmalz and A. H. Müller, Nature, 2013, 503, 247–251 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, B. A. Grzybowski and S. Granick, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 6964–6977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tigges, T. Heuser, R. Tiwari and A. Walther, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7870–7874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Protopopova, R. I. Litvinov, D. K. Galanakis, C. Nagaswami, N. A. Barinov, A. R. Mukhitov, D. V. Klinov and J. W. Weisel, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13707–13716 RSC .
N. Shah and F. P. Zamborini, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10278–10286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, A. Lukach, K. Sugikawa, S. Chung, J. Vickery, H. Therien-Aubin, B. Yang, M. Rubinstein and E. Kumacheva, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2648–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gao, S. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Zheng, J. Jiang and S. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 916–924 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, V. Gutkin and M. Driess, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8018–8021 RSC .
W. Zhou, W. Chen, J. Nai, P. Yin, C. Chen and L. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3678–3683 CrossRef CAS .
M. Klokkenburg, C. Vonk, E. M. Claesson, J. D. Meeldijk, B. H. Erné and A. P. Philipse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16706–16707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pan, M. Jurow, Y. Zhao, F. Qiu, Y. Liu, J. Yang, J. J. Urban, L. He and Y. Liu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17688–17693 RSC .
Y. Qian and Q. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7183–7190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Pavlopoulos, J. T. Dubose, N. Pinna, M. G. Willinger, K. Char and J. Pyun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1787–1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, H. Cho, D. A. Wood, A. D. Dinsmore and S. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5095–5101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Li and B. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8649–8652 RSC .
Y. Kuroda, I. Muto, A. Shimojima, H. Wada and K. Kuroda, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9137–9143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, P. Jin, Y. Zhou and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16595–16599 RSC .
Q. Pang, S. Yang, C. Ge, Y. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Fang, J. Zhou, Z. Li and L. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 334–340 CrossRef .
H. Hou, L. Wang, F. Gao, G. Wei, J. Zheng, X. Cheng, B. Tang and W. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 2986–2991 RSC .
K. Han, D. Go, D. Hoenders, A. J. Kuehne and A. Walther, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 310–314 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Gröschel, F. H. Schacher, H. Schmalz, O. V. Borisov, E. B. Zhulina, A. Walther and A. H. Müller, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 710 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. R. Breed, V. N. Manoharan, L. Feng, A. D. Hollingsworth, M. Weck and D. J. Pine, Nature, 2012, 491, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Uchida, K. Abe, Y. Endo, S. Ichiseki, S. Akita, S. Liu, S. Aradachi, M. Saito, A. Fukuchi and T. Kikkawa, Small, 2017, 13, 1702158 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lin, J. Zhang, X. Peng, Z. Wu, A. C. Coughlan, Z. Mao, M. A. Bevan and Y. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700458 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Jones, K. L. Kohlstedt, M. N. O’Brien, J. Wu, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5830–5835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xiong, H. S. Kim, S. Zhang, S. Kim, V. F. Korolovych, R. Ma, Y. G. Yingling, C. Lu and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12008–12019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Halverson, Y. Tian, A. V. Tkachenko and O. Gang, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 867–873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, T. Xin, B. Zhang and X. Fan, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2013, 5, 623–629 CrossRef CAS .
K. Butter, P. Bomans, P. Frederik, G. Vroege and A. Philipse, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 88–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. De Gennes and P. Pincus, Phys. Kondens. Mater., 1970, 11, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chantrell, A. Bradbury, J. Popplewell and S. Charles, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, L119–L122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sheparovych, Y. Sahoo, M. Motornov, S. Wang, H. Luo, P. N. Prasad, I. Sokolov and S. Minko, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 591–593 CrossRef CAS .
H. Singh, P. E. Laibinis and T. A. Hatton, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 11500–11509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Vuppu, A. A. Garcia and M. A. Hayes, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 8646–8653 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ling, M. J. Hackett and T. Hyeon, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 457–477 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kango, S. Kalia, A. Celli, J. Njuguna, Y. Habibi and R. Kumar, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1232–1261 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, Y. Yan, J. Huang, A. V. Petukhov, L. M. Kroon-Batenburg, M. Drechsler, C. Zhou, M. Tu, S. Granick and L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bharti, F. Kogler, C. K. Hall, S. H. Klapp and O. D. Velev, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 7747–7758 RSC .
A. Demortiere, A. Snezhko, M. V. Sapozhnikov, N. Becker, T. Proslier and I. S. Aranson, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3117 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Banfield, S. A. Welch, H. Zhang, T. T. Ebert and R. L. Penn, Science, 2000, 289, 751–754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Luo, P. P. Wang, D. Jing and X. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1584–1591 RSC .
X. Fan, J. Liu, X. Jia, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Wang, B. Zhang, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2905–2922 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tan, C. Li, J. Zhou, C. Yin, B. Zhang, J. Gu and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 13334–13339 RSC .
M. Qiao, X. Lei, Y. Ma, L. Tian, K. Su and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 304, 552–562 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Lee, W. M. Guo, V. H. Ho, A. Saha, H. C. Chong, N. S. Tan, E. Widjaja, E. Y. Tan and S. C. J. Loo, Small, 2014, 10, 3986–3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vecchione, G. Iaccarino, P. Bianchini, R. Marotta, F. D'autilia, V. Quagliariello, A. Diaspro and P. A. Netti, Small, 2016, 12, 3005–3013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hofmeister, K. Landfester and A. Taden, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 327–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu, X. Wang, S. Song and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605051 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yan, M. Pan, J. Yuan, G. Liu, L. Cui, G. Zhang and L. Zhu, Polymer, 2017, 122, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. López-Ortega, A. G. Roca, P. Torruella, M. Petrecca, S. Estradé, F. Peiró, V. Puntes and J. Nogués, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8025–8031 CrossRef .
M. K. Park, S. Jun, I. Kim, S. M. Jin, J. G. Kim, T. J. Shin and E. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4570–4579 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lan, Y. Wu, A. Karas and O. A. Scherman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2166–2169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ravaine and E. Duguet, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 30, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walther and A. H. Müller, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5194–5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, M. Liu, M. He, D. J. Pine and M. Weck, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 5599–5603 CrossRef .
N. Li, A. Nikoubashman and A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 8433–8441 RSC .
J. Lee, K. H. Ku, M. Kim, J. M. Shin, J. Han, C. H. Park, G. R. Yi, S. G. Jang and B. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700608 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Klinger, C. X. Wang, L. A. Connal, D. J. Audus, S. G. Jang, S. Kraemer, K. L. Killops, G. H. Fredrickson, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7018–7022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Jang, D. J. Audus, D. Klinger, D. V. Krogstad, B. J. Kim, A. Cameron, S. W. Kim, K. T. Delaney, S. M. Hur and K. L. Killops, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6649–6657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, L. Wang and B. Liu, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 8024–8032 RSC .
T. Yang, L. Wei, L. Jing, J. Liang, X. Zhang, M. Tang, M. J. Monteiro, Y. I. Chen, Y. Wang and S. Gu, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 8579–8583 CrossRef .
B. G. van Ravensteijn and W. K. Kegel, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 490, 462–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. van Ravensteijn, M. Kamp, A. van Blaaderen and W. K. Kegel, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4348–4353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. T. McGinley and J. C. Crocker, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 3080–3087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tian, X. Li, P. Zhao, Z. Ali and Q. Zhang, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 7078–7085 RSC .
H. Wang, P. B. Zetterlund, C. Boyer, B. J. Boyd, S. W. Prescott and P. T. Spicer, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 8492–8501 RSC .
L. Han, X. Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4601–4605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, X. Li, L. Li and R. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 3642–3647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sutter, P. Sutter, A. V. Tkachenko, R. Krahne, J. De Graaf, M. Arciniegas and L. Manna, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Arciniegas, A. Castelli, L. Ceseracciu, P. Bianchini, S. Marras, R. Brescia and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6154–6163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ye, M. D. Regulacio, S. Y. Zhang, X. J. Loh and M. Y. Han, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6001–6017 RSC .
T. L. Nghiem, T. I. Löbling and A. H. Gröschel, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 1583–1592 RSC .
G. Chen, S. Wang, L. Song, X. Song and Z. Deng, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9773–9776 RSC .
S. Sagebiel, L. Stricker, S. Engel and B. J. Ravoo, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9296–9299 RSC .
S. Guo, J. Nozawa, S. Hu, H. Koizumi, J. Okada and S. Uda, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 10543–10549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Soetan, W. R. Erwin, A. M. Tonigan, D. G. Walker and R. Bardhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18186–18194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sreedhala and C. Vinod, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10178–10181 RSC .
T. Wang, J. Zhuang, J. Lynch, O. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Wang, D. LaMontagne, H. Wu, Z. Wang and Y. C. Cao, Science, 2012, 338, 358–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Huang, Z. M. Abbas and B. C. Benicewicz, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 5347–5350 RSC .
P. Y. Kim, J. W. Oh and J. M. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8030–8033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, Y. Alvi, V. Li and A. R. Tao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9434–9440 RSC .
S. Mokashi-Punekar, A. D. Merg and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15043–15048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Merg, J. Slocik, M. G. Blaber, G. C. Schatz, R. Naik and N. L. Rosi, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 9492–9501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Heuser, E. Weyandt and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13258–13262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Q. Luo, C. Hou and J. Liu, Nano Today, 2017, 14, 16–41 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sim, D. Miyajima, T. Niwa, H. Taguchi and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4658–4661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gerling, K. F. Wagenbauer, A. M. Neuner and H. Dietz, Science, 2015, 347, 1446–1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Wang and Q. Q. Ni, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 1029–1033 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, H. Wei, Y. Liu, D. Zhang, B. Zhang, W. Chu, C. Pham-Huu and D. S. Su, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12750–12753 RSC .
A. H. Bae, M. Numata, T. Hasegawa, C. Li, K. Kaneko, K. Sakurai and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2030–2033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bai, S. Yang, W. Bao, J. Kao, K. Thorkelsson, M. Salmeron, X. Zhang and T. Xu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6847–6854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Shiers, R. Leech, C. J. Carmalt, I. P. Parkin and A. J. Kenyon, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5227–5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Miele, S. Raj, Z. Baraissov, P. Král and U. Mirsaidov, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702682 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Huang, A. Toma, L. Zhong, Z. Cui, W. Shao, Z. Li, W. Liang, F. De Angelis and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700505 CrossRef .
T. Rostamzadeh, M. S. Islam Khan, K. Riche, Y. M. Lvov, A. V. Stavitskaya and J. B. Wiley, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 13051–13059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Merindol and A. Walther, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5588–5619 RSC .
T. Lee, K. Gizynski and B. A. Grzybowski, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704274 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, T. Si, Z. Wu, C. Gao, X. Lin and Q. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13517–13520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoshida, M. Takinoue, E. Iwase and H. Onoe, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 084905 CrossRef .
L. J. Hill, N. E. Richey, Y. Sung, P. T. Dirlam, J. J. Griebel, E. Lavoie-Higgins, I.-B. Shim, N. Pinna, M. G. Willinger, W. Vogel, B. Jason, C. Kookheon and P. Jeffrey, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3272–3284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, Y. Lu, S. Zhang, S. Guo, B. Lin, M. Zhang and S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11606–11607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, M. Bloom, S. C. Bae, E. Luijten and S. Granick, Nature, 2012, 491, 578–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, S. C. Bae and S. Granick, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 874–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Jeong, D. K. Lee, V. T. Tran, C. Wang, J. Lv, J. Park, Z. Tang and J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7152–7160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, S. Li, T. Zhang, H. Jiang and Y. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 36157–36170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Li and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5439–5448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Biswas, D. Mitra, F. Kp, S. Bhat, A. Chatterji and G. Kumaraswamy, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 19702–19711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. McMullan and N. J. Wagner, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4123–4130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Morales, B. Bharti, M. D. Dickey and O. D. Velev, Small, 2016, 12, 2283–2290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Qu, C. Jiang, Y. Liu, R. Pradeep Narayanan, D. Williams, X. Zuo, L. Wang, H. Yan and H. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8639–8646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, J. H. Huh, J. Lee, K. Kim, K. J. Park, S. Lee and Y. Ke, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901364 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Wang, J. H. Huh, H. Park, D. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Lee, S. Lee and Y. Ke, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8926–8932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pazos, E. Sleep, C. M. Rubert Pérez, S. S. Lee, F. Tantakitti and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5507–5510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, P. Qiu, Y. Li, N. Zhou, M. Yang and C. Mao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 5, 832–839 CrossRef .
T. A. Pham, A. Schreiber, S. M. Schiller and H. Cölfen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604532 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, K. Zhou, Y. Zhang, M. Du and Q. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901485 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chekini, E. Prince, L. Zhao, H. Mundoor, I. I. Smalyukh and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901911 CrossRef CAS .
J. Majoinen, J. Hassinen, J. S. Haataja, H. T. Rekola, E. Kontturi, M. A. Kostiainen, R. H. Ras, P. Törmä and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5262–5267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, I. Filpponen, P. Su, J. Laine and O. J. Rojas, Cellulose, 2016, 23, 3065–3075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Ng, T. A. König and A. Fery, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 8629–8645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, O. Aftenieva, T. Bayrak, A. Jain, T. A. König, A. Erbe and R. Seidel, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Lin, J. A. Mason, Z. Li, W. Zhou, M. N. O’Brien, K. A. Brown, M. R. Jones, S. Butun, B. Lee and V. P. Dravid, Science, 2018, 359, 669–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, R. Liu, Y. Wei, J. Wei and Z. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 11662–11669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Chen, X. Shen, L. Zhu, J. He and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 8145–8149 CrossRef .
J. H. Park, G. von Maltzahn, L. Zhang, M. P. Schwartz, E. Ruoslahti, S. N. Bhatia and M. J. Sailor, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1630–1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. T. Lee, T. Liyanage and R. Sardar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1526–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Grzelak, M. Tupikowska, D. Vila-Liarte, D. Beutel, M. Bagiński, S. Parzyszek, M. Góra, C. Rockstuhl, L. M. Liz-Marzán and W. Lewandowski, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, Z. Cao, Z. Zhang, R. Liu, F. Zhang, J. Wei and Z. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2022, 134, e202117406 Search PubMed .
F. Yang, X. Liu and Z. Yang, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 14792–14799 CrossRef .
C. Zhou, T. Sun, M. Gong, Z. Xu, L. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Du, X. Kang and Y. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 7323–7332 RSC .
J. F. Berengut, C. K. Wong, J. C. Berengut, J. P. Doye, T. E. Ouldridge and L. K. Lee, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 17428–17441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tigges and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11261–11265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yu and T. G. Mason, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabg3678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Zhu, J. Cai and H. Qiu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yao, J. Li, Q. Li, X. Chen, X. Liu, F. Wang, Z. Qu, Z. Ge, R. P. Narayanan and D. Williams, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 781–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, H. Emamy, B. Minevich, Y. Xiong, S. Xiang, S. Kumar, Y. Ke and O. Gang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17531–17542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Loescher and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5515–5520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Xu, D. Li, X. Ma and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4577–4580 RSC .
N. Y. Ahn, S. Kwon, S. Cho, C. Kang, J. Jeon, W. B. Lee, E. Lee, Y. Kim and M. Seo, ACS Macro Lett., 2022, 11, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, W. Li, E. Duguet and S. Ravaine, ACS Macro Lett., 2022, 11, 156–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Hwang, S. M. Jin, J. Nam and E. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 7878–7888 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, A. Lukach, K. Sugikawa, S. Chung, J. Vickery, H. Therien-Aubin, B. Yang, M. Rubinstein and E. Kumacheva, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2648–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thutupalli, D. Geyer, R. Singh, R. Adhikari and H. A. Stone, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5403–5408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Nan, F. Han, N. F. Scherer and Z. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803238 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Martínez-Pedrero, A. González-Banciella, A. Camino, A. Mateos-Maroto, F. Ortega, R. G. Rubio, I. Pagonabarraga and C. Calero, Small, 2021, 17, 2101188 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, P. K. J. Wong, D. Zhang, J. Yue, Z. Kou, G. van der Laan, A. Scholl, J. G. Zheng, Z. Lu and Y. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701265 CrossRef .
A. F. Demirörs, D. Courty, R. Libanori and A. R. Studart, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 4623–4628 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Singh, H. Chan, A. Baskin, E. Gelman, N. Repnin, P. Král and R. Klajn, Science, 2014, 345, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, M. Han, J. Zhang, C. Xu, E. Luijten and S. Granick, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1095–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Yan and S. Granick, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5166–5169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, T. H. Besseling, M. Hermes, A. F. Demirörs, A. Imhof and A. van Blaaderen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3092 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Kundu, D. Samanta, R. Leizrowice, B. Margulis, H. Zhao, M. Börner, T. Udayabhaskararao, D. Manna and R. Klajn, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 646–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, A. A. Shah and M. J. Solomon, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nych, U. Ognysta, M. Škarabot, M. Ravnik, S. Žumer and I. Muševič, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. McBride and C. Avendaño, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 2085–2098 RSC .
M. Chen, H. Cölfen and S. Polarz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6944–6950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Müller, R. Zentel, T. Maka, S. G. Romanov and S. Torres, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1499–1503 CrossRef .
C. E. Owens, C. W. Shields, D. F. Cruz, P. Charbonneau and G. P. López, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 717–728 RSC .
Y. Yang, A. T. Pham, D. Cruz, C. Reyes, B. J. Wiley, G. P. Lopez and B. B. Yellen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4725–4731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Caleap and B. W. Drinkwater, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6226–6230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Min, M. Akbulut, K. Kristiansen, Y. Golan and J. Israelachvili, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 527–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Luo, C. Yan and T. Wang, Small, 2015, 11, 5984–6008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Faraudo, J. S. Andreu, C. Calero and J. Camacho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3837–3858 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singamaneni, V. N. Bliznyuk, C. Binek and E. Y. Tsymbal, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16819–16845 RSC .
K. M. Krishnan, A. B. Pakhomov, Y. Bao, P. Blomqvist, Y. Chun, M. Gonzales, K. Griffin, X. Ji and B. K. Roberts, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 793–815 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Coffey and Y. P. Kalmykov, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 121301 CrossRef .
M. Trau, D. Saville and I. Aksay, Science, 1996, 272, 706–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. D. Velev and K. H. Bhatt, Soft Matter, 2006, 2, 738–750 RSC .
A. A. Shah, H. Kang, K. L. Kohlstedt, K. H. Ahn, S. C. Glotzer, C. W. Monroe and M. J. Solomon, Small, 2012, 8, 1551–1562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hayward, D. Saville and I. Aksay, Nature, 2000, 404, 56–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. B. Jones, Electromechanics of particles, Cambridge University Press,  2005 Search PubMed .
J. de Vicente, D. J. Klingenberg and R. Hidalgo-Alvarez, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 3701–3710 RSC .
T. C. Halsey, Science, 1992, 258, 761–766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1847–1857 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Taheri, M. Michaelis, T. Friedrich, B. Förster, M. Drechsler, F. M. Römer, P. Bösecke, T. Narayanan, B. Weber and I. Rehberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 14484–14489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Rozynek, M. Han, F. Dutka, P. Garstecki, A. Józefczak and E. Luijten, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Thomas, J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 37, 2914–2915 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Puntes, K. M. Krishnan and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 291, 2115–2117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. F. Puntes, D. Zanchet, C. K. Erdonmez and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12874–12880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Klokkenburg, R. P. Dullens, W. K. Kegel, B. H. Erné and A. P. Philipse, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 037203 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Varón, M. Beleggia, T. Kasama, R. Harrison, R. Dunin-Borkowski, V. Puntes and C. Frandsen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1234 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Y. Keng, B. Y. Kim, I. B. Shim, R. Sahoo, P. E. Veneman, N. R. Armstrong, H. Yoo, J. E. Pemberton, M. M. Bull and J. J. Griebel, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3143–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, H. Ge, X. Wang, C. Dong, W. Dong, M. S. Riaz, Z. Xu, J. Zhang and F. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Liu, L. Guo, R. M. Wang, Y. Deng, H. B. Xu and S. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2726–2727 RSC .
L. He, W. Zheng, W. Zhou, H. Du, C. Chen and L. Guo, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 036216 CrossRef .
H. Tang, X. Zhan, Z. Wu, Y. Du, A. Talbi and P. Pernod, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2015, 377, 472–476 CrossRef CAS .
J. Knipping, H. Wiggers, B. Kock, T. Hülser, B. Rellinghaus and P. Roth, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, J. C. Yu, Y. X. J. Wang and K. M. Chan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2579–2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen and C. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2016, 166, 188–191 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Huang, Q. Zhang, D. F. Zhang, J. Zhou, C. Si, L. Guo, W. S. Chu and Z. Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6872–6879 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tong, Y. Liu, T. Wu, Y. Ye and C. Tong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16493–16503 RSC .
J. Lu, X. Jiao, D. Chen and W. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4012–4017 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, S. Li, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Liu and Z. Tong, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3514–3516 RSC .
M. R. Gao, S. R. Zhang, J. Jiang, Y. R. Zheng, D. Q. Tao and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16888–16892 RSC .
H. Ni, X. Sun, Y. Li and C. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 4270–4279 CrossRef CAS .
P. Y. Keng, M. M. Bull, I. B. Shim, K. G. Nebesny, N. R. Armstrong, Y. Sung, K. Char and J. Pyun, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1120–1129 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, F. Liang, X. Wen, S. Yang, L. He, W. Zheng, C. Chen and Q. Zhong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 425–430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou and Q. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 8622–8629 RSC .
Y. Xiong, J. Ye, X. Gu and Q. W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6998–7003 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. F. Huang, L. Guo, W. M. Chen, W. S. Chu, C. Chen and Z. Y. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5643–5649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ahmed, R. P. Laarman, C. Hellenthal, E. S. Kooij, A. van Silfhout and B. Poelsema, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6711–6713 RSC .
L. Wang, X. Lu, J. Wang, S. Yang and X. Song, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 681, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mandawala, I. Chebbi, M. Durand-Dubief, R. Le Fèvre, Y. Hamdous, F. Guyot and E. Alphandéry, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7644–7660 RSC .
E. Alphandéry, Y. Ding, A. T. Ngo, Z. L. Wang, L. F. Wu and M. P. Pileni, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1539–1547 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Huízar-Félix, D. Muñoz, I. Orue, C. Magén, A. Ibarra, J. M. Barandiarán, A. Muela and M. L. Fdez-Gubieda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 063109 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, C. Chen, C. Cao, T. Song, H. Yang and W. Song, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 2575–2580 RSC .
I. Orue, L. Marcano, P. Bender, A. García-Prieto, S. Valencia, M. Mawass, D. Gil-Cartón, D. A. Venero, D. Honecker and A. García-Arribas, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7407–7419 RSC .
S. L. Tripp, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski and A. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5591–5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kasama, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, M. R. Scheinfein, S. L. Tripp, J. Liu and A. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4248–4252 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Tripp, S. V. Pusztay, A. E. Ribbe and A. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7914–7915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Ding, Z. Li, H. Zhou, B. Zhao, J. G. Wan, F. Song and G. H. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10805–10813 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. W. Chen, Y. B. Sun, M. S. Wang, L. X. Sun and W. S. Yan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5957–5962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wei, T. Kasama and R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16686–16693 RSC .
L. J. Hill, N. E. Richey, Y. Sung, P. T. Dirlam, J. J. Griebel, I. B. Shim, N. Pinna, M. G. Willinger, W. Vogel, K. Char, C. Kookheon and P. Jeffrey, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9461–9468 RSC .
A. Hernando, P. Crespo, M. García, E. F. Pinel, J. de La Venta, A. Fernández and S. Penadés, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 74, 052403 CrossRef .
P. Crespo, R. Litrán, T. Rojas, M. Multigner, J. De la Fuente, J. Sánchez-López, M. García, A. Hernando, S. Penadés and A. Fernández, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 087204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Carmeli, G. Leitus, R. Naaman, S. Reich and Z. Vager, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 10372–10375 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Garitaonandia, M. Insausti, E. Goikolea, M. Suzuki, J. D. Cashion, N. Kawamura, H. Ohsawa, I. Gil de Muro, K. Suzuki and F. Plazaola, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 661–667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hori, Y. Yamamoto, T. Iwamoto, T. Miura, T. Teranishi and M. Miyake, Phys. Rev. B, 2004, 69, 174411 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, L. Sun, Y. Fu, Z. C. Huang, X. J. Bai, Y. Zhai, J. Du and H. R. Zhai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8152–8157 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, S. Wang and R. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5352–5357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, P. Liu and G. Yang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 5847–5855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, M. Qiao, C. Hou, Y. Chen, M. Ma, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 103064–103072 RSC .
M. Qiao, X. Lei, Y. Ma, L. Tian, X. He, K. Su and Q. Zhang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1500–1519 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Gao, L. Mao, Y. Hu and X. W. D. Lou, Small, 2014, 10, 2815–2819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Bonifacio, G. Das, I. M. Kennedy and K. van Benthem, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 234303 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ekeroth, E. P. Münger, R. Boyd, J. Ekspong, T. Wagberg, L. Edman, N. Brenning and U. Helmersson, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3132–3137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kralj and D. Makovec, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9700–9707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Bannwarth, S. Utech, S. Ebert, D. A. Weitz, D. Crespy and K. Landfester, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2720–2728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Rossi, J. G. Donaldson, J. M. Meijer, A. V. Petukhov, D. Kleckner, S. S. Kantorovich, W. T. Irvine, A. P. Philipse and S. Sacanna, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 1080–1087 RSC .
K. Han, C. W. Shields IV, N. M. Diwakar, B. Bharti, G. P. López and O. D. Velev, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701108 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, L. Gao, G. P. Lopez and B. B. Yellen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2705–2716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. V. Timonen, A. Carlson, D. M. Drotlef, C. T. Zhang, S. Kolle, A. Grinthal, T. S. Wong, B. Hatton and S. H. Kang, Nature, 2018, 559, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barcikowski, T. Baranowski, Y. Durmus, U. Wiedwald and B. Gökce, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10699–10704 RSC .
C. Li, J. Tan, H. Li, J. Gu, B. Zhang and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 28735–28742 RSC .
M. B. Bannwarth, S. W. Kazer, S. Ulrich, G. Glasser, D. Crespy and K. Landfester, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10107–10111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, Y. S. Choi, H. J. Lee, H. Yoon, Y. K. Kim and M. Oh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7617–7620 RSC .
M. Ma, Q. Zhang, J. Dou, H. Zhang, W. Geng, D. Yin and S. Chen, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2012, 290, 1207–1213 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, Y. Ma, B. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. Geng and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 3083–3090 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Wu, B. Yang, Q. Zhang and B. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 97882–97889 RSC .
J. Yan, H. Wang, S. Ji, B. G. Pollet and R. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7813–7820 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Yan, R. Wang, S. Li, D. J. Brett, J. Key and S. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 92–96 RSC .
M. Tadic, S. Kralj, Y. Lalatonne and L. Motte, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 476, 641–646 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Park, D. Shindo, Y. Waseda and T. Sugimoto, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1996, 177, 198–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sacanna, L. Rossi and D. J. Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6112–6115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee and C. M. Liddell, Small, 2009, 5, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Malik, A. Pal, O. Pravaz, J. J. Crassous, S. Granville, B. Grobety, A. M. Hirt, H. Dietsch and P. Schurtenberger, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14405–14413 RSC .
B. B. Yellen, R. M. Erb, D. S. Halverson, O. Hovorka and G. Friedman, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2006, 42, 3548–3553 Search PubMed .
M. D. Krebs, R. M. Erb, B. B. Yellen, B. Samanta, A. Bajaj, V. M. Rotello and E. Alsberg, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1812–1817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hejazian and N. T. Nguyen, Lab Chip, 2015, 15, 2998–3005 RSC .
J. V. Timonen, A. F. Demirörs and B. A. Grzybowski, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3453–3459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, Y. Hu, H. Kim, J. Ge, S. Kwon and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4708–4714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Y. Mao and J. Ge, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1598–1605 RSC .
M. Jadav and R. Patel, AIP Conf. Proc., 2015, 1665, 040015 CrossRef .
K. S. Khalil, A. Sagastegui, Y. Li, M.
A. Tahir, J. E. Socolar, B. J. Wiley and B. B. Yellen, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 794 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Colla, P. S. Mohanty, S. Nöjd, E. Bialik, A. Riede, P. Schurtenberger and C. N. Likos, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4321–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shih, J. J. Molina and R. Yamamoto, Soft Matter, 2018, 14, 4520–4529 RSC .
P. S. Mohanty, A. Yethiraj and P. Schurtenberger, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 10819–10822 RSC .
M. E. Leunissen, H. R. Vutukuri and A. van Blaaderen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3116–3120 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Edwards, D. J. Beltran-Villegas and M. A. Bevan, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 9208–9218 RSC .
J. J. Juárez, S. E. Feicht and M. A. Bevan, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 94–103 RSC .
S. O. Lumsdon, E. W. Kaler and O. D. Velev, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 2108–2116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mittal, P. P. Lele, E. W. Kaler and E. M. Furst, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 064513 CrossRef PubMed .
H. R. Vutukuri, F. Smallenburg, S. Badaire, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra and A. van Blaaderen, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 9110–9119 RSC .
B. Bharti, G. H. Findenegg and O. D. Velev, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 1004 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Crassous, A. M. Mihut, E. Wernersson, P. Pfleiderer, J. Vermant, P. Linse and P. Schurtenberger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Shah, B. Schultz, W. Zhang, S. C. Glotzer and M. J. Solomon, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, A. D. Hollingsworth, M. Weck, D. J. Pine and M. D. Ward, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3069–3075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kamp, N. A. Elbers, T. Troppenz, A. Imhof, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij and A. van Blaaderen, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1040–1048 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gangwal, A. Pawar, I. Kretzschmar and O. D. Velev, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1413–1418 RSC .
W. Ristenpart, I. Aksay and D. Saville, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 128303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bharti, G. H. Findenegg and O. D. Velev, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6577–6587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Singh, P. P. Lele, F. Nettesheim, N. J. Wagner and E. M. Furst, Phys. Rev. E, 2009, 79, 050401 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Nagao, M. Sugimoto, A. Okada, H. Ishii, M. Konno, A. Imhof and A. van Blaaderen, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6546–6550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 13201–13207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sacanna, W. Irvine, P. M. Chaikin and D. J. Pine, Nature, 2010, 464, 575–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jia, S. Sacanna and S. S. Lee, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 5724–5730 RSC .
A. van Blaaderen, M. Dijkstra, R. van Roij, A. Imhof, M. Kamp, B. Kwaadgras, T. Vissers and B. Liu, Eur. Phys. J.: Spec. Top., 2013, 222, 2895–2909 Search PubMed .
N. Yanai, M. Sindoro, J. Yan and S. Granick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 34–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Vutukuri, A. F. Demirörs, B. Peng, P. D. van Oostrum, A. Imhof and A. van Blaaderen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11249–11253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Griffin and C. D. Ferris, Nature, 1970, 226, 152–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Giner, M. Sancho, R. Lee, G. Martinez and R. Pethig, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1999, 32, 1182 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ruditskiy, B. Ren and I. Kretzschmar, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 9174–9181 RSC .
R. Kastilani, R. Wong and L. D. Pozzo, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 826–836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Torimoto, M. Yamashita, S. Kuwabata, T. Sakata, H. Mori and H. Yoneyama, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8799–8803 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Warner and J. E. Hutchison, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 272–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nakao, H. Shiigi, Y. Yamamoto, S. Tokonami, T. Nagaoka, S. Sugiyama and T. Ohtani, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1391–1394 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moeinian, F. N. Gür, J. Gonzalez-Torres, L. Zhou, V. D. Murugesan, A. D. Dashtestani, H. Guo, T. L. Schmidt and S. Strehle, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1061–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Patolsky, Y. Weizmann, O. Lioubashevski and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2323–2327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, R. K. Kankala, J. Ma, Y. Zhou, S. B. Wang and A. Z. Chen, Biomacromolecules, 2021, 22, 540–545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, S. Helmi, J. Teske and R. Seidel, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2707–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Jin, J. H. Hwang, K. Wang, J. Xu, I. Kim, J. Zhu and E. Lee, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 3032–3039 RSC .
H. Agrawal and E. C. Garnett, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11009–11016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, V. Gupta, M. Kumar, J. Schubert, P. T. Probst, J. Joseph and T. A. König, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13752–13760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, G. Cheng, Z. Man, Y. Xu, S. Zhou, J. Bian, Z. Lu and W. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005979 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Braun, Y. Eichen, U. Sivan and G. Ben-Yoseph, Nature, 1998, 391, 775–778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Richter, R. Seidel, R. Kirsch, M. Mertig, W. Pompe, J. Plaschke and H. K. Schackert, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 507–510 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Ford, O. Harnack, A. Yasuda and J. M. Wessels, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1793–1797 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, M. Jiang and D. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8744–8747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, Y. Li, J. Xu, X. Huang and D. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 6134–6138 RSC .
L. Xu, H. Yin, W. Ma, H. Kuang, L. Wang and C. Xu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 67, 472–476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Xu, L. M. Liz-Marzán, H. Kuang, W. Ma, A. Asenjo-García, F. J. García de Abajo, N. A. Kotov, L. Wang and C. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 641–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ren, J. Wang, C. Song, Q. Li, Y. Yang, N. Teng, S. Su, D. Zhu, W. Huang and J. Chao, Research, 2019, 2019, 7403580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuzyk, R. Schreiber, Z. Fan, G. Pardatscher, E. M. Roller, A. Högele, F. C. Simmel, A. O. Govorov and T. Liedl, Nature, 2012, 483, 311–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, T. Liu, Z. Wang, A. O. Govorov, H. Yan and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11763–11770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Alivisatos, K. P. Johnsson, X. Peng, T. E. Wilson, C. J. Loweth, M. P. Bruchez Jr and P. G. Schultz, Nature, 1996, 382, 609–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fire and S. Q. Xu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1995, 92, 4641–4645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Russell, K. Welch, J. Jarvius, Y. Cai, R. Brucas, F. Nikolajeff, P. Svedlindh and M. Nilsson, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1147–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheglakov, Y. Weizmann, A. B. Braunschweig, O. I. Wilner and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 126–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Beyer, P. Nickels and F. C. Simmel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 719–722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deng, Y. Tian, S. H. Lee, A. E. Ribbe and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3582–3585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shiraishi, L. Yu, Y. Akiyama, G. Wang, T. Kikitsu, K. Miyamura, T. Takarada and M. Maeda, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800189 CrossRef .
M. M. Ali, P. Kanda, S. D. Aguirre and Y. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2052–2056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Weizmann, F. Patolsky, I. Popov and I. Willner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumari, A. Solanki, S. Mandal, D. Subramanyam and P. Das, Bioconjugate Chem., 2018, 29, 1500–1504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Loescher, S. Groeer and A. Walther, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10436–10448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu and T. Liedl, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3032–3053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pal, Z. Deng, B. Ding, H. Yan and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Westover, B. R. Aryal, D. R. Ranasinghe, B. Uprety, J. N. Harb, A. T. Woolley and R. C. Davis, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 6661–6667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dai and P. K. Lo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5431–5435 RSC .
C. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Dong, C. Zhou and Q. Wang, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 14963–14968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Le, Y. Pinto, N. C. Seeman, K. Musier-Forsyth, T. A. Taton and R. A. Kiehl, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2343–2347 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Lau, G. D. Hamblin and H. F. Sleiman, Small, 2014, 10, 660–666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, S. Liu, T. Zhou, H. Zhang, F. Wang, G. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Liu, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 8904–8909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schreiber, N. Luong, Z. Fan, A. Kuzyk, P. C. Nickels, T. Zhang, D. M. Smith, B. Yurke, W. Kuang and A. O. Govorov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2948 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hartl, K. Frank, H. Amenitsch, S. Fischer, T. Liedl and B. Nickel, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2609–2615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Urban, P. K. Dutta, P. Wang, X. Duan, X. Shen, B. Ding, Y. Ke and N. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5495–5498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sharma, R. Chhabra, A. Cheng, J. Brownell, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Science, 2009, 323, 112–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Corra, M. S. Shoshan and H. Wennemers, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2017, 40, 138–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, C. F. Anderson, Z. Wang, W. Wu, H. Cui and C. J. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3310–3324 RSC .
C. J. Munro and M. R. Knecht, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2018, 12, 63–68 CrossRef .
V. Mikhalevich, I. Craciun, M. Kyropoulou, C. G. Palivan and W. Meier, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 3471–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wei, Z. Su, N. P. Reynolds, P. Arosio, I. W. Hamley, E. Gazit and R. Mezzenga, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4661–4708 RSC .
M. P. Hendricks, K. Sato, L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2440–2448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Knowles and R. Mezzenga, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6546–6561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Chen and N. L. Rosi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1924–1942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, Y. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Sha, L. Gui, L. Lai and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 902–906 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sharma, A. Top, K. L. Kiick and D. J. Pochan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7078–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Li and S. I. Stupp, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 1867–1870 CrossRef .
N. Ostrov and E. Gazit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3018–3021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, J. Zheng, J. Feng, Q. Qian and Y. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11378–11381 RSC .
M. Diaz Caballero, S. Navarro, I. Fuentes, F. Teixidor and S. Ventura, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5394–5407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Min, S. W. Lee, E. H. Lee, Y. S. Lee, H. Yi and D. P. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705729 CrossRef .
S. Ray, A. K. Das and A. Banerjee, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2816–2818 RSC .
E. Pazos, E. Sleep, C. M. Rubert Pérez, S. S. Lee, F. Tantakitti and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5507–5510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Cao, S. Guan, G. Shi, Q. Luo, L. Miao, I. Thistlethwaite, Z. Huang, J. Xu and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2575–2581 RSC .
Y. Feng, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, M. Meng, J. Mi, H. Yin and L. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2432–2442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gong, F. Li, C. Yang and X. Wan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 20369–20373 RSC .
C. L. Chen, P. Zhang and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13555–13557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Song, H. C. Fry and N. L. Rosi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 941–945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hwang, C. L. Chen and N. L. Rosi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 47, 185–187 RSC .
A. D. Merg, J. C. Boatz, A. Mandal, G. Zhao, S. Mokashi-Punekar, C. Liu, X. Wang, P. Zhang, P. C. van der Wel and N. L. Rosi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13655–13663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Song, M. G. Blaber, G. Zhao, P. Zhang, H. C. Fry, G. C. Schatz and N. L. Rosi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3256–3261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kang, Y. T. Kim, Y. S. Ko, N. H. Kim, G. Cho, Y. H. Huh, J. H. Kim, J. Nam, T. T. Thach and D. Youn, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6554–6562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Scheibel, R. Parthasarathy, G. Sawicki, X. M. Lin, H. Jaeger and S. L. Lindquist, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 4527–4532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hou, Y. Niu, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, R. Chen, T. Ma and F. Gao, Nano, 2016, 11, 1650063 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bolisetty, C. S. Boddupalli, S. Handschin, K. Chaitanya, J. Adamcik, Y. Saito, M. G. Manz and R. Mezzenga, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15, 2793–2799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jayarajan, R. Kumar, J. Gupta, G. Dev, P. Kadu, D. Chatterjee, D. Bahadur, D. Maiti and S. K. Maji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4486–4493 RSC .
L. Hou, Y. Niu, Y. Jiang, T. Jiao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhou and F. Gao, Colloid Surf., A, 2019, 573, 6–13 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saif and P. Yang, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 1156–1177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manuguri, K. Webster, N. A. Yewdall, Y. An, H. Venugopal, V. Bhugra, A. Turner, L. J. Domigan, J. A. Gerrard and D. E. Williams, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5138–5145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, Y. J. Choe, Y. S. Choi, G. Bhak, J. Lee and S. R. Paik, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 1368–1373 CrossRef .
P. Qiu, L. Wang, Y. Li and C. Mao, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, P. Qiu, T. Yang, N. Zhou, M. Zhai, Y. Li, Y. Zhou, S. Zou, M. Yang and C. Mao, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2097–2105 RSC .
C. Mao, D. J. Solis, B. D. Reiss, S. T. Kottmann, R. Y. Sweeney, A. Hayhurst, G. Georgiou, B. Iverson and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2004, 303, 213–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Olszewska-Widdrat, M. Bennet, F. Mickoleit, M. Widdrat, C. Tarabout, V. Reichel, K. Arndt, D. Schüler and D. Faivre, ChemNanoMat, 2021, 7, 942–949 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, J. S. Nam, K. Kim, E. J. Choi, J. M. Lee, S. Maruyama, I. Jeon and J. W. Oh, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 488–496 RSC .
A. Schreiber, M. C. Huber, H. Cölfen and S. M. Schiller, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Liljeström, A. Ora, J. Hassinen, H. T. Rekola, M. Heilala, V. Hynninen, J. J. Joensuu, R. H. Ras, P. Törmä and O. Ikkala, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 671 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chakraborty, Nonappa, B. Mondal, K. Chaudhari, H. Rekola, V. Hynninen, M. A. Kostiainen, R. H. Ras and T. Pradeep, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 3256–3267 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chekini, E. Prince, L. Zhao, H. Mundoor, I. I. Smalyukh and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901911 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kontturi, P. Laaksonen, M. B. Linder, A. H. Gröschel, O. J. Rojas and O. Ikkala, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703779 CrossRef PubMed .
H. W. Ko, T. Higuchi, C. W. Chang, M. H. Cheng, K. Isono, M. H. Chi, H. Jinnai and J. T. Chen, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 5428–5436 RSC .
S. H. Xu, G. T. Fei, Q. You, X. D. Gao, P. C. Huo and L. De Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 375601 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lin, J. A. Mason, Z. Li, W. Zhou, M. N. O’Brien, K. A. Brown, M. R. Jones, S. Butun, B. Lee and V. P. Dravid, Science, 2018, 359, 669–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jana, A. B. Vasista, H. Jog, R. P. Tripathi, M. Allen, J. Allen and G. P. Kumar, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3799–3803 RSC .
D. Guo, Y. Li, X. Zheng, F. Li, S. Chen, M. Li, Q. Yang, H. Li and Y. Song, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 18–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ni, J. Leemann, I. Buttinoni, L. Isa and H. Wolf, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501779 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mayer, P. L. Potapov, D. Pohl, A. M. Steiner, J. Schultz, B. Rellinghaus, A. Lubk, T. A. König and A. Fery, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3854–3862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Bayrak, S. Helmi, J. Ye, D. Kauert, J. Kelling, T. Schönherr, R. Weichelt, A. Erbe and R. Seidel, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2116–2123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, J. W. de Folter, J. Huang, A. P. Philipse, W. K. Kegel and A. V. Petukhov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3364–3368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. De Folter, P. Liu, L. Jiang, A. Kuijk, H. E. Bakker, A. Imhof, A. van Blaaderen, J. Huang, W. K. Kegel and A. P. Philipse, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 313–320 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. h. Do, A. Missaoui, A. Coati, D. Coursault, H. Jeridi, A. Resta, N. Goubet, M. M. Wojcik, A. Choux and S. Royer, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1598–1606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, D. P. Song, A. Ribbe and J. J. Watkins, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 5293–5300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sanwaria, A. Horechyy, D. Wolf, C. Y. Chu, H. L. Chen, P. Formanek, M. Stamm, R. Srivastava and B. Nandan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9090–9093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Naik, S. J. Stringer, G. Agarwal, S. E. Jones and M. O. Stone, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 169–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Schedl, P. T. Probst, C. Meichner, C. Neuber, L. Kador, A. Fery and H. W. Schmidt, Soft Matter, 2019, 15, 3872–3878 RSC .
T. D. Edwards, Y. Yang, W. N. Everett and M. A. Bevan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13612 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Rose, T. Vinod and S. A. Morin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12031–12037 RSC .
K. E. Sung, S. A. Vanapalli, D. Mukhija, H. A. McKay, J. Mirecki Millunchick, M. A. Burns and M. J. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1335–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. W. Zhang, C. F. Wang, D. A. Weitz and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803475 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Gole, Z. Yin, M. C. Wang, W. Lin, Z. Zhou, J. Leem, S. Takekuma, C. J. Murphy and S. Nam, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 12232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, C. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15348–15352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Su, Z. Huang, Z. Li, F. Li, Q. Pan, W. Ren, X. Hu and L. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22374–22380 RSC .
C. Yan, B. Su, Y. Shi and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 13–26 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang and L. Jiang, Acc. Mater. Res., 2020, 1, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, B. Hu, Z. Du, Y. Wu and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28520–28526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Horn, H. G. Schoberth, S. Hiltl, A. Chiche, Q. Wang, A. Schweikart, A. Fery and A. Böker, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 143, 143–150 RSC .
C. Lu, H. Möhwald and A. Fery, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1530–1536 RSC .
A. Schweikart, A. Fortini, A. Wittemann, M. Schmidt and A. Fery, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5860–5863 RSC .
C. Hanske, M. B. Müller, V. Bieber, M. Tebbe, S. Jessl, A. Wittemann and A. Fery, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 16745–16750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hanske, M. Tebbe, C. Kuttner, V. Bieber, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Chanana, T. A. König and A. Fery, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6863–6871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tebbe, M. Mayer, B. A. Glatz, C. Hanske, P. T. Probst, M. B. Müller, M. Karg, M. Chanana, T. A. König and C. Kuttner, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 181, 243–260 RSC .
C. M. Stafford, C. Harrison, K. L. Beers, A. Karim, E. J. Amis, M. R. VanLandingham, H. C. Kim, W. Volksen, R. D. Miller and E. E. Simonyi, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 545–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. Ye, S. D. Evans, Y. Ge, Z. Zhu, Y. Tu and X. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1704015 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Gu, L. Zhang and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 474–484 RSC .
S. Adireddy, C. E. Carbo, T. Rostamzadeh, J. M. Vargas, L. Spinu and J. B. Wiley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4614–4617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lvov, A. Panchal, Y. Fu, R. Fakhrullin, M. Kryuchkova, S. Batasheva, A. Stavitskaya, A. Glotov and V. Vinokurov, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 8646–8657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, O. Aftenieva, T. Bayrak, A. Jain, T. A. König, A. Erbe and R. Seidel, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2100381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ye, R. Weichelt, U. Kemper, V. Gupta, T. A. König, A. Eychmüller and R. Seidel, Small, 2020, 16, 2003662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, S. M. Jin, F. Li, D. Tian, J. Xu, E. Lee and J. Zhu, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 4925–4931 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, L. Chen, D. Li, L. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Wang, Q. Xiong and H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8426–8433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Biswas, M. Misra, A. S. Bisht, S. K. Kumar and G. Kumaraswamy, Soft Matter, 2021, 17, 4098–4108 RSC .
M. Li, S. Johnson, H. Guo, E. Dujardin and S. Mann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 851–859 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fukao, A. Sugawara, A. Shimojima, W. Fan, M. A. Arunagirinathan, M. Tsapatsis and T. Okubo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16344–16345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, J. R. Finnegan, D. W. Hayward, L. R. MacFarlane, R. L. Harniman and I. Manners, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 10591–10600 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, K. Yu and A. Eisenberg, Science, 1996, 272, 1777–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kang, K. J. Erickson and T. A. Taton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13800–13801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, G. Chen, Y. Zhao, G. Silber, Y. Wang, S. Xing, Y. Han and H. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11850–11860 RSC .
X. Cheng, G. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. Yan, H. Wang and H. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7746–7749 RSC .
J. Schöbel, C. Hils, A. Weckwerth, M. Schlenk, C. Bojer, M. C. Stuart, J. Breu, S. Förster, A. Greiner and M. Karg, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18257–18268 RSC .
B. Gao, G. Arya and A. R. Tao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 433–437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, T. Sakamoto, J. Wang, A. Sugawara-Narutaki, A. Shimojima and T. Okubo, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 13181–13188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, J. Wang, A. Sugawara-Narutaki, A. Shimojima and T. Okubo, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 481–482 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, Y. Oda, A. Shimojima, T. Okubo, S. Aoshima and A. Sugawara-Narutaki, Polym. J., 2015, 47, 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Atsumi, S. Araoka, K. B. Landenberger, A. Kanazawa, J. Nakamura, C. Ohtsuki, S. Aoshima and A. Sugawara-Narutaki, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 7751–7758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, A. Sugawara-Narutaki, S. Tsuboike, J. Wang, A. Shimojima and T. Okubo, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 13214–13220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gao, Y. Alvi, D. Rosen, M. Lav and A. R. Tao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4382–4384 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Shen, T. Li, J. Hu, D. Yang and A. Dong, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11196–11204 RSC .
Z. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Kou, Y. I. Lee, J. Hao and H. G. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 375, 118–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fei, Y. Cui, A. Wang, P. Zhu and J. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2310–2312 RSC .
L. Bazán-Díaz, R. N. Mendoza-Cruz, J. J. S. Velázquez-Salazar, G. N. Plascencia-Villa, F. M. Ascencio-Aguirre, H. J. Ojeda-Galván, R. L. Herrera-Becerra, G. G. Guisbiers and M. José-Yacamán, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 9394–9401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3984–3987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Tisserant, P. A. Reissner, H. Beyer, Y. Fedoryshyn and A. Stemmer, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7220–7227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. X. Chang, N. N. Zhang, Y. Wei, A. J. Li, J. Tai, Y. Xue, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Yang and L. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3463–3475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bagiński, M. Tupikowska, G. González-Rubio, M. Wójcik and W. Lewandowski, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904581 CrossRef PubMed .
A. N. Shipway, M. Lahav, R. Gabai and I. Willner, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8789–8795 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Stover, E. Moaseri, S. P. Gourisankar, M. Iqbal, N. K. Rahbar, B. Changalvaie, T. M. Truskett and K. P. Johnston, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 1127–1138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, Q. Liu, G. Huo, G. Liang, Q. Sun and X. Song, Colloid. Surface. A, 2012, 407, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, S. Matsubara, M. Nogami, J. Shi and W. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Shi, T. Tanaka and M. Nogami, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12042–12047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Fang, G. Chen, L. Song and Z. Deng, Small, 2018, 14, 1703303 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, J. Goebl, Z. Lu and Y. Yin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 5282–5289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, M. Li, E. Dujardin, C. Girard and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2553–2559 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shibu Joseph, B. I. Ipe, P. Pramod and K. G. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 150–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hussain, M. Brust, J. Barauskas and A. I. Cooper, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 1934–1939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abbas, R. Kattumenu, L. Tian and S. Singamaneni, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Fu, R. Wu, C. Liu, J. Lin, D. M. Sun and Y. W. Tang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 18111–18115 RSC .
P. Sudeep, S. S. Joseph and K. G. Thomas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6516–6517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cui, Z. Chen, S. Zhong, K. L. Wooley and D. J. Pochan, Science, 2007, 317, 647–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ohata, H. Sugimoto and M. Fujii, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7597–7604 RSC .
W. Ni, R. A. Mosquera, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1181–1185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mikšátko, D. Aurélio, P. Kovaříček, M. Michlová, M. Veverka, M. Fridrichová, I. Matulková, M. Žáček, M. Kalbáč and J. Vejpravová, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16773–16780 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Yabe, A. Shimojima, T. Sekiguchi, A. Sugawara-Narutaki and T. Okubo, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 934–935 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walther and A. H. Müller, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 663–668 RSC .
W. Li, H. Palis, R. Mérindol, J. Majimel, S. Ravaine and E. Duguet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1955–1976 RSC .
W. Wei, F. Bai and H. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11956–11966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yammine, E. Souaid, S. Youssef, M. Abboud, S. Mornet, M. Nakhl and E. Duguet, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2020, 37, 2000111 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Liao, D. Zherebetskyy, H. Xin, C. Czarnik, P. Ercius, H. Elmlund, M. Pan, L. W. Wang and H. Zheng, Science, 2014, 345, 916–919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, L. Xia, Y. Wang, W. Lu, Q. Liu, X. Shi and X. Sun, Small, 2018, 14, 1803111 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Henzie, M. Grünwald, A. Widmer-Cooper, P. L. Geissler and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhou, Z. Ye, S. Hu, C. Hao, X. Wang, C. Huang and F. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15771–15781 RSC .
S. Mehra, A. Bergerud, D. J. Milliron, E. M. Chan and A. Salleo, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3454–3461 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, X. H. Yang, H. G. Yang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13162–13164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, X. Zhu, L. Shao, J. Wang and A. Kristensen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901605 CrossRef CAS .
W. You, H. Bi, W. She, Y. Zhang and R. Che, Small, 2017, 13, 1602779 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xiao, P. Liu, C. Wang and G. Yang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 87, 140–220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, C. Li, X. Li and X. Lei, Particuology, 2013, 11, 768–775 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Solomon, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 16, 158–167 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Manoharan, Science, 2015, 349, 1253751 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Ilett, A. Orrock, W. Poon and P. Pusey, Phys. Rev. E, 1995, 51, 1344–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Young, M. R. Jones, J. Zhang, R. J. Macfarlane, R. Esquivel-Sirvent, R. J. Nap, J. Wu, G. C. Schatz, B. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 2240–2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Caswell, J. N. Wilson, U. H. Bunz and C. J. Murphy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13914–13915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. D. Hollingsworth, S. K. Yang, S. Patel, D. J. Pine and M. Weck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14064–14067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qi, M. Ghodousi, Y. Du, C. Grun, H. Bae, P. Yin and A. Khademhosseini, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2275 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Harada, R. Kobayashi, Y. Takashima, A. Hashidzume and H. Yamaguchi, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 34–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, E. Kesselman, Y. Talmon, M. A. Hillmyer and T. P. Lodge, Science, 2004, 306, 98–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Petukhov, R. Tuinier and G. J. Vroege, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 30, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Tuinier and H. N. Lekkerkerker, Colloids and the Depletion Interaction, Springer, Netherlands,  2011 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, E. Luijten and S. Granick, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 581–600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cademartiri and K. J. Bishop, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 2–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cademartiri, K. J. Bishop, P. W. Snyder and G. A. Ozin, Phil. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2012, 370, 2824–2847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. van Anders, D. Klotsa, N. K. Ahmed, M. Engel and S. C. Glotzer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, E4812–E4821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Badaire, C. Cottin-Bizonne, J. W. Woody, A. Yang and A. D. Stroock, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 40–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Badaire, C. Cottin-Bizonne and A. D. Stroock, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11451–11463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, P. R. Lang, M. Meyer and J. K. Dhont, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4679–4687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao and T. G. Mason, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 268301 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhao and T. G. Mason, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 148301 CrossRef PubMed .
L. C. Hsiao, B. A. Schultz, J. Glaser, M. Engel, M. E. Szakasits, S. C. Glotzer and M. J. Solomon, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Hatch, W. P. Krekelberg, S. D. Hudson and V. K. Shen, J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 194902 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, X. Zheng, V. Grebe, D. J. Pine and M. Weck, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1354–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, G. R. Yi, S. Sacanna, D. J. Pine and M. Weck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6866–6869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Ashton, R. L. Jack and N. B. Wilding, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 9661–9666 RSC .
M. Zhai, Q. Chen, W. Yuan, Q. Shi and H. Xu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 1888–1891 RSC .
S. Onishi, M. Tokuda, T. Suzuki and H. Minami, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 674–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, S. Liu, S. Cao, F. Han, H. Wang and H. Chen, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 6698–6703 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Oh, G. R. Yi and D. J. Pine, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 15786–15792 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lan, Z. Su, Y. Zhou, T. Meyer, Y. Ke, Q. Wang, W. Chiu, N. Liu, S. Zou and H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14632–14636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kashiwagi, S. Sim, T. Niwa, H. Taguchi and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 26–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, D. J. Pine and M. Weck, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3984–3989 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Oh, S. Lee, S. C. Glotzer, G. R. Yi and D. J. Pine, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3936 CrossRef PubMed .
W. B. Rogers and J. C. Crocker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 15687–15692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Covarrubias, A. Cha, A. Rahmy, M. Lorkowski, V. Perera, B. O. Erokwu, C. Flask, P. M. Peiris, W. P. Schiemann and E. Karathanasis, PLoS One, 2018, 13, e0204296 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Groeer and A. Walther, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16995–17004 RSC .
J. Lee, J. H. Huh, K. Kim and S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707309 CrossRef .
A. Harada, Y. Takashima and M. Nakahata, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2128–2140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Han, D. Go, T. Tigges, K. Rahimi, A. J. Kuehne and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 2208–2214 CrossRef .
F. Benyettou, X. Zheng, E. Elacqua, Y. Wang, P. Dalvand, Z. Asfari, J. C. Olsen, D. S. Han, N. I. Saleh and M. Elhabiri, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 7144–7150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, D. Wang, S. Huang, G. Auernhammer, Y. He, H. J. Butt and S. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2725–2727 RSC .
Z. Nie, D. Fava, E. Kumacheva, S. Zou, G. C. Walker and M. Rubinstein, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 609–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Z. Nie, N. Zhao, W. Li, M. Rubinstein and E. Kumacheva, Science, 2010, 329, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Mehetor, H. Ghosh and N. Pradhan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1300–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nakagawa, H. Kageyama, Y. Oaki and H. Imai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5597–5600 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. H. Lee, I. Y. Phang, R. Jiang, H. Y. F. Sim, J. Wang and X. Y. Ling, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3872–3878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. H. Lee, C. L. Lay and X. Y. Ling, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6137–6144 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiu, Z. M. Hudson, M. A. Winnik and I. Manners, Science, 2015, 347, 1329–1332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, X. Chen, M. Zeng, J. Ji, Y. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Yuan, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 2855–2860 RSC .
H. Y. Lee, S. H. R. Shin, A. M. Drews, A. M. Chirsan, S. A. Lewis and K. J. Bishop, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9979–9987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fang, A. Walther, A. Wolf, Y. Xu, J. Yuan and A. H. Müller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2877–2880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, J. Lin and X. Tian, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16873–16880 RSC .
J. H. Kim, W. J. Kwon and B. H. Sohn, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3324–3327 RSC .
S. Lee, S. Jang, K. Kim, J. Jeon, S.-S. Kim and B. H. Sohn, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9430–9433 RSC .
S. Chae, S. Lee, K. Kim, S. W. Jang and B. H. Sohn, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6475–6478 RSC .
K. Kim, S. Jang, J. Jeon, D. Kang and B. H. Sohn, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 4634–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kang and A. Honciuc, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1415–1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Si, D. Sikdar, Y. Chen, F. Eftekhari, Z. Xu, Y. Tang, W. Xiong, P. Guo, S. Zhang and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11086–11093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. De and R. Klajn, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706750 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Walther, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hess and J. L. Ross, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5570–5587 RSC .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, C. Gao, M. Chen, X. Lin and Q. He, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 35, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rieß, R. K. Grötsch and J. Boekhoven, Chem, 2020, 6, 552–578 Search PubMed .
G. Ragazzon and L. J. Prins, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 882–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Grzybowski, K. Fitzner, J. Paczesny and S. Granick, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5647–5678 RSC .
C. Cheng, P. R. McGonigal, J. F. Stoddart and R. D. Astumian, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8672–8688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. van Rossum, M. Tena-Solsona, J. H. van Esch, R. Eelkema and J. Boekhoven, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5519–5535 RSC .
X. Fan and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11398–11405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, A. Walther, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 3663–3668 CrossRef .

          P. Ball and N. R. Borley, The self-made tapestry: pattern formation in nature, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  1999 Search PubMed .
S. Mann, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 781–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Davies, T. Krüger, P. V. Coveney, J. Harting and F. Bresme, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6715–6719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Driscoll and B. Delmotte, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 40, 42–57 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jaquay, L. J. Martínez, N. Huang, C. A. Mejia, D. Sarkar and M. L. Povinelli, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5184–5188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ilday, G. Makey, G. B. Akguc, Ö. Yavuz, O. Tokel, I. Pavlov, O. Gülseren and F. Ö. Ilday, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14942 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tagliazucchi, E. A. Weiss and I. Szleifer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 9751–9756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heckel, S. Loescher, R. T. Mathers and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 7193–7201 CrossRef .
J. Deng and A. Walther, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Maity, C. Sharma, F. Lossada and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 22537–22546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng and A. Walther, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng and A. Walther, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, D. Bezold, H. J. Jessen and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 12084–12092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Z. Yin, R. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Ma, X. Dai, D. Zhou and X. Su, Nano Today, 2021, 41, 101308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Aguirregabiria, J. Aizpurua and R. Esteban, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 13760–13772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Zhang, L. Y. Niu, L. Jiang, P. G. Yin, L. D. Sun, H. Zhang, R. Zhang, L. Guo and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16011–16016 CrossRef CAS .
A. Poletti, G. Fracasso, G. Conti, R. Pilot and V. Amendola, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13702–13714 RSC .
K. Liu, A. Ahmed, S. Chung, K. Sugikawa, G. Wu, Z. Nie, R. Gordon and E. Kumacheva, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5901–5910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klinkova, H. Thérien-Aubin, A. Ahmed, D. Nykypanchuk, R. M. Choueiri, B. Gagnon, A. Muntyanu, O. Gang, G. C. Walker and E. Kumacheva, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6314–6321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bekana, R. Liu, M. Amde and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 513–520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, V. Tran and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 24433–24439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Yin, D. Sikdar, H. Liu, Q. Zhu, G. Yao, H. Qi and N. Gu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000248 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Guo, B. Qiu, Z. Lin and T. Wang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 835–860 RSC .
M. Liu, F. Dong, N. S. Jackson, M. D. Ward and M. Weck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 16528–16532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. B. Zion, X. He, C. C. Maass, R. Sha, N. C. Seeman and P. M. Chaikin, Science, 2017, 358, 633–636 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pigliacelli, R. Sánchez-Fernández, M. D. García, C. Peinador and E. Pazos, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8000–8014 RSC .
C. Hao, Y. Gao, D. Wu, S. Li, L. Xu, X. Wu, J. Guo, M. Sun, X. Li and C. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903200 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Fan and A. O. Govorov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13254–13261 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meng, H. Wang, F. Huang, Y. Guo, Z. Wang, D. Hui and Z. Zhou, Composties, Part B, 2018, 137, 260–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Z. Zhang, G. Hussain, L. Zhou, Q. Li and K. K. Ostrikov, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100596 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, B. Fan, G. Shao, B. Wang, X. Pian, W. Li and R. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 307, 293–300 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, H. Wang, X. Chi, R. Li and J. Wang, Carbon, 2014, 74, 312–318 CrossRef CAS .
R. Che, L. Peng, X. Duan, Q. Chen and X. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 401–405 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gong, J. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Yu, P. Zhang, Z. Wu and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10101–10107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Li, R. Liu, Y. Rao, H. Rong and G. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3494–3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, F. Wu, A. Xie, M. Sun and W. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33041–33048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, Z. Xiao, X. Yan, Z. Gao, Y. Tang, L. Hou, Q. Li, G. Ning and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40078–40087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Du, D. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Ma, Y. Wang, P. Xu and X. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4268–4277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Wang, D. S. Li and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900961 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sheng, Y. Yang, D. X. Yan, K. Dai, H. Duan, G. Zhao, Y. Liu and Z. M. Li, Carbon, 2020, 167, 530–540 CrossRef CAS .
M. Quinten, A. Leitner, J. R. Krenn and F. R. Aussenegg, Opt. Lett., 1998, 23, 1331–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. E. Koel and A. A. Requicha, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 229–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Gür, C. P. McPolin, S. Raza, M. Mayer, D. J. Roth, A. M. Steiner, M. Löffler, A. Fery, M. L. Brongersma and A. V. Zayats, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7323–7329 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Solis Jr, B. Willingham, S. L. Nauert, L. S. Slaughter, J. Olson, P. Swanglap, A. Paul, W. S. Chang and S. Link, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1349–1353 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Su, Y. Wu, Y. Tang, Y. Chen, W. Cheng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3968–3972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stern, G. Eidelshtein, R. Zhuravel, G. I. Livshits, D. Rotem, A. Kotlyar and D. Porath, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800433 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiang, Y. Wu, B. Su, R. Xie, W. Yang and L. Jiang, Small, 2014, 10, 258–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Tseng, C. Tsai, L. Ma, J. Ouyang, C. S. Ozkan and Y. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 72–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jacobs and C. Bean, Phys. Rev., 1955, 100, 1060–1067 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, K. Zheng, L. He, R. Wang, L. Guo, C. Chen, X. Han and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Toulemon, M. V. Rastei, D. Schmool, J. S. Garitaonandia, L. Lezama, X. Cattoën, S. Bégin-Colin and B. P. Pichon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2454–2462 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mostarac, P. A. Sánchez and S. Kantorovich, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13933–13947 RSC .
M. Gao, M. Kuang, L. Li, M. Liu, L. Wang and Y. Song, Small, 2018, 14, 1800117 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiang, J. Feng, L. Huang, Y. Wu, B. Su, W. Yang, L. Mai and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6952–6958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakata, Y. Hu, O. Uzun, O. Bakr and F. Stellacci, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4294–4299 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Huang, F. E. Uslu, P. Katsamba, E. Lauga, M. S. Sakar and B. J. Nelson, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau1532 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Tsang, E. Demir, Y. Ding and O. S. Pak, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020, 2, 1900137 CrossRef .
E. Climent, M. R. Maxey and G. E. Karniadakis, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pei, S. Xuan, J. Wu, L. Bai and X. Gong, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 12158–12167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, M. Sun, L. Sun and H. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, G. Pessot, P. Cremer, R. Weeber, C. Holm, J. Nowak, S. Odenbach, A. M. Menzel and G. K. Auernhammer, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 228–237 RSC .
V. Magdanz, I. S. Khalil, J. Simmchen, G. P. Furtado, S. Mohanty, J. Gebauer, H. Xu, A. Klingner, A. Aziz and M. Medina-Sánchez, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Townsend, R. Burtovyy, Y. Galabura and I. Luzinov, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6970–6978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Singh, P. E. Laibinis and T. A. Hatton, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2149–2154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dreyfus, J. Baudry, M. L. Roper, M. Fermigier, H. A. Stone and J. Bibette, Nature, 2005, 437, 862–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klinkova, R. M. Choueiri and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3976–3991 RSC .
L. Chen, L. Lu, S. Wang and Y. Xia, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 781–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yuan, X. Wu, X. Li, C. Hao, C. Xu and H. Kuang, Small, 2019, 15, 1901958 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lu and Y. Xia, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 8584–8591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Bhavya, S. R. Manippady, M. Saxena, N. S. John, R. G. Balakrishna and A. K. Samal, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 7332–7344 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, P. Zhang, C. M. Li, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 34, 197–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, D. He, W. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Fu and S. Li, Talanta, 2013, 115, 992–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, K. Zhang, J. Liang, W. Wu, J. Guo and H. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65690–65696 RSC .
A. J. Ruiz-Sanchez, C. Parolo, B. S. Miller, E. R. Gray, K. Schlegel and R. A. McKendry, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7262–7266 RSC .
L. Chang, Y. Khan, L. Li, N. Yang, P. Yin and L. Guo, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 13896–13903 RSC .
Y. Zhuo, Y. Wang, R. Yuan, Y. Chai, Y. Yuan, L. Bai and L. Zhang, Analyst, 2014, 139, 2560–2564 RSC .
L. Fu, Y. Liu, W. Wang, M. Wang, Y. Bai, E. L. Chronister, L. Zhen and Y. Yin, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14483–14488 RSC .
L. Kong, Y. Feng, W. Luo, F. Mou, K. Ying, Y. Pu, M. You, K. Fang, H. Ma and J. Guan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, B. Su, M. Liu, Y. Feng, X. Jiang, L. Jiang and A. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1601087 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Luo, Q. Cui, K. Fang, K. Chen, H. Ma and J. Guan, Nano Lett., 2018, 20, 803–811 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhou, S. Kim, J. Lee, J. Kim, F. Zou, J. Kim, J. Y. Park and J. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 203, 817–823 CrossRef .
T. Gu, Z. Ren, X. Li, J. Huang and G. Han, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9104–9107 RSC .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, Z. Ren, J. Huang, S. Best, X. Li and G. Han, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6324–6327 RSC .
W. Kim, D. H. Shin, J. Jun, J. H. Kim and J. Jang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700573 CrossRef .
S. Wang, K. Chen, M. Wang, H. Li, G. Chen, J. Liu, L. Xu, Y. Jian, C. Meng and X. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4737–4745 RSC .
P. M. Peiris, R. Toy, E. Doolittle, J. Pansky, A. Abramowski, M. Tam, P. Vicente, E. Tran, E. Hayden and A. Camann, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8783–8795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, T. Chen, G. Wang, T. Gu, C. Xie, J. Huang, X. Li, S. Best and G. Han, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7133–7139 RSC .
J. Zhou, J. Zhang, A. U. Rehman, K. Kan, L. Li and K. Shi, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 3757–3770 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qiu, G. Fu, Y. Zhao, Y. Tang, Y. Chen and T. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14874–14878 RSC .
Q. Liu, M. Zeng, J. Liu, B. Guo, X. Hao, Q. Cao, Y. Shang, X. Sun, J. Liu and X. Gao, Carbon, 2020, 171, 646–657 CrossRef .
E. Cui, F. Pan, Z. Xiang, Z. Liu, L. Yu, J. Xiong, X. Li and W. Lu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2021, 23, 2000827 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lei, Z. Yao, J. Zhou, W. Zheng, B. Wei, J. Zu and K. Yan, Carbon, 2021, 173, 69–79 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xie, F. Wu, W. Jiang, K. Zhang, M. Sun and M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2175–2181 RSC .
Z. Huang, H. Chen, Y. Huang, Z. Ge, Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, P. Xiao, J. Liang, T. Zhang and Q. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704363 CrossRef .
J. Y. Yusuf, H. Soleimani, Y. K. Sanusi, L. L. Adebayo, S. Sikiru and F. A. Wahaab, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 26466–26485 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Shi, M. S. Cao, J. Yuan and X. Y. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 163108 CrossRef .
C. Wang, S. Hu, X. Han, W. Huang and L. Tian, PLoS One, 2013, 8, e55928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. Wu, K. Jiang, G. Tong, K. Jin, N. Qian, L. Zhao and T. Lv, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7119–7129 RSC .
W. Xu, Y. F. Pan, W. Wei and G. S. Wang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 1116–1123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Lv, Y. F. Pan, P. B. Yang and G. S. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55546–55551 RSC .
B. Zhao, Y. Li, Q. Zeng, L. Wang, J. Ding, R. Zhang and R. Che, Small, 2020, 16, 2003502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, T. Yuan, X. Zhang, X. Yan, J. Guo, D. Ding, M. A. Khan, D. P. Young, A. Khasanov and Z. Luo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24784–24796 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Li, W. Xu, R. C. Ding, X. Shen, Z. Chen, M. D. Li and G. S. Wang, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiao, D. Wei, X. He, X. Lei, J. Wei and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 1312–1327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Zhang, J. Meng, C. Han, F. Liu, X. Liu, P. Wu, Z. Liu, X. Wang and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 54545–54552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, L. Yu, Z. Xiang, Z. Liu, B. Deng, E. Cui, Z. Shi, X. Li and W. Lu, Carbon, 2021, 172, 506–515 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, T. Qin, J. Wang, J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Cong, X. K. Li and Y. Li, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 455401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, Z. Ren, X. Zhu, Q. Zhang, D. Mei and B. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24588–24593 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, D. Nie, M. Song, T. Jiao, G. Fu and X. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7506–7512 RSC .
Z. Yin, Y. Wang, C. Song, L. Zheng, N. Ma, X. Liu, S. Li, L. Lin, M. Li and Y. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 864–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Yu, W. Yang, M. Shen, X. Liu, S. Geng, J. Li, C. Yu and Z. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17323–17328 RSC .
X. Wang, Z. Ma, L. Chai, L. Xu, Z. Zhu, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, Carbon, 2019, 141, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fan, L. Zhang, K. Li, J. Liu, Y. Zheng, L. Zhang, S. Song and Z. A. Qiao, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3889–3896 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, S. Li, Q. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, G. Fu and Y. Tang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17950–17957 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, Z. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Wang, C. Dong, M. S. Riaz and F. Huang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 1844–1848 RSC .
X. Qiu, H. Zhang, P. Wu, F. Zhang, S. Wei, D. Sun, L. Xu and Y. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603852 CrossRef .
J. Lu, S. Ji, P. Kannan, H. Wang, X. Wang and R. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 844, 156129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, G. Fu, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen and T. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13585–13590 RSC .
Q. Shi, C. Zhu, D. Du, C. Bi, H. Xia, S. Feng, M. H. Engelhard and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19626–19631 RSC .
H. You, F. Gao, T. Song, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Liu, M. Yuan, Y. Wang and Y. Du, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 574, 182–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Li, J. Zhang, M. Qin, G. Yang and Y. Tang, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 3060–3067 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Fu, K. Wang, M. Gao, X. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Chen and Q. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 459, 208–216 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, T. Xia, S. Wang, G. Yang, B. Dong, C. Wang, Q. Ma, Y. Sun and R. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11432–11440 RSC .
Y. Zhong, Y. Ni, S. Li and M. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15831–15837 RSC .
Z. He, J. Zhang, X. Li, S. Guan, M. Dai and S. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2005051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, C. Wang, P. Wang, P. B. Messersmith and H. Duan, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3071–3076 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, C. Cao, Y. Sun, P. Huang, F. Wei and W. Song, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 2699–2702 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Zhou, Y. Hu, C. Guo, H. Qian, F. Zhang and X. W. D. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 18359–18364 RSC .
L. Zhao, J. Zhou, L. Zhang, X. Sun, X. Sun, T. Yan, X. Ren and Q. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55838–55843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, J. Fu, K. Wang, M. Gao, X. Wang, Z. Wang and Q. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 525, 152–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Zhou, T. Yang, J. Gao, P. He, L. Jia, F. Dong, B. Jia and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 822, 153517 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou and H. Qi, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 17373–17384 RSC .
S. Zhu and L. Nie, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 93, 28–56 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C. C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photon., 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T. W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot and R. May, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Zhao, M. Zou, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Xu, H. Wu and A. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800013 CrossRef .
X. Yu, W. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Fautrelle, X. Lu and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33690–33701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, X. Zhang, Q. Wu, Y. Han, X. Wu, P. Ji, M. Zhou, G. Diao and M. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 141–144 RSC .
T. T. Lee, J. R. Hong, W. C. Lin, C. C. Hu, P. W. Wu and Y. Y. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Zhang, M. Li, S. Lu and P. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 8020–8029 RSC .
X. Yu, J. Yu, Y. Fautrelle, A. Gagnoud, Z. Ren, X. Lu and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19733–19744 RSC .
M. Zhong, L. Kong, N. Li, Y. Y. Liu, J. Zhu and X. H. Bu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 388, 172–201 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Wei, H. Liu and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25361–25368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, M. Liu, Z. Wei, Z. Pan, Y. Qiu, F. Ye, Y. Yang, X. Zhao, L. Sheng and Y. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 671–678 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Li, W. Zhang, H. Ang, H. Yu, B. Y. Xia, X. Wang, Y. H. Yang, Y. Zhao, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10676–10681 RSC .
S. Zhu, Y. Yang, J. Liu and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25371–25381 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Zhao, M. Zou, Y. Chen, L. Yang, L. Xu, H. Wu and A. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37813–37822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Samuel, B. Joshi, M. W. Kim, Y. I. Kim, S. Park, T. G. Kim, M. T. Swihart, W. Y. Yoon and S. S. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, H. Cai, W. Li, C. Chen, K. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, M. Wang and Y. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1881–1889 RSC .
Y. Du, W. Weng, Z. Zhang, Y. He, J. Xu, J. Sun, J. Liao, J. Bao and X. Zhou, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
E. Umeshbabu and G. R. Rao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 472, 210–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qin, J. Duan, Y. Yang and F. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6441–6452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, F. Wang, J. Zhang, R. A. Tong, S. Chong, W. A. Wang, C. A. Wang and C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20899–20904 RSC .
K. Lin, X. Qin, M. Liu, X. Xu, G. Liang, J. Wu, F. Kang, G. Chen and B. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Y. Yao, S. He, H. Xie, E. Hitz and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702714 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Shen, X. Q. Zhang, X. R. Chen, X. B. Cheng, C. Yan, C. Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Joule, 2018, 2, 764–777 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Stoehr, E. Gonzalez, A. Stampfl, E. Casals, A. Duschl, V. Puntes and G. J. Oostingh, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2011, 8, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Venkataraman, J. L. Hedrick, Z. Y. Ong, C. Yang, P. L. R. Ee, P. T. Hammond and Y. Y. Yang, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 1228–1246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. S. Sy, L. W. C. Ho, W. C. Y. Lau, H. Ko and C. H. J. Choi, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 14033–14045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, A. Mararenko, G. Cao, Z. Gai, K. Hong, P. Banerjee and S. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15309–15317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, W. Zhang, Q. Fu, H. Yue, W. Wei, P. Tang, W. Li, W. Li, L. Lin and G. Ma, Small, 2014, 10, 3619–3624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Situ and A. C. S. Samia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20154–20163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Geng, P. Dalhaimer, S. Cai, R. Tsai, M. Tewari, T. Minko and D. E. Discher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 249–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiong, J. Tian, K. Hu, X. Zheng, J. Sun, C. Yan, J. Yao, L. Song, Y. Zhang and N. Gu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17085–17089 RSC .
C. Ding, C. Zhang, X. Yin, X. Cao, M. Cai and Y. Xian, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 6702–6709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, C. Yan, J. Xie, D. Yan, K. Hu, S. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, N. Gu and F. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29536–29548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. K. Choi, Y. T. E. Chiu, X. Zhuo, Y. Liu, C. Y. Pak, X. Liu, Y. L. S. Tse, J. Wang and C. H. J. Choi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5864–5884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, L. Zhang, T. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, M. Gong, Z. Xu, M. Du, Y. Liu and G. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, T. Miao, J. Zheng, J. Xu, A. M. Asiri and H. M. Marwani, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 286, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hossaini Nasr, A. Tonson, M. H. El-Dakdouki, D. C. Zhu, D. Agnew, R. Wiseman, C. Qian and X. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11495–11507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Peiris, L. Bauer, R. Toy, E. Tran, J. Pansky, E. Doolittle, E. Schmidt, E. Hayden, A. Mayer and R. A. Keri, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4157–4168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Huang, Z. Wu, G. Yin, L. Wang and F. Gao, Colloids Surf., B, 2016, 140, 437–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ryu, Z. Jin, J. J. Lee, S. H. Noh, T. H. Shin, S. M. Jo, J. Choi, H. Park, J. Cheon and H. S. Kim, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 937–940 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, Y. Zhao, L. Yu, L. Dong, C. Shi, M. J. Hu, Y. J. Xu, L. P. Wen and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1407–1411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, H. Song, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Yue, P. Pan, J. Su, A. A. Elzatahry and Y. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707515 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Duan and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802394 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. He, K. Yang, C. Yi, Y. Liu, L. Nie, N. M. Khashab, X. Chen and Z. Nie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15809–15812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liao, W. Zhang, Z. Qiao, J. Luo, A. Erpuding, A. Niwaer, X. Meng, H. Wang, X. Li and F. Zuo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 562, 81–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, X. Ma, J. Gao, G. Chen, Z. Li, X. Wu, Z. Yu, J. Xing, L. Sun and H. Ruan, Small, 2018, 14, 1800094 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Mulens-Arias, A. Nicolás-Boluda, A. Gehanno, A. Balfourier, F. Carn and F. Gazeau, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3344–3359 RSC .
S. Son, N. Kim, D. G. You, H. Y. Yoon, J. Y. Yhee, K. Kim, I. C. Kwon and S. H. Kim, Theranostics, 2017, 7, 9–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Peiris, A. Abramowski, J. Mcginnity, E. Doolittle, R. Toy, R. Gopalakrishnan, S. Shah, L. Bauer, K. B. Ghaghada and C. Hoimes, Cancer Res., 2015, 75, 1356–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Peiris, R. Toy, A. Abramowski, P. Vicente, S. Tucci, L. Bauer, A. Mayer, M. Tam, E. Doolittle and J. Pansky, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 173, 51–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Perera, G. Covarrubias, M. Lorkowski, P. Atukorale, A. Rao, S. Raghunathan, R. Gopalakrishnan, B. Erokwu, Y. Liu and D. Dixit, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9659–9667 RSC .
K. Parkatzidis, H. S. Wang, N. P. Truong and A. Anastasaki, Chem, 2020, 6, 1575–1588 CAS .
J. F. Lutz, M. Ouchi, D. R. Liu and M. Sawamoto, Science, 2013, 341, 1238149 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Alam, V. Olin-Sandoval, A. Stincone, M. A. Keller, A. Zelezniak, B. F. Luisi and M. Ralser, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 16018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Grüning, D. Du, M. A. Keller, B. F. Luisi and M. Ralser, Open Biol., 2014, 4, 130232 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Vardi, S. Chaturvedi and L. S. Weinberger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E8803–E8810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Page, R. Thuret, L. Venkatraman, T. Takahashi, K. Bentley and S. P. Herbert, Cell Rep., 2019, 27, 3139–3151.e3135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Alon, Nat. Rev. Genet., 2007, 8, 450–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Varusai, W. Kolch, B. N. Kholodenko and L. K. Nguyen, Mol. BioSyst., 2015, 11, 2750–2762 RSC .
K. Kochanowski, B. Volkmer, L. Gerosa, B. R. H. van Rijsewijk, A. Schmidt and M. Heinemann, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 1130–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Frei, S. Shtrikman and D. Treves, Phys. Rev., 1957, 106, 446–455 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Present address: School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Xinlong Fan
	Xinlong Fan earned his bachelor degree in 2010 and doctoral degree in 2016 at Northwestern Polytechnical University. There he focused on morphology regulation and formation mechanism of functional polymeric particles in emulsion system, and synthesis and application of thermally stable anion exchange resin under the supervision of Prof. Qiuyu Zhang. From 2016 to 2019, he worked as a postdoc in the Walther group at University of Freiburg on spatial and time-programmed dynamic self-assembly of colloids and responsive molecules. In 2019, he joined Stephen Mann group at University of Bristol to integrate dynamic self-assembly into protocells.

Andreas Walther
	Andreas Walther is a Gutenberg Research Professor for Macromolecular Materials and Systems at the University of Mainz in Germany. His research interests concentrate on self-assembly concepts inside and outside equilibrium for the design of bioinspired and life-inspired systems with active, adaptive and autonomous behavior. He is a two times ERC grantee, a founding PI of the DFG Cluster livMatS, and a former Fellow of the Freiburg and Strasbourg Institutes for Advanced Studies. He has published ca. 200 publications, and has received the Bayer Early Excellence in Science Award, the Reimund Stadler Award of the GDCh, and the Hanwha-Total IUPAC Award.

 	Fig. 1  With higher structural complexity come more properties and functionalities. When 0D colloids self-assemble into hierarchical 1D colloidal chains, and 1D colloidal chains further assemble into higher dimensional arrays and superstructures, more collective and emergent properties will appear, which lead to more functionalities.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme of structure of building blocks and strategies of fabricating 1D colloidal chains in this review. Basically, four main categories of preparing 1D colloidal chains are identified: field-directed assembly based on dipole–dipole interaction, template-directed, ligand-mediated method, and directional self-assembly of shape anisotropic building blocks. The last category is the newly emerged out-of-equilibrium assembly of colloids mimicking living out-of-equilibrium systems.	 


In situ formed magnetic dipole–dipole interaction	Monodomain magnetic particles	Nanorings, block co-nanochains	Good	Ferromagnetism	Sensors, catalysts, energy materials	
171,172

External magnetic field induced dipole–dipole interaction	Magnetic and non-magnetic particles	Multi-component, helical, zig-zag oriented, branched, kinked chains, nanobundles	Good	Magnetic, thermal, optical and electrochemical properties and activities, reconfiguring self-assembly, field adaptivity	Photonic crystals, anisotropic optics, catalysts, sensors, bioimaging, radiation absorption, energy materials	
173–176

Electric field induced dipole–dipole interaction	Universal building blocks	Alternating binary nanochains, 1D tubular and solid filaments, staggered, stretched, helical chains	Good	Reconfiguring self-assembly, dielectric, optical properties, field adaptivity	Photonic crystals, responsive materials, catalysts	
177–180

DNA templates	Universal but mostly metal particles	Controlled length, interparticle-distance, sequence, helix, chirality, spatial patterns	Poor	Chiroptical, electronic and plasmonic properties	Tumor sensing	
181–183

Peptide and protein templates	Universal but mostly metal and magnetic particles	Controlled spatial periodicity and chirality	Medium	Chiroptical, electronic and magnetic properties	Bioimaging, catalysts	
184–187

Nanocellulose templates	Metal particles and quantum dots	Controlled chirality	Good	Chiroptical properties	Bioimaging	
188–190

Confining templates	Universal building blocks	Controlled length, width, sequence, helicity and orientation	Medium	Optical, electronic and optoelectronic properties	Sensors, photonic crystals, photoconductivity materials	
191–194

Polymer ligands	Universal building blocks	Alternating colloidal chains	Good	Plasmonic properties	Biomedical application, optoelectronic devices, catalysts	
195–197

Small molecule ligands	Universal building blocks	Controlled chirality and helicity	Good	Chiroptical, plasmonic properties	Chiroptical materials, catalysts, sensors, photothermal therapy	
198–201

Depletion interactions	Universal in principle but usually anisotropic particles	Controlled length	Good	Plasmonic properties	—	
202–204

Hydrogen bonds and DNA-mediated bindings	Anisotropic particles	Controlled length, interparticle-distance, sequence, helix, chirality, spatial patterns	Poor	Chiroptical, plasmonic properties	Photothermal therapy	
74,205–207

Host–guest interactions	Anisotropic particles	Alternating, zigzag, branched-like chains, reversible structure	Good	Plasmonic properties	—	
71,91,208,209

Solvophobic interactions	Anisotropic particles	Reversible structure	Good	Optical, plasmonic properties	Bioimaging	
210–213

Out-of-equilibrium self-assembly	Universal building blocks	Dissipative structure	Good	Dissipative properties	—	
168,170,214–216


 	Fig. 3  (a) Scheme of size-dependent behavior (superparamagnetic, monodomain, and multidomain) of magnetic NPs. (b) Critical size of single domain (Dcr) and superparamagnetism (Dsp) for common ferromagnetic materials at room temperature. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 235 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 237 Copyright 2006, Springer Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  Colloidal chains of magnetic NPs assembled through in situ formed dipole–dipole interactions in the absence of an external magnetic field. (a–a′) Compared to (a) conventional TEM, (a′) the in situ cryo-TEM image shows Fe3O4 NP chains with shorter lengths. (b) Ni7Co3 nanochains assemble into nanorings because of unsaturated magnetic dipoles. (c) Co NP-tipped nanorods and Co NPs co-assemble into block colloidal chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 81 Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society (ACS); (b) ref. 172 Copyright 2008, ACS; (c) ref. 171 Copyright 2014, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 5  Morphologies and structures of colloidal chains prepared in the presence of an external magnetic field. (a–a′) Comparing to the (a) monodisperse NPs prepared without external magnetic field, (a′) magnetic NPs obtained with an external magnetic field are polydisperse. (b–b′) Longer magnetic-field exposure time leads to longer 1D colloidal chains: (b) 85 min exposure time generates chains with ∼6 clusters, while (b′) longer exposure time prolongs the chain to ∼10–40 clusters. (c–c′) The rate of increasing the strength of the external magnetic field affects the sequence of colloidal chains when using polydisperse magnetic particles as building blocks: (c) slow increase results in block nanochains, and (c′) a fast increase results in statistical nanochains. (d) Cubic magnetic particles assemble into kinked chains in a high magnetic field. (e) Scheme and TEM image of single-stranded helices assembled from Fe3O4 nanocubes. (f–f′) Magnetic cubic chain shows reversible folding behavior programmed by an external magnetic field. (g–g′) Non-magnetic particles (green in scheme and microscope image) and magnetic particles (dark brown in scheme and microscope image) assemble into 1D colloidal chains with (g) binary colloids and (g′) ternary colloids (with third kind of non-magnetic particles shown in red in scheme and microscope image) in ferrofluid under external magnetic field. (h) Non-magnetic particles themselves can assemble into single component chains in ferrofluid in the presence of external magnetic field. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 299 Copyright 2018, ACS; (b) ref. 300 Copyright 2015, ACS; (c) ref. 301 Copyright 2015, ACS; (d) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial 3.0 Unported Licence, ref. 302 Copyright 2018, the authors, published by the Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC); (e) ref. 219 Copyright 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS); (f) the terms of Creative Commons-Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International-CC BY-NC 4.0, ref. 303 Copyright 2017, the authors, published by AAAS; (g) ref. 304 Copyright 2013, ACS; (h) ref. 305 Copyright 2018, Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 6  Morphologies and structures of 1D colloidal chains prepared in the presence of an external electric field. (a) Phase diagram of ionic microgel assemblies in an AC electric field shows that the microgel only forms 1D strings in the presence of low effective volume fractions (Φeff). (b) Scheme and microscope image of alternatingly aligned, short binary nanochains after removing the electric field. (c–c′′) The geometry of ellipsoidal colloids influences their 1D superstructure of the assemblies. With increasing aspect ratio of the ellipsoidal colloids, (c) 1D strings, (c′) 1D tubular structures, and (c′′) 1D solid filaments were obtained. (d) Scheme and microscope image of head-to-tail connected 1D chains using Janus particles as building blocks. (e–e′) Salt concentration can control the structures of aligned Janus PS/Au ellipsoids in an AC field, they formed (e) staggered chains with low NaCl concentration (<1.5 mM) and (e′) stretched chain-link structures when the concentration was above 1.5 mM. (f) Optical image and scheme of a double helix chain using multi-patch particles as building blocks. (g) 1D lock-and-key colloidal chains aligned along the direction of the electrical field. (h) Optical image of microparticles aligned perpendicularly to a high frequency AC electric field. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 330 Copyright 2012, RSC; (b) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/), ref. 337 Copyright 2012, the authors, published by Springer Nature; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), ref. 338 Copyright 2014, the authors, published by Springer Nature; (d) ref. 220 Copyright 2016, Macmillan Publishers; (e) ref. 339 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers; (f) ref. 340 Copyright 2015, ACS; (g) ref. 341 Copyright 2016, ACS; (h) ref. 342 Copyright 2010, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 7  1D noble metal colloidal chains templated by DNA. (a) The first example of Ag NP chains growing along a DNA strand via electrostatic interaction. (b–b′) Scheme and TEM images of alternating colloidal chains growing through step-by-step PCR cycles. (c–c′) Scheme and TEM image of Au colloidal chains assembled on linear DNA origami by complementary ssDNA. (d) Scheme and TEM images of Au nanosphere and nanorod chains with different spatial arrangement on DNA origami hashtag tile chains. (e) Scheme and TEM image of chiral Au helix growing around DNA origami nanorod. (f) Scheme of reconfigurable switch of 1D chiral chains between tightly folded state and an extended state (switch 1), or between two mirror-symmetric structures (switch 2). This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 368 Copyright 1998, Macmillan Publishers; (b) ref. 374 Copyright 2013, ACS; (c) the term of Creative Commons – Attribution 4.0 International – CC BY 4.0, ref. 375 Copyright 2019, the authors, published by Science Partner Journal and AAAS; (d) ref. 183 Copyright 2020, ACS; (e) ref. 376 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers; (f) the term of Creative Commons public use license, ref. 377 Copyright 2018, the authors, published by ACS.	 

 	Fig. 8  1D colloidal chains using peptides and proteins as templates. (a) By properly designing polypeptide and assembling the polypeptide into 1D fibrils, spatially precise repeating, positively charged histidine patches (dark orange bar in scheme) electrostatically attract negatively charged Au NPs, forming Au NP chains with defined interparticle distance. (b) The length of the aliphatic tail in peptide affects the pitch of the helical ribbon assembled from the peptide, therefore, adjusting the aliphatic tail can tune the pitch of chiral Au NP helices templated from the ribbon. (c) Scheme and TEM image of left-handed Au NP double helices, which were obtained by in situ reducing HAuCl4 during the assembly of amphiphilic peptides into 1D fibril templates. (d) Scheme and TEM image of 1D Au@α-synuclein NP chains induced by the amyloid fibrillation of α-synuclein. (e) Scheme and TEM image of highly oriented 1D Au NR chains assembled onto flagella via weak electrostatic interactions. (f) Scheme and TEM image of 1D co-assembly of Hcp1 pore protein and Au NPs via thiol- and dipole-induced self-assembly. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 410 Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 153 Copyright 2017, ACS; (c) ref. 421 Copyright 2008, ACS; (d) ref. 434 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH; (e) ref. 435 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH; (f) ref. 440 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme and TEM image of positively charged Au NPs electrostatically binding to negatively charged CNCs to form 1D right-handed Au NP chains. Reproduced with permission. ref. 189 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  1D Colloidal structures fabricated in confining templates. (a–a′) Scheme and fluorescent image of array of 1D Ag chain formed on a glass substrate by micromoulding in capillaries. Scheme and microscope images of digital control over the (b–b′) width and (c) length of colloidal chains by adjusting the geometry of confining templates and the size of building blocks. (d–d′′) 1D linear colloidal chains with different sequences (green (G), blue (B), and red (R) in scheme and images) assembled by sequential capillarity-assisted particle assembly. (e) Capillary confinements between micro pillars induced the co-assembly of binary colloids to form 1D colloidal structures. (f) Scheme and SEM image of Au NP chains aligned along 1D PDMS wrinkles. (g) Scheme and TEM images of AuNPs@PS confined in an AAO nanochannel. By adjusting the ratio of channel diameter (Dc) and Au NP diameter (Ds), 1D Au NP chains with different configurations were generated. (h–h′′) Scheme and TEM images of helical Au NP chains templated by helical structures in block copolymer films. The chiral tartaric acid directs the achiral poly(1,4-butadiene)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) to assemble into a microphase separated structure. After removing the tartaric acid, Au NPs fill the residual space and form 1D chiral Au NP chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 458 Copyright 2002, Nature; (b) the term of Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivative Works 4.0 license, ref. 365 Copyright 2020, the authors, published by ACS; (c) ref. 367 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (d) the term of Creative Commons – Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International – CC BY-NC 4.0, ref. 450 Copyright 2016, the authors, published by AAAS; (e) ref. 449 Copyright 2017, ACS; (f) the term of Creative Commons – Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International – CC BY-NC 4.0, ref. 464 Copyright 2021, the authors, published by Springer Nature; (g) ref. 364 Copyright 2020, RSC and the Chinese Chemical Society; (h) ref. 456 Copyright 2017, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 11  Colloidal chains mediated by polymer ligands. (a–a′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D assembly of Au NP@PS-b-PAA core–shell particles assisted by the sphere-to-cylinder transformation of PS-b-PAA micelles. The core–shell particles energetically prefer to attach to the ends of a nanochain rather than its lateral sides. (b–b′) Scheme and TEM images of alternating colloidal chains by PEG-induced electrostatic self-assembly. (c–c′′) Scheme and SEM images of self-assembly of polymer-grafted nanocubes: (c′) nanocubes modified with PVP–thiol aggregate in an edge–edge (EE) configuration after solvent annealing of PS thin film where the nanocubes were embedded; (c′′) while nanocubes modified with PEG-alkanethiol ligands rearrange into a face–face (FF) configuration after both solvent and thermal annealing. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 195 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 356 Copyright 2018, ACS; (c) ref. 494 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers.	 

 	Fig. 12  1D colloidal superstructures induced by small molecules and their assemblies. (a) Scheme of 1D Ag(I)-tiopronin sandwich-like complexes, and (a′) TEM image of Ag NP chains templated from the complexes. (b) Scheme of how isotropic electrostatic repulsion, van der Waals attraction, and anisotropic dipolar attraction regulate the self-assembly of charged particles; and (b′) TEM image of Au NP chains assembled by adjusting the ionic strength and polarity of the solvent. (c–c′′) Scheme and SEM images of Au NP chains assembled by anisotropic Debye length attraction induced by trace amount of water in ethanol. Diffusion-limited colloid aggregation (DLCA) results in branched aggregates, while reaction-limited colloid aggregation (RLCA) leads to more compact aggregates. (d–d′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D protein-jacketed superparamagnetic NPs (SNP) by Mg2+-mediated supramolecular polymerization of a NP-containing chaperonin protein (GroEL). (e–e′′) 1D chiral assemblies of gold nanorods induced by self-association of (e′) L- and (e′′) D-glutathione. (f–f′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D Au double helix triggered by the self-assembly of promesogenic compound (L) and liquid crystal-coated Au NPs. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 163 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 505 Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 506 Copyright 2015, ACS; (d) ref. 157 Copyright 2015, ACS; (e) ref. 507 Copyright 2017, ACS; (f) ref. 508 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  1D colloidal chains induced by depletion attraction. (a–a′′) Scheme and optical images of (a) cross-chains, (a′) ladder chains and (a′′) tilted ladder chains assembled from particles with different length width ratio. The assembly was triggered by Pluronic F127. (b) Scheme and confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) image of 1D cone-shaped particle chains where PEG 600 kDa was used as depletant. (c) Scheme and TEM images of 1D two-stranded filaments assembled from modified hexagon DNA origami, the assembly resulted from shape complementarity of the DNA origami. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 563 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (b) ref. 203 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 158 Copyright 2015, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 14  Hydrogen bond and DNA-mediated binding-directed 1D self-assembly of building blocks. (a) Scheme and TEM image of end-to-end assembly of Au NRs induced by the hydrogen bonding between UPy coated on NRs. (b) Scheme and optical images of step-growth alternating colloidal polymerization of two kinds of building blocks with complementary divalent patches (red and green tips in scheme). (c) Scheme and TEM image of colloidal oligomers formed by two kinds of divalent programmable atom-like NP A and B, where the bonding domains of x and y are complementary to x′ and y′ respectively. (d) Scheme and microscope images of reconfigurable thermally reversible transition among singlets, 1D chains and 2D bilayer structures using DNA-patched Janus particles as building blocks. (e) Scheme and TEM images of switchable 1D DNA origami superstructures: the assembly was induced by the complementary connector pairs at both ends of the DNA origami, while the disassembly can be achieved by thermal and chemical switching. (f–f′) Scheme of 1D DNA origami chain formed with controlled monomer sequence, and Scheme and TEM images 1D Au NP helix by grafting Au NPs on DNA origami chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 566 Copyright 2019, RSC; (b) ref. 93 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, ref. 206 Copyright 2019, the authors, published by Springer Nature. (d) Ref. 569 Copyright 2020, ACS; (e) ref. 74 Copyright 2016, ACS; (f) ref. 207 Copyright 2020, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 15  1D colloidal chains assembled by host–guest attraction. (a–a′) Scheme and CLSM image of 1D chains balanced by the electrostatic repulsion and host–guest attraction between α-CD and azobenzene-functionalized microgels. (b–b′) Scheme and CLSM image of 1D alternating colloidal chains of bivalent patchy particles. CB[8] worked as a connector to host viologen (blue pendant motif in the scheme) and azobenzene (red pendant motif in the scheme). (c–c′) Scheme of bivalent 3D DNA origami cuboid functionalized with adamantane and β-CD at the opposite ends, and (c′) TEM image of the assembled 1D fibrils. (d) Scheme and optical images of the reversible self-assembly of CB[7] modified patchy particles mediated by the reversible redox reaction of diphenyl viologen. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 91 Copyright 2017, ACS; (b) ref. 71 Copyright 2017, ACS; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs License, ref. 208 Copyright 2020, the authors, published by Wiley-VCH; (d) ref. 580 Copyright 2016, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 16  Solvophobic attraction induced self-assembly of building blocks into 1D structures. (a–a′) Scheme and SEM image of self-assembly of Au NRs with PS at both ends by adding water into DMF. (b) Scheme of the formation of divalent building block, which has two sticky patches on opposing sides of the core and a repulsive patch orthogonally surrounding the core, and Janus structure with attractive and repulsive patches on opposing sides by selectively adding solvent; (b′–b′′) TEM images of supracolloidal polymer chains by solvent-induced assembly of divalent particles and Janus particles. (c–c′′′) Scheme and TEM images of 1D superstructures with side-by-side (c–c′) and end-to-end (c′′–c′′′) configuration of triblock co-micelles. The triblock co-micelles contain a nonpolar, hydrophobic central segment and two polar terminal segments. When adding a mixture of hexane and isopropanol, a non-solvent for the central segments, the co-micelles assembled side-by-side. While adding hexane, a non-solvent for the terminal segments, the co-micelles assembled end-to-end. (d–d′) Scheme and TEM image of polymerization-induced particle-assembly of triblock polymers. Grafting a HPMA block onto the PDMA-b-PBzMA colloidal atom generates two patches on opposing side of the colloid. The solvent for the polymerization directly induced the self-assembly. (e–e′) Scheme and TEM image of Au NPs homogeneously functionalized with a mixture of 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid and 1-dodecanethiol assembling to chain-like structures. When dispersing the Au NPs in water, hydrophobic ligands redistributed on the particle surface to minimize their contact with water, and the resulting hydrophobic patches induced the self-assembly. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 582 Copyright 2007, Nature; (b) ref. 72 Copyright 2013, Macmillan Publishers; (c) ref. 588 Copyright 2015, AAAS; (d) ref. 589 Copyright 2020, RSC; (e) ref. 590 Copyright 2014, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 17  1D particle chains in out-of-equilibrium self-assembly states. (a–a′) 1D tubular assemblies of (a) mono- and (a′) multi-component building blocks assembled in a rotating fluid. The configuration of mono-component 1D assemblies depends on the normalized particle number and the rotation rate. The configuration of multi-component assemblies also relies on the ratio of particle sizes and particle numbers. (b) Scheme and dark-field images of 1D colloidal oligomer oriented perpendicular to the polarization direction of the light. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 168 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 215 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a–a′) Normalized extinction cross-section as a function of wavelength for Au NP chains assembled from (a) spherical NPs and (a′) nanocubes with the number of building blocks (Np) increasing from 1 to 16. (b–b′) Electric field profiles of silver unimer, dimer, trimer, and tetramer NPs simulated with an excitation wavelength of 785 nm, (b) for nanospheres and (b′) for face-to-face assembled nanocubes. Numbers above figures show the average electric-field enhancement factors per hot spot volume. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) the term of Creative Commons license, ref. 625 Copyright 2017, the authors, published by Optical Society of America; (b) ref. 629 Copyright 2014, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Circular dichroism (CD) signals of 1D chiral colloidal chains assembled from isotropic Au NPs. (b) Normalized CD extinction as a function of pitch length at a wavelength of maximum CD λ = 552 nm with a constant number of NPs in each pitch. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 376 Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers; (b) ref. 638 Copyright 2011, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 20  A representative scheme of the microwave absorption mechanism of colloidal chains based on the synergistic effect of magnetic (natural resonance and eddy current effect) and dielectric loss (conductive loss and interfacial polarization) and their match. The impedance matching of complex permittivity and permeability allows more microwaves to penetrate through the absorbent.	 

 	Fig. 21  Scheme and optical image of 1D Au NP chain as a plasmonic waveguide. Reproduced with permission.655 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) The I–V behavior of one Ag NP chain (circles in curve) and that of a monolayer of dense Ag NPs (triangles in curve). (b) Temperature-dependent I–V characteristics of Au nanochains measured at 10 and 293 K. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 657 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 452 Copyright 2018, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a–a′) Comparative field-dependent magnetization of (a) Fe2O3 colloidal chains (the field applied is in the plane of the chains) show a faster magnetization than (a′) discrete NPs at 300 and 5 K. (b) Scheme of the angle between 1D Fe3O4 NP chains and the direction of applied magnetic field, and (b′) the angle-dependent magnetization of the chains. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 661 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (b) ref. 664 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  Field-adaptive properties of 1D colloidal chains. (a) Scheme of hollow magnetic chains in shear stress, SEM and TEM images of hollow magnetic chains, and comparison of shear stress between Fe3O4 hollow chains and spheres. (b–b′) Scheme and optical images of 1D liquid magnetic droplets in a (b) circularly and (b′) conically polarized magnetic field. (c–c′) Morphologies of paramagnetic chains in a soft gel under a perpendicular magnetic field by varying the (c) length of chains and (c′) field strength. (d) Optical image of bovine sperm cells coated with maghemite NPs, and (d′) time-dependent deformation of the magnetic sperm under a rotating magnetic field, and (d′′) tracking line of the sperm head and tail. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 669 Copyright 2019, ACS; (b) ref. 670 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (c) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence, ref. 671 Copyright 2016, the authors, published by RSC; (d) the term of Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial license, ref. 672 Copyright 2020, the authors, published by AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 25  1D colloidal chains as sensors. (a) Scheme of directional self-assembly of Au NRs induced by different concentrations of Hg2+; (a′) Absorbance of Au NRs in the presence of different Hg2+ concentrations; (a′′) Linear plot of the ratio of the absorbance peaks at 1030 and 744 nm vs. the concentration of Hg2+. (b) Scheme of using pH responsive magnetic photonic nanochain cilia arrays to sense local pH variations: (b′) Reflective dark-field microscopic images and (b′′) diffraction peaks of the arrays at different pH values. (c) SEM images of plasmonic arrays of core–shell Au@Ag nanobricks with multiple (M-Array) and single (S-Array) nanobrick width; (c′) SERS sensitivity by comparing 4-aminothiophenol spectra generated with plasmonic arrays (M- and S-array) and commercial Klarite substrate; (c′′) SERS enhancement factors of the plasmonic arrays. (d) Scheme and SEM image of 1D colloidal chain array assembled from SnO2 NPs and Au NRs; (d′) Electrical response of the binary colloidal chain arrays and SnO2 counterpart at 50 ppm acetone: (d′′) Electrical response curve of binary colloidal chain array toward different concentrations of acetone. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 677 Copyright 2017, ACS; (b) ref. 688 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 632 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (d) ref. 689 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  1D colloidal chains applied for the absorption of electromagnetic waves. (a–a′) Scheme and TEM image of 1D chains with yolk–shell structure and their radiation absorption performance. (b–b′) Scheme and TEM image of FeCo/PVDF core–shell nanochains@graphene oxide composites and their electromagnetic wave-absorbing bandwidth. (c–c′) Scheme and SEM image of PVDF/MXene/Ni chain composite films and their electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness (EMI SE) with different film thicknesses. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 296 Copyright 2018, Tsinghua University Press and Springer; (b) ref. 701 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 649 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 27  1D colloidal chains as catalysts. (a) Scheme of preparation of Co@Co9S8 chains, and their enhanced charge transfer resulting from 3D networks composed of conductive Co@Co9S8 colloidal chains. Such enhanced charge transfer reduces the overpotential of oxygen evolution. (b) Scheme of magnetotactic bacteria (AMB-1) used as micro stirrers to enhance the epoxidation of cyclooctene catalyzed by phosphotungstic acid in Pickering emulsion. Comparing to Pickering emulsion without AMB-1 stirrers or normal stirrers, AMB-1 can largely promote the conversion. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 725 Copyright 2018, ACS; (b) the term of Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence, ref. 278 Copyright 2018, the authors, published by RSC.	 

 	Fig. 28  1D colloidal chains used as energy materials. (a) Optical band gap tuned by inter-nanocrystal distance of 1D Perovskite chains, the structures with smaller inter-nanocrystal spacing show a smaller optical band gap. (b–b′′) Scheme and TEM image of a sulfur loaded ZIF-8@carbon nanotube network, and their cycling performance when used as electrodes for sodium-ion batteries. (c–c′) Scheme and SEM image of 1D Zn–Co–S yolk–shell chains embedded in a carbon nanotube/graphene film, and (c′′) their Ragone plot comparison with other materials. (d–d′′) Scheme and TEM image of MoS2 encapsulated in necklaced nanotubes (ANL MoS2@CNFs) to alleviate the volume expansion, and their cycling performance when used in lithium/sodium-ion batteries. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 197 Copyright 2019, ACS; (b) ref. 746 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (c) ref. 747 Copyright 2020, ACS; (d) ref. 748 Copyright 2020, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 29  1D colloidal chains for biomedical applications. (a) Scheme and TEM image of the interactions of FeO NP@C nanochains with E. coli, and (a′) comparing to the magnetic nanochains without wash steps after each treatment, the nanochains with wash steps have higher loss of E. coli viability. (b) Scheme and TEM image of vincristine-loaded superparamagnetic anisotropic nano-assemblies (VCR-SANs). The VCR-SANs have a much longer mean residence time (MRT) in plasma compared to VCR and VCR-loaded isotropic nano-assemblies (VCR-SINs). (c) Compared to monodisperse spheres (S-MNPs-PPR) and clusters (C-MNPs-PPR) of Mn–Zn ferrite loading Cyclo(RGDyK) (PPR), 1D worm-like structures (W-MNPs-PPR) possess a higher relaxivity coefficient (r2), therefore show better negative contrast effects. (d–d′) Scheme of polydopamine-coated Au NPs and nanochains, and the comparison of intracellular dark field scattering images of HeLa cells incubated for 24 h with unassembled NPs and nanochains. (e) Scheme of Au NP chains coated with SiO2 and the H2O2-induced shift of chain plasmon resonance. (e′) Combined with laser radiation, such Au NP chains can effectively reduce the relative tumor volume, showing better tumor-microenvironment-activated theranostics behavior. This figure is adapted with permission from: (a) ref. 772 Copyright 2014, ACS; (b) ref. 774 Copyright 2016, RSC; (c) ref. 776 Copyright 2019, ACS; (d) ref. 777 Copyright 2019, ACS; (e) ref. 778 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 
Footnote
† Present address: School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TS, UK.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
