Ultrasmooth metal halide perovskite thin films via sol–gel processing   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA03092K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03092K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8308-8315Ultrasmooth metal halide perovskite thin films via sol–gel processing†

        
          
            Ross A. 
            Kerner
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Lianfeng 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengguo 
            Xiao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Barry P. 
            Rand
          
        
      ab
aDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. E-mail: rkerner@princeton.edu
bAndlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
Received 
      14th April 2016
    , Accepted 3rd May 2016First published on 10th May 2016AbstractWe demonstrate that lead halide perovskite thin film formation displays the characteristics of a sol–gel process. By performing a solvent exchange at different times, the stages of the sol–gel process are elucidated and their sensitivity to processing conditions are examined. For CH3NH3PbI3, the reaction and aging kinetics are found to be extremely rapid, complete within 10 s, and a competing formation of a highly crystalline PbI2:N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) complex introduces additional complications relative to a well-behaved sol–gel process. Perovskite formation from strongly polar solvents can be described, in most cases, by the sol–gel processing of PbI2 regarding other solution components as additives. Understanding the details of additive and environmental influences on the sol–gel properties allow us to exploit fundamental concepts of sol–gel engineering to direct solvent and surfactant choices to control particle size and demonstrate multiple widely employed lead halide perovskite films (CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbBr3, and CsPbBr3) with unprecedented surface roughness of less than 2 nm.
Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites have gained much attention from the thin film optoelectronic community due to their high photovoltaic power conversion efficiency demonstrated in lab scale devices. In particular, markedly high efficiencies of >20% have been achieved despite the processing challenges of these materials.1 Fabricating smooth, pinhole free films has proven to be a substantial challenge compared to most solution processed organic layers because of the high propensity for the halide perovskites to crystallize into large grains. While large crystals are important from the standpoint of efficient charge transport so as not to be hindered by grain boundaries, highly crystalline films tend to be rough relative to the thickness of the layer, leading to incomplete surface coverage and shorted or underperforming devices. In order to progress the field, there needs to be a deeper understanding of the processing details and the effects of various parameters on the resulting perovskite films. With a more detailed knowledge, additives and processes can be better engineered to obtain the desired film properties.
Recently, a myriad of solution processing pathways have been developed to improve device performance, with several successes. Many of these procedures use additives, such as a large excess of methylammonium iodide (MAI),2 diiodooctane (DIO),3 aqueous HI4 or HBr,5 alternative lead sources such as PbCl2 or Pb(acetate)2,6,7 methylammonium chloride (MACl),8 or even oxide nanoparticles.9 The role of the additive is not well understood in most cases, but it is usually concluded that the additive increases the solubility, slowing nucleation or making crystal growth more homogeneous. Other pathways involve engineering solvent mixtures. For example, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), γ-butyrolactone (GBL),10 and water,11 among others, have been added to the primary solvent N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) to keep the perovskite dissolved longer. In addition, solvent–solvent extractions are often utilized either by adding the complementary solvent while the substrate is still spinning10–12 or by dipping the wet precursor into a solvent bath to extract excess solvent.13 It is also apparent that processing films under elevated relative humidity improves the material quality.14–16 The role water plays is still not entirely clear, but more closely resembles a solvent annealing reduction in trap states while surface coverage only marginally benefits.16,17 Overall, it is apparent that effective additives, whether they increase or decrease solubility, improve device efficiency by producing a sufficiently thick, smooth, and pinhole free film.
Despite the various techniques emerging for the fabrication of perovskite films, we assert that they are quite similar and show all of the signatures of a sol–gel process. The implications of this innovation are that the processing of these hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites is much more closely related to the processing of inorganic semiconductors such as CIGS and CZTS than to processing of organic oligomeric/polymeric thin films. It is important to recognize these relationships to reach the Shockley–Queisser limit where the performance will undoubtedly rely on addressing the challenges more related to inorganic semiconductors (i.e. smooth, dense/void free, high purity, homogeneous chemistry within grains and grain boundaries). The concepts and techniques developed for CIGS and CZTS can be adapted to perovskites for this purpose and will additionally help facilitate the transition to industrial scale manufacturing of perovskites.
Briefly, the steps of the sol–gel process are: solution preparation, molding, gelation/polycondensation, aging, drying, stabilization and densification. In this work, we identify the sol–gel steps crucial for obtaining high quality lead halide perovskite films and how to engineer them. Specifically, we research the relationship between the solution properties, gelation kinetics, and aging conditions on the morphology of the final thin film. The results indicate that the processing of perovskites from highly polar solvents can be better described as the processing of a colloidal PbI2 solution with various additives that serve one of several possible purposes. Furthermore, we find that there is a phase in competition with the formation of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) that is catastrophic for the production of smooth films. In direct contrast to our observations, these coordination complexes are usually discussed as a helpful intermediate.10 By viewing the processing of lead halide perovskite films from a sol–gel context, we can utilize the large platform of knowledge provided by the sol–gel community to significantly aid the development of the perovskite technology leading to further improvements and applications.
Here, we show for the first time the ability to adopt sol–gel language to accurately describe our observations and find that they are closely related to other MAPbI3 processing phenomena observed in literature. This allows us to speculate in ways that unify many of the pathways available to fabricate metal halide perovskite films that were thought to be distinct. Furthermore, we systematically investigate sol–gel engineering methods to achieve high surface coverage and smooth MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and CsPbBr3 thin films.
Results and discussion
Sol–gel evolution of MAPbI3 films
Equilibrated PbI2:MAI solutions used in literature and the solutions used in this study have been proven to be a complex mixture of colloidal particles in a mother solution of dissolved ions.18 It was concluded that the colloidal size in solution can be directly correlated to the domain sizes of the final film. Our own dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements (see ESI Fig. S1†) indicate that within an hour of preparing a solution in DMF the vast majority of the particles are <3 nm (abutting the resolution of the technique) with a second, polydisperse population of large particles ranging from 100 nm to over a micron in size. After stirring overnight, the intensity at longer times in the correlation plot grows with respect to the signal from the small particle population, indicating that particles nucleate and grow over time. If the above assumptions are correct, then filtering the solutions immediately prior to spin coating should remove these particulates and result in a better film. However, a fresh, filtered solution still produces a micron sized needle-network film. Thus, it is indisputable that the vast majority of particle growth must occur during the solvent evaporation while spinning. Furthermore, DLS suggests that nucleation may have already occurred during solution preparation.

Fig. 1 shows a photograph of MAPbI3 films on glass prepared from a 0.75 M 1:1 MAI:PbI2 DMF solution in a spin coater with low DMF vapor pressure. Toluene was pipetted directly onto the rotating substrates at various points in time, halting crystal growth to get a snapshot of the morphological evolution as the solution progresses toward a solid film. As will become clear, the toluene does not induce crystallization unless it is dropped far too early. Its function is rather to prevent further evolution of the film and, therefore, it should be applied liberally (up to 1.5 mL) to completely remove the DMF and inhibit morphology changes due to interaction with DMF post toluene application. In a well-ventilated spin coater, the evaporation of DMF is rapid, making the mass transport of PbI2 in solution and particle growth the more rate-limiting processes during the film evolution. Our general observations are that a 0.75 M solution spun at 5500 rpm remains nearly transparent for the first 5 seconds as DMF evaporates. Abruptly at 6–7 s, the film turns white and hazy. After a few more seconds, the white film transitions to the signature, inhomogeneous matte brown/black of a rough perovskite film. If toluene is pipetted on the sample at any point, the film turns brown immediately and remains that color. Intuitively, spinning at slower speeds prolongs the times at which these transitions occur. We find that the highest quality films (i.e. smoothest and most uniform) are formed by solvent exchanging at 4–5 s, just as Jeon et al. and Xiao et al. have found for similar conditions.10,12Fig. 2(a)–(c) show atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the surface morphology of the films for toluene applied at 4, 5, and 6 s, respectively. The consistency of the morphology over larger areas was confirmed by electron microscopy (Fig. S2†). After toluene application and before annealing, the 4 s film exhibits a very low root mean square (RMS) roughness of <5 nm. The phase content of these ambiently dried films were checked by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. 3). All of the films were highly crystalline with minimal residual crystalline PbI2.
 Fig. 1  Photograph of MAPbI3 thin films spun at 5500 rpm in a low DMF vapor pressure environment where toluene was applied at 3, 4, 5, and 6 s or no toluene application. The size of each glass substrate is 2.5 × 2.5 cm. 
 Fig. 2  AFM images of MAPbI3 thin films solvent exchanged DMF for toluene at (a and d) 4 s, (b and e) 5 s, and (c and f) 6 s. Films (a–c) and (d–f) were processed in low and high DMF vapor pressure atmospheres, respectively. 
 Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the solvent exchanged MAPbI3 films in an unsaturated (solid curves) or saturated (dashed curves) DMF atmosphere. Data are offset for clarity. 
The transition from transparent to hazy is a critical moment during the sol–gel process. Before this point, DMF evaporates until the solubility limit is reached (∼1.9 M for a 1:1 MAI:PbI2 ratio at room temperature). Beyond this point, particles precipitate and grow as DMF continues to evaporate. This aspect is well known. It is less well understood that the nucleated particles begin to interact and eventually form a colloidal gel. From Fig. 1, the gelation point occurs at ∼4 s for 0.75 M and 5500 rpm spin speed. If the toluene lands on the substrate earlier, there are streaks and spirals formed by the toluene striking another low viscosity liquid. At 4 s, the shape and uniformity of the film are retained when the toluene is applied which means that the film has gelled to the point of having some elastic or at least viscoelastic rigidity. Toluene application at 4 s produces extremely uniform and smooth films, having an RMS roughness of ∼4 nm. Between 4 and 5 s, the DMF/air interface has retreated to the surface of the colloidal framework such that menisci are formed in the pores between the particles protruding from the surface. It can be seen from Fig. 1 that this is an inhomogeneous event and begins to affect some areas sooner than others (c.f. the 5 s film). At 5 s, the AFM image of the film reveals the beginning of the formation of aggregates that roughen the film surface. At 6 s and beyond, these aggregates are neatly organized into needle-like bundles that cover the substrate and result in a very hazy film. Adding toluene after this amount of aging turns the film from white to brown but does nothing to improve or even alter the film morphology.
Immediately after it has formed at 4–5 s, the gel begins the aging step of the sol–gel process. The menisci just begin to retreat into the pores creating capillary forces given by the Young–Laplace relation:19  where γ is the surface energy, θ is the contact angle between the liquid and solid interface, and r is the pore radius. These stresses can become very large as pores shrink and the residual DMF will act to pull particles closely together and, since PbI2 is highly soluble in DMF, facilitate the Ostwald ripening of grains. Together, these processes create large particles or aggregates that give the film its haze. The toluene addition can be viewed as a solvent exchange, a commonly employed technique in sol–gel processing.19 Often, a highly polar solvent is swapped with a much less polar solvent in order to minimize syneresis and cracking. This preserves the gel properties in what is sometimes referred to as an ambigel since it is formed under ambient temperatures and pressures.20 Toluene works well for the MAI:PbI2 material system because it is non-polar, miscible with DMF, and both PbI2 and MAI are nearly insoluble in it. The solvent exchange process with toluene for DMF is reproducible and we have demonstrated it for a range of concentrations (from 0.08 to 1.8 M giving thicknesses ranging 20–550 nm), spin speeds, and DMF atmospheres (a few examples are provided in the ESI†). It is important to point out that film cracking due to these same capillary stresses is problematic when spin coating thick films when fracture mechanics dictates that it is energetically favorable to create new surfaces. Catastrophic cracking occurs frequently in our attempts to fabricate MAPbI3 films >500 nm thick by this method (Fig. S3†).
Process sensitivity to kinetics
To more clearly demonstrate the gelation and aging stages of the sol–gel process, we processed films in a saturated DMF atmosphere in order to make DMF evaporation the rate limiting step. In principle, changing the spin speed would affect the time for DMF to leave the films, but we opted for saturating the DMF atmosphere so that the initial conditions, i.e. the height of the wet-film and, therefore, the amount of material available for crystallization, remain constant. In this way, the precipitation and re-dissolution of the colloidal particles have more time to reach equilibrium during the evaporation. Fig. 2(d)–(f) show films for which a toluene exchange was performed at 4, 5, and 6 s, respectively, in this high DMF vapor pressure atmosphere (XRD presented as dashed lines in Fig. 3). They have many similarities to the previous films showing aggregates forming between 4 and 5 s that eventually form needle-like bundles of grains after 6 s. However, in a high vapor pressure of DMF, the films have a coarser microstructure indicating that particles continue to grow in the presence of DMF, which we attribute mainly to Ostwald ripening rather than agglomeration. The solvent exchanged films do not turn brown in a saturated DMF environment until they are removed and allowed to dry in a solvent free atmosphere or on a hot plate at 70 °C for 1–3 minutes.
Since the particle size increases at later solvent exchange times to the point of micron sized needles, we hypothesize that the colloidal particles are similar to the macroscopic, highly crystalline, DMF coordinated PbI2 needles that grow out of concentrated PbI2:DMF solutions (Fig. S4†).21,22 Similarly to Jeon et al., we hypothesize that MAI modifies the chemistry, forming a DMF:MAI:PbI2 complex, until the DMF is almost completely evaporated, at which point the long, needle-like crystals decompose into many smaller perovskite grains.10 It is interesting that the needles grow with more well defined boundaries when DMF is removed quickly rather than slowly. This reflects smaller particles having higher reactivity and larger capillary stresses facilitating agglomeration in the last few moments of DMF evaporation. The kinetics of Ostwald ripening are not fast enough to completely dissolve and re-precipitate the larger grains in Fig. 2(e) compared to Fig. 2(b).
In order to check the feasibility that MAI can be considered a spectator, the same processing procedures were performed on PbI2 in DMF solutions in a saturated DMF atmosphere. The results are presented in Fig. 4 (SEM images in Fig. S5†). The solvent exchanged films are very good examples of ambigels, displaying small domain sizes and high volume fraction of voids. The size of the PbI2 domains clearly increase at longer solvent exchange times accompanied by changes in pore structure. Several PbI2 films left in the saturated DMF atmosphere for up to 3 minutes begin to form needle like features also microns in size (Fig. S6†). These resemble the macroscopic needle-like crystals that grow from supersaturated DMF:PbI2 solutions which can end up protruding from the solvent surface meaning they can grow upward by adding material from the base via the same mechanism as Ostwald ripening. Surface roughening of the thin films can and will continue as long as there is any DMF left inside the pores of the gel as well as prolonged exposure of a fully formed film to DMF vapor. Thus, particle growth, needle formations, gelation, and surface roughening are all properties of the DMF:PbI2 solutions that are simply modulated by the presence of MAI and any other additives. The most salient property of these DMF and/or DMSO solutions is the use of a solvent that strongly interacts/coordinates with the solute material.
 Fig. 4  AFM images of PbI2 films spun at 4000 rpm in a saturated DMF atmosphere. Solvent exchange was performed at (a) 4 s, (b) 5 s, (c) 7 s, and (d) no toluene exchange. 
Solvent exchange recommendations and beyond
We have demonstrated that colloidal DMF:PbI2 solutions (including solutions that contain MAI) are unstable and require substantial effort to access a window during which one can work with them. During spin coating, particle growth from precipitation and aggregation leading to gelation are driven by supersaturation as DMF evaporates. Ostwald ripening continually coarsens grains as the colloidal gel ages in the presence of DMF, resulting in an extremely rough surface and poor coverage. The process is further complicated by the formation of a crystalline intermediate phase (DMF:MAI:PbI2) that then decomposes into MAPbI3 by ejection of the coordinated DMF molecules, an aspect which is undesirable for a sol–gel process, but avoidable through a solvent exchange. The whole process for stoichiometric, 0.75 M MAI:PbI2 is summarized in detail by Fig. S9† (note that the solid volume fraction was assumed for purposes of illustration, not experimentally measured).
These are the same basic properties of MAPbI3 or PbI2 processed from DMSO. However, the kinetics in DMSO are much slower and the intermediate phase persists after the solvent exchange requiring post annealing to eject the DMSO molecules.10 The polarity and solubility characteristics of the original solvent and exchanged solvent can help to explain the differences in post-annealed microstructures observed for the wide variety of solvents studied by Xiao et al.12 Instead of dielectric constant, polarity index (the relative strength of a solvent molecule's interaction with a polar solute) provides more insight into the results of Xiao et al. and Jeon et al.10,12 The polarity index of toluene (2.4) is much lower than that of DMF (6.4) which is lower yet than DMSO (7.2).23 The relative strengths of these solvents' interactions with polar solutes are directly observable by the fact that a toluene solvent exchange with DMF immediately converts some of the DMF:MAI:PbI2 complex to MAPbI3 while the larger disparity in polarity index between toluene and DMSO prevents the toluene from displacing the DMSO at room temperature. The usefulness of polarity indices is further exemplified by the successful solvent exchange performed by Zhou et al. swapping N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (polarity index = 6.7) for diethyl ether (2.8) which have a slightly smaller polarity index difference compared to toluene and DMF.13,23
The kinetics of the precipitation and aging are complete on a time scale of only a few seconds and are extremely sensitive to the ambient DMF atmosphere, leading to highly variable morphologies. Thus, rapid removal of DMF will always produce films with higher surface coverage (through high spin speeds and good ventilation). The sensitivity of the film morphology to the DMF evaporation rate implies that slight changes in meniscus or wet film height will affect the appearance of the film. This is in agreement with similar conclusions drawn on the effects of humidity changing the surface energy of the air/liquid interface, affecting the liquid film thickness and, possibly, the evaporation rate.15,16 These effects are also apparent on regions of different surface energy on the same substrate, i.e. areas of glass and indium tin oxide, and even for different concentrations. The subtle effect of contact angles of MAI:PbI2 DMF changing as a function of concentration can be explained quite easily in a sol–gel context since MAI would be most commonly viewed as a short chain surfactant. A surfactant being a main component of the desired material in solution means it must be present in variable amounts of large quantities, leading to secondary effects on the sol–gel process.
With the observations we have made, we can prescribe a general solvent exchange procedure for MAPbI3 cast from DMF that accommodates a wide range of conditions and equipment. One needs to simply spin coat a solution without performing a solvent exchange, taking careful note of the time that the film becomes scattering (transitions to hazy-white). Then, the next films should be solvent exchanged 1–2 s immediately before that transition. We have demonstrated high quality films using this procedure for a variety of spin speeds, concentrations, and atmospheres (see Fig. S7 and S8†). More convincingly, we have directly applied this protocol to reproduce these films in labs at other institutions with different equipment than our own. Furthermore, this process can be expanded to many solvent combinations as long as the solvent polarity indices are compatible, provided the gelation point can be determined easily.
Additionally, these insights can be used to direct solvent and additive engineering. Several techniques attempt to slow the crystallization by using additives that increase the solubility of PbI2 in DMF. However, increasing the solubility does not prevent crystallization and still requires a solvent exchange to produce high surface coverage films.10 We have also shown that remaining DMF in the gel facilitates dramatic morphology changes due to Ostwald ripening unless exchanged for a low solubility solvent. The rate of Ostwald ripening in solution is known to be proportional to the solubility of the solute material.24 Counterintuitively, solvent engineering should benefit from additives that decrease solubility of PbI2, such as water.21 Instead of retarding nucleation of particles, a less soluble system would nucleate many small particles during early supersaturation that will Ostwald ripen slowly, allowing the gelation to progress uninhibited. In such a system, the stages of solution preparation, gelation, and aging would be decoupled and easier to optimize. Ideally, advances in solvent engineering would make a solvent exchange unnecessary.
Additive engineering
To achieve ultrasmooth films, we can apply known concepts from sol–gel science. Many oxide perovskite nanoparticle synthesis and sol–gel processes use a long chain carboxylic acid or carboxylate to surfact the nanoparticle surface and to sterically stabilize them against aggregation.25 Directly comparing the two systems, long chain ammonium halides are the natural surfactant choice for metal halide perovskite materials. We demonstrate extremely promising results by adding very small amounts of larger alkylammonium iodides to the stoichiometric MAI:PbI2 system to affect the kinetics of the sol–gel process. Fig. 5a shows the surface morphology of a film fabricated from a 0.12:1:1 butylammonium iodide (BAI):MAI:PbI2 (0.75 M w.r.t. MAPbI3), employing the same solvent exchange process as above. The surfacted film displays a significantly reduced 1.6 nm RMS roughness and characteristic domain size that is at or below the x–y resolution of AFM (∼50 nm) indicating that the surfactant indeed slows the particle growth during gelation. This intentional effect obtained by a controlled addition of a suitable surfactant illustrates the large potential benefits made possible by identifying the sol–gel nature of this process. The XRD pattern of the surfacted MAPbI3 film in Fig. 5b (solid lines are control, dashed lines for the additive films) indicates that little to no lower dimensional phases are formed using BAI in small amounts. The XRD peaks of the surfacted films are reduced in intensity and have larger widths consistent with the presumption that crystallite size is reduced throughout the entire film thickness. Thus, this is not simply a surface effect. While the crystalline phase content of the film is solely the 3D MAPbI3 structure, as revealed by Bragg–Brentano XRD geometry with a point scintillation detector, we cannot rule out the existence of amorphous or highly oriented lower dimensional phases.
 Fig. 5  Tapping mode AFM image of (a) a butylammonium iodide (BAI) surfacted MAPbI3 thin film with RMS roughness of 1.6 nm. Tapping mode AFM images of MAPbBr3 cast from 0.2 M solution (c) without and (d) with BABr additive with RMS roughnesses of 2.8 and 1.2 nm, respectively. Contact mode AFM images of CsPbBr3 films from 0.5 M solution in DMSO (e) without and (f) with BABr additive with roughnesses of 6.6 and 5.3 nm, respectively. The methylammonium containing films were solvent exchanged with toluene and the CsPbBr3 films were exchanged with chloroform. The XRD patterns (solid and dashed lines for pristine and additive containing films, respectively) in (b) show no extra phases are formed by addition of the butylammonium halide. The MAPbBr3 XRD data were scaled down due to their high intensity relative to the other films. 
Generality of sol–gel processing
We prove that the sol–gel engineering observations and improvements made here are general. Adding butylammonium bromide (BABr) to MAPbBr3 solutions in DMF display the same improvement in surface roughness as the iodide material system. Fig. 5c and d show MAPbBr3 films on glass spun from 0.2 M solutions without and with (BABr:MABr = 0.1) BABr surfactant. The lower concentration with respect to MAPbI3 was necessary because MAPbBr3 films cracked at lower thicknesses (see ESI† for discussion of film cracking). It should also be noted that MAPbBr3 precipitation, aggregation/gelation, and aging kinetics in DMF are more rapid than MAPbI3. The additive successfully reduced the MAPbBr3 RMS roughness from 2.8 nm to 1.2 nm. Similar to the BAI:MAPbI3 system, the XRD peaks are lower in intensity and have larger widths (note that the MAPbBr3 XRD data are scaled). Using a low concentration for MAPbBr3 also highlights the significant advantage of this process enabling fabrication of very thin films with full surface coverage. Images of other areas of the MAPbBr3 control film reveal that some of the gaps between grains may be pinholes extending through the thickness of the film (∼40–50 nm).
Finally, the improvement of proper surfactant choice was demonstrated for the completely inorganic CsBr:PbBr2 solutions in DMSO (0.5 M). Due to the polarity index disparity between DMSO and toluene, we changed the exchange solvent to chloroform (polarity index = 4.1) which is better matched to DMSO.23Fig. 5e shows that the chloroform exchanged control CsPbBr3 film without BABr was relatively rough (6.6 nm RMS) with a highly irregular morphology. Upon addition of BABr (BABr:CsBr = 0.2), the roughness was reduced to 5.3 nm (Fig. 5f). Most interesting, the morphology was altered from non-uniform domains to particles of a well-defined shape and size distribution. The crystallite size and crystallinity were changed very little based on the XRD patterns. These results further demonstrate that processing of lead halide perovskite thin films benefits directly from applied sol–gel concepts.
Device characterization
Thin (∼30 nm) MAPbI3 layers were incorporated into photovoltaic devices in order to demonstrate the advantages of processing improvements made possible through sol–gel engineering. The layers were kept thin in order to exaggerate the effects that shunting can have on rough layers and to ensure efficient photocurrent collection. Although the BAX additives allow for smooth, high quality interfaces, the fine grain structure is not optimal for photovoltaic performance due to reduced charge mobility resulting in low short-circuit current density (Jsc) and fill factor (FF) for thick layers. The device structure employed is: indium tin oxide (ITO)/poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)-benzidine] (poly-TPD)/MAPbI3/C60/bathocuproine/Al. Devices were fabricated with MAPbI3 layers without BAI and MAPbI3 + BAI (BAI:MAI = 0.1), both with and without a solvent exchange (SE). The low roughness of films processed by the SE technique allow for thin (25 nm), thermally evaporated electron transport layers without the use of a spin coated transport layer for planarization.
The current density–voltage (J–V) curves are plotted in Fig. 6. Independent forward and reverse scans were collected showing non-negligible hysteresis in all of the devices. However, for the BAI + SE device (RMS ∼ 2 nm), the averaged reverse scan open-circuit voltage (Voc), Jsc, FF, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) were 1.08 V, 7.6 mA cm−2, 70%, and 5.8%, respectively. The control device + SE (RMS ∼ 4 nm) displays average Voc, Jsc, FF, and PCE of 0.72 V, 9.8 mA cm−2, 62%, and 4.4%, respectively. Device statistics are presented in Table S1 in the ESI.† The former is, to the best of our knowledge, the best device performance for an MAPbI3 absorber layer of this thickness fabricated by either solution or vapor deposition methods.13,26 Most notably, the average Voc approaches the highest achieved for MAPbI3 absorbing layers in “hero” devices (1.09 V for poly-TPD,27 the highest reported is 1.13 V employing a poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) HTL28 which has been shown to have better energy level alignment29) despite being more than an order of magnitude thinner, which reflects the superior coverage, uniformity, and interface roughness enabled by sol–gel engineering. Without the SE, the films have comparable roughnesses and the J–V characteristics converge indicating that the BAI is solely a processing additive and is not contributing significantly to other effects such as passivation or energy level alignment. The 50% increase in Jsc for the other three devices is attributed to improved light absorption due to scattering from the much rougher perovskite film texturing the Al cathode. There is even a slight increase in Jsc for the control device without a SE compared to with a SE. The control without a SE has a slightly increased RMS roughness of ∼6–7 nm compared to ∼4–5 nm for the SE control. The ultrasmooth film fabricated with the BAI additive even allowed for reduced C60 thickness down to 10 nm, minimizing the series resistance of the ETL. This enabled even better charge collection and lower hysteresis for the BAI + SE device leading to improved PCE > 6%. In contrast, the control + SE device performance degraded with a 10 nm C60 ETL, presumably due to poor conformity of the evaporated C60 on the rougher interface leading to increased leakage and recombination losses (Fig. S12†). These results imply that even devices utilizing thick layers of MAPbI3 processed by state of the art methods suffer from voids.
 Fig. 6  Representative current density vs. voltage characteristics of thin (∼30 nm) MAPbI3 solar cells with BAI additive (solid lines) and without (dashed lines) under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G illumination. The red curves correspond to devices for which a solvent exchange (SE) was performed while the blue curves are the control devices where a SE was not performed. The dark curves are also shown. 
This straightforward experiment illustrates that an in depth understanding of the sol–gel processing of these perovskite materials is a powerful tool to control film morphology with clear implications for devices. And while it is unlikely that the films presented here will directly lead to record solar cell efficiencies, it is clear that film processing can continue to be improved. It is expected that these improvements will permit a wider variety of structures and devices to be fabricated and characterized, providing a more robust foundation for fundamental studies and, at the same time, facilitate a myriad of new applications.
Conclusion
We demonstrate that the spin coating of lead halide perovskites is a sol–gel process. The rapid kinetics of the sol–gel steps and competition from intermediate phases lead to low quality films with relatively poor reproducibility. Better processing routes would help to decouple the sol–gel steps making them more controllable. Movement away from coordination complex forming solvents, such as DMF and DMSO, in general would be beneficial and permit a wider variety of structures that could be fabricated. Ideally, substantial changes in solvent engineering, solution preparation, and additives would eliminate the need for a solvent exchange. Despite the process being less than ideal, we provide guidelines for optimizing film coverage and morphology using a solvent exchanged ambigel synthesis. Simple sol–gel concepts are used to properly select additives that improve the current processing methods enabling ultrasmooth perovskite films. Such low roughness and small domain size demonstrated here allow us to show high-quality solar cells from ultrathin layers, and are very promising for fabrication of thickness tunable, high optical quality layers for light emitters, harvesters, and lasing devices.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Prof. Robert Prud'homme and Prof. George Scherer for many fruitful discussions of colloidal and sol–gel chemistry. We would also like to thank Kyung-Min Lee for SEM and Brian Wilson for his help with the DLS measurements. We acknowledge a DARPA Young Faculty Award (Award #D15AP00093) and the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation (Award #2014199) for research funding. B. P. R. acknowledges the support of a DuPont Young Professor Award. R. A. K. acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE 1148900.
References
J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 CAS .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 CAS .
J. H. Heo, D. H. Song and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(48), 8179–8183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Moore, H. Sai, K. Wee Tan, L. A. Estroff and U. Wiesner, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081802 CrossRef .
K. W. Tan, D. T. Moore, M. Saliba, H. Sai, L. A. Estroff, T. Hanrath, H. J. Snaith and U. Wiesner, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(5), 4730–4739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, F. C. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4(14), 1400355 Search PubMed .
M. J. Carnie, C. Charbonneau, M. L. Davies, J. Troughton, T. M. Watson, K. Wojciechowski, H. J. Snaith and D. A. Worsley, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7893–7895 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Mohammad, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 CAS .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126(37), 10056–10061 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 CAS .
J. You, Y. Yang, Z. Hong, T.-B. Song, L. Meng, Y. Liu, C. Jiang, H. Zhou, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 183902 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. J. van Franeker, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Pathak, R. J. Sutton, G. Grancini, D. S. Ginger, R. A. J. Janssen, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(9), 9380–9393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Bao, F. Li, T. Yu, J. Yang, W. Zhu, X. Zhou, G. Fu and Z. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(17), 9110–9117 CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(37), 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, M. Long, T. Zhang, Z. Wei, H. Chen, S. Yang and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(13), 4460–4468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–Gel Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego,  1990, ch. 8, pp. 453–509 Search PubMed .
D. R. Rolison and B. Dunn, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 963–980 RSC .
A. Wakamiya, M. Endo, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and Y. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43(5), 711–713 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Muraeva, Inorg. Mater., 1997, 33, 508–509 CAS .
L. R. Snyder, J. Chromatogr., 1978, 92, 223–234 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, K. Kathan, W. Saad and R. K. Prud'homme, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 036102 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hu, C. Wang, R. M. Kennedy, L. D. Marks and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54(3), 740–745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldán-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, R. Betancur, G. Longo, C. Momblona, F. Jaramillo, L. Camacho and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2968–2973 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15001 CrossRef .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ryu, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2614–2618 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03092kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Photograph of MAPbI3 thin films spun at 5500 rpm in a low DMF vapor pressure environment where toluene was applied at 3, 4, 5, and 6 s or no toluene application. The size of each glass substrate is 2.5 × 2.5 cm.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM images of MAPbI3 thin films solvent exchanged DMF for toluene at (a and d) 4 s, (b and e) 5 s, and (c and f) 6 s. Films (a–c) and (d–f) were processed in low and high DMF vapor pressure atmospheres, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the solvent exchanged MAPbI3 films in an unsaturated (solid curves) or saturated (dashed curves) DMF atmosphere. Data are offset for clarity.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  AFM images of PbI2 films spun at 4000 rpm in a saturated DMF atmosphere. Solvent exchange was performed at (a) 4 s, (b) 5 s, (c) 7 s, and (d) no toluene exchange.	 

 	Fig. 5  Tapping mode AFM image of (a) a butylammonium iodide (BAI) surfacted MAPbI3 thin film with RMS roughness of 1.6 nm. Tapping mode AFM images of MAPbBr3 cast from 0.2 M solution (c) without and (d) with BABr additive with RMS roughnesses of 2.8 and 1.2 nm, respectively. Contact mode AFM images of CsPbBr3 films from 0.5 M solution in DMSO (e) without and (f) with BABr additive with roughnesses of 6.6 and 5.3 nm, respectively. The methylammonium containing films were solvent exchanged with toluene and the CsPbBr3 films were exchanged with chloroform. The XRD patterns (solid and dashed lines for pristine and additive containing films, respectively) in (b) show no extra phases are formed by addition of the butylammonium halide. The MAPbBr3 XRD data were scaled down due to their high intensity relative to the other films.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative current density vs. voltage characteristics of thin (∼30 nm) MAPbI3 solar cells with BAI additive (solid lines) and without (dashed lines) under simulated 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G illumination. The red curves correspond to devices for which a solvent exchange (SE) was performed while the blue curves are the control devices where a SE was not performed. The dark curves are also shown.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta03092k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
