Real-time X-ray scattering studies of film evolution in high performing small-molecule–fullerene organic solar cells    - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA00935A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA00935A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8764-8771Real-time X-ray scattering studies of film evolution in high performing small-molecule–fullerene organic solar cells†‡

        
          
            Sebastian 
            Engmann
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Felicia A. 
            Bokel
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrew A. 
            Herzing
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyun Wook 
            Ro
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Claudio 
            Girotto
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bruno 
            Caputo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Corey V. 
            Hoven
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Schaible
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Alexander 
            Hexemer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dean M. 
            DeLongchamp
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Lee J. 
            Richter
          
        
      *a
aMaterials Science Engineering Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA. E-mail: dean.delongchamp@nist.gov; lee.richter@nist.gov
bNEXT Energy Technologies, Inc., Santa Barbara, CA 9311, USA
cAdvanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
Received 
      4th February 2015
    , Accepted 11th February 2015First published on 23rd March 2015AbstractWe have studied the influence of the formulation additive 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO) on the structural evolution of bulk heterojunction (BHJ) films based the small molecule donor 7,7′-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(6-fluoro-5-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole) (p-DTS(FBTTh2)2) and phenyl-C71-butyric-acid-methyl ester ([70]PCBM). Real-time, in situ, grazing-incidence X-ray scattering experiments allow us to characterize the development of crystalline order via diffraction and phase separation via small angle scattering. The performance of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 based solar cells exhibits a distinct optimum with respect to volume fraction of DIO in the coating solution, unlike many polymer–fullerene systems that exhibit plateaus in performance above a certain additive volume fraction. Increasing the DIO volume fraction increases the crystallinity of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and dramatically increases the phase separation length scale even at small DIO amounts. These results suggest that the existence of an optimal DIO amount is a consequence of the phase separation length scale and its relationship to the optimal length for exciton dissociation. The effects of DIO on the time evolution of the drying films indicates that it acts as both a solvent and a plasticizer for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, controlling its nucleation density and promoting its crystal growth.
Introduction
As the earth's population surpasses 7 billion, economic and societal concerns mandate the adoption of sustainable manufacturing practices with earth-abundant raw materials and low energy consumption.1–3 Sustainability concerns have helped spur the current interest in organic photovoltaics, which promise low cost and short energy recovery times if efficiency and lifetime targets can be reached.4 Currently, the most successful organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices are based on the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) structure,5,6 in which phase separation of two organic semiconductors on a nanoscale can enable efficient exciton dissociation and charge transport. The majority of high-performing OPV demonstrations to date have been based on polymer–fullerene blends, which have the advantage of easy solution processability and an apparently self-limiting crystal domain size.7,8 However, polymer semiconductors are sensitive to polydispersity effects,2,9,10 and they are notoriously difficult to purify, which may adversely affect their manufacturability. Recently, there has been significant success in developing soluble small molecule semiconductors for OPV applications.11–13 Small molecules have the benefit of generally easier synthesis and purification, but they present challenges in terms of morphological control due to a propensity for excessive crystal growth.
The small molecule semiconductor 7,7′-(4,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-silolo[3,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-2,6-diyl)bis(6-fluoro-5-(5′-hexyl-[2,2′-bithiophen]-5-yl)benzo[c][1,2,5]thiadiazole), (p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, Fig. 1), has emerged as a promising OPV material, achieving over 7% power conversion efficiency (PCE) in blends with phenyl-C71-butyric-acid-methyl ester ([70]PCBM, Fig. 1) in both conventional and inverted architectures.14,15,35 Empirically it was found that the use of a high boiling point additive, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), was necessary for optimal device performance. Additives have become commonplace in the optimization of polymer–fullerene BHJ morphology.16–18 In general they are thought to act through two principal effects: (1) they alter the local order (generally enhancing the crystallinity and presumably the charge carrier transport); and (2) they influence the nanoscale phase separation. Examples can be found in the literature where additives either coarsen finely mixed systems or refine coarsely separated systems.16,18–20 Notably, in the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 system,21 like the analogous p-DTS(PTTh2)2 system,12 the device PCE was found to be extremely sensitive to the additive amount, achieving maximum performance at a very specific, low amount (≈0.4% volume fraction). This is in stark contrast to the behavior of most polymer–fullerene systems where the dependence on additive amount is rather weak and volume fractions of 2% to 3% are commonly added.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structure of: (top) p-DTS(FBTTh2)2; and (bottom) [70]PCBM. 
Real-time, in situ studies of structure evolution have proven to be a powerful tool to elucidate the mechanisms by which additives influence OPV film performance.22–25 In this report we present in situ studies of the structure evolution in blade coated films of the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM BHJ using grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXD) to characterize the local crystallinity and grazing incidence small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) to probe the phase separation length scale. The results allow us to develop a detailed model of how the additives control the film morphology that accounts for the extreme sensitivity of device performance on DIO amount.
Results & discussion
The studies were performed on films that were blade-coated on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) covered silicon wafers, mimicking conventional device fabrication. Blade coating is an excellent model for roll-to-roll compatible deposition schemes such as knife-over-edge or meniscus coating. It also facilitates real-time studies because the substrate is stationary. Experiments were performed with film composition and deposition conditions similar to those known to produce p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM films exhibiting high PCE. We describe how structure evolution depends on the amount of DIO added to the chlorobenzene (CB) BHJ solution, ranging from additive-free, thru intermediate (0.3% and 0.6%) volume fraction, to excessive (1.0%) volume fraction.
Previous studies of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM by Love et al., based on spin-coating deposition, demonstrated that additive-free solutions produce highly disordered films that result in poor PCE.26 The crystallinity of these films, as reflected in both ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectra and GIXD, was significantly enhanced by either thermal annealing or the use of DIO. Shown in our ESI‡ are comparisons of UV-Vis and GIXD data for spin coated and blade coated films, demonstrating that the extent of order within films formed by these two deposition techniques is similar and exhibit the same trends.
We collected GIXD patterns throughout the film formation process, but it is instructive to first consider the patterns at the end of drying, as shown in Fig. 2, from films coated from solutions having different DIO amounts. Also shown in Fig. 2e are vertical line profiles (qxy ≈ 0) extracted from the 2D-GIXD data for comparison. Consistent with earlier reports,21,26 one observes very little diffraction from the additive-free film. Films made from DIO-containing solutions with the optimal 0.6% volume fraction and excessive 1.0% volume fraction both exhibit a distinct (00l) series, with up to 3 orders of diffraction visible. (The inset of Fig. 2e) shows the thickness-normalized, integrated, and corrected27 (001) pole figure value, a relative measure for order, demonstrating the radical increase in the degree of crystallization due the addition of DIO to the coating solution.
 Fig. 2  GIXD patterns for films at the end of drying, coated with: (a) additive-free; (b) 0.3%; (c) 0.6%; and (d) 1.0% volume fraction DIO. Also shown is the vertical line profile (qxy ≈ 0) for each image (e). Inset is the relative crystallinity obtained from the thickness normalized (001) pole figures. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the approximate scattering vector magnitude (q). 
Love et al. reported a single crystal structure for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2. The triclinic unit cell contained 2 slip-stacked molecules, with alternating orientation with respect to the short axis. The alkyl stacking d-spacing was 2.2 nm. As shown in ESI,‡ the broad (001) series can be resolved into two polymorphs with d-spacings of (2.3 and 2.5) nm. The 2.3 nm form, with a peak at ≈0.27 Å−1, is presumably the bulk crystal structure reported by Love. A third structure, consistent with reports by Perez et al.,21 exhibits a single diffraction feature at ≈0.4 Å−1 (1.5 nm), but it only exhibits significant intensity in the additive-free films. We attribute the 0.4 Å−1 feature to a metastable phase, a possibility mentioned by Perez et al., that is gradually transformed to the final bulk crystal structure (see below). We observed significant run-to-run variation in the (always weak) diffraction intensity of the additive-free film.
The time evolution of the GIXD patterns of our p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM films is shown in Fig. 3. Also shown is the time evolution of the integral of the corrected pole figure of the combined (001) feature, and the total film thickness (including both liquids and solids) from simultaneous in situ reflectometry. As described previously24 the total film thickness decreases as the liquids evaporate, providing an indirect but quantitative in situ measurement of the amounts of CB, DIO, and the BHJ solids throughout structural evolution. The marked discontinuity in the film thickness evolution from rapidly decreasing to plateau-like represents the point at which CB evaporation is no longer dominant. For all films, we see a weak but sharp diffraction feature at ≈0.25 Å−1 that appears early in the time evolution, when significant amounts of CB remain. We attribute this feature to solution crystallization of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2. The onset of this solution crystallization is marked as time “A” in Fig. 3. This onset corresponds to a concentration of (45 ± 5) mg mL−1p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 with respect to the total solvent volume and (69 ± 5) mg mL−1 total solid content. For comparison the maximum solubility of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 in CB at the sample stage temperature of 40 °C is (45 ± 5) mg mL−1 (see ESI‡ for temperature dependent solubility data).
 Fig. 3  (Top) 2D false color images of GIXD pattern vertical line profiles (qxy ≈ 0) plotted over time. (Bottom) integrated value of the corrected pole figure (blue) as extracted from the time series, for the additive-free (a and e), 0.3% (b and f), 0.6% (c and g) and 1.0% (d and h) DIO case. Also shown is the film thickness (grey) from spectral reflectometry. Indicated are the onset positions of solution crystallization (A), onset of film crystallization (B), end of structure evolution from the metastable to the final crystal structure (C) and onset of bimodal growth (D). Crystallization nominally ends coincident with the evaporation of DIO at the end of drying (Dry), in case of the additive free film this coincident to the end of CB evaporation. 
At times much later after the solution crystal appearance, we see the appearance of a new, well-aligned and stronger diffraction feature at ≈0.4 Å−1 at times marked as time “B” that evolves into the dominant end-of-drying feature at ≈0.27 Å−1, (best observed in Fig. 3b). The completion of this structure evolution is marked as time “C” and in all cases ends prior complete removal of DIO. The evolution of the dominant diffraction feature from “B” to “C” is remarkable in the sense that it is not a simple solid–solid phase transition. The location of the diffraction features changes smoothly with time. Furthermore, the q location of the onset feature at time “B” is similar to that of the end-of-drying diffraction feature assigned to the metastable feature in our additive-free films (see Fig. 2). For the additive-free solution, the feature at ≈0.4 Å−1 is extremely weak (see Fig. S9‡) and film crystallization appears to nominally directly proceed to the limiting 0.27 Å−1 form. Note that the relative size of the feature at ≈0.4 Å−1 in additive free films is highly variable, as can be seen by comparison of Fig. 2, 3a and S2.‡ The film crystallization onset starts late in the drying process, at concentrations far above those characteristic of solution crystallization. The crystallization ends abruptly, nominally coincident with the removal of CB. As the additive-free case results in a very disordered film, the lack of continued crystallization suggests the amorphous film (at our controlled substrate temperature of ≈40 °C) is below its glass transition temperature (Tg). From thermal expansion measurements (for further details see ESI‡) we estimate the Tg of pristine p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 to be (45 ± 10) °C. We have recently estimated the Tg of [70]PCBM to be ≈(160 ± 10) °C.28 A Fox equation estimate29 places Tg of an amorphous, mixed glass phase well above 40 °C.
The early solution crystals do not appear to seed the formation of the later film crystals. The solution crystals have several distinct characteristics. They exhibit an isotropic orientation distribution. After a short window near their initial appearance, they do not appear to substantially grow in number or in size. The later crystals of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 are highly oriented (for details see ESI:‡ pole figures – orientation factor) grow quickly, and appear at a significantly different characteristic q.
The presence of DIO does not significantly affect the onset of solution crystallization (see Fig. 3 and S9–S12‡). However, DIO does delay the onset of film crystallization. This delayed onset suggests that DIO is a solvent for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2. This was confirmed by complementary studies revealing a solubility of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 in DIO of approximately (24 ± 3) mg mL−1 solvent at room temperature, which is slightly lower but of similar magnitude to its initial 36 mg mL−1 concentration in CB. Additionally, for all films, the DIO extends the time window over which crystallization occurs. In all cases, crystallization nominally ends upon the complete evaporation of DIO, indicated as “Dry”, defined as the time when no further detectable thickness change is observed. The increase in the degree of crystallization induced by the DIO can be largely attributed to the extended time window for crystallization. The increased time window for crystal growth suggests that the DIO plasticizes the amorphous p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM glass formed upon the removal of CB.
The time evolution of the 1.0% volume fraction DIO case is notable in that the vertical line cut at qxy ≈ 0 loses intensity during film drying (approximately 100 s to 200 s after blading, see Fig. 3d) and slowly recovers intensity. The integrated corrected pole figure, however does not share these characteristics and instead increases monotonically over the same time (see Fig. 3h). The apparent contradiction can be resolved when considering the time evolution of the corrected pole figure prior to integration, see ESI e.g. Fig. S5.‡ The decrease in the observed intensity of the vertical line cut over time is a result of the comparably narrow q range used for this profile. The corrected pole figure shows a reorientation of the (001) crystals toward a broader orientation distribution about the qxy ≈ 0 line. Furthermore, a second face-on oriented fraction starts to form and evolve, with an onset marked time “D”, after ≈3 min of film drying. The changing orientation distribution contributes to the integrated pole figure, but not to the narrow vertical line cuts shown in Fig. 3. We attribute the growth of less oriented crystals to bulk nucleation, while the formation of the face-on oriented species presumably is due to interface nucleation.
The enhanced p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 crystallinity provided by DIO should improve hole transport within the donor domains and potentially benefit charge extraction. The degree of crystallinity saturates, however, at 0.6% volume fraction DIO and thus cannot account for the severe drop in device performance with higher DIO amount. Energy-filtered transmission electron microscopy (EF-TEM) images of films at the end of drying, shown in Fig. 4a–c, indicate that the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 crystal size and spacing increase with increasing DIO amount. To quantify this increase, we employ GISAXS, which can measure the characteristic length scale of the donor and acceptor domains. Shown in the ESI‡ are GISAXS images acquired at the end of drying for the DIO amounts studied. Shown in Fig. 4d are sector cuts at the incident horizon enhanced by the total internal reflection conditions of the grazing experiment. These cuts describe a scattering vector parallel to the sample plane, and report the lateral length scales of domains. Very little scattering is observed from the additive-free film, consistent with the absence of significant crystallization and a finely mixed morphology. In contrast, the low DIO amounts (volume fractions of 0.3% and 0.6%) display a distinct maximum. The characteristic length scale and correlation length extracted from a Teubner-Strey30 dependence of I(q) for all four tested DIO amounts is summarized in Table 1. Only the values from the (0.3% and 0.6%) volume fraction DIO cases are likely to be physically meaningful. A small offset and additional Porod (≈q−4) like dependence for very small q values were used to model the intensity background. There is a monotonic increase in the characteristic length scale of the Teubner-Strey model with increasing DIO amount.
 Fig. 4  EF-TEM images of films formed with (a) additive-free; (b) 0.6% volume fraction DIO; and (c) 1.0% volume fraction DIO. Bright areas correspond to p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 rich domains. A Kratky plot of the extracted line profile at the sample horizon, as well as the background model used for the TSI evaluation, is shown in (d). 
Table 1 Characteristic length scale and correlation length as determined from a Teubner-Strey fit of the I(q) dependence near the sample horizon for all tested additive amounts. The uncertainties correspond to the fit uncertainties




DIO
0.0%
0.3%
0.6%
1.0%




Characteristic length scale [nm]
37.6 ± 8
30.2 ± 0.1
71.9 ± 0.1
223 ± 18


Correlation length [nm]
2.7 ± 0.4
10.7 ± 0.1
15.1 ± 0.1
21.8 ± 0.2


TSI [rel.]
0.1 ± 0.1
0.5 ± 0.2
1.0 ± 0.2
1.0




Also included in Table 1 is the normalized total scattering intensity (TSI) for the 4 DIO amounts. As discussed below, the TSI reflects the phase purity of the material domains. Whereas the characteristic length scale evolves monotonically, the phase purity saturates at ≥0.6% volume fraction DIO, consistent with the saturation in relative crystallinity.
The GISAXS and TEM agree with each other and with the atomic force microscopy (AFM) of Love et al., who demonstrated a dispersion in length scale between thermally annealed films and additive treated films. The GISAXS and TEM clearly suggest that the origin of PCE degradation with greater DIO amounts is the development of excessively large domains. This may be attributable to nucleation density, which at higher DIO amounts appears to be smaller than it is at lower DIO amounts, consistent with DIO being a good solvent for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and greater amounts of DIO suppressing the formation of critical p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 nuclei.
In Fig. 5 the time evolution of the GISAXS data is shown along with the TSI, after subtraction of a background, and the characteristic length scale from Teubner-Strey fits. In the absence of DIO, the scattering exhibits an abrupt increase at the end of drying at (8 to 9) s. For the DIO-containing cases, initial scattering appears upon removal of the CB at high q. While the film is swollen with the DIO, the films only slightly coarsen. In all cases the time evolution of the characteristic length scale in GISAXS ended prior to complete removal of the DIO, in contrast to the TSI which evolves until complete DIO evaporation. These observations can be reconciled by considering the anisotropic shape of the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 crystals as shown in Fig. 4. Viewed as a projection (plan-view), the crystals appear needle-like, with a short dimension that is relatively uniform within each film and a long dimension that varies considerably. The short dimensions of the crystals in TEM are similar to the length scales reported by GISAXS, and they increase proportionally to one another, but they are not the same. In the 0.6% volume fraction DIO case, for example, the characteristic SAXS length scale at long times is ≈75 nm, whereas in the TEM images, the short dimension of the crystals is about half that. The TEM sizes are more consistent with expected exciton diffusion lengths. The GISAXS length scale is, however, potentially consistent with a long period, that is, a distance between centers of mass of adjacent crystals. If the GISAXS length scale does represent a long period, then its constant value with respect to time suggests a constant nucleation density that is set at early times. Growth in the short axis direction would not change the long period but it would cause the interstitial material to become purer fullerene, enhancing TSI. The time evolution of the GISAXS data is thus consistent with the hypothesis that lower nucleation density at higher DIO amounts is responsible for excess crystal size.
 Fig. 5  (Top) 2D false-color images of the times series of Iq2 sector cuts at the reflectivity horizon after removal of a constant background in I(q) for additive-free (a and e), 0.3% (b and f), 0.6% (c and g) and 1.0% (d and h) DIO case. (Bottom) total scattering intensity (TSI, black), characteristic length scale (blue) and correlation length (red). The calculated TSI for a 2 phase system consisting of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 + [70]PCBM + DIO is shown in green. Data was smoothed using a box of 5 pixels width. 
The GISAXS TSI evolution can be quantitatively reconciled with the GIXD evolution, but we must first treat the TSI properly, as it reflects both the material purity of the donor/acceptor phases and the presence of the DIO. The TSI can be estimated as function of the scattered domain composition via:25  ,where Δρij is the difference in the scattering length density (SLD) between the phases with volume fraction φi and φj. In the case of a two phase system the above approximation becomes exact. The scattering length density of the pristine donor and acceptor were determined via X-ray reflectivity to be SLDDonor = 1.13 × 10−3 nm−2 and SLDAcceptor = 1.36 × 10−3 nm−2. The SLD of the DIO was estimated from its density and known molecular structure as SLDDIO = 1.45 × 10−3 nm−2.31 The GIXD show no evidence for formation of a co-crystal, so we can assume that one phase is crystalline p-DTS(FBTTh2)2. The volume fraction of the crystalline phase should be proportional to the GIXD integrated pole figure in Fig. 3. The simplest model for the DIO-swollen film is a two phase model where the second phase contains the remaining amorphous p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, the [70]PCBM, the CB and DIO. Assuming the evaporation of the CB and DIO obey Raoult's law, we can determine all necessary volume fractions (crystalline and amorphous p-DTS(FBTTh2)2, [70]PCBM, CB and DIO) from the thickness evolution and GIXD pole figure.25 Shown in Fig. 5 are fits to the TSI for the DIO-containing films based on this two phase model and the observed GIXD in Fig. 3. The two phase model is reasonably successful at capturing the evolution of the TSI. There is no need for a separate additive-fullerene liquid phase in a 3-phase model, as was necessary for a regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene)–[60]PCBM system using the 1,8-octanedithiol additive.25 This is consistent with the observation that DIO is a solvent for both p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and [70]PCBM. There are only 2 parameters in the fit: a total scale factor and the total degree of crystallinity (DOC) of the film at the end of drying. For the 1.0% volume fraction DIO, the model requires (80 to 90) %DOC, consistent with the saturation of the TSI/purity and the expectation of facile crystallization in a small molecule (versus a polymer, for example). For the 0.3% volume fraction DIO case, the model predicts a DOC of ≈10%, consistent with the smaller relative magnitude of the final pole figure. For the 0.6% DIO volume fraction, the two phase model tends to fit with an unrealistically low DOC (≈40%) when considering the relative magnitude of the pole figure (see Fig. 2).
An incubation time is observed between the GISAXS and GIXD, with GISAXS occurring earlier in time than the GIXD. Our 2 phase model cannot fit this early time data, because it requires phase separation in the absence of detectable diffraction. This could be due to the existence of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 phases that exclude [70]PCBM but have weak diffraction strength, such as the ≈0.4 Å−1 polymorph.
Conclusions and perspective
The combination of in situ GIXD and GISAXS for the drying of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM films allows us to present a very complete picture of the influence of DIO in this prototypical small molecule–fullerene BHJ. OPV PCE is critically influenced by two aspects of morphology: (1) ordering (crystallinity) that presumably influences hole transport and may, through both phase purity and energetic heterogeneity, influence recombination, and (2) nanoscale domain shape and size, which presumably influences carrier generation via available interfaces and carrier extraction through both connectivity and recombination. A primary role of the additive in this system is to promote crystallization that is significantly suppressed in the additive-free film. This suppression appears to be an effect of the rapid drying, quenching the mixed amorphous state below Tg, as thermal treatment of the film results in crystallization (and significantly improved device performance).11 The additive seems to promote crystallinity by plasticization of the nearly-dry film, allowing crystallization to occur over extended times. As the commonly used fullerenes all have a high Tg and will induce or exacerbate vitrification in most BHJs, plasticization should be a universal mechanism for improved crystallinity. Additionally, the amount of additive provides fine control over the phase separation length scale. This appears to be the origin of the extreme sensitivity in OPV performance to the additive amount. Both the integrated pole figure (crystallinity) and TSI (phase purity) for the 0.6% and 1.0% additive treated films are statistically the same, yet the characteristic length scale of the phase separation as shown by GISAXS differs by more than a factor of 3. We attribute this to a suppression of nucleation, as the development of film crystallinity is delayed in the presence of the additive. Crystallization in the presence of the additive occurs at an extent of super-saturation that is set by the additive amount. The high additive amounts (greater solvation) have a lower free-energy drive for nucleation and thus sparser nucleation. This leads to larger crystal sizes for increased additive content. As the performance of many small molecule-based BHJs exhibits high sensitivity to additive amount, this may also be a near universal mechanism for small molecule systems.
It is illuminating to compare the impact of the additive on the solidification of the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM system with previous reports for polymer–fullerene systems. The apparent impact of DIO on the nucleation density of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 appears to be relatively unique to this small molecule system, compared to what has been reported to date for polymers. Whether P3HT is crystallized in the presence of no additive, CN, or ODT, the crystals appear to be fibers for which the crystal length scale from SAXS is similar.25 There is no evidence that the additives impact the final polymer crystal nucleation density, although this could be in part because the polymer crystals exhibit self-limiting growth of their width, whereas p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 exhibits no such limit.
In the P3HT–[60]PCBM system, the addition of additive, whether it is a solvent for the polymer (1-chloronaphthalene, CN) or a nonsolvent (1,8-octanedithiol, ODT), generally causes P3HT aggregation to appear earlier during drying.24,25 Earlier nucleation was also identified as an important impact of ODT on the PCPDTBT–[70]PCBM system,32 and of DIO on the PTB7–[70]PCBM system.32,33 This early aggregation has been attributed to an additive induced decrease in the solvent quality. In p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM, however, the DIO additive causes the p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 to crystallize later. This difference may be, in part, attributed to the lower solvency of CN and ODT for P3HT, compared to the higher solvency of DIO for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2. It is intriguing that DIO does have a lower solvency for p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 than does the primary solvent CB, yet the addition of DIO still delays the onset of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 crystallization.
All of the additives in all of the systems studied to date, polymer and small molecule, greatly extend the crystallization window for the absorber by remaining in the film longer than the primary solvent and plasticizing the mixed glass. We initially expected that DIO in p-DTS(FBTTh2)2–[70]PCBM would act as ODT does in P3HT–[60]PCBM or PCPDTBT–[70]PCBM,32 due to its chemical similarity. I.e. that DIO would plasticize the mixed glass by selective solvation of the fullerene, removing it from the mixed amorphous phase. Instead, we observe that DIO acts more as CN does in P3HT–[60]PCBM,25 consistent with it being a moderately good, low-volatility solvent for the small molecule. These results highlight the importance of direct plasticization, rather than indirect plasticization by selective solvation of the vitrifying fullerene, as a mechanism by which additives can affect the solidification of organic BHJ films.
Experimental details
All films were made from a 1.5:1 by mass solution of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and [70]PCBM in chlorobenzene, CB. 1,8-diiodooctane, DIO, was used as the additive. A custom blade coater described earlier24 was employed, with a stage temperature of 40 °C, blade height of 200 μm, and blade velocity of 20 mm s−1p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 was provided as a gift from NEXT Energy Technologies Inc.§ [70]PCBM was from Nano-C, CB and DIO from Sigma-Aldrich. All materials were used as received. Solutions were 60 mg mL−1 total solids and were formed by stirring for ≈(2 to 3) h at 90 °C and then filtering into preheated mininert vials prior to storage at 70 °C. In this manner two stock solutions containing 0% and 1.0% DIO additive were prepared. Care was taken to dispense and weight the DIO additive inside a nitrogen purged glove box to minimize degradation of the material due to air contact. Intermediate additive concentrations of 0.3% and 0.6% DIO were achieved by stoichiometric mixing of the two stock solutions. Each solution was allowed to equilibrate for at least 2 h prior use. The solution was dispensed onto the blade coater from a 70 °C glass syringe.
GIXD and GISAXS experiments were conducted at beam line 7.3.3 at the advanced light source at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories. The collimated 10 keV beam was approximately 300 μm high and 300 μm wide. Beam damage over the course of the run was avoided by use of mica sheet attenuators. A 2M pixel Pilatus detector was used for both GIXD and GISAXS at nominally (203 and 3875) mm distances, respectively.
Multiple authors have treated the differences between GIXD recorded with an imaging detector and specular XRD recorded in a theta-2-theta mode. Geometry and conservation of energy allows one to assign a raw momentum transfer (q) to each point on an imaging detector. This simple calculation is used in assigning the axes of the image plots in Fig. 2 and in our ESI.‡ The real momentum transfer, accounting for the off-specular geometry of the GIXD experiment due to its fixed and low incident angle, opens a missing wedge of data, near zero in-plane momentum transfer (qxy ≈ 0). This transformation is applied to the data prior to the construction of pole figures (see Fig. S5‡). When calculating the total volume of crystalline scatters (the integral of the pole figure), one must also account for the different sampling of phase space (assuming isotropy in the surface plane) associated with each polar angle Ω. This results in a Sin(Ω) weighting that is also applied when integrating the missing wedge corrected pole figures (see ESI‡ for more details).
A home-made white light normal incidence reflectometer, based on a commercial array detector was used to simultaneously monitor the film thickness during X-ray measurements. A simple optical model consisting of an effective medium mixture of solvent, [70]PCBM, and two forms of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 (glassy and crystalline) was used to extract the thickness. The thickness of films at the end of drying agreed with ellipsometric measurements by ≈10 nm. Typical dwell times for the X-ray measurement varied from (0.1 to 9) s. For the optical measurements the acquisition rate was in the range between from (0.05 to 2.) s per spectra.
Specimens were prepared for energy-filtered TEM analysis by floating the films in DI water and attaching them to copper TEM grids. Energy-filtered images were collected using an FEI Titan 80-300 TEM/STEM operating at 300 kV and equipped with a Gatan Tridiem 865 imaging energy filter. Optimal energy-loss channels for maximum contrast were determined by a combination of hyperspectral imaging and principal component analysis, as described previously.34 The images presented were acquired by taking the ratio of a pair of images acquired using a 5 eV wide energy-selecting slit centered at 18 eV and 28 eV, respectively.
Acknowledgements
Materials preparation and ellipsometric studies were performed in the NIST Organic Photovoltaic Integrated Measurement Facility funded through ARRA. FB acknowledges support of a NIST/National Research Council (NRC) postdoctoral fellowship. Beamline 7.3.3 of the Advanced Light Source is supported by the Director of the Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
Notes and references
C. J. Brabec, F. Padinger, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen and N. S. Sariciftci, Synth. Met., 1999, 102, 861–864 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, P. Schilinsky, J. Hauch and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 503–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lizin, S. Van Passel, E. De Schepper, W. Maes, L. Lutsen, J. Manca and D. Vanderzande, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3136–3149 CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323–1338 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Beaujuge and J. M. J. Fréchet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20009–20029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Yang and W. You, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 607–632 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wolfer, A. Armin, A. Pivrikas, M. Velusamy, P. L. Burn and P. Meredith, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 71–77 RSC .
P. Schilinsky, U. Asawapirom, U. Scherf, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2175–2180 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. van der Poll, J. A. Love, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3646–3649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, C.-C. Chen, Z. Hong, J. Gao, Y. Yang, H. Zhou, L. Dou, G. Li and Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3356 Search PubMed .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, J. Zhang, S. Chand, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2397–2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Wang, A. K. K. Kyaw, V. Gupta, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1161–1165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3028–3036 CrossRef .
H.-C. Liao, C.-C. Ho, C.-Y. Chang, M.-H. Jao, S. B. Darling and W.-F. Su, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 326–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, J. K. Lee, J. S. Moon, J. Yuen, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1107–1111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pivrikas, P. Stadler, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 775–782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Perez, K. W. Chou, J. A. Love, T. S. van der Poll, D.-M. Smilgies, T.-Q. Nguyen, E. J. Kramer, A. Amassian and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6380–6384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schmidt-Hansberg, M. Sanyal, M. F. G. Klein, M. Pfaff, N. Schnabel, S. Jaiser, A. Vorobiev, E. Muller, A. Colsmann, P. Scharfer, D. Gerthsen, U. Lemmer, E. Barrena and W. Schabel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8579–8590 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Andrew, W. Tao and G. L. David, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 022501 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Shin, L. J. Richter, A. A. Herzing, R. J. Kline and D. M. DeLongchamp, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 938–948 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp, F. A. Bokel, S. Engmann, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian, E. Schaible and A. Hexemer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400975 Search PubMed .
J. A. Love, C. M. Proctor, J. Liu, C. J. Takacs, A. Sharenko, T. S. van der Poll, A. J. Heeger, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5019–5026 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Baker, L. H. Jimison, S. Mannsfeld, S. Volkman, S. Yin, V. Subramanian, A. Salleo, A. P. Alivisatos and M. F. Toney, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9146–9151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Leman, M. A. Kelly, S. Ness, S. Engmann, A. Herzing, C. Snyder, H.-W. Ro, R. J. Kline and L. J. Richter, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 383–392 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Fox and P. J. Flory, J. Appl. Phys., 1950, 21, 581–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Teubner and R. Strey, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 3195–3200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Neutron activation and scattering calculator, http://www.ncnr.nist.gov/resources/activation/, 2014.
J. T. Rogers, K. Schmidt, M. F. Toney, G. C. Bazan and E. J. Kramer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2884–2887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, W. Zhao, J. R. Tumbleston, C. Wang, Y. Gu, D. Wang, A. L. Briseno, H. Ade and T. P. Russell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301377 Search PubMed .
A. A. Herzing, L. J. Richter and I. M. Anderson, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17501–17508 CAS .
A. K. K. Kyaw, D. H. Wang, V. Gupta, W. L. Leong, L. Ke, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4569–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Official contribution of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST); not subject to copyright in the United States.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Optical absorption spectra, additional diffraction patterns, polymorphism discussion, pole figure analysis details, thermal expansion measurements, solubility measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta00935a§ Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structure of: (top) p-DTS(FBTTh2)2; and (bottom) [70]PCBM.	 

 	Fig. 2  GIXD patterns for films at the end of drying, coated with: (a) additive-free; (b) 0.3%; (c) 0.6%; and (d) 1.0% volume fraction DIO. Also shown is the vertical line profile (qxy ≈ 0) for each image (e). Inset is the relative crystallinity obtained from the thickness normalized (001) pole figures. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the approximate scattering vector magnitude (q).	 

 	Fig. 3  (Top) 2D false color images of GIXD pattern vertical line profiles (qxy ≈ 0) plotted over time. (Bottom) integrated value of the corrected pole figure (blue) as extracted from the time series, for the additive-free (a and e), 0.3% (b and f), 0.6% (c and g) and 1.0% (d and h) DIO case. Also shown is the film thickness (grey) from spectral reflectometry. Indicated are the onset positions of solution crystallization (A), onset of film crystallization (B), end of structure evolution from the metastable to the final crystal structure (C) and onset of bimodal growth (D). Crystallization nominally ends coincident with the evaporation of DIO at the end of drying (Dry), in case of the additive free film this coincident to the end of CB evaporation.	 

 	Fig. 4  EF-TEM images of films formed with (a) additive-free; (b) 0.6% volume fraction DIO; and (c) 1.0% volume fraction DIO. Bright areas correspond to p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 rich domains. A Kratky plot of the extracted line profile at the sample horizon, as well as the background model used for the TSI evaluation, is shown in (d).	 

Characteristic length scale [nm]	37.6 ± 8	30.2 ± 0.1	71.9 ± 0.1	223 ± 18
Correlation length [nm]	2.7 ± 0.4	10.7 ± 0.1	15.1 ± 0.1	21.8 ± 0.2
TSI [rel.]	0.1 ± 0.1	0.5 ± 0.2	1.0 ± 0.2	1.0

 	Fig. 5  (Top) 2D false-color images of the times series of Iq2 sector cuts at the reflectivity horizon after removal of a constant background in I(q) for additive-free (a and e), 0.3% (b and f), 0.6% (c and g) and 1.0% (d and h) DIO case. (Bottom) total scattering intensity (TSI, black), characteristic length scale (blue) and correlation length (red). The calculated TSI for a 2 phase system consisting of p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 and p-DTS(FBTTh2)2 + [70]PCBM + DIO is shown in green. Data was smoothed using a box of 5 pixels width.	 

 		 
Footnotes
† Official contribution of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST); not subject to copyright in the United States.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Optical absorption spectra, additional diffraction patterns, polymorphism discussion, pole figure analysis details, thermal expansion measurements, solubility measurements. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta00935a
§ Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
