High quality graphene -semiconducting oxide heterostructure for inverted organic photovoltaics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM00072E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM00072E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13032-13038Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHigh quality graphene-semiconducting oxide heterostructure for inverted organic photovoltaics

        
          
            Kyung-Sik 
            Shin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hanggochnuri 
            Jo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyeon-Jin 
            Shin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Won Mook 
            Choi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jae-Young 
            Choi
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Sang-Woo 
            Kim
          
        
      *ad
aSchool of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kimsw1@skku.edu;  Fax: +82-31-290-7381
bSamsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), Samsung Electronics, Yongin 446-712, Republic of Korea
cSchool of Chemical Engineering and Bioengineering, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, Republic of Korea
dSKKU Advanced Institute of Nanotechnology (SAINT), Center for Human Interface Nanotechnology (HINT), SKKU-Samsung Graphene Center, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea
Received 
      5th January 2012
    , Accepted 21st March 2012First published on 3rd May 2012AbstractIn this work, we demonstrate damage-free direct growth of high-quality semiconducting ZnO thin films on thermal chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown graphene transferred onto a plastic substrate. A mist pyrolysis CVD (MPCVD) method based on a non-vacuum process at a low growth temperature of 160 °C is introduced for the successful direct growth of ZnO on graphene without any additional treatments or processes. ZnO thin films that did not exhibit damage to the structural and electrical properties of graphene were successfully grown on graphene. The MPCVD-grown ZnO thin films revealed more uniform surface morphology and better structural property than ZnO thin films deposited using sol–gel and sputtering. Using the ZnO/graphene heterostructure, we fabricated bulk heterojunction inverted organic photovoltaics with a power conversion efficiency of 1.55%.
Introduction
Carbon materials such as carbon nanotube (CNT) and graphene, a honeycomb crystal structure of carbon atoms, have recently attracted interest for use in nanoscale functional devices due to their outstanding electronic, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties including quantum electronic transport, optical transparency, chemical stability, and mechanical durability.1–6 Graphene is one of the most promising next-generation transparent conducting materials for replacing traditional transparent conducting oxides such as indium tin oxide and fluorine tin oxide in functional devices including solar cells and light-emitting diodes7–9 as well as a promising candidate for the fabrication of nanoelectronics such as transistors.10,11
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown graphene anode-based organic solar cells (OSCs) with high performance (conversion efficiencies up to ∼2.5%) were recently reported.12,13 However, the CVD-grown graphene anode-based OSCs including semiconducting polymer/fullerene bulk heterojunction (BHJ) blends were fabricated on glass substrates rather than plastic substrates. Moreover, previous graphene anode-based BHJ OSCs included an acidic poly(3,4 ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) layer as an anode buffer layer that is hygroscopic and a low work function metallic cathode (e.g., Al, Ca) that is easily oxidized in air. As a result, PEDOT:PSS and the cathode strongly affect the stability of the OSCs.
Inverted OSCs (IOSCs) have been intensively studied due to their high potential interface stability, which results from the replacement of the low work function metallic cathode with an air-stable, high work function metallic anode (e.g., Au, Ag) and the introduction of n-type metal oxide semiconductors as a desirable path that can effectively transport electrons from the polymer layer to the cathode electrode. To the best of our knowledge, no reports have described large-scale graphene cathode-based BHJ IOSCs, possibly due to technical difficulties associated with the low-temperature damage-free direct growth of high quality n-type metal oxide semiconductors such as ZnO and TiOx on graphene/plastic substrates.14
Numerous efforts have been made to prepare high-quality metal oxide thin films or nanostructures on graphene using various methods including sol–gel,15 aqueous solutions,16 metal organic chemical vapor deposition,9 sputtering,17 and atomic layer deposition (ALD).18–20 However, low-temperature direct growth of oxide semiconductors on pristine graphene is not straightforward due to the hydrophobic and chemically inert nature of the basal plane of sp2-bonded graphene.
In particular, it has been proven rather challenging to nucleate and grow a uniform thin layer of metal oxide on graphene using ALD with a plasma surface treatment,18 a seeding layer,19 or a polymer layer20 for functionalization of the graphene plane. These additional processes can often result in a significant degradation in carrier mobility of graphene by plasma damage, and limit the effective gate coupling in nanoelectronics and effective carrier transport properties between oxide and graphene in electronic devices due to the polymer layer. A new approach that allows direct growth of metal oxide on graphene without introducing any appreciable defects into the carbon lattice and change of carrier transport properties of graphene is strongly required. In addition, direct growth of metal oxides on graphene/plastic substrates at low temperature is indispensable for large-area flexible device applications based on graphene.
In this work, we investigate damage-free direct growth of high-quality semiconducting ZnO thin films on large-scale graphene transferred onto a plastic substrate using MPCVD at a low growth temperature of 160 °C. Additionally, we fabricated graphene cathode-based BHJ IOSCs with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 1.55% using the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film acting as an electron transport layer.
Experimental
Preparation of graphene sheets on PEN and SiO2 substrates
Graphene was prepared on copper (Cu) foil using rapid thermal CVD (RT-CVD). The graphene was synthesized by methane and hydrogen gas flow (CH4:H2 = 2:1) for 30 min at 1000 °C. After completion of growth, the gas supply was terminated, and the chamber was cooled down to 500 °C with a cooling rate of 160 °C min−1.
To separate graphene from the Cu foil after synthesis, poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) was coated on the graphene/Cu foil, followed by dipping into an etchant (HNO3) solution. After the remaining graphene coated with PMMA was rinsed in deionized (DI) water, the PMMA-coated graphene sheets were transferred onto PEN or SiO2 substrate and the PMMA was removed by acetone. This transfer process was repeated three times to produce a graphene trilayer.
ZnO thin films on graphene/PEN and graphene/SiO2
Zinc acetate dehydrate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, 0.05 M) was dissolved in methoxy ethanol (C3H8O2, 9.56 mL) and monoethanolamine (C2H7NO, 0.44 mL) to form the ZnO sol. ZnO thin films were deposited onto graphene using spin coating at 4000 rpm for 30 s and heated at 150 °C for 30 min. In the sputter process, ZnO thin films on graphene/PEN or SiO2 were deposited by a radiofrequency (RF) magnetron sputtering system from a commercial ZnO target in a Ar/O2 (29:0.1 gas ratio) atmosphere. The deposition temperature and chamber pressure of the ZnO thin film were 100 °C and 3 mTorr, respectively. The RF power was maintained at 150 W for 16 min to deposit a thickness of approximately 60 nm. The source solution for the MPCVD growth of ZnO thin film was prepared by dissolving 0.01 M zinc acetate in acetone (100 mL). To form a ZnO precursor, the source solution was ultrasonically atomized by a 2.5 MHz ultrasonic transducer and was transferred to the graphene in the reactor by a nitrogen carrier gas flow of 5000 sccm. ZnO thin films were grown on PEN or SiO2 substrates at 160 °C.
Fabrication of BHJ IOSCs with MPCVD-grown ZnO thin films
The polymer blend was composed of P3HT:PCBM at a 1:1 weight ratio in a chlorobenzene solvent (15 mg mL−1) and stirred for 14 h at 40 °C in a glove box. An active layer with a thickness of 180 nm was spin-coated on MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film/graphene at 900 rpm. The devices were transferred to a glass Petri dish (d = 65 mm) containing solvents and covered with a glass cap. Then the active layers were annealed on a hotplate for 10 min at 110 °C. The MoO3 electron blocking layer and Ag anode were subsequently deposited by thermal evaporation.
Characterizations
Surface morphologies of graphene and ZnO thin films prepared using sol–gel, sputtering, and MPCVD methods were examined by FE-SEM and AFM. TEM (JEM 2100F, JEOL) and micro-Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw, RM-1000 Invia) using a 514 nm excitation were also used to characterize the samples. Hall-effect measurements (ACCENT semiconductor UK/HL 5500PC) based on the van der Pauw configuration were performed at room temperature. Characterizations of the fabricated IOSCs were carried out by measuring current density–voltage (J–V) using a solar simulator. The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as a function of excitation wavelength was obtained with an IPCE measurement system (PV Measurements, Inc.).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), optical microscopy (OM), and atomic force microscopy (AFM) results of the surface morphology of the graphene trilayer on a polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) substrate and of ZnO thin films prepared on graphene trilayer/PEN substrates using MPCVD methods. An atomically flat graphene surface was obtained, although some graphene wrinkles formed during the high temperature CVD growth and transfer processes, as observed in Fig. 1a and e.16 A large-area uniform ZnO thin film with nanoscale textured surface morphology was grown on the graphene trilayer/PEN using MPCVD, despite the hydrophobic and chemically inert nature of graphene (Fig. 1b and d), whereas the ZnO thin film derived using sol–gel had a spotted and porous surface and the ZnO thin film deposited by sputtering exhibited poor adhesion to graphene due to plasma damage, resulting in a cracked and peeled ZnO surface (Fig. 2). Surface topography and roughness of the graphene and ZnO thin film were characterized by AFM measurements (Fig. 1e and f). Root-mean-square (RMS) roughness values of the graphene trilayer were 2.28 nm over a 3 × 3 μm2 area, which are comparable to those previously reported.16 The RMS roughness value of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film was 12.25 nm (3 × 3 μm2 area), exhibiting a hazed surface morphology that usually leads to enhancement of optical absorption and efficient electron transport property by enlarging the surface area in functional devices.
 Fig. 1  FE-SEM images of (a) a graphene trilayer on a PEN substrate and (b) ZnO thin films prepared using MPCVD on graphene/PEN substrates. The inset is a magnified FE-SEM image showing the surface morphology of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on the graphene/PEN substrate. (c) and (d) OM images of the samples corresponding to the FE-SEM images shown in (a) and (b), respectively. (e) and (f) are photographs revealing the transparency and flexibility of the graphene trilayer on PEN and the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film/graphene trilayer on PEN, respectively. AFM images of (g) surface of graphene transferred onto a PEN substrate and (h) MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on a graphene/PEN substrate, respectively. 
 Fig. 2  FE-SEM images of ZnO thin films prepared using (a) sputtering and (b) sol–gel on graphene/PEN substrates. (c) and (d) Optical microscope images of the samples corresponding to the FE-SEM images shown in (a) and (b), respectively. 
In spin coating, the thin film thickness and other properties depend mainly on the balance between centrifugal forces controlled by spin speed and viscous forces that are determined by solvent viscosity and the wettability of the substrate,21 resulting in the sol–gel ZnO thin film that has a polka-dotted surface on graphene sheets. Furthermore, because ALD relies on chemisorption or rapid reaction of precursor molecules with surface functional groups, deposition of metal oxide using ALD is difficult on graphene without any dangling bonds or surface groups to react with precursors, resulting in preferential growth on the grain boundary or edges of graphene sheets.20 While the ZnO sol is used in bulk form (large drop size of the ZnO sol) in the spin coating process, micro-sized solution particles (so-called mist) generated by ultrasonication of the Zn acetate-dissolved acetone solution are used as a precursor in MPCVD,22,23 contributing to the wettability enhancement of the precursor on graphene. Furthermore, according to the previous work,16 the carbon (C)-atoms of graphene directly bind to the Zn-atoms of ZnO, thus Zn-ion precursors can be widely absorbed onto the C-atoms of graphene during the MPCVD process.
The growth of ZnO thin films using MPCVD is based on a chemical reaction that occurs after the adsorption and diffusion of tiny precursors on the substrate surface. The nucleation of ZnO at low temperature is more active than at high temperature, while the surface diffusion of the adatoms on graphene is limited due to low growth temperature,24 resulting in the formation of a large number of randomly oriented ZnO nuclei on the non-epitaxial graphene substrate in the initial growth stage (Fig. 3a). By continuous ZnO precursor supply, ZnO nuclei grow increasingly and form clusters since the interaction of ZnO nuclei–ZnO precursor is stronger than that of the ZnO precursor–graphene (Fig. 3b and c). In certain orientations, cluster growth emerges from the initial randomly oriented nuclei with additional growth. The preferred orientation of clusters is determined only by the preferred orientations of the initial nuclei at this stage. The cluster morphology is transformed into a nanoscale textured surface morphology as the growth proceeds (Fig. 3d). The Volmer–Weber growth mode is proposed to explain the formation mechanism of the textured surface morphology where adatom–adatom interactions are much stronger than those of the adatom–substrate.24
 Fig. 3  Schematics and FE-SEM images of the stages of ZnO thin film growth on the graphene layer via the MPCVD process; (a) the formation of nuclei with random orientations on graphene, (b) ZnO nuclei grow increasingly and form clusters by continuous ZnO precursor supply, (c) growth progression with preferred orientations, and (d) the formation of a thin film based on the Volmer–Weber growth mode. 
Raman spectra of the ZnO thin films prepared on SiO2/Si substrates using MPCVD and sputtering processes are shown in Fig. 4a. In the Raman spectra of the pristine graphene layer, distinct G- and 2D-peaks were observed near 1580 cm−1 and 2700 cm−1, respectively. A negligible difference in ID/IG between the MPCVD-grown ZnO sample and pristine graphene sample is clearly observed, while the intensity of the D-peak at near 1350 cm−1 increases considerably while intensities of the G-peak and 2D-peaks decrease markedly for the sputtering-deposited ZnO thin film. The distinct increase in the peak intensity ratio ID/IG for the sputtering-deposited ZnO thin film was observed compared to that of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film, indicating that severe structural damage was induced in the graphene layer during the sputtering process.25 The process damage to the graphene was additionally confirmed by Hall effect measurements based on the van der Pauw configuration (Fig. 4b). There was a slight change in the sheet resistance of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film (from 278 Ω per square to 409 Ω per square), while a dramatic increase in sheet resistance of the graphene trilayer after ZnO deposition using the sputtering process was observed (from 278 Ω per square to 1887 Ω per square) due to the plasma damage (Fig. 4b). Therefore, it can be concluded that MPCVD is a promising method for the growth of ZnO thin films on graphene without any significant damage to the graphene layer.
 Fig. 4  (a) Raman spectra and (b) sheet resistances for pristine graphene and graphene with ZnO thin film prepared using either MPCVD or sputtering. 
ZnO thin films were prepared using MPCVD on graphene sheets (six layers)/SiO2/Si substrates rather than graphene trilayer/PEN substrates for clear structural investigation based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements. A 70 nm thick ZnO thin film with a polycrystalline nature was successfully grown on graphene (Fig. 5a). The crystalline lattices of the graphene sheets in the MPCVD-grown sample were observed as shown by high-resolution (HR) TEM (HR-TEM) (Fig. 5b), although the graphene sheets were slightly damaged during TEM sample preparation. Alternatively, the HR-TEM image clearly shows fully damaged graphene sheets in the sputtering-deposited ZnO sample (Fig. 5c), which was further confirmed by the fast Fourier transformation (FFT) pattern shown in Fig. 5e.
 Fig. 5  (a) Cross-sectional bright-field TEM image of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on graphene sheets. HR-TEM images showing the interface states of (b) MPCVD-grown ZnO on graphene sheets and (c) sputtering-deposited ZnO on graphene sheets. (d) and (e) show FFT patterns of the areas (ZnO interfaces) marked “P1” and “P2”, respectively. 
To characterize optical and structural properties of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin films on graphene, we carried out transmission and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. The graphene trilayer/PEN sample exhibited approximately 82.6% transmittance at a wavelength of 550 nm and the 70 nm thick MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film/graphene trilayer/PEN sample revealed a high transmittance of 78.9%, indicating no significant changes in transmittance upon ZnO growth (Fig. 6a). Synchrotron XRD measurements were performed to investigate the crystallinity of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on graphene. The scans were taken normal to the surface direction, Qz [Q = 4πsin(2θ/2)/λ], in reciprocal space.26 A (002) reflection peak related to the wurtzite structure of ZnO was clearly detected at the Qz value of 2.406 Å−1, although the peak was weak and broad (Fig. 6b). However, graphene-related peaks were not observed due to extreme tenuity of graphene, even in the synchrotron XRD measurements.
 Fig. 6  (a) Transmittance spectra of graphene and MPCVD-grown ZnO/graphene on PEN substrates and (b) synchrotron XRD result of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on graphene. 
Flexible BHJ IOSCs were fabricated with a ZnO thin film acting as an effective electron transport (hole blocking) layer on a flexible, transparent, and conductive graphene cathode. Fig. 7a shows a schematic image of flexible IOSCs fabricated with a ZnO thin film/graphene cathode in this work. The structure of the flexible IOSC described in the present work was composed of silver (Ag) (top anode, 80 nm)/molybdenum oxide (MoO3) (electron blocking layer, 20 nm)/poly(3-hexylthiophene):[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butric acid methylester (P3HT:PCBM) (active layer, 180 nm)/ZnO (electron transport layer, 70 nm)/graphene (bottom cathode). The work function of the electrode plays an important role in determining the open-circuit current (VOC) of cells. The work function of graphene is 4.5–4.6 eV which is close to electron affinity of ZnO (Fig. 7b). This fact indicates that graphene is promising as a cathode electrode material in BHJ IOSCs when an increase in VOC is desired because it improves the efficiency of electron collection.27
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) band alignment of the graphene cathode-based flexible BHJ IOSC fabricated in this work. (c) J–V curves of the flexible BHJ IOSC with graphene under AM 1.5 G irradiation and in the dark. (d) IPCE spectrum of the flexible BHJ IOSC with graphene cathode. 

J–V measurements were performed using a solar simulator under standard simulated air mass (AM) of 1.5 global full-sun (1.5 G, 100 mW cm−2) illumination. Fig. 7c shows J–V curves of flexible BHJ IOSCs fabricated with MPCVD-grown ZnO thin films on a graphene trilayer under AM 1.5 G irradiation and in the dark. The J–V characterizations of flexible IOSCs fabricated with MPCVD-grown ZnO thin films on the graphene trilayer showed distinct diode behavior in the dark and the short-circuit current (JSC), fill factor (FF), VOC, and PCE of the graphene cathode-based IOSC were 6.62 mA cm−2, 46.59%, 0.50 V, and 1.55% under AM 1.5 G irradiation, respectively. An IPCE spectrum is shown in Fig. 7d. Flexible BHJ IOSCs fabricated with the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film showed a typical spectral response of the P3HT:PCBM BHJ with a maximum IPCE of approximately 44%, which is indicative of efficient photon-to-electron conversion. The integrated IPCE value is in good agreement with the measured JSC within a few percent. It should be noted that the performance of our flexible BHJ IOSCs based on graphene cathode is comparable to that of previously reported graphene anode-based BHJ OSCs with a normal structure,11,12,28,29 which indicates that MPCVD-grown ZnO is promising as an electron transport material in flexible BHJ IOSCs based on graphene cathode. However, the VOC, JSC, FF, and PCE in this work are slightly lower than those of the ITO cathode-based flexible IOSC in our previous work.22 This may be due to the increased leakage current induced by defects (point defects, wrinkles, and grain boundaries), the dominant hole transport electrical characteristics, and higher sheet resistances of graphene layers as compared to the commercially available ITO electrode, which could be improved by control of work function and electrical conductivity in graphene via effective ways such as growth method and doping control.7
Conclusions
In summary, the damage-free direct growth of high-quality ZnO thin films on graphene has been demonstrated using a MPCVD process at the low temperature of 160 °C. ZnO thin films that did not exhibit damage to the structural and electrical properties of graphene were successfully grown on graphene. The MPCVD-grown ZnO thin films revealed more uniform surface morphology and better structural property than ZnO thin films deposited using sol–gel and sputtering. Using the ZnO/graphene heterostructure, we fabricated BHJ IOSCs with the PCE of 1.55%.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST) (2009-0077682 and 2010-0015035), a grant (2011-0032151) from the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program of the MEST, and the New & Renewable Energy of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea Government Ministry of Knowledge Economy (No. 2009T100100614).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
V. C. Tung, L.-M. Chen, M. J. Allen, J. K. Wassei, K. Nelson, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1949 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1043 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lee, J. S. Park, S. H. Lee, H. Kim, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 629 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Hwang, J. S. Park, D. S. Choi, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, K. E. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, M. H. Song, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Mullen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chung, C.-H. Lee and G.-C. Yi, Science, 2010, 330, 655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Zhong, F. Zhu and K. P. Loh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 063302 CrossRef .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. D. Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865 CrossRef .
M. Choe, B. H. Lee, G. Jo, J. Park, W. Park, S. Lee, W.-K. Hong, M.-J. Seong, Y. H. Kahng, K. Lee and T. Lee, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1864 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1 CAS .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Z. Chen and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 701 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Choi, K.-S. Shin, H. S. Lee, D. Choi, K. Kim, H.-J. Shin, S.-M. Yoon, J.-Y. Choi and S.-W. Kim, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 440 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, P. D. Ye, M. A. Capano, Y. Xuan, Y. Sui, M. Qi, J. A. Cooper, T. Shen, D. Pandey, G. Prakash and R. Reifenberger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 092102 CrossRef .
W. J. Yu, S. H. Chae, S. Y. Lee, D. L. Duong and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1889 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shen, J. J. Gu, M. Xu, Y. Q. Wu, M. L. Bolen, M. A. Capano, L. W. Engel and P. D. Ye, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 172105 CrossRef .
X. Wang, S. M. Tabakman and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8152 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Middleman and A. K. Hochberg, Process Engineering Analysis in Semiconductor Device Fabrication, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1993 Search PubMed .

  (a) J. G. Lu, T. Kawaharamura, H. Nishinaka, Y. Kamada, T. Ohshima and S. Fujita, J. Cryst. Growth, 2007, 299, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. S. Shin, H. J. Park, B. Kumar, K. K. Kim, S. G. Ihn and S.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12274 RSC .
G. Blandenet, M. Court and Y. Lagarde, Thin Solid Films, 1981, 77, 81 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Kim, J. H. Lee and G.-C. Yi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 213101 CrossRef .
Y. J. Shin, Y. Wang, H. Huang, G. Kalon, A. T. S. Wee, Z. Shen, C. S. Bhatia and H. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3798 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Shin, K.-H. Lee, H. H. Lee, D. Choi and S.-W. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15782 CAS .
Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Huang, Q. Zhang, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, G. Long, L. Huang, Y. Huang, X. Wan, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3293 CrossRef .
X. Wang, L. Zhi, N. Tsao, Ž. Tomović, J. Li and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2990 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  FE-SEM images of (a) a graphene trilayer on a PEN substrate and (b) ZnO thin films prepared using MPCVD on graphene/PEN substrates. The inset is a magnified FE-SEM image showing the surface morphology of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on the graphene/PEN substrate. (c) and (d) OM images of the samples corresponding to the FE-SEM images shown in (a) and (b), respectively. (e) and (f) are photographs revealing the transparency and flexibility of the graphene trilayer on PEN and the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film/graphene trilayer on PEN, respectively. AFM images of (g) surface of graphene transferred onto a PEN substrate and (h) MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on a graphene/PEN substrate, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  FE-SEM images of ZnO thin films prepared using (a) sputtering and (b) sol–gel on graphene/PEN substrates. (c) and (d) Optical microscope images of the samples corresponding to the FE-SEM images shown in (a) and (b), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics and FE-SEM images of the stages of ZnO thin film growth on the graphene layer via the MPCVD process; (a) the formation of nuclei with random orientations on graphene, (b) ZnO nuclei grow increasingly and form clusters by continuous ZnO precursor supply, (c) growth progression with preferred orientations, and (d) the formation of a thin film based on the Volmer–Weber growth mode.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Raman spectra and (b) sheet resistances for pristine graphene and graphene with ZnO thin film prepared using either MPCVD or sputtering.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Cross-sectional bright-field TEM image of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on graphene sheets. HR-TEM images showing the interface states of (b) MPCVD-grown ZnO on graphene sheets and (c) sputtering-deposited ZnO on graphene sheets. (d) and (e) show FFT patterns of the areas (ZnO interfaces) marked “P1” and “P2”, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Transmittance spectra of graphene and MPCVD-grown ZnO/graphene on PEN substrates and (b) synchrotron XRD result of the MPCVD-grown ZnO thin film on graphene.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration and (b) band alignment of the graphene cathode-based flexible BHJ IOSC fabricated in this work. (c) J–V curves of the flexible BHJ IOSC with graphene under AM 1.5 G irradiation and in the dark. (d) IPCE spectrum of the flexible BHJ IOSC with graphene cathode.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
