Ionic moieties in organic and hybrid semiconducting devices: influence on energy band structures and functions  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03398G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03398G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13953-13971Ionic moieties in organic and hybrid semiconducting devices: influence on energy band structures and functions

        
          
            Yeasin 
            Khan†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yohan 
            Ahn†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jung Hwa 
            Seo
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bright 
            Walker
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Republic of Korea. E-mail: walker@khu.ac.kr
bDepartment of Materials Physics, Dong-A University, Busan 49315, Republic of Korea. E-mail: seojh@dau.ac.kr
Received 
      18th July 2020
    , Accepted 3rd September 2020First published on 3rd September 2020AbstractThe interaction between ionic moieties and the electronic properties of organic and hybrid semiconductors can yield a variety of interesting and sometimes surprising effects. Ionic moieties can induce interface dipoles, support electrochemical doping and lead to band-bending. The dynamic motion of ions under electric fields and the induced changes in conductivity can make it difficult to de-convolute the various mechanisms at play. This review attempts to provide a perspective on different types of interactions between ions and semiconductors and goes into depth addressing the application of solution-processed polyelectrolyte and oligoelectrolyte materials to control the energy band structures and behaviour of organic and hybrid semiconducting optoelectronic devices. This review introduces and highlights different types of ionic materials (such as conjugated polyelectrolytes and molecular ionic dopants) that have been used to achieve different effects (such as creating interfacial dipoles, vacuum energy shifts, changes in Fermi energies and doping) in organic and hybrid semiconducting devices before going into greater depth with the emerging class of non-conjugated polyelectrolytes and oligoelectrolytes and provides a comprehensive summary of recent progress using these materials in semiconducting devices. This class of materials has been receiving increasing attention recently and provides insights into the fundamental effects of ionic functionalities on the energy band structures and functions in organic and hybrid semiconductors.
I. Introduction
Over the past several decades, efforts to understand electronic phenomena in π-conjugated organic materials and devices have prompted the evolution of an entirely new branch of semiconductor physics. Compared to silicon and inorganic semiconductors, organic semiconductors offer several advantages like solution processability, flexibility and low cost. These desirable attributes have spurred an intense, worldwide research effort, which has overcome many of the inherent challenges of these materials such as low charge mobilities, high exciton binding energies, amorphous structures and completely different processing requirements. After pioneering research with early organic semiconductors showed that thin-films and crystals of organic materials could yield measurable photo-voltages,1 electroluminescence2 and charge carrier mobilities,3 their potential to be used in semiconducting devices became apparent. Tang and VanSlyke4,5 demonstrated their application in the first practical organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and the field of organic solar cells (OSCs) began to take off soon after. Since these landmark discoveries were made, academic and industrial interest in this field has grown rapidly.
The recently emerging class of lead-halide perovskites (LHPs) utilize many of the same device architectures that were initially developed for organic and dye-sensitized solar cells (SCs) and follow the same physics. Although LHPs have been known for more than 100 years,6 one of the reasons that they were not widely applied in optoelectronic devices until more recently7,8 may be that effective design principles and processing strategies used for OSCs and OLEDs did not exist. The emphasis of this review is on applications of polyelectrolytes in organic semiconductors, but it should be noted that many of the concepts and advances covered in this review may be applied to perovskite devices as well.
Almost every type of classic, inorganic semiconducting device, from diodes to SCs to transistors, relies on the formation of at least one P–N junction. P–N junctions can be formed by doping with donor and acceptor impurities in the case of inorganic crystalline materials (Fig. 1a). For example, when a group III element such as boron is added to a silicon crystal, it may remove an electron from the silicon lattice to form a negatively charged boron centre, which fits into the silicon lattice by forming four B–Si bonds; from a chemical perspective, this species can be considered a type of borate anion. The electron which was removed from the silicon lattice leaves an electronically delocalized hole (h+). This process moves the Fermi energy (EF) of the crystal closer to the valence band energy (VB). Likewise, adding a group V element such as phosphorus results in a tetravalent phosphonium ion while the excess valence electron of phosphorus is delocalized as an n-type charge carrier in the silicon lattice with a concomitant increase in EF.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams illustrating doping in (a) inorganic and (b) organic semiconductors. On the left, silicon is doped with boron or phosphorus, and on the right, tetracene is doped with chlorine or potassium. 
Doping of organic materials has proven to require fundamentally different approaches than in that of silicon. In the early studies of conjugated polymers (CPs), it was found that their conductivities could be increased dramatically upon treatment with halogens (Cl2, Br2, I2) or alkali metals (Li, Na, K) – due to doping.9Fig. 1b schematically illustrates how treatment with elements Cl2 or K can cause doping in organic materials. When an organic semiconductor is treated with a halogen like Cl2, it may remove electrons from (oxidize) the highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs) of the organic semiconductor to form radical cations and halide anions. The resulting holes (radical cations) are more localized on a single molecule (or repeat unit in the case of CPs) compared to silicon. Likewise, strongly reducing metal elements are able to transfer electrons to (reduce) the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) to form radical anions. These radical ions, which are coupled to spatial distortions in the geometry of the polymers or molecules (phonons), are referred to as polarons. Polarons can hop from one molecule (or repeat unit) to another and this hopping forms the basis for electronic conduction in organic semiconductors. Compared to crystalline inorganic semiconductors like silicon, where charge carriers are highly delocalized, radical ions in organic semiconductors are relatively more localized, however, often exhibit some degree of delocalization over several atoms or repeat units. For instance, if we consider the benzyl radical, the unpaired electron is stabilized by several resonance structures at ortho and para positions in the benzene ring. Likewise, in CPs, it is possible for radical ions to be delocalized between neighbouring repeat units as double bonds can be re-arranged to allow energetically equivalent resonance structures where the radical ion exists on either of two adjacent repeat units. Delocalization occurs in molecular semiconductors as well, where radical ion states may be spread out across several individual molecules that are stacked with overlapping π-orbitals. The extent of delocalization varies considerably between materials, however, delocalization correlates strongly with charge carrier mobility and tends to increase with crystallinity and decrease with reorganization (phonon) energy.10,11 For example, the well-known polymer P3HT and small molecule pentacene have been reported to have polarons delocalized over approximately 5 or 10 repeat units, respectively.12
It is important to note that in the case of silicon, the dopant atoms result in immobile borate or phosphonium ions which are covalently bound in the silicon crystal lattice, while in the case of halide or alkali metal doped organic semiconductors, the resulting anions or cations are not covalently bound and are prone to move under an electric field or by random diffusion, which makes it challenging to form stable P–N junctions. Stationary ions play a critical role in supporting stable, doped interfaces and this fundamental mechanism is one of the aspects which make polyelectrolytes useful.
Because doping with halogens or alkali metals is difficult to control and leads to unstable junctions, other approaches must be used to create P–N junctions in organic semiconductors. Two effective approaches to overcome this problem are developing strategies to achieve immobile dopant ions and employing heterojunctions between two semiconducting materials, which can function as P–N junctions without the need for doping. These types of band structures are illustrated in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Use of heterojunctions and homojunctions to control the movement of charge carriers. (a) Type II heterojunction where an ETL facilitates electron extraction while blocking hole extraction. (b) Type II heterojunction where an HTL facilitates hole extraction while blocking electron extraction. (c) Pristine organic semiconductor with EF in between HOMO and LUMO bands. (d) Cationic polymer supporting n-type doping in an organic semiconductor. (e) Anionic polymer supporting p-type doping in an organic semiconductor. 
Heterojunctions can create energy barriers to electron and hole movement while promoting the conduction of the opposite type of carrier. A material with a deep HOMO energy band and low energy barrier for electron injection (ϕe) functions as an electron transport layer (ETL) or a hole blocking layer (HBL, Fig. 2a) while a material with a high-lying LUMO energy band and low energy barrier for hole injection (ϕh) functions as a hole transport layer (HTL) or electron blocking layer (EBL, Fig. 2b). While heterojunctions are very effective at controlling the motion of charge carriers, they often result in undesirable energy barriers or losses in electrical potential that can reduce the efficiency of devices. As seen in Fig. 2a, a drop in LUMO energy (ϕe) of an ETL creates a thermodynamic driving potential for electrons to move downward in energy toward the electrode with a work function (WF) value of Φ, however, in the case of SCs this may lower the maximum open circuit voltage (VOC) which may be achieved in a SC, and may create an energy barrier (ϕe) for electron injection in the case of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and increase the operating voltage. Likewise, HTL heterojunctions (Fig. 2b) may provide a thermodynamic impetus for holes to move upward in energy toward the electrode, but also may reduce the VOC in SCs or increase the operating voltage in LEDs.
Doped interfaces have a strong advantage in this regard. Compared to a neutral semiconductor (Fig. 2c), n-doping (Fig. 2d) creates a band-bending effect where the energy bands slope downwards towards the doped interface, creating a potential energy well (VBB) which attracts electrons and repels holes. P-doping (Fig. 2e) creates an opposite band-bending effect, where VBB has the opposite sign and causes energy bands to slope upwards towards the interface, repelling electrons and attracting holes. These doped homojunctions do not introduce energy barriers (ϕe or ϕh) or offsets which cause potential energy losses that exist in heterojunctions. Band-bending effects in semiconductor devices have been studied extensively; a more detailed discussion of band bending effects can be found for example in the review by Zheng and Yates.13
The relatively low loss in potential is apparent when one compares the VOCs produced by doped homojunction solar cells like Si or GaAs, which are close to the band gap of the semiconductor, to the VOCs produced by heterojunction solar cells with energy barriers, which tend to be relatively lower compared to the band gaps of the light-absorbing layers. Table 1 shows a few representative examples of homojunction and heterojunction solar cells with their respective VOCs and energy losses. Notably, devices which use doped p–i–n homojunctions as the active layers produce larger VOCs relative to the band gap of the active layers.
Table 1 Examples of VOCs produced by homojunction and heterojunction solar cells




Homojunctiona

V
OC (V)
Bandgap (Eg) (eV)

E
loss

 (eV)
Ref.





a Devices which contain both doped junctions and heterojunctions have been classified as homojunctions.
b 
E
loss = (Eg − eVOC).
c Bandgap of donor.
d Bandgap of acceptor.
e Using the lowest value of EgD/EgA for Eg.





Silicon (crystalline)
0.738
1.12
0.382

14



GaAs
1.127
1.44
0.313

14



InP (crystalline)
0.939
1.34
0.401

14



CdTe
0.876
1.5
0.624

14



MAPbI3
1.076
1.52
0.444

15



(FAPbI3)0.05 (MAPbBr3)0.05
1.144
1.50
0.356

16



CIGS
0.734
1.15
0.416

17



CZTS
0.708
1.4–1.5
0.69–0.79

18



PbS (quantum dot)
0.630
1.33
0.700

19







Heterojunction

V
OC (V)
Bandgap (EgDc/EgAd) (eV)

E
Loss

 (eV)
Ref.




P3HT/PC61BM
0.556–0.641
2.1/2.3
1.45–1.54

20



PM6/Y6
0.83
1.93/1.51
0.68

21



PTB7:PC71BM
0.759
1.9/2.3
1.141

22



DSSC (ADEKA-1/LEG4)
1.014
1.85/1.91
0.836

23





II. Theory and mechanisms of ionic interaction
Polyelectrolytes (and ionic materials) can function as effective ETLs and HTLs by two main mechanisms: changing the WF of an electrode24,25 and by compensating the charges of mobile carriers to dope, or promote electrochemical doping26,27 at an interface as illustrated in Fig. 2d and e. Polyelectrolytes are typically wide-bandgap, electrical insulators. It may seem counter-intuitive that an electrical insulator would improve current through a junction, however, it is important to note that polyelectrolytes are most effective when deposited as ultra-thin interfacial layers (IFLs), with thicknesses on the order of nanometers. Despite their wide band gaps, electrical conduction through the IFL is not blocked, while a thin layer of charged moieties is still able to influence the band structure of the adjacent semiconductor. An excellent example of thin layers of ionic insulators being used to improve the current through semiconductor junctions is the case of LiF,28 which is in practice one of the most commonly used materials to improve n-type contacts in solar cells and LED devices, despite being a wide band-gap insulator. Polyelectrolytes do not necessarily dope the interface when they are initially deposited, however, when an electric potential is applied to the interface, the presence of ions may support electrochemical doping29 in a manner that has been well documented in light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs).27
Perhaps the most useful technique to understand the effect of ionic materials on the electronic band structure is via ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), which uses ultraviolet photons of a fixed energy (for example, He+ emission at 21.2 eV) to eject electrons from valence bands or HOMO levels present at the surface of a solid. The kinetic energy of electrons is related to the energy of incident photons by Einstein's photoelectric eqn (1)30 where Kmax is the maximum kinetic energy of ejected electrons, hf is the energy of the incident photon and Φ is the WF of the material: Kmax = hf − Φ(1)
This kind of data can be used to create detailed band diagrams31 which explain the behaviour of different ionic materials. Fig. 3 illustrates how UPS data can be interpreted to construct a band diagram.
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram outlining the analysis of UPS data. (a) Secondary edge region which provides information about the WF and vacuum energy. (b) Fermi edge region which provides information about HOMO and valence band energies. LUMO/conduction band energies may be extrapolated by adding the optical band gap. (c) Band diagram with important features highlighted. Adapted with permission from ref. 32, copyright (2009) John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Fig. 3a shows an example of the secondary edge region of a set of UPS spectra for a conjugated polyelectrolyte (CPE) on a gold substrate.32 The WF of the Au substrate, or minimum quantity of energy which is required to remove an electron from the surface, can be found by subtracting the onset of the secondary edge (∼16.6 eV in this example) from the incident photon energy (21.2 eV). This indicates a WF of 4.6 eV for the substrate. The WF changes as a CPE layer with increasing thickness is deposited on top. By convention, the EF is assumed to be constant through the Au/CPE stack, and the WF of the CPE layer matches that of the substrate. Thus, the shift in the secondary edge can be attributed to a change in the vacuum energy, rather than WF. This effect is referred to as a surface dipole19,31 or interfacial dipole (Δ).33 Surface dipoles can be generated when there is an anisotropic arrangement of polar molecules or ionic groups at the surface of a semiconductor or metal. For example, DeLongchamp and co-workers investigated the orientation of molecules when a thin CPE layer was deposited on an organic semiconductor and found that the ionic component of the CPEs migrated towards the top surface during spin-coating of the CPE while the hydrophobic backbone preferentially interacted with the organic semiconductor. This anisotropic arrangement of ionic functionalities led to a surface dipole, and the relative concentration of cations or anions at the top surface, and therefore the magnitude of this dipole, was dependent on which type of counter-ion was used.34
In the example shown in Fig. 3, the vacuum energy increasingly shifts downwards (VBB(Vac)), and Δ increases in magnitude as the CPE film thickness increases. Often, UPS and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) experiments are carried out at the same facilities using the same instruments with different light sources. Changes in vacuum energy (Δ and VBB(Vac)) are typically observed as shifts in both the secondary edge of UPS spectra as well as shifts in the binding energies of core electrons in XPS spectra, which can provide confirmation of vacuum level shifts and Δ.
The HOMO energy of the material can be quantified from the Fermi edge (Fig. 3b) by comparing the position of its onset relative to the onset of an Au or reference substrate. In this example, the onset occurs at increasingly higher binding energies compared to the Au reference as the film becomes thicker and indicates that the HOMO energy band bends downward away from the Au substrate (VBB(HOMO)). The LUMO energy band is typically calculated by adding the optical bandgap to the HOMO energy, and thus changes in the LUMO band follow changes in the HOMO band. The HOMO and LUMO energies relative to the vacuum energy are equivalent to the ionization potential (IP) and electron affinity (EA) of the solid CPE film. These different quantities are summarized as a band diagram as shown in Fig. 3c.
Organic materials deposited on metal interfaces are generally observed to reduce the WF of the metal,35 although it is possible to increase the WF depending on the orientation of the dipole moment of the IFL.36 Thus, there can be a competition between effects on the WF of a substrate for different ionic materials and IFLs.
III. Related ionic and interfacial materials
The focus of this review is on the recent application of non-conjugated polyelectrolytes (NPEs), oligoelectrolytes and small molecule electrolytes (SMEs) in optoelectronic devices, however, there are several classes of materials which perform related functions, including vacuum deposited dopants, electrochemically doped interfaces, polyethylenimine, ionic fullerene derivatives and CPEs. These topics have already been the subject of other review papers and are not covered in great detail in this review, however, in order to provide the reader with sufficient context to understand how polyelectrolytes relate to other ionic and interfacial materials, they are briefly summarized in the following sections.
One ionic material that deserves mention, which has been used ubiquitously in organic semiconducting devices, yet does not fit into other classifications covered in this review is LiF. Like polyelectrolytes, LiF is a wide-bandgap ionic solid which functions as an extremely effective ETL when it is deposited as an ultra-thin (∼1 nm) film, creating a Δ to effectively reduce the WF of electrodes.28 LiF has one of the largest band gaps (12.6 eV) of any solid material. Although it may seem counter-intuitive for an insulating layer to improve conductivity through a junction, LiF is one of the most widely used interlayers described in OLED and OSC literature and is highly effective in improving electron injection and extraction.
Vacuum deposited dopants
Doping with either alkali metals or halogens may lead to unstable homojunctions due to the reactivity of dopants and diffusion of ions. However, stable homojunctions can be prepared in a manner similar to inorganic materials by vapor-phase co-deposition of semiconductors and dopants, where the dopant molecules are fixed in the solid host semiconductor. In this approach, the distribution of dopants throughout the device can be controlled by varying the ratio of semiconductor to dopant during vapour deposition, and the relatively large size of the dopant molecules can prevent them from migrating through the device as smaller ions are prone to do. The resulting structure is similar to doped silicon, in the sense that charged dopant molecules are trapped in the organic semiconductor matrix and support mobile charge carriers with opposite charges.
Several groups have successfully developed doping mechanisms for both p-type and n-type doped semiconductors using vapour deposition. Effective dopants perform similar functions as alkali metals (n-doping) or halogens (p-doping) by either adding electrons to the LUMO level, or removing electrons from the HOMO level of the host semiconductor, resulting in positively charged dopants and mobile electrons in the former case, or negatively charged dopants and mobile holes in the latter case. The pioneering research of K. Leo37–39 and co-workers, for example, has demonstrated controlled doping of thin organic semiconductor films by co-sublimation of a matrix and dopant; subsequently there have been numerous efforts to control and understand doping in vacuum-deposited organic thin films for use in optoelectronic devices.40 The effect has been demonstrated for a variety of materials, for example, p doping of an amorphous aryl amines has been accomplished using very strong acceptors.41 Similarly controlled n-doping of organic semiconductors were also reported.42–45
Many organic semiconductors employed as thin films in OLEDs have been processed by vapour deposition techniques which yield smooth, homogenous films, with multi-component compositions including dopants.46–49 In some examples, vacuum deposition has been used in conjunction with solution-processed films. For example, poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) thin films have been doped by a small molecule 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4TCNQ) using vapour phase infiltration which allowed the doped polymer to inherit higher electrical conductivity and applicability in thermoelectric power devices.38,50 Excellent reviews exist which cover the topic of dopants in greater detail.51,52
Electrochemical doping and LECs
Early in the development of CPs, it was realized that they could be doped by electrochemical oxidation or reduction in an electrolyte solution.53 Interestingly, when a combination of CP, ion-conducting polymer and electrolyte is deposited together as a thin film, the film may behave as a miniature electrochemical cell. Upon application of an electric field, the anode and cathode interfaces become electrochemically doped, effectively creating a homojunction and allowing efficient charge injection at the electrodes. If a fluorescent CP is used, charge recombination in the middle of the homojunction can result in light emission. This type of device has been termed the LEC. Because the ions are mobile, dynamic and reversible P–N junctions are formed in LECs depending on the applied external bias, and revert to an un-doped state when the bias is removed. One interesting aspect is that the electrode WFs do not strongly influence the LEC behaviour, since doping occurs at the electrodes and results in ohmic contacts regardless of the type of electrode. In one example,53 ionic liquids were used to create p-doping and n-doping effects in a luminescent polymer, resulting in up to 1.4% external quantum efficiency (EQE) at 10 V potential. Many of the details and mechanisms of the LEC device are still under investigation, however, the electrochemical doping and injection characteristics are supported by both electrochemical54–56 and electrodynamic57 models. Several review articles have been published on LECs very recently.58–60
Conjugated polyelectrolytes
Early CPs like polyacetylene, polythiophene and poly(p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) possessed very poor solubility characteristics, which prompted the development of CPs with solubilizing groups. This led to some of the first CPs with practical applications of CPs in LED and SC devices. Efforts to produce water soluble CPs led to the development of the first ionic CPs–CPEs. The first CPEs based on polythiophene were reported by Wudl and coworkers in 1987; these were the first CPs with good solubility in water.61 These were prepared by polymerizing methyl 3-thiophene-β-ethanesulfonate or methyl 3-thiophene-δ-butanesulfonate followed by a conversion into their sodium salts. Since then, a wide range of research related to the application of CPE materials in optoelectronic devices has been carried out. For example, in 1996, Onitsuka et al.62 reported a thin-film LED based on a multi-bilayer combination of a PPV based CPE with different poly-anions which was fabricated using a layer-by-layer (LBL) processing technique. This material was found to dramatically improve the device luminescence and efficiency.
The solubility of CPEs in relatively polar solvents opened up the possibility to solution-process multilayer structures of CPEs by exploiting their “orthogonal solubility”. Attempting to solution process a second CP film on top of an underlying film generally tends to rinse away the underlying film if the polymers have similar solubility; however, by solution coating films from polymer solutions in alternately non-polar/polar solvents, multilayer structures are possible. Based on this finding, Heeger, Bazan and co-workers63 explored multi-layered solution processable polymer light-emitting diodes (PLED) and made the ground-breaking discovery that cationic CPEs functioned remarkably well as ETLs. Using CPEs resulted in low turn on voltages, better brightness and improved efficiencies in LEDs. Electrolytes containing conjugated backbones also found use in organic photovoltaic devices as reported by Baur et al.64 In 2005, Mwaura et al.65 showed that the performance of SCs is linearly related to the number of bilayers of an anionic CPE employed using the LBL method. Y. Cao reported66 an efficient approach to achieve large-area cathode interlayers using electrostatic layer-by-layer (eLBL) self-assembly of CPEs. In another example,67 a combination of side-chain functional groups on a conjugated polyfluorene backpone was studied as a cathode interlayer in polymer solar cells (PSCs) having PTB7:PC71BM as active layers, which showed great performance. Although CPEs are usually thought to function via an interface dipole effect and reduction in electrode WF, a recent report has confirmed that the cationic moieties in CPEs are able to support the self-doping of the CPEs if an electron withdrawing group is present.68 Several review articles have already been published regarding the topic of CPEs.69–71
Ionic fullerene derivatives
Since the invention of fullerene materials, amine-functionalized fullerenes72,73 have been widely studied in many fields especially in biomedical applications.74 Since their discovery, amino-functionalized fullerenes have made a mark in the photovoltaic field as effective ETLs. The photovoltaic performance of numerous devices has been improved by the use of a variety of amino-functionalized fullerene derivatives, especially as ultra-thin IFLs.75,76 A terminal amino group in the fullerene structure creates a dipole moment similar to amine functionalized CPEs and NPEs. The cation supporting amine groups allow the fullerene materials to self-dope, which, in combination with high charge mobilities, makes them very effective ETLs. These derivatives have already been demonstrated as effective cathode buffer layers77,78 in various PSCs and were also incorporable with high WF electrodes like gold, copper, and silver. In perovskite SCs, amine-functionalized fullerenes improve the molecular polarization and charge transport capabilities at the interface between perovskite and fullerenes, which results in improved photovoltaic performance and long-term stability of devices.79,80
IV. Polyelectrolytes, small molecule electrolytes and oligoelectrolytes
The focus of this review is on polyelectrolytes which do not contain extended π-conjugation (which have been covered in separate reviews) and the effects of ionic/polar materials on energy band structures. There is no clear boundary between materials that can be described as conjugated and non-conjugated. For the purposes of this review, we will consider polymers which contain two or fewer aromatic groups (such as viologen) continuously connected by sp2 carbons to be non-conjugated. Small molecules, low molecular weight oligomers and combinations of non-conjugated and conjugated materials have been included for thoroughness.
Another important distinction to make is in the case of alkyl amine moieties. Although their neutral structures imply that they are not ions, they are typically relatively strong Brønsted–Lowry and Lewis bases which are easily protonated or quaternized. Their amphoteric nature indicates that they may auto-ionize to a significant extent and are therefore considered to be classes of electrolytes in the context of this review.
Polyethyleneimine
The most widely applied class of NPE is based on the polyethylenimine (PEI) structure. Amine and ammonium functional CPEs were well known as effective ETLs before it was discovered that non-conjugated polyamines like ethoxylated polyethylenimine (PEIE)81 and PEI28 are able to reduce the WF of electrodes and function in a similar way. Since this discovery, many studies have confirmed the effectiveness of PEI derivatives as ETLs in SCs, LEDs and transistor devices.
For example, polyelectrolytes based on PEI and PEIE structures were found to be very effective in reducing WFs when blended with a bulk heterojunction composite.82 Here, self-assembly and vertical phase separation occurred, where the polyelectrolyte adsorbed to the bottom surface as an IFL and the photoactive layer migrated to the top. The effects of various counter anions such as Br−, I− and BIm4− counter anions83 were also investigated in PEI-based polyelectrolytes used as IFLs. Improved power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) were obtained from organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices using these materials.
In another study, a type of device referred to as a light emitting solar cell (LESC)84 was demonstrated using a methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3) perovskite active layer, where polyelectrolytes were used as IFLs. Whereas using ETLS with stepped LUMO energies resulted in barriers to either electron injection (Fig. 4a) or electron extraction (Fig. 4b), NPEs were able exploit a band bending effect to achieve charge carrier injection and extraction, as shown in Fig. 4c and 4d. The ability of the device to function as both an LED and a SC was attributed to the formation of a homojunction by the polyelectrolyte. Additional studies have investigated combinations of PEI with other electrolytes and polyelectrolytes, which are described in the following sections. This manuscript has been organized chronologically into sub-sections covering work published more than 5 years ago, to provide context and background, and then covering work published recently (within the last 5 years) to highlight recent advances in the field.
 Fig. 4  Energy band diagrams for devices with the architecture ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ETL/Ag. (a) Using ZnO as an ETL. (b) Using TPBI as an ETL. (c) Using PEI as an ETL. (d) Using PEIBIm4 as an ETL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Non-conjugated polyelectrolytes
Polyelectrolytes can have polymer backbones which are either conjugated (semiconducting) or non-conjugated (insulating). Although NPEs are simpler than CPEs, CPEs were demonstrated as effective IFLs and widely studied in organic semiconducting devices before NPEs were. It may seem counter-intuitive at first to use an in electronic insulator to improve charge injection or extraction, which may be the reason that NPEs were not explored in optoelectronic devices earlier. Interestingly, despite being electronic insulators, bilayers of cationic and anionic polyelectrolytes are able to form current rectifying P–N junctions even when no semiconductor is present.85
Although the importance of ions in compensating charge carriers was realized early in the development of organic semiconductors, it was not until later that ion-bearing CPEs86 and NPEs87 became widely used as effective interfacial materials in semiconducting devices. CPEs have delocalized π-electrons throughout their backbones, which provide a level of electronic functionality, however, the conjugated backbones tend to be difficult and expensive to synthesize in contrast to NPEs, which are often derived from low cost commodity polymers. The backbones of NPEs lack conjugated π-bonds, which makes them electrically insulating. Thus, their impacts on the electronic band structure are almost entirely determined by their ionic groups. A few examples of early NPEs are shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Chemical structures of early NPEs. 
Some of the earliest examples of polyelectrolytes being used in conjunction with semiconductors did not involve them being used to influence the electronic band structure of semiconductors, but to modify the surface charges and direct self-assembly via electrostatic interactions. For example, in the 1990s, the LBL film deposition technique was first introduced,88,89 which later became used more extensively in semiconducting devices. Decher et al. demonstrated that cationic and anionic polyelectrolytes could self-assemble onto a charged substrate by alternately depositing one monolayer at a time. This proved to be a powerful technique to self-assemble polyelectrolyte films with well-defined thicknesses and to control the surface charge of substrates. For example, LBL deposition of polyallylamine (PAA) and polyvinylsulfonic acid (PVSA) was used with ZnS-capped CdSe quantum dots (QDs)90 to make hierarchical structures where QDs were stabilized by the NPEs. Similar studies were performed using another class of PEI NPEs, where indium tin oxide (ITO) surfaces were modified using the same LBL technique.91 The LBL technique has been used to fabricate various photovoltaic devices as well.92–96 Inspired by these results, the application of NPEs in SCs was reported28 as IFLs in inverted PSCs where the electrolytes were coated onto an ITO substrate using ionic self-assembly. Dipoles were formed between the cationic amine of the NPE and the anionic oxygen of ITO. The WF of ITO could be dramatically reduced from 4.8 to 4.0 eV.
Poly-viologen (PV) derivatives97,98 have been investigated as IFLs due to their unique electrochromic properties. The structure of PV contains aromatic bipyridine groups, however, the backbone is not fully conjugated. Derivatives of PV having p-toluene sulfonate ions (PV-OTs) resulted in surface dipoles when used as IFLs in PSCs. Wu et al. prepared an interesting composite by polymerizing a monomer consisting of zinc acrylate. The composite ETL was able to improve the PCE of inverted PTB7:PCBM solar cells from 6.67% to 7.37%.99 Another interfacial material study100 showed that an anionic NPE sodium poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS-Na) could be employed in both PSC and PLED devices as a cathode interlayer. PSS-Na is commercially available and is soluble in protic solvents like water and water/alcohol mixtures. KPM revealed an interfacial dipole at the active layer/cathode interface, and a reduction in cathode WF which enhanced the performances of both devices. A mixed polyelectrolyte consisting of PSS and PEI was also investigated.101 Compared to PEI as an IFL, PEI:PSS resulted in a significant increase in photocurrent. Moreover, the device stability was improved when a bilayer of TiOx-PEI:PSS was used as an interlayer. In addition to tuning the cathode WF, the NPEs eliminated the necessity of post-UV treatment which is commonly required for devices containing TiO2 ETLs. PEIE has also been explored as an IFL for many PSC devices resulting in better device performance via a decrease in the electrode WFs. Inspired by these results a hybrid PEIE–Ag interfacial material was synthesized via ultraviolet irradiation of PEIE and silver nitrate solution. The generated silver nanoparticles were anchored to the PEIE polymer chains to form a conductive continuous interpenetrating network structure. As an IFL, PEIE–Ag leads to enhanced charge transport and improved light-harvesting ability (Fig. 6) largely due to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect.102 Tiwari et al. used a variety of polyelectrolytes including polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC), polyacrylic acid (PAA), PSS and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) in combination with ZnO as ETLs. PDADMAC was found to offer the greatest benefit and improved the PCE of P3HT:PCBM based devices from 0.10% to 1.86%.103
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic energy band diagram of a SC device with PEIE–Ag IFL (right). (b) J–V characteristics of inverted polymer SCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM without and with PEIE, PEIE–Ag interlayers; inset: J–V characteristics under dark conditions plotted on a semi-logarithmic scale. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
Zwitterionic NPEs based on poly(vinylpyridine) were investigated as cathode buffer layers both in conventional and inverted PSCs. A Δ was formed at the cathode interface, which was characterized by Kelvin probe microscopy (KPM). The NPEs were found to reduce the Schottky barrier104 for electron collection from the active layer to the cathode. Both conventional and inverted SCs exhibited improved performance compared with the devices without an interlayer.105 PEI and PEIE comprise similar structures and both have been demonstrated as effective ETLs, but it is not immediately clear if one offers an advantage over the other. A comparative study between PEI and PEIE was reported106 using high performance inverted OSCs. PEI showed significantly improved performance compared to PEIE in terms of both stability and PCE when applied as a cathode interlayer in devices having the same configuration. Eita et al. used the LBL approach to deposit composite electrodes based on ZnO and PAA. The optimum number of bilayers in the LBL processed ETL was found to be four, which increased the PCE from 4.5% to 6.0%.107 Both PEIE and CPEs are known to work well as ETLs, but were not directly compared until 2016, when Yeo et al. compared the performance of PEIE to a polyfluorene base CPE. In this study, PEIE produced a larger interface dipole and showed higher PCE (9.97%) and stability compared to the CPE ETL in PTB7-Th:PCBM SCs.108
Non-conjugated polyelectrolytes (recent)
As the field of OSCs continues to grow and gain traction as a commercially important technology, interest in understanding and developing new interfacial engineering strategies in photovoltaic devices has also increased. Many novel NPEs have been synthesized and explored as a potential interlayers for different optoelectronic devices. Structures of some recently developed NPEs are included in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures of recently reported NPEs. 
An IFL based on a hyper-branched poly(amido acid) with tertiary amido groups was found to increase the OSC performance (Fig. 8). The IFL rendered the ZnO layer more selective to electrons, reducing recombination losses and causing the JSC to increase. PCEs were increased from 7.1 to 7.8% in PTB7/PC71BM devices and 7.8 to 8.7% in PffVT4T-2OD/PC71BM devices due to physisorption of the aliphatic hyper-brunched poly(amido acid)s on the ZnO film which improved the morphology in the layer.109 In another study,110 PEI was used as an IFL between ITO and the perovskite active layer using spin coating methods which resulted in a smooth cathode (ITO/PEI) having a lowered WF. The best PCE obtained was 19.36% for rigid cells and 16.81% for flexible cells. Even after 80 days, 95% of the initial PCE value was retained under ambient conditions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Hyper-branched poly(amido acid) as IFL, (b) device architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
An NPE poly(4-vinyl N-ethyl pyridinium bromide) (PVPy-EtBr) was applied to an inverted PSCs as a cathode buffer layer, forming an Δ that reduced the Schottky barrier for electron collection from the active layer at the cathode interface.111 PVPy-EtBr was applied between the active layer and cathode by its electrostatic self-assembly, and resulted in an improved PCE of 3.49%, compared to only 2.95% observed in the absence of the interlayer, due to an increase in the JSC of the device (Fig. 9a). An industrial polyether amine derivative called “Jeffamine” was applied as an IFL in an OSC device and resulted in remarkable improvement in performance (Fig. 9b). The presence of Jeffamine altered the WF of ZnO and improved the electron transport of the device, thereby causing the ZnO layers to function more efficiently as electron selective electrodes.112 Hu et al. reported a series of perylene diimide based polyelectrolytes with various anions that exhibited electron spin resonance signals consistent with self-doping. These materials improved the PCE of PTB7-Th based solar cells from 6.32 to 9.45% when used as cathode interlayers.113 Xiong et al. utilized a PEIE based polyelectrolyte in CH3NH3PbI3 based solar cells and observed an improvement in the PCE from 11.2 to 13.0% as well as an improvement in stability. A novel NPE,114 poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid sodium salt) (PAMPS-Na) was synthesized and used as a cathode buffer layer in OSCs. Its good solubility in polar solvents allowed it to be solution processed without damaging the underlying active layer, significantly decreasing the WF of the aluminium electrode.
 Fig. 9  (a) PVPy-EtBr as the IFL in the P3HT:PC61BM based OPV device with the energy band diagram of the device; Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright (2017) by Taylor & Francis. (b) Schematic representation of OPV devices based on Jeffamines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright (2013) by The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) PEI with different counter ions as the IFL in OPV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2019) the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a recent study,115 alcohol-soluble polystyrene derivatives including poly[p-(N,N-dimethylamino)styrene] (PSN), poly[p-(N,N-dimethylamino)styrene]oxide (PSO), and poly[p-(N,N-dimethylamino)styrene] mesylate (PSM) were synthesized and studied as cathode interlayers in OSCs. This study focused on the interactions between pendent groups and acceptor molecules on the same non-conjugated backbones. Significant increases in VOC, Short circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) were obtained under optimized conditions along with a PCE increase from 3.74% to as high as 10.11%. The effects of different counter anions (Br−, I− and BIm4−) were explored using the same non-conjugated backbone (PEI) (Fig. 9c) as a cathode IFL in OSCs and transistor devices based on indium zinc oxide (IZO).83 NPEs with different counter ions demonstrated the ability to form dipoles at the metal electrode interfaces and control the WFs of the electrode. As a result, the PCE of the OSCs could be improved from 1.05% to 6.77%; on/off ratios and charge carrier mobilities of transistor devices were also improved.
Li et al. carried out a direct comparison between a small-molecule, monomeric ionic liquid and its NPE ionic liquid analogue while using both as IFLs in OSC devices containing PTB7-Th:PC71BM as the active layer.116 This study showed that the polymeric ionic liquid (PIL) yielded a homogeneous film morphology and a higher PCE than that the monomeric counterpart. Ionic liquids were also used in a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), where they were added to a polyethylene glycol (PEG) electrolyte containing the I/I3− redox couple. The photovoltaic performance of the cell was enhanced by 38% and the ionic liquid containing cells showed improved long-term stability than the cells without IFLs.117 Rafiq et al. investigated a series of hyper-branched polyelectrolytes based on a 1,3,5-trispyridylbenzene core. These were used with non-fullerene acceptor active layers and improved the PCE from 5.80 to 9.87%. Interestingly, these polyelectrolytes were also shown to improve the performance of photo-catalytic hydrogen cells.118
Because NPEs are electrical insulators, their influence on organic semiconducting device characteristics is not due to their HOMO or LUMO energy band structures but can be attributed exclusively to their ionic components; thus, they offer insight into the effects of ions and dipoles on the band structure and characteristics of devices. Despite the counter-intuitive concept of improving electrical current using electrically insultating interlayers, polyelectrolytes have been demonstrated to improve the device characteristics in a wide number of studies and offer improved device performance and often improved stability as well. Several general review articles have been published in relation to interfacial materials in optoelectronic devices119–121 and show that simple polyelectrolytes offer benefits comparable to much more synthetically challenging or impractical materials. For example, the ability of polyelectrolytes to tune the WF of electrodes is comparable to alkali or alkaline earth metals, however, polyelectrolytes are much more stable than these reactive metals. In the past, the function of electrolyte containing interfacial materials has been primarily attributed to changes in the WF due to interfacial dipoles, however, increasing evidence is emerging showing that ionic materials like CPEs and NPEs are often involved in doping or electrochemical doping at interfaces, which offers the possibility to conveniently create ohmic contacts without introducing potential energy barriers as is the case with typical semiconducting ETLs and HTLs. In any case, these materials have the advantages of being minimalistic interfacial materials in the sense that they are structurally simple and economical to synthesize. As new studies are published and the field continues to mature, it is likely that these materials will be increasingly used as a strategy to create and control homojunctions in organic and hybrid semiconducting devices.
Small molecule electrolytes
Non-polymeric materials may perform the same function as polyelectrolytes; although as the size decreases, they may diffuse or drift through solid films over time, which may lead to uncontrolled doping (for example the tetrabutylammonium cation) and/or unstable junctions. Although we will refer to these materials as “small molecules”, we will consider any molecule that does not contain many repeating monomer units to be a small molecule, regardless of its size or molecular weight.
Compared to polymer interlayers, small molecules have intrinsic advantages of easier synthesis and purification procedures, well-defined structures, mono-dispersity, and good batch-to-batch reproducibility.122,123 Owing to these advantages, small molecule compounds can be applied in semiconducting devices such as OLEDs, OSCs,124 and organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).125 Several structures are listed in Fig. 10, which were some of the original small SMEs to be investigated as interlayer materials.
 Fig. 10  Molecular structures of early small-molecule dopants. 
Some early OLEDs suffered from poor operating stability (less than 1000 h), a problem which could be mitigated by employing interlayers. Fang et al. synthesized a variety of novel zwitterionic small molecules as electron-injection layers in PLEDs. It was confirmed that the zwitterionic properties of the molecules were important for electron injection, while π-delocalized structures had less significant impacts on the device performance. A. Islam et al. have reviewed the recent progress and prospects of zwitterionic molecules recently.126 PLED devices using solid ionic liquids as ETLs exhibited improved performance and showed promise for general use as charge-injection layers in a variety of organic electronic devices.127 The discotic structure of pyrene derivatives, like 3,3′,3′′,3′′′-((pyrene-1,3,6,8-tetrayltetrakis(benzene-4,1-diyl))tetrakis(oxy))tetrakis(N,N-dimethylpropan-1-amine) (PBPA), makes it possible to be used as solution-processable ETLs in OSC devices. OSCs doped with PBPA reduced the interfacial resistance resulting in a FF increase from 55.1% to 63.6%, and a PCE increase from 7.2% to 8.3%.128
G. Feng et al. developed two hydrophilic small molecules consisting of a conjugated backbone with polar pendant groups and used them as cathode interlayers in inverted PSCs. These were found to be effective interface modifiers resulting in a PCE increase from less than 8.0% to 9.22%. As a result, it was demonstrated that the modification of the cathode with the electrolyte could increase not only VOC but also JSC and FF of inverted PSCs.129 Ouyang et al. introduced a zwitterionic small molecule layer and a LiF layer as a bilayer ETL between the cathode and active layer of perovskite solar cells (PeSCs). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the double-interlayer devices revealed a smoother surface compared to the pristine perovskite layer, with decreased root-mean-square roughness (RRMS) after deposition of rhodamine 101. Compared to the single interlayer, double interlayers of devices composed of LiF and rhodamine 101 exhibited significantly improved VOC and FF values, which improved the PCE of the PeSCs from 11.0% to 13.2%.130
Electrolytes have been used in quantum dot solar cells as well. In a study by Kim et al., an ionic liquid (IL) was used to polarize the surface of PCBM and shift its band edge closer to the vacuum level when introduced as an interlayer between PbS QDs and PCBM. Impedance spectroscopy data showed that the IFL reduced the contact resistance at the interface of PCBM and PbS by improving the compatibility between the two layers. As a result, devices with the IFL exhibited enhanced performance in VOC, from 0.41 V to 0.49 V, FF, from 0.48 to 0.59, and a PCE increase from 1.62% to 2.21%.131
In another example, 4-chlorobenzoic acid (CBA), a small molecule surface modifier, was used as an interfacial material on an ITO electrode in order to produce a hydrophobic surface and high WF. Whereas most IFLs contain amine groups and lower the WF of substrates, this material contains an anionic carboxylate group and increases the WF. Devices using CBA as the interlayer showed improved performance, with PCE increasing from 5.67% to 8.48% due to increased absorption in the active layer and an ohmic contact formed at the interface between the active layer and ITO.132
Small molecule electrolytes (recent)
Recently, the range and scope of ionic materials used in SCs and other optoelectronic devices has gained increasing traction. In this section, we introduce recent advances of SMEs in various photovoltaic devices such as zwitterionic compounds, organic metal salts, organic halides, and so on (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Molecular structures of recent small-molecule dopants. 
An iso-indigo derivative with zwitterionic water/alcohol-soluble groups was explored by Han et al. The electron extraction efficiency of the device was greatly enhanced.133 Novel SMEs like 3-(dimethyl(3-sulfopropyl)ammonio)propane-1-sulfonate (DSAPS) and 4-(dimethyl(4-sulfobutyl)ammonio)butane-1-sulfonate (DSABS) were used as cathode interlayers in PSCs. The interlayer was compared to methanol treatment; methanol treatment was found to increase the VOC while the interlayers increased both JSC and FF.134 A simple non-conjugated SME, ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid tetrasodium (EDTA-4Na), was successfully introduced into inverted OSCs as a cathode interlayer, leading to an increase in efficiency from 2.53% to 9.69% compared to the device without EDTA-4Na. Besides efficiency, the device stability was also improved in inverted OSC devices and almost 85% of the efficiency was maintained even after storage for 46 days despite no encapsulation.135 J. Fang showed that the introduction of EDTA derivatives as cathode interlayers led to improved device performance, increasing from 6% to 9.03%. When the ETL was changed from the disodium salt (EDTA-2Na) to tetrasodium salt (EDTA-4Na), the PCE of the devices was further improved to 9.65%.136 J. Kim et al. designed and synthesized new alcohol/water soluble small molecules consisting of quaternary ammonium salt and multiple hydroxyl groups. JSC values of the devices increased from 14.65 to 17.22 and 16.78 mA cm−2 using compounds C4 and C6 as an interlayer materials, respectively. The thin interlayers increased the JSC by forming a favourable Δ, reducing the ϕe, causing increases in JSC, VOC and FF, consequently improving the PCE of the devices from 7.41% to 9.20%.137
J. H. Kim developed a SME composed of a viologen backbone with a hydroxyl group at the end of the molecule, constituting a conveniently synthesized molecular design. Introduction of SM5 in SCs allowed the formation of a favourable Δ and resulted in an increase in Jsc, which after optimization yielded a PCE of up to 9.13% from 7.41% and good long-term stability.138 Liao et al. developed an F4-TCNQ-doped TS-CuPc as a hole-transporting material, which enhanced the film conductivity and hole mobility of PSCs. This approach gave some advantages of doping in terms of good stability which mitigated electrode erosion and led to improved hole extraction as a result of band-bending in the TS-CuPc layer; the approach could be applied in both p–i–n and n–i–p structures.139 Insertion of TBAI as an interlayer between C60 and the top electrode in hybrid silicon/C60 solar cells led to doping of the C60 layer and band bending in the Si layer. This, as well as aging in N2 improved the diode characteristics of the hybrid SC devices and reduced carrier recombination, leading to a PCE of 8.43%, which was orders of magnitude better than previous hybrid Si based solar cells using n-type semiconductors.140 Song et al. investigated the use of a sulfonated small molecule as an ETL and a cathode interlayer. An improvement in PCE from 7.16 to 8.68% in PTB7 based solar cells was acheived.141 When HTL interlayers are introduced into organic semiconductors, it is possible to form ohmic hole contacts, which allow injected or extracted hole currents to be improved. Additionally, these interlayers can eliminate the density of states (DOS) broadening that exists at the organic/electrode interface and reduces the effect of the attractive image potential near the electrode interfaces. Based on these concepts, Wetzelaer and coworkers demonstrated that contacts enhanced by interlayer can be applied in ultraviolet-emitting OLEDs and OSCs.142 Gupta et al. discovered that a mixture of aluminium tris(8-hydroxyquinolate) and tetraphenyl phosphonium bromide is able to function effectively as a cathode interlayer. The effect was attributed to a surface dipole and vacuum level shift, which was able to improve the performance of fullerene-free organic solar cells from 4.8% to 11%.143 One effective n-type dopant is the very small tetrabutylammonium halide (TBAX) salt, where X comprises anions F, Cl, Br, or I. Polymer–polymer solar cells, consisting of a polymer donor and polymer acceptor and doped with a low concentration of TBAX exhibited significantly increased FF and slightly increased JSC values, which improved the PCEs from 5.8% to over 7%. After adding TBAX dopants, absorption occurred in the range of around 400 nm and the area between 700 and 800 nm corresponding to the absorption graph of N2200, indicating that doping with TBAX changes the properties of N2200. The enhanced current was attributed to improved absorption and carrier extraction of N2200 upon using the dopant. Doping with TBAX compounds, especially with TBAI which showed the best improvement, was also found to enhance the electron mobility and reduce trap sites in the polymer films.144 Mennsfeld et al. reported enhancement in electrical characteristics upon n-type doping with a series of amine functional siloxanes (A-SAMs), while the stability of OFET performance was also improved after deposition. Furthermore, it was observed that the activity of doping with the A-SAM materials was increased when the number of amine groups increased, showing that the lone-pair electron played a significant role in the doping mechanism.125 Three novel non-conjugated small molecules comprising amino cations and sulfonate anions as well as various core atoms of oxygen, sulfur and sulfone were employed as cathode interlayers in non-fullerene PSCs, which resulted in improved device performance. Charge transport and collection capabilities were increased as the WF of the cathode decreased.145 Trifiletti et al. demonstrated that the molecular doping of spiro-OMeTAD and P3HT with F4-TCNQ is an effective method for improving device performance. According to this paper, doping with F4-TCNQ could mitigate the detrimental effects of oxygen on P3HT and prevent aggregation at the interface between the perovskite and HTM, which is known to degrade device performance and cause undesirable hysteresis.146 Feng et al. studied PSC devices utilizing a P3HT:(tbt)2Ir(acac):PC71BM and the morphology of the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) layer was well-controlled, which was confirmed by analyzing the absorption and emission spectra as well as AFM data. By introducing a phosphorescent small molecule dopant, the PCE was improved via increases in JSC from 10.7 to 12.5 mA cm−2 and FF from 54.1 to 61.8%, respectively.147
P-Doped conjugated SMEs can form well-aligned and uniform electric dipole layers on the surface of metal electrodes. The absorption spectrum of two SMEs, PFP and DPF (structures shown in Fig. 12) before and after doping reveals the amount of light transmitted to or from the active layer (Fig. 12a). In contrast to the PFP doped film, the DPF doped film exhibited a narrow absorption band without a tail, showing weaker doping via the oxidizing agent compared to that of PFP (Fig. 12b). The schematic illumination of PFP and PDF films indicates that p-DPF forms a well-oriented electric dipole layer on the surface of the metal electrode due to its high degree of freedom and strong electrostatic intermolecular interactions (Fig. 12d). The small-molecule nature of p-CSE leads to a superior WF tunability and performance of PSC and PLED devices compared to p-CPE.148 Naphthalenediimide (NDI) based small molecules such as PMDPT are novel electron-transporting materials for inverted PeSCs (iPeSCs). Solution-processed iPeSC devices using PMDPT as an ETL achieved PCEs of up to 9.2% from less than 5.2% by passivating the electron trap centres on the surface of the perovskite layers.149 Edward et al. doped the amine containing polymer poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis-N,N-(4-butyl phenyl)-bis-N,N-phenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine) (PFB) with F4-TCNQ and employed them as HTLs, which improved their bulk conductivity and resulted in excellent PCEs, which improved up to 15.81% from 9.09% in mesoporous PSC structures. Furthermore, the wide optical bandgap and lack of absorption in the visible range reduced parasitic absorption in the devices. Additionally, these HTLs were found to protect the active layer from humidity and consequently improve the stability of devices.150
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of PFP and DPF and their oxidation reactions with (NH4)2S2O8. (b) Absorption spectra of PFP and DPF before and after oxidative doping. (c and d) Schematic illustration of the molecular alignment of the p-PFP (upper) and p-DPF films (lower) on metal electrodes, respectively. The enlarged figure shows the possible electrostatic interaction between the backbone of p-DPF and hydroxide ion groups on the metal surface along with the out-of-plane direction. The red arrow indicates the direction of electric dipole of p-DPF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
Oligoelectrolytes
Conjugated oligoelectrolytes (COEs) are a type of electrolyte that falls between small molecules and polymers, consisting of well-defined molecular structures, solution processability in polar solvents and large size, which limits their diffusion or migration. Fig. 13 shows the molecular structures of representative oligoelectrolytes for semiconducting devices.
 Fig. 13  Molecular structures of oligoelectrolytes for interlayers in semiconducting devices. 
Bazan et al. showed that COEs are suitable materials as ETLs in PLEDs due to the formation of Ohmic contacts formed with common electrode materials like Al. The use of COEs led to faster temporal responses in the light emission and current densities of PLEDs compared to CPEs. The maximum luminance values were 96, 18552, and 20801 cd m−2 and current densities were 652, 259, and 132 mA cm−2 for devices without an IFL and with Ba and FFF-BIm4 as IFLs, respectively. Furthermore, COEs enabled good control over the reproducibility of device fabrication as well as the structural properties of the molecules.151
C. Yang et al. developed two star-shaped oligofluorenes, Tn0 and Tn1, and showed that these materials could be used as IFLs in inverted PSCs. A Δ was formed by the interlayers due to their polar diethylamino groups, which reduced the WF of the ITO. In Fig. 14a, the UPS data show the WF change of the ITO with and without the interlayer. The WF of bare ITO (−4.41 eV) was decreased to −3.56 eV and −3.83 eV after doping with Tn0 and Tn1, respectively. The J–V characteristics included slightly higher JSC values for devices doped with Tn0 and Tn1 compared to those with a control device having poly[(9,9-bis(30-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)] (PFN). In the EQE spectra, values of greater than 50% were maintained throughout the spectral range of 350–700 nm, which indicated excellent photon-to-electron conversion efficiency, increasing the JSC from 14.02 to 16.55 mA cm−2 (Fig. 14d). Furthermore, in the case of Tn1, the improved morphology hydrophobicity improved the cathode contact, resulting in improved device performance.152
 Fig. 14  (a) UPS spectra of bare ITO, ITO/Tn0 and ITO/Tn1 thin films and (b) illustrations of vacuum level shift and reduced work function of ITO after the deposition of Tn0 and Tn1, respectively. (c) J–V curves and (d) EQE spectra of the inverted PSCs. Photographs of water droplets on the surface of uncoated (e) ITO, (f) Tn0 and (g) Tn1 coated ITO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2016) Elsevier. 
Recent developments using small molecule and oligoelectrolytes as IFLs show that they have considerable impacts on the device performance. Compared to polyelectrolytes, small molecules and oligomers offer advantages in that they have well-defined structures, generally higher solubility than high MW polyelectrolytes and do not suffer from batch-to-batch variations or polydispersity issues that many polymers suffer from. Like polyelectrolytes, small molecule and oligoelectrolytes tend to have wider band gaps than adjacent semiconducting layers and function largely due to the influence of their ionic functionalities.
Small sized molecules, such as TBAI or TBAF, may diffuse into organic semiconducting layers and cause bulk doping effects throughout the film, which can be exploited to increase the bulk conductivity of semiconductor films, but their uncontrolled diffusion precludes their ability to create doped interfaces or stable junctions. Higher molecular weight molecules and oligomers can overcome this problem by forming separate, immiscible solid films which do support doped interfaces and stable junctions like polyelectrolytes.
Using conjugated small molecule and oligomer electrolytes provides the opportunity to exploit the electronic properties of the compounds as well, in order to achieve effects such as self-doping and cascading energy transfer. Future generations of these materials are likely to offer improved control over band structures and doping in organic and hybrid semiconductors and continue to have a remarkable impact on the field.
V. Conclusions
Ionic functionalities create localized electric fields and provide the ability to compensate charge carriers, aspects which have profound impacts on the properties, energy band structures and performance of organic and hybrid optoelectronic devices. Through these mechanisms, polyelectrolytes and oligoelectrolytes are able to modify the WF of metals and semiconductors by generating interfacial dipoles. It is also becoming apparent that they facilitate doping, compensating the charges of mobile carriers, offering control over the charge carrier density and allowing the creation of homojunctions. Although NPEs and oligoelectrolytes constitute simpler structures than CPEs, their development and an understanding of their role in optoelectronic devices has emerged more recently. Recent research has demonstrated that despite their wide band gaps, these materials are very effective at controlling the band structures of organic and hybrid semiconductors, even if they themselves are not conjugated and do not exhibit semiconducting behaviour by themselves.

Table 2 summarizes the influence of NPEs and oligomers on the performance of solar cells. It is clear that these materials can strongly influence the device characteristics via control of the interface properties and band structures of a wide range of hybrid and organic semiconducting devices. As the body of research related to ionic materials in organic semiconductors continues to grow, the understanding of the mechanisms by which they influence device behaviour has become clearer.
Table 2 The influence of NPEs and oligomers on the performance of solar cells




Materials
Devices
Type
Improvement (SC)
Ref.


PCE (%)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)




PEIHBr
OSC
Cationic
1.05 to 5.96
0.211 to 0.70
—
29.4 to 54.2

83



PEIHI
OSC
Cationic
1.05 to 4.95
0.211 to 0.635
—
29.4 to 51.5

83



PEIHBIm4
OSC
Cationic
1.05 to 6.77
0.211 to 0.71
—
29.4 to 90

83



PV
OSC
Cationic
2.22 to 3.30
—
—
—

97



PSS-Na
OLED, OSC
Anionic
16% increment
—
—
—

100



PEI:PSS
OSC
—
3.01 to 3.68
—
—
—

101



PEIE–Ag
OSC
Anionic
6.11 to 7.66
—
15.55 to 16.61
59.3 to 61.0

102



PDADMAC
OSC
Cationic
0.10 to 1.86
—
0.25 to 10.82



103



PVPy
OSC
Zwitterionic
2.95 to 3.55
0.60 to 0.62
8.11 to 9.49
—

105



HBPA
OSC
Cationic
7.1 to 8.7
—
14.5 to 15.2
—

109



PVPy-EtBr
OSC
Cationic
2.95 to 3.49
—
8.11 to 9.67
—

111



Jeffamine
OSC
Cationic
8.2 to 9.1
—
—
71.6 to 74.6

112



PPDI-Ac
OSC
Cationic
6.40 to 9.45
0.67 to 0.78
15.80 to 16.28
59.42 to73.31

113



PAMPS-Na
OSC
Anionic
8.32 to 9.16
—
14.57 to 15.76
—

114



PSN
OSC
Cationic
3.61 to 10.02
0.54 to 0.92
14.94 to 16.09
46.53 to 68.44

115



PSO
OSC
Cationic
3.61 to 9.22
0.54 to 0.89
14.94 to 16.44
46.53 to 63.08

115



PSM
OSC
Cationic
3.61 to 8.74
0.54 to 0.90
14.94 to 15.27
46.53 to 66.6

115



PIL
OSC
Cationic
6.44 to 9.04
0.749 to 0.802
14.96 to 17.12
57.1 to 65.3

116



HD-Br
OSC
Cationic
5.8 to 9.77
0.67 to 0.86
15.29 to 16.43
56.95 to 68.47

118



HN-Br
OSC
Cationic
5.8 to 8.66
0.67 to 0.85
15.29 to 15.52
56.95 to 64.58

118



HP-Br
OSC
Cationic
5.8 to 9.87
0.67 to 0.86
15.29 to 16.58
56.95 to 68.52

118



PBPA
OSC
Cationic
7.2 to 8.3
—
—
55.1 to 63.6

128



FBF-N, FTBTF-N
OSC
Cationic
1.18 to 9.22
0.25 to 0.74
14.02 to 17.23
33.46 to 72.11

129



Rhodamine 101
PeSC
Zwitterionic
9.2 to 13.2
0.91 to 1.01
—
0.53 to 0.73

130



BenMeIm-Cl
QDSC
Cationic
1.62 to 2.21
0.41 to 0.49
—
0.48 to 0.59

131



CBA
OSC
Cationic
5.67 to 8.48
0.62 to 0.74
14.96 to 16.47
0.61 to 0.70

132



IID derivatives
OSC
Zwitterionic
5.19 to 9.12
0.679 to 0.753
14.18 to 16.91
54.0 to 71.6

133



DSAPS, DSABS
OSC
Zwitterionic
3.89 to 9.79
0.55 to 0.76
15.30 to 18.20
45.5 to 70.0

134



EDTA-4Na
OSC
Anionic
—
0.330 to 0.794
15.04 to 17.00
50.8 to 71.8

135



SM3, SM4
OSC
Cationic
7.41 to 9.20
—
14.65 to 17.22
66.6 to 71.3

136



SM5
OSC
Cationic
7.41 to 9.13
—
14.65 to 17.13
66.6 to 71.1

138



TBT-a
OSC
Zwitterionic
7.16 to 8.68
0.72 to 0.75
16.49 to 18.69
60.25 to 62.07

141



F4-TCNQ doped TS-CuPc
PeSC
Anionic
12.88 to 14.94
0.91 to 0.96
19.72 to 21.71
0.74 to 0.77

139



Alq3, QPhPBr
OSC
Cationic
4.38 to 11.05
0.64 to 0.86
13.67 to 18.38
50.61 to 69.85

143



TBAX
OSC
Cationic
5.81 to 7.00
—
11.54 to 12.45
58.4 to 65.3

144



OAS,SAS,SOAS
OSC
Zwitterionic
6.38 to 11.30
0.739 to 0.945
—
53.32 to 72.21

145



F4-TCNQ
PeSC
Anionic
7.14 to 9.70
—
16.73 to 19.44
0.45 to 0.58

146



[(tbt)2Ir(acac)]
OSC
Anionic
3.03 to 4.08
—
10.7 to 12.5
54.1 to 61.8

147



p-DPF
OSC/OLED
Zwitterionic
4.7 to 9.4
0.67 to 0.79
14.1 to 16.5
53 to 72

148



PMDPT
PeSC
Cationic
5.2 to 9.2
0.88 to 1.02
17.5 to 22.4
45 to 49

149



Tn0, Tn1
OSC
Cationic
1.18 to 8.80
0.25 to 0.74
14.02 to 17.70
33.46 to 71.70

152





Initially, these materials were assumed to influence device performance primarily by an interfacial dipole mechanism and by changing the WF of electrodes. In several recent studies where ESR spectra have been collected, there is evidence that the presence of ionic functionalities leads to radical ions and doping in the organic semiconductor. Thus, it appears that ionic polymers like NPEs and CPEs may provide a general strategy to create homojunctions in organic semiconducting devices. Although most studies using ionic materials regularly characterize interfacial dipoles and how the ionic materials affect the work functions of electrodes, relatively few studies have included experimental evidence showing doping, how ionic materials affect the population of charge carriers near the interface and how the band structure changes within the semiconducting layer next to the ionic material. The presence of free charge carriers can be detected by characteristic polaron absorption bands, ESR spectroscopy and through changes in the conductivity of the film. Changes in the band structure of the active layer can be measured via UPS by incrementally depositing thicker films of the active semiconductor material on top of the ionic material; however, this type of depth-dependent investigation of the band structure, so far, is uncommon. This kind of detailed characterization of charge carriers and band structure is needed to fully understand how interlayers affect the device function and constitutes an important potential area for growth and development in the context of organic and hybrid semiconductors.
The simple and cost-effective synthetic processes needed to prepare NPEs make them a convenient and economical tool to control the properties of organic semiconducting and hybrid devices in both laboratory and industrial scale applications. Their solution processability makes the fabrication of solar cells and other devices by methods like ink jet printing or roll-to-toll coating feasible on a large scale.
The ability to create and control homojunctions offers a route to overcome some of the fundamental energy losses encountered in organic and hybrid semiconductors by removing energy barriers. This can lead to higher VOCs in solar cells and lower operating voltages in light-emitting devices. Additionally, placing three junctions together opens the possibility of realizing organic bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), a type of transistor which has been used extensively in the context of silicon devices but has not yet been developed in the context of organic and hybrid electronics. The ability to control the population of charge carriers also offers the opportunity to improve the performance of field-effect transistors. Thus, there are many potential advances that can be made by studying the influence of ion containing materials, like polyelectrolytes, on the band structure of semiconducting devices.
As organic and hybrid semiconducting devices become more mature, it is likely that we will continue to see NPEs employed more often and realize their utility in creating homojunctions and controlling the energy band structure of organic semiconductors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the national research foundation (NRF) of Korea [NRF-2017R1A2B2012971 and NRF-2020R1F1A1075539] and the Korea Research Fellowship [KRF-2020H1D3A1A02081526].
References
D. Kearns and M. Calvin, J. Chem. Phys., 1958, 29, 950–951 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pope, H. P. Kallmann and P. Magnante, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 2042–2043 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Lampert, Phys. Rev., 1956, 103, 1648–1656 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913–915 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
A. Werner, Z. Anorg. Chem., 1893, 3, 267–330 CrossRef .
C. R. Kagan, D. B. Mitzi and C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, Science, 1999, 286, 945–947 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chiang, C. R. Fincher, Y. W. Park, A. J. Heeger, H. Shirakawa, E. J. Louis, S. C. Gau and A. G. MacDiarmid, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1977, 39, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Giannini, A. Carof, M. Ellis, H. Yang, O. G. Ziogos, S. Ghosh and J. Blumberger, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3843 CrossRef .
R. Ghosh, C. M. Pochas and F. C. Spano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11394–11406 CrossRef CAS .
K. Marumoto, S. Kuroda, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 256603 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2020, 28, 3–15 CrossRef .
X. Ke, J. Yan, A. Zhang, B. Zhang and Y. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 91904 CrossRef .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jäger, Y. E. Romanyuk, B. Bissig, F. Pianezzi, S. Nishiwaki, P. Reinhard, J. Steinhauser, J. Schwenk and A. N. Tiwari, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 225303 CrossRef .
H. Katagiri, K. Saitoh, T. Washio, H. Shinohara, T. Kurumadani and S. Miyajima, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 65, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
D. Park and S. Yim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 208, 110363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
L.-M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434–1449 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796–801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J.-L. Brédas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, L. Hu, F. Qin, Y. Zhou and P. K. Chu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701404 CrossRef .
J. Lee, L. G. Kaake, J. H. Cho, X.-Y. Zhu, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8972–8981 CrossRef CAS .
P. Matyba, K. Maturova, M. Kemerink, N. D. Robinson and L. Edman, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 672–676 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, S. E. Shaheen, C. Winder, N. S. Sariciftci and P. Denk, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1288–1290 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yuen, A. S. Dhoot, E. B. Namdas, N. E. Coates, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch, D. Moses and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14367–14371 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Campbell, T. W. Hagler, D. L. Smith and J. P. Ferraris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 1900–1903 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kahn, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 7–10 RSC .
J. H. Seo, R. Yang, J. Z. Brzezinski, B. Walker, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tanaka, K. Kanai, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 990–993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, R. Yang, C. V. Hoven, A. Garcia, D. A. Fischer, T.-Q. Nguyen, G. C. Bazan and D. M. DeLongchamp, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2491–2496 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vázquez, Y. J. Dappe, J. Ortega and F. Flores, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 144703 CrossRef .
W. E. Ford, D. Gao, N. Knorr, R. Wirtz, F. Scholz, Z. Karipidou, K. Ogasawara, S. Rosselli, V. Rodin, G. Nelles and F. von Wrochem, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9173–9180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pfeiffer, A. Beyer, T. Fritz and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3202–3204 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, M. Pfeiffer, J. Blochwitz, A. Werner, A. Nollau, T. Fritz and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 410–412 CrossRef CAS .
B. Maennig, M. Pfeiffer, A. Nollau, X. Zhou, K. Leo and P. Simon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 195208 CrossRef .
S. R. Forrest, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1793–1896 CrossRef CAS .
J. Blochwitz, T. Fritz, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo, D. M. Alloway, P. A. Lee and N. R. Armstrong, Org. Electron., 2001, 2, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nollau, M. Pfeiffer, T. Fritz and K. Leo, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 4340–4343 CrossRef CAS .
A. Werner, F. Li, K. Harada, M. Pfeiffer, T. Fritz, K. Leo and S. Machill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Werner, F. Li, K. Harada, M. Pfeiffer, T. Fritz and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4495–4497 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, A. Werner, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and X. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17076–17082 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Katz, A. J. Lovinger, J. Johnson, C. Kloc, T. Siegrist, W. Li, Y.-Y. Lin and A. Dodabalapur, Nature, 2000, 404, 478–481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, E. Kawabe, K. Kanai, T. Iwahashi, T. Nishi, Y. Ouchi and K. Seki, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2005, 144–147, 533–536 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wei, T. Menke, B. D. Naab, K. Leo, M. Riede and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3999–4002 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo, X. Zhou, J. S. Huang, M. Hofmann, A. Werner and J. Blochwitz-Nimoth, Org. Electron., 2003, 4, 89–103 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lim, K. A. Peterson, G. M. Su and M. L. Chabinyc, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 998–1010 CrossRef CAS .
I. Salzmann, G. Heimel, M. Oehzelt, S. Winkler and N. Koch, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 370–378 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Jacobs and A. J. Moulé, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703063 CrossRef .
Q. Pei, G. Yu, C. Zhang, Y. Yang and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 269, 1086–1088 CrossRef CAS .
E. Moderegger, F. P. Wenzl, S. Tasch, G. Leising, U. Scherf and K. O. Annan, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 825–827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Cao, J. Gao, D. Wang, G. Yu and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1999, 99, 243–248 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, A. J. Heeger, I. H. Campbell and D. L. Smith, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, R2482–R2485 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Slinker, J. A. DeFranco, M. J. Jaquith, W. R. Silveira, Y.-W. Zhong, J. M. Moran-Mirabal, H. G. Craighead, H. D. Abruña, J. A. Marohn and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 894–899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 7, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Su, Y.-R. Chen and K.-T. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1906898 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, R. Liu, D. Zhang and L. Duan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1907156,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201907156 .
A. O. Patil, Y. Ikenoue, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 1858–1859 CrossRef CAS .
O. Onitsuka, A. C. Fou, M. Ferreira, B. R. Hsieh and M. F. Rubner, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4067–4071 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, P. K. Iyer, X. Gong, B. Liu, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 274–277 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Baur, M. F. Durstock, B. E. Taylor, R. J. Spry, S. Reulbach and L. Y. Chiang, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1547–1548 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Mwaura, M. R. Pinto, D. Witker, N. Ananthakrishnan, K. S. Schanze and J. R. Reynolds, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10119–10126 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Z. Hu, R. Xu, X.-F. Jiang, H.-L. Yip, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3607–3613 CrossRef CAS .
F. Carulli, G. Scavia, E. Lassi, M. Pasini, F. Galeotti, S. Brovelli, U. Giovanella and S. Luzzati, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 538, 611–619 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Liang, X. Li, J. Qin, M. Ren, C. Yang, X. Bao, Y. Xia and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11152–11159 RSC .
H. Jiang, P. Taranekar, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4300–4316 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2500–2521 RSC .
W. Lee, J. H. Seo and H. Y. Woo, Polymer, 2013, 54, 5104–5121 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Patil and G. W. Schriver, Macromol. Symp., 1995, 91, 73–79 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Goh, S. Y. Lee, Z. H. Lu and C. H. A. Huan, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2000, 201, 1037–1047 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bianco, T. Da Ros, M. Prato and C. Toniolo, J. Pept. Sci., 2001, 7, 208–219 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiao, D. Ma, M. Lv, W. Chen, H. Wang, J. Zhu, M. Lei and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14720–14728 RSC .
J. Zhen, Q. Liu, X. Chen, D. Li, Q. Qiao, Y. Lu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8072–8079 RSC .
Z.-G. Zhang, H. Li, B. Qi, D. Chi, Z. Jin, Z. Qi, J. Hou, Y. Li and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9624–9629 RSC .
J. Min, Y. N. Luponosov, Z.-G. Zhang, S. A. Ponomarenko, T. Ameri, Y. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400816 CrossRef .
E. Castro, J. Murillo, O. Fernandez-Delgado and L. Echegoyen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2635–2651 RSC .
M. A. Kumari, T. Swetha and S. P. Singh, Mater. Express, 2018, 8, 389–406 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xiong, F. Wang, X. Qiao and D. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 123310 CrossRef .
H. Kang, J. Lee, S. Jung, K. Yu, S. Kwon, S. Hong, S. Kee, S. Lee, D. Kim and K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11587–11591 RSC .
J. H. Kang, Y. J. Park, M. J. Cha, Y. Yi, A. Song, K.-B. Chung, J. H. Seo and B. Walker, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 20670–20676 RSC .
H.-B. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, J. Jeong, J. Heo, H. Jang, J. H. Seo, B. Walker and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1950–1957 RSC .
O. J. Cayre, S. T. Chang and O. D. Velev, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10801–10806 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, L. Liu, Q. Yang, F. Lv and S. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4687–4735 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, S. Hong, J. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3005–3009 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher and J. D. Hong, Ber. Bunsen-Ges., 1991, 95, 1430–1434 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, J. D. Hong and J. Schmitt, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 210–211, 831–835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jaffar, K. T. Nam, A. Khademhosseini, J. Xing, R. S. Langer and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1421–1425 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yamauchi, K. Kato and H. Iwata, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8360–8367 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, K. L. Dzienis, J. Xu and Q. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 542–548 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tse, K. Y. K. Man, K. W. Cheng, C. S. K. Mak, W. K. Chan, C. T. Yip, Z. T. Liu and A. B. Djurišić, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Schöning, M. H. Abouzar and A. Poghossian, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 115–122 CrossRef .
B. Vercelli, G. Zotti, A. Berlin and M. Natali, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2001–2009 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sheng, H. Bai, Y. Sun, C. Li and G. Shi, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5567–5572 CrossRef CAS .
M. Young Jo, Y. Eun Ha and J. Hyun Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 1–8 CrossRef .
M. Y. Jo, Y. E. Ha and J. H. Kim, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 995–1001 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, T. Song, Z. Xia, H. Wei and B. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 484012 CrossRef .
G. E. Lim, Y. E. Ha, M. Y. Jo, J. Park, Y.-C. Kang and J. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6508–6513 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Chang, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Wu and C. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7788–7794 RSC .
K. Yuan, L. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 11563–11572 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Tiwari, S. Pillai, S. Parakh, F. Ali, A. Sharma and S. Chand, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 41114 CrossRef .
R. T. Tung, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2014, 1, 11304 Search PubMed .
S. Lee, S. Park, N. Sylvianti, H. K. Choi and J. H. Kim, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 441–446 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. E. Courtright and S. A. Jenekhe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26167–26175 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eita, A. El Labban, F. Cruciani, A. Usman, P. M. Beaujuge and O. F. Mohammed, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1558–1564 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Yeo, M. Kang, Y.-S. Jung, R. Kang, S.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Heo, S.-H. Jin, D.-Y. Kim and S.-I. Na, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 26–38 CrossRef CAS .
T.-Y. Juang, Y.-C. Hsu, B.-H. Jiang and C.-P. Chen, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 7837–7843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Qi, G. Liu, Y. Zhang, N. Zhu, Q. Zhang, X. Guo, D. Wang, H. Hu, Z. Chen, L. Xiao and B. Qu, Org. Electron., 2019, 65, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Marsya, N. Sylvianti, Y. H. Kim, S. Il Yoo, B. Lee, H. L. Choi, D. K. Moon and J. H. Kim, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2017, 653, 72–77 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Jiang, Y.-J. Peng and C.-P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10424–10429 RSC .
Z. Hu, R. Xu, S. Dong, K. Lin, J. Liu, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 88–97 RSC .
Y. Cai, L. Chang, L. You, B. Fan, H. Liu and Y. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24082–24089 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lv, Y. Li, X. Wei, Y. Xu, Z. Ge and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2238–2245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Liu, D. Tu, Q. Yang, X. Chen, C. Li and X. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2956–2959 RSC .
R. Kushwaha, P. Srivastava and L. Bahadur, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2017, 21, 1533–1543 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rafiq, Z. Chen, H. Tang, Z. Hu, X. Zhang, Y. Xing, Y. Li and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, L. Hu, F. Qin, Y. Zhou and P. K. Chu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701404 CrossRef .
T. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Tu, X. Deng, Q. Li and Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 3301–3326 CrossRef CAS .
B. Walker, H. Choi and J. Y. Kim, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 370–391 CrossRef .
X. Ouyang, R. Peng, L. Ai, X. Zhang and Z. Ge, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 520–524 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Li, X. Xu, Y. Li, K. Li and Q. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4643–4652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Godovsky, L. Chen, L. Pettersson, O. Ingans, M. R. Andersson and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Mater. Opt. Electron., 2000, 10, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
N. Shin, J. Zessin, M. H. Lee, M. Hambsch and S. C. B. Mannsfeld, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802265 CrossRef .
A. Islam, J. Li, M. Pervaiz, Z.-H. Lu, M. Sain, L. Chen and X. Ouyang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803354 CrossRef .
C. Min, C. Shi, W. Zhang, T. Jiu, J. Chen, D. Ma and J. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3417–3420 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Song, E. J. Lee, D. H. Kim, T. H. Lee, M. Goh, S. Lee and D. K. Moon, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 113, 210–218 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Wu, Q. Bao, F. Gao and J. Fang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400359 CrossRef .
K. Sun, J. Chang, F. H. Isikgor, P. Li and J. Ouyang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 896–900 RSC .
G. H. Kim, H. B. Kim, B. Walker, H. Choi, C. Yang, J. Park and J. Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1757–1760 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hyosung, H. B. Kim, S. J. Ko, J. Y. Kim and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 892–896 CrossRef .
J. Han, Y. Chen, W. Chen, C. Yu, X. Song, F. Li and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32823–32832 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Ouyang, R. Peng, Y. Bai, D. Mi, W. Jiang, A. Facchetti and Z. Ge, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2530–2536 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Li, X. Liu, L. Zhu, W. Zhang and J. Fang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 26244–26248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Liu, X. Li, W. Zhang, F. Xing and J. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8426–8431 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, N. Sylvianti, M. A. Marsya, D. K. Moon and J. H. Kim, Org. Electron., 2016, 39, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, N. Sylvianti, M. A. Marsya, J. Park, Y.-C. Kang, D. K. Moon and J. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32992–32997 CrossRef CAS .
J.-M. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, M. Li, C.-C. Zhang, L.-L. Jiang, K.-H. Hu, Q.-Q. Ye and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701688 CrossRef .
M. H. Yun, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Park, D. S. Kim, B. Walker and J. Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16410–16417 RSC .
C. Song, X. Liu, X. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Bai and J. Fang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 33523–33528 RSC .
N. B. Kotadiya, H. Lu, A. Mondal, Y. Ie, D. Andrienko, P. W. M. Blom and G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gupta, D. Yan, J. Yao and C. Zhan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1876–1883 RSC .
Y. Xu, J. Yuan, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, X. Ling, H. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Wang and W. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2776–2784 CrossRef CAS .
R. Peng, Z. Liu, Q. Guan, L. Hong, W. Song, Q. Wei, P. Gao, J. Huang, X. Fan, M. Wang and Z. Ge, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6327–6334 RSC .
V. Trifiletti, T. Degousée, N. Manfredi, O. Fenwick, S. Colella and A. Rizzo, Metals, 2019, 10, 14 CrossRef .

          G. Feng, P. Fan, Y. Yuan, Q. Li and J. Zhon, in 9th International Symposium on Advanced Optical Manufacturing and Testing Technologies: Optoelectronic Materials and Devices for Sensing and Imaging, SPIE, China, 2019, p. 93.
J.-H. Lee, S. Kwon, S. Y. Jeong, B. Park, S. Hong, J. Kim, S.-Y. Jang and K. Lee, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 2566–2573 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Said, S. M. Wagalgave, J. Xie, A. L. Puyad, W. Chen, Z. Wang, S. V. Bhosale, S. V. Bhosale and Q. Zhang, J. Solid State Chem., 2019, 270, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elawad, L. Sun, G. T. Mola, Z. Yu and E. A. A. Arbab, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 771, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, Y. Xu, X. D. Dang, T. Q. Nguyen, Y. Cao and G. C. Bazan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3282–3283 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Xie, J. Fang and C. Yang, Org. Electron., 2016, 30, 182–190 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagrams illustrating doping in (a) inorganic and (b) organic semiconductors. On the left, silicon is doped with boron or phosphorus, and on the right, tetracene is doped with chlorine or potassium.	 

 	Fig. 2  Use of heterojunctions and homojunctions to control the movement of charge carriers. (a) Type II heterojunction where an ETL facilitates electron extraction while blocking hole extraction. (b) Type II heterojunction where an HTL facilitates hole extraction while blocking electron extraction. (c) Pristine organic semiconductor with EF in between HOMO and LUMO bands. (d) Cationic polymer supporting n-type doping in an organic semiconductor. (e) Anionic polymer supporting p-type doping in an organic semiconductor.	 


Silicon (crystalline)	0.738	1.12	0.382	
14

GaAs	1.127	1.44	0.313	
14

InP (crystalline)	0.939	1.34	0.401	
14

CdTe	0.876	1.5	0.624	
14

MAPbI3	1.076	1.52	0.444	
15

(FAPbI3)0.05 (MAPbBr3)0.05	1.144	1.50	0.356	
16

CIGS	0.734	1.15	0.416	
17

CZTS	0.708	1.4–1.5	0.69–0.79	
18

PbS (quantum dot)	0.630	1.33	0.700	
19


P3HT/PC61BM	0.556–0.641	2.1/2.3	1.45–1.54	
20

PM6/Y6	0.83	1.93/1.51	0.68	
21

PTB7:PC71BM	0.759	1.9/2.3	1.141	
22

DSSC (ADEKA-1/LEG4)	1.014	1.85/1.91	0.836	
23

Kmax = hf − Φ	(1)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram outlining the analysis of UPS data. (a) Secondary edge region which provides information about the WF and vacuum energy. (b) Fermi edge region which provides information about HOMO and valence band energies. LUMO/conduction band energies may be extrapolated by adding the optical band gap. (c) Band diagram with important features highlighted. Adapted with permission from ref. 32, copyright (2009) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy band diagrams for devices with the architecture ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ETL/Ag. (a) Using ZnO as an ETL. (b) Using TPBI as an ETL. (c) Using PEI as an ETL. (d) Using PEIBIm4 as an ETL. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Chemical structures of early NPEs.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic energy band diagram of a SC device with PEIE–Ag IFL (right). (b) J–V characteristics of inverted polymer SCs based on PBDTTT-C-T:PC71BM without and with PEIE, PEIE–Ag interlayers; inset: J–V characteristics under dark conditions plotted on a semi-logarithmic scale. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures of recently reported NPEs.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Hyper-branched poly(amido acid) as IFL, (b) device architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) PVPy-EtBr as the IFL in the P3HT:PC61BM based OPV device with the energy band diagram of the device; Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright (2017) by Taylor & Francis. (b) Schematic representation of OPV devices based on Jeffamines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright (2013) by The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) PEI with different counter ions as the IFL in OPV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2019) the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular structures of early small-molecule dopants.	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structures of recent small-molecule dopants.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of PFP and DPF and their oxidation reactions with (NH4)2S2O8. (b) Absorption spectra of PFP and DPF before and after oxidative doping. (c and d) Schematic illustration of the molecular alignment of the p-PFP (upper) and p-DPF films (lower) on metal electrodes, respectively. The enlarged figure shows the possible electrostatic interaction between the backbone of p-DPF and hydroxide ion groups on the metal surface along with the out-of-plane direction. The red arrow indicates the direction of electric dipole of p-DPF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Molecular structures of oligoelectrolytes for interlayers in semiconducting devices.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) UPS spectra of bare ITO, ITO/Tn0 and ITO/Tn1 thin films and (b) illustrations of vacuum level shift and reduced work function of ITO after the deposition of Tn0 and Tn1, respectively. (c) J–V curves and (d) EQE spectra of the inverted PSCs. Photographs of water droplets on the surface of uncoated (e) ITO, (f) Tn0 and (g) Tn1 coated ITO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2016) Elsevier.	 


PEIHBr	OSC	Cationic	1.05 to 5.96	0.211 to 0.70	—	29.4 to 54.2	
83

PEIHI	OSC	Cationic	1.05 to 4.95	0.211 to 0.635	—	29.4 to 51.5	
83

PEIHBIm4	OSC	Cationic	1.05 to 6.77	0.211 to 0.71	—	29.4 to 90	
83

PV	OSC	Cationic	2.22 to 3.30	—	—	—	
97

PSS-Na	OLED, OSC	Anionic	16% increment	—	—	—	
100

PEI:PSS	OSC	—	3.01 to 3.68	—	—	—	
101

PEIE–Ag	OSC	Anionic	6.11 to 7.66	—	15.55 to 16.61	59.3 to 61.0	
102

PDADMAC	OSC	Cationic	0.10 to 1.86	—	0.25 to 10.82	
	
103

PVPy	OSC	Zwitterionic	2.95 to 3.55	0.60 to 0.62	8.11 to 9.49	—	
105

HBPA	OSC	Cationic	7.1 to 8.7	—	14.5 to 15.2	—	
109

PVPy-EtBr	OSC	Cationic	2.95 to 3.49	—	8.11 to 9.67	—	
111

Jeffamine	OSC	Cationic	8.2 to 9.1	—	—	71.6 to 74.6	
112

PPDI-Ac	OSC	Cationic	6.40 to 9.45	0.67 to 0.78	15.80 to 16.28	59.42 to73.31	
113

PAMPS-Na	OSC	Anionic	8.32 to 9.16	—	14.57 to 15.76	—	
114

PSN	OSC	Cationic	3.61 to 10.02	0.54 to 0.92	14.94 to 16.09	46.53 to 68.44	
115

PSO	OSC	Cationic	3.61 to 9.22	0.54 to 0.89	14.94 to 16.44	46.53 to 63.08	
115

PSM	OSC	Cationic	3.61 to 8.74	0.54 to 0.90	14.94 to 15.27	46.53 to 66.6	
115

PIL	OSC	Cationic	6.44 to 9.04	0.749 to 0.802	14.96 to 17.12	57.1 to 65.3	
116

HD-Br	OSC	Cationic	5.8 to 9.77	0.67 to 0.86	15.29 to 16.43	56.95 to 68.47	
118

HN-Br	OSC	Cationic	5.8 to 8.66	0.67 to 0.85	15.29 to 15.52	56.95 to 64.58	
118

HP-Br	OSC	Cationic	5.8 to 9.87	0.67 to 0.86	15.29 to 16.58	56.95 to 68.52	
118

PBPA	OSC	Cationic	7.2 to 8.3	—	—	55.1 to 63.6	
128

FBF-N, FTBTF-N	OSC	Cationic	1.18 to 9.22	0.25 to 0.74	14.02 to 17.23	33.46 to 72.11	
129

Rhodamine 101	PeSC	Zwitterionic	9.2 to 13.2	0.91 to 1.01	—	0.53 to 0.73	
130

BenMeIm-Cl	QDSC	Cationic	1.62 to 2.21	0.41 to 0.49	—	0.48 to 0.59	
131

CBA	OSC	Cationic	5.67 to 8.48	0.62 to 0.74	14.96 to 16.47	0.61 to 0.70	
132

IID derivatives	OSC	Zwitterionic	5.19 to 9.12	0.679 to 0.753	14.18 to 16.91	54.0 to 71.6	
133

DSAPS, DSABS	OSC	Zwitterionic	3.89 to 9.79	0.55 to 0.76	15.30 to 18.20	45.5 to 70.0	
134

EDTA-4Na	OSC	Anionic	—	0.330 to 0.794	15.04 to 17.00	50.8 to 71.8	
135

SM3, SM4	OSC	Cationic	7.41 to 9.20	—	14.65 to 17.22	66.6 to 71.3	
136

SM5	OSC	Cationic	7.41 to 9.13	—	14.65 to 17.13	66.6 to 71.1	
138

TBT-a	OSC	Zwitterionic	7.16 to 8.68	0.72 to 0.75	16.49 to 18.69	60.25 to 62.07	
141

F4-TCNQ doped TS-CuPc	PeSC	Anionic	12.88 to 14.94	0.91 to 0.96	19.72 to 21.71	0.74 to 0.77	
139

Alq3, QPhPBr	OSC	Cationic	4.38 to 11.05	0.64 to 0.86	13.67 to 18.38	50.61 to 69.85	
143

TBAX	OSC	Cationic	5.81 to 7.00	—	11.54 to 12.45	58.4 to 65.3	
144

OAS,SAS,SOAS	OSC	Zwitterionic	6.38 to 11.30	0.739 to 0.945	—	53.32 to 72.21	
145

F4-TCNQ	PeSC	Anionic	7.14 to 9.70	—	16.73 to 19.44	0.45 to 0.58	
146

[(tbt)2Ir(acac)]	OSC	Anionic	3.03 to 4.08	—	10.7 to 12.5	54.1 to 61.8	
147

p-DPF	OSC/OLED	Zwitterionic	4.7 to 9.4	0.67 to 0.79	14.1 to 16.5	53 to 72	
148

PMDPT	PeSC	Cationic	5.2 to 9.2	0.88 to 1.02	17.5 to 22.4	45 to 49	
149

Tn0, Tn1	OSC	Cationic	1.18 to 8.80	0.25 to 0.74	14.02 to 17.70	33.46 to 71.70	
152

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
