 In situ etching-induced self-assembly of metal cluster decorated one-dimensional semiconductors for solar-powered water splitting: unraveling coopera ...  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR06697J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR06697J
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17118-17132
In situ etching-induced self-assembly of metal cluster decorated one-dimensional semiconductors for solar-powered water splitting: unraveling cooperative synergy by photoelectrochemical investigations†

        
          
            Fang-Xing 
            Xiao
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Liu
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Fuzhou.  and Fuzhou University, China. E-mail: fxxiao@fzu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 62 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637459, Singapore. E-mail: liubin@ntu.edu.sg;  Fax: +(65) 6794-7553;   Tel: +(65) 6513-7971
Received 
      8th September 2017
    , Accepted 9th October 2017First published on 11th October 2017AbstractAlthough recent years have witnessed considerable progress in the synthesis of metal clusters, there is still a paucity of reports on photoelectrochemical (PEC) properties of metal cluster/semiconductor systems for solar energy conversion. In this work, highly ordered glutathione (GSH)-protected gold (Au) cluster (Aux@GSH) enwrapped ZnO nanowire array (NW) heterostructures (Aux/ZnO NWs) were designed by a facile, green, simple yet efficient in situ etching-induced electrostatic self-assembly strategy by modulating the intrinsic surface charge properties of building blocks, which renders negatively charged Aux clusters spontaneously and uniformly self-assembles them on positively charged ZnO NWs framework with intimate interfacial integration. It was unraveled that such Aux/ZnO NWs heterostructures demonstrated significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performance in comparison with single ZnO NWs, Au nanoparticles (Au/ZnO NWs) and GSH-capped Agx clusters (Agx/ZnO NWs) decorated ZnO NWs counterparts under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation. The vitally important role of Aux clusters as photosensitizer was unambiguously revealed and the merits of Aux clusters in boosting charge transfer arising from their unique core–shell architecture were highlighted by systematic comparison under identical conditions, based on which Aux cluster-mediated PEC water splitting mechanism is delineated. It is anticipated that our work can highlight the possibility of harnessing metal clusters as efficient light-harvest antennas and open new avenues for rational construction of various highly energy efficient metal cluster/semiconductor heterostructures for widespread photocatalytic and PEC applications.
1. Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has been attracting enormous attention as a promising renewable energy technology over the past few decades since the pioneering work launched by Honda and Fujishima in 1972.1 Thereafter, a large variety of semiconductors have been exploited to act as photoelectrodes for water splitting. Among the fruitful semiconductors, zinc oxide (ZnO), as a direct bandgap and large exciton binding energy (60 meV), has been widely investigated for photocatalysis.2–8 Nonetheless, development of ZnO is hampered by its poor light absorption in the visible spectrum region due large bandgap (3.37 eV), thus resulting in limited light response in the UV region, which accounts for merely 3–5% of the solar spectrum and fast recombination of photogenerated charge carriers. To overcome these obstacles, various strategies have been developed to extend the light absorption band edge and simultaneously boost the lifetime of photogenerated electron–hole charge carriers, such as metal or non-metal elemental doping,9 noble metal deposition,10 passivation with carbon materials,11 or combination with other semiconductors.12,13 Among these, of particular note is the construction of metal/ZnO heterostructures, in which metals can not only serve as efficient electron traps for capturing photoelectrons but also as pronounced light-harvest antennas as a result of unique surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect for producing plasmon-induced hot carriers in the visible or even near-infrared regions.14
In recent years, metal nanocrystals (e.g., Au, Ag, Cu, Pt, and In) have been determined as a crucial part of nanomaterials on account of their SPR effect.15,16 When the size of metal nanoparticles (NPs) decreases to be atomically small (<2 nm) with precise number of metal atoms and these NPs are capped by stabilizing ligands, they are referred to as “metal clusters”.17–20 Compared with conventional bulk metals, metal clusters possess peculiar atom stacking mode, quantum confinement effect, and discrete molecule-like electronic band structure.21 Among copious metal clusters, gold (Au) and silver (Ag)-based clusters have attracted the most attention, with their structures well characterized by crystallography, mass spectrometry and computational methods.22–30 Most recently, it has remarkably been found that L-glutathione (GSH) molecule can act as the surface linker and a reducing agent, which benefits the formation of stable Aux clusters with core–shell architecture (i.e., Aux@GSH).
To date, only sporadic metal cluster/semiconductor nanocomposites have been reported for photocatalytic and PEC applications;17,18,30 moreover, metal cluster-induced photocatalytic and PEC mechanisms, especially, the essential roles of metal clusters in boosting the transfer of photo-induced charge carriers are still elusive. Furthermore, it is worth noting that most metal cluster/semiconductor systems currently being investigated are mainly confined to TiO2-based nanocomposites, and investigations on other metal cluster/semiconductor systems are still in their nascent stage. Besides, previous works indicate that external quantum efficiency of GSH-protected metal cluster/semiconductor nanocomposites for PEC water splitting in the visible region is relatively too low.31,32 Therefore, how to boost PEC water splitting efficiency of metal cluster/semiconductor heterostructures constitutes a grand challenge. On the other hand, it should be emphasized that one-dimensional (1D) semiconductors possess unprecedented merits in comparison with their corresponding bulk counterparts including fast and long-distance electron transport, large specific surface area and pore volume as well as enhanced light absorption and scattering capabilities.4,14 In this regard, it is reasonably envisaged that appropriate integration of 1D semiconductors with metal clusters would judiciously combine their respective advantages to construct highly efficient photoelectrodes.
With these motivations, we have successfully achieved the close integration of GSH-protected Aux clusters with ZnO nanowire arrays (NWs) by judiciously tuning their intrinsic surface charges properties, by which intrinsically negatively charged Aux clusters are spontaneously and uniformly assembled on ZnO NW scaffold with intimate interfacial interaction, thus giving rise to spatially and hierarchically ordered Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation is systematically explored and charge transfer between ZnO and Aux clusters is specifically probed. Besides, PEC performance of gold (Au) nanoparticles (NP) and Agx cluster decorated ZnO NW counterparts fabricated by analogous electrostatic self-assembly strategy has also been explored and compared with Aux/ZnO NWs under the same experimental conditions to highlight the pivotal influence of GSH-capped Aux clusters on boosting PEC water splitting performance of metal cluster/semiconductor nanocomposites. Finally, excited-state cooperative synergy between ZnO and Aux clusters in conjunction with PEC mechanism are delineated. Our work will provide a conceptual paradigm for self-assembly of a large variety of metal cluster/semiconductor heterostructures and afford enriched information on PEC properties of metal cluster/semiconductor nanocomposites for advanced solar energy conversion.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials

L-Glutathione (reduced, 98%), gold(III) chloride trihydrate (99.9%), deionized water (DI H2O, Millipore, 18.2 MΩ cm resistivity), zinc acetate, zinc nitrate, ethanol (C2H5OH), sodium sulphate (Na2SO4), nitric acid (HNO3, 95–98%), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), silver nitrate (AgNO3), sodium borohydride (NaBH4), and trisodium citrate (Na3C6H5O7·2H2O) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich and used without purification.
2.2 Preparation of ZnO NWs
Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates were cleaned by dipping in a freshly prepared piranha solution (3:1 concentrated 98% H2SO4/30% H2O2) for 30 min, rinsed with DI H2O, and dried with a gentle stream of N2. The piranha solution is very dangerous and it should be handled with great care. 110 mg of zinc acetate was added into ethanol solution to obtain 5 mM zinc acetate solution. 5–8 drops of the prepared zinc acetate solution were then dropped onto the FTO substrate with the conducting layer facing up. After about 25 s, the piece of FTO was rinsed in pure ethanol solution and immediately taken out and put in an electric oven at 100 °C for drying. This process was repeated for 4 times and the FTO with ZnO seeds was obtained by calcining at 350 °C in air for 30 min. The growth solution was prepared by adding 100 mL of 0.05 M methenamine into 100 mL of 0.05 M zinc nitrate solution. A piece of FTO coated with ZnO seeds was immersed into the growth solution containing 25 mM Zn(NO3)2 and 25 mM methenamine and kept in an electric oven at 95 °C for 3 h. Finally, the samples were calcined at 400 °C in air for 1 h.
2.3 Preparation of Aux@GSH clusters
Aux clusters were prepared by a recently published method with a slight modification.33–35 In brief, 40 mg of gold(III) chloride trihydrate and 46 mg of L-glutathione (GSH) were mixed in 50 mL of DI H2O under ambient conditions. The mixture was stirred until a colorless solution was obtained and then heated at 70 °C for 24 h. The Aux cluster aqueous solution was purified by adding acetonitrile to recrystallize the cluster and thoroughly washed with DI H2O and acetonitrile (1:3 in volume), re-dispersed in DI H2O, and finally stored in a refrigerator at 4 °C for further use.
2.4 Preparation of Au NPs
Preparation of Au NPs capped with negatively charged surface (i.e., citrate ions) according to a previously published method was referred to.36 Prior to the experiment, all glassware was cleaned with aqua regia (3:1 volume for HCl and HNO3) for 12 h and thoroughly washed with DI H2O. Gold(III) chloride (25 mL, 1 mM) and sodium citrate (2.5 mL, 38.8 mM) aqueous solutions were separately heated to boil under vigorous stirring (1200 rpm). Subsequently, the latter was rapidly added into the gold solution under vigorous stirring (1200 rpm). The mixture became dark and then wine red gradually in 20 s, and the heating lasted for 10 min. Finally, the solution was vigorously stirred under ambient conditions for another 15 min to finish the synthesis process.
2.5 Preparation of Agx@GSH clusters
AgNO3 (20 mM) and GSH (50 mM) aqueous solutions were prepared with DI H2O. A NaBH4 (112 mM) aqueous solution was freshly prepared by dissolving 43 mg of NaBH4 in 2 mL of 1 M NaOH solution, followed by adding 8 mL of DI H2O.37 The addition of a certain amount of NaOH to the NaBH4 solution was used to improve the stability of borohydride ions against hydrolysis. In a typical experiment to synthesize GSH-capped Agx clusters (Agx@GSH), AgNO3 (125 mL, 20 mM) and GSH (150 mL, 50 mM) aqueous solutions were first mixed in DI H2O (4.85 mL) under vigorous stirring to form thiolate–AgI complexes, followed by the addition of an aqueous solution of NaBH4 (50 mL, 112 mM). A deep-red solution of Agx clusters (5 mL) was collected after 5 min. This Agx cluster solution was then incubated at room temperature for 3 h and the deep-red solution gradually decomposed into a colorless solution, leading to the formation of thiolate–AgI complexes. Subsequently, 50 μL of 112 mM NaBH4 was introduced into this colorless solution under vigorous stirring (1200 rpm), which produces light-brown Agx cluster aqueous solution after 15 min. Without stirring, this light-brown Agx cluster solution was incubated at room temperature for 8 h.
2.6 Self-assembly of M/ZnO NWs (M = Aux, Au NPs, Agx) heterostructures
An efficient electrostatic self-assembly approach was developed to fabricate metal clusters (or metal)/semiconductor nanocomposites. For the preparation of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, ZnO NW substrate was first dipped into Aux cluster aqueous solution with its pH value delicately controlled to be 7.2 for different times (24, 36 and 48 h) to achieve spontaneous and uniform deposition of Aux clusters. Subsequently, the thus-assembled composited heterostructures were washed with DI H2O for 2 min and dried by a gentle stream of N2. Similarly, Au/ZnO NW and Agx/ZnO NW hybrid nanostructures were also prepared via the analogous electrostatic self-assembly approach using Au NPs and Agx@GSH aqueous solutions with the same concentration. For rational comparison, the optimal dipping time for fabricating Au NP/ZnO NW and Agx/ZnO NW heterostructures was controlled to be 24 h.
2.7 Characterization
Crystal structure of the samples was determined by X-ray diffraction (Bruker D8, 40 kV, 40 mA) using Cu Kα as the radiation source. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), high-resolution (HR) TEM and elemental mapping images were collected by a JEOL model JEM 2010 EX instrument (200 kV). UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) were obtained on a UV-vis-NIR spectrometer (Varian Cary 500 Scan) using BaSO4 as the internal background. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were probed on a photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250, Thermo Fisher Scientific); all binding energies (BE) of the elements were calibrated according to the BE of carbon (284.60 eV). Morphologies of the samples were measured by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JEOL JSM6701F). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a PerkinElmer FTIR spectrometer. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were collected by an LP920-KS instrument. Atomic force microscopy (AFM, MFP3D, Asylum Research) images were taken by a silicon cantilever, which operates in a tapping mode. Dynamic light scattering analysis (Zeta PALS, BROOKHAVEN INSTRUMENTS CO.) was used to determine the zeta potential. Raman spectra were tested on a RenishawinVia Raman System 1000 using an excitation source of 514 nm under ambient conditions.
2.8 PEC water splitting measurements
PEC water splitting measurements were performed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660D). The electrochemical setup was composed of a conventional three-electrodesystem, a quartz cell containing 20 mL Na2SO4 (0.5 M, pH = 7.2) aqueous solution and a potentiostat. A platinum plate (20 mm × 10 mm) was used as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl/KCl as reference electrode. The sample films (20 mm × 10 mm) were vertically dipped into electrolyte and irradiated with a 300 W xenon arc lamp (Newport) equipped with an AM 1.5 filter (100 mW cm−2) or an AM 1.5 filter combined with a UV cutoff filter (λ > 420 nm). Monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were collected using three-electrodesystem without bias vs. Pt counter electrode, for which monochromatic light was provided by a 300 W xenon arc lamp (Newport) combined with a monochromator (Newport).
3. Results and discussion
An efficient and green electrostatic self-assembly strategy has been developed to prepare spatially highly ordered Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, as depicted in Scheme 1. It should be emphasized that the reason for selecting ZnO as the semiconductor substrate is mainly ascribed to its excellent electron transport capability in comparison with other semiconductors (e.g., TiO2), which benefits efficient electron transfer with metal clusters. More specifically, ZnO NW framework is first dipped into Aux cluster aqueous solution with pH value carefully tuned (pH = 7.2). Considering the intrinsic isoelectric point of ZnO (ca. 8.7–10.3), its surface is positively charged.38,39 On the other hand, it is worthwhile that Aux clusters exhibit a negatively charged surface on account of the deprotonation of carboxyl groups on the GSH surface, which is composited of various oxygen-containing functional groups such as carboxyl and amide groups (Fig. S1e†). The intrinsic negatively charged surface of Aux clusters can be disclosed by its zeta potential in a large pH profile (2–12), as reflected by Fig. S1b.† In this regard, when ZnO NWs are dipped into the Aux cluster aqueous solution with favorable pH value (pH = 7.2), negatively charged Aux clusters are spontaneously and uniformly assembled on the whole matrix of ZnO NWs with intimate interfacial contact under pronounced electrostatic attraction. On the other hand, notably, Aux cluster aqueous solution demonstrates substantial light absorption in the visible region ranging from ca. 400 to 500 nm. Therefore, it can be reasonably deduced that assembly of Aux clusters on the ZnO NW framework is beneficial for extending light absorption edge of ZnO to the visible region, thus affording visible-light-driven photoactivities. For comparison, intrinsically negatively charged Ag@GSH and citrated-capped Au NPs are also electrostatically assembled on the ZnO NW scaffold via the analogous assembly strategy, which produces Agx/ZnO NW and Au NP/ZnO NW heterostructure counterparts. The characterizations of Au NPs are provided in Fig. S2.†
 Scheme 1  Schematic for self-assembly of M/ZnO NWs (M = Au, Aux, Agx) heterostructures. 
3.1 Characterizations of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures
Our work begins with the characterizations of samples. Microscopic structures of the samples were first probed by field emission scanning electron spectroscopy (FESEM). As shown in Fig. 1(a & b), ZnO framework is composed of various uniform nanowires with mean diameter of ca. 100 nm. Cross-sectional FESEM images of ZnO NWs show that the nanowires possess length of ca. 1.2 μm growing vertically and directly from FTO substrate (Fig. 1c). When Aux clusters are spontaneously self-assembled on the scaffold of ZnO NWs under pronounced electrostatic interaction, it is clearly seen that morphology of the Aux/ZnO NWs heterostructure is not remarkably altered in comparison with pristine ZnO NWs. Moreover, Aux/ZnO NWs heterostructure also consists of a large number of single nanowires (Fig. 1d). However, high-magnification FESEM image of such a heterostructure (Fig. 1e) manifests that ZnO NW matrix demonstrates a rather coarse and uneven surface consisting of tightly compacted nanoparticles, which is distinct from pristine ZnO NWs with a smooth surface. This is mainly ascribed to the etching effect of acidic Aux clusters on the ZnO NW framework. The coarse surface is in favor of boosting the specific surface area of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure and increasing the number of surface active reaction sites. Notably, no Aux clusters can be discernible on the ZnO NW scaffold from the FESEM image of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure and this is due to the ultra-small size of the clusters (ca. 1.5 nm, Fig. S1c–d†); thus, making direct observation of Aux clusters is rather difficult. Cross-sectional FESEM images of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. 1f) suggest that the thickness of the hybrid heterostructure is the same as the ZnO NWs, signifying that the main structure of the ZnO NW matrix is almost retained even after long Aux cluster etching. The local high-magnification cross-sectional FESEM images of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure are provided in the insets of Fig. 1c and Fig. (1f & S3†), respectively.
 Fig. 1  Panoramic low- and high-magnification FESEM images of (a & b) ZnO NWs and (d & e) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures. Cross-sectional FESEM images of (c) ZnO NWs and (f) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures with corresponding locally magnified images in the insets. 
Morphologies of the samples were further analyzed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). As shown in Fig. 2(a & b), pristine ZnO NW framework is consisted of various uniform single nanowires with a smooth surface, which is in good agreement with FESEM results (Fig. 1a). The lattice fringe of 0.26 nm in the HRTEM image (Fig. 2c) can be accurately attributable to the (002) crystallographic plane of ZnO. Fig. 2d exhibits the TEM image of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, from which it is clear to see that although 1D scaffold of ZnO NWs is retained, an apparent rough surface is observed in the composited heterostructure relative to pristine ZnO NWs (Fig. 2a & b) owing to the in situ etching effect of Aux clusters. Moreover, as displayed in Fig. 2e and Fig. S4,† a large amount of Aux clusters with mean particle size of 1.5 nm are uniformly tethered on the ZnO NW framework with close interfacial contact and no agglomeration of Aux clusters is seen, strongly suggesting the etching-induced electrostatic self-assembly strategy developed in our current work by judiciously tuning the intrinsic surface charge properties of assembly units is efficient in fabricating metal cluster/semiconductor heterostructures. The intimate integration of Aux clusters with ZnO NWs can be evidently disclosed by the HRTEM image in Fig. 2f. Note that no lattice fringe of Aux clusters is seen in the HRTEM image of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. 2f) other than ZnO matrix and this is in line with the intrinsic unique electronic structures of metal clusters that are strikingly distinct from bulk metal nanocrystals.40–42 The composition of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure and spatial distribution of constituent elements in the heterostructure, especially the Aux clusters, are revealed by scan tunneling TEM (STEM) and elemental mapping measurements, as displayed in Fig. 2(g–i) and the inset images. The results corroborate the uniform distribution of Zn, O, and Au core elements in the hybrid heterostructure.
 Fig. 2  TEM and HRTEM images of (a–c) ZnO NWs and (d–f) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with elemental mapping results displayed in (g–i) and STEM images in the inset of g as well as models in the insets of a and d. 
UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum (DRS) was utilized to reveal the optical properties of the hybrid heterostructure. Fig. 3a shows the DRS results of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, both of which demonstrate a substantial light absorption peak in the UV region and the peak arises from the photoexcitation bandgap of the ZnO substrate. However, with regard to DRS results of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, besides the peak mentioned above, another relatively weak absorption region ranging from 400 to 450 nm is apparently observed and this is consistent with the UV-vis absorption spectra of Aux clusters (Fig. S1a†), implying Aux clusters are successfully anchored on the ZnO NWs via substantial electrostatic interaction. This speculation can be verified by the colors of pristine ZnO NW (left, white) and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (right, yellow), as displayed in the inset of Fig. 3a. The plots obtained via the transformation based on the Kubelka–Munk function vs. energy of light are shown in Fig. 3b, from which the bandgap values of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure are roughly estimated to be ca. 3.18 and 2.62 eV, respectively. Obviously, bandgap narrowing occurs when ZnO NWs are decorated with Aux clusters, suggesting Aux cluster modification is in favor of improving light absorption of composited heterostructure, especially in the visible region. Notably, although Aux/ZnO NWs in the longer range (>450 nm) show less absorption compared with ZnO NWs, the variation is very small. We believe this is mainly ascribed to the slight influence of background baseline and it does not affect the determination of enhanced light absorption afforded by Aux cluster deposition.
 Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with a corresponding photograph in the inset (left: ZnO NWs, right: Aux/ZnO NWs); (b) the plots of transformed Kubelka–Munk function vs. energy of light. 
Crystal structures of the samples were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). As displayed in Fig. 4(a & b), the peaks at 2θ values of 31.8, 34.4, 36.25, 47.54, and 62.86° can be indexed to (100), (002), (101), (102), and (103) crystallographic planes of zincite ZnO (JCPDS: 36-1451), respectively. Note that diffraction peaks of ZnO are sharp and pronounced, implying ZnO NW framework is highly crystallized. It is worthwhile that XRD patterns of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure are similar to those of ZnO NWs and no diffraction peaks attributable to Aux clusters are observed, which is primarily due to the relatively low deposition amount of Aux clusters relative to ZnO NW scaffold, and probably, the diffraction peaks of the former are shielded by the pronounced peaks of ZnO.
 Fig. 4  XRD patterns of (a) ZnO NWs and (b) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (the plum star indicates the diffraction peak of FTO substrate). 
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra were obtained to investigate the structural features of heterostructures. As shown in the FTIR spectra of Aux/ZnO NWs (Fig. 5a), the peaks at 3447.50 and 511.26 cm−1 are attributed to the stretching vibration modes of surface hydroxyl groups (–OH) and Zn–O bond,43,44 respectively. The peaks at 2919.39 and 2856.14 cm−1 correspond to the stretching vibration mode of methylene group (–CH2) from GSH ligand on the Aux cluster surface. Note that peak intensity of carboxyl group at 1635.91 cm−1 for Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is much stronger than for ZnO NWs, which reflects the contribution role of carboxyl groups on the GSH ligand. Hence, FTIR results strongly indicate that Aux clusters have been successfully assembled on the ZnO NW framework via electrostatic self-assembly buildup. Alternatively, blue-shifts in wavenumber are observed for these characteristic peaks of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure as compared with ZnO NWs, implying there exists pronounced interaction between Aux clusters and ZnO NW scaffold afforded by electrostatic attraction. This speculation is confirmed by the Raman results (Fig. 5b), for which the peak intensity of featured peaks for ZnO NWs is remarkably reduced in Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, once again verifying the substantial interfacial interaction between Aux clusters and ZnO NW matrix.
 Fig. 5  (a) FTIR spectra and (b) Raman results of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. 
With a view to reveal the cooperative synergy of Aux cluster and ZnO NW matrix and simultaneously reveal the component and elemental chemical states of samples, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were systematically performed. Survey spectrum of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. 6h) shows that the nanocomposite is composed of Zn, O, C, N, S, and Au core elements, among which N, S, and Au elements arise from GSH ligands (Fig. S1e,† inset), while only Zn, O, and C elements are observed in the survey spectrum of ZnO NWs (Fig. 6g). More specifically, as shown in the high-resolution C 1s spectrum of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. 6d), the peaks at 284.60, 285.88, 287.38, and 288.78 eV are attributable to C–C/C–H,45 C–OH/C–O–C,46 C–N,47 and –COO48 species, respectively. Compared with the high-resolution C 1s spectrum of ZnO NWs (Fig. 6a) for which only three peaks at 284.60, 286.28, and 288.68 eV assigned to C–C/C–H, C–OH, and carboxylate (CO32−) species, respectively, resulting from CO2 absorption are discerned, Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrate more diverse carbon-correlating species that stem from polar functional groups of GSH ligand. The analogous result is also observed in high-resolution O 1s spectrum of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, as shown in Fig. 6e, in which the deconvoluted peaks at 531.13, 532.61, and 533.75 eV corresponding to lattice oxygen (Zn–O),49 surface hydroxyl (Zn–OH),50 and –COO−,51 respectively, are clearly seen. Yet, the peak ascribed to –COO− group is absent in the high-resolution O 1s spectrum of ZnO NWs (Fig. 6b), once again highlighting the assembly of Aux clusters on the ZnO NW matrix. Moreover, it is found that chemical state of Zn element in the nanocomposite is the same as that in ZnO NWs, both of which point to Zn being in the oxidation state of +2 (i.e., Zn2+),52,53 indicating that Aux cluster modification does not alter crystal structure of ZnO NW framework; nevertheless, substantial red-shift of binding energy for ZnO NWs (Fig. 6c) and Aux/ZnO NWs (Fig. 6f), i.e., 1021.21 vs. 1021.71 eV for Zn 2p3/2 and 1044.30 vs. 1044.78 eV for Zn 2p1/2, provides more solid evidence for the pronounced interaction between Aux clusters and ZnO NWs via electrostatic interaction. Analogous results are also seen in the X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. S5†). Notably, as shown in Fig. 6i, high-resolution Au 4f spectrum of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrates two doublets of Au 4f peaks at 83.75/87.37 eV and 85.18/89.57 eV for 4f7/2 and 4f5/2, which are attributed to metallic Au0 and Au+ species,54,55 respectively. This is in accordance with the core–shell structure of Aux clusters, viz. Au(0)Au(I)@GSH, which has been postulated by previous works.33,34 Consequently, XPS results undoubtedly evidence the decoration of Aux clusters on the ZnO NW scaffold via electrostatic self-assembly approach with pronounced interfacial interaction, which is in accordance with DRS, TEM, FTIR, and Raman results.
 Fig. 6  High-resolution and (g & h) survey spectra of (a & d) C 1s, (b & e) O 1s, and (c & f) Zn 2p for pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. (i) High-resolution spectrum of Au 4f for Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. 
3.2 PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting reaction was utilized to probe the potential application of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure for solar energy conversion. Typically, in a PEC water splitting cell, band bending occurs when the Femi level of semiconductor equilibrates with the redox potential of electrolyte solution.56 In this regard, transfer of photogenerated electron–hole charge carriers is triggered under an electric field from the semiconductor (i.e., electrons from p-type semiconductor and/or holes from n-type semiconductor) to the semiconductor/electrolyte interface, where water is either oxidized to oxygen by an n-type semiconductor (photoanode) or reduced to hydrogen with a p-type semiconductor (photocathode).57
Linear sweep photovoltammetry (LSV) measurements were carried out to probe the current density of photoelectrodes as a function of bias voltage under simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2). First of all, PEC performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with different deposition amount of Aux clusters, achieved by changing the dipping time of ZnO NW substrate in Aux aqueous solution, were explored. The results indicated that PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is closely associated with deposition amount of Aux clusters, for which Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with dipping time of 24 h in Aux cluster aqueous solution demonstrated the optimal PEC performance (Fig. S6†). Moreover, the influence of pH value of Aux cluster aqueous solution on the self-assembly buildup and PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure was also investigated. The results suggested that Aux clusters can be assembled on the ZnO NW framework with good structural integrity only when the pH value of the Aux cluster aqueous solution is ca. 7.2 (Fig. S7†). Therefore, Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure prepared under the optimal experimental conditions (i.e., t = 24 h, pH = 7.2) was utilized as the typical composited sample for the following systematic investigations. As shown in Fig. 7a, photocurrent density of different samples under simulated solar light irradiation increases with increasing forward bias voltage, suggesting an expected n-type semiconductor. Apparently, no photocurrent was observed over ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure in the dark, indicative of the essential role of light irradiation in triggering the production of photo-induced charge carriers that are responsible for the generation of photocurrent. Fig. 7a shows that Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrated significantly enhanced photocurrent density in comparison with pristine ZnO NWs under simulated solar light irradiation and the result strongly highlighted the substantial photosensitization effect of Aux clusters on boosting PEC water splitting performance of ZnO. Notably, a small peak at 0.1–0.3 V was observed in the LSV result of Aux/ZnO NWs in the dark, which might be attributed to the intrinsic electrocatalytic property of Aux clusters or to the oxidation of some GSH molecules loosely capped on the surface.19 Alternatively, too fast scan rate (50 mV s−1) in performing the LSV measurements might also induce the appearance of such a small peak because smooth electron transfer can be substantially retarded by fast scan rate owing to capacitance effect. On–off transient photocurrent responses of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure at the same bias voltage were collected, as displayed in Fig. 7b. Notably, upon light irradiation, Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure showed a steep rise in photocurrent, followed by a transient decay, while ZnO NWs demonstrated a gradient increase in photocurrent, followed by a relatively stable current. This might be caused by the defect sites formed on the ZnO NW surface during the self-assembly process and these defects might serve as the main recombination centers for photogenerated electron–hole pairs.58 Notwithstanding, the characteristics, amperometric I–t curves agreed well with the LSV results, for which photocurrent density of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure was almost 2.5 times larger than that of pristine ZnO NWs under simulated solar light irradiation. Besides, it was revealed that Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrated improved photostability in comparison with pristine ZnO NWs under continuous light irradiation (Fig. S8†), suggesting Aux cluster modification is beneficial for improving photostability of ZnO. This was probably due to the efficacious transfer of holes from the valence band (VB) of ZnO to HOMO of Aux clusters, thus avoiding the direct oxidation of ZnO by holes.
 Fig. 7  (a) LSV plots, (b) on–off transient photocurrent responses, (c) EIS, (d) Mott–Schottky plots, (e) decay curves of photovoltage, and (f) electron lifetime of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 7.2). 
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements were performed to probe the charge transfer process at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte. It has been well established that semicircle arc diameter of Nyquist plots in EIS results conveys enriched information on charge transfer resistance, that is, the smaller semicircle arc diameter, the smaller the charge transfer resistance and the more efficient the separation of photogenerated electron–hole charge carriers.59Fig. 7c shows that semicircle arc diameter of Nyquist plots for Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is smaller than that for pristine ZnO NWs under the same simulated solar light irradiation, implying that spontaneous assembly of Aux clusters on ZnO NWs is conducive to reduce charge transfer resistance in the interfacial region, thus leading to significantly improved photocurrent of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure.
Mott–Schottky (M–S) plots of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with 1/C2vs. potential are provided in Fig. 7d. Note that the slopes of the linear parts in the M–S results are positive, which suggests typical n-type semiconductor behavior and agrees with LSV results (Fig. 7a).60 When the linear parts of the curves are extrapolated to make 1/C2 equal to 0, the values of the Fermi levels (UFLvs. RHE) are roughly estimated to be 0.234 and 0.374 V (vs. RHE) for ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, respectively. The positive shift of UFL for Aux/ZnO NWs heterostructure relative to ZnO NWs suggests a decrease in the band bending edge on account of the intimate interfacial contact between Aux clusters and ZnO NW substrate, which is in favor of promoting electron transfer from Aux clusters to ZnO NWs. Therefore, M–S results reveal a faster charge carrier transfer over Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure compared with ZnO NW, thereby leading to remarkably improved PEC water splitting performance. The carrier density (ND) is determined by the following formula:53ND = (2/eεε0) [dUFL/d(1/C2)]where e = 1.6 × 10−19 C, ε0 = 8.86 × 10−12 F m−1, ε = 8.12 for ZnO, and C is the capacitance. The ND values of pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure are calculated to be 5.38 × 1028 and 6.44 × 1028 cm−3, respectively. Apparently, ND of Aux/ZnO NWs is larger than ZnO NWs and the result shows that the charge carrier transfer efficiency of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is higher than that of ZnO NWs, which contributes to significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performances of the former.
Open-circuit photovoltage decay (OCPD) technique, which involves turning off light illumination at a steady state and then monitoring variation in photovoltage (Voc) as a function of time,61 was utilized to explore the lifetime of photoelectrons and assess the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. The correlation of Voc decay rate with electron lifetime can be described by the following equation.41τ = (kBT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1where τ is the potential-dependent electron lifetime, kB is the Boltzmann's constant, T is the temperature, e is the charge of a single electron, and Voc is the open-circuit voltage at time t. The decay rate of photovoltage vs. time and corresponding calculated electron lifetime as a function of Voc are displayed in Fig. 7e and f, respectively, from which it is clearly seen that electron lifetime of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is remarkably longer than that of ZnO NWs, signifying Aux clusters are vitally important for prolonging the lifespan of photogenerated charge carriers. To further corroborate this speculation, photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the samples were probed. As displayed in Fig. S9,† PL intensity of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is much lower than that of Aux clusters, suggesting photo-induced electrons over Aux clusters are able to flow to the conduction band (CB) of ZnO NW matrix, thus giving rise to the prolonged lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers.
Incident photo-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) measurements were carried out under zero-bias (vs. Pt counter electrode) condition to determine the reasons accounting for the significantly enhanced photocurrent of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. Fig. S10† shows the photocurrents of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under monochromatic light irradiation, for both of which a pronounced peak ranging from 200 to 400 nm is concurrently observed and it corresponds well to the bandgap photoexcitation of ZnO substrate. However, as for the IPCE result of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure, apart from the peak at 300 nm, another relatively wide absorption region spanning from 400 to 500 nm is obviously observed, but it is absent in the IPCE result of ZnO NWs. Compared with the UV-absorption spectrum of Aux clusters (Fig. S1a†) and DRS result of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. 3), it can be speculated that the substantial light absorption region in the visible region (400–500 nm) arises from Aux clusters, verifying the pivotal role of Aux clusters in boosting PEC water splitting performances of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure.
Besides simulated solar light irradiation, PEC water splitting performance of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) was also evaluated. As shown in Fig. 8a, Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure still exhibits remarkably enhanced photocurrent in a designated bias voltage scope compared with that of ZnO NWs, which demonstrates negligible photocurrent due to failure of bandgap photoexcitation under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Consistently, on–off transient photocurrent responses of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (Fig. 8b) shows a result analogous, with photocurrent of the latter substantially surpassing that of the former, strongly substantiating the photosensitization effect of Aux clusters in the visible region, and this is in good agreement with DRS and IPCE results. Also, Fig. 8c reveals that photovoltage of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under visible light irradiation is much larger than that of ZnO NWs along with slower decay rate of photovoltage in the dark, persuasively indicative of a much more prolonged lifetime of photogenerated charge carrier produced over Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure relative to pristine ZnO NWs. Moreover, as mirrored by the EIS results in Fig. 8d, charge transfer resistance in the interfacial domain of ZnO NWs is indeed reduced with the decoration of Aux clusters. Consequently, the critical role of Aux clusters in elevating PEC water splitting performances of wide bandgap semiconductors (ZnO) under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation is undoubtedly ascertained.
 Fig. 8  (a) LSV plots, (b) on–off transient photocurrent responses, (c) photovoltage decay, and (d) EIS results of pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 7.2). 
3.3 Comparison of PEC performances of M/ZnO NW (M = Aux, Au NPs, and Agx) heterostructures
To comprehensively appraise the contributing roles of metal clusters and metal nanocrystals (NCs) in improving PEC water splitting performances of metal (cluster)/semiconductor heterostructures, intrinsically negatively charged Ag@GSH clusters with the same ligand (GSH) and negatively charged Au NPs were prepared and self-assembled on the ZnO NW framework by the analogous electrostatic self-assembly approach. The characterizations of Agx@GSH and Au NPs are provided in Fig. S11 & S12 and S2,† respectively. It should be emphasized that deposition amounts of Agx@GSH clusters and Au NPs on the ZnO NW matrix in nanocomposites are controlled to be the same as that of Aux/ZnO NWs for rational comparison. As displayed in Fig. 9(a & b), Au NP/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrates pronounced photocurrent under both simulated solar light and visible light irradiation. Notably, photocurrent of Au NP/ZnO NW heterostructure under visible light irradiation is attributable to SPR-induced plasmonic excitation of Au NPs (Fig. S13†), for which in situ produced hot electrons from the plasmonic excitation of Au NPs contribute to the generation of photocurrent. The photosensitization effect of Agx clusters on improving PEC water splitting performances of ZnO NWs is reflected in Fig. S14,† in which Agx/ZnO NWs heterostructure also showed enhanced photocurrent in comparison with pristine ZnO NWs under visible light irradiation, albeit the photocurrent is relatively small. For comparison, PEC water splitting performance of metal NC/ZnO NW and metal cluster/ZnO NW heterostructures under simulated solar light and visible light irradiation are summarized in Fig. 9c and d, respectively. Fig. 9c shows that under the same simulated solar light irradiation and deposited with the same loading amount of metal clusters and metal NCs, Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrates the most enhanced PEC water splitting performance and the different samples follow the order of Aux/ZnO NWs > Au NPs/ZnO NWs > Agx/ZnO NWs > ZnO NWs. Under visible light irradiation with other experimental conditions retained, PEC water splitting performance of these samples follows the same trend. The most significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NWs compared with other counterparts under both simulated solar and visible light irradiation can be ascribed to the unique core–shell structure of Au(0)@Au(I)@GSH (1:1 ratio of Au:GSH and having >29 Au atoms).35 It has been ascertained in our previous works that in situ transformation of Aux@GSH clusters to Au NPs spontaneously occurs under either simulated solar or visible light irradiation, which induces the co-existence of Aux clusters and Au NPs in this kind of clusters.34,35,62 Hence, when utilized as the light-harvest antenna under the irradiation of either simulated solar or visible light, cooperative synergy stemming from photosensitization effect of Aux clusters and SPR-induced plasmon excitation of in situ formed Au NPs concurrently contribute to the substantially improved PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NWs compared to that of Au NPs/ZnO NWs, in which only SPR effect of Au NPs is responsible for performance enhancement. The relatively weak photosensitization effect of Agx clusters is principally due to its limited light absorption in the visible region, as revealed in Fig. S12.†
 Fig. 9  (a) LSV plots and (b) on–off transient photocurrent responses of Au NP/ZnO NW heterostructures under simulated solar light (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) and visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Comparison of the PEC water splitting performance of pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW, Au NP/ZnO NW, and Agx/ZnO NW heterostructures under (c) simulated solar light (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) and (d) visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). 
On the other hand, it has been found that intrinsic properties of ZnO NW substrate exert pronounced influence on PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. For example, PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NWs, in which ZnO NW substrate is prepared via electrodeposition approach, is remarkably inferior to Aux/ZnO NW utilizing ZnO NW substrate prepared by a seed-mediated hydrothermal growth approach (Fig. S15†), albeit their morphologies are similar (Fig. S16†).
3.4 PEC mechanism
PEC water splitting mechanism of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure is vividly depicted in Scheme 2. It should be stressed that the Aux clusters used in our work are distinct from typical widely studied Au25@GSH clusters reported in previous works,63 which endows Aux@GSH clusters with unique HOMO–LUMO transition band structure. According to the Kohn–Sham molecular orbitals theory,64 various electron transitions from the occupied levels to the unoccupied levels can be initiated over the Aux clusters under light irradiation, thus affording Aux clusters a distinct HOMO–LUMO gap, which acts like a semiconductor with a small bandgap.65,66 This speculation can be corroborated by the favorable bandgap (2.62 eV) of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure whose light-harvesting capability is greatly improved compared with that of pristine ZnO NWs. In this regard, Aux clusters and ZnO in the composited heterostructure are concurrently photoexcited under simulated solar light irradiation, thus yielding electron–hole pairs in LUMO and HOMO levels for clusters and in CB and VB for ZnO matrix. Owing to the more negative LUMO potential of Aux clusters than of CB of ZnO (Fig. S9†) in conjunction with their intimate interfacial contact,28–30 electrons in LUMO energy level of Aux clusters are able to transfer spontaneously to CB of ZnO and eventually flow with the photoelectrons produced over ZnO to the counter electrode where water is reduced to hydrogen by the electrons. Simultaneously, holes on VB of ZnO transfer to HOMO energy level of Aux clusters and then oxidize water to oxygen on the working electrode. Under visible light irradiation, although ZnO cannot be photoexcited, photogenerated electron–hole pairs produced over Aux clusters are responsible for PEC water splitting reactions. This indicates that electrons in LUMO energy level of Aux clusters flow to CB of ZnO and then are involved in the water reduction reaction; meanwhile, the holes in HOMO energy level of Aux clusters join in the water oxidation reaction. On the other hand, it is worth noting that plasmonic effect of Au NPs in situ transformed from partial Aux clusters along with their synergistic interaction with Aux clusters may also play a vital role in boosting PEC water splitting performance of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. The in situ formed Au NPs can serve as electron transfer mediators, which benefits cascade electron transport from Aux clusters to ZnO NWs.35 As for the Au NPs/ZnO NW heterostructure, only hot electrons from the SPR effect of Au NPs are involved in PEC water splitting reactions. PEC mechanism of Agx/ZnO NWs heterostructure is mainly ascribed to the photosensitization effect of Agx clusters, which resemble the PEC mechanism of Aux clusters of similar band structure and composition.
 Scheme 2  Schematic depicting PEC water splitting mechanism of metal cluster/ZnO NW heterostructure. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, an efficient in situ etching-induced electrostatic self-assembly approach was developed to fabricate spatially and hierarchically ordered Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure via carefully tuning intrinsic surface charge properties of building blocks, based on which negatively charged Aux clusters were uniformly and spontaneously deposited on positively charged ZnO NW framework with intimate interfacial integration. It was revealed that Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure demonstrated significantly enhanced PEC water splitting performance in comparison with pristine ZnO NWs under both simulated solar light and visible light irradiation, owing predominantly to the pronounced photosensitization effect of Aux clusters and cooperative synergy between in situ transformed Au NPs and Aux clusters, which is beneficial for shuttling and transferring photoelectrons to the ZnO matrix. Moreover, PEC water splitting performance of Au NP/ZnO NW and Agx/ZnO NW heterostructure counterparts under the same simulated solar and visible light irradiation were probed and systematically compared with Aux/ZnO NWs. It was ascertained that Aux@GSH clusters played the most significant role in boosting PEC water splitting performances of the composited heterostructure on comparing Au NPs and Agx@GSH clusters under the same conditions. Finally, possible PEC water splitting mechanism of Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures was elucidated. Our work will open new conceptual avenues to rationally prepare a large variety of metal cluster/semiconductor heterostructures and provide new insights for unveiling the promising potential applications of metal clusters in photocatalysis and photoelectrocatalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The award program for Minjiang Professorship (0180-510485) is greatly acknowledged. This work was supported by Singapore Ministry of Education Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 1: RG111/15 and RG10/16, Tier 2: MOE2016-T2-2-004, Public Sector Funding from Agency for Science, Technology and Research of Singapore (A*Star): M4070232.120, and the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister's Office, Singapore, under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE) program. Special thanks to Dr Kaiyuan Zheng and Prof. Jianping Xie of the National University of Singapore for providing us with Agx@GSH clusters.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, D. H. Tan, M. Montano, J. Goldberger, G. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1231–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kwiatkowski, I. Bezverkhyy and M. Skompska, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12748–12760 CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
Y. Tang, P. Wang, J.-H. Yun, R. Amal and Y. Hau Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15876–15881 CAS .
J. Yu, S. Zhuang, X. Xu, W. Zhu, B. Feng and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1199–1207 CAS .
S. Bera, H. Khan, I. Biswas and S. Jana, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 383, 165–176 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5124–5129 CAS .
H.-Y. Wang, J. Chen, F.-X. Xiao, J. Zheng and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6926–6932 CAS .
F. Xiao, F. Wang, X. Fu and Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2868–2877 RSC .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Li, G. Zhan and L. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 112–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Huang, Y. Fang, M. Zhang, K. Liu and B. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606688 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Thimsen, F. Le Formal, M. Gratzel and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 35–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Chen, L. Shao, Q. Li and J. F. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2679–2724 RSC .
Y.-S. Chen, H. B. Choi and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8822–8825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6075–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li and R. Jin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1749–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Wu and R. Jin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2568–2573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. Zeng and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10735–10744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Negishi, C. Sakamaot, T. Ohyama and T. Tsukuda, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1624–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bahena, N. Bhattarai, U. Santiago, A. Tlahuice, A. Ponce, S. B. H. Bach, B. Yoon, R. L. Whetten, U. Landman and M. Jose-Yacaman, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 975–981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Whetten and R. C. Price, Science, 2007, 318, 407–408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1003–1007 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Tang, D. A. Robinson, N. Bokossa, B. Xu, S. M. Wang and G. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16037–16044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shichibu, Y. Negishi, T. Tsukuda and T. Teranishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13464–13465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kurashige, M. Yamaguchi, K. Nobusada and Y. Negishi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2649–2652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. U. B. Rao and T. Pradeep, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3925–3929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-T. Chen, Y.-J. Hsu and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2493–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3185–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kogo, N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4217–4221 RSC .
Y.-S. Chen, H. B. Choi and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8822–8825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Chen and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6075–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, X. Yuan, Y. Yu, Q. Zhang, D. T. Leong, J. Y. Lee and J. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16662–16670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Dotzauer, J. H. Dai, L. Sun and M. L. Bruening, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2268–2272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, M. I. Setyawati, A. S. Tan, C. N. Ong, D. T. Leong and J. Xie, NPG Asia Mater., 2013, 5, e39–e47 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Parks, Chem. Rev., 1965, 65, 177–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. Degen and M. Kosec, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 20, 667–673 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, S.-F. Hung, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang and B. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 554–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-X. Xiao, Z. Zeng, S.-H. Hsu, S.-F. Hung, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28105–28109 CAS .
F. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16487–16498 CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4430–4431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16744–16746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Wang, B. Liu, Y. Sang and H. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 202, 620–641 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long, Y. Li, Y. Liu, S. Chen, X. Zheng, C. Gao, C. He, N. Chen, Z. Qi, L. Song, J. Jiang, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4486–4492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Biniak, G. Szymanski, J. Siedlewski and A. Swiatkowski, Carbon, 1997, 35, 1799–1810 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Wei and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 433–442 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, S. Xie, B. Weng and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18804–18814 CAS .
C. Han, Z. Chen, N. Zhang, J. C. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
B. Weng, M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9380–9389 CAS .
F. Xiao, F. Wang, X. Fu and Y. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2868–2877 RSC .
F.-X. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 7055–7063 CAS .
F. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7819–7830 RSC .
J. Huang, W. L. Dai and K. N. Fan, J. Catal., 2009, 266, 228–235 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Xiao, J. Miao, H.-Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Chen and B. Liu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6727–6737 RSC .
Z. Zhang and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6506–6512 CAS .
X. Zhu, H. Jia, X.-M. Zhu, S. Cheng, X. Zhuo, F. Qin, Z. Yang and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700016 CrossRef .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. L. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cocivera, A. Darkowski and B. Love, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2514–2517 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Meekins and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3437–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3185–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10346–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, C. M. Aikens, F. J. Hollander, G. C. Schatz and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5883–5885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, W. T. Eckenhoff, T. Pintauer and R. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14221–14224 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06697jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic for self-assembly of M/ZnO NWs (M = Au, Aux, Agx) heterostructures.	 

 	Fig. 1  Panoramic low- and high-magnification FESEM images of (a & b) ZnO NWs and (d & e) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures. Cross-sectional FESEM images of (c) ZnO NWs and (f) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructures with corresponding locally magnified images in the insets.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM and HRTEM images of (a–c) ZnO NWs and (d–f) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with elemental mapping results displayed in (g–i) and STEM images in the inset of g as well as models in the insets of a and d.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure with a corresponding photograph in the inset (left: ZnO NWs, right: Aux/ZnO NWs); (b) the plots of transformed Kubelka–Munk function vs. energy of light.	 

 	Fig. 4  XRD patterns of (a) ZnO NWs and (b) Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure (the plum star indicates the diffraction peak of FTO substrate).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) FTIR spectra and (b) Raman results of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 6  High-resolution and (g & h) survey spectra of (a & d) C 1s, (b & e) O 1s, and (c & f) Zn 2p for pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure. (i) High-resolution spectrum of Au 4f for Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) LSV plots, (b) on–off transient photocurrent responses, (c) EIS, (d) Mott–Schottky plots, (e) decay curves of photovoltage, and (f) electron lifetime of ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under simulated solar light irradiation (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 7.2).	 
ND = (2/eεε0) [dUFL/d(1/C2)]
τ = (kBT/e)(dVoc/dt)−1

 	Fig. 8  (a) LSV plots, (b) on–off transient photocurrent responses, (c) photovoltage decay, and (d) EIS results of pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW heterostructure under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution (pH = 7.2).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) LSV plots and (b) on–off transient photocurrent responses of Au NP/ZnO NW heterostructures under simulated solar light (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) and visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). Comparison of the PEC water splitting performance of pristine ZnO NWs and Aux/ZnO NW, Au NP/ZnO NW, and Agx/ZnO NW heterostructures under (c) simulated solar light (AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2) and (d) visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm).	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic depicting PEC water splitting mechanism of metal cluster/ZnO NW heterostructure.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr06697j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
