Structure–property–function relationship of fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0QM00769B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0QM00769B
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 2506-2551Structure–property–function relationship of fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers

        
          
            M. G. Monika 
            Bai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            H. Vignesh 
            Babu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Lakshmi
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            M. Rajeswara 
            Rao
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad, Dharwad, Karnataka 580011, India. E-mail: monika.g.18@iitdh.ac.in; hvigneshbabu@gmail.com; rajesh@iitdh.ac.in
bDepartment of Applied Sciences and Humanities, National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, Ranchi, Jharkhand 834003, India
cDepartment of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Suratkal, Karnataka 575025, India. E-mail: lakshmi.vellanki@nitk.edu.in
Received 
      30th September 2020
    , Accepted 11th January 2021First published on 12th January 2021AbstractPorous organic polymers (POPs) consisting of open interconnected pores offer a broad and vast accessible surface area, and thus have been explored extensively in both academia and industry for numerous applications including heterogeneous catalysis, gas separation, gas adsorption/storage, and ion exchange. Introducing the benefits of microporous polymers into the extended π-conjugated organic polymer gives rise to novel materials, namely, conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs), which endow even more intriguing properties/applications, especially in optoelectronics, energy storage, and sensors. In particular, within the domain of CMPs, luminescent CMPs enjoy the advantage of possessing aggregation-induced emission (AIE) and long-range exciton migration accompanied by the intrinsic properties such as microporosity and high surface area. The significant host–guest interactions and fast analyte diffusion facilitated by the microporous environment along with the efficient exciton migration through the polymer network will be fundamental for fast and highly sensitive chemical sensing. The unique structural features in conjunction with the selective properties and encouraging applications of the fluorescent CMPs have triggered a great deal of interest, which have led to rapid progress in the development of structurally diverse fluorescent CMPs. In this review, we present a comprehensive summary of all the advances in the development of fluorescent CMPs based on tetraphenyl ethene (TPE), phenylene, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and boron- and nitrogen-based π-systems and their emerging applications in numerous fields as well as our perspectives on future research.
M. G. Monika Bai
Ms. Monika Bai M G was born in Ranchi, Jharkhand. She completed her BSc in Chemistry from St. Agnes College, Mangalore and MSc from VIT university, Vellore in 2017. She joined as a PhD student in Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad in 2018, working with Prof. Rajeswara Rao M. Her research focuses on the development of π-conjugated small molecules and porous organic polymers via C–H activation methodology and exploring their application in the field of material science in developing systems for sensing, photocatalytic activity and opto-electronics.
H. Vignesh Babu
Vignesh Babu obtained his BSc degree from The Gandhigram Rural Institute and MSc degree in Chemistry from Madurai Kamaraj University. He completed his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. K. Muralidharan from the University of Hyderabad, India in 2014. Following post-doctoral research at IMDEA Materials Institute, Madrid, Spain, he began his academic career at IIT Dharwad. Currently, he has been working as an assistant professor in the Department of Applied Sciences and Humanities, National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, Ranchi. His research interests include the synthesis and multifunctional applications of porous polymers, polymer composites, bio-based polymeric materials in carbon dioxide fixation, water treatment and energy storage.
V. Lakshmi
Lakshmi Vellanki is an assistant professor at the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal, India. She received her PhD in 2014 from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India. As a post-doc, she joined Prof. Hiromitsu Maeda, Ritsumeikan University, Japan, for 2.5 years and Prof. Dmitrii Perepichka, McGill University, Canada, for 1.5 years. Her research interests involve the synthesis and characterization of novel π-conjugated building blocks, organic semiconductors, optically active materials based on conjugated oligomers, dyes and further extend to porous organic frameworks.
M. Rajeswara Rao
Rajeswara Rao is currently an assistant professor at Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad (IIT Dharwad) since 2017. He received his PhD from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India in 2011 under the supervision of Professor M. Ravikanth. Subsequently, he spent two years at Academia Sinica, Taiwan and about three years at McGill University, Canada, for post-doctoral studies. His research interests include designing and developing organic π-conjugated, small, one-dimensional and two-dimensional (covalent organic frameworks) polymers for sensing, optoelectronic and photocatalytic applications.
1. Introduction
POPs are a unique class of two/three-dimensional organic materials that are developed via the covalent integration of building blocks with different topology and geometries.1–5 The interest in the design and the development of POPs has originally stemmed from naturally-existing porous materials such as biological tissues, soil, rocks, petroleum reservoirs, zeolites, and synthetic hybrid polymers such as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),6,7 considering their enormous practical importance. Owing to the outstanding features of POPs such as the porous nature, crystallinity, high surface area, and ease of ability to tune their functionality and/or properties,3 these materials have emerged as a versatile platform for a variety of applications including gas storage,8–10 energy storage,11 photocatalysis,12,13 heterogeneous catalysis,14,15 and sensing.16 Typically, POPs can be broadly classified (Fig. 1) as crystalline covalent organic frameworks (COFs)17–21 and various amorphous materials such as porous aromatic frameworks (PAFs),22,23 hyper cross-linked polymers (HCPs),24,25 polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs),26 and conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs).27–29 COF polymerization proceeds through the thermodynamic route to yield crystalline materials and is typically developed by the condensation of appropriate building blocks by employing reversible reactions.17–19 Because of this, these materials are limited by the hydrolytic stability and synthetic strategies that promote the formation of crystalline materials. However, the well-defined crystalline porous network of COFs offers unique advantages in developing novel materials for optoelectronic and semiconducting applications.30 On the other hand, PAFs are stable and robust materials developed mostly by carbon–carbon bond linkages. Unlike for COFs, a wide variety of reactions and a broad range of building blocks are available to synthesize PAFs, which permits the development of a plethora of compounds. However, the polymer framework consists of tetrahedral tetraphenylmethane nodes and thus does not contribute to the extended π-conjugation.31 As far as the HCPs are concerned, the polymers consist of a high cross-linking network with predominant porosity. The main limitation of these materials is that the pore structure of the polymers cannot be controlled due to the irregular network formed, resulting from the fast kinetics of the reactions (for example, Friedel–Crafts reactions) employed. However, the low-cost reagents and the diversity of the building blocks and their applications in energy and gas storage make HCPs important materials. PIMs are another example of porous organic polymers that possess highly rigid and contorted shape networks that minimize the intermolecular packing and maximize the intrinsic microporosity. Because of this reason, most polymers are soluble and amenable to solution processability but the drawback of these polymers is the availability of a limited number of building blocks and also the lack of extended π-delocalization. Overall, the above-mentioned organic porous polymers other than COFs are amorphous but differ from each other in the type of employed linkages and the integrated building blocks.28
 Fig. 1  Classifications of porous polymers and porous organic polymers (POPs). The diagrammatic representation of different POPs has also been presented to provide insights into the polymer network topology. 
Among amorphous porous materials, CMPs are a unique class of POPs that possess extended π-conjugation and a permanent pore structure by virtue of the integrated π-conjugated building blocks and the π-propagating linkages.28 The facile π-delocalization across the polymer network offers intriguing optical and electronic properties that are desirable for semiconducting applications, OFETs, OLEDs, light-harvesting antennae, heterogeneous catalysis, super-capacitive energy storage, and fluorescent sensing.15,16,27–29,32 Since the first CMP of poly(aryleneethynylene) reported by Cooper et al. in 2007,33 there has been an increasing interest in developing a wide variety of CMPs. The vast choice of accessible building blocks (Chart 1) and a wide range of reactions (Chart 2) allow various possible permutations and combinations of monomers and linkages that give rise to a countless number of CMPs.27–29 Such design flexibility for the synthesis of conjugated networks of CMPs permits the fine-tuning of the properties as desirable for a specific application.
 Chart 1  Various building blocks used for the construction of fluorescent CMPs. 
 Chart 2  Schematic representation of the reactions used for the synthesis of CMPs. 
2. Fluorescent CMPs
Of specific interest, the materials that exhibit strong fluorescence have received tremendous interest owing to their wide range of applications as biological probes, chemical sensors, for cell imaging, and in organic light-emitting diodes, among others.34,35 Thus, a wide variety of luminescent materials spanning from organic to inorganic and oligomeric to polymeric materials have been developed and employed for suitable applications. In particular, polymeric fluorescent compounds have attracted special attention due to the fact that extending the π-conjugation from the oligomers to one-dimensional (1D) polymers renders uninterrupted π-delocalization along the polymeric backbone, which allows the exciton to migrate throughout the polymer.36 Such a unique feature of the polymers offers not only superior semiconducting applications but also amplified fluorescence signal transduction in analyte sensing. Relying on the outstanding properties of 1D polymers, Swager et al. have developed several fluorescent 1D conjugated polymers and have demonstrated the polymers' superiority towards the sensing of a variety of analytes.37,38 If such an efficient π-delocalization is introduced into the 2D-polymers, such as fluorescent CMPs, two-dimensional π-delocalization within the framework brings forth several benefits39,40 compared to fluorescent oligomers39 and 1D-polymers. Some advantages include (a) extended π-delocalization into the second dimension will enable even better efficient exciton migration; (b) the immobilization of fluorophoric building blocks in the 2D-framework will reduce the molecular π–π interactions and open-up the radiative pathways that enhance the light-emitting efficiencies; (c) the network structure also makes the CMPs fluoresce both in the solution and the solid-state while the monomers and the corresponding 1D polymers are non-emissive in the solution state; (d) the microporous scaffold of CMPs favors the fast diffusion of analytes and provides a unique environment to maximize the fluorophore guest molecules interactions; (e) the large surface area of the CMPs is also advantageous for improving the host–guest interactions. Due to these unique properties/features of 2D-conjugated polymers, they are expected to have superior analyte sensing with high selectivity, sensitivity, and fast response. Moreover, the microporous structure also plays a vital role in creating non-covalent D–A structures for light-harvesting antennas. However, it is important to note that the institution of uninterrupted π-delocalization in CMPs may not be possible for several reasons such as (a) node-promoted cross-conjugation, (b) cross-linking between the polymeric chains, (c) the presence of polarizable linkages (–CN, –CO, –NR–), and (d) the presence of non-planar building units. Thus, in most cases, the extended π-delocalization in the CMPs is not substantial concerning the corresponding monomers/model oligomeric compounds. Because of this reason, a vast majority of fluorescent CMPs show only about ∼20–50 nm redshift in the emission spectra compared to the monomers. However, by incorporating appropriate building blocks and linkers, CMPs possessing desirable luminescent properties can be developed and a broad range of unique advantages can be realized over non-fluorescent CMPs. In this context, fluorescent CMPs featuring both microporosity and extended π-conjugation with a large surface area possess unique advantages for fluorescence-based sensing of explosives, volatile organic compounds (VOCs), metal ions, fullerene derivatives, and biomolecules. Besides, the unique way of rigidifying the chromophores in the CMP framework also enables applications in OLED.39–41 These specialized applications are distinctive of the fluorescent CMPs.
2.1 Design strategy of fluorescent CMPs
Luminescent CMPs are a subclass of π-conjugated CMPs, which upon photoexcitation emit energy in the form of light. The integrated building blocks often govern the luminescence properties of the CMPs. Thus, by varying the building units, the illuminating characteristics of the CMPs can be modulated/fine-tuned.40,42 However, most of the 2D CMPs are non-fluorescent due to strong interlayer π–π interactions, which promote aggregation caused quenching (ACQ). Thus, special structural design strategies are necessary to counteract these interactions and to realize luminescence for CMPs. The most popular designs employed so far are (a) introducing AIE-active building blocks into the CMP network. The AIE-active molecules possess propeller-like conformation with rotatable phenyl units, which in the aggregation state prevent strong π–π interactions and restrict the phenyl rotations, thus enhancing the solid-state emission (Fig. 2B).42–45 The integration of such molecules into the CMP network will render even more superior fluorescence properties compared to the monomers due to the unique structural features furnished by the CMPs.40–42 (b) The incorporation of the non-planar linkages between the building blocks. (c) The incorporation of structural contortion into the 2D-plane of the CMP. Such structural features will minimize π–π interactions and activate radiation pathways.40 However, the most successful strategy to obtain highly luminescent CMPs has been introducing inherently AIE-active building blocks. The structural rigidification and locking of the rotatable subunits in the CMP network vs. the corresponding monomeric units are expected to suppress the non-radiative pathways that lead to stronger fluorescence and higher quantum yield efficiency. However, in some cases, the fluorescence of the CMPs is weak compared to the monomers. This is due to the amorphous nature of the polymeric network and pore collapse in the CMPs, which enhances the π–π interactions between the fluorophores and promotes ACQ. In addition, molecular vibrations associated with the dynamic nature of CMPs will also activate non-radiative pathways to reduce the fluorescence of the polymers.46 Following the three strategies mentioned above, several chromophoric systems such as fluorenes, phenylenes, carbazoles, pyrenes, TPEs, phenylenevinylenes units, aryleneethylenes, boron- and nitrogen-based π-systems have been integrated into the CMPs and their fluorescence properties have been evaluated.40,47 Taking into consideration the outstanding properties and range of applications manifested by fluorescent CMPs, there has been an explosion in the development of several novel fluorescent functional CMPs. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to survey all the reported fluorescent CMPs as it will benefit not only the polymer research community but also those who work in optoelectronics, photochemistry, and allied fields. However, on this specific subject, only two review articles have been reported so far. The contributions by Guipeng et al.40 and Jiang et al.47 present a detailed discussion on the AIE properties and pertinent applications of CMPs, COFs, and MOFs but talks about only a few selected examples of fluorescent CMPs. On the other hand, although the concept paper published by Patra and Scherf48 discusses the fluorescence properties of the CMPs exclusively, the high volume of publications published in the recent years (after 2012) certainly necessitate another review. In light of this, we would like to bring up a review article by covering the recent papers published on this emerging field of fluorescent CMPs. The review illustrates two aspects: structure–fluorescent property and structure–function relationship of a variety of fluorescent CMPs. We classified the review into five sections based on the structural diversity of the integrated building blocks (TPEs, phenylenes, PAHs, boron, and nitrogen π-conjugated systems) and each section is further sub-classified to discuss the properties and pertinent applications (fluorescent explosives, VOC, biomolecules sensors, OLEDs, etc.). We hope that this review provides a more in-depth insight into this subject, which may fuel future innovations in this field.
 Fig. 2  (A) Illustration of the solution and solid-state fluorescence images to describe the ACQ (left) and AIE (right) effect. The middle image depicts the Jablonski diagram (radiative and non-radiative transitions). (B) The pictorial illustration of the design rationale employed to realize fluorescent CMPs. These three strategies help in weakening the interlayer π–π interactions in 2D CMPs and trigger the AIE properties. 
2.2 Fluorescent TPE-based CMPs

2.2.1 Structure–luminescence correlations. 
TPE is a novel AIE-active molecule that is known to exhibit outstanding fluorescence properties in the solid-state.49,50 The molecule's unique AIE properties stem from its propeller-like structure as such the conformation, which can prevent the aromatic units from having strong π–π interactions and trigger solid-state emission. However, the free phenyl rotors of TPE quenches the emission in the solution state (Fig. 2A). A large library of TPE-based fluorophores has been developed and explored for a wide variety of applications.49,50 However, when compared to simple TPE oligomers, their integration into the porous organic network brings forth additional advantages such as extended π-delocalization over the 3D conjugated network, leading to efficient exciton migration;36 the porous structure of the CMPs facilitates the efficient diffusion of analytes and provides special molecular interactions within the pores. Thus, these intriguing additional features of TPE–CMPs over oligomeric TPEs leads to the highly sensitive and selective detection of analytes. Moreover, the fluorescent TPE CMPs will also find applications for developing host–guest based light-harvesting antennas and OLEDs. Thus, in this line, Jiang et al.51 used the idea of developing a highly fluorescent TPE-based CMP TPE1 (Scheme 1) via the Yamamoto coupling of tetrabromoTPE (B1). The covalent incorporation of TPE units into the CMP framework severely suppressed the individual phenyl rotors' rotation. It rendered the CMP strong fluorescence with fluorescence quantum yields (PLQY) (Φf) as high as ∼40% in both the solution state and the aggregation state. In sharp contrast, structurally-relevant 1D polymer (TPE-LP; Φf = 0.65%) and the TPE building block (B1; Φf = 0.16%) consisting of free phenyl rotors exhibited significantly low PLQY (Scheme 1). Interestingly, the study also disclosed that the macroscopic particle size of the CMPs controls the optical properties (Fig. 3A–D). The time-dependent Yamamoto coupling reaction (2 h, 12 h, 36 h, and 72 h) enables the growth of the polymer network and increases the particle size (25 nm, 55 nm, 100 nm, and 255 nm), which consistently red-shifted the emission profiles from 538 to 551 nm. The results suggest that the increased reaction times positively affect the polymeric chain's growth, which favored extended π-delocalization. As anticipated, π-extension led to low-energy emission. The strategy provides a simple route to tune the polymers' emission wavelengths by varying the reaction time (Fig. 3E).
 Scheme 1  Synthesis of CMPs TPE1–4 and TPE-LP. 
 Fig. 3  FE-SEM images of the TPE1 CMPs synthesized at (A) 2 h, (B) 12 h, (C) 36 h, and (D) 72 h of reaction times (adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society); (E) left: pictorial illustration of the increase in the particle size (25–255 nm) of TPE1 for time-dependent Yamamoto-coupling when the time period is maintained from 2–72 h. Right: Representation of a 2D sheet of TPE1 with enhanced π-conjugation on increasing the size of the particle. The different color circles behind the 2D polymeric sheet indicate the size of the particle while the black color on the highlight depicts the extended π-delocalization. 
Lee et al.52,53 have later developed similar type of fluorescent CMPs (TPE1 and TPE2) via the Suzuki coupling of tetrabromo TPE B1 with either TPE tetraboronic acid bis(pinacol)ester B2 or 1,4-phenylenediboronic acid bis(pinacol)ester B3 (Scheme 1; TPE2 was also previously reported by Chen et al. using similar synthetic methods).54 Surprisingly, TPE2 (λem = 542 nm and Φf = 32%) having an additional 1,4-phenylene spacer in the π-conjugation length compared to TPE1 (λem = 551 nm; Φf = ∼40%), which showed hypsochromic emission signals, indicates restricted π-delocalization caused by non-planarity. However, the structural variations were found to have a negligible influence on the polymers' fluorescence quantum yields. In another study, Suzuki–Heck reaction was employed to introduce vinyl spacers by using potassium vinyltrifluoroborate (PVTFB) between the TPE unit B1 (Scheme 1) to realize π-extended fluorescent CMP (TPE3).55 Unlike the counterintuitive trend observed for TPE2, the planar vinyl spacers in TPE3 promote facile π-delocalization, which rendered red-shift photoluminescence with an emission band at ∼560 nm. The structural features of TPE1–TPE3 provide an important insight into the strategies that are needed to install the π-extension within the polymer network and obtain the low-energy emissive materials.
Later, Wei et al. developed a fluorescent CMP (TPE4) by replacing the vinyl linker with phenylene-cyanovinyl unit B6 through the Knoevenagel condensation reaction of 4-formylphenyltetraphenylethene B5 and 2,2′-(1,4-phenylene)diacetonitrile B6 (Scheme 1).56 The new linker supports π-delocalization and also installs donor–acceptor (D–A) interactions between the TPE and cyanovinyl groups; thus, the emission experienced an additional red-shift to 595 nm. The AIE of the CMP results from the combination of both integrated AIE-active TPE and the non-planar cyanostilbene linkers; thus, the polymer showed a high fluorescence quantum yield of 39.9%. The cyanostilbene also rendered solid-state emissive properties to the CMPs integrated with non-AIE functional building blocks [phenyl (478 nm), tetraphenylmethane (532 nm), and triphenylamine (622 nm)] by preventing the adjacent 2D sheets from forming short π–π contacts. However, the fluorescence quantum yields (3.4–8.6%) of the resultant polymers (TPE4) were low compared to the corresponding TPE-based CMP. It indicates that the TPE unit plays a critical role in boosting the polymers’ AIE emission.
Sun et al.55 demonstrated that the emission color of the CMP can be modulated by varying the concentration of the integrated building blocks. In this line, CMPs (TPE5(a–e)) exhibiting blue to green emissions have been developed by adjusting the tetraphenylmethane (B7):TPE (B1) ratios (Scheme 2). Increasing the TPE concentration consecutively from 0, 1%, 5%, 15%, 30%, 50%, and 100% increases the π-delocalization within the polymeric network and consequently red-shifts the emission signal from 460 nm to 570 nm (Fig. 4A). Tetraphenylmethane (B7) carrying an sp3-carbon in the center limits the π-delocalization and restricts the blue region's emission. Simultaneously, the facile π-conjugation in TPE allows for unrestricted π-delocalization and shifts the emission to the green region. This study precisely pinpoints the importance of the polymeric framework of CMPs over the HCPs towards fine-tuning the emission.
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of CMPs TPE5–10. 
 Fig. 4  (A) Photographs of fluorescence emission of TPE5a–e under UV light (adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Fluorescent spectra of TPE9 dispersed in various solvents (1 mg mL−1; λex = 460 nm). Inset: Photographs of solid-state and TPE9 suspensions in different solvents under UV light (adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc.). 
Besides the modulation of the π-delocalization length to regulate the luminescent properties of the materials, the other way to fine-tune the emission characteristics is to introduce donor–acceptor (D–A) units into the polymeric framework. The in-chain D–A interactions in the network impart the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) character and significantly modify the electronic levels of the polymer. Strong ICT interactions between the D–A units leads to narrow bandgap, red-shifted emission, and a large Stokes shift.58,59 In particular, the luminescence properties of the compounds depend on the degree of interactions between the donor and acceptors units; thus, by varying these moieties in the framework, the fluorescence properties of the polymers can be precisely fine-tuned. Moreover, D–A-based CMPs also showcase solvent-dependent emission variations, giving access to a range of potential applications. To draw advantage from such systems, TPEs were coupled with other π-conjugated building blocks to create novel π-conjugated units and D–A-based CMPs (Scheme 2). In this line, Faul et al.60 have coupled TPE (B1) units with triphenylbenzene (B8)/triazine (B9) moieties through Buchwald–Hartwig (BH) cross-coupling to achieve D–A luminescent porous polymers TPE6 and TPE7, respectively. TPE7 (611 nm) vs.TPE6 (536 nm) possesses relatively strong D–A interactions that guide the polymer's emission to the low energy region of the visible spectrum. Di- and triphenylamine-coupled TPEs (B10, B11) and triazine B12 were also connected through acid-catalyzed Friedel–Crafts polymerization (Scheme 2) in fluorescent CMPs (TPE8–9).57 Though these polymers are structurally similar to TPE6, the emission characteristics are distinctly different, with narrow and blue-shifted emission signals between 400–525 nm. Interestingly, the emission intensity and the emission wavelength of the solvent-dispersed TPE8–9 is heavily dependent on the solvent polarity (Fig. 4B). TPE8 showed strong fluorescence in both the solid and solvent dispersion state while TPE9 exhibited strong fluorescence in relatively less polar solvents.
Later, Maji et al.61 coupled TPE with electron-accepting fluorenone units to create strong D–A type CMPs TPE10a–d (Scheme 2). The study uses a strategy of incorporating three building blocks into the polymer network by reacting tetrabromoTPE (B1) and 2,7-dibromofluorenone (B13) with phenyl-1,4-diboronic acid (B4) via Suzuki coupling. By varying the concentrations of B13 (0.0, 0.1, 0.5, and 2.0 eq.) concerning the other coupling partners B1 and B4, the emissive colors can be tuned from green to red and the emission signals from 480 nm to 580 nm (Fig. 5A and B). The strong D–A interactions between the TPE and fluorenone unit in the polymer framework of TPE10b–d split the emission signal of TPE10a (480 nm) into two bands: a high energy band at 435, 430, and 425 nm and a low energy band at 540, 560, and 580 nm. The low energy band corresponds to the ICT state between TPE and fluorenone. The high energy bands correspond to the free TPE moieties that do not participate in the ICT interactions with fluorenone. The photophysical studies revealed that there exists an energy transfer from the latter to the former upon the selective excitation of the polymers in the TPE absorbing region (λex = 350 nm). Thus, both strong ICT interactions between the TPE units and fluorenone, and energy transfer from the TPEs that are not involved in ICT to the TPE–fluorenone ICT state were responsible for the tuneable emission colors in the polymers (Fig. 5C–G). The fluorescence solvatochromic and the fluorescence lifetime analyses also supported the existence of ICT and the energy transfer processes. Similar multi-component integrated CMPs (TPE2, TPE11, and TPE12) have also been developed through the Suzuki coupling (Scheme 3) of tetrabromoTPE (B1) and tetrabromo tetrakis(4-bromophenyl)methane (B5) [or tetrabromo-9,9′-spirobifluorene (B14)] with phenyl-1,4-diboronic acid (B4).54 In the solid-state, TPE11–12 showed emission signals at about 530–540 nm. The blue shift in the emission of TPE11–12vs.TPE10 indicates that weak D–A interactions exist between TPE and the tetraphenyl methane/spirobisfluorene units. On the other hand, the strong electron accepting nature of the fluorenone unit promotes the strong D–A interactions in TPE10. This study demonstrates that the CMPs fluorescence can be modulated by the judicious choice of the D–A building units.
 Fig. 5  (A) Fluorescence spectra of TPE10a–d; (B) photographs of TPE10a–d (from left to right) dispersed in THF solvent (top) and drop casted on a glass substrate (bottom) under UV-light (adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons). The pictorial portrayal of the processes that are responsible for the tuneable emission of colors of TPE10. The top image represents the incorporation of fluorenone units into TPE–CMP and the institution of (C) ICT from the TPE unit to fluorenone and (D) energy transfer from a group of TPE moieties to the TPE–fluorenone moiety. The bottoms images depict the energy level diagrams of (E) the simple emission process, (F) ICT process between TPE and fluorenone, (G) energy transfer process between the TPE–TPE units and the TPE–fluorenone unit. 
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of CMPs TPE11–16. 
Besides, TPE is also integrated with intriguing building blocks such as cationic imidazolium62B15 or pillar [5]arene63B16 to realize fluorescent CMPs TPE13a–d or TPE14 that are suitable for a specific application (Scheme 3). Different ratios of imidazolium and TPE units vary the ionic character of CMPs TPE13a–d. Among these ionic CMPs, TPE13a exhibits a very broad emission signal spanning across 450–800 nm with a peak maximum at 595 nm. TPE14 displays single- and two-photon fluorescence with an emission at 537 nm upon excitation either at 365 or 690 nm, having relatively strong fluorescence quantum yield (Φf) of 25.6%. In another work, TPEs, in combination with phloroglucinol moieties, have been integrated in to a CMP (TPE15) via azo linkages (Scheme 3).64 Due to photo-induced electron transfer (PET) interactions between the integrated monomeric units, the CMP is non-emissive. However, the emission of the CMP was partially recovered when it was impregnated with Ag+ ions. The Ag+ ions are expected to be bound to the hydroxyl (phloroglucinol) and azo groups of the CMP and quench the PET.64
Scherf et al.65 investigated the fluorescent properties of CMPs-sandwiched graphene nanosheets (CMP–G). The CMP–graphene nanosheets (G-TPE1 and G-TPE16) were obtained by introducing a 4-iodophenyl-substituted graphene template into Yamamoto coupling of B1 (or Sonagashira coupling of B1 with tetraalkenyl TPE B17) (Scheme 3). This synthetic strategy tailors the morphology of the CMP nanosheets and enhances the aspect ratio and surface area. G-TPE1 and G-TPE16 are fluorescent and exhibit an emission band at 575 nm and 590 nm, respectively, which are quite similar to the parent CMPs (TPE1 and TPE16) but display a modest red-shift of 20 nm (Fig. 6A and B). However, the graphene nanosheets compared to the parent CMPs are much weakly fluorescent as the strong D–A interactions between the electron-rich CMP and electron-deficient graphene promote the radiative deactivation of the excited states.
 Fig. 6  (A) Pictorial representation of TPE CMP–graphene sheets (G-TPE1) and the D–A interactions between the CMP (donor) and the graphene sheet (acceptor) leads to the red-shift in the emission when compared with that of the parent CMP (B). (C) Photograph of the nanofibrous films of TPE1/PLA illuminated by a UV lamp; (D) the fluorescence quenching of the nanofibrous films of TPE1/PLA upon 1 min immersion with different metal ions (adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
Besides the conventional synthetic routes, electropolymerization techniques have also used to develop TPE comprised of fluorescent CMPs. Given that electropolymerization renders thin-film CMPs, the method overcomes the complications posed by the processability of insoluble polymeric materials obtained from conventional methods. The technique provides excellent control over the preparation of thin films with varied thickness. Moreover, the thin film-based devices are also known for fast and amplified signal responses. In this line, Jiang et al.66 have demonstrated an electrochemical oxidative polymerization (Scheme 4) of tetra-carbazole substituted TPE (Eox = 1.1 V) for the development of the fluorescent CMP film (TPE17). The thin films of a thickness (Fig. 7A inset) ranging from dozens of nanometers to several micrometers have been obtained by controlling the number of cyclic voltammogramic cycles (Fig. 7A). The CMP films (λem = 524 nm and Φf = 40%) exhibit two-fold higher fluorescence properties compared to the oligomeric reference compound (λem = 520 nm and Φf = 21%) due to suppressed carbazole rotation in the polymer films (the structurally similar triphenylbenzene convenor exhibited blue-shifted emission (λmax = ∼400 nm and Φf = 10%). Thus, it suffers TPE in the core, promotes pi-delocalization, and AIE).31 Scherf et al.67 later extended the strategy to develop a series of electrogenerated CMPs TPE17–23 from four or eight functionalized electroelective thiophene- and carbazole-based monomers (Scheme 4). Compared to the thiophene-based CMPs (540–600 nm), the carbazole analogues (520–540 nm) exhibited shorter emission wavelengths (Fig. 7B) but relatively high PLQY values (up to 11.5%), possibly due to weak molecular interactions caused by the non-planar carbazole units.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of CMPs TPE17–23 obtained by the electro-polymerization method using building blocks B19–B24. 
 Fig. 7  (A) Cyclic voltammetry curves of TPE17 in ACN/CH2Cl2 (1:4 v/v) at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1 at 258 °C in the presence of the NBu4PF6 electrolyte (inset: the image of fluorescent microporous TPE17 film under UV-light) (adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons). (B) Photographs of B20 (a), B22 (b), B21 (c), B19 (d), B23 (e), and B24 (f) building blocks coated on quartz plates under UV irradiation (adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The same group also developed D–A based electrogenerated TPE–CMPs (TPE24–25) by incorporating fluorenone units (Scheme 5). The fluorenone-free CMP (TPE24) exhibit an emission signal at 525 nm with a fluorescence quantum yield of 4%.68 On the other hand, the CMP having fluorenone units (TPE25) exhibit strong D–A interactions with TPE units and shifts the emission signal to 608 nm. The D–A interactions also opened up the non-radiative pathways and reduced the emission of the polymer to 1.9%.
 Scheme 5  Synthesis of CMPs TPE24–25. 
An overview of the TPE CMP section reveals that these polymers fluoresce strongly in both the solid-state and dispersion state and the AIE properties mainly stem from the TPE units. The π-electron propagating features of TPE enable the development of blue to red emissive material. The modulation of the emission colors for CMPs is possible by adjusting the TPE units' ratios concerning poor π-electron communicating tetraphenyl methane/spirobisfluorene units. However, the D–A strategy was found to be universal and useful for the precise tuning of the emission of the TPE CMPs.


2.2.2 Structure–function correlations. 
The electron-rich characteristics of TPE units and unique interactions rendered by the porous network of CMPs provide a selective and superior sensing environment for electron-deficient guest molecules via the variation in the emission properties. Thus, the sensing capability of fluorescent CMPs have been investigated for a wide variety of nitroaromatic compounds. Lee, J. J. et al.52,53 realized that TPE1–2 selectively detects picric acid (PA) among various tested nitro-analytes such as 2,4-dinitrobenzene (2,4-DNT), 2,6-dinitrotoluene (2,6-DNT), and picric acid (PA). Between TPE1 and TPE2, the latter having an additional phenylene unit in the framework, displays relatively weak emissions and thus less sensitivity towards PA, i.e., TPE2 displays 42-folds reduction in the fluorescence compared to 190 folds for TPE1. The naked eye can visualize the changes. The estimated association constant (KSV) using the Stern–Volmer equation for TPE1 towards PA was as high as 14890 M−1. The study also discloses the significance of a porous network of CMPs toward superior sensing analyte activity. TPE1–2 exhibit two orders of magnitude higher performance over structurally similar TPE-containing linear 1D polymer. The porous network of the CMPs helps in two ways to improve the analyte sensing: (a) the analyte will be able to diffuse into the polymer porous network so that the analyte can freely approach the fluorophore, (b) the porous polymeric framework induces secondary interactions such as van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonding interactions, which improves interactions between the fluorophore (TPE) and the nitroaromatics (Fig. 8A). The π-conjugated TPE3 surprisingly showed low detection efficiency for any nitroaromatics tested (2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB), nitrotoluene (NT), and DNT).55 This was because of the poor spectral overlap between the analyte and the CMP, caused by the π-extended vinyl functionalities. On the other hand, tetraphenyl methane comprising counterpart (TPE5a) possess inefficient π-delocalization and thus exhibit excellent spectral overlap, particularly with PA, leads to efficient sensing (Fig. 8B). The emission quenching reaches up to 83.3% in the presence of 46.5 μM concentration of PA. Unlike TPE1–5, the amine-functionalized TPE6–7 did not show any selectivity for a particular nitroaromatic compound but responds to a range of explosives.60 The order of luminescence quenching with various analytes is in the order of trinitrotoluene (TNT) > NP > DNB > DNT > NB, which is precisely in the reverse order of the LUMO energy levels of these compounds (TNT < NP < DNB < DNT < NB). It demonstrates that the low lying LUMO of TNT matches well with the LUMO of CMPs and triggers an electron transfer from the photo-excited CMP. However, moderate quenching efficiency (Stern–Volmer plots; KSV ∼ 1000 M−1) and the high detection limit (3 ppm) of CMPs towards TNT indicates an inefficient energy level matching. TPE6 also exhibits an excellent adsorption capability of VOCs (methanol and toluene) with an uptake ability reaching up to 114 wt% for toluene at the saturated vapor pressure. This performance is at par with the highest reported materials.69,70 Thus, these materials may find application in the removal of hazardous industrial gaseous effluents.
 Fig. 8  (A) Pictorial representation of analyte diffusion into the CMP pores; the inset depicts the secondary interactions between the analyte and the CMP pore walls, enabling superior sensing. (B) Spectral overlap diagram for TPE3 and TPE5a,e with aromatic analytes such as PA, DNCB, 4-NT, 2,4-DNT, and (C) a comparative frontier energy level diagram of TPE24–25 with various nitroaromatics. 
In general, the major limitation that CMPs encounter is insolubility, which poses serious issues during solution processing and thin film preparation, thus severely impeding their applicability. To address this issue, Chen and Scherf et al.65 developed a judicious strategy of fabricating nanofibrous films via the electrospinning of CMPs (TPE1) using poly(lactic acid). The flexible and highly emissive films (Fig. 6C) detect not only various nitroaromatics (DNB and TNB) with up to 75% fluorescence quenching but also 80% for electron-deficient benzoquinone and 38% and 77% for metal ions such as Ag+ and Fe3+, respectively (Fig. 6D). The rationale behind the sensing behavior of CMP films is a photoinduced electron transfer from the electron-rich CMP to the electron-deficient compounds. However, in case of iron sensing, photo-oxidation of CMP by Fe3+ triggers the fluorescence quenching. Similarly, the sensing applications of the fluorescent films (Fig. 7A inset) developed through the electropolymerization technique were also explored (Scheme 4).66 TPE-carbazole CMP films (TPE17) of 5 nm thickness could efficiently detect TNP with a high degree of fluorescence quenching (82%) over DNP, DNT, NP, NT for 1 min exposure. Interestingly, the material's quenching efficiency is found to be inversely proportional to the thickness of the films. For example, the Stern–Volmer measurements (kSV) of the films with a thickness of 10 nm are 6.4 × 104 M−1 for TNP, which was drastically increased to 4.04 × 105 M−1 for 5 nm thick films. The higher selectivity of the polymer for TNP can be attributed to the matching LUMO levels of TNP (−3.92 eV) with that of the CMP (−2.69 eV), which provides a driving force for photoinduced electron transfer. On the other hand, the higher LUMO energy levels of NP (−2.19 eV) and NT (−2.31 eV) prevents electron transfer. However, the monomer displays a very inferior performance with respect to the polymer, indicating the importance of the porous framework.
Scherf et al.68 also investigated the structurally similar electrogenerated TPE24 thin films for the vapor-phase sensing of nitroaromatics (Fig. 9A). Although the solution phase sensing of nitroaromatics by CMP films achieved tremendous success, vapor phase sensing of the explosives is relatively low. Vapor-phase sensing offers a unique advantage as it is more relevant to real-time sensing. The thin films of TPE24 and TPE25 were highly sensitive towards TNT vapors. TPE24 exhibits 73% fluorescence quenching upon exposure to the TNT vapors for 60 s and reaches a maximum quenching of 95% within 3 min. Similarly, TPE25 exhibited a maximum quenching of 70% in 2 min. The detection limit of TPE24 for TNT was as low as ten ppb. The perfectly matching LUMO energy levels of TPE24 with the LUMO of TNT enable electron transfer from the photo-excited TPE24 to the low-lying LUMO of TNT, which triggers non-radiative pathways. The relatively high energy LUMOs of DNB, DNT, and NT does not affect the fluorescence of the films. On the contrary, TNB, despite having low-lying LUMO energy levels compared to CMP, is not detected by the CMP films (Fig. 8C). It reveals that besides having matching energy levels, the diffusion of the analyte into the pores and its interactions with the host also plays a significant role in the sensing. The high sensitivity of the films in sensing TNT vapors emerges due to the inherent microporosity (<1 nm), which provides a confined environment and one-to-one host–guest interactions, leading to trace level detection in a shorter time. The structurally similar CMP (TPE22) also showcase the chemical sensing of nitroaromatics at 100 ppm concentrations upon 1 min exposure.67 The polymer showed the highest sensitivity for TNB and TNP with a maximum fluorescence quenching of 75% and a lower detection limit for TNT (1 ppm).
 Fig. 9  (A) Photograph of the fluorescence quenching of TPE24 upon exposure to the vapors of TNT under UV-light and the pictorial representation of TPE24 (adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (B) The graphical representation of fluorescence quenching efficiency of TPE14 with respect to various ions (adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons). (C) Luminescence spectra upon the gradual addition of I2 to TPE9 dispersed in DMF (adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc). 
The sensing capability of CMPs towards a specific ion/molecule can be improved by introducing analyte selective receptor units into the CMP framework. Typically, the receptor binds to a specific target/analyte and the resultant complex influences the fluorescence properties of CMP. Thus, pillar[5] arene receptors that can host specific ions such as iron ions71,72 mercury ions73 and silver ions74 have been incorporated into fluorescent TPE–CMP (TPE14).ref. 63 The size matching ability of pillar[5] arene with Fe3+ leads to strong binding and high fluorescence quenching up to 92.9% among a broad range of tested cations (Fig. 9B). Furthermore, TPE14 also explicitly recognized 4-aminoazobenzene (Oil Yellow B) with 98.5% quenching of fluorescence over nitro-compounds, pyridine derivatives, etc., quaternary ammonium salts, indicating that it could be a useful sensor for amine-based compounds.

TPE13, owing to the presence of cationic imidazolium ion in the framework, was able to capture high concentrations of Cr2O72− from aqueous solutions and loses its fluorescence (λem = 595 nm).62 The CMP could discriminate Cr2O72− from other anions such as Cl−, SO42−, and NO3− with the highest removal efficiency of 87.9% within 5 min. Interestingly, the CMP also displayed an excellent efficiency in removing Cr2O72− from acidic electroplating wastewater, which indicates its practical utility in the electroplating industry.
In general, TPE-based polymers are widely studied for the sensing of nitroaromatics but are relatively less explored for iodine sensing. Geng et al.57 explored TPE8 and TPE9 having large porosity and charge transfer interactions for the dual function of both iodine sensing (Fig. 9C) and iodine uptake. The polymers showed high sensitivity towards iodine over various nitroaromatics (o-NP, p-DNB, PA, NB, m-DNB, m-NT, PhOH) via high fluorescence quenching and an increased uptake up to 350 wt% (3.5 g g−1). Besides iodine, the polymers also show high selectivity towards PA. Later, Liu et al.64 found that Ag+-doped azo-linked CMP (Ag-TPE15) possesses high iodine adsorption capacity up to 202 wt% (2.2 g g−1). The studies revealed that silver metal ion plays a critical role in binding iodine in the pores and enhancing the uptake as the metal-free TPE15 is found to have 50% reduced uptake. The chelating azo- and phenolic-groups present on the CMP framework will also help in sensing various heavy metal ions (Cu2+, Cr3+, Hg2+, and Ni2+ ions). The CMP exhibits high fluorescence quenching towards the metal ions (as high as 99%) even at low concentrations. For example, Cu2+ can quench the fluorescence of the polymer up to 35% at 10−9 M.
Although the porous network of CMPs provides a unique environment that facilitates superior sensing ability towards the guest molecules, the microporous structure in CMPs generally limits the efficient diffusion of guest molecules into the pores that may, in turn, restrict the interaction of the analytes with the functionalities of CMPs, leading to substandard detection sensitivity. To address this issue and improve the sensing performance, Kang et al.75 have developed a strategy to introduce a secondary porosity, i.e. macroporosity into the CMP material. A binary porous material CMP TPE(MA-F)16 has been formed by treating tetra(4-ethynylphenyl)ethylene B17 with tetra(4-bromophenyl)ethylene B1 under Sonogashira coupling method on the surface of the template silica spheres. The binary porous material indeed displayed a superior fluorescence sensing performance towards nitrotoluenes compared to the corresponding microporous CMP polymer TPE(F)16 (Table 1). For example, the association constant (KSV values) of the polymer TPE(MA-F)16 with DNT (63700 M−1), 4NT (138600 M−1), and 2NT (87700 M−1) are more than two times to those of TPE(F)16 [DNT (21500 M−1), 4NT (55700 M−1), and 2NT (52300 M−1)]. Moreover, the performance and detection limit (LOD) of MA–CMP is superior to that of the reported CMPs.
Table 1 
TPE-based fluorescent CMPs for sensing applications




S. no.
Structure
Building block effect on porosity and emission
Application (sensing)
Stern–Volmer constant KSVa (M−1)
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Fluorescence emission wavelength (nm) and quantum yield (%)
Ref.





a 
K
SV has been given for the highly sensitive analyte.





1

TPE1

Simple TPE units linked to exhibit strong emission with AIE and microporous amorphous CMP
PA > 2,4-DNT > 2,6-DNT
PA-1.4 × 104
672.95
547 (λex = 332 nm); Φf = ∼40%

53




TPE2

Phenyl-linked TPE tuning porosity and TPE-based AIE exhibits strong fluorescence
PA-8.026 × 103
685.05
542 (λex = 332 nm); Φf = ∼32%

52



2

TPE4

The vinyl linked TPE pertaining extended π-conjugation exhibits AIE and the porosity
PA > DNCB > DNT > NT
NA
318
560 (λex = 350 nm)

56



3

TPE6–7

Triamine building block connected with TPE enhanced the porosity and AIE inducing strong emission
TNT > NP > DB > DT > NB

TPE6


TPE6


TPE6


60



TNT-8.86 × 102
1340
536 (λex = 400 nm)



TPE7


TPE7


TPE7



TNT-1.245 × 103
570
611 (λex = 400 nm) in THF


4

TPE8–9

Strut length greatly influencing porosity and AIE

TPE8–I2

TPE8


TPE8


TPE8


57




TPE9–I2, PA
I2-1.53 × 105 LM−1
564.8
530 (λex = 460 nm)





TPE9


TPE9


TPE9





I2-9.07 × 104 LM−1
44.1
512 (λex = 350 nm) in THF


5

TPE13

Cationic framework enhances adsorption capacities and conjugation. The surface area is tuned by varying the linker. The luminescence is enhanced with TPE linked with the cationic linker.
Cr2O72−
NA

TPE13a


TPE13a


62



193 ± 3
595 (λex = 365 nm)



TPE13b





618 ± 9





TPE13c





1045 ± 10




6

TPE16

Porosity replicated by assembling on silica template to obtain uniform microporous spheres and TPE based AIE exhibiting fluorescence.
BQ > DNB > TNB > DNT > 4-NT > 2-NT

TPE16


TPE16


TPE16


75



4-NT-1.3 × 105
647
523 (λex = 410 nm);



MA-TPE16


MA-TPE16


MA-TPE16



4-NT-5.5 × 105
676
517 nm (λex = 410 nm).


7

TPE17

Phenylene twisted linkers used to design 3-D porous polymer and TPE undergoes AIE resulting in high luminescence.
TNP (82%) > DNP > DNT > NP > NT
TNP-6.4 × 104, DNP-2.3 × 103, DNT-7.9 × 102
1020
524 nm (λex = 331 nm); Φf = 40%

66



8

TPE22

The carbazolyl and thienyl reactive sites with phenylene linkers enhances cross-linking densities and rigidity and the emission is greatly enhanced by TPE based AIE
TNT > DNT > TNB > 1,3-DNB > NT > ClB > toluene
1.52 × 105 between 30–105 μM, and 2.53 × 105 between 105–120 μM of TNB
2203
Thin-film 520 (λex = 340 nm); Φf = 73%

67



9

TPE24–25

The carbazole linkers to the TPE induces ICT, thereby influencing the emission properties and the dimeric carbazole unit reduces the surface area
TNT
NA

TPE24


TPE24


68



930
525 (λex = 355 nm); Φf = 4.0%



TPE25


TPE25



509
608 (λex = 355 nm); Φf = 1.9%





2.3 Fluorescent phenylene-based CMPs

2.3.1 Structure–luminescence correlations. 
Polyphenylenes (PP) are another set of building blocks that are integrated into the CMP framework, offering unique structural topology that imparts extended π-conjugation and bestows photoluminescence. In 2008, Weber and Thomas76 developed the first spirobisfluorene-based fluorescent PP CMPs (PP1–3) through Suzuki coupling methods (Scheme 6). The luminescent properties of these CMPs are derived from their extended π-conjugation and high rigidity, combined with the cruciform conformation of spirobisfluorenes, which prevents the short π–π interactions. PP1–2 emits at 460 nm, whereas PP3 fluoresce at 400 nm with a shoulder at 525 nm. The red-shift in the emission for PP3 stems from the π-extended ethyne linkages. Later in 2010, using the similar synthetic approach, however, introducing appropriately functionalized phenylene building blocks (Scheme 7), Jiang et al.77 reported purely polyphenylene-based fluorescent CMP (PP4). The resultant CMP exhibited a strong fluorescence at 443 nm and high quantum yield of 23% corresponding to increased π-delocalization due to p-substituted phenylenes.
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of CMPs PP1–3. 
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of CMPs PP4–11. 
The same research group also studied the influence of linkage geometry (ortho-, meta-, and para-connected) on the luminescent properties of CMPs (PP5–7).78 The synthesis of these polymers used Yamamoto homocoupling reactions (Scheme 7) of various bromo-linked benzene derivatives B31–33. All the polymers showed strong solid-state emission; however, they exhibited varying emission wavelengths (Fig. 10A). The cross-conjugation effect in all the meta-connected CMP (PP5) hampers π-delocalization, thus limiting the emission maximum to 383 nm. On the other hand, the open π-electron delocalization pathways in ortho–meta–para connected PP6 and ortho–meta–ortho–meta connected PP7 experiences a red-shift of 18 nm (λmax = 401 nm) and 140 nm (λmax = 523 nm), respectively. The progressive red-shift in the emission is consistent with the extended π-conjugation facilitated by ortho- and para-connections. The longer fluorescence lifetime and lower fluorescence depolarization value of PP7 indicate the efficient exciton migration over the π-conjugated framework. Biphenylene has also been integrated into the CMP network (CMPs PP8–9) under Pd-catalyzed Suzuki coupling reaction conditions (Scheme 7).79 Although the linkages are all meta-connected, the positive π-conjugation effect of the biphenyl units red-shifts the emission of CMP to 413 nm and 385 nm for the suspensions PP8 and PP9 in ethanol, respectively, compared to phenylene-based PP4 (λmax = 383 nm). Although PP4–PP9 are all structurally alike and consist of simple phenylene units, these polymers' emission properties are different from each other. The linkage geometry predominantly controlled the properties. It indicates that the structural topology is another important factor that needs to be considered while designing fluorescent materials (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 10  (A) The solid-state luminescence spectra of PP5 (black), PP6 (blue), and PP7 (red) (adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) TEM image of nano-colloids PP10 (inset: schematic illustration of network-inclusive PP10) (adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (C) Photoluminescence spectra of PP16 in solid-state and as a PEG dispersion (λexc = 360 nm). (D) The photographs of PP16 on ambient light and UV light in solid-state (left) and as PEG dispersed samples (right) (adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 
 Fig. 11  Pictorial representation of depicting the influence of the linkage geometry on the π-delocalization and the emission properties of CMPs PP4–9. By varying the position of the phenyl linker, the fluorescence of the CMPs is fine-tuned. The blue- and red-curved/straight lines represent the extended π-conjugation and cross-conjugation respectively. 
Further, Zhang et al83 introduced 1,3,5-triethynyl benzene (B37) into CMP through Sonogashira coupling reaction in a toluene-in-water mini-emulsion (Scheme 7) to produce poly(p-phenyleneethynylene)-based conjugated nanoporous polymer colloids (PP10). In contrast to the complicated processibility procedures encountered for insoluble CMP materials, the colloidal form is useful to conveniently incorporate the CMP materials in devices by inkjet printing and spin coating (Fig. 10B). The π-delocalization promoting ethynyl linkages B37 influence PP10 to emit at 450 nm (λex = 365 nm), which is about 70 nm red-shifted compared to that of PP4. Interestingly, the fluorescence of PP10 nano-colloids (Fig. 10B) was sensitive to the solvent polarity as the polymer's fluorescence intensity was doubled upon changing the solvents from aqueous to THF. This can be attributed to the restricted free rotation of the conjugated units with solvent-induced stiffness of the backbones from the higher enthalpy of interactions. Dichtel et al.84 have developed structurally alike CMP (PP11) with the only difference of having additional methoxy substituents on 1,4-diethynylbenzene B38 unit (Scheme 7). The emission of the polymer in the thin-film state appears at ∼530 nm.
Interestingly, the polymer growth and the polymer activation methods influenced the fluorescence properties of PP11. For example, the polymer synthesized in DMF possessed higher polymeric growth and thus exhibited higher fluorescence quantum yields than the one prepared in toluene (Φf = 0.45). Besides, the polymer that was evacuated under the freeze-drying method (lyophilization) was found to be more luminescent (Φf = 1 in DMF) compared to the one evacuated under vacuum method (Φf = 0.13). The differences in the emission efficiency may be arising from the variability in the degree of chromophore aggregation in the activation methods. Hua, D. et al.80 also incorporated 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene B37 into a CMP (PP12) in partnering with amidoxime bearing fluorenes B39 through Sonogashira coupling methods (Scheme 8). The CMP exhibits green luminescence with an emission maximum at 500 nm.
 Scheme 8  Synthesis of CMPs PP12–16. 
In another study, Bonillo et al. have explored the influence of electron acceptor moieties on the fluorescence properties of PP-based CMP. In the Suzuki coupling reaction of tetrabromobenzene (B40) with phenyldiboronic acid (B4), various amounts of (0.1–5%) dibromo-functional acceptor moieties (Scheme 8) such as benzothiadiazole (B41), bisthiophenebenzothiadiazole (B42), and perylenediimide (B43) have been introduced. The modified CMPs (PP13–16) have exhibited ten times higher PLQY compared to the parent PP CMP (PP4) polymer (Fig. 10C).85 The acceptor doping regulates the chain aggregation in the polymer network and activates the radiation pathways. Interestingly, the incorporation of two acceptors (B42 and B43) into CMP (PP16) leads to the formation of white light-emitting material (Fig. 10D).
Green fluorescent protein (gfp) is a bio-inspired emissive material and a well-explored biomarker. The fluorophore (p-hydroxybenzylideneimidazolinone), when it rests in the protein β-barrel groove, undergoes intramolecular excited-state proton transfer (ESIPT) and exhibits green fluorescence. In contrast, the isolated chromophore undergoes ultrafast internal cis–trans isomerization and becomes non-fluorescent. To mimic the natural emission properties of the gfp chromophore, Maji et al.81 incorporated this fluorophore unit into CMP PP17 through coupling with 1,3,5-triethynylbenezene B37 (Scheme 9). The covalent locking of the fluorophore in CMP seizes the cis–trans isomerization and renders green emission with a peak maximum at 515 nm (Φf = 0.82%). The evaluated emission properties of CMP match well with the original GFP chromophore. However, DFT studies predicted that PP17 does not show ESIPT due to the covalent locking of the gfp chromophore in CMP, making the benzylidine ring to twists along the plane of the imidazolinone ring (Fig. 12A). On the contrary, as established by comparing with the methoxy-substituted PP18 (λmax = 440 nm), the hydroxyl group of PP17 participates in intermolecular proton transfer with polar solvent and showcases similar fluorescent properties as that of natural gfp (Scheme 9).
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of CMPs PP17–18. 
 Fig. 12  (A) The DFT predicted energy differences and the optimized structures of the enol and keto forms of PP17 in methanol for both ground (G.S.) and excited states (E.S.) (adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) PP24 in the form of powder (P1), soluble in organic solvents (P2) and an aqueous dispersion of nanoparticles (P3) (adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Shiming et al.88 developed fluorescent CMPs consisting tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)methane (TPM) B46 and diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) B47 (PP19–22) through the Sonogashira coupling reaction (Scheme 10). The extended π-delocalization contributed by ethynyl phenyl B46 and DPP B47 in the CMP render red fluorescence with an emission maximum centered at about ∼640 nm. At the same time, the bulky N-substituents of DPP disfavor the interpenetration of networks and enhances the porosity, which in turn favors spatial isolation of the dyes and boosts AIE quantum yields up to 19%. In another study, Patra et al.89 utilized the TPM unit in a Sonogashira coupling with diethynylbezene B29 (Scheme 10) to fabricate fluorescent CMP nanoparticles (PP23). The nanoparticles with an avg. diameter of 30–60 nm has been developed in the aqueous dispersion by mini-emulsion polymerization technique. The material exhibited strong fluorescence with an emission maximum at 505 nm and Φf of 4%. Generally, fabricating CMPs in nanoparticles and thin films is desirable due to the ease of processability in the device preparation in semiconducting and sensing applications. Patra et al.82 later introduced a new phenylene-based core, tetraphenyl-5,5-dioctylcyclopentadiene B48, into a fluorescent CMP PP24 (Scheme 11). Depending on the protocols employed for the Sonogashira coupling polymerization of tetrakis(4-bromophenyl)-5,5-dioctylcyclopentadiene (B48) and 1,4-diethynylbenzene (B29), the CMP was obtained as an insoluble powder, soluble powder, and water dispersion nanoparticles (Fig. 12B). The insoluble solid is non-fluorescent due to strong aggregation-induced π–π interactions between the aromatic rings. However, the soluble powder and nanoparticles having weak intermolecular interactions exhibit strong cyan fluorescence with peak maxima at 468 nm (Φf = 27%) and 470 nm (Φf = 8%), respectively. Later, the research group also used this building block (B48) to copolymerize with benzothiadiazole B49 under the Suzuki coupling conditions (Scheme 11).86 The strong D–A interactions present in the CMP (PP25) stabilizes the excited state and narrows the HOMO–LUMO gap, which allows the polymer to exhibit yellow fluorescence centered at about 580 nm (Φf = 46%). It is almost 100 nm red-shifted compared to the emission of PP24. In 2019, Li et al.90 coupled cyclopentadiene building block (B50) with various π-conjugated moieties (TPE B51, 9-phenylcarbazole B52 and fluorene B53) to develop a series of highly luminescent hyper-branched CMPs PP26–28via the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction (Scheme 11). Surprisingly, copolymerization did not affect the emission maxima (∼468 nm in THF) of the CMPs but heavily influenced the PLQYs. The solution state PLQYs are enhanced from 2% to 43% and 48% for TPE (PP26), carbazole (PP27), and fluorene (PP28) polymers, respectively. However, in the aggregation state, a reverse trend has been observed; for example, PP26 powders exhibited dramatically enhanced photoluminescence quantum yield up to ∼23.7% while 20.4% and 32.5% for PP27 and PP28 showed reduced quantum yields, respectively. It can be rationalized by the structure packing effects of these compounds in the solid-state; the restriction of the free phenyl rotors of TPE units in aggregation enhances the emission, whereas for carbazole and fluorene, aggregation causes strong π–π interactions between the fluorophores and activates non-radiative pathways.
 Scheme 10  Synthesis of CMPs PP19–23. 
 Scheme 11  Synthesis of CMPs PP24–PP28. 
As a whole, the PP CMP section reveals that the AIE properties of the polymers are governed by the non-planar conformation of the phenylene units, which hinder the short π-interactions and activates the radiative pathways. On the flip side, these conformations restrict the efficient π-delocalization along the polymer chain and thus most of the PP CMP emits in the blue region of the visible spectrum. However, the emission color tuning can be accomplished by introducing electron-accepting moieties (or) D–A systems (or) π-electron promoting novel systems in the PP CMPs. Another key learning from the analysis of various PP CMP is that the linkage geometry between the integrated phenylene units plays a crucial role in installing the π-electron propagation and modulating the polymers' emission properties.


2.3.2 Structure–function correlations. 
The highly electron-rich π-conjugated phenylenes in the CMPs act as good donors in transferring their energy to suitable guests in a confined nanospace and create light-harvesting antennas. Artificial light-harvesting systems that exhibit excellent energy transfer efficiency are of great interest to mimic natural photosynthesis and potential applications in charge carrier transport. The most successful design to develop such systems is to connect the D and A system covalently. However, constructing efficient light-harvesting systems is challenging due to associated tedious synthetic methods and complicated fine-tuning procedures.32 As an alternative, Jiang et al.77 developed CMP (PP4)-based non-covalent light-harvesting systems via the physical confinement of guest molecules in the pores. One essential requirement for energy transfer occurrence is to have an efficient overlap of the donor emission spectrum with the acceptor absorption spectrum. The electronic complimentary guest molecule such as coumarin-6 (acceptor; absorption band spans from 400–500 nm) for PP4 (donor; emission band spans from 400–500 nm) facilitates the construction of a light-harvesting system (Fig. 13A). The exclusive excitation of PP4 in the PP4-coumarin system at 363 nm (where the selective excitation of CMP occurs) shows no emission from the CMP. Rather, only an intense green emission at 512 nm corresponds to coumarin-6 appears. It demonstrates the occurrence of efficient energy transfer from PP4 to the coumarin fluorophore. The calculated quantum efficiency of energy transfer was 91%. Moreover, the D–A system's fluorescence intensity is as high as 21% that of the direct excitation of the coumarin dye, indicating the antenna effects arising from the harvest and funnelling of photons by several phenylene units of the CMP. Bi et al.88 followed a similar strategy and constructed a light-harvesting system by introducing 2-cyano-5-diethylamincoumarin into the pores of PP19–22. In contrast to the PP4-coumarin system, π-conjugated CMPs (PP19–22) behave as acceptors while coumarin acts as a donor. However, the suitably matching energy levels of the donor and acceptor moieties facilitated efficient energy transfer from the coumarin unit to CMP with an efficiency of 67%. The time-resolved fluorescence decay measurements showed an abrupt drop in coumarin's fluorescence lifetime from 2.38 to 0.82 ns in the adduct, further supporting the energy transfer (Fig. 13B).
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic representation of the energy transfer process from PP4 to coumarin-6 upon the irradiation of light (adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (B) Fluorescence decay measurements of coumarin and coumarin@PP21 for lifetime studies (adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (C) Photographs of PP23 as: (a) nanoparticles and (b) with rhodamine 6G (adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). (D) Images of PP25 depicting (a) white light emission in solution, (b) nanoparticles (c) thin-film, (d) gel, and (e) emission spectra of its versatile application in hydrogen uptake and light-harvesting systems (adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Patra et al.89 also created a light-harvesting system that was based on fluorescent CMP nanoparticles (PP23) composed of tetraphenyl methane and surface-bound rhodamine 6G dye. Upon coating rhodamine 6G on the nanoparticle surface, PP23 shows excellent excitation energy transfer from CMP to rhodamine (Fig. 13C). The excitation of CMP in the D–A system at 311 nm and a strong emission band at 561 nm corresponding to rhodamine have been exclusively observed. Later, the group also tested 5-octyl-1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenyl-1,3-cyclopentadiene (pc) dye encapsulated PP25 for light-harvesting applications.86 Interestingly, no energy transfer from the blue emissive pc dye (λem = 435 nm) to yellow emissive (λem = 577 nm and Φf = 46%) CMP was noticed but rather the mixing of the dyes produced a white light emission. The PLQYs of the resultant white light emission was calculated to be 14% and the coordinates such as Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) coordinates (x = 0.34, y = 0.31), color rendering index (CRI) of 84, and correlated color temperature of 5290 K supports the formation of perfect white light emission. The authors have also fabricated white light-emissive CMP nanoparticle dispersion that showed broad emission ranging from 400–700 nm (λex = 340 nm) with a quantum yield of 35%. Besides, white light-emissive gel and thin films having quantum yields of 13% and 8% have also been developed (Fig. 13D).
As the phenylene-based CMPs are also electron-rich systems, fluorescent CMPs offer excellent sensing behavior of electron-deficient nitroaromatics. The luminescent biphenyl CMPs (PP8 and PP9) were found to exhibit high sensitivity and selectivity for PA (Fig. 14A) among the tested analytes such as DNT, NT, NP, NBA, ClNB, and ClDNB (Table 2). The PA could quench the CMP emission up to 83% in the micromolar (μM) concentration of the analyte (∼50 μM). The corresponding quenching constants are in the range of 5 × 104 M−1.79 The authors attribute the high sensitivity of CMP fluorescence towards PA to resonance energy transfer between the fluorophore and a non-emissive analyte arising from significant overlap of the emission spectrum of the fluorophore and the absorption spectrum of the analyte. The thin films of PP11 were tested for the fluorescence detection of TNT.84 This study particularly disclosed the effect of polymer growth on the analyte response. The CMP that was prepared in DMF vs. toluene showed higher polymer growth and thus exhibited higher sensitivity to TNT. This trend is consistent with the increased degree of conjugation in the DMF polymer, facilitating longer excitonic diffusion lengths.
 Fig. 14  (A) Fluorescence quenching of PP8 with exposure to nitroaromatics of 47.6 μM concentration (adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (B) Emission spectra demonstrating the quenching of fluorescence of PP24 in THF (λex = 365 nm) with increasing concentrations of picric acid (PA) (inset: photographs of PP24 before and after the addition of PA under the illumination of UV light) (adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (C) Emission spectra (λem = 365 nm, λem = 468 nm), demonstrating fluorescence quenching of the PP24 polymer with increasing concentrations of PNA; (D) non-linear Stern–Volmer plots of I0/I against the concentration for PNA (adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Table 2 
PP and PAH-based fluorescent CMPs for sensing applications




S. no.
Structure
Building block effect on porosity and emission
Application (sensing)
Stern–Volmer constant KSVa (M−1)
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Fluorescence emission wavelength (nm) and quantum yield (%)
Ref.





a 
K
SV are only mentioned for the highly sensitive analytes.





1

PP8–9

The higher reactive site greatly influences the porosity and the emission is due to the extended π-conjugated skeleton of phenylene linkers.
PA > NP > ClNB > NT > DNT > ClNB > NBA

PP8


PP8


PP8


79



PA-5.05 × 104
493
413 (λex = 345 nm)



PP9


PP9


PP9



PA-3.7 × 104
1576
385 (λex = 332 nm)


2

PP11

Methoxy groups to the phenyl and the alkyne linkers amplifies the pore volume; the emission is due to the chromophore aggregation
TNT
NA
767
515 (λex = 396 nm)

84



3

PP12

The side chains intruding into the pore induces low surface area and the emission is influenced by the amidoximine and carboxylate ligands
Uranium sensing
NA
44.4
483 (λex = 320 nm)

80



4

PP24

Tetraphenyl-5,5-dioctylcyclopentadiene connected with diethynyl benzene linkers extend π-conjugation resulting in fluorescence emission
PNA > DCPNA > DNA > ONA > MNA
PNA-1.7 × 104
39
468 (λex = 325 nm); Φf = 27%

91



PA > DNT > DNB > NB
PA-7.6 × 105


5

PAH4a–e

By tuning the number of monomer units, the porosity and the emission is modulated
PA > pDNB > DNT > DNB
PA-2.4 × 105

PAH4a


PAH4a


94



1302
533 (λex = 344 nm)



PAH4b


PAH4b



1208
543 (λex = 344 nm);



PAH4c


PAH4c



931
555 (λex = 344 nm);



PAH4d


PAH4d



716
655 (λex = 469 nm);



PAH4e


PAH4e





815 (λex = 532 nm)


6

PAH6

Electron rich azo-linkages to pyrene enhances the porosity and the strong emission is due to aggregation of pyrene and azo-pyrene extended π-conjugation
PA ≫ p-NB ∼ DNT ∼ m-DNB ∼ NB ≫ NM
PA-1.37 × 103
700
485 (λex = 415 nm)

95



7

PAH7

Porosity is depicted by the number of linkages formed and the emission is due to extended π-conjugation between rigid perylene unit through the phenylene linkers

o-NP and PA

o-NP-2.00 × 104
378
409 (λex = 365 nm) in THF

96



PA-2.76 × 103


8

PAH8–9

The porosity varied with the position of cross-linking and the number of linkages formed and the emission is due to the extended π-conjugation through phenyl linkages
NB, PA, DNT, p-DNB, o-NP, p-NT, m-DNB, and PhOH sensing

PAH7


PAH7


PAH7


97




o-NP-1.83 × 104
402.1
405 (λex = 365 nm) in DOX



p-DNB-8.45 × 104

PAH8





PAH8
378




PA-2.17 × 104







o-NP-1.69 × 104






9

PAH11–12

Truxene unit influencing emission by extended π-conjugation
2-NA > PA > NP > TNT > DNB > DNT > 3-NA > NB > A

PAH10

NA

PAH10


98



2-NA-1.608 × 104
402 (λex = 320 nm); Φf = 56.1% in THF





PAH11





428 (λex = 320 nm); Φf = 64.5% in THF


10

PAH13

Carbazole analogue with extended electronic conjugation induces fluorescence emission with higher porosity
Benzoquinone (BQ), NB and DNT
DNT-5.9 × 103
1280
468 (λex = 368 nm); Φf = 10%

99



11

PAH14

Triphenylene building block depicts higher surface area and greater emission
NB
NA
1104
500 (λex = 300 nm)

100





The potentiality of PP24 was also tested towards the chemical sensing. The soluble polymer and water dispersion nanoparticles of CMP were responsive to electron-deficient nitroaromatics, particularly for PA.82 The fluorescence of the soluble polymer (THF solution)/water dispersion nanoparticles was attenuated by 93% and 98% at low concentrations of 1.33 and 0.23 mM, respectively, which indicates the high sensitivity of the polymers towards PA (Fig. 14B). Interestingly, with the increase in the analytes' concentration, the CMP displayed an amplified fluorescence quenching, however, with little changes in the fluorescence lifetimes. It supports an amplified static quenching mechanism in which a loose ground state complex between the analyte and CMP is expected to exist. It corroborates with the static quenching model based on the sphere of action. The model assumes a hypothetical sphere of volume around the fluorophores and if the analyte is present within this sphere at the time of fluorophore excitation, the fluorophore quenches. Nanoparticle dispersion of CMP, expectedly having higher surface area and accessible pores, us found to exhibit superior sensing performance compared to the soluble polymer of CMP.
Later in 2016, the group also explored the potential of solution-processable PP24 for sensing a library of 30 nitroaromatics ranging from nitrophenols, nitrotoluenes, nitroanilines to quinones.91 The studies revealed that nitroanilines quench the fluorescence of the polymer more effectively. For example, the quenching efficiency of p-nitroaniline is more than thrice that of PA. Overall, p-nitroaniline (PNA), 2,6-dichloro-p-nitroaniline (DCPNA), and 2,4-dinitroaniline (DNA) are found to have a quenching efficiency of 99%, 95%, and 90%, respectively. The CMP also exhibited the static amplified fluorescence quenching in the presence of nitroanilines (Fig. 14C and D). It was also found that CMP is suitable for solid-state naked-eye detection of nitro-amines, especially p-nitroaniline with a shallow detection limit of 1.8 mg cm−1.
Yugun et al.90 explored the electroluminescence performance of PP26–28. The device was fabricated using PP26–28 as the emitting layers and 1,3-bis(N-carbazolyl)benzene (mCP) as the host material showed an excellent electroluminescence performance with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) up to 6.36%, 1.12%, and 2.56% respectively (Fig. 15). The high EQE values of PP26 can be attributed to strong π-electron delocalization and solid-state emission characteristics. However, when the host material is changed with thermally-activated delayed fluorescence (TDAF) material such as 10-(4-((4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)sulfonyl)phenyl)-9,9-dimethyl-9,10-dihydroacridine, the EQE values were increased to 9.74%, 6.51%, and 4.87% for PP26–28, respectively. The TDAF host materials harvest both singlet and triplet excitons and transfer to the emitting layers efficiently, thus enhancing the device performance.
 Fig. 15  The energy level diagram of the OLEDs device (adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
The amidoxime-tethered fluorescent CMP (PP12) has been tested to detect and sequester uranium with high selectivity and sensitivity.80 The amidoxime and carboxylate affix groups are useful in increasing the binding selectivity of U(VI) and aqueous dispersibility, respectively. The sorption capacity of PP12 for uranyl ions reaches up to 251.9 mg U g−1, with fluorescence attenuation of 73.6%. The process of uranyl adsorption also provides naked eye visual observation. The CMP is highly selective for uranium among a mixture of various ions such as U(VI), Ba(II), Zn(II), Sr(II), Co(II), Al(III), Ni(II), Mn(II), and Cd(II). Moreover, PP12 showed a low detection limit for uranyl ions in deionized water of 1.7 × 10−9 mol L−1, which is far below the maximum standard drinking water contamination limit (6.2 × 10−8 M).
Colloid-based conjugated nanoporous polymer (CMPs) have been used as a suitable catalyst by inserting Pd metal into the CMPs by the template method.83 The catalytic activity was tested for Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reaction (Suzuki–Miyaura coupling) between phenylboronic acid and different halo-derivatives. The high catalytic activity of Pd@PP10 was observed for aryl bromide derivatives in a short time. Pd@PP10 can be used as an alternative for commercially available Pd catalysts due to its excellent TOF activity 44100 h−1.

2.4 Fluorescent PAH-based CMPs

2.4.1 Structure–luminescence correlations. 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a particular class of π-conjugated compounds made up of two or more fused aromatic rings and are thus considered as building blocks of graphene.87,92 Owing to the large π-conjugated aromatic structures, these compounds possess strong visible light absorption/fluorescence and excellent photo-stability and thermal-stability. The unique features of PAHs have kindled the research interest of many and have been the focal point for developing a wide variety of functional compounds.93,101,102 Thus, these compounds are desirable building blocks for incorporation into the CMPs. The introduction of large aromatic PAHs into CMPs enable extended π-delocalization and act as potential sites to induce supramolecular interactions with guest molecules, thereby providing superior chemical sensing, gas storage, and binding.
Pyrene is one of the very famous PAHs that has rich luminescent characteristics. It has been studied extensively for optoelectronics and OLED applications.103 Cooper's group pioneered developing a variety of pyrene-based CMPs and explored their optical properties in-detail. In one of the studies, the authors developed a series of solid-state emissive pyrene integrated CMPs (PAH1–3) through the Yamamoto coupling reaction (Scheme 12). The contorted porous network arising from the aromatic units' steric repulsions reduces the intermolecular interactions and endows strong AIE emission for CMPs. The study disclosed that fine-tuning of the fluorescence of the CMPs to different emission colors is possible by introducing a spacer in the polymer framework (Fig. 16). Varying the spacer from none (B54 (PAH1)) to 1,4-phenylene (B55 for PAH2) or 4,4′-biphenylene (B56 for PAH3) in the polymer (Scheme 12), the fluorescence is shifted from red (620 nm) to the high energy region, yellow (582 nm) and orange (602 nm), respectively (Fig. 17A).103 The counter-intuitive blue shift of the emission maxima, despite increased π-conjugation length from PAH1 to PAH2–3, is consistent with the twisted conformation of the phenyl substituents, which prevent effective π-delocalization within the framework. However, among PAH2 and PAH3, PAH3 displays a modest red-shift due to the enhanced π-conjugation introduced by the biphenylene unit. Rao et al.104 later explored the solvent/guest responsive dynamic nature of PAH2 and its super-absorbent behavior. The hydrophobic pores of the purely aromatic CMP allow the encapsulation of aromatic compounds via host–guest interactions and undergo structural transformation due to the polymer's dynamic and soft nature. The encapsulation of guest molecules such as o-dichlorobenzene, toluene, DMF, hexane, and ethanol enhances the fluorescence of PAH2 up to 5-folds, which can be rationalized by the reorganization of the framework due to reduced intermolecular interactions facilitated by the guest molecules. The CMP can accommodate large amounts of guest molecules in the pores and undergo swelling. The size, shape, and polarity of the guest molecules along with the potential to develop π–π interactions with the host framework governed the up-take capacity of PAH2. Moreover, the CMP also uptakes diesel up to 12 times of its weight and recovers 60% from a water–diesel mixture.104 It suggests the potential application of the CMP for the recovery of oils in marine spills.
 Scheme 12  Synthesis of CMPs PAH1–6. 
 Fig. 16  Pictorial representation of the CMP structures that exhibited a counter-intuitive blue shift in the emission wavelength upon introducing p-spacers between the pyrene units. PAH1 with no spacers displayed emission at λem = 620 nm while PAH2 and PAH3 having phenylene and biphenylene exhibit blue-shifted emission at λem = 585 nm and 602 nm, respectively. This is due to the distortion introduced by the π-spacers within the CMP framework. The interaction of solvent molecules such as o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB), toluene, hexane, dimethylformamide (DMF), and ethanol with PAH2 depict a greater shift in the fluorescence intensity. ODCB solvent–CMP interactions showed fluorescence 4–5 folds enhancement, whereas the other organic solvents gave 1.5–2 folds fluorescence enhancement compared to PAH2. 
 Fig. 17  (A) Photographs of the polymers in the solid-state under illumination with UV light (λex = 365 nm); (a) PAH1, (b) PAH2, and (c) PAH3 (adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Photographs of PAH7 dispersion in different solvents under UV light irradiation at 365 nm (adapted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc.). 
Cao et al.94 later copolymerized pyrene with triphenylbenzene into a fluorescent CMP (PAH4a–e). The synthetic methodology involves the introduction of double monomers (tetrabromopyrene (B54) and 1,3,5-tris(4-bromophenyl)benzene (B57)) into Yamamoto coupling and varying the ratios of the reactive monomers (B54:B57: 2:3, 1:1, 3:2, 4:1, 9:1) in PAH4a–e (Scheme 12). The varied monomeric ratios tune the emission of the polymers to a wide range of colors from green to red and the emission signal shifts from 533 to 815 nm. As the pyrene content (B54) increases in the polymer, the degree of π-delocalization increases and red-shifts the emission signal. The large red-shift (∼275 nm) for PAH4e can be assigned to an efficient energy transfer from the optically isolated regions to the other parts of the polymer. The formation of such optically isolated regions is expected when the polymer contains hierarchically-disordered channels.
Owing to the importance of the soluble CMPs, Cooper et al.105 applied the hyper-branching technique to prepare soluble fluorescent CMPs.105 The two-step Suzuki coupling of tetrabromopyrene (B54) and tert-butyl-pyrene (B58) with bis(pinacolato)diborone (B59), delivered soluble luminescent CMP PAH5 (Scheme 12). The tert-butyl-pyrene building block (B58) plays a critical role in achieving the soluble polymer: the bulky tert-butyl group enhances the solubility (via suppression of π–π interactions) and the di-topic functionalization restricts the multidirectional growth of the polymer. The method delivers a transparent and soluble film of CMP. However, the high BET surface area (505 m2 g−1) of the polymer reveals that the growth of the polymer is still considerably high.
Later, Murugavel et al.95 developed luminescent azo-linked pyrene CMP PAH6 (Scheme 12). The azo-linker supports π-delocalization over the 2D-framework, whereas the bulky isopropyl substituents on the pyrene unit contribute to structural non-planarity. As a result, PAH6 acquires AIE but displays a hypsochromic emission signal at 485 nm compared to PAH1–3.
Perylenediimide (PDI), an electron-deficient PAH, has also been incorporated into the CMP framework (PAH7) via the Sonogashira coupling of N,N′-di(4-bromophenyl)-1,7-dibromo PDI B6196,97 with diethynylbenzene B29 (Scheme 13). The large π-conjugated framework of PDI along with π-delocalization promoting ethylene linkages render bluish-green emission to the CMP (PAH7) with a peak maximum at 409 nm. Further, the cross-linkages in the polymer enhances the emission by reducing the molecular vibrations. Interestingly, the CMP suspension showcased a different degree of emission intensity for different solvents. Among the tested solvents, namely, acetonitrile, acetone, ethanol, and water, the CMP displayed very low emission while THF, DMF, dioxane, and chloroform exhibit amplified emission (Fig. 17B). For example, the CMP's PLQYs experienced a 10-fold increase in THF (Φf = 0.71) compared to the powder (Φf = 0.082). Rigidified polymer conformations in THF greatly boost the emission due to the large enthalpy of interaction between CMP and THF. The other CMPs (PAH8–9)97 developed using PDI building blocks B62 and B63 of different positional isomers and diethynyl benzene showed little variations in the fluorescence properties (Scheme 13). Later, Faul et al.106 incorporated PDI B64 into CMP PAH10 in combination with melamine B65 building block (Scheme 13). The propeller-like structural topology prevents strong π–π interactions between the framework components and activates radiation pathways. It was evident from high PLQYs of the CMP compared to the monomer (Φf = 0.85 vs. 0.04).106 On the other hand, the emission maximum of THF dispersion of PAH9 (λem = 522 nm) is hypsochromically shifted relative to the monomers (λem = 530 nm).
 Scheme 13  Synthesis of CMPs PAH7–10. 
Truxene is another attractive building block that will help to construct π-extended and electron-rich polymers. Bunz et al.98 have introduced the planar, π-conjugated truxene into the CMP framework (PAH11–12) via the Sonogashira coupling of triiodo-substituted truxene (B66) with 1,4-diethynylbenzenes (B67 and B68) (Scheme 14). The long alkyl chain substitution on the truxene core prevents the molecular π-interactions, which promote the solubility of the CMPs in solvents and imparts strong blue fluorescence (λem = 400–420 nm, Φf = ∼60%).
 Scheme 14  Synthesis of CMPs PAH11–14. 
However, the analogous 1D poly(phenyleneethylene)s98vs. CMP displays a bathochromic shift of 20–50 nm and higher Φf (80%). It indicates that the CMP suffers from cross conjugation and relatively strong π-stacking interactions promoted by the truxene ring. Similarly, Jiang et al.99 introduced nitrogen-doped truxene (Scheme 14) in the form of triindocarbazole (B69) into the CMP framework (PAH13). The presence of the electron-rich aromatic core promotes π-delocalization and shifts the fluorescence to the longer wavelength region (λem = 468 nm) compared to PAH11 and PAH12 but activates the non-radiative pathways and reduces the fluorescence quantum yields to 10%. On the other hand, when compared to the structurally relevant 1D polymer (PAH-LP (Scheme 14); λem = 445 nm and Φf = 0.6%), the fluorescence of PAH13 is much stronger as well as red-shifted by ∼20 nm. The low fluorescence depolarization (p) value (0.0018) for the CMP compared to the 1D polymer (0.062) reveals enhanced exciton migration over the three-dimensional network. Triphenylene100B70 (Scheme 14) and hexa-(peri)-hexabenzocoronene107B71 and B72 (Scheme 15)-based PAHs have also been used to fabricate CMPs (PAH14–16). The large electron-rich π-conjugated systems in the CMP backbone facilitate the CMPs to emit at 475 nm and 525 nm.
 Scheme 15  Synthesis of CMPs PAH15–18. 
Long et al. developed polycarbazolyl CMPs108 consisting of iridium-based metal complexes towards realizing solid-state phosphorescent materials. The CMPs (PAH17–18) have been synthesized by FeCl3-catalyzed oxidative coupling of triscyclometallated iridium complexes containing carbazoles B73–74 (Scheme 15). The CMPs exhibit yellow-green emission with intense phosphorescence at 485 nm. Interestingly, the polymers' phosphorescence signal is relatively blue-shifted by 20–30 nm compared to the monomers. The blue shift in the emission reflects that the molecular units possess a non-planar conformation in the polymeric network. The polymers exhibit long fluorescence lifetimes (5.3–7.2 μs) typical of the phosphorescent materials.
From the above discussion, we conclude that the strong π–π interactions among the large π-conjugated PAH systems can be countered with an appropriate substitution (bulky group substitution, alkyl substitution, propeller-like arrangement) and can be successfully integrated into solid-state emissive CMPs. The emission wavelengths and emission colors are mainly defined by the PAH building block. The PAH CMPs can also be made soluble via hyper-branched methodology. Studies also revealed that the type/position of the linking in the PAH building block would significantly affect the emission properties of the resultant CMPs.


2.4.2 Structure–function correlations. 
As PAHs possess a large π-conjugated backbone, they induce strong electrostatic interactions with electron-deficient nitroaromatics; thus, PAH CMPs are expected to have outstanding sensory performance. In this line, the potential of the pyrene integrated PAH4a–e towards sensing nitroaromatics such as PA, DNT, m-DNB, and p-DNB has been tested.94 Among all the tested analytes, PAH4a–e exhibited high selectivity for PA with more than 90% quenching of the emission and at a low detection limit of <1 ppm. Interestingly, PAH4a–e acts as a selective fluorescent probe for Fe3+ among the various tested metal ions (Pb2+, Cu2+, Cr3+, Co2+, Fe3+, Cd3+, Me2+, Ni2+, and Zn2+). The emission of CMP turns-off completely after the addition of Fe3+. Similarly, PAH6 was also tested towards sensing nitroaromatics such as PA, DNT, p-DNB, m-DNB, NB, and electron-deficient nitromethane (NM), hexafluorobenzene (HFB), and pentafluorophenol (PFP).95 Although CMP is responsive towards all the tested analytes with some degree of fluorescence quenching (<10%), PA is specifically found to be more sensitive with 60% fluorescence quenching (Fig. 18A). This agrees with the evaluated Stern–Volmer constants (Fig. 18B), which follows the order of PA ≫ p-DNB ∼ DNT ∼ m-DNB ∼ NB ≫ NM, HFB, PFP.95 The unaffected fluorescence lifetimes, upon increasing the analyte concentration, supports that the static quenching mechanism is in action. PAH7–9 also selectively detects PA and o-nitrophenol with massive quenching efficiencies and low detection limit ∼1.5 nM.96,97 The high discrimination of the CMP towards PA and o-nitrophenol are attributed to (1) strong host–guest interactions supported by hydroxyl substituents of the analytes and (2) the low lying LUMOs of the analytes, which readily accepts an electron from photo-excited CMP. Among PAH7–9, PAH7 is found to have superior sensing ability compared to PAH8 and PAH9. This is because the different positional linking in PAH7-9 is expected to increase crosslinking from PAH7 to PAH9, which will hinder the movement of analytes into the pores as well as reduce the π-delocalization, thus leading to inefficient electron transfer.
 Fig. 18  (A) Luminescent spectral changes of PAH6 dispersed in THF with increasing concentrations of PA; (B) Stern–Volmer plot of PAH6 in the presence of various analytes (adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (C) Schematic representation of the formation of water-soluble fluorescent micelles of PAH11–12 with F-127 micelles (adapted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (D) Photographs of PAH13 in the presence and absence of toluene under a handheld UV lamp (adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (E) Fluorescence emissions changes of solid PAH14 (λex = 300 nm) upon exposure to nitrobenzene vapor (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
On the other hand, the hyperbranched truxene CMPs (PAH11–12) making up sensor arrays instead of exhibiting a single response to a single analyte; however, o-nitrobenzene, among the tested analytes, showed a relatively better response.98 The high sensitivity is in agreement with a higher spectral overlap of CMPs with the analyte, resulting in efficient resonance energy transfer. Interestingly, water-soluble fluorescent micelles derived by treating PAH11–12 with amphiphilic F-127 (poly(oxyethylene)-block-poly(oxypropylene)-block-poly-(oxyethylene)) exhibited improved sensing ability (Fig. 18C). Though the quantum yields have dropped to ≤20%, the polymer micelles display superior detection ability (almost doubled) to those of the original CMPs in organic solvents98 as the micelle environment allows close contacts of CMP units. The analytes also lead to long-range exciton migration between the polymer aggregate and the analyte, which will result in the superior discrimination of analytes.

PAH13 exhibits significant fluorescence turn-off for the electron-deficient vapors of 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ), NB, and DNT with KSV of 2.6, 3.1, and 5.9 (×103 M−1), respectively, while it exhibits fluorescence amplification with electron-rich arenes.99 The vapors of chlorobenzene, mesitylene, benzene, and toluene amplify the fluorescence intensity by 80–135% within 20 s of exposure (Fig. 18D). Mapping the LUMO energy levels of the CMP with the LUMOs of the analytes explains the observation: the LUMO of PAH13 is higher than the LUMO of the electron-deficient arenes, which promotes electron transfer from CMP to the analyte, causing fluorescence quenching. On the other hand, the LUMOs of the electron-rich arenes are higher than the LUMOs of CMPs, causing the reverse flow of electron from the electron-rich arenes to CMPs, thus promoting fluorescent enhancement. However, the structurally relevant 1D polymer showcased a low degree of fluorescence quenching or enhancement either with electron-deficient or with electron-rich arenes, respectively. The extended π-delocalization, coupled with the porous network, manufactures a unique environment for sensing arenes.
Han et al.100 explored the triphenylene-incorporated CMP (PAH14) potential for the detection of electron-deficient nitrobenzene (NB) vapors. The CMP fluorescence was quenched by 18% within 1 min of NB vapor exposure and reached a maximum of 85% when the exposure continued for 30 min (Fig. 18E). The sensitivity studies revealed that the fluorescence quenching was as high as 50% when the nitrobenzene concentration was 1761 ppm. The large electron-rich π-conjugated HBC was utilized to accommodate electron-deficient guest molecules such as buckminsterfullerene into the pores.107 The donor–acceptor interactions between HBC and the fullerene significantly quenched the fluorescence of the polymer.

2.5 Heteroatom based CMPs (boron-based systems)

2.5.1 Structure–luminescent correlations. 
Boron-based systems such as borondipyrromethene (BODIPYs) and triaryl boranes are known for their intriguing electronic and photophysical properties such as strong visible region absorption, sharp emission signals, and high fluorescence quantum yields.109–111 Thus, these compounds have been extensively investigated for numerous applications including chemo-sensing, OLEDs and solar cells.112–114 To benefit from the intriguing optical properties of boron-based systems and to make them AIE active, these building blocks have been incorporated into the porous organic polymer framework.
Liras et al.115 have incorporated a highly luminescent BODIPY into CMP (BHA1) via the Sonogashira coupling of diiodoBODIPY B77 with the triethynyl benzene B37 building block (Scheme 16). Contrary to the sharp emission spectral profiles typically observed for BODIPYs, the toluene/dichloromethane solutions of BHA1 manifested a broad fluorescence signal centered at 512 nm to H-aggregation. Such aggregation is expected when CMP undergoes a partial pore collapse (Fig. 19). However, due to the variable degree of solvation effects, the collapse was found to be less in 2-ethoxyethanol, and thus the CMP displayed dual emission corresponding to both the aggregation state (λmax = 560 nm) and non-aggregation state (λmax = 512 nm). Simultaneously, Patra et al.116 also reported analogous structural polymers BHA2–4 (Scheme 16) using meso-aryl-substituted BODIPY building blocks B78–80. The CMPs showed similar fluorescence properties with emission maxima centered around 515 nm and quantum yield of 15–20%. A BODIPY-based CMP (BHA5) was also derived from Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling (Scheme 16).117 Despite having a shorter π-delocalization path and non-planar structural topology, the CH2Cl2 suspension of BHA5 emits at a more extended wavelength region (λem = 541 nm; λex = 520 nm) compared to that of BHA1–4, indicating the absence of H-aggregation in this polymer.
 Scheme 16  Synthesis of CMPs BHA1–6. 
 Fig. 19  Pictorial representation of the pore collapse of in BHA1, the inset shows the H-aggregation stacking of the BODIPY-CMP framework (left). The right image shows the partial recovery of the collapse upon 2-ethyoxy ethanol impregnation. The solvent occupies the pores and develop the interactions with the framework and weakens the aggregation, thus leading to dual emission. 
Recently, Patra et al.118 also came up with a strategy for the soluble BODIPY-based CMP (BHA6) owing to their advantages in the solution processing applications. In general, the rigid and planar π-conjugated molecules induce strong π–π interactions in the solid-state and render insoluble polymeric materials. Thus, to counter these effects and to develop a solubilizing material, the BODIPY building block (B76) has been coupled with a dicarbazole (B81)-based flexible building block (Scheme 16). A long alkyl chain (n-C8H16) between the two carbazole units suppresses the efficient packing of the polymeric chains and allows the polymer to be soluble in solvents such as dichloromethane, chloroform, and tetrahydrofuran. The flexible CMP backbone is expected to have high vibrational and translational motions and quench the CMP emission. Thus, the CMP is weakly fluorescent (Φf = 5%) with an emission maximum at 610 nm. The polymer's red-shifted emission can be assigned to both extended π-delocalization in the polymeric backbone and D–A interactions between BODIPY and carbazole moieties.
Triarylborane is another boron-based building block incorporated into the CMP framework due to its rich fluorescence properties and high quantum yields. The presence of the sp2-hybridized boron atom makes this molecule electron-deficient. Thus, they offer unique D–A interactions when coupled with electron-rich molecules and play a critical role in selective sensing and capturing fluoride ions. In this research line, Maji et al.119 have incorporated triarylboron into the CMP network via Sonogashira coupling with the diethynylbiphenyl building block B83 (Scheme 17).
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of CMPs BHA7–10. 
The CMP (BHA7) exhibited a strong green fluorescence with an emission band centered at 520 nm, whereas the basic triarylboron unit emits only around ∼350 nm. Such a large redshift of the CMP suggests the presence of the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) from the diethynylbiphenyl donor to boron acceptor. A clear depiction of localization of HOMOs on ethynylbenzene moieties and LUMOs on the triphenylborane unit in the DFT calculations and the solvent dependent emission spectral variations further supports the presence of ICT. The green emission of CMP turns to blue emission (λem = 410 nm) in non-polar solvents. Liu et al.120 have developed BHA8 by replacing the diethynylbiphenyl B83 moiety with the triphenylamine unit B84 in BHA7. The electron-rich triphenylamine in BHA8 induces even stronger D–A interactions, and thus, the fluorescence of the BHA8 experiences an apparent redshift of ∼40 nm (λem = 558 nm) relative to BHA7 (Scheme 17). However, the homo-coupled polymer BHA9 only emits blue emission at 483 nm (Fig. 20A). As is the case with typical D–A molecules, BHA8 exhibits pronounced solvatochromism; upon changing from toluene to chloroform and acetonitrile, the emission maxima will also experience a bathochromic shift from 528 nm to 541 nm and 562 nm, thus indicating that the polymer possesses a highly polarized excited state.
 Fig. 20  (A) The solid-state fluorescence spectra of BHA8 (blue) and BHA9 (red) (inset shows the photographs of solid samples) (adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) UV-vis and (C) normalized emission (λex = 350 nm) of BHA10 (adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (D) Electropolymerization of B87 using cyclic voltammetry (potential from −0.2 to 1.0 V) (adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
Triarylboron is also coupled to triphenylamine (B86) to yield triarylboron–triarylamine CMP (BHA10) via Suzuki coupling (Scheme 17).124,125 The shorter π-conjugation length combined with phenyl–phenyl steric repulsions caused a substantial hypsochromic shift in the emission (λmax = 488 nm). However, the non-planar framework prevents the intermolecular interactions and boosts the fluorescence quantum yields to 0.13 for BHA10 from 0.07 for BHA8.125 The fluorescence anisotropy studies reveal low fluorescence depolarization (ρ) values for the CMP (0.0068) vs. physical mixture of monomers (0.059) supports an efficient exciton migration along the conjugated chain of the 3D network. BHA10 displays a broad region of emission wavelengths in different solvents due to strong ICT features (Fig. 20B and C). Later, Dongling et al.126 utilized the electropolymerization technique (Scheme 18) to construct the polytriarylborane CMPs (BHA11–13). The polymer thin films with a varied thickness (2 to 20 nm) were fabricated using an electrochemical set-up by subjecting the electroactive carbazole substituted triarylborane B87 to an oxidative potential 0.88 V (Fig. 20D). Akin to BHA9, the steric factors prevent effective π-delocalization and allow BHA11–13 to emit around ∼450 nm.
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of CMPs BHA11–13. 
An overview of this section presents that the high fluorescence of the monomeric units (BODIPYs and triarylboron) can be preserved in the polymeric form. The polymers exhibit AIE emission, although the corresponding monomers are non-fluorescent in the solid-state. Besides, the polymeric materials exhibit varied emission profiles (wavelength, fluorescence anisotropy and solvatochromism) concerning the monomers and the model compounds. This indeed indicates that the polymers provide a unique environment for the integrated fluorophores. The D–A interactions instituted between the boron-systems and the other triaryl amine-based systems lead the emission to red-region of the visible spectrum.


2.5.2 Structure–function correlations. 
The intense visible light absorption and sharp emission profiles of the boron-based CMPs make them suitable for numerous applications.109,110 To evaluate the potential of CMPs, tested BHA1–6 for the visible-light-driven singlet oxygen mediated photocatalysis. In general, the most popular strategy to develop a singlet oxygen sensitizer is to introduce heavy halogen atoms in the chromophore structure, which through spin–orbit coupling activates triplet state generation. However, the recent development of singlet oxygen sensitizers disclosed that appropriately designed ICT-active halogen-free BODIPYs might also induce triplet sensitization.121BHA1–6 having such features was also likely to prevent the recombination of excitons and yield more intersystem crossing to populate the triplet state.115 The visible light photocatalytic reaction BHA1 as a photocatalyst proved that the polymer indeed generates singlet oxygen and successfully catalyzed the photo-oxidation reaction of thioanisole to methyl phenyl sulfoxide (Fig. 21A). The resultant product is a crucial pharmaceutical intermediate. Interestingly, the photocatalytic activity of BHA1 is far superior and surpassed the performance of the halogen-free BODIPY model compounds,121 iodo-substituted BODIPY127 and also very well-known Ru-based photosensitizer (Ru(bpy)3Cl2).122BHA2–4 also performed the photocatalytic oxidation of thio-anisoles to methylphenyl sulfoxide.116 The high tolerance of CMP for a large number of substrates including p-bromo, chloro-, methoxy-substituted thioanisoles, diphenyl sulfide, 2-naphthyl methyl sulfide etc. indicates the versatility of the polymer. On the other hand, BHA5 was explored for the photocatalytic Alder-ene reaction of α-terpinene into ascaridole.117 The reaction yielded >99% conversion. This heterogenous photosensitizer BHA5 was tested in a commercial photochemical flow reactor. The solution soluble BHA6 could successfully catalyse the oxidation of benzylamine to imine under visible light in both solution and thin film states.118
 Fig. 21  (A) The structure and the fluorescence microscopy image of BHA1 and its activity as a photocatalyst under visible light (adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (B) The fluorescence spectra of THF/H2O (9:1) dispersed BHA7 in the presence of fluoride (inset: images of BHA7 before and after addition of F−) (adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). (C) Device structure of the iOSCs based on BHA11 film electrode (left); J–V characteristics of the iOSCs under air mass (AM) 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) (right) (adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). 
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the end-capping technique employed to CMPs with methyl acrylate (MA). 
In general, the Lewis acidic boron sites have been instrumental in selective sensing F− due to associated electronic interactions between the electron-deficient empty pπ orbital of boron site and the anion.123 This interaction leads to the quenching of the ICT emission and most often trigger a new localized π*–π emission arising from the π-structure of the compounds. In this line, the luminescent Lewis acidic BHA7 has been studied for sensing fluoride in aqueous solutions.119 Upon increasing the concentration of F− in the solution of BHA7, the intensity of the emission band at 520 nm of CMP decreased while a new band at 420 nm developed concomitantly. Besides, the solution's color has also changed from green to blue (Fig. 21B).
On the other hand, anions such as Cl−, Br−, I−, NO3−, SO42−, and CO32− showed no appreciable fluorescence response, attributed to the weak interactions of anions with the boron center (receptor) due to steric crowding caused by the ortho-methyl groups of the aryl substituents. BHA10 also exhibits highly selective and specific F− sensing over other ions.124 It also acts as a colorimetric sensor for fluoride as the polymer solution's color changes from yellow to blue upon addition of the fluoride ions. BHA10 not only detects the fluoride ions but also sequestrate from the solution; 82% of fluoride can be captured in a solution having 10 mg L−1 fluoride concentration (Table 3).
Table 3 
BHA- and NHA-based fluorescent CMPs for sensing applications




S. no.
Structure
Building block effect on porosity and emission
Application (sensing)
Stern–Volmer constant KSVa (M−1)
BET surface area (m2 g−1)
Fluorescence emission wavelength (nm) and quantum yield (%)
Ref.





a 
K
sv has given for the highly sensitive analyte.





1

BHA7

Fluorescence is due to the internal charge transfer via conjugation from phenyl linker to vacant p orbital of boron
Fluoride
4.5 × 10−4
390
520 (λex = 350 nm)

119



2

BHA10

Non-planarity, extended π-conjugated system with ICT induces the emission
Fluoride
NA
950
488 (λex = 375 nm); Φf = 18%

124



3

NHA1

The expanded conjugation with twisted configuration induces 3-D porosity with strong fluorescence emission
NT, PA than NB, DNT, P-NP, DCIB
NP-4.85 × 104 LM−1
222
475 (λex = 370 nm) in THF

128



4

NHA3–4

The triazine coplanar units linked to TDAB unit induced small pore and the nitrogen-rich system depicts fluorescence emission with solvatochromic effect

o-NP

NHA3


NHA3


NHA3


129




o-NP-2.11 × 104
1.643
346 (λex = 340 nm) in THF



NHA4


NHA4


NHA4




o-NP-8.63 × 103 LM−1
2.778
358 (λex = 350 nm) in THF


5

NHA5

Triazine linker connected to TPA core induces nitrogen-rich unit with greater surface area and extended π-conjugation
Iodine

NHA5

308
430 (λex = 350 nm) in THF

130



I2-2.38 × 104


6

NHA8–9

High fluorescence emission exhibited due to the nitrogen-containing pyrazine units by extending electron-rich π-conjugation

o-NP, PA and I2

NHA8


NHA8


NHA8


131



I2-3.76 × 103
561.3
450 (λex = 365 nm) in THF



NHA9


NHA9


NHA9



I2-1.10 × 103
13.5
465 (λex = 365 nm) in THF



o-NP-1.86 × 103






7

NHA10

Triazine linkers induce excellent porosity and the thiophene core with triazine rigid framework extends π-conjugation and enhances fluorescence emission

o-NP, PA, DNT, NB and NT

o-NP-6.20 × 103
315.5
525 (λex = 365 nm) in THF

132



8

NHA11–13

Pyrene building blocks greatly enhanced the fluorescence emission and quantum yields. The fluorescence increased with the number of TPA linkers to reduce aggregation quenching
Iodine

NHA11


NHA11


NHA11


133



I2-1.40 × 105
43
480 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 63.45% in ACN



NHA12


NHA12


NHA12



I2-2.02 × 104
187.5
400 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 51.57% in ACN



NHA13


NHA13


NHA13



I2-4.65 × 103
695.2
470 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 70.45%


9

NHA15

Electron rich TPA core with MA and boronic acid induced donor–acceptor type of interactions and hence exhibits stronger emission
PA
PA-4 × 104
686

NHA15


134



466 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 0.64%


10

NHA18

The triazole unit induces electron-rich CMP by oxidative coupling with fluorescent properties and greater porosities

p-Nitroaniline, p-NP, p-AP

p-NA-7.08 × 104
808.6

NHA18


135



525 (λex = 417 nm)




The capability of boron-carbazole CMP (BHA11) has been tested as an electrode interlayer material.126 The electrode interlayers are typically used between the two electrodes of a device which will influence the work functions of the electrode. The study disclosed that BHA11 in its pure form as an interlayer material lowers the work function of the ITO electrode from 4.68 eV to 4.05 eV and serves as an electron selective electrode (Fig. 21C). On the other hand, upon F-ligation (BHA12) and electro-oxidation of CMP (BHA13), the work function of the polymer increases significantly to 5.25 eV and endows the electrode with selective hole transport functions. The CMP materials found to influence the work functions of other well-known conducting substrates such as Au, ZnO, and PEDOT:PSS. The energy-converting devices fabricated using these modified CMP materials as interlayers display improved device performance. For examples, the inverted organic solar cells constructed from the CMP-coated ZnO nanoparticle cathode yielded a higher power conversion efficiency of 6.88% compared to the conventional ZnO nanoparticles (6.33%).

2.6 Heteroatom based CMPs (nitrogen-based systems)

2.6.1 Structure–luminescent correlations. 
There is a significant interest in developing fluorescent CMPs consisting of heteroatoms in the polymer backbone as such systems impart better interactions with guest molecules, and ions thereby enhance the adsorption capacity and/or detect sensitivity. Moreover, the electron-donating/accepting characteristics of nitrogen-based systems such as triphenylamine (TPA) and triazine produce strong push–pull CMP systems and allow the facile modulation of fluorescence properties.
Geng et al.128 synthesized a nitrogen-rich CMP (NHA1) through the Friedel–Crafts reaction (Scheme 19) of 2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine (B88) and tetraphenyl benzidine (B89). The polymer dispersion in DMF displayed a strong emission at 430 nm. Interestingly, the luminescence of CMP is dependent on the reaction time. The material obtained after 12 h of reaction time exhibits weak emission while the one isolated after 24 h shows strong fluorescence (Fig. 23A). Increasing the reaction time increases the length of the CMP framework and π-delocalization, resulting in the amplification of the fluorescence. Later, the same group have also explored the impact of various π-extended triphenylamine building blocks (Chart 1) on the fluorescence properties of the triazine CMP.129 Replacing B89 with (N,N,N,N-tetraphenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine) (B90, NHA2) or 1,3,5-tris[(3-methylphenyl)phenylamino]benzene (B92, NHA4) in NHA1 redshifts the emission maxima by 20–40 nm (λem = 450–470 nm). The redshift is in line with the extended π-delocalization supported by TPA building blocks incorporated in NHA2–4 (Scheme 19). The CMPs exhibited a pronounced solvatochromism with significant fluorescence changes upon varying the solvent polarity, indicates the presence of the ICT effect.
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of CMPs NHA1–7. 
 Fig. 23  (A) Photographs of solvent dispersed NHA1 under UV light (365 nm). (a and b) Indicate the reaction time of 12 h and 24 h respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Fluorescence spectra of NHA11 (λex = 400 nm) dispersions in different solvents and its colors under UV lamp (365 nm) (adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). (C) Fluorescence spectra of NHA17a–e (adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (D) Pictorial representation of the systematic increase in the D–A strength in NHA17via feeding in the amount of theacceptor (triazine) component that resulted in red-shifting the emission maximum from λem = 587 to 619 nm of wavelength. 
The introduction of even larger dendritic TPA building blocks such as TPA (B93), tris(N,N-diphenylamino)triphenylamine (B94) and tri[phenyl(m-tolyl)amino]triphenylamine (B95) further supplements the π-delocalization within the triazine CMP (Scheme 19). The resulting CMPs (NHA5–7)130 display a range of fluorescent colors spanning across bright blue, sky blue, green and yellow depending on the CMP (NHA5–7) and the dispersed solvent. The emission maxima vary from 410 nm to 480 nm from NHA5 to NHA7, respectively as the conjugation increased in this order. The CMPs exhibit stronger emission in THF and (or) DOX, indicates higher enthalpy of interactions between the CMPs and THF and DOX (Fig. 24A). Later, Geng et al.131 have also introduced the electron-withdrawing pyrazine-coupled B88 (B96/B97) building block into CMP NHA8–NHA9 to increase the push-full interactions (Scheme 20). As predicted, the stronger D–A interactions in NHA8/NHA9 stabilize the excited state and extend the emission to red-region by about 50–70 nm relative to TPB consisting NHA1.
 Fig. 24  (A) The Stern–Volmer plots of THF dispersed NHA5 (λex = 370 nm), DOX dispersed NHA6 (λex = 350 nm) and DOX dispersed NHA7 (λex = 370 nm) for I2 (adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc). (B) Fluorescence spectral changes of DMF dispersed NHA11 (λex = 400 nm) (adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). (C) Fluorescence of NHA17c upon exposure to different volatile organic compounds (adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (D) Fluorescence emission spectra of TH (thiamine) with the treatment of light irradiation, NHA19 and NHA19 under light irradiation, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc). 
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of CMPs NHA8–10 and NHA17a–e. 
Recently, the group also synthesized a new CMP (NHA10) by coupling B88 with a new core of tetraphenylthiophene (B98) via the Friedel–Crafts reaction (Scheme 20).132 The 1,2 and 1,4-substitution of tetraphenylthiophene unit B98 render higher π-electron delocalization, giving rise to low-energy emission (λem = 525 nm) compared to the TPA-based systems. The fluorescence properties of triazine-based CMPs are further modulated by introducing π-conjugated pyrene moieties into the framework (Scheme 21).133 With various combinations of appropriately functionalized pyrene B98, triethynylbenzene B37 and triphenylamine B100 building blocks, and utilizing the Sonagashira-Hagihara polycondensation reaction and acid-catalyzed reactions, variety of CMPs (NHA11–13) have been prepared. The fluorescence is consistently redshifted and broadened (425 nm to ∼475 nm) moving from the CMP consisting only pyrene units (TDP) to pyrene–triazine CMP (NHA11) and pyrene–triazine–TPA CMPs (NHA12–13), respectively. The presence of pyrene in the CMP framework imparts high quantum yields up to 70%. D–A CMP (NHA11) also exhibited fluorescence solvatochromism (Fig. 23B).
 Scheme 21  Synthesis of CMPs TDP, NHA11–13. 
For any typical synthesis of CMPs there remain unreacted residual functional groups at the surface of the polymer. Such surface remnant functional groups such as heavy atoms will negatively influence the polymer's fluorescence properties. To improve the fluorescence properties of polymers the functional groups must be removed. Thus, Ma et al.134 converted the functional groups into methyl acrylate groups via the end-capping methodology using Heck coupling (NHA14–16; B84) (Scheme 22). The methyl acrylate (MA) B101 end-capping in NHA14–16 polymers effectively suppressed heavy atom effects caused by the iodine functionality and improved the fluorescence compared to the parent polymers. The NHA14 polymer having better π-delocalization resulted in a longer emission signal at 520 nm (Φf = 0.03%), followed by NHA15 and NHA16 at 466 nm (Φf = 0.64%) and 459 nm (Φf = 2.23%), respectively (Fig. 22).
 Scheme 22  Synthesis of CMPs NHA14–16. 
Concerning the development of novel CMPs with intriguing properties, new synthetic methodologies have to be approached other than the metal-catalyzed coupling reactions. In this regard, recently, Gu et al.138 came up with a method of coexisting Friedel–Crafts and Scholl polymerization reaction (Scheme 20) to develop novel π-conjugated CMPs (NHA17a–e). By controlling the ratios of the building blocks (spirobifluorene (B103) and 1,3,5-triazine (B88)), NHA17a–e have been synthesized. As the triazine concentration with respect to spirobifluorene B103 increases in the CMPs from 4:0 (NHA17a) to 4:4 (NHA17e), the fluorescence of the polymers was redshifted from 587 nm to 619 nm (Fig. 23C), in line with the increased D–A interactions. However, NHA17b (4:1 ratio of spirobifluorene:triazine) displayed the largest redshift, possibly due to optimal coexisting contributions of D–A interactions and extended π-delocalization (Fig. 23D).
Zheng et al.135 studied the fluorescence properties of a heterocyclic 1,2,3-triazole consisting CMP (NHA18) constructed by the oxidative coupling of a dendritic thiophene building block B102 (Scheme 23).135 The effective π-conjugation and strong electron-donating ability of 1,2,3-triazole allow the polymer to emit at 525 nm.
 Scheme 23  Synthesis of CMPs NHA18 and NHA19. 
An overview of this section presents that the triazine and triarylamine are the most explored nitrogen systems for developing CMPs. In combination with triazine, several triaryl amine systems have incorporated into the fluorescent CMP backbone such as simple triaryl amine to π-extended aryl amines and dendritic aryl amines. However, the emission signals have scarcely redshifted (about 20–30 nm); it indicates that the propeller-like conformation of the triaryl amines does not propagate the π-delocalization. However, the systems are coupled with other π-conjugated systems (pyrene, tetra arylthiophene etc.) the D–A interactions come into the play and red-shifted the emission signals. Overall the fluorescence quantum yields of these nitrogen-based systems are low compared to the other systems such as TPE, phenylene, PAHs and boron-based.


2.6.2 Structure–function correlations. 
In general, lone pairs of the heteroatoms induce strong interactions with guest molecules and electron-deficient systems, and thus the heteroatom rich CMPs find potential applications in the absorption, adsorption and detection of the guest molecules.136,139 The abundant number of nitrogen atoms and the well-defined microporosity of CMPs (NHA1–13) support uptake of iodine in the range of 1.8–4.4 g g−1. The adsorption capacity of these CMPs are at far with the highest values of all CMPs reported to date (Table 3).122,123,127,130 Also, the potentiality of the luminescent conjugated triazine CMPs (NHA1–13) have been utilized for the sensing of nitroaromatics and iodine.128–130,133 The electron-rich character of CMPs and the coordinating nitrogen sites of triazine units enabled the detection of explosive nitroaromatics with high selectivity and sensitivity.132 Interestingly, almost all the CMPs exhibited high selectivity towards nitrophenol and picric acid among numerous tested analytes (NB, NT, DNT, PhOH etc.). NHA1–4 display high association constants (KSV = ∼104 L mol−1) and very low detection limits (10−10 mol L−1). The hydrogen-bonding interactions between the hydroxyl groups of nitroaromatics and nitrogen atoms of triazine in the framework, probably favor the discrimination. Besides the sensing of nitroaromatics, NHA5,8,9,11 also act as fluorescent sensors towards iodine and exhibited extremely high detection sensitivity (Fig. 24B) with detection limits are in the range of 10−11 to 10−13 mol/L. Between the nitroaromatics and iodine, some CMPs found to display high selectivity towards iodine, while others for nitroaromatics depending on matching LUMO energy levels between the polymer and analyte/iodine. Another triazine-based CMP NHA17c (CMP@4:2) was explored to sense VOCs (Fig. 24C).138 The electron-deficient VOCs (nitromethane and 4-fluoronitrobenzene) caused the polymer's fluorescence quenching, while the electron-rich VOCs (benzene) enhanced the emission of the polymer. The higher LUMO of CMP (−3.45 eV) vs. electron-deficient VOCs (−3.65 eV) allows the photoelectron transfer from CMP to VOCs and quenches the emission of CMP. On the other hand, the lower LUMO of CMP compared to the LUMO of electron-donating VOCs (−1.38 eV); CMP accepts an electron from VOCs and enhances the emission of the polymer. The potential of the triazole-based NHA18 was also explored for the detection of nitroaromatics.135 The CMP detects p-nitroaniline (p-NA) with high sensitivity (KSV = 7.08 × 104 M−1) and ppm level of the detection limit among a large number of analytes tested. CMP was modified to the CMP–Au composite via the impregnation of Au nanoparticles into the CMP polymer and used as a catalyst in reducing p-nitrophenol (p-NP) to p-aminophenol (p-AP). The composite exhibits an impressive catalytic activity (rate constant −0.812 min−1) and high recyclability.
Recently, Liang and Su et al.137 developed a photo-responsive CMP (NHA19) based on pyrazino[2,3-g]quinoxaline B103 with an activity of mimicking oxidase (Scheme 23). In the presence of light, CMP generates reactive oxygen (O2˙−) and catalyzes the oxidation of a range of substrates such as 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine, p-phenylenediamine, 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid), o-phenylenediamine (Fig. 24D). Moreover, CMP also could perform pH-dependent photocatalytic oxidation (in alkaline medium) of non-fluorescent thiamine to fluorescent thiochrome. This pH-dependent thiamine/CMP photocatalytic system was useful in analyzing a bio-enzyme such as urease in the real saliva samples.

3. Conclusion and prospective
CMPs are a special class of organic porous polymers typically characterized by high surface area and inherent π-conjugation. These compounds triggered considerable interest due to associated intriguing properties such as narrow-band gaps, conducting properties, strong visible absorption characteristics and strong photoluminescence. Thus, it led to developing a plethora of CMPs and exploring their applications for semiconducting and optoelectronic applications. In particular, fluorescent CMPs, a subclass of CMPs, attracted considerable attention because of the vital role the luminescent materials play in the modern-day technology. The integrated building blocks and the rigid and non-planar conformations of the CMP framework impart AIE properties to CMPs. Besides, the facile π-delocalization in CMP render two-dimensional exciton migration over the polymer network, which combined with fluorescence properties and porous network of CMPs offers special advantages in detecting the guest molecules with high accuracy. Thus, the fluorescent CMPs have been studied as sensors for explosives, VOCs, metal ions, OLEDs, etc.
Despite the fact that a significant number of fluorescent CMPs are reported to date, the field is still in its infancy stage and exploration is limited to the research laboratories. The materials are yet to be applied for practical applications. Witnessing the real potential of these materials is possible by diversifying the structural variety and establishing an in-depth structure–property relationship. It is indeed possible to achieve owing to the availability of diverse building blocks, a large variety of linkers, and multiple synthetic routes. Such an establishment will open-up the strategies to precisely design and develop CMPs with improved fluorescent properties, photostability (and photo-resistivity). It will also enable the development of novel materials such as NIR emissive and phosphorescent materials. Apart from the demand to diversify the structural novelty, there are also a few inherent bottlenecks that CMPs face that needs special attention: (1) the fluorescence features of the CMPs mainly stem from the integrated building blocks, which sometimes become a constrain for the applicability of these polymers beyond analyte sensing. This is either due to the unavailability of a diversified number of AIE-active building blocks or the difficulty in instituting desirable functional groups on AIE-active building blocks. Thus, the limitation makes it challenging to develop application-targeted fluorescent CMPs. This particular shortcoming can be addressed by developing linker promoted fluorescence. The linker promoted fluorescence strategy allows the incorporation of any building block into the fluorescent CMP network, enhancing the scope of these polymers for a broad range of applications; (2) insolubility of the fluorescent CMP materials is another obvious constrain that restricts their scope of use in constructing devices. It demands novel material processing techniques and (or) sheds light on electropolymerization methods to bring forth a solution for this daunting problem; (3) cross-conjugation introduced by C3-topic building blocks limits the π-delocalization within the CMP framework that primarily affects the exciton migration and also hampers NIR-emission. This limitation can be addressed by combining C2 and C4-topic building blocks into the CMP network, which will provide uninterrupted π-delocalization pathways; (4) limited 2D-π-delocalization within the CMP network due to the presence of contorted molecular building blocks although they are essential to reduce the intermolecular π–π interactions and to enhance AIE properties. However, these building blocks significantly prevent in-plane π-delocalization and considerably minimize the fluorescence properties of the polymer. One strategy to circumvent this issue without compromising on the AIE properties is to introduce planar building blocks with bulky peripheral/pendant substituents; (5) the cost implications associated with the synthesis of CMPs as some of the building blocks utilized for the construction of fluorescent CMPs involve laborious synthesis. On the other hand, utilizing alternative readily available building blocks in place of judiciously designed and application-oriented building blocks may not be effective. Thus, the most potential solution to reduce the cost of the material will be improving the stability, efficiency and recyclability of CMPs.
As the structure–property and structure–functionality of the CMPs are being established, this field's future direction must focus on (1) the development of NIR emissive CMPs: the vast majority of the CMPs are only blue-/green-emissive, but red-/NIR-emissive CMPs are very scarce. Owing to the importance of the red-/NIR-emissive materials, in general, for biomedical and optoelectronic applications, the efforts must be invested to develop low energy emissive CMPs; (2) development of phosphorescent CMPs: the phosphorescent materials have also attracted significant attention due to their applications as OLEDs, photovoltaics etc. However, the CMPs that exhibit phosphorescence are rare. The integration of the unique properties (high porosity, large surface area and exciton migration) of CMPs with phosphorescence may lead to emerging new properties; (3) target oriented analyte sensing: the majority of the fluorescent CMPs reported for the analyte sensing suffer from selectivity as there are no defined sensing antenna units in the CMP network. Thus, judicious structural designs need to be developed for incorporating receptor units that are specific to a particular analyte. These receptor moieties can be introduced into CMPs either as a building block(s) or as pendant substituents on the polymer framework; (4) broadening the fluorescent sensing application of CMPs beyond the nitroaromatic explosives: a large section of the fluorescent CMPs are used for only nitroaromatic sensing owing to their electron-rich characteristics. However, it is crucial to expand the utility of CMPs for the sensing of other analytes.
Overall, this review methodically highlights the structure–property and structure–functional correlations of the reported fluorescent CMPs. It is fascinating to note that the trivial changes/modifications of the CMP structure lead to a big-time shift in the properties/functions. The results indeed emphasize that the fluorescent CMP materials will have a bright and promising future as optoelectronic material, light-harvesting antennas, sensors, OLEDs etc.
Abbreviations

BHCBuchwald–Hartwig coupling
EPMElectropolymerization method
FCPFriedel–Crafts polymerization
HCHeck coupling
OCPOxidative coupling polymerization
OFETOrganic field effect transistor
OLEDOrganic light emitting diode
PVTFBPotassium(ethenyl)trifluoroborate
ScCScholl coupling
SHCSuzuki–Hagihara coupling
S-HecSuzuki–Heck coupling
SMCSuzuki–Miyuara coupling
UCUllmann coupling
YCYamamoto coupling

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
MRR thank the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) for the financial support through the Early Career Research Award (ECR/2018/002285).
References
Z. Li and Y.-W. Yang, Creation and bioapplications of porous organic polymer materials, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 9278–9290 RSC .
B. Zheng, X. Lin, X. Zhang, D. Wu and K. Matyjaszewski, Emerging Functional Porous Polymeric and Carbonaceous Materials for Environmental Treatment and Energy Storage, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1907006 Search PubMed .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. Qiu, Porous Organic Materials: Strategic Design and Structure-Function Correlation, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bildirir, V. G. Gregoriou, A. Avgeropoulos, U. Scherf and C. L. Chochos, Porous organic polymers as emerging new materials for organic photovoltaic applications: current status and future challenges, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 546–556 RSC .
J. Zhu, C. Yang, C. Lu, F. Zhang, Z. Yuan and X. Zhuang, Two-Dimensional Porous Polymers: From Sandwich-like Structure to Layered Skeleton, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 3191–3202 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, M. Chrzanowski, Y. Zhang and S. Ma, Applications of metal-organic frameworks featuring multi-functional sites, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 106–129 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. J. Zhou and S. Kitagawa, Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs), Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5415–5418 RSC .
P. Bhanja, A. Modak and A. Bhaumik, Porous Organic Polymers for CO2 Storage and Conversion Reactions, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 244–257 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cousins and R. Zhang, Highly Porous Organic Polymers for Hydrogen Fuel Storage, Polymers, 2019, 11, 690 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mukhtar, S. Saqib, N. B. Mellon, M. Babar, S. Rafiq, S. Ullah, M. A. Bustam, A. G. Al-Sehemi, N. Muhammad and M. Chawla, CO2 capturing, thermo-kinetic principles, synthesis and amine functionalization of covalent organic polymers for CO2 separation from natural gas: A review, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2020, 77, 103203 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao and Y. Xu, Recent progress in two-dimensional polymers for energy storage and conversion: design, synthesis, and applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21676–21695 RSC .
C. Xu, W. Zhang, J. Tang, C. Pan and G. Yu, Porous Organic Polymers: An Emerged Platform for Photocatalytic Water Splitting, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 592 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, G. Xing, W. Chen and L. Chen, Porous organic polymers: a promising platform for efficient photocatalysis, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 332–353 RSC .
K. Dong, Q. Sun, X. Meng and F.-S. Xiao, Strategies for the design of porous polymers as efficient heterogeneous catalysts: from co-polymerization to self-polymerization, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1028–1039 RSC .
Y.-B. Zhou and Z.-P. Zhan, Conjugated Microporous Polymers for Heterogeneous Catalysis, Chem. – Asian J., 2018, 13, 9–19 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Suresh and U. Scherf, Electrochemically Generated Conjugated Microporous Polymer Network Thin Films for Chemical Sensor Applications, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2018, 219, 1800207 CrossRef .
H. V. Babu, M. G. M. Bai and M. Rajeswara Rao, Functional π-Conjugated Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11029–11060 CrossRef CAS .
K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Covalent Organic Frameworks: Design, Synthesis, and Functions, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lohse and T. Bein, Covalent Organic Frameworks: Structures, Synthesis, and Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705553 CrossRef .
M. Rajeswara Rao, Y. Fang, S. De Feyter and D. F. Perepichka, Conjugated Covalent Organic Frameworks via Michael Addition-Elimination, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2421–2427 CrossRef .
V. Lakshmi, C.-H. Liu, M. Rajeswara Rao, Y. Chen, Y. Fang, A. Dadvand, E. Hamzehpoor, Y. Sakai-Otsuka, R. S. Stein and D. F. Perepichka, A Two-Dimensional Poly(azatriangulene) Covalent Organic Framework with Semiconducting and Paramagnetic States, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2155–2160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and G. Zhu, Porous Aromatic Frameworks (PAFs), Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8934–8986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan and G. Zhu, Porous Aromatic Frameworks as a Platform for Multifunctional Applications, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 409–418 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan and B. Tan, Hypercrosslinked porous polymer materials: design, synthesis, and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3322–3356 RSC .
J. Huang and S. R. Turner, Hypercrosslinked Polymers: A Review, Polym. Rev., 2018, 58, 1–41 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ramimoghadam, E. M. Gray and C. J. Webb, Review of polymers of intrinsic microporosity for hydrogen storage applications, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16944–16965 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Cooper, Conjugated Microporous Polymers, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1291–1295 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. M. Lee and A. I. Cooper, Advances in Conjugated Microporous Polymers, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2171–2214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, S. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Conjugated microporous polymers: design, synthesis and application, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8012–8031 RSC .
D. Kaleeswaran, P. Vishnoi and R. Murugavel, [3+3] Imine and β-ketoenamine tethered fluorescent covalent-organic frameworks for CO2 uptake and nitroaromatic sensing, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7159–7171 RSC .
U. H. F. Bunz, K. Seehafer, F. L. Geyer, M. Bender, I. Braun, E. Smarsly and J. Freudenberg, Porous Polymers Based on Aryleneethynylene Building Blocks, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1466–1496 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, Z. Zeng, G. Zeng, Z. Liu, R. Xiao, P. Xu, H. Wang, D. Huang, Y. Liu, B. Shao, Q. Liang, D. Wang, Q. He, L. Qin and Y. Fu, Recent advances in conjugated microporous polymers for photocatalysis: designs, applications, and prospects, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6434–6470 RSC .
J.-X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, N. L. Campbell, H. Niu, C. Dickinson, A. y. Ganin, M. J. Rosseinsky, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, Conjugated Microporous Poly(aryleneethynylene) Networks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8574–8578 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, A. C. Sedgwick, T. Gunnlaugsson, E. U. Akkaya, J. Yoon and T. D. James, Fluorescent chemosensors: the past, present and future, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 7105–7123 RSC .
V.-N. Nguyen, A. Kumar, M. H. Lee and J. Yoon, Recent advances in biomedical applications of organic fluorescence materials with reduced singlet-triplet energy gaps, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 425, 213545 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Andrew and T. M. Swager, Structure-Property relationships for exciton transfer in conjugated polymers, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 476–498 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Thomas, G. D. Joly and T. M. Swager, Chemical Sensors Based on Amplifying Fluorescent Conjugated Polymers, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1339–1386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rochat and T. M. Swager, Conjugated Amplifying Polymers for Optical Sensing Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4488–4502 CrossRef CAS .
H. Singh, K. Tiwari, R. Tiwari, S. K. Pramanik and A. Das, Small Molecule as Fluorescent Probes for Monitoring Intracellular Enzymatic Transformations, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11718–11760 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, C. Liu, J. Tang, L. Luo and G. Yu, Fluorescent porous organic polymers, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 1168–1181 RSC .
N. Chaoui, M. Trunk, R. Dawson, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Trends and challenges for microporous polymers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3302–3321 RSC .
Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced emission, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5361–5388 RSC .
J. Mei, N. L. C. Leung, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-Induced Emission: Together We Shine, United We Soar!, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11718–11940 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, B. He and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-induced emission of siloles, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5347–5365 RSC .
Y. B. Hu, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Recent Progress in AIE-active Polymers, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 289–301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inukai, T. Fukushima, Y. Hijikata, N. Ogiwara, S. Horike and S. Kitagawa, Control of Molecular Rotor Rotational Frequencies in Porous Coordination Polymers Using a Solid-Solution Approach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12183–12186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dalapati, C. Gu and D. Jiang, Luminescent Porous Polymers Based on Aggregation-Induced Mechanism: Design, Synthesis and Functions, Small, 2016, 12, 6513–6527 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra and U. Scherf, Fluorescent Microporous Organic Polymers: Potential Testbed for Optical Applications, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 10074–10080 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, J. W. Y. Lam and B. Z. Tang, Tetraphenylethene: a versatile AIE building block for the construction of efficient luminescent materials for organic light-emitting diodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23726–23740 RSC .
H.-T. Feng, Y.-X. Yuan, J.-B. Xiong, Y.-S. Zheng and B. Z. Tang, Macrocycles and cages based on tetraphenylethylene with aggregation-induced emission effect, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7452–7476 RSC .
Y. Xu, L. Chen, Z. Guo, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Light-Emitting Conjugated Polymers with Microporous Network Architecture: Interweaving Scaffold Promotes Electronic Conjugation, Facilitates Exciton Migration, and Improves Luminescence, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17622–17625 CrossRef CAS .
H. Namgung, J. J. Lee, Y. J. Gwon and T. S. Lee, Synthesis of tetraphenylethylene-based conjugated microporous polymers for detection of nitroaromatic explosive compounds, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 34291–34296 RSC .
J. J. Lee and T. S. Lee, Synthesis of conjugated microporous polymer-based fluorescent “turn-off” sensor for selective detection of picric acid, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2019, 686, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, J.-X. Wang, F. Yang, D. Zhou, N. Bian, X.-J. Zhang, C.-G. Yan and B.-H. Han, Tetraphenylethylene-based fluorescent porous organic polymers: preparation, gas sorption properties and photoluminescence properties, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13554–13560 RSC .
L. Sun, Y. Zou, Z. Liang, J. Yu and R. Xu, A one-pot synthetic strategy via tandem Suzuki-Heck reactions for the construction of luminescent microporous organic polymers, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 471–478 RSC .
Y. Wei, W. Chen, X. Zhao, S. Ding, S. Han and L. Chen, Solid-state emissive cyanostilbene based conjugated microporous polymers via cost-effective Knoevenagel polycondensation, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 3983–3988 RSC .
T. Geng, C. Zhang, G. Chen, L. Ma, W. Zhang and H. Xia, Synthesis of tetraphenylethylene-based fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers for fluorescent sensing and adsorbing iodine, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 284, 468–475 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wan, C. Li, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Acceptor-donor-acceptor type molecules for high performance organic photovoltaics - chemistry and mechanism, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2828–2842 RSC .
S. Jaswal and J. Kumar, Review on fluorescent dono-acceptor conjugated system as molecular probes, Mater. Today: Proc., 2020, 26, 566–580 CAS .
L. Pan, Z. Liu, M. Tian, B. C. Schroeder, A. E. Aliev and C. F. J. Faul, Luminescent and Swellable Conjugated Microporous Polymers for Detecting Nitroaromatic Explosives and Removing Harmful Organic Vapors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 48352–48362 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Mothika, P. Sutar, P. Verma, S. Das, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Regulating Charge-Transfer in Conjugated Microporous Polymers for Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 3867–3874 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, Y. Wang, X. Li, X. Li and R. Wang, Imidazolium-Based Porous Organic Polymers: Anion Exchange-Driven Capture and Luminescent Probe of Cr2O7, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18904–18911 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Li and Y.-W. Yang, Tetraphenylethylene-Interweaving Conjugated Macrocycle Polymer Materials as Two-Photon Fluorescence Sensors for Metal Ions and Organic Molecules, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800177 CrossRef .
M. Liu, C. Yao, C. Liu and Y. Xu, Ag+ doped into azo-linked conjugated microporous polymer for volatile iodine capture and detection of heavy metal ions, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14072 CrossRef .
K. Yuan, P. Guo-Wang, T. Hu, L. Shi, R. Zeng, M. Forster, T. Pichler, Y. Chen and U. Scherf, Nanofibrous and Graphene-Templated Conjugated Microporous Polymer Materials for Flexible Chemosensors and Supercapacitors, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7403–7411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Wu, H. Xu and D. Jiang, Design of Highly Photofunctional Porous Polymer Films with Controlled Thickness and Prominent Microporosity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11540–11544 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma-Cando, D. Woitassek, G. Brunklaus and U. Scherf, Luminescent tetraphenylethene-cored, carbazole- and thiophene-based microporous polymer films for the chemosensing of nitroaromatic analytes, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1118–1124 RSC .
V. S. Mothika, A. Raupke, K. O. Brinkmann, T. Riedl, G. Brunklaus and U. Scherf, Nanometer-Thick Conjugated Microporous Polymer Films for Selective and Sensitive Vapor-Phase TNT Detection, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6483–6492 CrossRef CAS .
D.-P. Liu, Q. Chen, Y.-C. Zhao, L.-M. Zhang, A.-D. Qi and B.-H. Han, Fluorinated Porous Organic Polymers via Direct C-H Arylation Polycondensation, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 522–526 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ben, H. Ren, S. Ma, D. Cao, J. Lan, X. Jing, W. Wang, J. Xu, F. Deng, J. M. Simmons, S. Qiu and G. Zhu, Targeted Synthesis of a Porous Aromatic Framework with High Stability and Exceptionally High Surface Area, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9457–9460 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Chen, G. Meng, Q. Zhu, S. Zhang and P. Chen, Pillar[5]arenes: a new class of
AIEgen macrocycles used for luminescence sensing of Fe3+ ions, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11747–11751 RSC .
R. Joseph, Selective Detection of Fe3+, F−, and Cysteine by a Novel Triazole-Linked Decaamine Derivative of Pillar[5]arene and Its Metal Ion Complex in Water, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 6215–6220 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Chen, B.-B. Han, J.-F. Ma, X. Liu, Q.-Y. Yang, Q. Lin, H. Yao, Y.-M. Zhang and T.-B. Wei, Pillar[5]arene-based fluorescent polymer for selective detection and removal of mercury ions, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 47709–47714 RSC .
B. Hua, L. Shao, Z. Zhang, J. Liu and F. Huang, Cooperative Silver Ion-Pair Recognition by Peralkylated Pillar[5]arenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15008–15012 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Kang, D. H. Lee, Y. J. Shin, J. Choi, Y.-J. Ko, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim, K. C. Ko and S. U. Son, Conjugated macro-microporous polymer films bearing tetraphenylethylenes for the enhanced sensing of nitrotoluenes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17312–17317 RSC .
J. Weber and A. Thomas, Toward Stable Interfaces in Conjugated Polymers: Microporous Poly(p-phenylene) and Poly(phenyleneethynylene) Based on a Spirobifluorene Building Block, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6334–6335 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Honsho, S. Seki and D. Jiang, Light-Harvesting Conjugated Microporous Polymers: Rapid and Highly Efficient Flow of Light Energy with a Porous Polyphenylene Framework as Antenna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6742–6748 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and D. Jiang, Structural insights into the functional origin of conjugated microporous polymers: geometry-management of porosity and electronic properties, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2781–2783 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Yu, J. Du, Y. Cui, X. Song and Z. Liang, Conjugated microporous polymers based on biphenylene for CO2 adsorption and luminescence detection of nitroaromatic compounds, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 9482–9487 RSC .
M. Xu, T. Wang, P. Gao, L. Zhao, L. Zhou and D. Hua, Highly fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers for concurrent adsorption and detection of uranium, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11214–11222 RSC .
A. Singh, D. Samanta, M. Boro and T. K. Maji, Gfp chromophore integrated conjugated microporous polymers: topological and ESPT effects on emission properties, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2837–2840 RSC .
S. Bandyopadhyay, P. Pallavi, A. G. Anil and A. Patra, Fabrication of porous organic polymers in the form of powder, soluble in organic solvents and nanoparticles: a unique platform for gas adsorption and efficient chemosensing, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 3775–3780 RSC .
P. Zhang, Z. Weng, J. Guo and C. Wang, Solution-Dispersible, Colloidal, Conjugated Porous Polymer Networks with Entrapped Palladium Nanocrystals for Heterogeneous Catalysis of the Suzuki Miyaura Coupling Reaction, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5243–5249 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Novotney and W. R. Dichtel, Conjugated Porous Polymers For TNT Vapor Detection, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bonillo, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Tuning Photophysical Properties in Conjugated Microporous Polymers by Comonomer Doping Strategies, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3469–3480 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pallavi, S. Bandyopadhyay, J. Louis, A. Deshmukh and A. Patra, A soluble conjugated porous organic polymer: efficient white light emission in solution, nanoparticles, gel and transparent thin film, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1257–1260 RSC .
P. Xing, L. Bai, H. Chen, P. H. Tham, A. Hao and Y. Zhao, Self-Assembly of Organic Building Blocks with Directly Exfoliated Graphene to Fabricate Di- and Tricomponent Hybrids, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 517–527 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bi, Y. Li, L. Wang, J. Hu and H. Liu, Constructing Diketopyrrolopyrrole-Based Fluorescent Porous Organic Polymer for Chromo Communication via Guest-to-Host Energy Transfer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 6685–6691 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patra, J.-M. Koenen and U. Scherf, Fluorescent nanoparticles based on a microporous organic polymer network: fabrication and efficient energy transfer to surface-bound dyes, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9612–9614 RSC .
Y. Xie, Y. Gong, M. Han, F. Zhang, Q. Peng, G. Xie and Z. Li, Tetraphenylcyclopentadiene-Based Hyperbranched Polymers: Convenient Syntheses from One Pot “A4 + B2” Polymerization and High External Quantum Yields up to 9.74% in OLED Devices, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 896–903 CrossRef .
A. Deshmukh, S. Bandyopadhyay, A. James and A. Patra, Trace level detection of nitroanilines using a solution processable fluorescent porous organic polymer, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4427–4433 RSC .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Three dimensional macroporous architectures and aerogels built of carbon nanotubes and/or graphene: synthesis and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
F. Yan, M. Zhang and J. Li, Solution-Gated Graphene Transistors for Chemical and Biological Sensors, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 313–331 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo and D. Cao, Color tunable porous organic polymer luminescent probes for selective sensing of metal ions and nitroaromatic explosives, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8490–8494 RSC .
S. K. Gupta, D. Kaleeswaran, S. Nandi, R. Vaidhyanathan and R. Murugavel, Bulky Isopropyl Group Loaded Tetraaryl Pyrene Based Azo-Linked Covalent Organic Polymer for Nitroaromatics Sensing and CO2 Adsorption, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 3572–3582 CrossRef CAS .
T.-M. Geng, D.-K. Li, Z.-M. Zhu, W.-Y. Zhang, S.-N. Ye, H. Zhu and Z.-Q. Wang, Fluorescent conjugated microporous polymer based on perylene tetraanhydride bisimide for sensing o-nitrophenol, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1011, 77–85 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, Y.-C. Gao, C. Zhang, M. Liu and T.-M. Geng, The effects of the crosslinking position and degree of conjugation in perylene tetraanhydride bisimide microporous polymers on fluorescence sensing performance, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 5108–5115 RSC .
W. Huang, E. Smarsly, J. Han, M. Bender, K. Seehafer, I. Wacker, R. R. Schroder and U. H. F. Bunz, Truxene-Based Hyperbranched Conjugated Polymers: Fluorescent Micelles Detect Explosives in Water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3068–3074 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Xu and D. Jiang, Conjugated Microporous Polymers as Molecular Sensing Devices: Microporous Architecture Enables Rapid Response and Enhances Sensitivity in Fluorescence-On and Fluorescence-Off Sensing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8738–8741 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, X. Fan, Z.-Z. Zhuang, W.-C. Song, Z. Chang, Y.-H. Zhang and X.-H. Bu, A triphenylene-based conjugated microporous polymer: construction, gas adsorption, and fluorescence detection properties, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 15350–15353 RSC .
K. Fujimoto, M. Takahashi, S. Izawa and M. Hiramoto, Development of Perylene-Based Non-Fullerene Acceptors through Bay-Functionalization Strategy, Materials, 2020, 13, 2148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, K. Mullen and A. Narita, Syntheses and Characterizations of Functional Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons and Graphene Nanoribbons, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2020, 93, 490–506 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Jiang, A. Trewin, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Band gap engineering in fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1777–1781 RSC .
K. V. Rao, S. Mohapatra, T. K. Maji and S. J. George, Guest-Responsive Reversible Swelling and Enhanced Fluorescence in a Super-Absorbent, Dynamic Microporous Polymer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cheng, T. Hasell, A. Trewin, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Soluble Conjugated Microporous Polymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12727–12731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, J. Weber and C. F. J. Faul, Fluorescent Microporous Polyimides Based on Perylene and Triazine for Highly CO2-Selective Carbon Materials, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2064–2073 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Thompson, F. Li and R. A. Smaldone, Synthesis and sorption properties of hexa-(peri)-hexabenzocoronene-based porous organic polymers, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6171–6173 RSC .
L. Pan, M.-Y. Xu, L.-J. Feng, Q. Chen, Y.-J. He and B.-H. Han, Conjugated microporous polycarbazole containing tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridium(iii) complexes: phosphorescence, porosity, and heterogeneous organic photocatalysis, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2299–2307 RSC .
V. Lakshmi, R. Sharma and M. Ravikanth, Functionalized boron-dipyrromethanes and their applications, Rep. Org. Chem., 2016, 6, 1–24 CAS .
V. Lakshmi, M. Rajeswara Rao and M. Ravikanth, Halogenated boron-dipyrromethenes: synthesis, properties and applications, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 2501–2517 RSC .
M. Poddar and R. Misra, Recent advances of BODIPY based derivatives for optoelectronic applications, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 421, 213462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chinna Ayya Swamy, G. Sivaraman, R. N. Priyanka, S. O. Raja, K. Ponnuvel, J. Shanmugpriya and A. Gulyani, Near Infrared (NIR) absorbing dyes as promising photosensitizer for photo dynamic therapy, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 411, 213233 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Kim, W. X. Ren, J. S. Kim and J. Yoon, Fluorescent and colorimetric sensors for detection of lead, cadmium, and mercury ions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3210–3244 RSC .
B. M. Squeo and M. Pasini, BODIPY platform: a tunable tool for green to NIR OLEDs, Supramol. Chem., 2020, 32, 56–70 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liras, M. Iglesias and F. Sanchez, Conjugated Microporous Polymers Incorporating BODIPY Moieties as Light-Emitting Materials and Recyclable Visible-Light Photocatalysts, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1666–1673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bandyopadhyay, A. G. Anil, A. James and A. Patra, Multifunctional Porous Organic Polymers: Tuning of Porosity, CO2, and H2 Storage and Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27669–27678 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tobin, J. Liu, H. Hayes, M. Demleitner, D. Ellis, V. Arrighi, Z. Xu and F. Vilela, BODIPY-based conjugated microporous polymers as reusable heterogeneous photosensitisers in a photochemical flow reactor, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 6662–6670 RSC .
S. Bandyopadhyay, S. Kundu, A. Giri and A. Patra, A smart photosensitizer based on a red emitting solution processable porous polymer: generation of reactive oxygen species, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9123–9126 RSC .
V. M. Suresh, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. Roy, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Highly Luminescent Microporous Organic Polymer with Lewis Acidic Boron Sites on the Pore Surface: Ratiometric Sensing and Capture of F− Ions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 10799–10804 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Li, A. Sigen, H. Xia and Y. Mu, Triarylboron-based fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21267–21270 RSC .
M. A. Filatov, Heavy-atom-free BODIPY photosensitizers with intersystem crossing mediated by intramolecular photoinduced electron transfer, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2020, 18, 10–27 RSC .
L. Wang and Z. Yan, Visible-Light-Mediated Facile Reductive Aromatization of Quinols, Synlett, 2016, 1602–1606 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lakshmi and M. Ravikanth, Boron-dipyrromethene based multi-anionic sensor and a specific cationic sensor for Fe3+, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5576–5586 RSC .
Z. Li, H. Li, H. Xia, X. Ding, X. Luo, X. Liu and Y. Mu, Triarylboron-Linked Conjugated Microporous Polymers: Sensing and Removal of Fluoride Ions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 17355–17362 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, X. Zhuang, D. Wu, F. Zhang, D. Gehrig, F. Laquai and X. Feng, Boron-π-nitrogen-based conjugated porous polymers with multi-functions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13878–13884 RSC .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Ma and D. Jiang, Porous Organic Polymer Films with Tunable Work Functions and Selective Hole and Electron Flows for Energy Conversions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3049–3053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mauger, J. Farjon, P. Nun and V. Coeffard, One-Pot Synthesis of Functionalized Fused Furans via a BODIPY-Catalyzed Domino Photooxygenation, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4790–4793 CrossRef CAS .
T. Geng, Z. Zhu, W. Zhang and Y. Wang, A nitrogen-rich fluorescent conjugated microporous polymer with triazine and triphenylamine units for high iodine capture and nitro aromatic compound detection, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7612–7617 RSC .
T. Geng, S. Ye, Z. Zhu and W. Zhang, Triazine-based conjugated microporous polymers with N,N,N',N'-tetraphenyl-1,4-phenylenediamine, 1,3,5-tris(diphenylamino)benzene and 1,3,5-tris[(3-methylphenyl)-phenylamino]benzene as the core for high iodine capture and fluorescence sensing of o-nitrophenol, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2808–2816 RSC .
T. Geng, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu and X. Kai, Triazine-based conjugated microporous polymers constructing triphenylamine and its derivatives with nitrogen as core for iodine adsorption and fluorescence sensing I2, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 273, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
T. Geng, L. Ma, G. Chen, C. Zhang, W. Zhang and Q. Niu, Fluorescent conjugated microporous polymers containing pyrazine moieties for adsorbing and fluorescent sensing of iodine, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 20235–20245 CrossRef CAS .
T. Geng, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, G. Chen, L. Ma, S. Ye and Q. Niu, A covalent triazine-based framework from tetraphenylthiophene and 2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine motifs for sensing o-nitrophenol and effective I2 uptake, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 777–784 RSC .
T.-M. Geng, C. Zhang, C. Hu, M. Liu, Y.-T. Fei and H.-Y. Xia, Synthesis of 1,6-disubstituted pyrene-based conjugated microporous polymers for reversible adsorption and fluorescence sensing of iodine, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 2312–2320 RSC .
L. Ma and H. Ma, Synthesis of π-conjugated network polymers based on triphenylamine (TPA) and tetraphenylethylene (TPE) as building blocks via direct Pd-catalyzed reactions and their application in CO2 capture and explosive detection, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 18098–18105 RSC .
F. Wei, X. Cai, J. Nie, F. Wang, C. Lu, G. Yang, Z. Chen, C. Ma and Y. Zhang, A 1,2,3-triazolyl based conjugated microporous polymer for sensitive detection of p-nitroaniline and Au nanoparticle immobilization, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9, 3832–3839 RSC .
H. Wang, B. Hou, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Zhu, A. Thomas and Y. Liao, Cobalt Nanocrystals Encapsulated in Heteroatom-Rich Porous Carbons Derived from Conjugated Microporous Polymers for Efficient Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution, Small, 2018, 14, 1803232 CrossRef .
M. Wang, S. Wang, X. Song, Z. Liang and X. Su, Photo-responsive oxidase mimic of conjugated microporous polymer for constructing a pH-sensitive fluorescent sensor for bio-enzyme sensing, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 316, 128157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, J. Guo, Q. Huang, J. He, Y. Fu, G. Kuang, C. Pan and G. Yu, 1,3,5-Triazine-Based Microporous Polymers with Tunable Porosities for CO2 Capture and Fluorescent Sensing, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 8512–8520 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, L. Guo, N. Wang, X. Zhu, S. Jin and B. Tan, Layered Thiazolo[5,4-d] Thiazole-Linked Conjugated Microporous Polymers with Heteroatom Adoption for Efficient Photocatalysis Application, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15861–15868 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

M. G. Monika Bai
	Ms. Monika Bai M G was born in Ranchi, Jharkhand. She completed her BSc in Chemistry from St. Agnes College, Mangalore and MSc from VIT university, Vellore in 2017. She joined as a PhD student in Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad in 2018, working with Prof. Rajeswara Rao M. Her research focuses on the development of π-conjugated small molecules and porous organic polymers via C–H activation methodology and exploring their application in the field of material science in developing systems for sensing, photocatalytic activity and opto-electronics.

H. Vignesh Babu
	Vignesh Babu obtained his BSc degree from The Gandhigram Rural Institute and MSc degree in Chemistry from Madurai Kamaraj University. He completed his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. K. Muralidharan from the University of Hyderabad, India in 2014. Following post-doctoral research at IMDEA Materials Institute, Madrid, Spain, he began his academic career at IIT Dharwad. Currently, he has been working as an assistant professor in the Department of Applied Sciences and Humanities, National Institute of Foundry and Forge Technology, Ranchi. His research interests include the synthesis and multifunctional applications of porous polymers, polymer composites, bio-based polymeric materials in carbon dioxide fixation, water treatment and energy storage.

V. Lakshmi
	Lakshmi Vellanki is an assistant professor at the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal, India. She received her PhD in 2014 from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India. As a post-doc, she joined Prof. Hiromitsu Maeda, Ritsumeikan University, Japan, for 2.5 years and Prof. Dmitrii Perepichka, McGill University, Canada, for 1.5 years. Her research interests involve the synthesis and characterization of novel π-conjugated building blocks, organic semiconductors, optically active materials based on conjugated oligomers, dyes and further extend to porous organic frameworks.

M. Rajeswara Rao
	Rajeswara Rao is currently an assistant professor at Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad (IIT Dharwad) since 2017. He received his PhD from Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India in 2011 under the supervision of Professor M. Ravikanth. Subsequently, he spent two years at Academia Sinica, Taiwan and about three years at McGill University, Canada, for post-doctoral studies. His research interests include designing and developing organic π-conjugated, small, one-dimensional and two-dimensional (covalent organic frameworks) polymers for sensing, optoelectronic and photocatalytic applications.

 	Fig. 1  Classifications of porous polymers and porous organic polymers (POPs). The diagrammatic representation of different POPs has also been presented to provide insights into the polymer network topology.	 

 	Chart 1  Various building blocks used for the construction of fluorescent CMPs.	 

 	Chart 2  Schematic representation of the reactions used for the synthesis of CMPs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Illustration of the solution and solid-state fluorescence images to describe the ACQ (left) and AIE (right) effect. The middle image depicts the Jablonski diagram (radiative and non-radiative transitions). (B) The pictorial illustration of the design rationale employed to realize fluorescent CMPs. These three strategies help in weakening the interlayer π–π interactions in 2D CMPs and trigger the AIE properties.	 

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis of CMPs TPE1–4 and TPE-LP.	 

 	Fig. 3  FE-SEM images of the TPE1 CMPs synthesized at (A) 2 h, (B) 12 h, (C) 36 h, and (D) 72 h of reaction times (adapted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society); (E) left: pictorial illustration of the increase in the particle size (25–255 nm) of TPE1 for time-dependent Yamamoto-coupling when the time period is maintained from 2–72 h. Right: Representation of a 2D sheet of TPE1 with enhanced π-conjugation on increasing the size of the particle. The different color circles behind the 2D polymeric sheet indicate the size of the particle while the black color on the highlight depicts the extended π-delocalization.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of CMPs TPE5–10.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Photographs of fluorescence emission of TPE5a–e under UV light (adapted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Fluorescent spectra of TPE9 dispersed in various solvents (1 mg mL−1; λex = 460 nm). Inset: Photographs of solid-state and TPE9 suspensions in different solvents under UV light (adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Fluorescence spectra of TPE10a–d; (B) photographs of TPE10a–d (from left to right) dispersed in THF solvent (top) and drop casted on a glass substrate (bottom) under UV-light (adapted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons). The pictorial portrayal of the processes that are responsible for the tuneable emission of colors of TPE10. The top image represents the incorporation of fluorenone units into TPE–CMP and the institution of (C) ICT from the TPE unit to fluorenone and (D) energy transfer from a group of TPE moieties to the TPE–fluorenone moiety. The bottoms images depict the energy level diagrams of (E) the simple emission process, (F) ICT process between TPE and fluorenone, (G) energy transfer process between the TPE–TPE units and the TPE–fluorenone unit.	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of CMPs TPE11–16.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Pictorial representation of TPE CMP–graphene sheets (G-TPE1) and the D–A interactions between the CMP (donor) and the graphene sheet (acceptor) leads to the red-shift in the emission when compared with that of the parent CMP (B). (C) Photograph of the nanofibrous films of TPE1/PLA illuminated by a UV lamp; (D) the fluorescence quenching of the nanofibrous films of TPE1/PLA upon 1 min immersion with different metal ions (adapted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of CMPs TPE17–23 obtained by the electro-polymerization method using building blocks B19–B24.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Cyclic voltammetry curves of TPE17 in ACN/CH2Cl2 (1:4 v/v) at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1 at 258 °C in the presence of the NBu4PF6 electrolyte (inset: the image of fluorescent microporous TPE17 film under UV-light) (adapted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons). (B) Photographs of B20 (a), B22 (b), B21 (c), B19 (d), B23 (e), and B24 (f) building blocks coated on quartz plates under UV irradiation (adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthesis of CMPs TPE24–25.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Pictorial representation of analyte diffusion into the CMP pores; the inset depicts the secondary interactions between the analyte and the CMP pore walls, enabling superior sensing. (B) Spectral overlap diagram for TPE3 and TPE5a,e with aromatic analytes such as PA, DNCB, 4-NT, 2,4-DNT, and (C) a comparative frontier energy level diagram of TPE24–25 with various nitroaromatics.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Photograph of the fluorescence quenching of TPE24 upon exposure to the vapors of TNT under UV-light and the pictorial representation of TPE24 (adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). (B) The graphical representation of fluorescence quenching efficiency of TPE14 with respect to various ions (adapted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons). (C) Luminescence spectra upon the gradual addition of I2 to TPE9 dispersed in DMF (adapted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2019 Elsevier Inc).	 


1	
TPE1
	Simple TPE units linked to exhibit strong emission with AIE and microporous amorphous CMP	PA > 2,4-DNT > 2,6-DNT	PA-1.4 × 104	672.95	547 (λex = 332 nm); Φf = ∼40%	
53


TPE2
	Phenyl-linked TPE tuning porosity and TPE-based AIE exhibits strong fluorescence	PA-8.026 × 103	685.05	542 (λex = 332 nm); Φf = ∼32%	
52

2	
TPE4
	The vinyl linked TPE pertaining extended π-conjugation exhibits AIE and the porosity	PA > DNCB > DNT > NT	NA	318	560 (λex = 350 nm)	
56

3	
TPE6–7
	Triamine building block connected with TPE enhanced the porosity and AIE inducing strong emission	TNT > NP > DB > DT > NB	
TPE6
	
TPE6
	
TPE6
	
60

TNT-8.86 × 102	1340	536 (λex = 400 nm)

TPE7
	
TPE7
	
TPE7

TNT-1.245 × 103	570	611 (λex = 400 nm) in THF
4	
TPE8–9
	Strut length greatly influencing porosity and AIE	
TPE8–I2	
TPE8
	
TPE8
	
TPE8
	
57


TPE9–I2, PA	I2-1.53 × 105 LM−1	564.8	530 (λex = 460 nm)

	
TPE9
	
TPE9
	
TPE9


	I2-9.07 × 104 LM−1	44.1	512 (λex = 350 nm) in THF
5	
TPE13
	Cationic framework enhances adsorption capacities and conjugation. The surface area is tuned by varying the linker. The luminescence is enhanced with TPE linked with the cationic linker.	Cr2O72−	NA	
TPE13a
	
TPE13a
	
62

193 ± 3	595 (λex = 365 nm)

TPE13b
	

618 ± 9	


TPE13c
	

1045 ± 10	

6	
TPE16
	Porosity replicated by assembling on silica template to obtain uniform microporous spheres and TPE based AIE exhibiting fluorescence.	BQ > DNB > TNB > DNT > 4-NT > 2-NT	
TPE16
	
TPE16
	
TPE16
	
75

4-NT-1.3 × 105	647	523 (λex = 410 nm);

MA-TPE16
	
MA-TPE16
	
MA-TPE16

4-NT-5.5 × 105	676	517 nm (λex = 410 nm).
7	
TPE17
	Phenylene twisted linkers used to design 3-D porous polymer and TPE undergoes AIE resulting in high luminescence.	TNP (82%) > DNP > DNT > NP > NT	TNP-6.4 × 104, DNP-2.3 × 103, DNT-7.9 × 102	1020	524 nm (λex = 331 nm); Φf = 40%	
66

8	
TPE22
	The carbazolyl and thienyl reactive sites with phenylene linkers enhances cross-linking densities and rigidity and the emission is greatly enhanced by TPE based AIE	TNT > DNT > TNB > 1,3-DNB > NT > ClB > toluene	1.52 × 105 between 30–105 μM, and 2.53 × 105 between 105–120 μM of TNB	2203	Thin-film 520 (λex = 340 nm); Φf = 73%	
67

9	
TPE24–25
	The carbazole linkers to the TPE induces ICT, thereby influencing the emission properties and the dimeric carbazole unit reduces the surface area	TNT	NA	
TPE24
	
TPE24
	
68

930	525 (λex = 355 nm); Φf = 4.0%

TPE25
	
TPE25

509	608 (λex = 355 nm); Φf = 1.9%

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of CMPs PP1–3.	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of CMPs PP4–11.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) The solid-state luminescence spectra of PP5 (black), PP6 (blue), and PP7 (red) (adapted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) TEM image of nano-colloids PP10 (inset: schematic illustration of network-inclusive PP10) (adapted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society). (C) Photoluminescence spectra of PP16 in solid-state and as a PEG dispersion (λexc = 360 nm). (D) The photographs of PP16 on ambient light and UV light in solid-state (left) and as PEG dispersed samples (right) (adapted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Pictorial representation of depicting the influence of the linkage geometry on the π-delocalization and the emission properties of CMPs PP4–9. By varying the position of the phenyl linker, the fluorescence of the CMPs is fine-tuned. The blue- and red-curved/straight lines represent the extended π-conjugation and cross-conjugation respectively.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthesis of CMPs PP12–16.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of CMPs PP17–18.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) The DFT predicted energy differences and the optimized structures of the enol and keto forms of PP17 in methanol for both ground (G.S.) and excited states (E.S.) (adapted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) PP24 in the form of powder (P1), soluble in organic solvents (P2) and an aqueous dispersion of nanoparticles (P3) (adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthesis of CMPs PP19–23.	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthesis of CMPs PP24–PP28.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic representation of the energy transfer process from PP4 to coumarin-6 upon the irradiation of light (adapted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (B) Fluorescence decay measurements of coumarin and coumarin@PP21 for lifetime studies (adapted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (C) Photographs of PP23 as: (a) nanoparticles and (b) with rhodamine 6G (adapted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). (D) Images of PP25 depicting (a) white light emission in solution, (b) nanoparticles (c) thin-film, (d) gel, and (e) emission spectra of its versatile application in hydrogen uptake and light-harvesting systems (adapted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Fluorescence quenching of PP8 with exposure to nitroaromatics of 47.6 μM concentration (adapted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (B) Emission spectra demonstrating the quenching of fluorescence of PP24 in THF (λex = 365 nm) with increasing concentrations of picric acid (PA) (inset: photographs of PP24 before and after the addition of PA under the illumination of UV light) (adapted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry). (C) Emission spectra (λem = 365 nm, λem = 468 nm), demonstrating fluorescence quenching of the PP24 polymer with increasing concentrations of PNA; (D) non-linear Stern–Volmer plots of I0/I against the concentration for PNA (adapted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 


1	
PP8–9
	The higher reactive site greatly influences the porosity and the emission is due to the extended π-conjugated skeleton of phenylene linkers.	PA > NP > ClNB > NT > DNT > ClNB > NBA	
PP8
	
PP8
	
PP8
	
79

PA-5.05 × 104	493	413 (λex = 345 nm)

PP9
	
PP9
	
PP9

PA-3.7 × 104	1576	385 (λex = 332 nm)
2	
PP11
	Methoxy groups to the phenyl and the alkyne linkers amplifies the pore volume; the emission is due to the chromophore aggregation	TNT	NA	767	515 (λex = 396 nm)	
84

3	
PP12
	The side chains intruding into the pore induces low surface area and the emission is influenced by the amidoximine and carboxylate ligands	Uranium sensing	NA	44.4	483 (λex = 320 nm)	
80

4	
PP24
	Tetraphenyl-5,5-dioctylcyclopentadiene connected with diethynyl benzene linkers extend π-conjugation resulting in fluorescence emission	PNA > DCPNA > DNA > ONA > MNA	PNA-1.7 × 104	39	468 (λex = 325 nm); Φf = 27%	
91

PA > DNT > DNB > NB	PA-7.6 × 105
5	
PAH4a–e
	By tuning the number of monomer units, the porosity and the emission is modulated	PA > pDNB > DNT > DNB	PA-2.4 × 105	
PAH4a
	
PAH4a
	
94

1302	533 (λex = 344 nm)

PAH4b
	
PAH4b

1208	543 (λex = 344 nm);

PAH4c
	
PAH4c

931	555 (λex = 344 nm);

PAH4d
	
PAH4d

716	655 (λex = 469 nm);

PAH4e
	
PAH4e


	815 (λex = 532 nm)
6	
PAH6
	Electron rich azo-linkages to pyrene enhances the porosity and the strong emission is due to aggregation of pyrene and azo-pyrene extended π-conjugation	PA ≫ p-NB ∼ DNT ∼ m-DNB ∼ NB ≫ NM	PA-1.37 × 103	700	485 (λex = 415 nm)	
95

7	
PAH7
	Porosity is depicted by the number of linkages formed and the emission is due to extended π-conjugation between rigid perylene unit through the phenylene linkers	
o-NP and PA	
o-NP-2.00 × 104	378	409 (λex = 365 nm) in THF	
96

PA-2.76 × 103
8	
PAH8–9
	The porosity varied with the position of cross-linking and the number of linkages formed and the emission is due to the extended π-conjugation through phenyl linkages	NB, PA, DNT, p-DNB, o-NP, p-NT, m-DNB, and PhOH sensing	
PAH7
	
PAH7
	
PAH7
	
97


o-NP-1.83 × 104	402.1	405 (λex = 365 nm) in DOX

p-DNB-8.45 × 104	
PAH8
	

PAH8	378	

PA-2.17 × 104	
	


o-NP-1.69 × 104	
	

9	
PAH11–12
	Truxene unit influencing emission by extended π-conjugation	2-NA > PA > NP > TNT > DNB > DNT > 3-NA > NB > A	
PAH10
	NA	
PAH10
	
98

2-NA-1.608 × 104	402 (λex = 320 nm); Φf = 56.1% in THF

	
PAH11


	428 (λex = 320 nm); Φf = 64.5% in THF
10	
PAH13
	Carbazole analogue with extended electronic conjugation induces fluorescence emission with higher porosity	Benzoquinone (BQ), NB and DNT	DNT-5.9 × 103	1280	468 (λex = 368 nm); Φf = 10%	
99

11	
PAH14
	Triphenylene building block depicts higher surface area and greater emission	NB	NA	1104	500 (λex = 300 nm)	
100


 	Fig. 15  The energy level diagram of the OLEDs device (adapted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Scheme 12  Synthesis of CMPs PAH1–6.	 

 	Fig. 16  Pictorial representation of the CMP structures that exhibited a counter-intuitive blue shift in the emission wavelength upon introducing p-spacers between the pyrene units. PAH1 with no spacers displayed emission at λem = 620 nm while PAH2 and PAH3 having phenylene and biphenylene exhibit blue-shifted emission at λem = 585 nm and 602 nm, respectively. This is due to the distortion introduced by the π-spacers within the CMP framework. The interaction of solvent molecules such as o-dichlorobenzene (ODCB), toluene, hexane, dimethylformamide (DMF), and ethanol with PAH2 depict a greater shift in the fluorescence intensity. ODCB solvent–CMP interactions showed fluorescence 4–5 folds enhancement, whereas the other organic solvents gave 1.5–2 folds fluorescence enhancement compared to PAH2.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Photographs of the polymers in the solid-state under illumination with UV light (λex = 365 nm); (a) PAH1, (b) PAH2, and (c) PAH3 (adapted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Photographs of PAH7 dispersion in different solvents under UV light irradiation at 365 nm (adapted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc.).	 

 	Scheme 13  Synthesis of CMPs PAH7–10.	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthesis of CMPs PAH11–14.	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthesis of CMPs PAH15–18.	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Luminescent spectral changes of PAH6 dispersed in THF with increasing concentrations of PA; (B) Stern–Volmer plot of PAH6 in the presence of various analytes (adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (C) Schematic representation of the formation of water-soluble fluorescent micelles of PAH11–12 with F-127 micelles (adapted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (D) Photographs of PAH13 in the presence and absence of toluene under a handheld UV lamp (adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (E) Fluorescence emissions changes of solid PAH14 (λex = 300 nm) upon exposure to nitrobenzene vapor (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthesis of CMPs BHA1–6.	 

 	Fig. 19  Pictorial representation of the pore collapse of in BHA1, the inset shows the H-aggregation stacking of the BODIPY-CMP framework (left). The right image shows the partial recovery of the collapse upon 2-ethyoxy ethanol impregnation. The solvent occupies the pores and develop the interactions with the framework and weakens the aggregation, thus leading to dual emission.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of CMPs BHA7–10.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) The solid-state fluorescence spectra of BHA8 (blue) and BHA9 (red) (inset shows the photographs of solid samples) (adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) UV-vis and (C) normalized emission (λex = 350 nm) of BHA10 (adapted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). (D) Electropolymerization of B87 using cyclic voltammetry (potential from −0.2 to 1.0 V) (adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of CMPs BHA11–13.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) The structure and the fluorescence microscopy image of BHA1 and its activity as a photocatalyst under visible light (adapted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). (B) The fluorescence spectra of THF/H2O (9:1) dispersed BHA7 in the presence of fluoride (inset: images of BHA7 before and after addition of F−) (adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co). (C) Device structure of the iOSCs based on BHA11 film electrode (left); J–V characteristics of the iOSCs under air mass (AM) 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) (right) (adapted with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co).	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation of the end-capping technique employed to CMPs with methyl acrylate (MA).	 


1	
BHA7
	Fluorescence is due to the internal charge transfer via conjugation from phenyl linker to vacant p orbital of boron	Fluoride	4.5 × 10−4	390	520 (λex = 350 nm)	
119

2	
BHA10
	Non-planarity, extended π-conjugated system with ICT induces the emission	Fluoride	NA	950	488 (λex = 375 nm); Φf = 18%	
124

3	
NHA1
	The expanded conjugation with twisted configuration induces 3-D porosity with strong fluorescence emission	NT, PA than NB, DNT, P-NP, DCIB	NP-4.85 × 104 LM−1	222	475 (λex = 370 nm) in THF	
128

4	
NHA3–4
	The triazine coplanar units linked to TDAB unit induced small pore and the nitrogen-rich system depicts fluorescence emission with solvatochromic effect	
o-NP	
NHA3
	
NHA3
	
NHA3
	
129


o-NP-2.11 × 104	1.643	346 (λex = 340 nm) in THF

NHA4
	
NHA4
	
NHA4


o-NP-8.63 × 103 LM−1	2.778	358 (λex = 350 nm) in THF
5	
NHA5
	Triazine linker connected to TPA core induces nitrogen-rich unit with greater surface area and extended π-conjugation	Iodine	
NHA5
	308	430 (λex = 350 nm) in THF	
130

I2-2.38 × 104
6	
NHA8–9
	High fluorescence emission exhibited due to the nitrogen-containing pyrazine units by extending electron-rich π-conjugation	
o-NP, PA and I2	
NHA8
	
NHA8
	
NHA8
	
131

I2-3.76 × 103	561.3	450 (λex = 365 nm) in THF

NHA9
	
NHA9
	
NHA9

I2-1.10 × 103	13.5	465 (λex = 365 nm) in THF

o-NP-1.86 × 103	
	

7	
NHA10
	Triazine linkers induce excellent porosity and the thiophene core with triazine rigid framework extends π-conjugation and enhances fluorescence emission	
o-NP, PA, DNT, NB and NT	
o-NP-6.20 × 103	315.5	525 (λex = 365 nm) in THF	
132

8	
NHA11–13
	Pyrene building blocks greatly enhanced the fluorescence emission and quantum yields. The fluorescence increased with the number of TPA linkers to reduce aggregation quenching	Iodine	
NHA11
	
NHA11
	
NHA11
	
133

I2-1.40 × 105	43	480 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 63.45% in ACN

NHA12
	
NHA12
	
NHA12

I2-2.02 × 104	187.5	400 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 51.57% in ACN

NHA13
	
NHA13
	
NHA13

I2-4.65 × 103	695.2	470 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 70.45%
9	
NHA15
	Electron rich TPA core with MA and boronic acid induced donor–acceptor type of interactions and hence exhibits stronger emission	PA	PA-4 × 104	686	
NHA15
	
134

466 (λex = 365 nm); Φf = 0.64%
10	
NHA18
	The triazole unit induces electron-rich CMP by oxidative coupling with fluorescent properties and greater porosities	
p-Nitroaniline, p-NP, p-AP	
p-NA-7.08 × 104	808.6	
NHA18
	
135

525 (λex = 417 nm)

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of CMPs NHA1–7.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Photographs of solvent dispersed NHA1 under UV light (365 nm). (a and b) Indicate the reaction time of 12 h and 24 h respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Fluorescence spectra of NHA11 (λex = 400 nm) dispersions in different solvents and its colors under UV lamp (365 nm) (adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). (C) Fluorescence spectra of NHA17a–e (adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (D) Pictorial representation of the systematic increase in the D–A strength in NHA17via feeding in the amount of theacceptor (triazine) component that resulted in red-shifting the emission maximum from λem = 587 to 619 nm of wavelength.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) The Stern–Volmer plots of THF dispersed NHA5 (λex = 370 nm), DOX dispersed NHA6 (λex = 350 nm) and DOX dispersed NHA7 (λex = 370 nm) for I2 (adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc). (B) Fluorescence spectral changes of DMF dispersed NHA11 (λex = 400 nm) (adapted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry). (C) Fluorescence of NHA17c upon exposure to different volatile organic compounds (adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). (D) Fluorescence emission spectra of TH (thiamine) with the treatment of light irradiation, NHA19 and NHA19 under light irradiation, respectively (adapted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2020 Elsevier Inc).	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of CMPs NHA8–10 and NHA17a–e.	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthesis of CMPs TDP, NHA11–13.	 

 	Scheme 22  Synthesis of CMPs NHA14–16.	 

 	Scheme 23  Synthesis of CMPs NHA18 and NHA19.	 
BHC	Buchwald–Hartwig coupling
EPM	Electropolymerization method
FCP	Friedel–Crafts polymerization
HC	Heck coupling
OCP	Oxidative coupling polymerization
OFET	Organic field effect transistor
OLED	Organic light emitting diode
PVTFB	Potassium(ethenyl)trifluoroborate
ScC	Scholl coupling
SHC	Suzuki–Hagihara coupling
S-Hec	Suzuki–Heck coupling
SMC	Suzuki–Miyuara coupling
UC	Ullmann coupling
YC	Yamamoto coupling

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
