Strain-induced ferroelectricity and lattice coupling in BaSnO 3 and SrSnO 3  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CP03952B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CP03952B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 26047-26055Strain-induced ferroelectricity and lattice coupling in BaSnO3 and SrSnO3

        
          
            Yajun 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Wang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            M. P. K. 
            Sahoo
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Takahiro 
            Shimada
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Takayuki 
            Kitamura
          
        
      d
aDepartment of Engineering Mechanics, School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310007, China. E-mail: jw@zju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Soft Machines and Smart Devices of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou 310007, China
cDepartment of Physics, RGUKT IIIT, Nuzvid Campus, Andhra Pradesh, India
dDepartment of Mechanical Engineering and Science, Kyoto University, Nishikyo-ku, Kyoto 615-8540, Japan
Received 
      13th June 2017
    , Accepted 7th September 2017First published on 7th September 2017AbstractPerovskite stannates such as BaSnO3 and SrSnO3 exhibit promising photovoltaic properties, and hold promise for application in solar cell devices. However, the lack of ferroelectricity and the wide band gap in these materials limit their potential for photovoltaic applications. Here, by first-principles calculations, we demonstrate the realization of a primary ferroelectric polarization in non-ferroelectric BaSnO3 and SrSnO3 through strain engineering. In addition to the appearance of polarization, the band gaps of the materials are greatly narrowed when the paraelectric to ferroelectric phase transition takes place under compressive strain. Furthermore, an intriguing Q2 mode triggered by lattice coupling with the polar mode is found in the stannates subjected to a sufficient tensile strain and this mode has a significant effect on the band gap, which suggests another pathway to narrow the band gap through the electric field control of the Q2 mode. The fruitful electronic, structural, and energetic properties are discussed in detail to achieve a fundamental understanding of the strain-induced ferroelectricity, tunable band gap, and lattice couplings between the Q2 mode and different polar/rotational distortions in the perovskite stannates.
I. Introduction
Photovoltaic materials that convert abundant and accessible solar energy to renewable energy have been attracting considerable interest in both industry and academia. Increasing the energy conversion efficiency of current photovoltaic technology based on silicon and related semiconductor materials is hindered by the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit in cells with a single p–n junction.1 One of the reasons for the SQ limit is that the photon excited carriers are separated by the internal electric field only near the p–n junction interface. Moreover, the particular p–n junction structure complicates the device fabrication as a result of complex lattice mismatch, heavy doping, and band alignment at the interface. Therefore, developing suitable photovoltaic materials with extraordinarily high energy conversion efficiency and an accessible fabrication method has attracted great interest and been subjected to intensive research explorations.
Currently, perovskite as a very inexpensive material is being used to replace the expensive crystalline silicon. In particular, the stannates-based ceramics show great potential in optoelectronic devices.2–4 Among them, the alkaline-earth stannates of BaSnO3 (BSO) and SrSnO3 (SSO) are important n-type semiconducting perovskite oxides with an optical band gap between 3 and 4 eV.5 BSO exhibits a cubic perovskite structure and can be stable at temperatures up to 1546 °C,6 and has been successfully integrated into dye-sensitized solar cells and demonstrated excellent properties.7,8 In a recent report, mesoporous BSO-based perovskite solar cells showed higher electron mobility and better performance than widely investigated TiO2-based perovskites.9 Moreover, it has been reported that the power conversion efficiency of BSO-based nanocuboid/nanoparticle structures reaches 4.28%.10 All these features make BSO an important candidate for solar cell applications. The SSO compound has an orthorhombic structure in space group Pbnm, undergoes Pbnm–Incn–I4/mcm–Pmm phase transitions as temperature increases,11 and also exhibits very high mobility and carrier concentration.12
Nevertheless, the efficiency of a photovoltaic material is quite complex and not determined entirely by the band gap and high mobility. There are three important factors that govern the efficiency of photovoltaic devices, namely, the light absorption, subsequent charge separation, and transport of charge carriers.13 The spontaneous electric polarization in perovskite oxides has recently been demonstrated to play an important role in the charge separation of solar cells.14–16 In contrast to conventional p–n junction solar cells, where the internal electric field is only present in a thin interfacial depletion layer, the polarization-related field extends over the whole volume.17–19 As a result, the desirable separation of photo-excited carriers could be realized in a large region and the migration of light-generated electron–hole pairs could be improved, giving the opportunity to overcome the limitations of previous device layouts and enhance the efficiency. In general, the parent compounds of BSO and SSO do not exhibit ferroelectricity in the absence of an external field.
Strain has been an effective way to induce ferroelectricity in perovskites such as SrTiO3,20 PbTiO3,21 BiFeO3,21 and SrZrO3.22 However, the origin of ferroelectricity (proper or improper), the critical strain for polarization, and the amplitude of polarization in a thin film can be totally different for different materials as reported in ref. 20. Thus it is necessary to study the origin of ferroelectricity, the critical strain, and the polarization amplitude in the promising stannate epitaxial thin films. Furthermore, the band gap of perovskite stannates is very sensitive to strain or pressure, whereas the band gap of normal perovskites such as SrTiO3 and PbTiO3 is not strongly related to the stress. Despite plenty of work having been done on the strain-tuned electronic and structural properties of perovskite stannates,23–26 the possible ferroelectricity in BSO and SSO thin films has not yet been investigated in the literature. Moreover, a full strain phase diagram is limited for BSO, and different growth directions were not considered in Pbnm SSO in previous work.26 A complete strain-phase diagram will provide a vivid guide for experiments due to the recent great attention on the properties of stannates films.
In addition, toward practical application of photovoltaic materials, the ability to precisely control the band gap of these materials and get tunable values is essential. Recently, Varignon et al. demonstrated that distortion characterized by an alternating long and short B–O bond length in the ab plane can be induced by lattice mode couplings.20,27 Besides, they demonstrated that such distortion could be further controlled by the electric field due to the couplings with polarization. It should be noted that this distortion just resembles the Jahn–Teller (JT) distortion caused by electronic instability and do not come from the traditional JT effect. We follow the notation of ref. 28, and call it the Q2 mode in the following. From ref. 20, the Q2 mode controlled band gap is material dependent, and whether it could play an important role in tuning the band gap in stannates is unknown. Previous works show that the band gap of perovskite stannates is mainly sensitive to the volume strain, and is not sensitive to the ferroelectric and antiferrodistortive distortions.29 It become significantly interesting to check the possibility of the Q2 mode and its influence on the band gap. If the band gap could be further lowered by the Q2 mode, it will provide two ways (strain and electric field) to increase the efficiency of light absorption. However, very limited effort has been devoted to achieving such distortion in BSO and SSO compounds. In addition, the coupling between polarization, Q2 mode, rotation, and anti-polar modes has not been systemically studied, and a detailed coupling between different modes from the frozen phonon method needs to be addressed. Thus, systematic investigation of the possibility of ferroelectric polarization and its coupling with the Q2 mode must be addressed in order to maximize the photovoltaic functionality of these materials.
In this work, we have systematically studied the ferroelectric property and Q2 mode in BSO and SSO compounds subjected to epitaxial strain through first-principles calculations. It is predicted that the strain could not only introduce ferroelectricity but also facilitate the Q2 mode in the stannates. An intriguing P4mm ferroelectric phase is found for the two materials under sufficient compressive strain, and a novel Pb21m ferroelectric phase is obtained under sufficient tensile strain. Interestingly, Ima2 ferroelectric phases with a lowest band gap of about 1.96 eV are predicted for BaSnO3 under 7% strain. Furthermore, we demonstrate three coupling forms, the coupling between polar and rotation modes, the coupling between anti-polar and rotation modes, and the coupling between polar and anti-polar modes, which give rise to the Q2 mode. The coupling between the polarization and Q2 mode provides an efficient means to tune the electronic properties, for instance the band gap, of stannates in solar cell applications by an external stimulus such as an electric field.
II. Methods
We perform first-principles calculations on the basis of the projector-augmented wave (PAW) potentials30 which are implemented in the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).31 Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof exchange–correlation functional revised for solids (PBEsol)32 is used for the structural relaxation and the more accurate HSE06 functional33 with an exchange screening parameter of 0.2 Å−1 is employed to determine the electronic structure. The Brillouin zone is sampled using 6 × 6 × 4 Monkhorst–Pack k-point mesh34 for a  supercell and a plane-wave cutoff energy of 500 eV is employed. The atomic configuration is considered to be converged when the Hellmann–Feynman forces on the atoms are less than 0.01 eV Å−1. To simulate the effects of epitaxial strain, in-plane lattice parameters are fixed for the supercell with a given value, whereas the out-of-plane lattice parameter and all atomic coordinates are free to relax. The spontaneous polarization P is calculated by the Berry-phase approach.35 The ISOTROPY programs were utilized to identify the group–subgroup relationship and quantify the structural distortion.36
III. Results and discussion
A. Strain-induced ferroelectricity in stannates
Prior to the study of the strained structure, the structural properties of strain-free BSO and SSO are first investigated to verify the reliability of the present calculation methods. To determine the most stable phase of these two materials, we take the high-symmetry cubic phase as the reference state and perform full structural optimization of various distorted structures with individual and/or coupled modes to find the state with the minimum energy. These modes include (i) in-phase rotation mode ϕ+z along the long [001] axis (irreps M+2), (ii) out-of-phase rotation mode ϕ−z along the [001] axis (irreps R−5), (iii) out-of-phase rotation mode ϕ−xy around the [110] axis (irreps R−5), (iv) in-plane polarization mode Pxy along the [110] direction (irreps Γ−5), (v) out-of-plane polarization mode Pz along the [001] direction (irreps Γ−3), (vi) anti-polar mode A (irreps M−5) and (vii) the Q2 mode (irreps M+3). Note that the Q2 mode denotes oxygen rotations around an axis going through the A-site cation, in which two Sn–O bond lengths contract and two elongate.37 Comparing the energies of all the cases considered, it is found that the energy of the I4/mcm phase is a little bit lower than that of the experimentally observed Pmm phase for BSO, which is consistent with the previous work;38 this may be due to the fact that the PBEsol functional slightly overestimates the lattice constant and AFD distortion. However, the energy difference is less than 0.1 meV per unit, which can be negligible. The lattice constant of cubic BSO is a = 4.139 Å, which is compatible with the experimental value (4.116 Å).39 For SSO, the ground state (GS) exhibits an orthorhombic Pbnm type perovskite structure with a−a−c+ tilting in Glazer notation.40 The lattice constants of the optimized structure are a = 5.72 Å, b = 5.75 Å and c = 8.10 Å, which are in good agreement with the experimental results.11 We further check the phonon dispersion curve of BSO and SSO, and no imaginary (or soft mode) frequency is found at the zone center, which means that the strain-free state does not show any ferroelectric instability.
Now we focus on the impact of strain on the ferroelectric and structural properties of BSO and SSO. In order to identify the GS structure under different in-plane strains, we perform the structural relaxation of various distorted structures arising from the condensation of individual and/or coupled unstable modes. Fig. 1(a) and (b) display the total energies of the various phases as a function of strain. For BSO, six typical phases are predicted under in-plane epitaxial strains, which are the high-symmetry P4/mmm, I4/mcm, P4mm, Imma, Ima2 and Pb21m phases. The corresponding unstable modes in these phases are shown in Fig. 2(a). It is found that there is a strong coupling between the strain and AFD modes, which is consistent with the previous results.41,42 Compressive strain leads to the emergence of out-of-phase oxygen octahedral rotation along the [001] axis, and this mode gradually increases with strain, while tensile strain results in the appearance of tilting around the [110] axis and this mode also increases as strain increases. As a result, the system undergoes P4/mmm to I4/mcm and P4/mmm to Imma phase transitions under moderate compressive and tensile strains, respectively. However, these two new phases are still paraelectric as shown in Fig. 2(a), in which the polar mode is zero. As the compressive strain further increases, it is intriguing that the ferroelectric tetragonal P4mm phase becomes the GS, and out-of-plane polarization is induced. On the other hand, when tensile strain is above 6%, the crystal structure changes to the polar Ima2 phase which exhibits an electrical polarization along the in-plane [110] axis. Further increase in the tensile strain results in a novel Pb21m phase. The particular Pb21m phase contains polar, anti-polar and a0a0a+ AFD modes simultaneously. Moreover, the notable Q2 mode is also predicted in the same range of strain as shown in Fig. 2(a) and all these four modes increase as tensile strain increases.
 Fig. 1  Total energy of various possible ground states and polarization under strain for (a) BaSnO3 and (b) SrSnO3. 
 Fig. 2  The amplitudes of possible distorted modes as functions of epitaxial strain for (a) BaSnO3 and (b) SrSnO3. 
For SSO, the different phases under various strains are shown in Fig. 1(b). Here, both c-ePbnm, ab-ePbnm phases defined in ref. 43 are considered, the ab-ePbnm phase has a different growth direction compared to the c-ePbnm phase and the symmetry is lowered to the P21/m space group. It is found that both compressive and tensile epitaxial strains drive a series of phase transitions in the system. From −3% to 7% strain, the Pbnm phase with a−a−a+ tilting is still the GS. The ab-ePbnm phase occupies lower energy than the c-ePbnm phase between −3% and 0% strain, while the transition from the ab-ePbnm to c-ePbnm phase occurs under tensile strain. However, these two phases are still paraelectric states without any polarization. The system changes to the I4/mcm phase when the compressive strain is above 3%. Importantly, SSO exhibits the same ferroelectric phases as BSO under sufficient compressive and tensile strain as shown by the amplitude of different modes in Fig. 2(a) and (b), and the atomic structures in Fig. 3(b and f) and 4(b and f), even though the initial phases of these two materials are completely different. Fig. 1 shows the polarization of BSO and SSO GS with different strains as shown in the phase diagram. The amplitude of polarization increases as strain (both compressive and tensile) increases and reaches a value of more than 100 μC cm−2 under compressive strain, which is much larger than that of the BSO/SSO superlattice.44 The above results indicate that sufficient strain can induce ferroelectricity in perovskite stannates with a considerable magnitude of polarization. It is expected that this is a universal property for all perovskite stannates. This ferroelectric characteristic has never been reported before in perovskite stannate systems to the best of our knowledge. Thus, the present work implies an effective strategy to realize ferroelectricity in perovskite stannates, which is of critical importance for increasing the photovoltaic efficiency of these materials. We should bear in mind that even though the present work and previous excellent theoretical works20–22,45 focusing on highly strained systems have predicted interesting phenomena, frangibility and defect problems are inevitable in experiments with the present epitaxial grown technology. Thanks to the dramatic advances in the synthesis of coherent epitaxial films, the compressive strain of 7%46 and the tensile strain of 4%47 have recently been imposed on perovskite thin films. For the specific perovskite stannates, high quality and highly epitaxial BSO and La doped BSO films grown on SrTiO3(001) [lattice mismatch of +5.28%] and SmScO3(110) substrates [+3.08% lattice mismatch] have been prepared by Wadekar et al.24 We hope that as the development of the epitaxial growth technology progresses, highly strained and low defect concentration thin films could be synthesized in the future.
 Fig. 3  The optimized structures of BaSnO3: (a) top view and (b) side view under 8% compressive strain, (c) top view and (d) side view under zero strain, (e) top view and (f) side view under 8% tensile strain. 
 Fig. 4  The optimized structures of SrSnO3: (a) top view and (b) side view under 9% compressive strain, (c) top view and (d) side view under zero strain, (e) top view and (f) side view under 8% tensile strain. 
B. Origin of ferroelectricity
To achieve a full understanding on the strain-induced ferroelectricity, it is of significant importance to investigate the microscopic origin of the polarization. According to previous studies, ferroelectricity can be induced by not only the polarization–strain coupling48,49 but also the trilinear coupling between the polarization, oxygen octahedral rotation, and tilting.50–52 Understanding why the strained stannates have notable polarization will provide guidelines to experimentalists in preparing ferroelectric stannates and shed light on how an external electric field will control the polarization in practical devices. In the following, we will focus on the ferroelectric P4mm, Ima2, and Pb21m phase in the two materials.
Based on Fig. 2(a) and (b), only out-of-plane polar mode Γ−3 exists in the P4mm phase under sufficient compressive strain; all the other modes vanish. Fig. 3(a and b) and 4(a and b) show the top and side view atomic structure of P4mm BSO and SSO, respectively. It is obvious that atoms undergo a notable displacement along the [001] direction with respect to the high-symmetry locations. As a result of the different displacement amplitude, there is a local dipole moment in both the Ba (Sr)–O and Sn–O plane which gives rise to a spontaneous polarization. Thus, the zone-center polar lattice distortion completely accounts for the symmetry lost and is responsible for the paraelectric–ferroelectric transition. For the ferroelectric Ima2 phase, both tilting and the in-plane polar mode exist as can be found from Fig. 2(a). The ferroelectric Pb21m phase is more complex as described in Fig. 3(e and f) and 4(e and f), in which the in-plane polar mode denoted by anion–cation relative displacements, anti-polar A-site distortion, a0a0c+ AFD motion and the Q2 mode coexist. To explore whether the ferroelectricity is induced by polar lattice distortion, known as “proper”, or trilinear coupling, known as “hybrid improper”, the energy potentials are plotted in Fig. 5 with respect to the amplitude of different modes with the corresponding paraelectric phase as a reference. For the Ima2 phase of BSO, as shown in Fig. 5(a), both the polar mode and tilting show double-well character indicating proper ferroelectricity. In terms of the Pb21m phase, the potential-energy of four modes for BSO and SSO is rather different. Paraelectric BSO only shows a double-well potential-energy for Γ−5 and exhibits an in-plane polar instability, whereas the other individual motion is stable. Different from that of BSO, the total energy of SSO displays a double-well potential-energy for Γ−5, M+2 and M−5, while the Q2 mode (M+3) retains single-well character. Both materials display a characteristic double-well potential-energy for the Γ−5 mode, indicating that the in-plane polar mode is the primary order parameter for the Pb21m phase of ferroelectric stannates. Thus, it is demonstrated that P4mm, Ima2, and Pb21m ferroelectric phases show a “proper” nature, in which the strain-induced ferroelectricity stems from the lattice displacement.
 Fig. 5  The variation of total energy of P4/mmm with (a) BaSnO3 (under 7% tensile strain), and (b) BaSnO3 (under 8% tensile strain) and (c) SrSnO3 (under 8% tensile strain) as a function of the mode distortion ratio. 
C. Engineering band gap by strain
Perovskite stannates show good photovoltaic properties, but their energy conversion efficiency may be limited by their large band gaps. For the improvement of solar cell efficiencies, the ability to narrow the band gap is essential for practical applications. It is well known that strain is an effective method to modulate the electronic structures and boost device performance. Detailed and systematic analysis of strain-controlled band gaps is of great importance. Fig. 6(a) illustrates the variations of band gap for BSO and SSO as a function of biaxial strain. It is interesting that the band gap of two materials shows great strain dependence and displays a large range of values. Several intriguing and novel characters are found: (i) two compounds show similar characters under biaxial strain and a wide range of band gaps between 1.96 and 3.76 (2.67 to 4.62) eV could be realized; (ii) for the paraelectric phase, the band gap gradually increases under compressive strain, and it decreases under tensile strain. The trend of the variation for the band gap in the present work is the same as previous work under volume strain, in which the small difference comes from different phases used. We use the GS phase, while ref. 21 keeps the Pbnm symmetry. (iii) There are sudden jumps of band gap at the P4mm and Pb21m phase boundary: a large decrease happens under a critical compressive strain and a notable increase occurs under a critical tensile strain; (iv) the band gap of the ferroelectric phase with strain could even be lower than the paraelectric phase without strain, in which the Ima2 phase contains the lowest gap of about 1.96 eV. Therefore, the strain can not only induce ferroelectricity but also significantly tune the band gap of the semiconducting stannates, which may maximize the absorption over wide spectrum ranges and thus enhance their performance as photovoltaic materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) Band gaps of BaSnO3 and SrSnO3 and total density of states for (b) BaSnO3 and (c) SrSnO3 under different strains. The Fermi lever of the strain-free state is set as a reference. 
To explore the microscopic mechanism of the strain-controlled band gap, the total density of states (TDOS) of BSO and SSO are presented in Fig. 6(b) and (c). It is observed that the position of the valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) is significantly sensitive to strain. Detailed analysis of the partial density of states (PDOS) shows that the top of the valence band is primarily attributed to hybridized orbitals of Ba (p, d), Sn (p, d) and O (p) electrons, giving rise to covalent bonding states in the SnO3 octahedron. The contributions of the CBM are mainly composed of s and p states of Sn atoms. These features have been clearly shown in our recent work on BaSnO3/SrSnO3 superlattices.29 For the paraelectric phase, tensile strain leads to a nearly linear downward shift of the energy of the CBM for both compounds. Consequently, the band gap decreases largely. Turning to the question of compressive strain, a linear shift of the energy of the CBM to a higher level is observed. The position of the VBM increases slightly, so the band gap is increased. For the ferroelectric phase under 8% tensile strain, the VBM decreases slightly, while the CBM shifts upwards significantly compared with 7% tensile strain, thus the band gap increases. Under 7% compressive strain for BSO (9% for SSO), even though the VBM is downwards shifted, the CBM decreases with a much larger value compared with 6% (8% for SSO) compressive strain. As a result, the band gap jumps to a smaller value.
D. Jahn–Teller distortion in strained stannates
In addition to the novel ferroelectricity, another important feature of the strained Pb21m phase is the unusual Q2 mode, which has never been reported in perovskite stannates. The Oh-type crystal field in the perovskite structure splits the d electron levels of the Sn atom into two-fold eg(dx2−z2, d3y2−r2) and three-fold t2g (dxy, dyz, dzx) states. These states distribute toward four neighboring A-site atoms and six neighboring O atoms, respectively. To give a further insight into the effect of the Q2 mode on the electronic structure of the Sn d states, Fig. 7(c) and (d) plot the PDOS of the d levels of two neighboring Sn atoms in the same plane for BSO and SSO under 8% tensile strain. TDOS is also shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b) for comparison. Comparing the TDOS and PDOS as shown in Fig. 7, it is clear that the states ranging from −22 to −20 eV are mainly composed of the Sn d states and the degeneracy of the t2g states between the dyz and dzx orbitals of two neighbor Sn atoms is lifted.
 Fig. 7  Total density of states for (a) BaSnO3 and (b) SrSnO3 under 8% tensile strain, the corresponding partial density of states of d levels on two in-plane neighboring Sn atoms are shown in (c) and (d). 
Since the Q2 mode provides the freedom to manipulate electronic degrees of freedom, to fully understand the microscopic mechanism will be of great importance for the practical manipulation of the electronic properties by an external stimulus. As shown in Fig. 5(b) and (c), the Q2 mode in the two materials cannot exist independently. Therefore, the Q2 mode must arise from coupling with other modes. In order to explore the origin of the Q2 mode, we artificially froze the hybrid order parameter (Pxyϕ+z, A+z and PxyA) corresponding to the GS, and analyzed the energy evolution of BSO and SSO under 8% tensile strain as a function of the Q2 mode ratio as plotted in Fig. 8. It is interesting to find that two different materials show similar potential-energy curves; as the Q2 mode increases, the minimum energy shifts to a nonzero value with the consideration of PxyA, Pxyϕ+z or Aϕ+z which confirms the hybrid improper character of the Q2 mode. This means that the Q2 mode is not induced by electronic instability, but produced as a by-product of different types of couplings, i.e. the coupling between Q2, Pxy and ϕ+z; the coupling between Q2, A and ϕ+z; and the coupling between Q2, Pxy and A. To further give insight into the competition and coupling between different coupling forms, we also plot the atomic structures of three couplings in the insets of Fig. 8. Firstly, from the energy scale and lowest energy Q2 mode ratio, it is notable that PxyAQ2 coupling makes the main contribution to the Q2 mode, and the other two couplings slightly contribute to the Q2 mode. Secondly, from the atomic structure, it can be seen that PxyAQ2 and ϕ+zAQ2 couplings induce a positive Q2 mode, while Pxyϕ+zQ2 induces a Q2 mode along the opposite direction; this is consistent with the potential energy curves. Thus, we can draw the conclusion that the Q2 mode in the GS of Pb21m is determined by the PxyAQ2 and ϕ+zAQ2 couplings, and there is competition between Pxyϕ+zQ2 and the other two couplings.
 Fig. 8  The energy surface of the Q2 mode as a function of mode distortion ratio when (a) PA, (b) Pϕ+z and (c) Aϕz coexist for BaSnO3. The corresponding energy surfaces of SrSnO3 are plotted in (d), (e) and (f), respectively. 
For practical application, the ability to precisely control the electronic structure of the materials and get tunable properties is beneficial. It is well known that the Q2 mode has a strong relationship with the electronic properties. So it is possible to manipulate the electronic structure of stannates through an external stimulus such as an electric field. Considering that the polar mode could be tuned by an electric field, changing the polar mode will affect the amplitude of the Q2 mode because of the PxyAQ2 coupling. To check the effect of Q2 mode on the band gap which is strongly related to the absorption of the solar spectrum, we plot in Fig. 9(a) the TDOS of BSO under 9% tensile strain as a function of Q2 mode compared with the GS. It is clear that the Q2 mode has a significant effect on the band gap, and decreasing the distortion amplitude will greatly decrease the band gap. It should be noted that previous work showed that the rotation mode and polar mode had a slight effect on the band gap of stannates,29 however, the Q2 mode that appeared in the present case has a significant effect on the band gap. To give a further insight into the Q2 mode controlled band gap, we compare the VBM and CBM of BSO with different ratios of Q2 mode as shown in Fig. 9(a). Even though the energy level of the VBM almost remains the same, it is found that the energy level of the CBM is very sensitive to the Q2 mode, and decreasing the Q2 mode will significantly decrease the energy of the CBM and decrease the band gap. Thus, the highlight of the present work is that not only can the strain control the band gap as shown in Fig. 6, but also the electric field controlled Q2 mode is another effective way to further control the band gap of strained thin films. Fig. 9(b) illustrates schematically the control of the Q2 mode by an electric field. Based on the effect of the Q2 mode on the band gap, the electric field becomes another pathway instead of strain to narrow the band gap of stannates through reducing the Q2 mode.
 Fig. 9  (a) Total density of states for P4/mmm BaSnO3 (9% tensile strain) with different ratios of Q2 mode compared with the ground state. The Fermi lever of the P4/mmm phase is set as a reference. (b) Couplings between Q2, Pxy, ϕ+z and A modes and the mechanism of the electric field controlled Q2 mode. 
IV. Conclusions
In summary, the electronic, ferroelectric, and structural properties of BaSnO3 and SrSnO3 are systematically investigated through first-principles calculations. It is found that both compressive and tensile strains could induce ferroelectricity in the perovskite stannates. Energy curves with different distortion modes indicate that the ferroelectricity is driven by zone-center polar lattice distortion, in which polarization is the primary order parameter. In addition to the appearance of polarization, the band gap of BaSnO3 and SrSnO3 is also narrowed in the ferroelectric phase with the presence of sufficient compressive and tensile strains. Furthermore, intriguing couplings between the polarization and Q2 mode are found in the stannates under sufficient tensile strain, which suggests another pathway to narrow the band gap through the electric field control of the Q2 mode. The ferroelectricity is desirable for the separation of photo-excited carriers in the photovoltaic materials, whereas the narrowed band gap is necessary for increasing the efficiency of light absorption. We hope our findings will stimulate more experimental investigations on ferroelectric stannates as photovoltaic materials for solar cell applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11472242, 11672264, 11621062) and the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. LZ17A020001). The calculations in this work were conducted at the National Supercomputing Center of Tianjin, China.
References
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mizoguchi, P. M. Woodward, S. H. Byeon and J. B. Parise, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3175–3184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Borse, U. A. Joshi, H. G. Kim, S. M. Ji, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 034103 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Wang and W. F. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8553–8557 CAS .
H. Mizoguchi, H. W. Eng and P. M. Woodward, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 1667–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ostrick, M. Fleischer, U. Lampe and H. Meixner, Sens. Actuators, B, 1997, 44, 601–606 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Kim, S. S. Shin, S. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. H. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. S. Jung and K. S. Hong, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 449–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, J. S. Kim, J. H. Suk, K. D. Lee, D. W. Kim, J. H. Park, I. S. Cho, K. S. Hong and J. Y. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1027–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, Z. Shao, J. Ye, X. Zhang, X. Pan and S. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 970–973 RSC .
N. Rajamanickam, P. Soundarrajan, V. K. Vendra, J. B. Jasinski, M. K. Sunkara and K. Ramachandran, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8468–8478 RSC .
M. Glerup, K. S. Knight and F. W. Poulsen, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 507–520 CrossRef CAS .
E. Baba, D. Kan, Y. Yamada, M. Haruta, H. Kurata, Y. Kanemitsu and Y. Shimakawa, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 455106 CrossRef .

          P. Würfel, Physics of Solar Cells, Wiley-VCH, Berlin,  2009 Search PubMed .
T. Choi, S. Lee, Y. J. Choi, V. Kiryukhin and S.-W. Cheong, Science, 2009, 324, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Yang, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 143–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Grinberg, D. V. West, M. Torres, G. Gou, D. M. Stein, L. Wu, G. Chen, E. M. Gallo, A. R. Akbashev, P. K. Davies, J. E. Spanier and A. M. Rappe, Nature, 2013, 503, 509–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. M. Fridkin, Photoferroelectrics, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. Inoue, K. Sato, K. Sato and H. Miyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 2809–2810 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Young and A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 116601 Search PubMed .
J. Varignon, N. C. Bristowe and P. Ghosez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 057602 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Ren, M. Stengel, X. H. Yan and L. Bellaiche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 057602 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tian, A. J. Mao, H. J. Zhao, Y. Q. Cui and X. Y. Kuang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7680 RSC .
J. D. Baniecki, T. Yamazaki, D. Ricinschi, Q. Van Overmeere, H. Aso, Y. Miyata, H. Yamada, N. Fujimura, R. Maran, T. Anazawa, N. Valanoor and Y. Imanaka, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Wadekar, J. Alaria, M. OSullivan, N. L. O. Flack, T. D. Manning, L. J. Phillips, K. Durose, O. Lozano, S. Lucas, J. B. Claridge and M. J. Rosseinsky, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 052104 CrossRef .
D. J. Singh, Q. Xu and K. P. Ong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 011910 CrossRef .
K. P. Ong, X. Fan, A. Subedi, M. B. Sullivan and D. J. Singh, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 062505 CrossRef .
J. Varignon, N. C. Bristowe, E. Bousquet and P. Ghosez, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Marianetti, D. Morgan and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 224304 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, M. P. K. Sahoo and J. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 7032–7039 RSC .
P. E. Blochl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 136406 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 219906 CrossRef .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1976, 13, 5188 CrossRef .
R. D. King-Smith and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 47, 1651 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Hatch and H. T. Stokes, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2003, 36, 951–952 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1998, 28, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Mulder, N. A. Benedek, J. M. Rondinelli and C. J. Fennie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4810–4820 CAS .
E. Bevillon, A. Chesnaud, Y. Wang, G. Dezanneau and G. Geneste, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 145217 CrossRef .
A. Glazer, Acta Crystallogr., 1972, 28, 3384–3392 CrossRef CAS .
P. Aguado-Puente, P. Garca-Fernandez and J. Junquera, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 217601 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. P. K. Sahoo and T. Shimada, 
            et al.
          , J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 385901 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-J. Eklund, C. J. Fennie and K. M. Rabe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 220101 CrossRef .
H. Sim, S. W. Cheong and B. G. Kim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 014101 CrossRef .
H. J. Zhao, Y. Yang, W. Ren, A.-J. Mao, X. M. Chen and L. Bellaiche, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 472201 CrossRef PubMed .
R. U. Chandrasena, W. Yang and Q. Lei, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 794–799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sando, Y. Yang, E. Bousquet, C. Carretero, V. Garcia, S. Fusil, D. Dolfi, A. Barthélémy, Ph. Ghosez, L. Bellaiche and M. Bibes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Haeni, 
            et al.
          , Nature, 2004, 430, 758–761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Liu, J. Wang, T. Shimada and T. Kitamura, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 224107 CrossRef .
E. Bousquet, M. Dawber, N. Stucki, C. Lichtensteiger, P. Hermet, S. Gariglio, J.-M. Triscone and Ph. Ghosez, Nature, 2008, 452, 732–736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Rondinelli and C. J. Fennie, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1961–1968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and M. P. K. Sahoo, 
            et al.
          , Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 24024–24032 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Total energy of various possible ground states and polarization under strain for (a) BaSnO3 and (b) SrSnO3.	 

 	Fig. 2  The amplitudes of possible distorted modes as functions of epitaxial strain for (a) BaSnO3 and (b) SrSnO3.	 

 	Fig. 3  The optimized structures of BaSnO3: (a) top view and (b) side view under 8% compressive strain, (c) top view and (d) side view under zero strain, (e) top view and (f) side view under 8% tensile strain.	 

 	Fig. 4  The optimized structures of SrSnO3: (a) top view and (b) side view under 9% compressive strain, (c) top view and (d) side view under zero strain, (e) top view and (f) side view under 8% tensile strain.	 

 	Fig. 5  The variation of total energy of P4/mmm with (a) BaSnO3 (under 7% tensile strain), and (b) BaSnO3 (under 8% tensile strain) and (c) SrSnO3 (under 8% tensile strain) as a function of the mode distortion ratio.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Band gaps of BaSnO3 and SrSnO3 and total density of states for (b) BaSnO3 and (c) SrSnO3 under different strains. The Fermi lever of the strain-free state is set as a reference.	 

 	Fig. 7  Total density of states for (a) BaSnO3 and (b) SrSnO3 under 8% tensile strain, the corresponding partial density of states of d levels on two in-plane neighboring Sn atoms are shown in (c) and (d).	 

 	Fig. 8  The energy surface of the Q2 mode as a function of mode distortion ratio when (a) PA, (b) Pϕ+z and (c) Aϕz coexist for BaSnO3. The corresponding energy surfaces of SrSnO3 are plotted in (d), (e) and (f), respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Total density of states for P4/mmm BaSnO3 (9% tensile strain) with different ratios of Q2 mode compared with the ground state. The Fermi lever of the P4/mmm phase is set as a reference. (b) Couplings between Q2, Pxy, ϕ+z and A modes and the mechanism of the electric field controlled Q2 mode.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2017
