Latest advances in supercapacitors: from new electrode materials to novel device designs  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00205J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00205J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816-6854Latest advances in supercapacitors: from new electrode materials to novel device designs

        
          
            Faxing 
            Wang†
abc, 
      
        
          
            Xiongwei 
            Wu†
ad, 
      
        
          
            Xinhai 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zaichun 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yi 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lijun 
            Fu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yusong 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qingming 
            Zhou
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Yuping 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
        
      a
aSchool of Energy Science and Engineering, and Institute for Advanced Materials, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, Jiangsu Province, China. E-mail: wuyp@fudan.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Catalysis and Innovative Materials, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
cDepartment of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
dCollege of Science, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan 410128, China
Received 
      28th May 2017
    First published on 4th September 2017AbstractNotably, many significant breakthroughs for a new generation of supercapacitors have been reported in recent years, related to theoretical understanding, material synthesis and device designs. Herein, we summarize the state-of-the-art progress toward mechanisms, new materials, and novel device designs for supercapacitors. Firstly, fundamental understanding of the mechanism is mainly focused on the relationship between the structural properties of electrode materials and their electrochemical performances based on some in situ characterization techniques and simulations. Secondly, some emerging electrode materials are discussed, including metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), MXenes, metal nitrides, black phosphorus, LaMnO3, and RbAg4I5/graphite. Thirdly, the device innovations for the next generation of supercapacitors are provided successively, mainly emphasizing flow supercapacitors, alternating current (AC) line-filtering supercapacitors, redox electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors, metal ion hybrid supercapacitors, micro-supercapacitors (fiber, plane and three-dimensional) and multifunctional supercapacitors including electrochromic supercapacitors, self-healing supercapacitors, piezoelectric supercapacitors, shape-memory supercapacitors, thermal self-protective supercapacitors, thermal self-charging supercapacitors, and photo self-charging supercapacitors. Finally, the future developments and key technical challenges are highlighted regarding further research in this thriving field.
Yuping Wu
Dr Yuping Wu is a distinguished professor at Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, China. Since 1994, he has published over 240 peer-reviewed papers, written 6 monographs whose sales are above 40000 copies over the world and 10 chapters, translated one book, and got 24 issued patents. His present H-index is 58. Within 10 years, 34 papers are listed as ESI highly cited papers, and he has been one of the highly cited researchers throughout the world since 2015. His research has led to the creation of four companies on anode materials, cathode materials, separators and power lithium ion batteries, respectively. His research is mainly focused on energy storage and conversion systems and solar hydrogen.
1. Introduction
The development of civilization is directly related to progress in science and technology. Today, someone who could imagine the reality without electrochemical energy storage systems would see a world without electronic portable devices such as cellular phones, laptops, or iPods, and also without electric vehicles, airplanes, and many other inventions which make our life easier and more comfortable. In this energy-dependent world, electrochemical devices for energy storage play a vital role in overcoming fossil fuel exhaustion.1 Among various electrochemical energy storage devices, supercapacitors have attracted significant interest in both academia and industry during the past several decades owing to their superior power density, fast charge/discharge rate and long cycle life.2–5 Supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries are similar systems with negative electrodes, positive electrodes and separators that are soaked with electrolytes.1 Normally, supercapacitors are considered as the intermediate between the battery and the conventional dielectric capacitor. Now, supercapacitors have been utilized in many applications such as consumer electronics, transportation, military and aerospace, grid balancing, and power backup by protecting, enhancing, and/or replacing batteries in these applications.6–10 For example, they can be used along with rechargeable batteries to provide the additional power required in many applications, such as electrical vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) for capturing and storing energy from regenerative braking and supplying vehicle acceleration power. This can protect rechargeable batteries from high-frequency rapid discharge/charge processes.
Historically, a capacitor was evolved from a Leyden jar consisting of a glass vessel whose interior and exterior were coated with metal foils. Those metal foils and the jar acted as the electrodes and dielectric, respectively. During the charging process, positive charges gradually accumulate on one plate while negative charges accumulate on the other plate. When these two electrodes are connected using a conductive wire with or without a load, a discharging process occurs.9b Materials that can be polarized when an electric field is applied are utilized as dielectric capacitors. The dielectric is generally composed of an electrical insulation material, such as a vacuum, a non-ionized gas, a solid such as a ceramic or polymer, or a liquid (aqueous or non-aqueous electrolyte). In 1886, the use of electrolytes as dielectrics was initially developed by Charles. Electrolytic dielectrics include metal oxides (like aluminum oxide and tantalum pentoxide), aqueous-based liquid electrolytes, and non-aqueous-based liquid electrolytes. Currently, there are mainly two types of electrolytic capacitors (aluminum electrolytic capacitors and tantalum electrolytic capacitors). Since 1930, ceramics have been widely used to construct capacitors for radio receivers. These early capacitors were mainly utilized as primary circuit elements in holding microfarad to picofarad charges of direct current or to filter the frequencies for alternating current circuits.9 In 1957, the earliest supercapacitors, electrochemical double layer capacitors (EDLCs), were invented as an electrolytic capacitor for low voltage operation. In 1962, a chemist at the Standard Oil Company of Ohio refined the carbon–carbon electrochemical capacitor. For EDLCs, the energy storage is based on the adsorption of electrolyte ions on the large specific surface area of electrically conductive porous electrodes. Typically, carbon materials and their derivatives are used in EDLCs, including activated carbon, porous carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene. To increase the capacitance and energy density of supercapacitors, some electrochemically active materials have been explored as electrode materials for pseudocapacitors. In the case of pseudocapacitance, energy storage comes from reversible surface faraday redox reactions occurring at the interface between electrolytes and electroactive materials. Electrode materials for pseudocapacitors consist of transition metal oxides (e.g. RuO2, MnO2, and Fe3O4), transition metal sulfides (e.g. MoS2), carbon materials possessing oxygen- and nitrogen-containing surface functional groups, and conducting polymers (e.g. polythiophene (PT), polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline (PANi)).11–18 It should be noted that the electrochemical behaviors of some metal oxides/hydroxides/sulfides (like Ni(OH)2) have been verified to be a semi-infinite diffusion-limited reaction process according to the linear relationship of the current peak (ip) vs. square root of the scan rate (v1/2). These electrode materials, involving typical diffusion-limited redox reactions, should be battery-type ones instead of supercapacitor-type ones. However, it is appropriate to combine these battery-type electrode materials such as Co3O4, NiO and CoS2 with capacitive materials for fabricating hybrid supercapacitors.15
If supercapacitors could meet all the requirements of next-generation electronic devices, everything would be simple and perfect. Unfortunately, the traditional supercapacitor has a rigid bulky or planar structure and there is little possibility of achieving future applications, which require being weaveable, or miniature, or smart, or large-scale.19–23 To transcend the limitations, various novel devices of supercapacitors have been designed to achieve special properties. Thinner, lighter, smart or even transparent supercapacitors are needed for increasingly multifunctional consumer electronics. With the emergence of various types of future electronics, supercapacitors with more functions and novel features are being sought to extend their applications. For EDLCs and pseudocapacitors, the most commonly used electrode materials for industrial applications are still activated carbons and metal oxides, respectively. In the case of activated carbons, they normally exhibit irregular morphologies, poorly graphitized frameworks, and wide pore size distributions.24 While the application of metal oxides in pseudocapacitors is seriously hindered by their relatively low electronic conductivities, which cannot keep pace with energy storage in higher rate environments.24c Different from many inorganic electrode materials, it is easy to control the porous architectures, pore volumes, and surface areas of MOFs and COFs, which makes them good candidates for supercapacitors.24,25 Many electrode materials with high electronic conductivity (such as MXene, metal nitrides, mixed conductors etc.) or with a special two-dimensional structure (like phosphorene) have also been investigated during the past several years.26 Another key component of supercapacitors is the electrolyte. Generally, there are two types of electrolytes: liquid electrolytes and solid/quasi-solid-state electrolytes. Currently, solid-state electrolytes (like Li2S–P2S5 systems) and quasi-solid-state electrolytes (such as polymer systems) suffer from low ionic conductivities, which limit the fast charge/discharge ability of supercapacitors.26c But solid-state electrolytes can avoid the leakage problem of the liquid electrolytes. Liquid electrolytes can be classified as aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes and ionic liquids (ILs). Three representative aqueous electrolytes are based on acid, alkaline, and neutral solutions, possessing high ionic conductivities but narrow operating voltage windows. Most commercial supercapacitors use organic electrolytes owing to their wider operation potential windows, but are sometimes associated with safety risks because of the flammability, volatility, and toxicity of the organic electrolytes and improper use such as overcharge or short-circuit. Ionic liquid electrolytes are hot topics in supercapacitors owing to their high electrochemical stability, negligible volatility, and non-flammability. However, their high viscosity and high cost limit their practical application.1 Thus, extensive efforts have been devoted to exploring new electrolytes to improve the overall performance of supercapacitors. For example, redox-active electrolyte enhanced devices have emerged through introducing the pseudocapacitive contribution in the electrolytes.26d Therefore, on one hand, much effort has been made toward discovering new electrode materials; while on the other hand, it is also critically important to produce matching devices to power future electronic devices.
Currently, many excellent reviews have overviewed traditional supercapacitors (like electrode materials and electrolytes)1–6,8,10–14,16–18 and some novel supercapacitors (like flexible and smart devices).7,19,20 However, there is still no systematic summary of recent progress in the development of next-generation supercapacitors, which should cover fundamental understanding, new emerging materials and device innovations. Accordingly, this review provides a comprehensive description of the latest scientific progress toward supercapacitors, which is divided into three main sections including mechanisms, new electrode materials, and novel device designs (Fig. 1). In particular, this work will first briefly present an overview of the development on mechanisms based on some in situ characterization techniques and ab initio simulation. This section is intended to examine recent progress in EDLC and pseudocapacitors, highlighting the fundamental understanding of the charge storage mechanisms, and transport pathways of electrons and ions. Then, we present a summary of the recent progress in the development of new electrode materials, such as MOFs, COFs, Mxene, metal nitrides, black phosphorus, LaMnO3, MxMnO2 and RbAg4I5/graphite. In this section, an emphasis is put on the synthetic strategies and the related electrochemical properties. The next section details the state-of-the-art research activities in the area of device innovations for the next generation of supercapacitors, including flow supercapacitors, alternating current (AC) line-filtering supercapacitors, redox electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors, metal ion hybrid supercapacitors, micro-supercapacitors (fiber, plane and 3D) and multifunctional supercapacitors including electrochromic supercapacitors, self-healing supercapacitors, piezoelectric supercapacitors, shape-memory supercapacitors, thermal self-protection supercapacitors, thermal self-charging supercapacitors, and photo self-charging supercapacitors. A particular focus is directed to their design principles and special functions. To facilitate further research and development, some future research trends and directions are finally discussed. This review is aimed at providing readers with a comprehensive insight into the fundamental understanding, new electrode materials and novel device designs of supercapacitors.
 Fig. 1  An overview of the latest advances on materials and devices of supercapacitors (SCs). The latest emerging electrode materials and device designs will be discussed. 
2. New findings on mechanisms
2.1 EDLCs
For the past several decades, researchers thought that the best strategy for increasing the capacitance of EDLCs was to increase the specific surface area (SSA) of carbon materials. The high surface-to-volume ratio arises from the porosity. Normally, the pore size in porous EDLCs should be approximately twice the ion size to allow the coverage of the pore walls. One may expect that the capacitance would decrease by decreasing the pore size as fewer ions can enter a pore. Solvated ions often were not believed to enter the pores if the size exceeded the pore dimensions. However, this ‘common sense’ reasoning was experimentally negated by the report of a huge increase in the specific capacitance with decreasing pore width for pores smaller than double the size of the bare ions.26,27 Actually, there is not a clear correlation between specific surface area and the specific capacitance. Increasing the SSA with a simultaneous increase in the average pore size does not result in an increase in the specific capacitance.28 Interestingly, using microporous carbons with pores smaller than 1 nm enabled the volumetric capacitance to increase from 55 to 80 F cm−3.26 Monte Carlo simulations suggested that the ‘anomalous’ increase of the capacitance with decreasing pore width resulted from exponential screening of the electrostatic interactions of ions inside a pore, as well as the image-charge attraction of ions to the pore surface.29 Recently, researchers came to realize that the pore size and the carbon nanostructure (rather than specific surface area) played a more crucial role in increasing the specific capacitance.30,31 With the help of various in situ spectroscopies and advanced simulation techniques, understanding the physical processes and underlying the charge storage mechanisms became hot spots for carbon-based supercapacitors.
The charge storage in supercapacitors was traditionally attributed to a simple mechanism of the applied potential driving the ions into the porous carbon network.9 For activated carbon used for supercapacitors in the electrolyte of tetraethylphosphonium tetrafluoroborate (PEt4–BF4) salt dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN), the in situ31P NMR spectra showed an increase in the in-pore cation population for the negative voltage range, because cations were absorbed into the micropores. This is consistent with the classical charge separation occurring upon polarization at the electrode/electrolyte interface. In other words, ions of opposite charge were adsorbed onto the surface to form an electric double layer. However, the charging mechanism was not a purely adsorptive process for the positive polarization. Its charge storage was normally driven by exchange of the cations for anions, whereby anions were absorbed into the micropores while cations were simultaneously ejected. In the negative voltage range, the in-pore cation population increases while there were no significant changes in the in-pore anion populations (Fig. 2a). Thus, charge storage in the negative voltage range was dominated by counter-ion adsorption, which meant cation adsorption dominates the negative polarization.32 Therefore, the charge storage mechanisms were different for positively and negatively polarized electrodes. Moreover, the adsorbed ions were only partially solvated. The slope of a linear fit of the experimental mass change versus charge presented an experimental molar mass of 369 g mol−1 per adsorbed species (Fig. 2b). When the adsorbed species are PEt4+ cations, the cation solvation number, based on the NMR results, was estimated to be 5.4, which is slightly lower than the solvation number of 7 predicted for chemically similar NEt4+ cations in bulk solution.32 This suggested that cations were partially desolvated when they entered the pores of the microporous carbon.
 Fig. 2  Some new findings on mechanisms for EDLCs based on in situ NMR, EQCM and IR. (a) In-pore ion populations for activated carbon based supercapacitors in 0.5 M PEt4–BF4/ACN at different states of charge in the range of −1.5 V to +1.5 V. (b) EQCM data for activated carbon based supercapacitors in a 0.75 M PEt4–BF4/ACN electrolyte. Calculated mass changes were based on a purely adsorptive mechanism (green triangles) and an ion exchange mechanism (orange squares) (modified from ref. 32, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). The normalized absorbance of the infrared bands of the cation and anion as a function of time during CV cycles from −1.5 to +1.5 V at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 for (c) CDC electrodes and (d) OLC electrodes (modified from ref. 40, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society). 
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations confirmed the phenomenon of ion confinement in carbon nanopores.33 That is to say, ions in electrolytes lose a part of their solvation shell to access these small nanopores. Such desolvation and the local charge stored on the electrode increase with the degree of confinement. The degree of confinement has a substantial influence upon the local charge stored on the electrode surface. The solvation numbers around ions can be quantified directly using an electrochemical quartz crystal micro-balance (EQCM). For carbide-derived carbon (CDC) using EMI-TFSI in acetonitrile as an electrolyte, the solvation numbers around the cation in 1 and 0.65 nm pores are estimated to be 3–4 and 1–2, respectively.34 Less solvated solvent molecules in a 0.65 nm pore than in a 1 nm-pore suggested that the ion desolvation occurred to fit in the smaller pores.
From MD simulation results, the capacitance versus pore size was found to exhibit two peaks located at 0.7 and 1.4 nm, respectively. Specifically, as the pore shrinks from 1.0 to 0.7 nm or expands from 1 to 1.4 nm, the capacitance of the micropore increases anomalously in a 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium (EMIM)-based ionic liquid electrolyte.35–37 Actually, large capacitance can be expected if the ion solvation is weak (as in the 0.7 nm pore) or if the electrification of a pore disrupts the inside strong ion solvation structure (as in the about 1.3 nm pore).37 Similarly, the classical DFT method showed that the capacitance displayed multiple peaks with a decaying envelope as the pore size increases from one to many times the ion diameter.38 The maximum capacitance was obtained when the pore size was comparable to ion diameters (0.7 nm). At this point, the pore size was perfectly adapted to the ion size and ion adsorption was achieved in the most efficient way. When the pore size was decreased below 0.68 nm, there was less and less space available for double layer charges since ions cannot get into the smallest pores.27 MD simulations also showed that charging subnanometer pores with ionic liquids was often accompanied by overfilling, which could accelerate charging.39 While the de-filling slows down charging significantly, and this would reduce the power density of EDLCs. One way to relieve it is to make pores ionophobic by eliminating overfilling/de-filling. Ionophobic pores can accelerate charging by an order of magnitude compared to conventional and ionophilic pores.
Apart from the pore sizes, carbon nanostructures also show great influence on the physical processes underlying the charge storage mechanisms. The ion dynamics of 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis-((trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)imide (EMIM-TFSI) in electrodes made of porous nanosized CDCs and nonporous onion-like carbons (OLCs) were investigated at a molecular level using an in situ infrared spectroelectrochemical technique.40 Electrolyte ions (both cations and anions) could enter the pores of CDCs, while only occupying the surface of OLCs without long-range ion transport through the bulk electrode. In Fig. 2c, it is shown that the absorbances of both the cation and anion decreased with the voltage increasing from 0 to +1.5 V, suggesting that ions enter the pores of the CDC particles. When the voltage reverts from +1.5 V to 0 V, the absorbance increased and reached a maximum as the voltage approaches 0 V, indicating that ions are expelled from the pores. Then with the voltage scanning from 0 V in the negative direction, the absorbance began to decrease again as ions re-enter the pores. When the voltage approached −1.5 V, the absorbance of both the cation and anion reached a new minimum as the pores again fill with ions. However, only a small change in absorbance was observed for the CDC electrodes (Fig. 2d), which was similar to the change in absorbance for a supercapacitor only with the current collectors (without any carbon). Sometimes, it is very hard to compare different studies due to large differences in the materials’ structure, binder content, crystallinity, and, more importantly, pore size distribution.
2.2 Pseudocapacitors
For many years, the term ‘pseudocapacitance’ was synonymous with surface redox reactions. However, more recently, the concept of ‘intercalation pseudocapacitance’ was proposed.41–44 Due to the pursuit of high-energy supercapacitors while maintaining high power and long cycling life, continuous reports on the combination between rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors are creating electrode materials with new reaction mechanisms for ultra-fast charge/discharge and high rate performance. Through physical control of electrode materials (including particle size, surface area, electronic conductivity, phase structure, and crystalline), scientists discovered the existence of pseudocapacitance contribution in some electrode materials for metal ion batteries, which is named as ‘intercalation pseudocapacitance’. Currently, the most widely investigated electrode materials for intercalation pseudocapacitance are mainly nanostructured TiO2 (B), Nb2O5 and MoO3 in organic electrolytes.41–44
The capacitive effect can be characterized by analyzing the cyclic voltammetric data at various sweep rates according to eqn (1): i = avb,(1)where i is the current (A) and v is the sweep rate (mV s−1) of a cyclic voltammetry experiment, and a and b are adjustable parameters. The b-values are determined from the slope of the plot of log(i) vs. log(v). As is well-known, a b-value of 0.5 generally indicates a diffusion controlled faradaic intercalation process, which is normally a battery behavior. In this case, the current is proportional to the square root of the sweep rate, v, according to eqn (2): i = nFAC*D1/2v1/2(αnF/RT)1/2π1/2χ(bt),(2)where C* is the surface concentration of the electrode material; α is the transfer coefficient; D is the chemical diffusion coefficient; n is the number of electrons involved in the electrode reaction; A is the surface area of the electrode material; F is the Faraday constant; R is the molar gas constant; T is the temperature; and the function (bt) represents the normalized current. In contrast, typical capacitive behavior is not diffusion-controlled and the capacitive current is proportional to the sweep rate, according to eqn (3): i = CdAv,(3)where Cd represents the capacitance and A is the surface area of the active materials. As reported, to better understand the capacitance contribution to the total charge storage, the total current resulting from capacitive effects (k1v) and diffusion controlled Faradic processes (k2v1/2) can be represented as: i = k1v + k2v1/2,(4) or i/v1/2 = k1v1/2 + k2.(5)After interpreting the results from CV curves with various scan rates, one can determine the k1 and k2 values, as well as the capacitive current contribution at a given potential, by plotting i/v1/2versus v1/2.45–49 In fact, the intercalation pseudocapacitive behavior displays kinetics that is similar to typical pseudocapacitive behavior. One of the more popular approaches to develop intercalation pseudocapacitive materials involves the synthesis of nanoscale materials. Taking mesoporous iso-oriented α-MoO3 as an example, the capacitive contribution occupied 70% of the total charge storage (Fig. 3a).43 The capacitive contribution for the mesoporous α-MoO3 crystalline films was significantly higher than that for the amorphous ones. The charge storage mechanism involved in mesoporous α-MoO3 is not controlled by semi-infinite diffusion but more close to a surface-controlled diffusion with the b-value varying from 0.8 to 1.0 in the potential range of 1.5–2.6 V (vs. Li+/Li) (Fig. 3b). At 2.4 V and 2.1 V (vs. Li+/Li), respectively, the b-values are smaller, which indicates that the current arises from capacitive effects mixed with contributions from the diffusion-controlled Li+ ion intercalation reaction. But the major part of the total stored charge is capacitive. Very recently, the introduction of oxygen vacancies into α-MoO3 led to a larger interlayer spacing that promotes faster charge storage kinetics with intercalation pseudocapacitive behavior.50 The intercalation pseudocapacitive charge storage for MoO3−x was two times larger than that for MoO3 (Fig. 3c and d). No phase transition occurred in MoO3−x because the expanded lattice galleries were apparently large enough that a phase transition was no longer energetically needed to accommodate Li+ ions in the structure.
 Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammetric (CV) behaviors of MoO3. (a) CV curves of mesoporous MoO3 films at a sweep rate of 0.1 mV s−1; (b) the calculated b-value at different potentials during a cathodic sweep (modified from ref. 43); CV curves of thin-film (c) MoO3−x and (d) MoO3 electrodes. The capacitive contribution to the total current is shown by the shaded region (modified from ref. 50) (Copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
There are two important considerations for intercalation pseudocapacitive materials: (1) the structure is not accompanied by a phase transformation upon intercalation and (2) the b-value in eqn (1) should be equal/or close to 1. Mesoporous and nanocrystal films of orthorhombic Nb2O5 (T-Nb2O5) offer two-dimensional transport pathways and little structural change on Li+ ion intercalation. Thus even a 40 mm thick T-Nb2O5 electrode still exhibited very fast charge/discharge characteristics up to 1000C.42 It also displayed sloping charge/discharge curves within a wide potential window of 1.2 to 3 V (vs. Li+/Li), which was different from conventional battery electrode materials. Intercalation pseudocapacitance was also found in H2Ti6O13.51 The XRD pattern of Li-intercalated H2Ti6O13 electrodes was almost the same as that of fresh H2Ti6O13 electrodes, demonstrating that the Li+ ion intercalation did not result in an obvious change in the crystalline parameters of H2Ti6O13.
V2O5 also presented a two-dimensional ion (Li+ and Na+) diffusion pathway with intercalation pseudocapacitance. Its open and layered structure enabled fast ion transport within the V2O5 bulk.52,53 The V2O5 anchored on CNTs displayed a total charge storage of 2780 C g−1 originating from a Faradaic process and 1855 C g−1 from a nonfaradaic process corresponding to charge storage due to surface reactions.52 The nanocomposites of V2O5/CNT provided facile Na+ ion insertion/extraction and fast electron transfer, enabling the fabrication of high-performance Na ion pseudocapacitors in an organic electrolyte.53 The capacitive processes account for 70% and 95% of the charge storage at 1 mV s−1 and 20 mV s−1, respectively. Besides, SnS2 nanosheets, TiO2/graphene and TiO2/MoO2/C were reported as Na+ ion intercalation pseudocapacitive materials, which also displayed both high rate capability and excellent cycling stability.54–56
3. New materials for supercapacitors
3.1 Metal–organic frameworks
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), also known as porous coordination polymers, are receiving increasing attention in the field of electrochemical energy storage due to their diverse structures, highly porous frameworks and tunable chemical compositions which can be designed at the molecular level.57 MOF-derived carbons with various architectures for supercapacitors were summarized in a recent review.23 Thus, in this section, only the latest progress on fabricating MOFs directly for supercapacitors is presented. Note that, MOF-derived carbon materials, metal oxides, metal sulfides and their composites are not included here because the inherent properties of these materials from sacrificial MOF templates do not change as the electrode for supercapacitors.58,59
MOFs, defined by Yaghi in 1995, are extremely light with very high specific surface areas (up to >6000 m2 g−1), large pore volumes and well defined pore sizes.60 The entire framework of MOFs is supported by coordination bonds and/or other weak cooperative interactions such as H-bonding, p–p stacking, and van der Waals interactions. MOFs can be obtained from relatively cheap precursors. Inorganic salts (nitrates, sulfates, and chlorides) are typically applied as the metal-ion precursor. The organic linkers are usually multidentate organic ligands such as carboxylates, azoles or nitriles.61 Solvothermal synthesis is the most frequent method, involving addition of all the reactants (metal salts, ligands and solvents) in sealed vessels and then heating at elevated temperatures under subcritical conditions.62 The microwave-assisted method and surfactant-assisted synthesis have also been developed for fabricating MOFs.63,64 Large-scale production of MOFs in tonnes was achieved by some companies, such as BASF, MOF Technologies and Strem Chemicals.65 MOFs provide opportunities to tailor single atomic active metal centers which can reduce the mass consumption and increase the electrode/electrolyte interface. The controllable pore size in the micropore range (0.6–2 nm) and the ability to incorporate pseudo-capacitive redox metal centers make MOFs potential candidates as electrode materials for supercapacitors.
In 2011, the use of MOFs as electrode materials for supercapacitors was firstly demonstrated employing some Co-based MOFs in a 1 M LiOH aqueous electrolyte and a 0.1 M TBAPF6 (tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate)/acetonitrile nonaqueous electrolyte.66,67 Co8-MOF-5 (Zn3.68Co0.32O(BDC)3(DEF)0.75) displayed a very low specific capacitance (below 5 F g−1) but both of them presented low loss in capacitance for 1000 cycles in a 0.1 M TBAPF6/acetonitrile electrolyte. However, in an aqueous electrolyte, the Co based MOF delivers relatively high specific capacitances (about 200 F g−1).66–68 Then, a specific capacitance of Ni-based MOFs up to 634 F g−1 was reported.69 A reversible redox peak was found in its CV curves in 6 M KOH, where redox active species should be coordinated to Ni. Then nanocrystals made from a series of 23 different MOFs were explored as electrode materials for supercapacitors.70 Zirconium-based MOFs achieved the highest gravimetric (726 F g−1) and aerial (5.09 mF cm−2) capacitances. In general, electrochemical behaviors in pristine MOFs are mainly dependent on the properties of particle size, active surface area, pore size distribution, crystallinity and availability of functional groups for efficient conductivity.
Ni-Based MOFs of similar topology, [Ni(L)(DABCO)0.5], were tested in a 2 M KOH aqueous electrolyte.71 In such MOFs, DABCO is 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]-octane and L is a functionalized ligand such as NDC (1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid), ADC (9,10-anthracenedicarboxylic acid), or TM (2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid). A Ni–DMOF–ADC based electrode presented higher specific capacitance and better rate performance than the other two. The Ni3(btc)2·12H2O MOF material, obtained by adding NiCl2·6H2O together with H3btc (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid) in a solvent of DMF, exhibited superior pseudocapacitive behavior in a KOH aqueous electrolyte with a high specific capacitance of 726 F g−1.72 The asymmetric supercapacitor achieved a high energy density of 16.5 W h kg−1 using this nickel-based MOF as a positive electrode and commercial activated carbon as a negative electrode in KOH electrolyte. Similarly, another Ni based MOF through mixing NiCl2·6H2O and PTA (p-benzenedicarboxylic acid) in DMF (N,N-dimethylformamide) showed a pseudocapacitive behaviour with a couple of redox peaks at 0.32 and 0.17 V vs. a saturated calomel electrode (SCE).73 The electrochemical reactions might be represented by eqn (6):74 [Ni3(OH)2(C8H4O4)2·(H2O)4]·2H2O + OH− − e− ↔ [Ni3O(OH)(C8H4O4)2·(H2O)4]·2H2O + H2O.(6)The (100) plane in such MOFs is the largest exposed facet. Along the [001] direction, the chains of Ni octahedra with 1D structure connected to each other can provide a conductive path for electrons, while the parallel layers with interspaces along the [010] direction can promote the storage and diffusion of electrolyte ions. To further improve the capacitance, Zn-doping was introduced into such MOFs.75 With increasing Zn content, the capacitance value initially increased, and then tended to decrease. A maximum specific capacitance of 1620 F g−1 was reached at a rate of 0.25 A g−1. The doped Zn2+ ions can enlarge the interlayer distance providing enough space for electrolyte ion diffusion and act as a pillar to prevent the collapse of the crystal ensuring good cycling behaviors.
The poor electron-conductive property of most MOFs was the biggest disadvantage for them as electrode materials for supercapacitors. Thus, composites combining MOFs and carbon-based species (CNT, RGO, and C3N4) were investigated recently.76–78 Carbon materials are expected to increase the electronic conductivity and thus enhance charge transfer characteristics. In addition, the conductive MOF, Ni3(2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene)2 (Ni3(HITP)2) with high electronic conductivity (>5000 S m−1), served as the free-standing electrode material in an EDLC without conductive additives or other binders.79 Ni3(HITP)2 consisted of stacked π-conjugated 2D layers with an surface area of 630 m2 g−1, which were penetrated by 1D cylindrical channels of ∼1.5 nm diameter (Fig. 4a). Ni3(HITP)2 powder could be pressed into self-supported pellets at high pressure with a density of 0.6 ± 0.2 g cm−3. In a tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate/acetonitrile (TEABF/ACN) electrolyte, galvanostatic charge and discharge of Ni3(HITP)2//Ni3(HITP)2 symmetrical supercapacitors displayed a gravimetric capacitance of 111 F g−1 at the low current density of 0.05 A g−1 with triangular traces (Fig. 4b). The obtained areal capacitance was 18 μF cm−2, higher than those observed for most carbon materials (Fig. 4c). The equivalent series resistance (ESR) of the Ni3(HITP)2//Ni3(HITP)2 symmetrical supercapacitor was as low as 0.47 ohm (0.61 ohm cm−2). It showed a loss of 10% in capacitance and no increase in the ESR after 10000 cycles. When assembling the Ni3(HITP)2 pellets, increasing the pressure can increase the density of the electrodes to 1.1 ± 0.2 g cm−3. These denser pellets gave rise to significantly improved volumetric capacitances of up to 118 F cm−3 with little negative effect on gravimetric capacitances and the ESR. The large open channels in Ni3(HITP)2 can enable swift electrolyte movement and reduce volume changes on repeated charge/discharge cycling. TEA+, TEA+·7ACN, BF4− and BF4−·9ACN exhibit ionic diameters of 0.68, 1.3, 0.46 and 1.16 nm, respectively, and can fit comfortably within the one-dimensional channels of Ni3(HITP)2 (Fig. 4d). Generally, MOFs exhibit both rigid and flexible structures which can be further tuned to optimize the conductivity.
 Fig. 4  The conductive MOFs as electrode materials for supercapacitors. (a) Molecular structure of Ni3(HITP)2. (b) Its galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at various current densities. (c) Comparison of areal capacitances among various EDLC materials. The areal capacitance for various materials is normalized relative to their BET surface areas. (d) Relative size of pores, electrolyte Et4NC and BF4− ions, and acetonitrile solvent molecules shown in a space-filling diagram of idealized Ni3(HITP)2. Green, lime, blue, grey, brown, and white spheres represent Ni, F, N, C, B, and H atoms, respectively (modified from ref. 79, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
3.2 Covalent organic frameworks
In 2005, Yaghi and co-workers designed porous organic frameworks connected via covalent bonds, which were the first successful examples of the so-called covalent organic frameworks (COFs).80 COFs represent a fascinating new type of covalent porous crystalline polymers enabling the elaborate integration of organic building blocks into an ordered structure with atomic precision.81 The formation of strong covalent bonds through various synthetic organic reactions between the building units enabled COFs with well-defined and predictable 2D or 3D crystalline structures.82 In COFs, the organic building units are held together by strong covalent bonds, such as B–O, C–N, B–N, and B–O–Si.83,84 Similar to MOFs, the COFs have high surface areas, controllable pore sizes and highly flexible molecular designs. The rapid development in this area has attracted increasing interest from scientific researchers in various fields ranging from organic synthesis to energy storage.85
It is believed that the formation reaction of the COF should be a reversible reaction since it is difficult to crystallize linked organic polymers into solids using irreversible reactions. In the case of preparation methods of COFs, solvothermal synthesis was one of the most common methods. Normally, monomers and mixed solvents are placed in a Pyrex tube and degassed. After that, the tube is sealed and heated to a designated temperature (ranging between 80 and 120 °C) for a certain reaction time (taking 2–9 days). Finally, the precipitate is collected, washed with suitable solvents, and dried under vacuum to yield the COF as a solid powder.80,81 To rapidly and efficiently synthesize COFs, microwave reactions have been applied under solvothermal conditions, which make large-scale synthesis of COFs possible.86 Besides the solvothermal method, the ionothermal method was also applied to produce crystalline porous COFs.87 A molten ZnCl2 salt at 400 °C acted as the solvent and catalyst for the reversible reaction. One of the biggest disadvantages in ionothermal synthesis is the poor crystallinity control because of the harsh reaction conditions. Different from the bulk synthesis, monolayer COFs can grow on the surface of some substrates (such as clean Ag, highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) and graphene).88–90
The poor hydrolytic and oxidative stability of boronate ester-linked frameworks in early COFs precluded their application in energy storage. Until 2013, when incorporating redox-active 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ) moieties into a 2D COF linked by β-ketoenamines (Fig. 5a) resulted in well-defined redox processes with a potential at −0.05 V (vs. AgCl/Ag) in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte as shown in Fig. 5b.91 DAAQ moieties can be reduced to 9,10-dihydroxyanthracenes upon two-electron, two-proton reduction in a protic electrolyte (Fig. 5c). The peak separation (ΔEp) between the oxidative and reductive peaks was only 4 mV s−1, suggesting a rapid electron transfer during the redox reaction. Furthermore, the peak current was directly proportional to the scan rate over the range of 1–1000 mV s−1, which was typical of a surface-confined redox couple. The electrode based on DAB-TFP COF displayed a capacitance of 48 ± 10 F g−1. After 10 charge/discharge cycles, its capacitance was stabilized at 40 ± 9 F g−1, which showed no further significant decrease after 5000 cycles. To make full use of the redox-active groups in the DAB-TFP COF, oriented thin films were formed through the slow introduction of the DAAQ monomer into a solution of TFP (1,3,5-triformylphluroglucinol) in the presence of Au substrates.92 Galvanostatic charge/discharge tests showed that the specific capacitance of the DAAQ-TFP COF was drastically improved from 0.4 to 3 mF cm−2 by using oriented crystalline thin films. Such DAAQ-TFP COF thin films provided near-quantitative addressability of the anthraquinone moieties at a thickness of up to ∼200 nm.
 Fig. 5  Redox-active moiety modified COFs as electrode materials for supercapacitors. (a) Synthesis of DAAQ-TFP COF. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of DAAQ-TFP COF in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at different scan rates. (c) The corresponding redox reaction (modified from ref. 91, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society). 
A pyridine containing COF (TaPa-Py COF) also exhibited reversible electrochemical processes in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte.93 The redox behavior of the TaPa-Py COF is from the redox active pyridine moieties. During the electrochemical process, pyridine of the TaPa-Py COF first takes H+ ions and gains an e−, forming a pyridinyl radical. In the next successive step, the pyridinyl radical takes another H+ ion and gains an e−, changing to dihydropyridine (DHP) as shown in eqn (7).  (7)A capacitance of 180.5 F g−1 for the TaPa-Py COF was obtained at 20 mV s−1. At a current density of 0.5 A g−1, it delivered a capacitance of 209 F g−1 with a combination of Faradaic capacitance along with double-layer capacitance originating from the pyridine units and the ordered porous structure of the TaPa-Py COF. The symmetrical supercapacitor based on the TaPa-Py COF showed excellent cycling stability after 6000 charge/discharge cycles with 92% capacitance retention.93 To enhance the conductivity of 2D COFs, facile electropolymerization of EDOT within the pores of COF films (∼1 μm) was achieved very recently.94 The PEDOT-modified DAAQ-TFP COF exhibited well-defined redox peaks associated with the reduction and oxidation of the anthraquinone moieties. It had a higher capacitance of 197 F g−1 than that of the pure DAAQ-TFP COF and retained more than 80% of its capacitance when charged/discharged at 10 and 100C. Amazingly, it even retained 50% of its maximum capacitance at the extremely high charging rate of 1600C corresponding to a charging time of only 2.25 s.
3.3 MXenes
The discovery of graphene opened a gate for exploration of 2D materials.95–98 MXenes, a recently discovered family of 2D transition metal carbides and carbonitrides (Nb2C, Ti3C2, Ta4C3, etc.), have received increasing attention since 2011.99 They consist of Mn+1Xn layers, where M is an early transition metal, X is carbon and/or nitrogen, and n = 1, 2 or 3. They exhibits various unique properties (such as high conductivity, good mechanical properties, and hydrophilicity), making them quite attractive for energy storage applications. For instance, Ti3C2-based MXenes displayed an electronic conductivity as high as 7000 S cm−1 depending on the terminating functional groups on the surface.
MXenes are usually produced by the selective etching of “A” element layers (mostly Al) from the MAX phases via wet chemistry routes, such as etching in HF,99,100 or acidic solutions of fluoride salts (LiF in HCl).101 This synthesis yields electron-conductive MXene layers with –F and –OH/O surface termination abbreviated as Tx, thus giving a general formula of Mn+1XnTx. Among the MXene family, Ti3C2Tx is the most studied one to date. In situ polymerization of pyrrole confined between Ti3C2Tx layers was achieved by mixing a Ti3C2Tx suspension and pyrrole at room temperature at 1000 rpm using a vacuum filtered process.102 Nb2CTx was obtained by selective removal of Al from Nb2AlC in an HF solution. It was subsequently oxidized in a CO2 atmosphere to synthesize a Nb2O5/carbon/Nb2CTx composite.103 The oxidation temperature, time, and CO2 flow rate would determine the Nb2O5 crystal size as well as the structure, composition, and charge storage properties of the hybrid material. Sandwich-like MXene/CNT composite paper electrodes were fabricated by alternating filtration of MXene and CNT dispersions.104 At first, a thin layer of MXene flakes was formed by vacuum-assisted filtration of the solution containing Ti3C2Tx flakes. After that, a layer of CNT was deposited on top. Such processes were repeated several times to obtain composite paper electrodes. Films several micrometers in thickness could be fabricated in 10 minutes, which was much simpler, faster, and more effective than the conventional layer-by-layer (LBL) assembly processes.
In 2013, the initial study of Ti3C2Tx as an electrode material in supercapacitors showed capacities of 50–100 F g−1 for intercalation of cations such as Li+, Mg2+ or Al3+ in aqueous electrolytes. Because of the low tap density of carbon (<0.5–1 g cm−3), the volumetric capacitance of carbon-based electrodes is usually limited below 300 F cm−3. Impressively high volumetric capacitance reaching 900 F cm−3 was measured for Ti3C2Tx in aqueous electrolytes, which was comparable with hydrated RuO2.101 Spontaneous cation intercalation accompanied by electrode deformations (expansion/contraction) was evidenced by electrochemical quartz crystal admittance (EQCA)105 and in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy106 studies of Ti3C2Tx multilayer particles in several aqueous electrolytes with different cations.
Similar to other 2D materials, the restacking of MXene flakes during production limits the accessibility to electrolyte ions, and hinders the full utilization of their surfaces. By separating multilayer stacks into few-layered sheets, the energy storage properties of MXene were enhanced and the area of the electrochemically active surface could be increased.107 Another effective strategy for improving the electrochemical performance of MXene was to introduce interlayer spacers. The hydrazine treated Ti3C2-based MXene demonstrated a greatly improved capacitance of 250 F g−1 in acidic electrolytes with an excellent cycling stability even if the MXene electrode was as thick as 75 μm.108 Besides creating a pillaring effect between Ti3C2Tx layers improving the accessibility to active sites, the hydrazine intercalation into 2D titanium carbide led to changes in its surface chemistry by decreasing the amount of –F, and –OH surface groups and intercalated water. In addition, intercalation of polymers (such as polypyrrole and polyvinyl alcohol) also facilitated charge transport in supercapacitor electrodes.102,109 For example, Ti3C2Tx MXene was mixed with either a charged polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA) or an electrically neutral polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to produce flexible free-standing Ti3C2Tx/polymer films (Fig. 6a). PDDA is a cationic polymer while the Ti3C2Tx flakes are negatively charged. PVA has good solubility in water and a large concentration of hydroxyl groups along its backbone. The as-fabricated composites were flexible and have high electronic conductivities. The tensile strength of the Ti3C2Tx/PVA composites was significantly improved compared with pure Ti3C2Tx or PVA films. The intercalation and confinement of the polymer between the MXene flakes not only increased flexibility but also enhanced cationic intercalation of the MXene/PVA composite film.109 Besides, the PPy/Ti3C2Tx composite exhibited a high gravimetric capacitance (416 F g−1) with an excellent cycling stability up to 25000 cycles.102
 Fig. 6  Polymer modified MXene and in situ XRD study on the mechanism of MXene during the charge/discharge process. (a) A schematic illustration of MXene-based functional films (modified from ref. 109, copyright permission from National Academy of Sciences USA). (b) Electrochemical in situ X-ray diffraction study of Ti3C2Tx film at various constant potentials (0.5 V steps) in an EMI-TFSI electrolyte. Green squares represent peaks of the in situ XRD cell without working electrodes (modified from ref. 112, copyright permission from Elsevier). 
Although the density of the MXene composite paper electrodes decreased slightly with the incorporation of the CNTs, higher volumetric capacitances were still obtained for the sandwich-like MXene/CNT composite.104 A high volumetric capacitance of 435 F cm−3 was obtained at 2 mV s−1 for such a sandwich-like composite. When the scan rate increased to 200 mV s−1, a capacitance of 320 F cm−3 was achieved. It yielded a volumetric capacitance of around 300 F cm−3 at 10 A g−1, which increased to 350 F cm−3 after 10000 cycles. The gradual increase with cycling may result from the gradual electrolyte wetting between MXene flakes during cycling. Interestingly, terminal fluorine was successfully replaced with oxygen-containing functional groups after the chemical intercalation of potassium salts.110 This change in surface chemistry led to a 4-fold increase in the capacitance in sulfuric acid solution.
Considering all the above discussions, MXenes and their composites have shown excellent volumetric capacitance in aqueous electrolytes, but displayed limited electrochemical windows due to water electrolysis. Thus the electrochemical behaviors of Ti3C2Tx in organic and ionic liquid electrolytes were investigated.111 In a 1 M solution of 1-ethly-3-methylimidazolium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)-imide (EMITFSI) in acetonitrile, a Ti3C2Tx/CNT electrode displayed capacitances of 85 F g−1 and 245 F cm−3 at 2 mV s−1. In situ X-ray diffraction study reveals the intercalation of large EMI+ cations into the MXene. Very recently, electrochemical characteristics of Ti3C2Tx electrodes were investigated in a neat EMI-TFSI electrolyte.112 As shown in Fig. 6b, when the applied potential increased from 0 V to 1.5 V, a progressive shift of the Ti3C2Tx(00l) peaks to higher 2θ values was observed, indicating a continuous decrease of the interlayer spacing. When discharging from 1.5 V back to 0 V, those peaks reversibly shifted back to the original position. In the positive potential range, the decreasing of the interlayer spacing is due to the electrostatic attraction between intercalated TFSI− anions and positively charged MXene layers and/or steric effects originating from de-intercalation of EMI+ cations. With a decrease of the applied potential from −0.5 V to −2 V, the XRD peaks of Ti3C2Tx shifted to lower 2θ values and the peak intensity of the (002) peak increases. The expansion of the interlayer spacing should result from the steric effect caused by EMI+ cation intercalation. While the appearance of the (002) peak at a lower 2θ degree position can be ascribed to the pillared structure of Ti3C2Tx flakes after being intercalated by EMI+ cations. Full charging to 0 V led to the recovery of the (002) peak, suggesting a reversible transition during the charge/discharge process.112
The Nb2O5/C/Nb2CTx composite displayed a high capacitance of 660 mF cm−2 (275 F g−1) over charge/discharge times of 4 min in a 1 M LiClO4 organic electrolyte.103 Such electrodes were 50 μm in thickness and 2.4 mg cm−2 in mass loading, which were comparable to commercial devices. The good electrochemical performance was attributed to the fast pseudocapacitive responses of Nb2O5, the high electronic conductivity of Nb2CTx, and the fast charge transfer pathways provided by the disordered carbon. Beyond single electrodes and half-cell studies, three types of Li ion capacitors (full cells) based on Nb2CTx were investigated recently.113 The Nb2CTx/CNT film electrode can be paired with either a battery-type negative electrode (graphite) or a battery-type positive electrode (LiFePO4). All these Li ion capacitors were capable of operating within 3 V voltage windows with distorted charge/discharge profiles resembling a classical triangular capacitive shape. More details about Li ion capacitors will be discussed in Section 4.4.1.
3.4 Metal nitrides
Metal nitrides (MN, M = V, Ti, W, Mo, Nb, and Ga) have attracted increasing attention as suitable electrode materials for high-performance supercapacitors because of their high electronic conductivities. The most common method applied to synthesize VN was to use nitride vanadium-based precursors under a NH3 atmosphere.114–118 In a NH3 atmosphere, the Ni1−xVxO2 binary metal oxide was successfully transformed into cubic phased VN and metallic Ni, due to the nitridation effect of ammonia to vanadium oxide and the thermoreduction reaction between the nickel species and NH3.119 The metallic Ni was well dispersed in the VN skeleton, enabling good electrical contact and transfer of the interface electrons. VN could also be synthesized from the melamine reduction of V2O5 xerogel under a N2 atmosphere.120,121 Similar to VN, the TiN and WN were produced by direct thermal nitridation of TiO2122–124 and WO3125 in NH3, respectively. This process was carried out at a high temperature (600–1000 °C) for a long period of time. The used precursors always suffer from serious morphological changes during the high-temperature and long annealing processes. Alternative methods were developed, involved in directly growing or depositing active materials onto substrates or collectors. For example, TiN nanotubes were synthesized by atomic layer deposition using tetrakis(dimethylamino)titanium(IV) (TDMAT) (or TiCl4) and ammonia (NH3) as the two precursors.126,127
MoNx and NbNx nanocrystallines were reported to be synthesized through ammonolysis and nitridation of the corresponding metal chlorides.128,129 Reactions of MoCl5 or Mo(NMe2)4 with ammonia followed by pyrolysis of the resultant precipitates result in γ- or δ-MoNx.129 Besides, n-type GaN was produced by metal–organic chemical vapor deposition. To increase its specific surface area, a single-crystal GaN mesoporous membrane was successfully fabricated by electrochemical etching.130 A free-standing film of graphite paper/GaN nanowires was prepared via the growth of GaN on graphite paper through catalyst assisted CVD.131 Nanostructured Fe2N on vertically aligned graphene nanosheets was obtained by atomic layer deposition (ALD) and thermal annealing in a NH3 atmosphere.132 Thin films of ZnO with a thickness of 20 nm were coated by ALD onto the graphene nanosheet substrates. ZnO was then transferred to FeOOH via a solution reaction in 0.5 M Fe(NO3)3. The FeOOH thin film was finally converted to Fe2N nanoparticles dispersed uniformly on the surface of graphene nanosheets after ammonia annealing.
The VN electrode materials have notable advantages, such as large theoretical capacity (>1000 F g−1), metallic electronic conductivity, reversible and fast redox Faradic response with various oxidation states (II–V) of vanadium, and high hydrogen evolution overpotential.114–116 The specific capacitances of VN were determined to be 114, 45.7 and 273 F g−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4, 2.0 M NaNO3 and 1.0 M KOH solutions, respectively.120 Thus, the KOH solution was considered as the best aqueous electrolyte for the capacitive performance of VN. In fact, MN (M = V, or Ti) was one promising candidate for negative electrode materials in hybrid supercapacitors in alkaline electrolytes.117–119,121 It was recognized that an oxide layer was usually presented on the VN surface. One possible reaction of VN in an aqueous KOH electrolyte was proposed as eqn (8):119 VNxOy + OH− ↔ VNxOy//OH− + VNxOy–OH,(8)where VNxOy//OH− and VNxOy–OH correspond to the electrical double layer and redox pseudocapacitance. Recently, it was found that VN was not very stable in aqueous solution due to the irreversible electrochemical oxidation reaction of forming soluble vanadium oxide (VOx) on the surface.117 The stability of the VN as a negative electrode was significantly improved by using a LiCl/PVA gel electrolyte.117 The VN nanowire electrode exhibited a remarkably good cycling stability in the LiCl/PVA gel electrolyte with a capacitance retention of 95.3% after 10000 cycles, which was much better than that obtained in a 5 M LiCl aqueous electrolyte (only 14.1%).117 The charge storage mechanism of VN depended on the nature of the electrolyte, and only double layer capacitance was observed when using NEt4BF4 solution in acetonitrile as an electrolyte.133 But the specific capacitance in NEt4BF4/acetonitrile solution was several orders of magnitude lower than that in the KOH aqueous electrolyte.
The rate capability of porous carbon can be tuned by coating TiN on the surface. C@TiN maintained a rectangular shape very well in its CV curves even at 500 mV s−1.122 The TiN coating significantly improved the kinetic response of the electrode although some TiO2 and TiON phases were formed on the surface of the TiN nanocrystallites.122,127 In an aqueous electrolyte, the TiN electrode is not very stable because of some irreversible electrochemical reactions as shown in eqn (9) and (10): TiN + 2H2O → TiO2 + 0.5N2 + 4H+ + 4e−,(9) 2TiN + O2 → TiO2 + N2.(10)In this regard, MnO2 deposition,126 and polymer and carbon coating techniques124,127,134 gave improved long-term cycling stability compared to the bare TiN electrode.
The electrochemical behavior of WN was studied in various aqueous electrolytes including 1 M H2SO4, 1 M KOH, 3 M KCl, 3 M NaCl, 1 M LiCl and 1 M CaCl2.125 The highest specific capacitance was observed in a 1 M KOH electrolyte. Similarly, in the 1 M KOH electrolyte, the highest capacitances for NbN and γ-Mo2N crystallites were 73.5 F g−1 and 111 F g−1, respectively, at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1.128 But their electrochemical stability windows were rather narrow, ranging from −1.0 to −0.7 V for NbN and −1.1 to −0.2 V for γ-Mo2N with respect to the Hg/HgO reference electrode. Differently, in aqueous H2SO4 or K2SO4 electrolytes within the potential range of −0.7 to 0 V (vs. Hg/HgSO4), pseudocapacitance took a much more prominent role in the distorted rocksalt structure of imide-derived Mo2N while the effect of double layer capacitance was more significant in the chloroimide-derived Mo2N.129
When a GaN mesoporous membrane was utilized as an electrode for supercapacitors, the capacitance ranged from 23.11 mF cm−2 at 0.5 mA cm−2 to 12.86 mF cm−2 at 100 mA cm−2.130 It was demonstrated that the metal oxynitride thin films could enhance the pseudocapacitance of GaN in acid electrolytes as per eqn (11): GaN1−xOx + 2yH+ + 2y e− ↔ GaN1−x−yOx−y + yH2O.(11)The flexible supercapacitor based on GaN nanowire/graphite paper nanocomposites manifested a high specific capacitance of 53.2 mF cm−2, and high energy and power densities (0.30 mW h cm−3 and 1000 mW cm−3).131 The outstanding electronic conductivities of the GaN nanowire (6.36 × 102 S m−1) and graphite paper (7.5 × 104 S m−1) delivered a synergistically enhanced electrochemical performance.
3.5 Black phosphorus
An increasing number of monolayer/multilayer 2D nanomaterials (such as hexagonal boron nitride, transition–metal dichalcogenides, 2D COFs and 2D MOFs) with various unique physical and chemical properties have been widely studied in various applications. Among the large family of 2D nanomaterials, black phosphorus (BP) is attracting enormous attention because of its distinct structure with corrugated planes of P atoms, which are connected by strong intralayer P–P bonding and weak interlayer van der Waals forces.135 By breaking down the weak interlayer interactions, the bulk BP can be exfoliated into thin BP sheets with a few layers or even a monolayer.136
Few-layer BP (also called phosphorene) has a direct band gap which can be tunable between 0.30 and 2.2 eV by controlling the number of layers. Moreover, BP has a large spacing of 5.3 Å between adjacent puckered layers, larger than the 3.6 Å of graphite and comparable to the 6.15 Å of the 1T MoS2 phase.137 Similar to the other 2D materials, BP nanosheets were utilized as electrode materials and a polysulfide immobilizer in rechargeable batteries, like Li or Na ion batteries138,139 and Li–S batteries.140 The exploration of BP in supercapacitors is still very much in its infancy.137 There are several methods to produce BP crystals, such as using high-energy mechanical ball-milling of red phosphorus, heating toxic white or red phosphorus under high pressure or transforming white phosphorus in liquid metal.140 To obtain few-layer phosphorene nanosheets, a liquid exfoliation approach in organic solvents (such as acetone and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone) is the most common method.137,140
A flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor was demonstrated in a PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte with liquid-exfoliated BP nanoflakes as flexible electrodes.137 It displayed volumetric capacitances of 17.78 F cm−3 (59.3 F g−1), 13.75 F cm−3 (48.5 F g−1) and 4.25 F cm−3 (14.2 F g−1) at scan rates of 0.005, 0.01 and 0.09 V s−1. The capacitive retention was 71.8% after 30000 cycles. It showed an energy density ranging from 0.123 to 2.47 mW h cm−3 and a maximum power density of 8.83 W cm−3. Normally, the diffusion of water to BP nanoflakes can lead to an irreversible reaction between water and phosphorus. Interestingly, such a reaction on liquid-exfoliated BP nanoflakes was able to produce complicated oxygen functional groups (like POx) owing to the contaminated surfaces with molecules of solvent. These produced oxygen functional groups on the surfaces of BP nanoflakes may serve as reversible adsorption/desorption sites of H+ ions, which is beneficial for significant enhancement of specific capacitances. Moreover, the presence of oxygen functional groups and H3PO4 on the surfaces of BP nanoflakes can efficiently prevent the direct contact between the diffused water and BP nanoflakes, thus reducing the reaction-induced damage of the BP nanoflakes.
3.6 Other materials
Due to its low cost and environmental friendliness, and the abundance of manganese resources, spinel LiMn2O4 is regarded as one of the most promising positive electrode materials for Li ion batteries.141–143 Its kinetics of charge storage are controlled by the diffusion of Li ions within the LiMn2O4 structure, which is not suitable for supercapacitors. Interestingly, intercalation pseudocapacitance has been reported in a nonstoichiometric LixMn2O4 (1 < x < 2) mesoporous thin film by Dunn's group very recently.144 The nanoporous Mn3O4 films were converted to nanoporous LixMn2O4 (1 < x < 2) via solid-state reaction with LiOH calcined at 500 °C in air. The working electrode using nanoporous LixMn2O4 (1 < x < 2) films deposited on the ITO substrates presented a reversible capacity of 55 mA h g−1 at a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 (corresponding to a charging time of 2 min).144 In stoichiometric LiMn2O4, its theoretical capacity was 148 mA h g−1 with Li ion extraction occurring at approximately 4 V (vs. Li+/Li) in a two-stage process (LiMn2O4/Li0.5Mn2O4 and Li0.5Mn2O4/λ-MnO2). The low capacity of nanoporous LixMn2O4 was due to the fact that the surface of the nanoporous LixMn2O4, which should contain exclusively Mn3/4+, presented a spinel structure with reduced Mn2+ (inactive) in the tetrahedral site. But even at 1000C, it still displayed a reversibly capacity of 20 mA h g−1 corresponding to 0.1 mol of lithium per mole of LixMn2O4. According to the relationship between current and sweep rate, the majority of the charge storage in nanoporous LixMn2O4 arose from pseudocapacitive mechanisms and not from electric double-layer capacitance. The small wall thickness (15 nm) ensures that the majority of the lithium in this material is located in “near-surface” sites. At 10 mV s−1, the separation between the anodic and cathodic peak potentials was less than 0.059 V. Such high electrochemical reversibility indicates there was relatively little structural change upon lithiation and delithiation.144 Actually, as early as three years ago, Wu's group reported nonstoichiometric LixMn2O4 (0.5 < x < 1) with a nanoporous structure as the electrode for aqueous supercapacitors.145a The nanoporous LiMn2O4 spinel was prepared by a hydrothermal method using MnO2 nanotubes as a precursor at 180 °C. Presumably due to the low reaction temperature, Li+ ions could not fully penetrate into the interior of MnO2 to form LiMn2O4 and some amounts of phase impurities are present in the sample. It exhibited a specific capacitance of 189 F g−1 (about 63 mA h g−1) at 0.3 A g−1. A stable specific capacitance of 166 F g−1 (55 mA h g−1) could be achieved when the current rate was increased to 12 A g−1. After 1500 cycles, there was no evident capacity fading.145a Generally, the use of nanoparticles or wires alone cannot solve the diffusion problem unless each individual nanoparticle or nanowire can be exposed to the liquid electrolyte. Nanocrystal-based nanoporous materials can create this ideal architecture, thus bringing intercalation pseudocapacitance. In addition, other MxMnO2 (M = Na and K) materials have been applied as electrode materials for supercapacitors.145b–d The sizes of Na+ and K+ are larger than that of Li+ and the structure of MxMnO2 (M = Na and K) was not spinel but instead layered. Small redox couples were found in the CV curves of MxMnO2 (M = Na and K), indicative of pseudocapacitance properties, which were ascribed to the intercalation/de-intercalation of Na+ and/or K+ into and from the solid lattice near the surface of the bulk.145b,c
Mixed conductors, composed of purely electronic conductors and purely ionic conductors, exhibit varied stoichiometries, giving them substantial potential for use as electrodes.146 Very recently, Maier and co-authors reported a milestone work on composites of RbAg4I5/graphite as artificial mixed conductors for all-solid-state supercapacitors.147 In pure ionic conductors (like RbAg4I5) or pure electronic conductors (like graphite), the stoichiometry changes were impossible due to the lack of one necessary carrier and the high electronic energy. While the heterogeneous mixed conductor (RbAg4I5/graphite) can quickly take up or release substantial silver with excess and deficiency. As shown in Fig. 7a, the silver deficiency was realized by vacancies  on the ionic-conductor (RbAg4I5) side and electron holes (h˙) on the electronic-conductor (graphite) side. The silver excess was realized by silver interstitials (AgI˙) on one side and excess electrons (e′) on the other side. Furthermore, the super-ionic conductor (RbAg4I5) can naturally be utilized as a solid electrolyte (Fig. 7b). Such all-solid-state supercapacitors had specific capacitances ranging from 0.06 to 0.09 F cm−3 with an extremely short relaxation time (τ0) of 40 ms (Fig. 7c).
 Fig. 7  Mixed conductors as electrode materials for supercapacitors. (a) Schematic of Ag deficiency and excess through interfacial storage. (b) Schematic illustration of the all-solid-state supercapacitor based on RbAg4I5/graphite. (c) The frequency dependence of the real (C′) and imaginary (C′′) parts of the capacitance (modified from ref. 147, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
Recently LaMnO3 nanoparticles as electrode materials for supercapacitors have been prepared via a reverse-phase hydrolysis method.148 Ideal LaMnO3 shows a cubic perovskite structure, where lanthanum atoms locate at a body centered position, manganese atoms at cubic corner positions, and oxygen atoms at mid-edge positions. It was found that oxygen intercalation had a significant effect on LaMnO3 perovskite nanoparticles as supercapacitor electrodes. The specific capacitances of LaMnO3.09 and LaMnO2.91 reached 586 and 609 F g−1, respectively. Interestingly, oxygen intercalation was the major charge storage mechanism of LaMnO3 perovskite supercapacitor electrodes. This assumption was further demonstrated by applying an electrolyte with varying anion concentrations as well as different electrolyte types (i.e. neutral and alkaline electrolytes). The diffusion rate of O2− in LaMnO3.09 was approximated as 5.6 × 10−12 cm2 s−1. The diffusion rate doubled to 1.2 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 in LaMnO2.91 with the introduction of oxygen vacancies.148 Perovskite materials might open a new paradigm as supercapacitor electrode materials for oxygen-ion-based charge storage.
4. New devices for supercapacitors
4.1 Flow supercapacitors
The redox flow batteries are one of the most suitable candidates for large-scale energy storage in the grid because their energy densities are dependent on the volumes and concentrations of the electrolytes, and the power densities can be made flexible by altering the size of the stack and the number of single cells.149–151 In 2012, researchers demonstrated that supercapacitors could be scaled up for grid energy storage applications through the utilization of flowable carbon slurry in electrolytes for capacitive energy storage, which was called flow supercapacitors or electrochemical flow capacitors.152–154Fig. 8 shows the flow-assisted supercapacitor device based on suspension electrodes. Different from redox flow batteries with two primary storage tanks containing two redox-electrolytes, flow supercapacitors are characterized by four tanks. During the charging process, the slurry electrode is pumped through a polarized flow cell, where energy storage occurs through the formation of the EDLC at the surface of the carbon particles. When the particles are charged, the presence of counter ions and co-ions at the surface makes the particles (and suspension) electrically neutral. Ion diffusion from one slurry electrode to another occurs through a low cost porous separator (e.g., polyvinylidene fluoride membrane) that acts as an electrical insulator. Once charged, the slurry is pumped into an external reservoir for storage. From these reservoirs, the slurry can be pumped back into the electrochemical cell, where the material can be fully discharged for energy recovery.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the flow supercapacitor. Slurry electrode is the core of a flow supercapacitor. Ion diffusion from one slurry electrode to another occurs during the charging/discharging process. 
The flow supercapacitors have the advantages of both supercapacitors and flow batteries; namely the high power density and long cycle lifetime of supercapacitors and the scalable energy of flow batteries. Thus, they are targeted for high-power applications on the grid. But two disadvantages of flow supercapacitors are: (1) electrochemical inefficiencies due to charge leakage outside the electroactive region and (2) charge redistribution as a result of a non-uniform flow profile. A synergistic balance between the flow-properties and suspension-electrode design played a pivotal role in overcoming polarization challenges and promoting efficient utilization of the active material in a suspension electrode.154 A suspension electrode, which is the core of flow supercapacitors, normally includes an electrochemically active solid material, a conductive additive and an electrolyte. Spherical activated carbons and non-spherical titanium carbide were first examined as the active material for the flow supercapacitor, which displayed a capacitance of 125 F g−1 in aqueous electrolytes and 49 F g−1 in organic electrolytes.152 The flowable electrode composed of carbon spheres activated at 1000 °C for one hour showed significantly enhanced performance both in static and under intermittent flow conditions.155 The effects of the solid fraction, shape, and size of the carbon particles on the electrochemical and rheological properties of the slurry electrodes were then investigated.156 Carbon bead slurries containing intermediate-sized spherical particles presented the highest capacitances and rate capabilities due to improved percolation through the particle network, increased surface area and more favorable diffusion of ions through the pore-structure of the particles. Highly porous carbon spheres with a submicrometer size were obtained by using a modified Stober method followed by carbonization and activation steps.157 When applied as a capacitive flowable suspension electrode, they offered shorter transport pathways for facile ion and charge transport compared with the micron size carbon spheres.
Graphene and its composite based suspension electrodes were examined in flow supercapacitors recently.158,159 The flow supercapacitor based on a graphene nanoplatelet slurry showed a capacitance of 1.08 F and 2 V device performances with a slurry input of 24 mL.158 The energy density and power density were 0.064 W h L−1 and 0.013 W L−1, respectively, which were better than those with a graphite slurry (0.02 W h L−1 and 0.004 W L−1). The nanosize of graphene helps in the improvement of energy storage and hence the capacitance. The hybrid suspension electrode of RGO and micron-sized carbon spheres (CS) with a 1:2 (GO:CS) ratio gave the highest gravimetric capacitance (200 F g−1) and the lowest equivalent series resistance (ESR) value.159 It should be noted that the higher amount of RGO (1:1, GO:CS) led to a higher viscosity (poor flowability), poor rate capability, and lower gravimetric capacitance.
Interestingly, redox-active species (like hydroquinone160,161 and p-phenylenediamine162) were introduced into the carbon slurries for increasing the overall capacitance and energy of flow supercapacitors. A flowable electrode composed of hydroquinone/carbon spheres under intermittent flow conditions yielded a capacitance of 64 F g−1, which is 50% higher than that of the flowable electrodes based on pristine carbon spheres.160 The hydroquinone molecules could be either deposited on carbon spheres by a self-assembly approach or utilized as a redox-mediating agent in the electrolyte. p-Phenylenediamine (PPD) as a redox mediator was also shown to dramatically enhance the capacitance of flow supercapacitors.162 The redox couple p-phenylenediamine and p-phenylenediimine (PPD/PPI) is a two-electron and two-proton transfer reaction with pseudocapacitive behavior. More discussion on redox couples used in supercapacitors will be found in Section 4.3.
The employment of an asymmetric configuration was another strategy to improve the energy density of flow supercapacitors.163–165 An expanded voltage window of 1.6–1.8 V was achieved when combining a composite of a MnO2–carbon suspension (positive electrode) and an activated carbon suspension (negative electrode) in a charge balanced asymmetric device.163,164 The expansion of the voltage window resulted in a significant increase in the energy density to above 10 W h kg−1, which was 3 times higher than that of a symmetric suspension electrode based on activated carbon. A record energy density (20.9 W h kg−1) was achieved for aqueous flow Li ion capacitors employing high-performance Li-insertion-type electrode materials (LiMn2O4) and activated carbon slurry electrodes.165 More information and discussion on Li ion capacitors will be presented in Section 4.4.1.
4.2 Alternating current (AC) line-filtering supercapacitors
Alternating current (AC) electricity is normally generated at a frequency of 60 Hz. Higher-order harmonics (typically >120 Hz) can be induced when nonlinear loads are connected in the circuitry, which are detrimental to the electronic devices. AC line-filters are widely applied to smoothen the leftover AC ripples for the operation of most line-powered electronics. Currently, commercialized aluminum electrolytic capacitors (AECs) are utilized for this purpose but with low specific capacitances. Their bulky volume makes them usually the largest components in electronic circuits, which is incompatible with the rapid development of miniaturized and wearable electronics. Ultrahigh-rate capacitors need to respond harmonically at 120 Hz (double the value of the AC frequency, 60 Hz, the United States standard) to smoothen the leftover AC ripples.166–170 However, due to the slow and lossy internal response of the polarization, the phase angle for commercial supercapacitors at 120 Hz is close to 0°, which is far from the −90° value needed for filtering. When driven by 120 Hz AC, they respond like a transmission line and behave like a resistor rather than a capacitor. Thus, supercapacitors with a rate-performance comparable to that of AECs are expected to be next-generation AC line-filters. Actually, great progress on AC line-filtering supercapacitors has been achieved as summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Some characteristics of AC line-filtering supercapacitors




Electrode materials
Electrolyte
Phase at 120 Hz (°)

τ
RC (ms)

τ
0 (ms)
Specific capacitance at 120 Hz
Ref.




Vertically graphene
KOH
82
0.2
—
175 μF

166



Vertically graphene
KOH
85
—
—
265 μF cm−2

167



Vertically graphene
KOH
≈90
—
32.8
30 F g−1

168



3D RGO
KOH
84
1.35
0.17
283 μF cm−2

169



Graphene films
H2SO4
—
—
13.3
125 F g−1

170



RGO aerogel
—
75.4
0.35
1.9
0.32 mF cm−2

171



Graphene@CNT
Na2SO4
81.5
0.19
0.82
662 μF cm−2

172



CNT film
TEABF4
84.3
—
0.124
104 μF cm−2

173



Porous C film@CNT
K2SO4
81
0.2
—
601 μF cm−2

174



Carbon sponges
KOH
78
0.32
0.37
172 mF cm−2

175



PEDOT@graphene
H2SO4/PVA
≈75
0.46
1
75 μF

176



PEDOT
H2SO4/PVA
65
0.8
3.3
—

177



PEDOT@PPS
H2SO4
84
0.15
0.59
994 mF cm−2

178





The phase angle at 120 Hz can be used as a “factor of merit” to measure AC line-filtering performance. The measured total resistances at 120 Hz yield the resistor–capacitor (RC) time constants (τRC). The RC time constants are the results of charge mobility limitations, electronic and ionic, which appear as compounded resistance in series with the main capacitance. The RC time constant can be obtained by the equation τRC = C × Z′, where Z′ is the resistance derived from the real part of the impedance (Ω). And C is the device capacitance calculated from the equation C = −1/(2πfZ′′), where f is the frequency (Hz) and Z′′ is the imaginary part of the impedance (Ω). The relaxation time constant (τ0 = 1/f0) is the minimum time needed to discharge all the energy from the device with an efficiency of more than 50%. The characteristic frequency f0 is the value at the phase angle of −45°. A lower τ will lead to higher scan rate ability (Fig. 9a). A phase angle close to −90° in the Bode plot represents the ability to maintain a capacitive behavior at high frequencies, which depends also on the time constant τ (Fig. 9b). The typical resistor–capacitor (RC) time constant for an EDLC is ∼1 s, which is far too long to be useful for the common application of 120 Hz filtering (8.3 ms).7a
 Fig. 9  The relaxation time, phase angle and frequency for AC line-filtering supercapacitors. (a) Calculated CV curves of normalized current (I/sC) versus the voltage, where I is the current, s is the scan rate, and C is the capacitance. All the CVs are compared for the same scan rates. (b) Simulation of the impedance phase angle versus frequency with decreasing τ0 (modified from ref. 7a, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). (c) Plot of impedance phase angle versus frequency for the vertically oriented graphene nanosheet based supercapacitors. (d) Plot of its specific capacitance versus frequency using a series-RC circuit model (modified from ref. 156, copyright permission from AAAS). 
The supercapacitor based on vertically oriented graphene nanosheets,166–168 3D graphene169–171 and their composites172 were fabricated with comparable rate performance to those of AECs. The impedance phase angles of vertical graphene and activated carbon based supercapacitors and AECs at different frequencies are plotted in Fig. 9c. The impedance phase angle of the vertical graphene based supercapacitor reached −45° at ∼15000 Hz, and this frequency was much higher than that of activated carbon based supercapacitors (0.15 Hz) but lower than that of AEC (∼30000 Hz). The impedance phase angle of the vertical graphene based supercapacitor was as large as −82° at 120 Hz (as compared with 0° for the activated carbon based supercapacitor), which was comparable to that of a commercial AEC. Capacitance versus frequency is plotted in Fig. 9d. At 120 Hz, the derived capacitance value was 175 μF, and the measured resistance was 1.1 Ω, yielding an RC time constant of less than 200 μs.166
The structure of CNTs was controlled to be open so that ion diffusion was sufficiently fast for 120 Hz applications.173,174 Ultrathin CNT films on Au/Ti/Al current collectors in organic electrolytes enabled AC-line-filtering supercapacitors with high volumetric energy densities at 120 Hz. The ions in the organic electrolytes moved sufficiently fast due to the short pore length of the ultrathin CNT films. In addition, the Au insertion layer between the CNTs and the current collector greatly improved the quality of the electrical interfacing and enables the fast response required for AC line filtering.173 Supercapacitors based on meso/macroporous camphor-derived carbon sponges also showed highly promising performance in AC line-filtering, exhibiting a phase angle of −78° and a RC time constant of 319 ms at 120 Hz.175 Some surface functional groups (–OH, –C–O, –CO) were usually presented on the carbon sponge surfaces. Those functional groups can improve the electrode wettability in aqueous electrolytes, resulting in higher ion mobility and faster ion transport.
Polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT) on different current collectors (Au/Ti and graphite) was employed to fabricate flexible supercapacitors for AC line-filtering.176–178 Ultrathin printable supercapacitors based on PEDOT/graphene could be operated at an ultrahigh rate of up to 2000 V s−1 with an extremely short RC time constant of less than 0.5 ms.176 The PEDOT based micro-supercapacitors exhibited excellent frequency response characteristics (an impedance phase angle of −65° at 120 Hz, a frequency of 400 Hz at a phase angle of −45°, τ0 of 3.3 ms and τRC of 0.8 ms).177 More discussions on micro-supercapacitors will be presented in Section 4.5. Instead of using Au as a current collector, an AC line-filtering supercapacitor was achieved based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as an electrode material and graphite foil as the current collector.178 It exhibited high areal (994 mF cm−2) and volumetric (16.6 F cm−3) specific capacitances at 120 Hz, which were superior to those of the state-of-the-art supercapacitors for this purpose.
4.3 Redox electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors
Integrating solvated redox-active species into electrolytes has emerged as an effective strategy to increase the energy density of EDLCs.179,180 Normally, ion diffusivity is typically around several orders of magnitude higher in liquids than in solids. Actually, dissolved redox species react with the same fast kinetics as the electrostatic surface storage mechanisms. A number of redox couples have been studied in redox-active electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors (Fig. 10a), including halides (I−/I3− and Br−/Br3−), vanadium complexes, copper salts, methylene blue, phenylenediamine, indigo carmine, quinones (Q) and hydroxyquinone (HQ).
 Fig. 10  Redox-active electrolytes, biredox ionic liquid electrolyte and the related enhanced supercapacitors. (a) A summary of some redox pairs for electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors. (b) Synthesis of the biredox ionic liquid, where the anions and cations were functionalized with anthraquinone (AQ) and 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-1-oxyl (TEMPO) moieties, respectively. (c) Capacitances versus full cell or single-electrode voltage. (d) CVs at 5 mV s−1 of the PICA electrode at 60 °C with 0.5 M biredox IL in BMImTFSI (solid line), pure BMImTFSI (dashed line), and pure biredox IL (green line). (e) Self-discharge current test for the devices based on PICA electrodes with BMImTFSI (blue line) or 0.5 M biredox IL in BMImTFSI (red line) at room temperature (modified from ref. 216, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
Iodide can produce redox pairs (like I−/I3− and I2/IO3−) during the electrochemical process. The ionic sizes of I−, I3− (I3− solvated by 4 water molecules), and IO3− (IO3− solvated by 3 water molecules) are 0.39 nm, 0.63 (1.8) nm and 0.57 (1.4) nm, respectively.181 Owing to these small ionic sizes, these ions can easily access the micropores and small mesopores of the porous electrode. For the symmetrically activated carbon supercapacitors, a nearly two-fold improved specific capacitance and energy density of 912 F g−1 and 19.04 W h kg−1 were achieved in the voltage range of −0.2 to 0.8 V (vs. AgCl/Ag) when 0.08 M KI was added in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte.182 Another supercapacitor based on PANi@CNT in a H2SO4/KI (1 M/0.5 M) electrolyte displayed a maximum discharge specific capacitance up to 4960 F g−1.183 An increase of ∼105% in the specific energy density of an asymmetric supercapacitor based on ZrO2@CNT//WO3@CNT was achieved together with good cycling stability even after 3000 cycles.184 Besides acid electrolytes, the mixed KI and basic electrolyte provided the redox couple of IOx−/I− (x = 3 or 4) since the I− ions in a basic electrolyte could be oxidized into IOx− instead of I3−.185 The effect of I− ion concentration on the electrochemical performance of a supercapacitor was studied recently.186 They found that 2 M of alkali metal iodide solution was an optimal electrolyte for the supercapacitor based on activated carbon in KOH electrolytes. For too high concentrations (like 5 M), there might be some problems with the transport of iodine species due to molecular collisions or some steric hindrance at the carbon/electrolyte interface and in the pores of the active material. Interestingly, adding redox additive I−/I3− into a PVA and PEO (poly(ethylene oxide)) polymer electrolyte system was reported.187,188 Gel polymer electrolytes can enhance the safety of supercapacitors and solve problems associated with electrolyte leakage and corrosion. The Br−/Br3− pair with a higher reduction potential (vs. SCE) compared with iodine (vs. SCE) provided higher energy density for such kinds of supercapacitors.189,190
The vanadyl sulfate system (VO2+/VO2+) was another effective addition for redox-active electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors.191–194 It is well-known that VO2+/VO2+ is one of the most important ionic species in vanadium redox flow batteries. The activated carbon based EDLC in a VOSO4 added H2SO4 electrolyte showed a maximum specific capacitance of 630.6 F g−1 at 1 mA cm−2 which is a 43% improvement in the specific capacitance compared to 1 M H2SO4 (440.6 F g−1).192 Compared to V3+/V2+, the VO2+/VO2+ redox reaction has slower kinetics, thus catalytic processes with hydroxyl or carbonyl functionalized carbon materials were introduced to enhance this redox reaction.194
Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− is a redox pair with very good electrochemical reversibility, widely used in electroanalysis and sensors. There are many reports on Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− as an additive in the electrolyte for supercapacitors.195–199 For example, flexible and conductive fabric-supported cauliflower-like Ni3Se2 exhibited enhanced specific capacitance when introducing a small quantity of Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− additive into the aqueous KOH solution.198 The highly soluble and electrochemically active hexacyanoferrate ions could easily absorb the liberated electrons from Ni2+ in Ni3Se2via the reduction process of Fe(CN)63− to Fe(CN)64−, which would not only promote the electron gain and loss of Ni ions in the charging/discharging process but also directly influence the acceleration of the reaction rate for higher capacitance properties.
Using Cu2+/Cu as a redox-active addition in aqueous electrolytes, a 10-fold increase in the specific voltammetric capacitance (4700 F g−1) was achieved in supercapacitors based on porous carbon microspheres.200,201 But the cycling stability was traded-off because of the poor reversibility of the redox reactions between Cu2+/Cu on the surface of porous carbon electrodes.201 When Fe2+ ions were added to the H2SO4 and Cu2+ electrolytes, a stable cyclability was obtained because of the synergistic effects between Fe3+/Fe2+ and Cu2+/Cu ions, which might arise from the formation of complexes between the (FexCuy)2x+ adions and the edge site carbon atoms of the porous carbon electrodes.
Similarly, the specific capacitance of a fiber supercapacitor based on RGO was improved more than three times using sodium molybdate (Na2MoO4) as a redox-active electrolyte.202 The molybdate species (MoO42−) can form polymeric ions (H2MoO4) in acidic medium (PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte) with a +VI oxidation state. H2MoO4 can react with H+ ions via possible redox couples Mo(VI)/Mo(V) and Mo(VI)/Mo(IV). The S2−/Sx2− redox couple was another effective mediator in alkaline electrolytes. The specific capacitance of CuS nanotubes was greatly improved by adding S2−/Sx2− into the electrolyte containing 0.5 M NaOH, 0.5 M Na2S and 0.5 M S powder.203 A specific capacitance of 2175 F g−1 was obtained even at the current density of 15 A g−1. The S is easily dissolved in concentrated Na2S solution to form polysulfide anions (Sx2−). Then a series of redox reactions will happen between polysulfide anions Sx2− (x = 2–6) to S2− during the charging/discharging process.
Organic compounds with functional groups such as hydroquinone, quinone and amine were used as intriguing candidates as redox electrolyte mediators for supercapacitors. Hydroquinone (HQ) is one of the good electrochemically active organic compounds involved in a two-electron transfer redox reaction. During the charging process HQ can be oxidized into quinone (Q) near the positive electrode. Then during the discharging process, Q is reduced back to HQ as per eqn (12). (12)This redox property of hydroquinone at the electrolyte–electrode interface contributed to the increase of the total capacitance for the supercapacitor.204–210 The redox reaction between p-phenylenediamine/p-phenylenediimine was also utilized to improve the specific capacitance of a MnO2 based supercapacitor in KOH electrolyte.211
Apart from hydroquinone, other organic redox mediators (such as m-phenylenediamine,212 indigo carmine213 and methylene blue214 and 2-mercaptopyridine215) were reported to improve the specific capacitance of EDLCs via related redox reactions. For m-phenylenediamine, the specific capacitance of the supercapacitor increased not so much (just from 36.43 F g−1 to only 78.01 F g−1) with the optimal concentration of redox-active alkaline electrolyte.212 A reversible process associated with the two-stage redox reaction of indigo carmine (eqn (13)) was found to be responsible for the capacitance increase. (13)The first stage involves the oxidation of the conjugated enol groups of the leuco-indigo species producing the diketone structure of the indigo carmine. The second stage involves the oxidation of indigo through the –NH groups of the indol structures to yield dehydro-indigo.213 Methylene blue gave rise to a capacitance enhancement, about 4.5 times higher than that of the original EDLC based on CNTs, in H2SO4 solution from a two-electron reversible process (eqn (14)).214 (14)Unfortunately, these three organic redox mediators led to limited Faradaic contribution from the redox reactions due to their large mass. Through the use of a redox-active gel electrolyte (2-mercaptopyridine–H2SO4–PVA, eqn (15)), a high area specific capacitance of 507.02 mF cm−2 was achieved in wearable fiber-shaped supercapacitors.215 (15)The fiber-shaped supercapacitor derived from an aligned CNT/mesoporous carbon hybrid fiber was prepared via coating mesoporous carbon onto aligned CNT sheets, followed by rolling into a fiber. More detailed discussions will be given on fiber-shaped supercapacitors in Section 4.4.2.
Self-discharge and leakage currents are the main concerns when applying redox-active electrolytes in supercapacitors. To curb the self-discharge, a bi-redox ionic liquid (IL) was reported, where the anion and cation were functionalized with anthraquinone (AQ) and 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-1-oxyl (TEMPO) moieties, respectively (Fig. 10b).216 The reversible electrochemistry of the redox moieties is shown in Fig. 10c. One couple of peaks at around 0.6 V (vs. AgCl/Ag) was assigned to the reverse reaction between TEMPO radical (MIMC+–TEMPO˙) and TEMPO cation (MIM+–TEMPO+). Two couples of reduction peaks at around −0.7 and −0.9 V (vs. AgCl/Ag) were consistent with the reduction of the AQ–PFS− moiety to the anthraquinone radical anion (AQ˙−–PFS−) and di-anion (AQ2−–PFS−). When using PICA (one type of activated carbon with a significant amount of pores centred at about 1 nm) as an electrode, the specific capacitances were 99, 204 and 370 F g−1 for 0 and 0.5 M and pure bi-redox IL, respectively (Fig. 10d). For self-discharge and leakage current measurements, both supercapacitors based on PICA with BMIMTFSI and 0.5 M bi-redox IL in BMIMTFSI as electrolytes presented similar voltage profiles (Fig. 10e). Rapid voltage decay down to about 2.5 V, followed by a slower decay to reach a plateau at 1.7–1.8 V, was observed. The calculated leakage currents were fairly small, only in the range of a few μA F−1. The bulky size of the redox ions impeded diffusion through the porous electrodes, which greatly reduced the self-discharge. Moreover, the electrosorption of the multi-charged ion as well as the higher viscosity of the electrolyte contributed to the low self-discharge in the bi-redox electrolyte.
4.4 Metal ion hybrid supercapacitors

4.4.1 Li ion capacitors. 
In 2001, a concept named as a Li ion capacitor (or Li ion hybrid supercapacitors) was introduced to improve energy density by integrating the advantages of Li ion batteries and supercapacitors.217 Its patent was filed by Fuji Heavy Industry.218–220 Li ion capacitors combine the energy storage mechanism of supercapacitors and Li ion batteries with anions adsorbing/desorbing onto/from one electrode surface and Li+ ions intercalating/de-intercalating into/from the bulk of the other electrode simultaneously. Thus, the overall process for Li ion capacitors is a cation and anion reversibly consuming reaction, which is different from that of a “rocking-chair” type reaction as in Li ion batteries. There have been several excellent reviews on Li ion capacitors reported between 2012 and 2015.20,221–223 For example, various insertion-type electrodes were systematically summarized for non-aqueous Li ion capacitors in detail.20 Graphene-based electrode materials for Li ion capacitors have been highlighted either as positive- or as negative-electrodes.221 Considering these excellent reviews, in this section, we will just briefly summarize the latest advances in Li ion capacitors reported after 2015, as illustrated in Table 2.
Table 2 The summary of electrochemical performances of the recently reported Li ion capacitor




Li ion capacitor (−)//(+)
Working voltage (V)
Energy density/W h kg−1
Power density/kW kg−1
Cyclea
Ref.





a Cycle number with capacitance retention in brackets.





Li4Ti5O12//C nanosheet
1–3
63
6
6000 (97%)

224



Li4Ti5O12//nanoporous carbon
1–3
57
10
2000 (92%)

225



Mesoporous MnO//activated carbon
0.1–4
227
3
5000 (76%)

226



MnO nanocrystal@C//activated carbon
0.1–4
220
3
3600 (95%)

227



MnNCN//activated carbon
0.1–4
103
8.5
5000 (99%)

228



Nb2O5@CMK-3//activated carbon
0.5–3
44
8.7
1000 (87%)

229



NbN//activated carbon
0–4
149
45
15000 (95%)

230



CuBi2O4 microspheres//activated carbon
0.2–3
24
2
1500 (85%)

231



TiO2@RGO//activated carbon
0–3
50
4
5000 (77%)

232



H-TiO2 nanowire arrays//activated carbon
0–3
94
15
3000 (78%)

233



TiO2@EG//EG
0–3
72
3
1000 (68%)

234a



Li3VO4@EG//EG
0–3.8
110
3.87
2400 (86%)

234b





The commonly used supercapacitor-type electrode materials for Li ion capacitors are carbonaceous materials (activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc.). Among the carbonaceous materials, activated carbon is the most widely used due to its high surface area and relatively low cost. For example, activated carbon nanosheets were obtained via a bottom-up synthesis precisely employing sp2 carbon rich 1,2,4,5-benzene tetracarboxylic acid (BTCA) as a precursor.224 Its specific surface area was extended to 2673 m2 g−1 by a well-known chemical activation process using KOH. Nanoporous carbon was derived from rice husk chemically activated with KOH and H3PO4.225 Rice husk is a naturally abundant biomass waste available worldwide.
Various battery-type electrode materials are used for Li ion capacitors, including carbonaceous materials (like graphite and graphene), metal oxides, intercalation compounds and their composites. Mesocrystal MnO cubes were synthesized using a PVA assisted hydrothermal method in one step.226 The micrometer-sized mesocrystal MnO cubes consisted of numerous homoepitaxially aggregated nanocrystals with percolated porous channels. Spindle-like porous carbon dispersed MnO nanocrystals were prepared through a hydrothermal method followed by calcination at different temperatures.227 The calcination temperature of 600 °C was found to be effective for a low degree of crystallinity, which would benefit the phase transition in conversion reactions at the negative electrode. Besides MnO, MnNCN synthesized through a facile solvothermal method with a following calcination was applied as a new negative electrode for either Li ion capacitors or Li ion batteries.228 The Nb2O5/ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) nanocomposite was synthesized through nanocasting technology using CMK-3 as the hard template and NbCl5 as the precursor.229 CMK-3 is an ordered mesoporous carbon material with ordered pore distribution, large pore volume, high specific surface areas, and intrinsic high conductivity. The conductive porous niobium nitride (NbN) was prepared by the direct nitridation of commercial powdery Nb2O5.230 The uniform hierarchical CuBi2O4 microspheres were synthesized through a facile surfactant-free hydrothermal method.231 The formation of CuBi2O4 microspheres occurs via three different stages: nucleation, Ostwald ripening, and self-assembly. A TiO2/RGO nanocomposite was fabricated by microwave-assisted forced hydrolysis.232 TiO2 with a size of 3 nm is uniformly distributed on the RGO surface.
Prior to construction, the charge-storage performance of a single electrode in a half cell needs to be evaluated to adjust the mass loading, because one electrode undergoes a Faradaic reaction, whereas the other obeys a nonfaradaic mechanism.224 The mass balance between the negative and positive electrodes is one of the pre-requisites to achieve a superior energy density. It should be noted that most reports use total mass loading (negative and positive electrodes) for the calculation of energy and power densities. For the Li4Ti5O12//rice husk derived carbon, it showed a pair of redox peaks with considerable area at the voltage of 2 V.225 The CV curve at 10 mV s−1 was wired because normally the peak separation increased with the scan rate due to overpotentials caused by the sluggish intercalation/deintercalation redox reactions. The EIS spectra of MnO//AC displayed a very low internal resistance of 0.21.226 But this value cannot reflect the IR drops. The IR drops were obtained from a dynamic state in the galvanostatic process that could induce the polarization resistance. While the EIS was measured at the static state of capacitors and the polarization resistance could be avoided.226 The Li ion capacitor with the spindle MnO as a negative electrode and activated carbon as a positive electrode offered a significantly high energy density of 220 W h kg−1, comparable to that of Li ion batteries.227
MnNCN was studied as a negative electrode in Li ion capacitors with activated carbon as the positive electrode.228 Compared with MnO, the longer bonding length of Mn–N in MnNCN and the weaker Pauling electronegativity of N lead to a larger degree of covalent bonding and an increased energy level related to charge transfer, which will be displayed as a lower potential plateau. For the negative electrode, the lower potential benefits the Li ion capacitor with a larger working voltage, and thus higher energy density. Other Li ion capacitors composed of Nb2O5/CMK-3 as the negative electrode and activated carbon as the positive electrode demonstrated an excellent cycling stability.229 The orthorhombic Nb2O5 has a 2D transport path with pseudocapacitive properties and only slight structural change during the intercalation process. Moreover, the CMK-3 could suppress the volume change during Li+ ion insertion and extraction.
The fifth family transition metal nitrides present much better electronic conductivity compared to their oxides and show potential application as the negative electrode in Li ion capacitors.230 The Li ion capacitor fabricated by using NbN as the negative electrode and activated carbon as the positive electrode exhibited an ultrahigh power density of 45 kW kg−1 as well as a superior capacity retention of 95% after 15000 cycles. NbN possessed pseudocapacitive charge-storage properties with fast Li+ ion storage capability. As another novel negative electrode, CuBi2O4 microspheres were applied in Li ion capacitors.231 Li+ ions can reversibly intercalate into CuBi2O4, where the bismuth cations in the CuBi2O4 crystal structure change their valence state via redox reaction. But Li ion capacitors based on CuBi2O4 exhibited a low discharge capacitance (26.5 F g−1) and low energy density (24 W h kg−1) and further optimization is needed in future work.
TiO2 and its composites were also applied as negative electrodes for Li ion capacitors.232–234 The main disadvantage that restricts the applications of TiO2 electrodes is their low electronic conductivity, which would result in the poor rate capability of the Li ion capacitor. The common ways to address this problem are: (1) to tailor the particle size of active materials to the nanometer-scale,232 (2) hydrogenation treatment,233 and (3) coating a conductive layer.234 For example, Ti3+ was efficiently introduced into the TiO2 frameworks by a facile hydrogenation treatment,233 which has also been proved by our previous work.235 Most of the above Li ion capacitors were reported based on liquid electrolytes,217–233 easily resulting in leakage of the electrolytes, which causes serious safety issues. On the basis of our continuous studies on gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) systems,236–239 replacing the liquid electrolyte with a Li ion conducting gel polymer in Li ion capacitors was achieved very recently.234 This quasi-solid-state Li ion capacitor achieved a high energy density of 72 W h kg−1. Even discharging within 1 min at a high current density, an energy density as high as 10 W h kg−1 was retained. The high ionic conductivity (σ) of the GPE is one of the key points to achieve superior power density of Li ion capacitors.


4.4.2 Na ion capacitors. 
Due to the great success of Li ion capacitors, the development of new power sources combining the advantages of both supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries attracts considerable interest. The constraint in the lithium resources on the earth compels researchers to replace lithium with other abundant elements in energy storage devices. Sodium, the second lightest metallic element after lithium, is 4–5 orders of magnitude more abundant than lithium. In this context, Na ion capacitors have been explored by integrating the advantages of Na ion batteries and supercapacitors since 2012.240–242
Similar to Li ion capacitors, the Na ion capacitor couples a battery-type negative electrode with high capacity and a surface adsorption based supercapacitor-style positive electrode with high rate. The negative electrodes for Na ion capacitors include hard carbon (or biowaste-derived carbon),240,243,244 V2O5,241 Na2Ti3O7,242 Nb2O5,245,246 and NiCo2O4,247 and Na3V2(PO4)3.248 Hydrothermal treatment of different TiO2 precursors with concentrated NaOH is a facile and effective way to synthesize sodium titanate nanotubes.242 Peanut shell ordered carbon was prepared by carbonization of peanut shells (1200 °C) in argon, followed by a mild low temperature (300 °C) activation treatment in air.243 The peanut currently has no commercial end uses apart from as filler in animal feed or as charcoal. Thus, peanut shell ordered carbon as the negative electrode for Na ion capacitors will be truly green because it is derived from organic waste products that otherwise possess no economic value. Nb2O5 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets were prepared by a hydrothermal reaction using niobium foil, hydrogen fluoride (HF), and lithium hydroxide (LiOH) as the precursors.245 The pH value of the reaction system is very important since it affects the proceeding of the hydrolysis reaction as shown in eqn (16) and (17): 4Nb + 20F− + 5O2 + 6H2O → 4NbOF52− + 12OH−,(16) 2NbOF52− + 3H2O → Nb2O5 + 10F− + 6H,(17)Normally, the [001] direction of Nb2O5 is the preferential growth orientation due to its lowest energy, leading to 1D Nb2O5 nanorods.
When the pH value increased to a higher level, the growth speed for other orientations would exceed the speed of [001].245 NiCo2O4 displays many intriguing advantages of low-cost, abundant resources and environmentally friendliness. Porous NiCo2O4 was fabricated via a facile and scalable chemical deposition route, followed by annealing at 300 °C.247 The porous NiCo2O4 showed a large specific surface area (190.1 m2 g−1) and high mesopore volume (0.943 cm3 g−1). The supercapacitor-type electrodes for Na ion capacitors are carbon materials, like activated carbon and graphene. For example, 3D macroporous graphene was prepared by a microwave-assisted electrochemical exfoliation in aqueous electrolyte combined with a hard template method.248 First, the ultrathin graphene nanosheets were obtained by expansion of graphite in (NH4)2SO4 aqueous solution under high voltage. Under the high voltage (5–10 V), SO42− ions together with water molecules intercalated into the graphitic layers (positive electrode). The gases (SO2 and O2) produced from SO42− and OH− could exert large forces on the graphite layers, which were sufficient to separate the weakly bonded graphene layers from one another.249,250 Subsequent vacuum filtration was then conducted to realize the sandwich-type assembly of MnCO3 spheres and graphene sheets, followed by removing the MnCO3 template using HCl. 2D V2C from the MXene family was also investigated as the positive electrode for Na ion capacitors.251
V2O5 can accommodate a variety of metal ions, such as Li+ and Na+ ions. However, it generally exhibits poor electronic conductivity and slow ion diffusion. To solve this problem, composites of V2O5 nanowires/CNTs were obtained and applied as the negative electrode for Na ion capacitors.241 The interpenetrating porous networks of this composite provided facile Na+ ion insertion/extraction and fast electron transfer, enabling the fabrication of high-performance Na ion capacitors in an organic electrolyte. For sodium titanate, compared with bulk materials, the predominance of sodium titanate nanotubes enabled an excellent rate performance, which could cater to the demand for supercapacitors.242
The most studied negative electrode for Na ion capacitors is disordered carbon (or hard carbon) because of its large interlayer distances (>0.38 nm) and disordered structures, facilitating Na ion insertion and extraction.240,243,244,252 The assembled Na ion capacitor derived entirely from a single precursor of biomass waste peanut shells operated within a wide temperature range (0–65 °C) and achieved an energy density of above 200 W h kg−1 at room temperature.243 Another Na ion capacitor, in which both the positive and the negative electrodes were based on peanut skin derived carbon nanosheets, finished charging/discharging within 20 s with an energy density of 47 W h kg−1.244 The advantages of such kinds of Na ion capacitors were their simplicity, environmental friendliness and potential for low cost manufacturing of a device with identical waste-derived materials as both electrodes.
Nb2O5 with intercalation pseudocapacitance makes it an ideal negative electrode material in Na ion capacitors.245,246 Nb2O5@C@RGO//AC delivered an exceptionally high energy density (76 W h kg−1) even at a very high power density (20.8 kW kg−1).246 Spinel nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) possessed richer redox chemistry and much higher electronic conductivity than nickel oxides and cobalt oxides.247 It presented Na ion insertion/extraction reactions and conversion reactions at different potentials. Through the effective control of Na ion insertion/extraction reactions in the NiCo2O4 electrode, the 3 V class NiCo2O4//activated carbon exhibited a much superior performance to the theoretical 4.3 V class capacitor. But its energy density was very low (only 13.8 W h kg−1). Hard carbon//V2CTx showed a maximum voltage of 3.5 V and a relatively high specific capacitance.251 But cyclability was not satisfactory and the capacity retention was 70% after only 300 cycles. The potential of the V2CTx electrode went slightly beyond the optimum operating potential range of 1 to 3.5 V, which led to irreversible redox reactions. Interestingly, two Na ions can be extracted from or one Na ion can be inserted into the Na3V2(PO4)3 host, exhibiting two distinctive plateaus of 3.4 and 1.6 V (vs. Na+/Na) with a theoretical capacity of 118 and 59 mA h g−1, respectively.252 So Na3V2(PO4)3 can be applied as either a positive electrode or negative electrode in Na ion capacitors.253
Recently, our group successfully demonstrated the first quasi-solid-state Na ion capacitor in a Na+ ion conducting gel polymer electrolyte with nanoporous carbon nanoparticles and macroporous graphene as the negative and positive electrodes, respectively.248 A Na+ ion conducting gel polymer using a P(VDF–HFP) membrane as the matrix was utilized as the electrolyte. The color of the membrane changed from white to transparent, indicating that the organic electrolyte was successfully entrapped in the pores of the P(VDF–HFP) matrix (Fig. 11a). This quasi-solid-state Na ion capacitor operated at a high voltage up to 4.2 V (Fig. 11b) with an energy density of 168 W h kg−1. In the case of this quasi-solid-state device, the lamination (electrodes and polymer electrolyte), stacking, and hermetic sealing processes are much simpler and cost-effective. Moreover, polymers are lightweight, flame-resistant, and can be shaped to satisfy the requirements for reliable applications. Regrettably, the power density of such Na ion capacitors is relatively not high. Using the same gel polymer electrolyte, another quasi-solid-state Na ion capacitor was designed based on urchin-like Na2Ti3O7 as the negative electrode and peanut shell derived carbon as the positive electrode (Fig. 11c).254 Such a flexible quasi-solid-state Na ion capacitor was sealed by two thin pieces of foil/poly bag film. It achieved an energy density of 33.2 W h kg−1 even at a high power density of 11.2 kW kg−1. Importantly, it presented remarkable mechanical robustness and there was no obvious capacitance loss under different bending conditions (Fig. 11d). Such superior performances indicate that the quasi-solid-state Na ion capacitor may be the key to bridge the gap between rechargeable batteries and supercapacitors, meanwhile meeting the safety demands of electronic devices.
 Fig. 11  The quasi-solid-state electrolyte, electrochemical behavior and flexible device for Na ion capacitors. An optical photograph showing the polymer electrolyte (a) before and (b) after the gel for the quasi-solid-state sodium ion capacitor (hard carbon//graphene). (c) Its galvanostatic charge/discharge curves from 0 to 4.2 V at different current densities (modified from ref. 248, copyright permission from Wiley). (d) Schematic illustration of the flexible Na ion capacitor. (e) The capacitance retention of the flexible Na ion capacitor under different bending conditions (modified from ref. 254, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society). 


4.4.3 Other metal ion capacitors. 
Apart from Na ion based systems, K ion based energy storage systems also offer an attractive alternative due to the low cost and natural abundance of K resources. K metal has a lower redox potential (−2.93 V for K+/K vs. SHE compared to Na with −2.71 V for Na+/Na vs. SHE).255 Although the atomic weight ratio of K against Li is 5.7 (=39/6.9), the ratio of (P2-type K2/3CoO2)/(LiCoO2) is only 1.19, which means that the atomic weight of K does not remarkably affect the gravimetric capacity and total weight of the K ion-based energy storage system. Like Li ion capacitors or Na ion capacitors, exploiting electrode materials holds the key for developing high-performance K ion capacitors. Recently, a graphite–polyacrylate electrode was proposed as a negative electrode for 4 V class K ion capacitors.256 Sodium polyacrylate was utilized as the binder to improve the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI)-passivation. KClO4 and KBF4 were almost insoluble in propylene carbonate (PC) while KPF6 was not completely dissolved into ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate (EC/DEC). The electrolyte used in the K ion capacitors was 1 M KFSI dissolved into EC/DEC. The authors also showed that the ionic conductivities at ambient temperature were 9.3, 9.7 and 10.7 mS cm−1 for 1 M LiFSI, NaFSI, and KFSI in EC/DEC, respectively.256 The high conductivity is very important for ion transfer in electrolytes and at the electrode/electrolyte interface, especially in the application of supercapacitors. K+ ions can be intercalated into graphite to form KC8 with a stage-1 structure with a capacity of 279 mA h g−1. However, at a low potential (close to 0–0.2 V vs. K+/K), both K metal plating and intercalation of K ions into the graphite would occur on the negative electrode. In such a case, the emerging major problem is the growth of K-dendrites at such low potential, causing safety hazards and exposing the device to wide safety concerns. It should be noted that K metal is violently reactive compared to Li and Na metals and its melting point (64 °C) is much lower than others. In this regard, a safe aqueous K ion capacitor was built based on KxMnO2 as an active material in a K2SO4 electrolyte.145c It worked in the entire voltage region of 0 to 1.9 V with no more than 2% capacitance loss after 10000 cycles. Another hybrid K ion capacitor (KIC) was assembled based on activated carbon and high quality cubic Prussian blue in a K2SO4 electrolyte solution.257 It presented a maximum energy density of 28 W h kg−1 with capacity retention of nearly 98% over 1200 cycles. Prussian blue and its analogues (PBAs), one class of MOFs, have received attention from the community owing to their impressive electrochemical performance with reversible intercalation of different metal ions as well as easy synthesis procedures.1c
Beyond monovalent metal ion systems, multivalent metal-ion (Al3+etc.) based energy storage systems are of interest due to their potentially higher energy. Aluminum (Al) is the most abundant metal element in the Earth's crust.258 Moreover, the aluminum-based redox couple engages a three-electron transportation during the electrochemical charge/discharge reactions, which offers viable storage capacity relative to the Li- or Na-ion capacitors from a single electron. Reversible Al ion storage behaviors in Prussian blue analogues and MoO3 nanotubes were recently proposed for aqueous Al ion capacitors.259,260 The Al ion capacitor, using Al0.2CuFe–PBA as the positive electrode and activated carbon as the negative electrode, achieved an energy density of 13 W h kg−1. At a current rate as high as 100C (34 mA cm−2), its capacitance remained more than 65% of that for discharging at 1C.259 Another Al ion capacitor, assembled by using a composite of MoO3 nanotubes coated by a conductive polypyrrole (PPy@MoO3) as the negative electrode and activated carbon as the positive electrode, presented an energy density of 30 W h kg−1 with an operation voltage up to 1.5 V in aqueous electrolyte.260 Its cycling stability with 93% retention of the initial specific capacitance after 1800 cycles was competitive to those of the latest reported Li/Na ion capacitors as discussed in the above section. The shell PPy can absorb the small amount of acid from the hydrolysis of 0.5 M Al2(SO4) electrolyte capacitors, which alleviates the acid etching of the core MoO3. No new phases emerge from the ex situ XRD spectra when the Al3+ ions intercalate into MoO3. Yet, CV scans of MoO3 in aqueous Al2(SO4)3 electrolyte do not support a strictly capacitive process. The b value is close to 0.5, indicating that the kinetics may be solid-state diffusion. Thus, whether the observed Al ion intercalation in MoO3 can be categorized as a pseudocapacitive response is not clear. Another pending question is whether there is a dehydration reaction process during trivalent Al3+ ion insertion. Al3+ ions have a smaller Shannon radius (39 pm) compared to Na+ ions (102 pm), K+ ions (151 pm) and Mg2+ ions (72 pm). But, Al3+ ions, with a radius of 480 pm, have very strong ion–water interactions due to their high charge. Of course, further direct evidence about the reaction mechanism based on some in situ characterization techniques is further needed.

4.5 Microsupercapacitors

4.5.1 Fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors. 
Recently, fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors have been demonstrated with a twisted fiber configuration made from ZnO nanowire electrodes, which utilize 1D cylindrically shaped fibers as electrodes.261,262 Currently, there are mainly three types of device configurations for fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors, including two parallel fibers (Fig. 12a), two twisted fibers (Fig. 12b) and one coaxial fiber (Fig. 12c). Parallel fiber microsupercapacitors were produced by integrating more fiber electrodes on the planar substrate, while the twisted-fiber microsupercapacitors were fabricated by twisting two fiber electrodes together with a solid state electrolyte between them.262 The third one, a coaxial-fiber microsupercapacitor, was achieved by layer-by-layer assembly of a core fiber electrode, a solid state electrolyte, and an outer electrode layer.263,264 Currently, several types of carbonaceous fibers and carbon-based composite fibers containing pseudo-capacitive materials are applied for fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors, as summarized in Table 3. In some cases, only partial data were listed because some information was missing in the original references.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors with different configurations. (a) Parallel electrodes, (b) twisted electrodes and (c) coaxial electrodes. 
Table 3 The summary of electrochemical performances of recently reported fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors




Fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor (−)//(+)
Configuration
Working voltage (V)
Energy density
Power density
Cyclea
Ref.





a Cycle number with capacitance retention in brackets.





Pen ink//pen ink
Parallel
0–1
2.70 × 10−6 W h cm−2
9.07 mW cm−2
15000

265



Ink-gel activated carbon//ink-gel
Coaxial
0–0.8
—
—
—

266



Activated carbon@cotton//activated carbon@cotton
Parallel
0–0.8
—
—
3000 (77%)

267



Porous C//porous C
Parallel
0–0.8
3.7 × 10−7 W h cm−1
70.3 μW cm−1
4000 (88%)

268



CFs//CFs
Twisted
0–1
0.35 mW h cm−3
3 W cm−3
10000 (91%)

269



Activated carbon@CF//activated carbon@CF
Twisted
0–1
6.5 μW h cm−1
220 mW h cm−1
10000 (87%)

270



CNT//CNT
Coaxial
0–1
1.88 W h kg−1
755.9 W kg−1
11000 (100%)

271



Graphene//graphene
Parallel
0–1
—
—
2000 (94%)

272



Graphene//graphene
Coaxial
0–0.8
17.5 μW h cm−2
819 μW cm−2
10000

273



Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT
Parallel
0–0.8
—
—
5000

274



Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT
Twisted
0–1
2.4 mW h cm−3
0.016 W cm−3
10000

275



N-Doped graphene@CNT//N-doped graphene@CNT
Parallel
0–1
6.3 mW h cm−3
1085 mW cm−3
10000 (93%)

276



Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT
Parallel
0–1
2.8 mW h cm−1
379 mW cm−1
10000 (92%)

277



Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT
Parallel
0–0.8
—
—
1000 (80%)

278



Activated carbon@graphene//activated carbon@graphene
Twisted
0–0.8
2.5 mW h cm−3
5 mW cm−3
10000 (94%)

279



MnO2@CNT//MnO2@CNT
Twisted
0–2
92.84 mW h cm−3
3.87 W cm−3
1000

280



MoS2@CNT//MoS2@CNT
Twisted
0–0.8
0.55 W cm−3
3 mW h cm−3
10000 (92%)

281



NiCo2O4@PPy@CNT//NiCo2O4@PPy@CNT
Parallel
0–1
17.5 W h kg−1
4 kW kg−1
10000 (87%)

282



MnO2@graphene//MnO2@graphene
Twisted
0–0.8
–
—
1000 (80%)

283



PEDOT–PSS@graphene//PEDOT–PSS@graphene
Parallel
0–0.8
27.1 μW h cm−2
200 μW cm−2
10000 (96%)

284



N-Doped graphene@CNT//MnO2@graphene@CNT
Parallel
0–1.8
5 mW h cm−3
929 mW cm−3
10000 (87%)

285



V2O5@PANI@CFs//MnO2@PPy@C
Coaxial
0–2
10.8 mW h cm−2
30 mW cm−2
5000

286



OMC@CNT//MnO2@PEDOT–PSS@CNT
Twisted
0–1.8
11.3 mW h cm−3
2.1 W cm−3
10000 (85%)

287



CNT//MnO2@ZnO2@CNTs
Twisted
0–1.8
13.25 mW h cm−2
2.1 W cm−2
1000 (97%)

288



Porous C@CF//NiCo2O4@CF
Twisted
0–1.65
0.53 mW h cm−3
1 W cm−2
3000 (92%)

289



CoFe2O4@PANI@graphene//Co(OH)2
Parallel
0–1.5
27 μW h cm−3
625 μW cm−1
1000

290



MoS2@graphene@CNTs//graphene@CNT
Parallel
0–1.6
—
—
7000

291



Ni3S2 nanorod array//pen ink
Coaxial
0–1.4
0.81 mW h cm−3
285 mW cm−3
3000 (93%)

292



OMC//Ni(OH)2
Twisted
0–1.5
2.16 mW h cm−3
1.6 W cm−3
10000 (70%)

293





A simple dip-coating method was applied to form pen-ink-coated metal wires, which were then assembled into parallel fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors.265 A spacer wire was utilized for the efficient separation of the two fiber electrodes. It displayed a maximum capacitance of 19.5 mF cm−2, an energy density of 2.70 × 10−6 W h cm−2, and a power density of 9.07 mW cm−2. Pen ink possesses advantages of low cost, high stability, and well-established industrial production. A coaxial fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor was demonstrated using ink-gel activated carbons.266 It consisted of three active coating layers and one silver paint layer for the current collector. The first and third active layers served as positive and negative electrodes, respectively, prepared by using Chinese ink and activated carbon slurry. The second layer was an electrolyte using a PVA–H3PO4–H2O gel solution. Its capacitance was calculated to be 0.1 mF cm−1 (3.18 mF cm−2). Activated carbon can also be introduced into swelled cellulose yarns (cotton, linen, bamboo, and viscose) through a welding process.267 The natural fiber welded material yielded high activated carbon mass loadings per length of yarn ranging from 0.35 mg cm−1 up to 0.62 mg cm−1, achieving high capacitance per length of 8 mF cm−1 up to 37 mF cm−1 at 2 mV s−1, respectively. However, not all of the electrode yarns are suitable for knitting. Only the activated carbons, linen, bamboo and viscose yarns, were successfully knitted into symmetric fabric devices. Another fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor was fabricated by using porous carbon derived from the dead leaves of Ficus religiosa.268 Its calculated length capacitance and energy density were 4.2 mF cm−1 and 37.3 × 10−8 W h cm−1, respectively.
Carbon fiber (CF) consists of graphite filaments of about 5–10 μm in diameter. Pristine CF has a low surface area (<10 m2 g−1) and poor porosity. Activated CF was utilized to construct fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors with excellent flexibility and weavability.269
Activation of pristine CFs was achieved by oxidative exfoliation with KMnO4/H2SO4, annealing in air, and reducing with a mixture of hydrogen iodide (HI) and acetic acid (AcOH). The specific volumetric capacitance of the activated CF tows presented a 22-fold increase up to 14.2 F cm−3. Their capacitance retention was maintained at nearly 100% when bending from 0° to 180°. Conductive CFs can act as current collectors in fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors and as substrates for depositing large surface area activated carbon particles.270 A 10 cm long fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor, with the composition of 2.2 mg cm−1 of activated carbons and 1 mg cm−1 of CF, exhibited an ultra-high length capacitance of 45.2 mF cm−1 together with an energy density of 6.5 μW h cm−1. It retained an energy density of 3.0 mW h cm−1 even at a higher power density of 220 mW h cm−1.
Due to their remarkable mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were widely studied as electrode materials for fabricating fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors.271 CNT fibers were dry-spun from CNT arrays. The resulting fiber showed electronic conductivity at the level of 102–103 S cm−1. The microsupercapacitor based on CNT fibers in a coaxial structure displayed a maximum discharge capacitance of 59 F g−1 (32.09 F cm−3 or 29 μF cm−1 or 8.66 mF cm−2). This value is much higher than that of microsupercapacitors by twisting the same CNT fibers together, suggesting that the coaxial structure allows an adequate transportation of ions between the two electrodes.
Graphene nanosheets and its composites were also made into continuous fibers as electrodes for fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors.272–279 For example, a graphene-based coaxial fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor was fabricated with a continuous liquid crystal wet-spun core fiber and a dip-coated cylinder sheath fiber as two electrodes.273 The face-to-face structure of the two electrodes showed lower solution resistance compared with the twisted-structured graphene based microsupercapacitor. Graphene nanosheets were incorporated among neighboring CNTs, serving as effective bridges to improve the charge transport because of strong π–π interactions between CNTs and graphene.274
As expected, the specific capacitance of fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors was improved by incorporating second phases such as conducting polymers or metal oxide into carbon materials. Pseudocapacitive electrode materials have higher specific capacitance but poor conductivity. The incorporation of MnO2 nanoparticles,280 MoS2 nanosheets281 and NiCo2O4 nanowires282 into CNT fibers has been achieved as electrodes in recent years. After the deposition of second phases, the high flexibility, strengths and conductivities in the CNTs were all well maintained. Compared with the CNT fiber, the graphene fiber demonstrated much higher loading capability and better flexibility for a second phase.283,284 The electronic conductivities of the hollow graphene/conducting polymer composite fibers reached 4700 S m−1, in which the conducting polymer was a composite of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) with poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS).284 The obtained fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor demonstrated a specific areal capacitance up to 304.5 mF cm−2 (or 143.3 F cm−3 or 63.1 F g−1) at 0.08 mA cm−2.
All the above reported fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors were based on a symmetric device configuration with two identical fiber electrodes, and their operating voltages were limited to 0.8–1 V.265–284 Apart from increasing the specific capacitances of the electrode materials, extending the voltage window makes an enormous contribution to the increase of energy density as well. A promising strategy to achieve both wide voltage window and high energy density is to construct asymmetric fiber microsupercapacitors. Asymmetric supercapacitors can make full use of two different electrodes, exhibiting two different potential windows in the same electrolyte. Accordingly, the working voltage windows increase and thus the energy densities are improved significantly. MnO2 and its composites are the most commonly used positive electrode materials for asymmetric fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors with carbon or other metal oxides as negative electrodes.285–288 Mixed transition–metal oxides (like NiCo2O4 and CoFe2O4) were also promising positive electrodes for asymmetric fiber microsupercapacitors due to their good electrochemical properties, such as excellent reversibility and conductivity.289,290 Besides metal oxides, MoS2, Ni3S2 and Ni(OH)2 were also reported as positive electrodes for asymmetric fiber microsupercapacitors recently.291–293 MoS2 nanosheets can efficiently store charges by pseudocapacitance within a positive potential window resulting from the Faradaic charge-transfer process on the Mo center or the formation of a double-layer at the electrode/electrolyte interface because of the adsorption of protons or other cations on the nanosheet. These asymmetric fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors operated in a wide potential window up to 1.4 V even to 2.0 V,285–292 which greatly enhanced the energy densities of fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors.


4.5.2 Plane microsupercapacitors. 
The initial generation of 2D micro-supercapacitors is based on a planar architecture like thin film batteries. These types of devices usually consist of thin film electrodes with a thickness of micro-size. Currently, such kinds of thin film devices are commercially available and are not included here. In this section, we focus on the plane micro-supercapacitor with interdigital electrode architecture (fingers). As early as 2003, interdigitated micro-supercapacitors were achieved through the electrodeposition of conducting polymers on interdigital gold or platinum micro-electrodes on Si/SiO2 substrates.294 These gold or platinum microelectrode arrays were prepared by UV photolithography and a wet etching method. Actually, the key step for micro-supercapacitors with in-plane interdigital electrode architecture was the advanced microfabrication method, which could accurately control very small distances between the interdigital electrodes.295 Currently, many methods are reported for such micro-supercapacitors, such as (1) the mask-assisted current collector protection method, (2) laser-patterning directly performed on a thin film of active material to form the interdigital electrodes, (3) printing and (4) spray coating.
For the first method, normally, there were two different steps after fabricating interdigital current collectors: removing the extra active materials without coating the current collector296–302 or depositing active materials on the current collector.303–308 Taking one example in Fig. 13a for illustration, a thin film of graphene was obtained on a modified silicon wafer by rapidly reducing a GO film from spin-coating a GO dispersion. Next, micro-mask techniques were applied to manufacture interdigital microelectrode patterns through the deposition of gold current collectors. After that, oxidative etching in oxygen plasma was utilized to remove the extra graphene film without the current collector. Finally, a GPE (H2SO4/PVA) was drop-casted onto the interdigital electrodes and solidified.297 Such microdevices operated at an ultrahigh rate of up to 1000 V s−1, which was several orders of magnitude higher than that of conventional supercapacitors. If there are any metal oxides in the electrodes, the device needs to be placed in an acid solution to remove the residual metal oxides.300 Another microsupercapacitor based on micrometer-thick PANi@graphene was developed using the same method.301 It delivered an ultrahigh areal capacitance of 368 mF cm−2 and a landmark volumetric capacitance of 736 F cm−3, which were very high values among the reported state-of-the-art plane microsupercapacitors.301 Deposited active materials on the interdigital current collector were also applied to obtain plane microsupercapacitors. Onion-like carbon (OLC) particles, produced by annealing nanodiamond powder at 1800 °C, were deposited from colloidal suspensions using an electrophoretic deposition technique (EPD) onto interdigital gold current collectors patterned on silicon wafers (Fig. 13b). It showed regular widths of 150 μm and an interspace of 50 μm between neighbouring electrode fingers (Fig. 13c). The microdevice was constructed with 16 interdigital electrodes with thicknesses of 7 μm (Fig. 13d). The OLC-based micro-supercapacitors showed a specific capacitance of 0.9 mF cm−2 even at 100 V s−1 (Fig. 13e). It also sustained very high scan rates, like electrolytic capacitors. In contrast, the capacitance of microdevices based on 5.0 mm-thick activated carbon (1700–1800 m2 g−1) fell quickly at a higher scan rate.303
 Fig. 13  Some fabrication methods reported for plane micro-supercapacitors. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of RGO based microsupercapacitors via the mask-assisted current collector protection method (modified from ref. 297, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). (b) Schematic of the carbon anion based micro-supercapacitors. (c) Optical image of its interdigital fingers with 100 mm spacing. (d) Scanning electron microscope image of the cross-section of the carbon anion electrode. (e) Plot of specific capacitance versus scan rate (modified from ref. 303, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of RGO based micro-supercapacitors via the laser-patterning direct writing method. (g) An optical photograph showing a lot of RGO based microsupercapacitors on a DVD media disc (modified from ref. 311, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). 
Many graphene based microsupercapacitors were fabricated using an unconventional method of direct laser reduction and patterning of hydrated GO.309–313 The laser patterned part of the GO film (reduced GO) worked as the electrodes. When GO absorbed high-intensity light, it was converted into graphene. While the hydrated GO between the electrodes served as the separator since hydrated GO was simultaneously a good ionic conductor and an electrical insulator.309 Compared with the above methods utilizing interdigital current collectors, this direct laser patterned technique does not require masks, expensive materials, post-processing or clean room operations. Later, more than 100 microsupercapacitors were produced on a single disc in less than 30 minutes by direct laser writing on GO films using a standard LightScribe DVD burner (Fig. 13f and g).311 Using LightScribe, interdigitated electrodes were precisely patterned with a lateral spatial resolution of 20 μm. The production of 3D porous graphene films from polyimide was achieved by a CO2 infrared laser.314,315 The sp3-carbon atoms were photothermally converted to sp2-carbon atoms by pulsed laser irradiation. The ultra-polycrystalline nature of this laser induced graphene had an abundance of grain boundaries (GBs), which were composed of pentagon and heptagon pairs. These defects were more ‘metallic’ than regular hexagons and could enhance the charge storage performance from theoretical calculations.314
Interdigitated electrodes were also obtained by cutting the active material films.316,317 However, this cutting method by hand is not suitable for large-scale production of microsupercapacitors. Very recently, the direct printing of microsupercapacitors was developed by spray-coating an electrochemically exfoliated graphene hybrid ink through a shadow mask with the designed geometry.318 The thickness of the patterned microelectrodes was easily controlled by adjusting the amount of graphene ink and the number of spray-coating cycles. To meet the industrial requirements for scale-up production of microsupercapacitor arrays, an inkjet printing technique was realized using a commercial inkjet printer.318 Such printable microsupercapacitors showed great potential for “ultra flexible” device architectures, which could be attached to a human finger or other body parts. Besides graphene ink, CNT ink was also carefully micropipetted into two micro-channels perpendicular to the finger-like micro-channels through a wetting-induced micro-patterning fabrication approach.319 The flow of the CNT ink was guided and patterned by hydrophilic open micro-channels on PDMS.
Asymmetric micro-supercapacitors were developed to extend their operating voltage windows.320,321 For example, MnO2 nanoflowers were selectively electrodeposited on one set of graphene microelectrodes produced by direct writing on GO films using a consumer-grade LightScribe DVD burner.321 Charge balance between the two electrodes was achieved by controlling the deposition time of MnO2 at the positive electrode and the thickness of the graphene film at the negative electrode. In addition, the micro Li ion capacitor was fabricated by using a special micro electro-mechanical systems fabrication technology.320 This micro Li ion capacitor worked at a voltage range of 0–3.8 V. Compared with the symmetric AC supercapacitor in a LiPF6 electrolyte, it achieved much higher energy density due to both higher capacitance and extended voltage.


4.5.3 3D microsupercapacitors. 
The tailored dimensionality is a new development direction in the field of microsupercapacitors. Microsupercapacitors could gain enormous benefits through a redesign from 2D to 3D. For example, higher areal energy density could be easily obtained without loss in power density, simply by increasing the height of an interdigitated electrode.322 Moreover, the 3D microarchitecture can bring increased energy density by fully utilizing the limited volume available.
Several 3D microsupercapacitors have been reported so far based on Pt@RuO2 core–shell nanotubular electrodes,323 ripple-like CNT@RuO2,324 and RuO2 nanotubes.325 Because of facilitated transport of protons and electrons, high specific capacitances (100–320 mF cm−2) were obtained, demonstrating high utilization of RuO2 electrodes. The application of nanostructured MnO2 materials on 3D Si nanowires arrays326–328 and Ni nanocone arrays329 also emerged as a promising strategy for preparing high-performance 3D microsupercapacitors. MnO2 was normally electrodeposited on the resulting 3D conducting architecture. Its thicknesses could be controlled according to the number of deposition pulses.
The above 3D designs were mainly focused on the electrodes, while architectures of devices may be more essential in designing 3D microsupercapacitors. Among the 3D concepts that have emerged for microsupercapacitors, three types of device architectures were suggested, which were similar to those 3D micro-Li ion batteries, as shown in Fig. 14. The first one is based on interdigitated rod electrodes (Fig. 14a). The positive and negative electrodes with 1D nanorods alternate to form ordered 3D arrays separated by the electrolyte. The second is constituted by interdigitated plates rather than rods (Fig. 14b). Alternative layer stacked Au/MnO2/Au electrodes for such microsupercapacitors were fabricated through combining laser printing technology with the electrodeposition technique.330 Besides, the 3D printing technique can be applied to build up such microstructures, which has been demonstrated in Li ion batteries.331,332 The third one is a concentric 3D architecture (Fig. 14c), in which a rod-shaped electrode is coated by an electrolyte layer and the remaining volume is filled by the other electrode. Thus, the volume is fully utilized and the energy density can be increased. However, such microarchitecture is just conceptual and far from reality. Generally, the manufacturing of 3D microsupercapacitors involves tedious processes, and cost-saving production technologies are highly desirable in this field in the future.
 Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of 3D microsupercapacitors with different configurations. (a) Interdigitated rod electrode, (b) interdigitated plate electrode, and (c) concentric electrode. 

4.6 Multifunctional supercapacitors

4.6.1 Electrochromic supercapacitors. 
Some electrode materials reversibly change their colors during electrochemical reduction/oxidation processes, which can be clearly observed when they are fabricated on transparent current collectors. This phenomenon is known as electrochromism.333 Electrochromism shows great potential application in variable transmittance windows such as in energy-efficient architecture, non-emissive information displays, and variable-reflectance mirrors.334 Electrochromic materials, discovered in the late 1960s, include various transition metal oxides and conducting polymers.335 If a supercapacitor can change its color according to its charge/discharge state, its charge/discharge states can be monitored by simple visual inspection.
The important parameters of electrochromism are coloration efficiency (CE) and the switching time. The coloration efficiency (CE) is defined as the change in optical density (ΔOD) per unit charge (ΔQ) into the electrode. It can be calculated from the following formula: CE(λ) = ΔOD(λ)/ΔQ = log(Tb/Tc)/ΔQ,(18)where Tb and Tc denote the transmittance in the bleached and colored states, respectively, at a certain wavelength. The switching time is defined as the time required for a system to reach 90% of its full optical modulation, which is also a direct indicator of the kinetics in the electrochemical process.336
The most commonly used electrochromic oxides for supercapacitors are based on tungsten oxides.337–340 Following eqn (19), [WO3]bleached + xH+ + xe− ↔ [HxWO3]colored(19)the color of the WO3 electrode changes from transparent to dark blue due to the increasing formation of blue color center W5+ polarons during the discharge process. While the W5+ was oxidized back to the higher valence states during the charge process, accompanied by a color loss due to the extraction of H+ ions from the WO3 film. WO3 films deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass exhibited a high specific capacitance of 639.8 F g−1, with an abrupt decrease in optical transmittance from 91.3% to 15.1% at a wavelength of 633 nm when a voltage of −0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) was applied.337 Actually, the capacitance of WO3 film was thickness-dependent. The total electrochemically stored charge in WO3 contained three parts: the Faradaic contribution from the slow H+ ion insertion process (solid-state ion diffusion), the Faradaic contribution from the fast charge-transfer process at the surface (pseudocapacitance), and the nonfaradaic contribution from the fast electric double layer effect.338 The 100 nm-thick WO3 film exhibited the highest charge capacity at high rates, and more than 78% stored charges were attributed to capacitive effects at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.338 Besides the active materials, another key component of electrochromic supercapacitors is the current collector, which not only needs to be highly transparent but also highly conductive. The most commonly used transparent conducting current collectors are indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass and FTO-coated glass.337,338 However, ITO and FTO as transparent current collectors are unsuitable for flexible electronics applications due to their brittleness and the high cost of the preparation procedure. Thus, silver grid/polyethylene terephthalate (PET) transparent electrodes coated with one layer of PEDOT:PSS were introduced to WO3-based electrochromic supercapacitors.339 The WO3 on the silver grid/PEDOT:PSS hybrid film displayed specific capacitances of 221.1, 195.4, 168.6, 153.1, and 148.6 F g−1 at 1, 2, 5, 8, and 10 A g−1, respectively. Furthermore, the WO3 on the silver grid/PEDOT:PSS hybrid film showed an effective color change during fast charge and discharge processes with a high coloration efficiency (CE) of 124.5 cm2 C−1.
Another electrochromic oxide for supercapacitors is nickel oxide (NiO) and the schematic reaction is summarized in eqn (20). [NiO]bleached + OH− − e− ↔ [NiOOH]colored.(20)The color of the NiO electrode changes from brown (colored state) to transparent (bleached state). Electrochromic supercapacitors based on direct growth of NiO nanoparticle films on ITO glass achieved short switching time for coloration and bleaching (only 11.5 and 9.5 s).341
It had an outstanding stable and reversible electrochromic effect, which sustained a transmittance modulation of about 90.8% of the initial value after 1000 cycles. Supercapacitors built from NiO nanoflake films displayed a high areal capacitance of 74.8 mF cm−2 with a large transmittance modulation of 40% and a CE of 63.2 cm2 C−1 at a wavelength of 632.8 nm.342 Besides NiO, supercapacitors made from gyroid-structured V2O5 electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of 155 F g−1 in lithium salt electrolytes with a strong electrochromic color change from green/gray to yellow during the charge/discharge process.343
Apart from metal oxides, PANi films have been widely explored in applications of electrochromic supercapacitors.344–346 PANi films exhibit reversible color changes from transparent leucoemeraldine to yellow-green emeraldine then to dark blue-black pernigraniline. As a good illustration, asymmetric supercapacitors were fabricated from two electrochromic materials with W18O49 as the negative electrode and PANi as the positive electrode.346 Both electrode materials in this asymmetric supercapacitor possessed excellent electrochemical and electrochromic behaviors, which operated in different potential windows, −0.5 to 0 V (W18O49) and 0–0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (PANi) as shown in Fig. 15a. The change in coloration of the PANi during oxidation commenced at a potential of 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and ended at 0.8 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), while the response for the W18O49 started at 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) and finished at −0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) during reduction (Fig. 15b). One electrode was colored while the other was bleached. In addition, this electrochromic supercapacitor displayed excellent cycling properties with no signs of degradation through repeated cycles (Fig. 15c). Integrating electrochromism into a supercapacitor presents a significant opportunity in the development of future supercapacitors with imaginative and humanization features.
 Fig. 15  (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of W18O49 nanowires and PANi at different current densities. In situ optical response of W18O49 nanowires and PANi at 633 nm showing transmittance variation with (b) potential and (c) time (modified from ref. 346, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society). 


4.6.2 Self-healing supercapacitors. 
To restore the supercapacitor configuration integrity and electrical properties after mechanical damage, self-healing supercapacitors are fabricated by the integration of appropriate self-healing materials into supercapacitor devices. The first self-healing supercapacitor was designed by spreading CNT films onto self-healing substrates composed of a supramolecular network (with a low glass transition temperature below room temperature) and hierarchical flower-like TiO2 nanostructures.347 A PVP–H2SO4 gel served as both the electrolyte and separator. The interaction between TiO2 nanospheres and supramolecules by hydrogen bonds held the shape of the supramolecular networks and enhanced the glass transition temperature. After cutting, lateral movement of the underlying self-healing composition layer brings the separated areas of the SWCNT layer into contact and restored its conductivity. In the case of the electrolyte, PVP gel was a self-adhering material and could self-heal to some extent. When the device was damaged, the specific capacitance of the 5th healing was 30 F g−1 with the capacitance retention ratio of about 85.7%. The capacitance of the self-healing supercapacitor decreased gradually with increasing cycles of cutting and healing. The ESRs of this supercapacitor before cutting and after the 1st, 3rd and 5th healing were 4.8, 9.8, 13.1, and 15.2 Ω, respectively.
Compared with the conventional supercapacitor, fiber microsupercapacitors are seriously limited by accidental mechanical damage during practical applications since the reconnection of the broken fiber electrode composed of multiple tiny fibers (diameter <20 μm) is much more difficult and challenging. Fortunately, self-healing fiber supercapacitors were successfully developed by wrapping wire-like electrodes around a self-healing polymer shell.348,349 When the broken parts were brought back into contact, an aligned-CNT strand was more favorable for the self-healing of an electrical property. Hydrogen bonds would be formed between the two sections of the self-healing polymer fibers, and the aligned CNTs between the two cross-sections were thus re-connected by van der Waals forces during the self-healing process of the polymer.348 To improve its specific capacitance, polyaniline (PANi) was uniformly incorporated into the aligned CNTs through electropolymerization. To enhance the reconnection of broken electrodes, magnetic electrodes (Fe3O4/PPy) with a self-healing polyurethane (PU) shell were applied to the supercapacitor.349 The strong force from magnetic attraction between the broken yarn electrodes benefited reconnection of fibers in the electrodes, enabling efficient recovery of electrochemical performance after self-healing. The specific capacitance of the magnetic electrode was restored to 71.8% after the fourth healing.
A new electrolyte, comprised of polyacrylic acid dual crosslinked by hydrogen bonding and vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticles (VSNPs-PAA), has been developed for a self-healing supercapacitor recently.350 This polyelectrolyte had advantages of tuneable ionic conductivity, self-healability and high stretchability. It was easily self-repaired at room temperature and was stretched over 3700% without any cracks. During the hydrogen bond forming process, small conductive CNT patches were utilized to overcome the well-known misalignment problem of self-healing supercapacitors. The capacitances from both CV and charge/discharge curves were maintained completely during all 20 breaking/healing cycles. This is superior to all the previous work.347–349 The excellent self-healing property was attributed to intrinsically self-healable electrolyte and small CNT patches.


4.6.3 Piezoelectric supercapacitors. 
In 2006, the report on piezoelectric ZnO nanowires for electricity generation attracted substantial attention on piezoelectric materials in energy harvesting and transducer technology.351 A mechanical-to-electrochemical piezoelectric supercapacitor can be fabricated using a piezoelectric film to replace the traditional separator of a supercapacitor. However, these inorganic nanowire-based electrical generators are fragile to strain. In this regard, piezoelectric polymers (polyamide (PA) and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) with a predominantly β-phase crystal structure) are promising alternatives for excellent processibility and flexibility, and low cost.352
The core of a piezoelectric supercapacitor is the piezo-separator which is normally a well-polarized PVDF film located between the electrodes. The piezoelectricity originates from the polar β crystalline phase where the C–F dipoles align in the same direction and thus produce intrinsic charges.353 In the piezo-electrochemical mechanism, piezoelectric potential created by the mechanical strain along the PVDF film can drive anion and cation migration towards the interface of the positive and negative electrodes establishing an electronic double layer or pseudo-capacitance at the interface; thus electricity is therefore stored in the form of electrochemical energy (Fig. 16). The hybridization of the two separate energy processes (i.e., mechanically harvesting energy created from a piezoelectric potential and storing electrochemical energy induced by ion migration) can supply continuous power by the mechanical deformation from the environment without using external DC power.354
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the working principle of piezoelectric supercapacitors driven by compressive straining. Piezoelectric potential can be created by the mechanical strain along the PVDF film, which will drive anions and cations to migrate towards the interface of the positive and negative electrode establishing an electronic double layer at the interface. 
Because of their excellent mechanical stability and intrinsic flexibility, functionalized carbon cloths have been assembled as both positive and negative electrodes with polarized PVDF films coated with a H2SO4/PVA electrolyte.355 The maximum specific capacitance of 357.6 F m−2 was obtained at 8 A m−2, retaining 59.84% of the capacitance when the current density was increased to 200 A m−2. When the charging process was performed under a continuous compressive force with the average frequency of 4.5 Hz, the voltage of the piezo-supercapacitor was increased to 100 mV within 40 s. The stored electric capacity was about 0.25 mA h from the discharge curve at a constant current of 100 mA. The supercapacitor failed to be charged by applying a repeatable mechanical deformation when replacing the PVDF film with a commonly used separator without piezoelectric properties, indicating that the charging of the supercapacitor was surely a result of the piezoelectric PVDF separator.
The integration of a pseudo-supercapacitor and piezoelectric materials was achieved using MnO2 nanowires as positive and negative electrodes and a PVDF–ZnO film as a separator and a piezoelectric material.356 The addition of ZnO nanowires in the PVDF matrix induced the polarization of ions in the composite film without electrical poling. When applying a compressive force from continuous palm impact, the voltage of the device increased from 35 to 145 mV (110 mV charged) in 300 seconds. The self-charging effect was enhanced with the applied force due to the increase in piezopotential with the higher applied strain.
A flexible piezoelectric micro-supercapacitor was demonstrated using a laser engraving technique by integrating a triboelectric nanogenerator and plane micro-supercapacitor array into a single device.357 A high degree of integration was realized through the double-faced laser engraving of a polyimide (PI) substrate. The two sides of the graphene electrode were used separately for fabricating the triboelectric nanogenerator and micro-supercapacitor array. The nanogenerator component can generate electricity from ambient mechanical vibrations with high output while the rectified electrical energy was directly stored in the micro-supercapacitor array component, which could be charged to 3 V in 117 minutes.


4.6.4 Shape-memory supercapacitors. 
Electronic devices that can be flexible, bendable, foldable and stretchable are desirable for new applications, such as wearable electronics, smart clothes, electronic skins, bendable smart phones and implantable medical devices. This requires electronic devices and their power units to possess mechanically deformable ability. The appearance of stretchable, compressible and shape-memory supercapacitor paves the way to future applications in the above devices. In 2016, there have been several excellent reviews summarizing the recent progress on flexible, stretchable and compressible supercapacitors.358–360 Thus, we mainly focus on shape-memory supercapacitors in this section.
Incorporation of shape-memory materials into supercapacitors can recover devices back to their initial shape or size after irreversible deformations in practical applications. There are mainly two categories of shape-memory materials, namely shape-memory alloys (SMAs) and polymers (SMPs).359,361 The shape-memory effect of SMAs arises from a reversible crystalline phase change known as a martensite–austenite transformation. When heated to a certain temperature, the deformed SMAs return to their original shape and remove all plastic deformations. The most prominent SMAs are based on nickel–titanium (NiTi) due to its superior mechanical and electrical characteristics.
A shape-memory supercapacitor was realized using graphene coated on TiNi alloy flakes as the negative electrode, and an ultrathin MnO2/Ni film as the positive electrode in gel electrolytes.361 It demonstrated a specific capacitance of 53.8 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1. The bent device regained its original planar shape within 550 s when heated to ambient temperature. The recovery speed of this supercapacitor was relatively low. Recently, NiTi wires were applied as current collectors and substrates for the active materials (MnO2 and PPy) in a twisted fiber shape-memory supercapacitor, which could restore serious plastic deformations to an undistorted state within a few seconds.362 Meanwhile the capacitive performance remained nearly unchanged.
Above the glass transition temperature (Tg) (amorphous polymers) and melting temperature (Tm) (crystalline polymers), SMPs are soft, light-weight and can be extended to several hundreds of percent. SMPs can memorize more than one shape and recover its original form when subjected to various stimuli such as temperature, light, magnetic fields and electric currents. Wrapping aligned CNT sheets onto a shape-memory polyurethane (SMPU) substrate enabled a shape memory and fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor.363 After 500 cycles of deformation and recovery at a strain of 50%, its electrochemical properties showed no obvious decrease, suggesting excellent stability of the device structure. However, its maximum specific capacitance was only 42.3 mF cm−1, which could be enhanced by introducing pseudocapacitve materials. Densely compacted CNT layers and PANi layers were coated on the PVA/CNT SMPU fibers through layer by layer (LBL) technology.364 The resulting shape memory supercapacitors not only possessed shape memory properties, but also exhibited outstanding specific capacitance exceeding 427 F cm−3.


4.6.5 Thermal self-protective supercapacitors. 
When supercapacitors work at high environmental temperature, the high power delivery and fast current flow are prone to generate a lot of heat that the device cannot dissipate quickly which may result in the risk of fire or explosion. To address the thermal runaway problem in supercapacitors, a thermal self-protective supercapacitor was developed in 2013.365 A thermosensitive polymer P(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-2-acrylamido-2-methyl propane sulfonic acid) (P(NIPAM-co-SPMA)) was coated onto the surface of NiAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanowalls as the electrode material for supercapacitors (Fig. 17a). An increase in temperature would cause P(NIPAM) to collapse into a hydrophobic state from its hydrophilic state due to breaking of hydrogen bonds between N-isopropyl groups and water. The collapsed polymer at 40 °C inhibits the migration of conductive ions between the electrodes, thus reducing the specific capacitance (Fig. 17b).
 Fig. 17  The working principle of a thermal self-protection supercapacitor and its electrochemical behavior. (a) Schematic illustration of the LDH@P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) film on a flexible Ni foil substrate serving as a self-protection supercapacitor with thermally-responsive ion channels. (b) The specific capacitance of the switch between 20 °C and 40 °C for thermal self-protection supercapacitors (modified from ref. 365, copyright permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The copolymer poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylamide) (PNIPAM/AM) with LiOH was applied as a reversible sol–gel electrolyte for thermal self-protective supercapacitors.366 Importantly, the transition temperature of the sol–gel process could be controlled by adjusting the molar ratio of NIPAM to AM. The diffusion coefficient of the Li ions decreased from 1.9 × 10−13 m2 s−1 at 20 °C to 7.6 × 10−14 m2 s−1 at 70 °C. A Pluronic [poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(propylene oxide)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO–PPO–PEO)] aqueous solution dissolved with ions (such as H+ or Li+) was also utilized as a smart electrolyte for thermal self-protection of supercapacitors.367 The Pluronic-based electrolyte was in the solution state and the ions could move freely between the electrodes at room temperature. When temperature increased, this electrolyte transformed to a gel state, which would inhibit the motion of ions and shut down the electrochemical devices. The specific capacitances of the supercapacitor based on this electrolyte were 110 and 10 F g−1 in the sol and gel states, respectively, showing significant inhibition of its electrochemical storage performance at high temperature (≈91% capacity loss).


4.6.6 Thermal self-charging supercapacitors. 
Thermal self-charging supercapacitors were developed to harvest electrical energy from low-grade heat using thermal-to-electrical energy conversion techniques, such as the Seebeck effect (electron diffusion by temperature gradient), thermally driven ion diffusion, and temperature-dependent electrochemical redox potential.368–372 The thermal self-charging supercapacitor can absorb heat when the temperature rises and releases electricity during the discharging process. There are many low-grade heat sources such as the waste heat in power generation plants, ocean thermal energy, and distributed solar thermal energy.
The thermal self-charging supercapacitor consisted of two electrodes at different temperatures. Each electrode was formed by immersing an electrode in an electrolyte solution.370 At the electrode–liquid interface, solvated ions were adsorbed and an electrode potential was developed after the electrical charge/discharge process (sometimes called activation).373 The adsorption coverage became different and the electrode potential varied when temperature changed. With a nickel-coated CNT based electrode, the thermal sensitivity of the electrode potential was up to 6 mV K−1.374 Meanwhile, the harvested electrical energy was 600–1800 mJ g−1 of electrode material per thermal cycle with a temperature range of 45–50 °C.374 Another thermal self-charging supercapacitor based on PANi@graphene@CNT employed polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSSH) as both a solid electrolyte and a voltage generator.369 The Seebeck coefficients were as high as 8 mV K−1. With a small temperature difference of 5.3 K, a charged potential of 38 mV and an areal capacitance of 120 mF cm−2 were achieved in this supercapacitor. When heat was applied to one of the electrodes, the temperature gradient between the two electrodes caused more mobile H+ ions to diffuse to the cold side (Soret effect), leaving less mobile PSS− ions behind. Therefore, the H+ ion concentration near the hot electrode decreased and the H+ ion concentration near the cold electrode increased. As a consequence, the potential difference between the two electrodes was produced by the concentration difference according to the Nernst eqn (21): (21)where E is the potential difference between the two electrodes with temperature gradient; E° is the standard cell potential from the two electrodes; the molar concentrations near the hot and cold electrode are [H+hot] and [H+cold], respectively; R is the universal gas constant; T is the temperature; and F is the Faraday constant. The potential difference enables electron flow leading to oxidation and reduction of PANi at the hot and cold electrodes, respectively.
The polymer electrolyte based on PEO treated by NaOH showed an exceptionally high ionic Seebeck coefficient up to 11.1 mV K−1.375 The resulting thermal self-charging could convert and store 2500 times more energy compared with a traditional thermoelectric generator connected in series with a supercapacitor. Differently, an open circuit voltage of 80–300 mV was obtained by heating the commercial EDLCs to 65 °C.373 It was found that, at higher temperature, the thermo-electrochemical process could enhance the kinetics of the Faradaic process including the charge transfer process at the electrolyte/electrode interface and other processes involved in the reaction (such as diffusion of reactants in electrolytes). The kinetics of surface reactions was slower than the free electron flow in the electrode. The Fermi level of electrons in the negative electrode moved toward more negative voltages during the thermal charging process, which led to the increase of the full cell voltage in this thermal charging process.


4.6.7 Photo self-charging supercapacitors. 
As the most widespread, renewable, and environmentally friendly resource in the world, the solar energy from the sun is estimated to be 3 × 1024 J year−1, which is 104 times more than the consumption rate of mankind. Photovoltaic electricity generation is the second-fastest growing source in the world's power sector. An effective approach to collect the fluctuating electricity generated from solar cells is to integrate solar cells and supercapacitors, which is called photo-supercapacitors or photo self-charging supercapacitors.
The fiber photo-supercapacitors were fabricated by combining a fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cell and a fiber-shaped microsupercapacitor into a single device.376–380 For example, a dye-sensitized solar cell and supercapacitor were integrated by twisting two fiber electrodes (Ti wire and CNT fiber) together. It exhibited a high overall photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency of 1.5%.376 However, due to the use of a liquid electrolyte, this device exhibited a very low mechanical stability as two fiber electrodes were peeled off from each other under bending. Thus a coaxial and all-solid-state ‘energy fiber’ was introduced by integrating polymer solar cells and supercapacitors.379,380 For the photovoltaic conversion, the coaxial structure was similar to the efficient planar polymer solar cell in the radial direction, enabling the generated charges to be rapidly separated and transported to produce high photocurrents. For the energy storage, the coaxial structure brought much higher effective contact area and favors rapid charge transport.379 The photoelectric conversion and energy storage efficiencies currently reach 2.73% and 75.7%, respectively, in the CNT@Ti wire based coaxial photo-supercapacitor.380 More importantly, such fiber photo-supercapacitors can be woven into various structures such as lightweight textiles.

5. Conclusions and outlook
Supercapacitors are emerging as promising devices for electrochemical energy storage and this review has introduced recent progress on theoretical understanding, new electrode materials and novel device designs of supercapacitors. Research studies on new materials and devices in supercapacitors are currently undergoing an exciting development with increasing achievements. Discovering and creating new materials with tailored architectures present a chance to improve the performance with both high power and energy density. MOFs and COFs are two types of fascinating materials with great potential in the field of supercapacitors. MXenes and metal nitrides possess high electronic conductivity. Although investigations have only been conducted for a short time, MXenes have demonstrated great potential for enhanced volumetric energy density as electrodes of supercapacitors. Other layer-structured materials (like phosphorene) seem to be promising for supercapacitor applications due to their reduced diffusion pathway and highly dense structure that induces intercalation chemistry though they are difficult to synthesize. New reducing agents, etchants, and intercalants should be considered in the near future.
Recent progress in developing new devices is followed to reflect a new booming direction in the energy storage industry. Flow supercapacitors hold great promise for large-scale stationary energy storage systems, such as smart grids. AC line-filtering supercapacitors provide a possibility of replacing aluminum electrolytic capacitors to greatly reduce the sizes of future electronic circuits and electronic devices. Metal ion hybrid supercapacitors may be the key to bridge the gap between conventional metal ion batteries and supercapacitors. It is worth noting that the present strategies of designing metal ion capacitors to increase the energy density are usually realized at the expense of the power capability. The metal ion insertion processes into the bulk of the negative electrodes are known to be substantially more kinetically sluggish than EDLC in positive electrodes, posing a major challenge to finding metal ion intercalation pseudocapacitive materials. For microsupercapacitors, the unique structures shorten the distance for ions to travel between electrodes thus enhancing the electrochemical performance. Various kinds of functions (like electrochromism, self-healing, shape-memory, thermal-responsive, and light) have successfully been introduced into supercapacitors. This is a great step for achieving smart supercapacitors.
Although some encouraging results have been achieved, the development of a new generation of supercapacitors is still at its early stage. Much effort is still needed before real practical applications become possible: (1) the energy storage mechanisms must be deeply understood for controlling interfacial reactions between the electrode and electrolyte. Advanced simulation and modeling studies are necessary to uncover underlying electrochemical mechanisms on the nanoscale. A lot of theoretical and computational studies on EDLCs have been reported as discussed in Section 2. However, theoretical understanding of pseudocapacitance is very limited because surface redox and ion-intercalation pseudocapacitors are more complicated and difficult to simulate.381 Besides, the state-of-the-art in situ microscopic and spectroscopic techniques are important to provide direct experimental proof. (2) “Technology is always limited by the materials available,” and this holds true whether it is in the past, or today, or the future. This call for new materials has generated a series of new 2D materials beyond graphene (like germanene, silicone, tinene, and borophene) in the past several years,382,383 which exhibit potential applications in supercapacitors due to their unique electronic, chemical, and surface properties. Of course, one of the greatest challenges for these new nanomaterials is to achieve a large-scale yield with high purity. Additionally, for large-scale applications of those electrode materials discussed in Section 3, more effort should be made to realize massive production to meet the industry requirements. (3) The fast-growing popularity of intelligent electronics requires the continuous development of smart power sources with integrated stimulus-response. Integrating more functions into one energy storage device is fascinating. With further research effort on the optimization, smart supercapacitors will play important roles in lightweight, flexible, and wearable capacitive devices in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the National Materials Genome Project (2016YFB0700600), the Distinguished Young Scientists Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51425301) and the NSFC (U1601214, 21374021 and 21210004) is gratefully appreciated.
Notes and references

  (a) C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Tang, Y. Zhu, Y. Hou, L. Liu, Y. Wu, K. P. Loh, H. Zhang and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2093–2104 RSC ; 
  (c) F. Wang, X. Wu, C. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Fu, Y. Wu and X. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3570–3611 RSC ; 
  (d) R. Li, Z. Lin, X. Ba, Y. Li, R. Ding and J. Liu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 150–155 RSC .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647–12659 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Liu, B. Zhang, F. Wang, Z. Wen and Y. Wu, Pure Appl. Chem., 2014, 86, 593–609 CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 10,  DOI:10.1126/science.1246501 .
G. P. Wang, L. Zhang and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .

  (a) N. A. Kyeremateng, T. Brousse and D. Pech, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 7–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) D. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, L. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201602802 .

  (a) S. Yang, R. E. Bachman, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 116–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. B. Wu, G. Zhang, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 27–40 RSC .

  (a) 
            B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors Scientific Fundamentals and Technological Applications, Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York,  1999 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            A. Yu, V. Chabot and J. Zhang, Electrochemical supercapacitor for energy storage and delivery: Fundamentals and application, CRC Press, by Taylor & Francis Group,  2013 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Ren, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 5159–5223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Z. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
G. Yu, X. Xie, L. Pan, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 213–234 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, Z. Feng and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 31–54 CAS .
C. Zhang, W. Lv, Y. Tao and Q. H. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1390–1403 CAS .

  (a) M. Yu, W. Qiu, F. Wang, T. Zhai, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15792–15823 RSC ; 
  (b) W. Tang, L. Liu, S. Tian, L. Li, Y. Yue, Y. Wu and K. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10058–10060 RSC ; 
  (c) X. Wang, M. Li, Z. Chang, Y. Wang, B. Chen, L. Zhang and Y. Wu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A1966–A1971 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Q. Qu, Y. Zhu, X. Gao and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 950–955 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. F. Wang, B. W. Chen, Z. Chang, X. W. Wang, L. X. Zhang, Y. S. Zhu, L. J. Fu and Y. P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8981–8988 RSC .
X. Wang and G. Yushin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1889–1904 CAS .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 CAS .
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P.-L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16070 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Naoi, S. Ishimoto, J. Miyamoto and W. Naoi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9363–9373 RSC ; 
  (b) T. Zhai, X. Lu, F. Wang, H. Xia and Y. Tong, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 109–124 RSC .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11619–11635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Chang, Y. Zhu, L. Fu, X. Liu and Y. Wu, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 272–289 RSC .
Z. Chang, Y. Yang, M. Li, X. Wang and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10739–10755 CAS .

  (a) P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Liang, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy storage Mater., 2016, 5, A1–A3 CrossRef ; 
  (c) D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .

  (a) R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti, J. Kim, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 2796–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Kondrat and A. A. Kornyshev, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 45–52 RSC ; 
  (c) Z. S. Wu, Y. Zheng, S. Zheng, S. Wang, C. Sun, K. Parvez, T. Ikeda, X. Bao, K. Müllen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29 DOI:10.1002/adma.201602960 .
J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 638–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Zheng, Z. S. Wu, S. Wang, H. Xiao, F. Zhou, C. Sun, X. Bao and H. M. Cheng, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 6, 70–97 CrossRef ; 
  (b) H. Xiao, Z. S. Wu, L. Chen, F. Zhou, S. Zheng, W. Ren, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7284–7292 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. A. Choudhury, S. Sampath and A. K. Shukla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 55–67 RSC ; 
  (d) G. Lota and E. Frackowiak, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Chmiola, G. Yushin, Y. Gogotsi, C. Portet, P. Simon and P. L. Taberna, Science, 2006, 313, 1760–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Largeot, C. Portet, J. Chmiola, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2730–2731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 1996, 41, 1633–1639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kondrat, N. Georgi, M. V. Fedorov and A. A. Kornyshev, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11359–11366 RSC .
C. Merlet, B. Rotenberg, P. A. Madden, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and M. Salanne, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Deschamps, E. Gilbert, P. Azais, E. R. Piñero, M. R. Ammar, P. Simon, D. Massiot and F. Béguin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 351–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Griffin, A. C. Forse, W. Y. Tsai, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 812–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Merlet, C. Pean, B. Rotenberg, P. A. Madden, B. Daffos, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and M. Salanne, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2701–2706 CAS .
W. Y. Tsai, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8722–8728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Feng and P. T. Cummings, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2859–2864 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xing, J. Vatamanu, O. Borodin and D. Bedrov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 132–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, J. Huang, V. Meunier, B. G. Sumpter and R. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9044–9051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jiang, Z. Jin and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5373–5377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kondrat, P. Wu, R. Qiao and A. A. Kornyshev, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 387–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. Richey, B. Dyatkin, Y. Gogotsi and Y. A. Elabd, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12818–12826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zukalova, M. Kalbac, L. Kavan, I. Exnar and M. Graetzel, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1248–1255 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P. L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. D. Abruña, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Augustyn, E. R. White, J. Ko, G. Gruner, B. C. Reganbc and B. Dunn, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 219–223 RSC .
T. C. Liu, W. G. Pell and B. E. Conway, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 1882–1888 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Polleux, J. Lim and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14925–14931 CAS .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, P. Yang, X. Xia, J. Liu, J. Wang, X. Fan, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin, H. J. Fan and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12122–12129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, D. Chao, Y. Zhang, J. Zhan, Y. Zhong, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. X. Shen, J. Tu and H. J. Fan, Small, 2016, 12, 3048–3058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, F. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Chang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Z. Wen, Y. Wu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9022–9029 CAS .
H. S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Wang, Z. S. Hong, M. D. Wei and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5185–5193 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathiya, A. S. Prakash, K. Ramesha, J. M. Tarascon and A. K. Shukla, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16291–16299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, X. Jia, Q. Xiao, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4319–4327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, P. Yang, X. Xia, J. Liu, J. Wang, X. Fan, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin, H. J. Fan and Z. X. Shen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12122–12129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) D. Chao, P. Liang, Z. Chen, L. Bai, H. Shen, X. Liu, X. Xia, Y. Zhao, S. V. Savilov, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10211–10219 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Zhao, C. Yu, M. Zhang, H. Huang, S. Li, X. Han, Z. Liu, J. Yang, W. Xiao, J. Liang, X. Sun and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201602880 .
C. Chen, Y. Wen, X. Hu, X. Ji, M. Yan, L. Mai, P. Hu, B. Shan and Y. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6929–6936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, L. Zhang and Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, C. Young, J. Tang, T. Takei, Y. Ide, N. Kobayashi and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4764–4767 RSC .

  (a) N. L. Torad, R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Li, H. Hamoudi, M. Imura, Y. Sakka, C. C. Hu and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 7895–7900 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Kamachi, N. L. Torad, S. M. Hwang, Z. Sun, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19848–19854 RSC .

  (a) O. M. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. K. Brozeka and M. Dincă, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5456–5467 RSC ; 
  (c) N. Campagnol, T. R. C. Van Assche, M. Li, L. Stappers, M. Dincă, J. F. M. Denayer, K. Binnemans, D. E. DeVose and J. Fransaer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3914–3925 RSC .
A. Morozan and F. Jaouen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9269–9290 CAS .
W. Xuan, C. Zhu, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1677–1695 RSC .
D. Y. Hong, Y. K. Hwang, C. Serre, G. Ferey and J. S. Chang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1537–1552 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, B. Han, J. Song, J. Li and Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 636–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahmood, W. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201600423 .
D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shresth, S. H. Lee, H. Ahn and S. H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163–165 CrossRef CAS .
R. Díaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126–128 CrossRef .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, E. K. Kim, W. Lee, I. W. Oh, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S. H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 171, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liao, Y. Zuo, W. Zhang, J. Zhao, B. Tang, A. Tang, Y. Sun and J. Xu, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2012, 49, 983–986 CrossRef .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. Park Hyo, Y. B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Qu, Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, D. Chen, R. Zou, K. S. Walton and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kang, S. X. Sun, L. B. Kong, J. W. Lang and Y. C. Luo, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2014, 25, 957–961 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, P. Xiong, C. Zheng, H. Qiu and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16640–16644 CAS .
Y. Yan, P. Gu, S. Zheng, M. Zheng, H. Pang and H. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 19078–19085 CAS .
J. Yang, C. Zheng, P. Xiong, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19005–19010 CAS .
P. Wen, P. Gong, J. Sun, J. Wang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13874–13883 CAS .
N. Campagnol, R. Romero-Vara, W. Deleu, L. Stappers, K. Binnemans, D. E. De Vos and J. Fransaer, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1182–1189 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Banerjee, D. E. Lobo, R. Middag, W. K. Ng, M. E. Shaibani and M. Majumder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3655–3664 CAS .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C. J. Sun, S. H. Yang and M. Dinca, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, X. Ding and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6010–6022 RSC .
S. Y. Ding and W. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 548–568 RSC .
S. S. Han, J. L. Mendoza-Cortés and W. A. Goddard III, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1460–1476 RSC .
P. J. Waller, F. Gandara and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3053–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, S. Dalapati and D. Jiang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 586–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dogru, A. Sonnauer, A. Gavryushin, P. Knochel and T. Bein, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1707–1709 RSC .
P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. A. Zwaneveld, R. Pawlak, M. Abel, D. Catalin, D. Gigmes, D. Bertin and L. Porte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6678–6679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Guan, D. Wang and L. J. Wan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2943–2945 RSC .
J. W. Colson, A. R. Woll, A. Mukherjee, M. P. Levendorf, E. L. Spitler, V. B. Shields, M. G. Spencer, J. Park and W. R. Dichtel, Science, 2011, 332, 228–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. E. Silberstein, T. T. Truong, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16821–16824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. H. Burgos, K. E. Silberstein, G. G. Rodrıguez-Calero, R. P. Bisbey, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Khattak, Z. A. Ghazi, B. Liang, N. A. Khan, A. Iqbal, L. Li and Z. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16312–16317 CAS .
C. R. Mulzer, L. Shen, R. P. Bisbey, J. R. McKone, N. Zhang, H. D. Abruna and W. R. Dichtel, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 667–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dong, M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12058–12063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) S. Liu, F. Wang, R. Dong, T. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Zhuang, Y. Mai and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8365–8370 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Xiong, J. Zhu, L. Zhang and X. Wang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 340–374 RSC .
F. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Chang, Y. Wu and R. Holze, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. Anasori, C. Shi, E. J. Moon, Y. Xie, C. A. Voigt, P. R. C. Kent, S. J. May, S. J. L. Billinge, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 227–234 RSC .
M. R. Lukatskaya, O. Mashtalir, C. E. Ren, Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, M. Naguib, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2013, 341, 1502–1505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CAS .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, M. Beidaghi, M. Naguib, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, B. Dyatkin, K. M. Cook, S. J. Kim, B. Eng, X. Xiao, D. Long, W. Qiao, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Levi, M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Sigalov, M. Beidaghi, N. Shpigel, L. Daikhin, D. Aurbach, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. M. Bak, X. Yu, X. Q. Yang, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500589 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Hou, F. Wang, M. R. Lohe, X. Zhuang, L. Niu and X. Feng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601847 .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. I. Kolesnikov, E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Naguib, M. W. Barsouma and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9128–9133 RSC .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco and J. Qiu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dall'Agnese, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 118–122 CrossRef .
Y. Dall'Agnese, P. Rozier, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 510–515 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, P. Rozier, B. Duployer, P. L. Taberna, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 72, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
A. Byeon, A. M. Glushenkov, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, B. W. Byles, B. Blake, K. L. Van Aken, S. Kota, E. Pomerantseva, J. W. Lee, Y. Chen and Y. Gogotsi, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 686–694 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, X. Peng, H. Jin, T. Li, C. Zhang, B. Gao, B. Hu, K. Huo and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5091–5097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Gao, H. Zhang, G. P. Cao, M. F. Han and Y. S. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 87, 375–380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, K. Guo, H. Li and T. Zhai, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3040–3047 RSC .
X. Lu, M. Yu, T. Zhai, G. Wang, S. Xie, T. Liu, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2628–2633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, X. Yan, J. Lang, Z. Zheng and P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12724–12732 CAS .
C. Ji, J. Bi, S. Wang, X. Zhang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2158–2168 CAS .
F. Cheng, C. He, D. Shu, H. Chen, J. Zhang, S. Tang and D. E. Finlow, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 131, 268–273 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shu, C. Lv, F. Cheng, C. He, K. Yang, J. Nan and L. Long, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2013, 8, 1209–1225 CAS .
X. Wang, V. Raju, W. Luo, B. Wang, W. F. Stickle and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2901–2905 CAS .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, Y. Ling, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376–5381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, K. Huo, J. Fu, X. Zhang, B. Gao and P. K. Chu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10172–10174 RSC .
O. Kartachova, A. M. Glushenkov, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, X. J. Dai and Y. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Sherrill, J. Duay, Z. Gui, P. Banerjee, G. W. Rubloff and S. B. Lee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15221–15226 RSC .
F. Grote, H. Zhao and Y. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3465–3470 CAS .
D. Choi and P. N. Kumta, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 94, 2371–2378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Imran U. Shah, A. L. Hector and J. R. Owen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 456–463 CrossRef .
S. Wang, L. Zhang, C. Sun, Y. Shao, Y. Wu, J. Lv and X. Hao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3768–3776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, C. Sun, Y. Shao, Y. Wu, L. Zhang and X. Hao, Small, 2017 DOI:10.1002/smll.201603330 .
C. Zhu, P. Yang, D. Chao, X. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Chen, B. K. Tay, H. Huang, H. Zhang, W. Mai and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4566–4571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lucio-Porto, S. Bouhtiyya, J. F. Pierson, A. Morel, F. Capon, P. Boulet and T. Brousse, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 141, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Q. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Wang and W. Chen, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 15077–15080 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Zhu, X. Yu, X. Zeng, Q. Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Wang, J. Shi, H. Zhang and L. Mei, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201603276 .
C. Hao, B. Yang, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zeng, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3194–3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, G. Y. Zheng, H. W. Lee, N. Liu, H. T. Wang, H. B. Yao, W. S. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4573–4580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H. W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. Yuan, G. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, L. Chen, S. Mukherjee, J. Gao, H. Sun, Z. Liu, X. Ma, T. Gupta, C. V. Singh, W. Ren, H. M. Chengand and N. Koratkar, Adv. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adma.201602734 .
W. Tang, Y. Hou, F. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Wu and K. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2036–2040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Wang, S. Y. Xiao, Y. Shi, L. L. Liu, Y. S. Zhu, Y. P. Wu, J. Z. Wang and R. Holze, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 93, 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Wang, S. Y. Xiao, Y. S. Zhu, Z. Chang, C. L. Hu, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 19–23 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Lesel, J. S. Ko, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7572–7581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. X. Wang, S. Y. Xiao, X. W. Gao, Y. S. Zhu, H. P. Zhang, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Power Sources, 2013, 24, 560–565 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Q. T. Qu, Y. Shi, S. Tian, Y. H. Chen, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1222–1225 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Q. T. Qu, L. Li, S. Tian, W. Guo, Y. P. Wu and R. Holze, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2789–2794 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) B. H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Chang, Y. Q. Yang, Z. B. Wen and Y. P. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 693–698 CrossRef CAS .
I. Riess, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 157, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, L. Fu and J. Maier, Nature, 2016, 536, 159–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tyler Mefford, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Mater., 2013, 13, 726–732 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, C. Suh, S. Er, M. R. Gerhardt, C. J. Galvin, X. Chen, A. A. Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Ding, Y. Li, L. Peng, H. R. Byon, J. B. Goodenougha and G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7968–7996 RSC .
V. Presser, C. R. Dennison, J. Campos, K. W. Knehr, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 895–902 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Gogotsi, V. Presser and E. C. Kumbur, The Electrochemical Flow Capacitor: A New Concept of Rapid Energy Recovery & Delivery, PCT/US2012/024690,  2012 Search PubMed .
K. B. Hatzell, M. Boota and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8664–8687 RSC .
M. Boota, K. B. Hatzell, M. Beidaghi, C. R. Dennison, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1078–A1083 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Campos, M. Beidaghi, K. B. Hatzell, C. R. Dennison, B. Musci, V. Presser, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 98, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, K. B. Hatzell, M. Boota, B. Dyatkin, M. Beidaghi, D. Long, W. Qiao, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Carbon, 2014, 77, 155–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sasi, A. Murali, S. V. Nair, A. S. Nair and K. R. V. Subramanian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2717–2725 CAS .
M. Boota, K. B. Hatzell, M. Alhabeb, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Carbon, 2015, 92, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boota, K. B. Hatzell, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 835–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoon, H. J. Kim, J. J. Yoo, C.-Y. Yoo, J. H. Park, Y. A. Lee, W. K. Cho, Y. K. Han and D. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23323–23332 CAS .
K. B. Hatzell, M. Beidaghi, J. W. Campos, C. R. Dennison, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 888–897 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Hatzell, L. Fan, M. Beidaghi, M. Boota, E. Pomerantseva, E. C. Kumbur and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8886–8893 CAS .
H. Liu and K. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 9306–9313 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, L. Liao, Y. C. Lu and Q. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601248 .

  (a) J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Yang, K. S. Schellhammer, F. Ortmann, S. Sun, R. Dong, M. Karakus, Z. Mics, M. Lçffler, F. Zhang, X. Zhuang, E. Canovas, G. Cuniberti, M. Bonn and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1–6 CrossRef .
M. Cai, R. A. Outlaw, R. A. Quinlan, D. Premathilake, S. M. Butler and J. R. Miller, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5873–5882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bo, W. Zhu, W. Ma, Z. Wen, X. Shuai, J. Chen, J. Yan, Z. Wang, K. Cen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5799–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sheng, Y. Sun, C. Li, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247–251 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Li, Z. Lin, B. Song, Z. Li, K. S. Moon, C. P. Wong and S. L. Bai, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10983–10989 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 72–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoo, S. Kim, B. Kim and W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11801–11806 CAS .
Y. Rangom, X. Tang and L. F. Nazar, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7248–7255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joseph, A. Paravannoor, S. V. Nair, Z. J. Han, K. Ostrikov and A. Balakrishnan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14105–14108 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3669–3675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kurra, M. K. Hota and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Zhou, J. Chen, X. Yu, L. Huang, Y. Li, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2005–2010 CAS .
K. Fic, E. Frackowiak and F. Beguin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24213–24223 RSC .
S. T. Senthilkumar, R. Kalai Selvan and J. S. Melo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12386–12394 CAS .
G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 12, 38–41 CrossRef .
S. T. Senthilkumar, R. Kalai Selvan, Y. S. Leeb and J. S. Melo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1086–1095 CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Zu, H. Lian, Z. Hu, Y. Jiang, Y. Liu, X. Wang and X. Cui, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 694, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh and A. Chandra, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25793–25805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, R. S. Chandrabose, S. E. Chun, T. Zhang, B. Evanko, Z. Jian, S. W. Boettcher, G. D. Stucky and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19978–19985 CAS .
J. Menzel, K. Fic, M. Meller and E. Frackowiak, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 439–445 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, J. Wu, L. Fan, K. Xu, X. Zhong, Y. Lin and J. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6881–6886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, J. Zhou, A. N. Mansour and X. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5997–6002 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Chun, B. Evanko, X. Wang, D. Vonlanthen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7818–7828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gastol, J. Walkowiak, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 587–594 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, B. Kruner, A. Tolosa, S. Sathyamoorthi, D. Kim, S. Choudhury, K. H. Seo and V. Presser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3392–3398 CAS .
S. T. Senthilkumar, R. Kalai Selvan, N. Ponpandian, J. S. Meloc and Y. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7913–7919 CAS .
S. Roldan, D. Barreda, M. Granda, R. Menendez, R. Santamarıa and C. Blanco, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 1084–1092 RSC .
Z. Liang, J. Wen, B. Guo, Z. Cheng, Y. Qiu, P. Xu, H. Fan and C. He, Ionics, 2016, 22, 1253–1258 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Su, X. G. Zhang, C. H. Mi, B. Gao and Y. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 2195–2202 RSC .
J. Zhou, J. Cai, S. Cai, X. Zhou and A. N. Mansour, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10479–10483 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Choudhury, D. Weingarth, D. Kim and V. Presser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23676–23687 CAS .
G. Nagaraju, S. Min, C. S. C. Sekhar and J. S. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601362 .
J. Zhou, J. Cai, S. Cai, X. Zhou and A. N. Mansour, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10479–10483 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Mai, A. M. Khan, X. Tian, K. M. Hercule, Y. L. Zhao, X. Lin and X. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2923–2929 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, K. Li, C. Sun and Y. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 611, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Veerasubramani, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2016, 105, 638–648 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, X. Tian, L. Yang, J. Mao, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 1703–1708 RSC .
S. Roldn, C. Blanco, M. Granda, R. Menendez and R. Santamaria, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1699–1701 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Senthilkumar, R. Kalai Selvan, N. Ponpandian and J. S. Melo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 8937–8940 RSC .
S. Roldan, M. Granda, R. Menendez, R. Santamaría and C. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17606–17611 CAS .
L. Chen, H. Bai, Z. Huang and L. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1750–1759 CAS .
E. Frackowiak, M. Meller, J. Menzel, D. Gastol and K. Fic, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 172, 179–198 RSC .
J. Zhong, L. Q. Fan, X. Wu, J. H. Wu, G. J. Liu, J. M. Lin, M. L. Huang and Y. L. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 166, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .
P. Navalpotro, J. Palma, M. Anderson and R. Marcilla, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 711–717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Jun, W. J. Huai, F. L. Qing, L. Y. Zhen, C. S. Hong, C. Yuan, W. J. Li, H. M. Liang, L. J. Ming, L. Zhang and H. Y. Fang, Sci. China: Chem., 2012, 55, 1319–1324 CrossRef .
H. Yu, L. Fan, J. Wu, Y. Lin, M. Huang, J. Lin and Z. Lan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6736–6740 RSC .
S. Roldán, Z. González, C. Blanco, M. Granda, R. Menéndez and R. Santamaría, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3401–3405 CrossRef .
S. Roldán, M. Granda, R. Menéndez, R. Santamaría and C. Blanco, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 241–246 CrossRef .
S. Pan, J. Deng, G. Guan, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6286–6290 CAS .
E. Mourad, L. Coustan, P. Lannelongue, D. Zigah, A. Mehdi, A. Vioux, S. A. Freunberger, F. Favier and O. Fontaine, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 446–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Amatucci, F. Badway, A. D. Pasquier and T. Zheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A930–A939 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Tasaki, N. Ando, M. Nagai, A. Shirakami, K. Matsui and Y. Hato, Lithium ion capacitor, WO 2006/112068,  2006 Search PubMed .

          H. Tanizaki, N. Ando and Y. Hato, Lithium-ion capacitor, EP1914764A1,  2007 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Li, Z. Chang, Y. Yang, Y. Wu and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2280–2285 CAS .
Y. Ma, H. Chang, M. Zhang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5296–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. I. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Naoi, S. Ishimoto, J. I. Miyamotoad and W. Naoi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9363–9373 CAS .
D. Mhamane, V. Aravindan, M. S. Kim, H. K. Kim, K. C. Roh, D. Ruan, S. H. Lee, M. Srinivasan and K. B. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5578–5591 CAS .
B. Babu, P. G. Lashmi and M. M. Shaijumon, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 289–296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C. Zhang, H. Song, C. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Nan and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 290–300 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, C. Zhang, H. Song, X. Nan, H. Fu and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3362–3370 CAS .
C. Liu, C. Zhang, H. Fu, X. Nan and G. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601127 .
J. Wang, H. Li, L. Shen, S. Dong and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 71338–71344 RSC .
P. Wang, R. Wang, J. Lang, X. Zhang, Z. Chen and X. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9760–9766 CAS .
S. Yuvaraj, K. Karthikeyan, D. Kalpan, Y. S. Lee and R. K. Selvan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 469, 47–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Kim, D. Mhamane, M. S. Kim, H. K. Roh, V. Aravindan, S. Madhavi, K. C. Roh and K. B. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
L. Que, Z. Wang, F. Yu and D. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8716–8723 CAS .

  (a) F. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Chang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu and D. Zhao, Small, 2016, 12, 6207–6213 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. X. Wang, Z. C. Liu, X. H. Yuan, C. Y. Li, Y. S. Zhu, L. J. Fu, X. W. Wu and Y. P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14922–14929 RSC .
C. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Li, Q. Yue, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, A. A. Elzatahry, A. Al-Enizi, Y. Wu, Y. Deng and D. Zhao, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, F. Wang, L. Liu, S. Xiao, Z. Chang and Y. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 618–624 CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Xiao, Y. Shi, Y. Yang, Y. Hou and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300647 CrossRef .
S. Y. Xiao, Y. Q. Yang, M. X. Li, F. X. Wang, Z. Chang, Y. P. Wu and X. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Zhu, S. Y. Xiao, M. X. Li, Z. Chang, F. X. Wang, J. Gao and Y. P. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuratani, M. Yao, H. Senoh, N. Takeichi, T. Sakai and T. Kiyobayashi, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 76, 320–325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, X. Jia, Q. Xiao, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4319–4327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, L. Qi and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2762–2768 CAS .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, K. Cui, D. Karpuzov, X. Tan, A. Kohandehghan and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 941–955 CAS .
H. Wang, D. Mitlin, J. Ding, Z. Li and K. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5149–5158 CAS .
H. Li, Y. Zhu, S. Dong, L. Shen, Z. Chen, X. Zhang and G. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5753–5760 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lim, C. Jo, M. S. Kim, M. H. Kim, J. Chun, H. Kim, J. Park, K. C. Roh, K. Kang, S. Yoon and J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3711–3719 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ding, L. Qi and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 726–735 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Chang, X. Wu, X. Liu, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6962–6968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Parvez, Z. S. Wu, R. Li, X. Liu, R. Graf, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6083–6091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Huang, R. Yan, F. Wang, W. Cheng, Q. Guo and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3144–3150 CAS .
Y. Dall'Agnese, P. L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2305–2309 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Thangavel, K. Kaliyappan, K. Kang, X. Sun and Y. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201502199 .
Z. Jian, V. Raju, Z. Li, Z. Xing, Y. S. Hu and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5778–5785 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Peng, Y. Zhu, X. Zhang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5938–5943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, W. Luo, M. Carter, L. Zhou, J. Dai, K. Fu, S. Lacey, T. Li, J. Wan, X. Han, Y. Bao and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komaba, T. Hasegawa, M. Dahbi and K. Kubota, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, M. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, L. Fu, X. Liu, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 405–411 CrossRef .

  (a) M. C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D. Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Wang, F. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Chang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Z. Wen, Y. Wu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9022–9029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, K. Xiang, W. Xing, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401410 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Wang, X. Yuan, X. Wu, Y. Zhu, L. Fu and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5115–5123 CAS .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem.
Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647–662 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Qiu, J. Ren, G. Guan, H. Lin, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6436–6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4279–4285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Harrison, F. Qiu, J. Fyson, Y. Xu, P. Evansa and D. Southee, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12215–12219 RSC .
K. Jost, D. P. Durkin, L. M. Haverhals, E. K. Brown, M. Langenstein, H. C. D. Long, P. C. Trulove, Y. Gogotsi and G. Dion, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401286 CrossRef .
S. T. Senthilkumar and R. Kalai Selvan, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, S. Zhai, W. Jiang, K. Goh, L. Wei, X. Chen, R. Jiang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4895–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhai, W. Jiang, L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, Y. Yuan, A. K. Ng and Y. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 598–605 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Qiu, J. Ren, G. Guan, H. Lin, Z. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6436–6441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Sheng, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 291–293 RSC .
X. Zhao, B. Zheng, T. Huang and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9399–9404 RSC .
H. Sun, X. You, J. Deng, X. Chen, Z. Yang, J. Ren and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2868–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Fang, H. Sun, S. He, J. Ren, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7854–7860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, Q. Zhang, L. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jiang, S. Zhai, Q. Qian, Y. Yuan, H. E. Karahan, L. Wei, K. Goh, A. K. Ng, J. Wei and Y. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 611–622 CAS .
T. Xu, X. Ding, Y. Liang, Y. Zhao, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12113–12117 RSC .
W. Ma, S. Chen, S. Yang, W. Chen, W. Weng and M. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14622–14627 CAS .
J. Ren, L. Li, C. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cai, L. Qiu, Y. Wang, X. Zhu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1155–1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Fang, J. Ren, W. Weng, Y. Jiang, H. Sun, B. Wang, X. Cheng and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17553–17557 CAS .
W. Xiong, X. Hu, X. Wu, Y. Zeng, B. Wang, G. Hea and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17209–17216 CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. He, Y. Bai, L. Kang, H. Xu, F. Shi, Z. Lei and Z. H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9088–9096 CAS .
G. Qu, J. Cheng, X. Li, D. Yuan, P. Chen, X. Chen, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, K. Goh, Q. Zhang, L. Wei, H. Wang, W. Jiang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6790–6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Chen, C. Yang, J. Tao, S. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Su, L. Li and Y. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13461–13467 CAS .
X. Cheng, J. Zhang, J. Ren, N. Liu, P. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Deng, Y. Wang and H. Peng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9685–9691 CAS .
Y. Li, X. Yan, X. Zheng, H. Si, M. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, Y. Jiang and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17704–17710 CAS .
S. T. Senthilkumar, N. Fu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Zhou and H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 411–419 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Sankar and R. K. Selvan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 469–481 CrossRef .
G. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wen, S. Li, K. Zhou, Z. Song, B. Li, Z. Chen, T. Chen, Y. Guo and G. Fang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, Z. Guo, Y. Song, M. Hou, J. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3405–3412 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. H. Sung, S. J. Kim and K. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 343–350 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. H. Sung, S. J. Kim and K. H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 133, 312–319 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. S. Wu, Y. Z. Tan, S. Zheng, S. Wang, K. Parvez, J. Qin, X. Shi, C. Sun, X. Bao, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4506–4512 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Zheng, X. Tang, Z. S. Wu, Y. Z. Tan, S. Wang, C. Sun, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2171–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. Zheng, Z. Li, Z. S. Wu, Y. Dong, F. Zhou, S. Wang, Q. Fu, C. Sun, L. Guo and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4009–4016 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) S. Wang, Z. S. Wu, S. Zheng, F. Zhou, C. Sun, H. M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4283–4291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chmiola, C. Largeot, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2010, 328, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487–2494 Search PubMed .
J. Yun, D. Kim, G. Lee and J. S. Ha, Carbon, 2014, 79, 156–164 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiong, C. Meng, R. G. Reifenberger, P. P. Irazoqui and T. S. Fisher, Energy Technol., 2014, 2, 897–905 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, C. Lu, X. Wang, R. Y. Tay and B. K. Tay, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1528–1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, S. Li, S. Yang, Z. Liu, S. Liu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4054–4061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wei, N. Nitta and G. Yushin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6498–6506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pech, M. Brunet, H. Durou, P. Huang, V. Mochalin, Y. Gogotsi, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 651–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Wu, Z. Lin, L. Li, B. Song, K. Moon, S. L. Bai and C. P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 222–228 CrossRef CAS .
M. Beidaghi and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4501–4510 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, W. Zou, B. Quan, A. Yu, H. Wu, P. Jiang and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1068–1072 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, A. Sumboja, W. L. Foo, C. Y. Yan, K. Tsukagoshi and P. S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15827–15833 RSC .
G. Lee, D. Kim, J. Yun, Y. Ko, J. Cho and J. S. Ha, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9655–9664 RSC .
W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci, R. Vajtai, Q. Zhang, B. Wei and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475–1483 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Kumar, R. Savu, E. Joanni, A. R. Vaz, M. A. Canesqui, R. K. Singh, R. A. Timm, L. T. Kubota and S. A. Moshkalev, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 84769–84776 RSC .
F. Wen, C. Hao, J. Xiang, L. Wang, H. Hou, Z. Su, W. Hu and Z. Liu, Carbon, 2014, 75, 236–243 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Z. Peng, Y. Liu, F. R. Zepeda, R. Ye, E. L. G. Samuel, M. J. Yacaman, B. I. Yakobson and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5714–5721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. In, B. Hsia, J. H. Yoo, S. Hyun, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Carbon, 2015, 83, 144–151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, C. Jia and Z. Wan, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 121, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Xu, Y. Yang, Y. Zhao, W. Yang, X. Mao, X. He and S. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 193, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. S. Wu, S. Yang, R. Dong, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2217–2222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kim, H. J. Koo, A. Lee and P. V. Braun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5108–5112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 282, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, M. Ihns, M. Li, J. Y. Hwang, M. F. Mousavi, L. Chaney, A. T. Lech and R. B. Kaner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4233–4238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ferrari, M. Loveridge, S. D. Beattie, M. Jahn, R. J. Dashwood and R. Bhagat, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 25–46 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, S. Garbarino, E. Bertin and D. Guay, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 228–231 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Yin, C. Hao and Z. You, Carbon, 2015, 82, 436–445 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Yin, X. Li and Z. You, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 64–72 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, D. Aradilla, G. Bidan, P. Gentile, T. J. S. Schubert, J. Wimberg, S. Sadki and P. G. Romero, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 09771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, T. Shi, D. Liu, H. Long, S. Xi, F. Wu, X. Li, Q. Xia and Z. Tang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
E. Eustache, C. Douard, R. Retoux, C. Lethien and T. Brousse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500680 CrossRef .
Z. Su, C. Yang, B. Xie, Z. Lin, Z. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Li, F. Kang and C. P. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2652–2659 CAS .
H. Hu, Z. Pei, H. Fan and C. Ye, Small, 2016, 12, 3059–3069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. Wang, C. Yan, Y. Yao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, S. Lacey, Y. Wang, J. Wan, T. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Xu and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2587–2594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. Yao, J. Dai and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201603486 .
P. Yang, P. Sun and W. Mai, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 394–402 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Wen, C. G. Granqvist and G. A. Niklasson, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 996–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, E. C. Walter, A. Agrawal, C. Bohn, J. Velmurugan, W. Zhu, H. J. Lezec and A. Alec Talin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 7, 10479–10484 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Grote, Z. Y. Yu, J. L. Wang, S. H. Yu and Y. Lei, Small, 2015, 11, 4666–4672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, P. Sun, Z. Chai, L. Huang, X. Cai, S. Tan, J. Song and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11935–11939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, P. Sun, L. Du, Z. Liang, W. Xie, X. Cai, L. Huang, S. Tan and W. Mai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16483–16489 CAS .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, W. Meng, Q. Gong, G. Li and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21321–21327 CAS .
G. Cai, X. Wang, M. Cui, P. Darmawan, J. Wang, A. L. S. Eh and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 258–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Wang, P. Sun, P. Yang, L. Du and W. Mai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20614–20618 CAS .
D. Wei, M. R. J. Scherer, C. Bower, P. Andrew, T. Ryhanen and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1857–1862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Lin, J. Deng, Y. Zhang, X. Sun, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang, G. Guan and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8126–8132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Lin, P. Chen, G. Guan, J. Deng and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4444–4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, S. Cong, W. Su, H. Chen, Q. Li, F. Geng and Z. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2150–2156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Zhu, W. Jiang, Y. Yang, W. R. Leow, H. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3638–3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9526–9531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, Z. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242–6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310–10317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, C. Xu, F. Zhang, J. Zheng and C. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8926–8931 RSC .
A. J. Lovinger, Science, 1983, 220, 1115–1121 CAS .
Y. S. Kim, Y. Xie, X. Wen, S. Wang, S. J. Kim, H. K. Song and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
R. Song, H. Jin, X. Li, L. Fei, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, H. L. Chan, Y. Wang and Y. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14963–14970 CAS .
A. Ramadoss, B. Saravanakumar, S. W. Lee, Y. S. Kim, S. J. Kim and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4337–4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, F. R. Fan, T. Jiang, Z. Wang, W. Tang, C. Zhang, M. Liu, G. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 3934–3943 CrossRef .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201603436 .
K. Guo, N. Yu, Z. Hou, L. Hu, Y. Ma, H. Li and T. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16–30 CAS .
T. Q. Trung and N. E. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017 DOI:10.1002/adma.201603167 .
L. Liu, B. Shen, D. Jiang, R. Guo, L. Kong and X. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600763 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1290–1297 CAS .
J. Deng, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, P. Chen, X. Cheng and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15419–15423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhong, J. Meng, Z. Yang, P. Poulind and N. Koratkar, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 330–338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dou, T. Pan, A. Zhou, S. Xu, X. Liu, J. Han, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8462–8464 RSC .
H. Yang, Z. Liu, B. K. Chandran, J. Deng, J. Yu, D. Qi, W. Li, Y. Tang, C. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5593–5598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Ha, A. A. Sudani, C. J. Ellison and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7921–7928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hartel, M. Janssen, D. Weingarth, V. Presser and R. Roij, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2396–2401 Search PubMed .
S. L. Kim, H. T. Lin and C. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201600546 .
H. Lim, C. Zhao and Y. Qiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12728–12730 RSC .
Y. Qiao, V. K. Punyamurtula and A. Han, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 153102 CrossRef .
Y. Qiao, V. K. Punyamurtual, A. Han and H. Lim, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 403–405 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. P. Feng, Y. Yang, N. Y. Hau, M. Munro, E. F. Yang and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5784–5790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lim, Y. Shi and Y. Qiao, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2016, 122, 443–448 CrossRef .
D. Zhao, H. Wang, Z. U. Khan, J. C. Chen, R. Gabrielsson, M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggrena and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1450–1457 CAS .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, X. You, J. Deng, X. Chen, Z. Yang, P. Chen, X. Fang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 6782–6786 CrossRef .
J. Liang, G. Zhu, C. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Zhu, Y. Hu, H. Lv, R. Chen, L. Ma, T. Chen, Z. Jin and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601208 .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
C. Zhan, C. Lian, Y. Zhang, M. W. Thompson, Y. Xie, J. Wu, P. R. C. Kent, P. T. Cummings, D. Jiang and D. J. Wesolowski, Adv. Sci., 2017 DOI:10.1002/advs.201700059 .

  (a) C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Kong, Q. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Peng and Q. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2127–2157 RSC .
A. J. Mannix, B. Kiraly, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017 DOI:10.1038/s41570-016-0014 .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Yuping Wu
	Dr Yuping Wu is a distinguished professor at Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing, China. Since 1994, he has published over 240 peer-reviewed papers, written 6 monographs whose sales are above 40000 copies over the world and 10 chapters, translated one book, and got 24 issued patents. His present H-index is 58. Within 10 years, 34 papers are listed as ESI highly cited papers, and he has been one of the highly cited researchers throughout the world since 2015. His research has led to the creation of four companies on anode materials, cathode materials, separators and power lithium ion batteries, respectively. His research is mainly focused on energy storage and conversion systems and solar hydrogen.

 	Fig. 1  An overview of the latest advances on materials and devices of supercapacitors (SCs). The latest emerging electrode materials and device designs will be discussed.	 

 	Fig. 2  Some new findings on mechanisms for EDLCs based on in situ NMR, EQCM and IR. (a) In-pore ion populations for activated carbon based supercapacitors in 0.5 M PEt4–BF4/ACN at different states of charge in the range of −1.5 V to +1.5 V. (b) EQCM data for activated carbon based supercapacitors in a 0.75 M PEt4–BF4/ACN electrolyte. Calculated mass changes were based on a purely adsorptive mechanism (green triangles) and an ion exchange mechanism (orange squares) (modified from ref. 32, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). The normalized absorbance of the infrared bands of the cation and anion as a function of time during CV cycles from −1.5 to +1.5 V at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 for (c) CDC electrodes and (d) OLC electrodes (modified from ref. 40, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society).	 
i = avb,	(1)
i = nFAC*D1/2v1/2(αnF/RT)1/2π1/2χ(bt),	(2)
i = CdAv,	(3)
i = k1v + k2v1/2,	(4)
or i/v1/2 = k1v1/2 + k2.	(5)

 	Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammetric (CV) behaviors of MoO3. (a) CV curves of mesoporous MoO3 films at a sweep rate of 0.1 mV s−1; (b) the calculated b-value at different potentials during a cathodic sweep (modified from ref. 43); CV curves of thin-film (c) MoO3−x and (d) MoO3 electrodes. The capacitive contribution to the total current is shown by the shaded region (modified from ref. 50) (Copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group).	 
[Ni3(OH)2(C8H4O4)2·(H2O)4]·2H2O + OH− − e− ↔ [Ni3O(OH)(C8H4O4)2·(H2O)4]·2H2O + H2O.	(6)

 	Fig. 4  The conductive MOFs as electrode materials for supercapacitors. (a) Molecular structure of Ni3(HITP)2. (b) Its galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at various current densities. (c) Comparison of areal capacitances among various EDLC materials. The areal capacitance for various materials is normalized relative to their BET surface areas. (d) Relative size of pores, electrolyte Et4NC and BF4− ions, and acetonitrile solvent molecules shown in a space-filling diagram of idealized Ni3(HITP)2. Green, lime, blue, grey, brown, and white spheres represent Ni, F, N, C, B, and H atoms, respectively (modified from ref. 79, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 5  Redox-active moiety modified COFs as electrode materials for supercapacitors. (a) Synthesis of DAAQ-TFP COF. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of DAAQ-TFP COF in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte at different scan rates. (c) The corresponding redox reaction (modified from ref. 91, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society).	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 6  Polymer modified MXene and in situ XRD study on the mechanism of MXene during the charge/discharge process. (a) A schematic illustration of MXene-based functional films (modified from ref. 109, copyright permission from National Academy of Sciences USA). (b) Electrochemical in situ X-ray diffraction study of Ti3C2Tx film at various constant potentials (0.5 V steps) in an EMI-TFSI electrolyte. Green squares represent peaks of the in situ XRD cell without working electrodes (modified from ref. 112, copyright permission from Elsevier).	 
VNxOy + OH− ↔ VNxOy//OH− + VNxOy–OH,	(8)
TiN + 2H2O → TiO2 + 0.5N2 + 4H+ + 4e−,	(9)
2TiN + O2 → TiO2 + N2.	(10)
GaN1−xOx + 2yH+ + 2y e− ↔ GaN1−x−yOx−y + yH2O.	(11)

 	Fig. 7  Mixed conductors as electrode materials for supercapacitors. (a) Schematic of Ag deficiency and excess through interfacial storage. (b) Schematic illustration of the all-solid-state supercapacitor based on RbAg4I5/graphite. (c) The frequency dependence of the real (C′) and imaginary (C′′) parts of the capacitance (modified from ref. 147, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of the flow supercapacitor. Slurry electrode is the core of a flow supercapacitor. Ion diffusion from one slurry electrode to another occurs during the charging/discharging process.	 

Vertically graphene	KOH	82	0.2	—	175 μF	
166

Vertically graphene	KOH	85	—	—	265 μF cm−2	
167

Vertically graphene	KOH	≈90	—	32.8	30 F g−1	
168

3D RGO	KOH	84	1.35	0.17	283 μF cm−2	
169

Graphene films	H2SO4	—	—	13.3	125 F g−1	
170

RGO aerogel	—	75.4	0.35	1.9	0.32 mF cm−2	
171

Graphene@CNT	Na2SO4	81.5	0.19	0.82	662 μF cm−2	
172

CNT film	TEABF4	84.3	—	0.124	104 μF cm−2	
173

Porous C film@CNT	K2SO4	81	0.2	—	601 μF cm−2	
174

Carbon sponges	KOH	78	0.32	0.37	172 mF cm−2	
175

PEDOT@graphene	H2SO4/PVA	≈75	0.46	1	75 μF	
176

PEDOT	H2SO4/PVA	65	0.8	3.3	—	
177

PEDOT@PPS	H2SO4	84	0.15	0.59	994 mF cm−2	
178


 	Fig. 9  The relaxation time, phase angle and frequency for AC line-filtering supercapacitors. (a) Calculated CV curves of normalized current (I/sC) versus the voltage, where I is the current, s is the scan rate, and C is the capacitance. All the CVs are compared for the same scan rates. (b) Simulation of the impedance phase angle versus frequency with decreasing τ0 (modified from ref. 7a, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). (c) Plot of impedance phase angle versus frequency for the vertically oriented graphene nanosheet based supercapacitors. (d) Plot of its specific capacitance versus frequency using a series-RC circuit model (modified from ref. 156, copyright permission from AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 10  Redox-active electrolytes, biredox ionic liquid electrolyte and the related enhanced supercapacitors. (a) A summary of some redox pairs for electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors. (b) Synthesis of the biredox ionic liquid, where the anions and cations were functionalized with anthraquinone (AQ) and 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyl-1-oxyl (TEMPO) moieties, respectively. (c) Capacitances versus full cell or single-electrode voltage. (d) CVs at 5 mV s−1 of the PICA electrode at 60 °C with 0.5 M biredox IL in BMImTFSI (solid line), pure BMImTFSI (dashed line), and pure biredox IL (green line). (e) Self-discharge current test for the devices based on PICA electrodes with BMImTFSI (blue line) or 0.5 M biredox IL in BMImTFSI (red line) at room temperature (modified from ref. 216, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group).	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)


Li4Ti5O12//C nanosheet	1–3	63	6	6000 (97%)	
224

Li4Ti5O12//nanoporous carbon	1–3	57	10	2000 (92%)	
225

Mesoporous MnO//activated carbon	0.1–4	227	3	5000 (76%)	
226

MnO nanocrystal@C//activated carbon	0.1–4	220	3	3600 (95%)	
227

MnNCN//activated carbon	0.1–4	103	8.5	5000 (99%)	
228

Nb2O5@CMK-3//activated carbon	0.5–3	44	8.7	1000 (87%)	
229

NbN//activated carbon	0–4	149	45	15000 (95%)	
230

CuBi2O4 microspheres//activated carbon	0.2–3	24	2	1500 (85%)	
231

TiO2@RGO//activated carbon	0–3	50	4	5000 (77%)	
232

H-TiO2 nanowire arrays//activated carbon	0–3	94	15	3000 (78%)	
233

TiO2@EG//EG	0–3	72	3	1000 (68%)	
234a

Li3VO4@EG//EG	0–3.8	110	3.87	2400 (86%)	
234b

4Nb + 20F− + 5O2 + 6H2O → 4NbOF52− + 12OH−,	(16)
2NbOF52− + 3H2O → Nb2O5 + 10F− + 6H,	(17)

 	Fig. 11  The quasi-solid-state electrolyte, electrochemical behavior and flexible device for Na ion capacitors. An optical photograph showing the polymer electrolyte (a) before and (b) after the gel for the quasi-solid-state sodium ion capacitor (hard carbon//graphene). (c) Its galvanostatic charge/discharge curves from 0 to 4.2 V at different current densities (modified from ref. 248, copyright permission from Wiley). (d) Schematic illustration of the flexible Na ion capacitor. (e) The capacitance retention of the flexible Na ion capacitor under different bending conditions (modified from ref. 254, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of fiber-shaped microsupercapacitors with different configurations. (a) Parallel electrodes, (b) twisted electrodes and (c) coaxial electrodes.	 


Pen ink//pen ink	Parallel	0–1	2.70 × 10−6 W h cm−2	9.07 mW cm−2	15000	
265

Ink-gel activated carbon//ink-gel	Coaxial	0–0.8	—	—	—	
266

Activated carbon@cotton//activated carbon@cotton	Parallel	0–0.8	—	—	3000 (77%)	
267

Porous C//porous C	Parallel	0–0.8	3.7 × 10−7 W h cm−1	70.3 μW cm−1	4000 (88%)	
268

CFs//CFs	Twisted	0–1	0.35 mW h cm−3	3 W cm−3	10000 (91%)	
269

Activated carbon@CF//activated carbon@CF	Twisted	0–1	6.5 μW h cm−1	220 mW h cm−1	10000 (87%)	
270

CNT//CNT	Coaxial	0–1	1.88 W h kg−1	755.9 W kg−1	11000 (100%)	
271

Graphene//graphene	Parallel	0–1	—	—	2000 (94%)	
272

Graphene//graphene	Coaxial	0–0.8	17.5 μW h cm−2	819 μW cm−2	10000	
273

Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT	Parallel	0–0.8	—	—	5000	
274

Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT	Twisted	0–1	2.4 mW h cm−3	0.016 W cm−3	10000	
275

N-Doped graphene@CNT//N-doped graphene@CNT	Parallel	0–1	6.3 mW h cm−3	1085 mW cm−3	10000 (93%)	
276

Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT	Parallel	0–1	2.8 mW h cm−1	379 mW cm−1	10000 (92%)	
277

Graphene@CNT//graphene@CNT	Parallel	0–0.8	—	—	1000 (80%)	
278

Activated carbon@graphene//activated carbon@graphene	Twisted	0–0.8	2.5 mW h cm−3	5 mW cm−3	10000 (94%)	
279

MnO2@CNT//MnO2@CNT	Twisted	0–2	92.84 mW h cm−3	3.87 W cm−3	1000	
280

MoS2@CNT//MoS2@CNT	Twisted	0–0.8	0.55 W cm−3	3 mW h cm−3	10000 (92%)	
281

NiCo2O4@PPy@CNT//NiCo2O4@PPy@CNT	Parallel	0–1	17.5 W h kg−1	4 kW kg−1	10000 (87%)	
282

MnO2@graphene//MnO2@graphene	Twisted	0–0.8	–	—	1000 (80%)	
283

PEDOT–PSS@graphene//PEDOT–PSS@graphene	Parallel	0–0.8	27.1 μW h cm−2	200 μW cm−2	10000 (96%)	
284

N-Doped graphene@CNT//MnO2@graphene@CNT	Parallel	0–1.8	5 mW h cm−3	929 mW cm−3	10000 (87%)	
285

V2O5@PANI@CFs//MnO2@PPy@C	Coaxial	0–2	10.8 mW h cm−2	30 mW cm−2	5000	
286

OMC@CNT//MnO2@PEDOT–PSS@CNT	Twisted	0–1.8	11.3 mW h cm−3	2.1 W cm−3	10000 (85%)	
287

CNT//MnO2@ZnO2@CNTs	Twisted	0–1.8	13.25 mW h cm−2	2.1 W cm−2	1000 (97%)	
288

Porous C@CF//NiCo2O4@CF	Twisted	0–1.65	0.53 mW h cm−3	1 W cm−2	3000 (92%)	
289

CoFe2O4@PANI@graphene//Co(OH)2	Parallel	0–1.5	27 μW h cm−3	625 μW cm−1	1000	
290

MoS2@graphene@CNTs//graphene@CNT	Parallel	0–1.6	—	—	7000	
291

Ni3S2 nanorod array//pen ink	Coaxial	0–1.4	0.81 mW h cm−3	285 mW cm−3	3000 (93%)	
292

OMC//Ni(OH)2	Twisted	0–1.5	2.16 mW h cm−3	1.6 W cm−3	10000 (70%)	
293


 	Fig. 13  Some fabrication methods reported for plane micro-supercapacitors. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of RGO based microsupercapacitors via the mask-assisted current collector protection method (modified from ref. 297, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). (b) Schematic of the carbon anion based micro-supercapacitors. (c) Optical image of its interdigital fingers with 100 mm spacing. (d) Scanning electron microscope image of the cross-section of the carbon anion electrode. (e) Plot of specific capacitance versus scan rate (modified from ref. 303, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group). (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of RGO based micro-supercapacitors via the laser-patterning direct writing method. (g) An optical photograph showing a lot of RGO based microsupercapacitors on a DVD media disc (modified from ref. 311, copyright permission from Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic illustration of 3D microsupercapacitors with different configurations. (a) Interdigitated rod electrode, (b) interdigitated plate electrode, and (c) concentric electrode.	 
CE(λ) = ΔOD(λ)/ΔQ = log(Tb/Tc)/ΔQ,	(18)
[WO3]bleached + xH+ + xe− ↔ [HxWO3]colored	(19)
[NiO]bleached + OH− − e− ↔ [NiOOH]colored.	(20)

 	Fig. 15  (a) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of W18O49 nanowires and PANi at different current densities. In situ optical response of W18O49 nanowires and PANi at 633 nm showing transmittance variation with (b) potential and (c) time (modified from ref. 346, copyright permission from the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the working principle of piezoelectric supercapacitors driven by compressive straining. Piezoelectric potential can be created by the mechanical strain along the PVDF film, which will drive anions and cations to migrate towards the interface of the positive and negative electrode establishing an electronic double layer at the interface.	 

 	Fig. 17  The working principle of a thermal self-protection supercapacitor and its electrochemical behavior. (a) Schematic illustration of the LDH@P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) film on a flexible Ni foil substrate serving as a self-protection supercapacitor with thermally-responsive ion channels. (b) The specific capacitance of the switch between 20 °C and 40 °C for thermal self-protection supercapacitors (modified from ref. 365, copyright permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
	(21)
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
