Fabrication of ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays for efficient solar energy conversion  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B904993B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B904993B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5945-5951Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFabrication of ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays for efficient solar energy conversion

        
          
            Youngjo 
            Tak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Suk Joon 
            Hong
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jae Sung 
            Lee
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Kijung 
            Yong
          
        
      *a
aSurface Chemistry Laboratory of Electronic Materials, Department of Chemical Engineering, POSTECH (Pohang University of Science and Technology), Pohang, 790-784, Korea. E-mail: kyong@postech.ac.kr.;  Fax: +82 54-279-8298;   Tel: +82 54-279-2278
bEco-friendly Catalysis and Energy Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, POSTECH (Pohang University of Science and Technology), Pohang, 790-784, Korea
Received 
      11th March 2009
    , Accepted 4th June 2009First published on 30th June 2009Abstract
        ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire heterostructure arrays are fabricated by a two-step chemical solution method for use in semiconductor-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells (PECs). The successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) shows a remarkable controllability of CdS shell thickness, which affects visible-light absorption properties and PEC performances of the heterostructures. The cell has a high short-circuit photocurrent density of 7.23 mA/cm2 with a power conversion efficiency of 3.53% under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW/cm2. These results demonstrate that the ZnO/CdS core/shell heterostructure nanowire arrays can provide a facile and compatible frame for the potential applications in nanowire-based solar cells.
Introduction
In recent years, nanomaterials and nanostructures have attracted much attention as fundamental building blocks for the development of next generation solar energy conversion devices, which have high performance and novel functionalities such as flexibility and mobility. The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC), which uses a TiO2nanoparticle porous film as an anode, is a well-known example of a nanostructured solar cell.1 Recently, a number of nano-photovoltaic device concepts based on one-dimensional nanomaterials, including nanowires and nanotubes, have been proposed and studied. Aligned one-dimensional nanostructure arrays are beneficial for photovoltaic applications because they have ideal geometrical structures to provide a direct pathway for charge transport as well as a high junction area.2–4 Furthermore, one-dimensional nanostructure arrays generally have the advantage of low reflectance due to light scattering and trapping, over a wide spectrum range, endowing them with superior optical absorption properties compared with thin films.5,6 Therefore, various types of photovoltaic devices with one-dimensional nanostructure arrays as electrodes or active materials have been developed, including dye-sensitized,7 quantum-dot sensitized,8,9 and organic hybrid10 solar cells.

        ZnO
        nanowire arrays have been studied for use in photovoltaic device applications due to their facile synthesis and excellent optical properties. However, ZnO itself has a wide band-gap energy, which is disadvantageous in regard to the absorption of radiation in the visible-light region of the solar spectrum. Thus, to generate electron–hole pairs efficiently through visible-light excitation, ZnO nanowires have been sensitized by the addition of various narrow band-gap materials, such as organic dyes,11,12 inorganic quantum dots,13 inorganic thin layers,14,15 and polymeric absorbers.16,17 Among these sensitizing materials, CdS is a well-known semiconductor material that has been used as a visible-light photocatalyst for water-splitting, and also as a photosensitizer of various wide band-gap semiconductor photoanodes in photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) due to its narrow direct band-gap (2.4 eV) and flat band potential at −0.66 V (pH 7).18 Additionally, in thin film solar cells, CdS is used as a buffer layer in transparent conducting oxide (TCO)/CdS/CdTe or ZnO/CdS/CuInSe2/Mo structures to increase the cell efficiency, where it acts as an n-type semiconductor for heterojunction formation with p-type materials (CdTe or CuInSe2) and also forms a suitable band alignment with the ZnO window layer.19,20 To deposit conformal CdS films as a buffer layer in thin film solar cells, chemical bath deposition (CBD) has been widely used. However, the conventional CBD method has some drawbacks that complicate its direct application to one-dimensional nanostructures. In our previous work on the CBD of CdS on ZnO nanowires, only CdS-nanoparticle-coated ZnO nanowires were obtained rather than a uniform core/shell structure.21 Cui et al. deposited a CdS shell layer on CuInSe2 nanowires using a conventional CBD method, but the resulting core/shell structure was unstable and transformed into nanotubes after prolonged deposition times through a nanoscale Kirkendall effect.22 The ability to form uniform CdS shell layers on one-dimensional nanostructures, especially ZnO nanowire arrays, with control of the shell thickness is a key step toward the realization of high-efficiency ZnO nanowire solar cells. Such core/shell nanowire structures of ZnO/CdS should form type-II band alignments, which facilitate charge separation and provide high junction areas. Moreover, controlling the shell thickness is desirable because this parameter is important in optimizing the optical/electrical properties of the heterostructures.
Here, we report a novel heterostructure of ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays fabricated by a facile two-step, solution-based approach consisting of growth of ZnO nanowire arrays in zinc-ammonia complex solution followed by successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) for depositing CdS layers to form a shell. The structural characteristics, optical properties, and photoelectrochemical cell performances of the heterostructures were characterized for various CdS shell thicknesses.
Experimental
Fabrication of ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays
Vertically aligned ZnO nanowire arrays were synthesized on Si, transparent conducting oxide (TCO) and Ti metal by an ammonia solution method using a sputtered ZnO film as a buffer layer. The detailed synthesis procedure is described in the literature.1,2 The CdS shell layer was coated on the ZnO nanowires by SILAR technique.3 Typically, the ZnO nanowire array samples were successively immersed in two different aqueous solutions for 20 s, one containing Cd2+ cations (50 mM Cd(NO3)2) and the other containing S2− anions (50 mM Na2S). Between each immersion step, the samples were rinsed with de-ionized water for 20 s to remove excess ions that were weakly bound to the nanowire surfaces. This immersion cycle was repeated for up to 120 cycles and, after finishing the coating, the samples were dried by N2 blowing.
Characterization and measurements
The morphology of each sample was observed using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; XL30S, Philips). The crystallinity of the sample was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD; M18XHF, Mac Science). The detailed microscopic structure and the chemical composition of the ZnO/CdS core/shell heterostructures were investigated using high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopes (Cs-corrected HR-STEM, JEM2010F and JEM2200FS operating at 200 kV, JEOL). The optical absorbance of each sample was measured using a UV2501PC (SHIMADZU) spectrometer. To examine the photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) properties of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire array electrodes, a typical three-electrode potentiostat system (Potentiostat/Galvanostat, Model 263A, EG&G Princeton Applied Research) with a saturated calomel reference electrode (SCE) and a Pt counter electrode was used. As a working electrode, ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays grown on Ti substrates were tested. A 1 M Na2S aqueous solution was used as an electrolyte. The photocurrent and voltage of the cell were measured for a specific area (0.1 ∼ 0.2 cm2) of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire array working electrode under AM 1.5G simulated sunlight illumination (100 mW/cm2, Model 91160, Oriel).
Results and discussion
The morphologies and crystalline structures of bare ZnO nanowire and ZnO/CdS heterostructure arrays, obtained via a SILAR process, were investigated. The SILAR process is based on the successive surface adsorption of ions and thus proceeds via a layer-by-layer buildup of the film. Figures 1(a) and (b) show typical scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of an as-grown ZnO nanowire array, displaying a uniform vertical alignment of ZnO nanowires on a Ti foil substrate, with a mean diameter of ∼100 nm and a length of ∼10 µm. SEM images of the coated nanowire array after 30 cycles of the CdS SILAR process (Figure 1(c) and (d); images obtained at an intentionally cracked region for convenient observation) show little evidence of any morphological changes of the ZnO nanowire array upon CdS deposition, such as significant surface roughening or diameter increase. This smooth surface morphology was consistently observed for the ZnO nanowires, even after 60 and 120 cycles of SILAR deposition (not shown here). However, X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the ZnO/CdS nanowire arrays clearly indicated that cubic phase CdS, with (111), (220), (311) peaks at ∼26.5°, ∼44.0°, ∼52.2° (well-matched to the reference data JCPDS 80-0019), were deposited on the vertically aligned ZnO nanowires grown along the c-axis after CdS SILAR (Figure 1(e)). Also, it was observed that the intensity of the main CdS (111) peak increased with increasing number of SILAR cycles (not shown here). On the basis of the SEM and XRD data, which showed gradual, uniform CdS layer growth on the ZnO nanowire surfaces, we suggest that the CdS growth occurred by the ion-by-ion growth mode rather than by the cluster growth mode.
 Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a well-aligned ZnO nanowire array grown on a Ti foil substrate by an ammonia solution method. (b) High-magnification SEM image of the ZnO nanowires in (a). (c) SEM image of a ZnO nanowire array after 30 cycles of CdS SILAR deposition (intentionally cracked region). (d) High-magnification SEM image of the ZnO nanowires in (c). (e) XRD patterns of as-prepared ZnO and ZnO/CdS nanowire arrays coated with CdS over 60 SILAR cycles. (f) Low-magnification TEM image of a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire (30 CdS SILAR cycles). A thin layer of CdS was coated on the ZnO nanowire. (g) High-resolution TEM image of the interface region of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire, showing a single crystalline wurtzite ZnO nanowire core and a polycrystalline cubic CdS shell layer. Inset shows the corresponding fast-Fourier transform (FFT), having superimposed spot patterns of rectangular ZnO and circular CdS. (h) Bright field (BF) and (i) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning TEM image of a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire. 
To elucidate the microscopic structure of the ZnO nanowires after CdS SILAR cycling, a more detailed investigation was conducted using field-emission transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM). Figure 1(f) shows a low-magnification TEM image of a ZnO/CdS nanowire. The ZnO nanowire surface is uniformly coated with a thin CdS shell of thickness ∼5 nm. A high-resolution image of the ZnO/CdS core/shell interface region and corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern indicate that the polycrystalline cubic CdS shell was deposited on the single crystalline hexagonal ZnO nanowire grown along the c-axis (Figure 1(g)). Moreover, bright field (BF) and high angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning TEM images of the sample showed clear contrast differences between the core and the shell layer (Figure 1(h), (i)).
In general, to prepare the samples for TEM measurements, detached core/shell nanowires in ethanol were subjected to sonication to generate a well-dispersed colloidal solution of the sample, which was then dropped on a TEM grid. Interestingly, after severe sonication treatment, we found decisive observations verifying the specific ZnO/CdS core/shell structures. Figure 2(a) shows a HAADF image displaying various broken pieces of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowires (120-cycle deposited sample). On a certain part of a TEM grid, fully detached CdS shell nanotubes and fractured ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowires were observed simultaneously (Figure 2(b)). Only Cd and S atoms were detected in the energy dispersive spectra (EDS) of the CdS nanotubes, whereas the CdS/ZnO core/shell structure shows Zn and O in addition to Cd and S (Figure 2(c), (d)). These findings demonstrate that the CdS shell layer was completely stripped from the ZnO nanowire core. Figures 2(e) and (f) show conventional TEM images of a CdS nanotube and a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire, while Figures 2(g) and (h) show high-resolution images taken at the marked region of each sample. The CdS shell produced after 120 deposition cycles showed a higher shell thickness and grain size compared to the 30 cycle deposited sample (Figure 1(g)). Figure 2(i) shows a HAADF image of the end part of a fractured ZnO/CdS core/shell heterostructure. The edge region clearly shows cylindrical shell contrast reflecting the overlapped double layers, and the EDS elemental mapping confirmed localized Zn and O in the filled core area.
 Fig. 2  (a) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image of ZnO/CdS core/shell heterostructures (120 cycles of CdS SILAR). The image shows broken pieces of core/shell nanowires, formed as a result of severe sonication treatment. (b) HAADF image showing a broken ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire and CdS shell nanotube, which was detached from the core/shell nanowire. (c), (d) Energy dispersive spectra (EDS) recorded from a CdS nanotube (red spot in (b)) and a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire (green spot in (b)), respectively. (e), (f) Conventional bright field TEM images of the CdS nanotubes and the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire in (b). (g), (h) High-resolution TEM image of the CdS nanotube and the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire taken from the marked regions in (e) and (f), respectively. (i) STEM image of the broken edge region of a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire, and the corresponding EDS elemental mapping of (j) Zn, (k) O, (l) Cd and (m) S. 
Controlling the shell thickness is an important issue in core/shell heterostructure nanomaterial synthesis because this parameter crucially affects the electrical and optical properties of the heterostructures.23 In this regard, we investigated correlations between the number of SILAR cycles and the shell thickness through high-resolution TEM analyses. As shown in Figures 3(a)–(d), the shell thickness increased linearly with increasing cycle number (Figure 3(e)). In principle, in an ideal SILAR process (i.e., saturated self-limiting adsorption of initial ions and complete reaction of the ions with subsequent counter ions), the thickness should increase linearly with cycle number, regardless of the sample surface area and dipping time. Such cycle-dependent layer-by-layer growth in the solution-phase SILAR process is analogous to vapor-phase atomic layer deposition (ALD), which is a very powerful thin film growth technique in current semiconductor processing.
 Fig. 3  (a–d) High-resolution TEM images, showing that the CdS shell thickness changes with the number of SILAR cycles. (e) Graph plotting shell thickness vs SILAR cycle number. 

Figure 4(a) shows photographs of bare ZnO and ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays grown on Ti substrates. The corresponding absorption spectra of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays with various CdS shell thicknesses are shown in Figure 4(b). The color of the sample changed from gray to orange with increasing CdS shell thickness. The bare ZnO nanowire array absorbs only in the UV region at wavelengths shorter than 420 nm. The light absorption ranges of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays, by contrast, extended to the visible-light region, with the degree of red-shift of the absorption range increasing with increasing number of SILAR cycles.
 Fig. 4  (a) Digital camera images and (b) diffused reflectance spectra (DRS) of the as-prepared ZnO nanowire and the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays, where the shell thickness increases with the number of SILAR cycles (5, 10, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 cycles), grown on Ti foil substrates. (c) Changes in the absorption edge of the samples, obtained from the intersection point of two fitting lines as shown in (b) for the 120-cycle system. 
The absorption edge of each sample was estimated from the intersection point of two fitting lines, the saturation and incline lines, as shown in Figure 4(b) for the array coated using 120 SILAR cycles. The results, plotted in Figure 4(c), show that from the initial absorption edge (in eV) of the ZnO nanowire array (3.2 eV), the absorption edge decreased quickly in the early cycles (up to 30 cycles) and then showed a slow decrease in subsequent cycles, finally reaching ∼2.4 eV, which is the band-gap energy of bulk CdS. The trend in the light absorption edge during the initial CdS deposition stage is very similar to the previously reported increase in exciton energy of CdS nanoparticles with decreasing particle size due to quantum size effects.24 This indicates that the initial CdS deposit is composed of a few nanometer-sized islands, which subsequently coalescence to form the shell layer. As the shell thickness increases, the crystallite size (or the shell thickness itself) becomes comparable to the exciton Bohr diameter in bulk CdS (∼8 nm). These optical properties are consistent with the TEM images presented above showing an increase in CdS polycrystalline grain size with increasing shell thickness.
Given the importance of photoelectrochemical cells (PEC) as solar energy conversion devices, we tested the PEC applications of our ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays as photoanodes. The schematic diagram of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire array PEC shown in Figure 5(a) illustrates the basic operation steps of the cell, which include electron–hole pair generation by incident photons, separation and transport of charges, and reduction/oxidation reactions of electrolyte. Figure 5(b) shows the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of photoelectrodes comprised of a bare ZnO nanowire array or ZnO/CdS core/shell arrays with various shell thicknesses. The bare ZnO nanowire array showed an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of about −0.8 V versus a saturated calomel reference electrode (SCE), whereas the ZnO/CdS core/shell arrays showed an increased Voc of about −1.55 V. The change of Voc indicates a negative shift of the Fermi level as a result of coupling between CdS and ZnO. It was previously reported that better charge separation and electron accumulation in the metal-semiconductor and semiconductor-semiconductor junctions shift the Fermi level to more negative potential.25–27 Our ZnO and CdS system has a type-II band-gap alignment, which means the conduction band edge of ZnO is located between the conduction band and the valence band of CdS (as shown in the schematic diagram in Figure 5(a)). In this band-gap configuration, when electron-hole pairs are generated by visible-light excitation in CdS nanoparticles, the photoelectrons can be transferred to the conduction band of the ZnO nanowires, which facilitates the charge separation process of electron-hole pairs before they recombine. This band-alignment is an important factor to be considered when seeking to enhance the PEC performances of the semiconductor sensitized photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire array photoelectrochemical cell, showing the type-II band-gap alignment, electron-hole pair generation and separation, charge transport, and recycling of the Na2S electrolyte. (b) Chopped illumination (100 mW/cm2) current-voltage (I–V) characteristics of the bare ZnO nanowire and ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays formed using 5, 15, 30, 60, or 120 CdS deposition cycles. (c) Graph showing the short-circuit current as a function of CdS SILAR cycle number. 
The short-circuit photocurrent (Jsc) was 0.37 mA/cm2 for the bare ZnO nanowire array, but increased greatly with increasing CdS deposition cycle number, up to a value of 7.23 mA/cm2 with the maximum power conversion efficiency of 3.53% for the 120 cycle deposited sample. These Jsc and conversion efficiency are comparable to the highest ever values of 7.82 mA/cm2 and 4.15% obtained from a TiO2nanotube/CdS nanoparticle heterostructure, which was recently reported by Sun et al.28 However, they used much longer nanotubes (19.2 µm) and a higher intensity light source (138.4 mW/cm2) than were employed in our experiments (∼10-µm-long nanowires and 100 mW/cm2 light power). The comparison of our current experiments with those by Sun et al. indicates that there is still much scope for improving the PEC performance of our ZnO/CdS photoanodes in future studies. As shown in the graph of the short-circuit photocurrent (Jsc) vs CdS SILAR cycle number (Figure 5(c)), Jsc shows a saturation curve very similar to the trend in the absorption threshold observed in Figure 4(c). Recalling that the shell thickness increases linearly with the cycle number, these findings suggest that, once a uniform core/shell ZnO/CdS structure is formed with a defined ZnO/CdS junction area, photocurrent generation is more limited by the visible-light absorption threshold rather than the amount of CdS photosensitizer deposited. In these regards, it is expected that an introduction of a narrower band-gap sensitizer to the current ZnO/CdS heterostructure could bring more red-shifts in the absorption threshold and boost the overall efficiency. Research efforts are underway to demonstrate a multi-sensitizing system for more improved photoconversion efficiency.
Conclusions
In summary, large-scale, well-aligned ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays were fabricated using a facile two-step solution method. The ZnO nanowires were grown vertically on various substrates by a low-temperature, low-cost ammonia solution method and the CdS shell was coated on the ZnO nanowire core using the SILAR method. TEM analysis showed that the ZnO nanowire core and CdS shell had wurtzite single crystalline and cubic polycrystalline structures, respectively. The thickness of the CdS shell layer was successfully controlled by changing the number of SILAR cycles. As the shell layer thickness increased to ∼12 nm, the visible-light absorption range of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays was gradually expanded to ∼2.4 eV, which is the band-gap energy of bulk CdS. A PEC in which a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire array was used as a photoanode showed a high short-circuit current of ∼7.23 mA/cm2 and an open-circuit voltage of approximately −1.55 V with the maximum power conversion efficiency of 3.53% under 100 mW/cm2 of AM 1.5G illumination. We expect that our solution-based approach for the fabrication of ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays will be applicable to the synthesis of various novel heterostructures for high efficiency nanowire solar energy conversion devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grant No. R01-2006-000-10230-0 (2006) from the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation, grant No. RTI04-01-04 from the Regional Technology Innovation Program of the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy (MOCIE), and the Korean Research Foundation Grants funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD) (KRF-2008-005-J00501) and Grant No. KRF-2007-521-D00118.
References
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Tang, Z. H. Chen, H. S. Song, C. S. Lee, H. T. Cong, H. M. Cheng, W. J. Zhang, I. Bello and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4191–4195 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kannan, K. Castelino and A. Majumdar, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1729–1733 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Muskens, J. G. Rivas, R. E. Algra, E. P. A. M. Bakkers and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2638–2642 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3249–3252 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, J. W. Elam, J. T. Hupp and M. J. Pellin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2183–2187 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Baxter and E. S. Aydil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053114 CrossRef .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Leschkies, R. Divakar, J. Basu, E. Enache-Pommer, J. E. Boercker, C. B. Carter, U. R. Kortshagen, D. J. Norris and E. S. Aydil, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1793–1798 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lévy-Clément, R. Tena-Zaera, M. A. Ryan, A. Katty and G. Hodes, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1512–1515 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tena-Zaera, A. Katty, S. Bastide, C. Lévy-Clément, B. O'Regan and V. Muñoz-Sanjosé, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 483, 372–377 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Greene, M. Law, B. D. Yuhas and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18451–18456 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Birkmire and E. Eser, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1997, 27, 625–653 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramanathan, M. A. Contreras, C. L. Perkins, S. Asher, F. S. Hasoon, J. Keane, D. Young, M. Romero, W. Metzger, R. Noufi, J. Ward and A. Duda, Prog. Photovolt: Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 225–230 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, Y. Lee, M. S. White, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley, J. A. Voigt and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16640–16645 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata, K. Domen, A. Gupta, K. Yanagisawa and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17527–17534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tak, H. Kim, D. Lee and K. Yong, Chem. Commun., 2008, 38, 4585–4587 Search PubMed .
H. Peng, C. Xie, D. T. Schoen, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3734–3738 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 7019–7029 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and N. Herron, Phys. Rev. B, 1990, 42, 7253–7255 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Baker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 805–811 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wood, M. Giersig and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 8810–8815 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spanhel, H. Weller and A. Henglein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6632–6635 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Yu, H. Pan, X. Gao, Q. Chen and L. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a well-aligned ZnO nanowire array grown on a Ti foil substrate by an ammonia solution method. (b) High-magnification SEM image of the ZnO nanowires in (a). (c) SEM image of a ZnO nanowire array after 30 cycles of CdS SILAR deposition (intentionally cracked region). (d) High-magnification SEM image of the ZnO nanowires in (c). (e) XRD patterns of as-prepared ZnO and ZnO/CdS nanowire arrays coated with CdS over 60 SILAR cycles. (f) Low-magnification TEM image of a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire (30 CdS SILAR cycles). A thin layer of CdS was coated on the ZnO nanowire. (g) High-resolution TEM image of the interface region of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire, showing a single crystalline wurtzite ZnO nanowire core and a polycrystalline cubic CdS shell layer. Inset shows the corresponding fast-Fourier transform (FFT), having superimposed spot patterns of rectangular ZnO and circular CdS. (h) Bright field (BF) and (i) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) scanning TEM image of a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) High angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image of ZnO/CdS core/shell heterostructures (120 cycles of CdS SILAR). The image shows broken pieces of core/shell nanowires, formed as a result of severe sonication treatment. (b) HAADF image showing a broken ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire and CdS shell nanotube, which was detached from the core/shell nanowire. (c), (d) Energy dispersive spectra (EDS) recorded from a CdS nanotube (red spot in (b)) and a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire (green spot in (b)), respectively. (e), (f) Conventional bright field TEM images of the CdS nanotubes and the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire in (b). (g), (h) High-resolution TEM image of the CdS nanotube and the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire taken from the marked regions in (e) and (f), respectively. (i) STEM image of the broken edge region of a ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire, and the corresponding EDS elemental mapping of (j) Zn, (k) O, (l) Cd and (m) S.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–d) High-resolution TEM images, showing that the CdS shell thickness changes with the number of SILAR cycles. (e) Graph plotting shell thickness vs SILAR cycle number.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Digital camera images and (b) diffused reflectance spectra (DRS) of the as-prepared ZnO nanowire and the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays, where the shell thickness increases with the number of SILAR cycles (5, 10, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120 cycles), grown on Ti foil substrates. (c) Changes in the absorption edge of the samples, obtained from the intersection point of two fitting lines as shown in (b) for the 120-cycle system.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire array photoelectrochemical cell, showing the type-II band-gap alignment, electron-hole pair generation and separation, charge transport, and recycling of the Na2S electrolyte. (b) Chopped illumination (100 mW/cm2) current-voltage (I–V) characteristics of the bare ZnO nanowire and ZnO/CdS core/shell nanowire arrays formed using 5, 15, 30, 60, or 120 CdS deposition cycles. (c) Graph showing the short-circuit current as a function of CdS SILAR cycle number.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
