The effect of the graphene integration process on the performance of graphene-based Schottky junction solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA05481E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA05481E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18716-18724The effect of the graphene integration process on the performance of graphene-based Schottky junction solar cells†

        
          
            Yunseong 
            Choi‡
, 
      
        
          
            Junghyun 
            Lee‡
, 
      
        
          
            Jihyung 
            Seo‡
, 
      
        
          
            Seungon 
            Jung
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ungsoo 
            Kim
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hyesung 
            Park
          
        
      *
      Department of Energy Engineering, School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Low Dimensional Carbon Materials Center, Perovtronics Research Center, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hspark@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      23rd June 2017
    , Accepted 4th August 2017First published on 4th August 2017AbstractWith the rise of graphene, its applications as the active component in various types of solar cells, such as transparent conductors, additives, or interfacial charge transport layers, have been intensively investigated. Among them, graphene-based Schottky junction solar cells have been rapidly developed due to their relatively simple device structures compared to conventional p–n junction type solar cells. Through various modifications such as chemical doping, antireflection coating, and interfacial oxide layer control, a power conversion efficiency of over 15% was successfully reported. However, graphene-based Schottky junction type solar cells often suffer from s-shaped current density–voltage characteristics, which leads to the inevitable performance degradation, particularly for the fill factor. In this work, we investigate the origin of such aforementioned behaviors and propose a facile approach to suppress the s-shape character in the operation of graphene-based Schottky junction solar cells. Through the careful modulation of the graphene integration process, the interfacial charge recombination seemed to be significantly suppressed leading to a notably improved device performance (from 0.8% to 12.5%). Our findings shall provide valuable insights into the operating principle of graphene-based Schottky junction solar cells, which can play an important role as one of the primary suppliers of next-generation renewable clean energy.
Introduction
Since the first experimental demonstration, graphene,1 a two-dimensional layered material with a honeycomb lattice structure, has found its applications in diverse fields of study such as touch screen displays, transistors, photovoltaics, and sensors due to its outstanding electrical, optical, and mechanical properties.2–7 Such rapid growth in the application of graphene is facilitated by the development of synthesis methods of graphene such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or liquid phase exfoliation.8,9 Among the various synthesis routes developed so far, the CVD method enables uniform growth of large-area monolayer graphene sheets with desired electrical and optical properties which can be utilized as transparent conductive media in optoelectronic devices.10–13
In particular, for photovoltaic applications, graphene can provide several functionalities such as an alternative transparent conductive electrode (TCE),9,14–18 an additive material to the photoactive layers,19,20 and a charge transporting/blocking layer at the interface.21,22 For instance, several studies have successfully demonstrated the application of the graphene TCE in various architectures of solar cells including organic photovoltaics and perovskite solar cells, indicating its possibility as an alternative to the commonly used indium tin oxide (ITO) which suffers from several issues such as mechanical and chemical stability issues.23,24 Similar to conventional p–n junction type solar cells, graphene has been successfully adopted in metal–semiconductor Schottky junction solar cell configurations as well, with the desired rectifying junction formation.25–28 Among these various types of solar cell structures wherein graphene has been applied, graphene and silicon-based Schottky junction solar cells offer several advantages over p–n junction solar cells such as faster switching speed, low forward voltage drop, and small voltage overshoot when turning off. Furthermore, the Schottky junction structure allows relatively simple device architectures under low-temperature processing conditions, thus benefiting the reduction of the overall production cost. Although the maximum achievable theoretical power conversion efficiency (PCE) of Schottky junction solar cells is lower than that of conventional p–n junction type solar cells, the Schottky junction is still an attractive system for the reasons mentioned above and may find its utility in various aspects of energy harvesting.
In conventional Schottky junction solar cells, however, metal electrodes typically limit the device performance owing to the absorption and reflection of the illuminated light from the metal side.27,29 There have been several efforts to replace the shiny metal, for instance, with metal oxides30,31 or conducting polymers.26,32 However, these approaches still suffer from issues similar to the metal electrode. On the other hand, graphene can serve as a viable material platform in the Schottky junction structure with its outstanding optoelectronic properties and chemical inertness. One of the first kinds of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells was demonstrated by Li et al. with a PCE of 1.5%.25 Since then, several approaches were proposed to improve the device performance: (i) chemical doping which enhances the conductivity and modifies the work function of the graphene electrode thus contributing to the Schottky barrier height adjustment and charge separation and transport,33,34 (ii) junction modification via an interfacial layer to suppress the charge recombination and promote carrier transport,35,36 (iii) engineering the silicon morphology to improve the light absorption efficiency through surface texturing or periodic patterning,37,38 and (iv) applying antireflection coatings (ARCs) to minimize the reflection of incident light.39 Furthermore, the flexible and stretchable nature of graphene enabled the construction of flexible devices40 and, recently, a PCE of 15.6% was reported by a combinatorial effect of chemical doping, antireflection coating, and an interfacial layer at the Schottky junction.35 Interestingly, one of the commonly observed phenomena from these earlier studies is that the pristine graphene–silicon solar cells typically suffer from s-shape current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics with a low fill factor (FF) and thereby an inferior PCE.
In this work, we investigate the origin of the s-shape J–V behavior in graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells and demonstrate a simple strategy to obtain the rectifying diode behavior (henceforth referred to as the j-shape) while suppressing the undesirable s-shape character through thorough examination of each processing step during the overall solar cell fabrication procedure. To enhance the performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells, previous work mostly focused on modifying the device structure or additional post treatments following the completion of the graphene–silicon cell structure. Herein, we primarily investigated the integration process of the graphene electrode with the silicon substrate. By effectively controlling this integration process combined with chemical doping, we obtained a PCE of 9.5%, which is a significant improvement over the device processed by the conventional route (a PCE of 0.8%). The application of an ARC layer further enhanced the solar cell performance achieving a PCE of 12.5%. We expect that the results presented in this work can be readily adopted for other configurations of Schottky junction type solar cells, which can diversify the spectrum of the photovoltaic community.
Experimental section
Graphene synthesis and transfer
Monolayer graphene was synthesized on 25 μm thick copper foil with a low-pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD) system. After loading the copper foil into the CVD chamber and annealing at 1000 °C for 30 min under H2 (10 sccm), graphene growth was performed with mixture gases of CH4 (30 sccm) and H2 (10 sccm) for 30 min at 1000 °C. Once the growth was terminated, the CVD chamber was rapidly cooled down to room temperature. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was used to transfer the as-grown CVD graphene onto the target substrate. After coating the graphene/copper stack with PMMA, the underlying copper was removed by using ferric chloride (FeCl3) or ammonium persulfate ((NH4)2S2O8, APS) solution. Once the PMMA/graphene stack was transferred onto the target substrate, the PMMA supporting membrane was finally removed by using acetone or annealing at 400 °C with mixture gases of Ar (300 sccm) and H2 (300 sccm).
Fabrication of Schottky junction solar cells
n-Type silicon wafer (1–10 Ω cm) with a 300 nm SiO2 layer was patterned by photolithography (MDA-400S, MIDAS) and wet-etching of oxide to define the windows of the photoactive device region. Monolayer graphene was then transferred onto the pre-patterned SiO2/Si substrate. A gallium–indium eutectic (≥99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich) and Ag paste (P-100, CANS) were applied as back and front contact electrodes. Doping of graphene was performed by spin-coating AuCl3 (10 mM in nitromethane) at 2500 rpm. PMMA (2% PMMA in anisole, Microchem) was spin-coated onto the completed device at 2000 rpm to serve as an antireflection coating layer with a thickness of ∼90 nm.
Graphene field-effect transistor
The CVD-grown graphene was first transferred on the SiO2/Si substrate. The graphene field-effect transistor (FET) was then fabricated by patterning graphene channels by photolithography (MDA-400S, MIDAS) and reactive-ion etching (RIE, Labster, TTL). Source and drain metal contacts were prepared with Ti (10 nm)/Au (50 nm) via E-beam evaporation (FC-2000, Temescal). The electrical properties of graphene FETs were measured using a probe station with a Keithley 2400 source meter under ambient conditions.
Characterization
The solar cell performance was measured by using a solar simulator equipped with a Keithley 2400 source meter under standard test conditions (AM1.5G illustration, 100 mW cm−2). External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurement was carried out with an EQE system (Model QEX7, PV Measurements). Raman spectroscopy analysis was conducted at an excitation wavelength of 532 nm (Alpha 300R, WiTec) and reflectance of PMMA antireflection coating was obtained on a UV-Vis-NIR (Cary 5000, Agilent). The work function of graphene was measured via ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, ESCALAB 250XI, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using He I radiation (21.2 eV). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was performed by using an ESCALAB 250XI (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sheet resistance of the graphene film was measured by using a 4-point probe (CMT-SR2000N, Advanced Instrument Technology). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) were carried out by using a JEM-2100F (JEOL).
Results and discussion
A typical fabrication process of the graphene–silicon (n-type) Schottky junction solar cell is illustrated in Fig. 1. As described in the schematic, the overall solar cell fabrication process is relatively simple compared to that of conventional p–n junction type solar cells, where the principal fabrication step involves the integration of metallic graphene sheets with the semiconducting silicon substrate. Therefore, this integration process should guarantee successful transfer of graphene, which is synthesized on the catalytic metal (copper) substrates through the CVD process. For the transfer process, a poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) assisted method is used which involves several steps.41 The fabrication details are described in the Methods section. In the following discussion, we focus on two primary steps involved during the transfer process, i.e., PMMA removal and copper etching, and investigate the associated effects on the overall solar cell performance.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cell. The growth template of graphene, i.e., copper, is etched by using either APS or FeCl3 solution, and the PMMA supporting membrane is removed by either thermal annealing or acetone treatment. 
PMMA is usually removed using organic solvents such as acetone or chloroform, while thermal annealing treatment is also applied which is known to remove the supporting PMMA layer more thoroughly.42,43 The amount of PMMA residues although not perfectly controlled or the way by which the PMMA layer is removed all have different effects on the physical properties of graphene to a certain degree including the doping level.44 Thus, we investigated how these two generalized PMMA removal approaches on graphene influence the performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells. We note that, in the following discussion, the copper substrate was removed using ammonium persulfate (APS, (NH4)2S2O8) solution (the effect of the metal etchant will be discussed later). Fig. 2 shows J–V measurements of solar cells prepared from acetone- and annealing-processed transfer methods under simulated AM1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 irradiance, and the corresponding key photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI.† As shown in Fig. 2a, J–V characteristics of the acetone-processed solar cells (the most widely used method) without any chemical doping typically show s-shape behavior with a low FF (19.5%) and thus a low PCE (0.8%). With the annealing-processed device, while keeping all the other experimental conditions the same, the s-shaped J–V profile was immediately restored to normal j-shaped characteristics with notable improvements in both the FF (33.4%) and the PCE (2.8%). Similar to earlier reports,33,44 we also observed that the acetone-processed device exhibited j-shaped behavior after p-type doping of graphene using AuCl3 with a PCE of 5.5% as shown in Fig. 2b. Interestingly, the doping effect of graphene was most noticeable for the annealing-processed devices leading to a PCE of 9.5%.
 Fig. 2  Device performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells fabricated through different PMMA removal approaches. (a) J–V characteristics obtained from acetone- and annealing-processed devices with pristine graphene. (b) J–V characteristics obtained from acetone- and annealing-processed devices with AuCl3-doped graphene. 
To elucidate this distinctive difference in the solar cell performance resulting from simply switching the PMMA removal methods, related physical properties of the graphene were analyzed by Raman spectroscopy, transport, and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) measurements. Fig. 3a shows the Raman spectra of graphene films transferred onto the SiO2 substrate by acetone and annealing methods, which displays two distinctive peaks at 1589/1605 cm−1 and 2680/2687 cm−1, G and 2D modes representing the in-plane vibration of sp2 carbon and stacking orders, respectively.45 In both cases, minimal D peaks at 1350 cm−1, representing the degree of defects in the sp2 domain, were present indicating that the overall quality of the graphene films prepared via two different approaches is comparable with negligible defects. However, as shown in Fig. 3b, the G and 2D bands of the annealing-treated graphene are up-shifted from those of the acetone-treated graphene, by 16 cm−1 and 7 cm−1, respectively. Note that the typical Raman peaks of the pristine undoped graphene are located at 1350, 1580, and 2700 cm−1 for the D, G, and 2D bands, respectively; the peak positions observed above indicate that the overall blue shift is due to the hole doping of graphene and not due to the compressive stress on graphene by substrates.46 The intensity ratio of 2D and G bands (I2D/IG) also represents the degree of doping level in graphene; doping-induced electrons or holes cause the scattering of electron–hole pairs generated from the photoexcitation.47,48 Here, the I2D/IG values of 2.1 and 1.2 in the acetone- and annealing-treated graphene, respectively, indicate that more hole doping is present in the latter case. Therefore, more hole doping obviously occurs in the annealing-treated graphene than the acetone-treated one. Such doping in graphene typically occurs by the molecular adsorption and the consequent charge transfer. By removing the pre-existing molecules such as H2O and O2 on graphene, the thermal annealing process thus provides a more appropriate environment for the adsorbate-derived hole doping in air after the annealing.46 To elucidate such unknown adsorbates remaining on the graphene surface prepared from the annealing process, we carried out X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis on the as-transferred graphene and compared the result to that of the acetone-processed graphene (Fig. S1 in the ESI†). The larger intensity of the O 1s peak, indicative of the oxygen-derived materials (O2−, OH−, H2O), from the annealing-treated graphene film indicates that more oxygen-derived adsorbates are physisorbed on the surface of graphene than the acetone-processed graphene.
 Fig. 3  Raman spectroscopy analysis of graphene films transferred onto the SiO2 substrate by acetone and annealing treatments for the PMMA removal. (a) Black and red lines represent Raman spectra of acetone- and annealing-treated graphene. (b) Zoom-in spectra of G and 2D band regions. Both the G and 2D bands of annealing-treated graphene are up-shifted from those of the acetone-treated graphene by 16 cm−1 and 7 cm−1, respectively. (c) Raman spectra of G bands for both the acetone and annealing cases. Raman mapping is performed near the G peak of acetone-treated graphene, which is represented by the blue-shaded region. (d) and (e) Raman mapping of acetone- and annealing-treated graphene around 1589 cm−1. (f) Raman spectra of G bands for both the acetone and annealing cases. Raman mapping is performed near the G peak of annealing-treated graphene, which is represented by the blue-shaded region. (g) and (h) Raman mapping of acetone- and annealing-treated graphene around 1605 cm−1. 
Raman mapping analysis was further performed to confirm the uniformity and relative degree of doping level between acetone- and annealing-processed graphene sheets. As shown in Fig. 3c–h, the mapping results from the G band of each transfer case exhibit the suppression of the Raman peak from other approaches, which confirms the obvious blue shift of the annealing-treated graphene from the acetone-treated one with good uniformity.
To estimate the degree of doping level in graphene prepared by the two different transfer methods (acetone vs. annealing), transport measurements were carried out by fabricating graphene field-effect transistors (FET) where both types of graphene films are transferred onto the silicon substrate with Ti (10 nm)/Au (50 nm) as the source and the drain electrode. As shown in Fig. S2a in the ESI,† the Dirac point, located at the maximum of resistance, of acetone-treated graphene is observed at ∼40 volts due to the slight hole doping resulting from the wet transfer process,49 whereas that of the annealing-processed graphene is found at over 80 volts indicating strong hole doping from the thermal treatment. These results are consistent with those of Raman analysis corroborating the strong hole doping character of graphene from the thermal annealing treatment. Furthermore, UPS measurements were performed to determine the work function of both types of graphene (acetone vs. annealing). As shown in Fig. S2b in the ESI,† the Fermi energy of the annealing-processed graphene exhibits a higher energy level than that of the acetone-treated graphene with the work function values of 4.61 eV and 4.45 eV, respectively, again confirming a more pronounced hole doping effect with the annealing-transferred graphene.
With these experimental results, we can qualitatively understand the improved device performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells processed by the annealing transfer route that showed more pronounced hole doping than the acetone approach. In pristine neutral graphene, the valence and conduction bands are completely full and empty in the Dirac cone (Fig. S3a in the ESI†). In an electron-drained or hole-doped state, the Fermi energy shifts down toward the valence band (Fig. S3b in the ESI†). When graphene makes contact with silicon, the Schottky junction is formed according to the relative energy band structures of each, and the photogenerated charge carriers are separated by the built-in field developed at the graphene–silicon heterojunction. Since the Schottky barrier height (ΦB) is obtained from the difference between the work function of graphene (ΦG) and the electron affinity of silicon (χ) as ΦB = ΦG − χ, increasing the work function of graphene leads to the increase of the Schottky barrier height, which can promote the separation of photogenerated charge carriers more efficiently due to the enhanced built-in field. A higher work function of graphene also renders the hole transport from the silicon to the graphene electrode more efficient.
Besides, the doping of graphene improves the electrical conductivity of graphene which decreases the series resistance of the completed device.50 The more hole-doped annealing-processed graphene has lower sheet resistance than the acetone-processed graphene (384 ± 18 and 479 ± 24 Ω sq−1, respectively) as shown in Fig. S4 in the ESI.† When such annealing-processed graphene is additionally doped with AuCl3, the sheet resistance is further reduced to 129 ± 9 Ω sq−1.
Apart from the removal process of the PMMA supporting membrane for the CVD graphene, another primary step in the transfer process is to eliminate the catalytic metal growth substrate, typical of which is the copper. In general, copper can be chemically dissolved by ferric chloride (FeCl3) or APS solution through the following processes, 2Fe3+ + Cu → 2Fe2+ + Cu2+ or S2O2−8 + Cu → 2SO2−4 + Cu2+, where the former reaction tends to leave more chemical residues than the latter.51,52 The existence of Fe ions on the surface of FeCl3-transferred graphene film was confirmed from the XPS and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) measurements as shown in Fig. S5 and S6 in the ESI,† respectively. XPS analysis showed a distinctive Fe ion peak, and TEM and electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) analysis revealed the existence of Fe metallic residues remaining on the FeCl3-transferred graphene. In contrast, such metallic impurities were not observed for the APS-transferred graphene, which could become the potential source of the charge recombination center in the solar cell. Similar to previous observations, acetone-processed devices exhibited s-shaped J–V characteristics regardless of the etchant type (Fig. 4a), which was recovered to j-shaped behaviors through the annealing process (Fig. 4b). The FeCl3-processed devices typically showed slightly higher performance than the APS-processed ones for the pristine undoped graphene in both the acetone and annealing cases, with PCEs of 1.1% vs. 0.8% for the acetone-process and 3.9% vs. 2.8% for the annealing process, respectively. After doping with AuCl3, notable enhancement in device performance was observed in all cases, i.e., different configurations of PMMA-removal and copper-etching processes (Fig. 4c and d). However, the s-shape character was still present under the FeCl3–acetone-doping treatment conditions. With doping, the APS-processed devices generally showed better performance than the FeCl3 case. The highest device performance was observed for the APS–anneal-doping case with a PCE of 9.5%. The related representative photovoltaic parameters are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI.† We speculate that the primary cause for these intriguing phenomena is closely related to the metallic residues from the FeCl3 etchant which can moderately hole-dope the graphene,51 thus leading to the observed better device performance than the APS case in undoped pristine graphene electrodes. However, once the graphene electrode is hole-doped with AuCl3, such metallic contaminant induced moderate doping does not seem to have conspicuous effects on the overall device performance, which is likely to be dominated by the intentional p-doping through AuCl3. Instead, these metallic impurities now appear to become the potential carrier recombination center which traps the free charge carriers, causing the observed slightly lower Voc and FF, and thus PCE. The above discussion is schematically illustrated in Fig. S6 in the ESI.†
 Fig. 4  Device performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells fabricated through different PMMA removal and metal etching processes. (a) and (b) J–V characteristics of FeCl3- and APS-processed devices with acetone (a) and annealing (b) treatments before doping the graphene. (c) and (d) J–V characteristics of FeCl3- and APS-processed devices with acetone (c) and annealing (d) treatments after doping graphene with AuCl3. 
With carefully controlled fabrication conditions in graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells, we also applied the ARC layer to further improve the device performance. Herein, PMMA was utilized as the ARC layer, whose refractive index of n ≈ 1.5 (at the wavelength of 550 nm) suggests that it can be used as an appropriate antireflection layer according to the following relationship: n = (nSinair)1/2, where nSi ≈ 3.4 and nair ≈ 1.0, and the optimized refractive index of the ARC layer is n ≈ 1.8.53 An appropriate thickness of PMMA as the ARC layer decreases the light reflectance from ∼40% to below 10% at 550 nm wavelength as shown in Fig. S7 in the ESI.†Fig. 5a shows the J–V characteristics of ARC-applied graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells (champion device) processed under APS-annealing-treated conditions, showing a PCE of up to 12.5%. These results are summarized in Table S2 in the ESI.† The effect of the ARC layer was also confirmed from the quantum efficiency measurement shown in Fig. 5b.
 Fig. 5  Device performance of the champion graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells with a PMMA ARC layer. (a) J–V characteristics of devices processed with APS and annealing treatments with pristine (black line) and AuCl3-doped graphene (red line), and with an additional ARC layer (blue line). (b) EQE measurements of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells without (black line) and with the ARC layer (red line). 
Conclusions
In this work, we investigated the origin of performance degradation in graphene/silicon-based Schottky junction solar cells and proposed a simple approach to remedy such performance degradation. It turns out that the integration process of a graphene film with the silicon substrate plays a critical role in forming a suitable Schottky junction interface, which is necessary for obtaining the desired solar cell performance. By carefully examining the transfer process of CVD graphene, mainly focusing on PMMA and copper removal processes, combined with appropriate doping and an ARC layer, two extreme power conversion efficiencies, 0.8% and 12.5%, were observed, corroborating the significance of the integration process. The results of this study shall provide valuable information for understanding the appropriate design and operating principle of graphene-based Schottky junction solar cells, which can be further utilized as a useful guide to other configurations of graphene-processed emerging solar cell technologies, as well as other structures of optoelectronic devices including photodiodes or light-emitting diodes.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (2015R1D1A1A0105791).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Liang, Y. Fang, T. Qiu, J. Zhang and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2874–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lotya, Y. Hernandez, P. J. King, R. J. Smith, V. Nicolosi, L. S. Karlsson, F. M. Blighe, S. De, Z. Wang, I. T. McGovern, G. S. Duesberg and J. N. Coleman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3611–3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Özyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Cai, M. Borysiak, B. Han, D. Chen, R. D. Piner, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4359–4363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, S. Chang, S. Gradecak and J. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600847 CrossRef .
H. Sung, N. Ahn, M. S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, H. Yoon, N.-G. Park and M. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501873 CrossRef .
L. G. De Arco, Y. Zhang, C. W. Schlenker, K. Ryu, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2865–2873 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Byun, S.-H. Bae, T. Ahmed, J.-X. Zhu, S.-J. Kwon, Y. Lee, S.-Y. Min, C. Wolf, H.-K. Seo, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600172 CrossRef .
P. You, Z. Liu, Q. Tai, S. Liu and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3632–3638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hadadian, J.-P. Correa-Baena, E. K. Goharshadi, A. Ummadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, J. Luo, S. Gholipour, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8681–8686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Jun, S. H. Jin, B. Lee, B. H. Kim, W.-S. Chae, S. H. Hong and S. Jeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3000–3006 CAS .
S.-S. Li, K.-H. Tu, C.-C. Lin, C.-W. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3169–3174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, Y. Q. Dong, X. Wang, S. Y. Khoo, B. Liu and C. M. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 214–218 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. de Jong, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. J. A. de Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2255–2257 CrossRef CAS .
N. Formica, P. Mantilla-Perez, D. S. Ghosh, D. Janner, T. L. Chen, M. Huang, S. Garner, J. Martorell and V. Pruneri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4541–4548 CAS .
X. Li, H. Zhu, K. Wang, A. Cao, J. Wei, C. Li, Y. Jia, Z. Li, X. Li and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, C. Jiang, H. Wang, H. Lei, D. Lai and Rusli, IEEE, 2012, 002785–002787 Search PubMed .
L. Lancellotti, E. Bobeico, A. Capasso, E. Lago, P. Delli Veneri, E. Leoni, F. Buonocore and N. Lisi, Sol. Energy, 2016, 127, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Mohan, T. M. Undeland and W. P. Robins, Power Diodes. Power Electronics: Converters, Applications, and Design, John Wiley & Sons,  2007, pp. 539–543 Search PubMed .
W. G. Townsend, IEE J. Solid-State Electron Devices, 1978, 2, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mizrah and D. Adler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 29, 682–684 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ashok, P. P. Sharma and S. J. Fonash, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1980, 27, 725–730 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, W. Cui, Y. Zhu, F. Zu, L. Liao, S.-T. Lee and B. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 297–302 CAS .
X. Li, D. Xie, H. Park, M. Zhu, T. H. Zeng, K. Wang, J. Wei, D. Wu, J. Kong and H. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1945–1948 RSC .
X. Miao, S. Tongay, M. K. Petterson, K. Berke, A. G. Rinzler, B. R. Appleton and A. F. Hebard, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2745–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, X. Li, C. Mackin, X. Zhang, W. Fang, T. Palacios, H. Zhu and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2104–2110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tsuboi, F. Wang, D. Kozawa, K. Funahashi, S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi, T. Takenobu and K. Matsuda, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14476–14482 RSC .
T. Feng, D. Xie, Y. Lin, Y. Zang, T. Ren, R. Song, H. Zhao, H. Tian, X. Li, H. Zhu and L. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 233505 CrossRef .
C. Xie, X. Zhang, K. Ruan, Z. Shao, S. S. Dhaliwal, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang and J. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15348–15354 CAS .
E. Shi, H. Li, L. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Li, P. Li, Y. Shang, S. Wu, X. Li, J. Wei, K. Wang, H. Zhu, D. Wu, Y. Fang and A. Cao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1776–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jiao, D. Wei, J. Liu, W. Sun, S. Jia, W. Zhang, Y. Feng, H. Shi and C. Du, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 73202–73206 RSC .
H. Park, S. Chang, J. Jean, J. J. Cheng, P. T. Araujo, M. Wang, M. G. Bawendi, M. S. Dresselhaus, V. Bulović, J. Kong and S. Gradečak, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 233–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ahn, H. Kim, Y.-H. Kim, Y. Yi and S.-I. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 091602 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Lin, C.-C. Lu, C.-H. Yeh, C. Jin, K. Suenaga and P.-W. Chiu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 414–419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Lin, T.-H. Chen, J.-K. Chang, J.-I. Taur, Y.-Y. Lo, W.-L. Lee, C.-S. Chang, W.-B. Su and C.-I. Wu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1784–1791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Ferrari, J. C. Meyer, V. Scardaci, C. Casiraghi, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, S. Piscanec, D. Jiang, K. S. Novoselov, S. Roth and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 187401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Ni, H. M. Wang, Z. Q. Luo, Y. Y. Wang, T. Yu, Y. H. Wu and Z. X. Shen, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2010, 41, 479–483 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Basko, S. Piscanec and A. C. Ferrari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 165413 CrossRef .
A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and A. K. Sood, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 210–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, Q. Zhou, C. Wang, Q. Li, C. Wang and Y. Fang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 767–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, S.-H. Bae, T.-H. Han, K.-G. Lim, J.-H. Ahn and T.-W. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 014012 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. T. Wu, W. W. Zhao, W. Y. Chen, J. Jiang, H. Y. Nan, X. T. Guo, Z. Liang, Y. M. Chen, Y. F. Chen and Z. H. Ni, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2015, 46, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, K. Miyazaki, H. Ariga, S. Takakusagi and K. Asakura, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 88, 1029–1035 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jiao, D. Wei, X. Song, T. Sun, J. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Feng, W. Sun, W. Wei, H. Shi, C. Hu and C. Du, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 10175–10179 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta05481e‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the fabrication process of the graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cell. The growth template of graphene, i.e., copper, is etched by using either APS or FeCl3 solution, and the PMMA supporting membrane is removed by either thermal annealing or acetone treatment.	 

 	Fig. 2  Device performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells fabricated through different PMMA removal approaches. (a) J–V characteristics obtained from acetone- and annealing-processed devices with pristine graphene. (b) J–V characteristics obtained from acetone- and annealing-processed devices with AuCl3-doped graphene.	 

 	Fig. 3  Raman spectroscopy analysis of graphene films transferred onto the SiO2 substrate by acetone and annealing treatments for the PMMA removal. (a) Black and red lines represent Raman spectra of acetone- and annealing-treated graphene. (b) Zoom-in spectra of G and 2D band regions. Both the G and 2D bands of annealing-treated graphene are up-shifted from those of the acetone-treated graphene by 16 cm−1 and 7 cm−1, respectively. (c) Raman spectra of G bands for both the acetone and annealing cases. Raman mapping is performed near the G peak of acetone-treated graphene, which is represented by the blue-shaded region. (d) and (e) Raman mapping of acetone- and annealing-treated graphene around 1589 cm−1. (f) Raman spectra of G bands for both the acetone and annealing cases. Raman mapping is performed near the G peak of annealing-treated graphene, which is represented by the blue-shaded region. (g) and (h) Raman mapping of acetone- and annealing-treated graphene around 1605 cm−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  Device performance of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells fabricated through different PMMA removal and metal etching processes. (a) and (b) J–V characteristics of FeCl3- and APS-processed devices with acetone (a) and annealing (b) treatments before doping the graphene. (c) and (d) J–V characteristics of FeCl3- and APS-processed devices with acetone (c) and annealing (d) treatments after doping graphene with AuCl3.	 

 	Fig. 5  Device performance of the champion graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells with a PMMA ARC layer. (a) J–V characteristics of devices processed with APS and annealing treatments with pristine (black line) and AuCl3-doped graphene (red line), and with an additional ARC layer (blue line). (b) EQE measurements of graphene–silicon Schottky junction solar cells without (black line) and with the ARC layer (red line).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ta05481e
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
