Surface-functionalized perovskite films for stable photoelectrochemical water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA08812K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA08812K
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 910-913Surface-functionalized perovskite films for stable photoelectrochemical water splitting†

        
          
            Chongwu 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuang 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tianyu 
            Wen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hua Gui 
            Yang
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Ultrafine Materials of Ministry of Education, School of Materials Science and Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, 130 Meilong Road, Shanghai 200237, China. E-mail: hgyang@ecust.edu.cn
Received 
      11th October 2016
    , Accepted 2nd December 2016First published on 2nd December 2016AbstractOrganometal halide perovskite has attracted intensive research interest for its unlimited potential in solar energy conversion. In this work, a rationally designed perovskite film with surface functionalization and an ultrathin Ni proactive layer delivers a stable photocurrent of 2.08 mA cm−2 for nearly 30 min during photoelectrochemical measurements.
The increasing global demand for energy compels people to seek renewable energy resources. Among them, solar energy utilization, especially artificial photosynthesis has attracted intensive research effort due to its unmatched resource potential.1 However, efficient photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting demands photoelectrode materials with superior light harvesting as well as excellent efficient charge separation, which is hard to satisfy at the same time.2–6
In the past several years, rapid improvement has been achieved in organometal halide perovskite (CH3NH3PdI3) PV cells and a maximum solar conversion efficiency of 21.1% has been demonstrated by Grätzel et al. through tailoring the cations in perovskites.7 The high conversion efficiencies of perovskites are mainly due to their suitable bandgaps, long diffusion lengths of charges as well as balanced charge transport,8–14 which are all ideal properties for efficient photoelectrochemical (PEC) electrodes as well. However, the extreme susceptibility of perovskite to water has placed an impregnable barrier on its application in solar-to-fuel conversion such as PEC water splitting.15
Recently, utilization of perovskite photoanodes in water oxidation via Ni passivation has been demonstrated.16 The ultrathin Ni surface layer functions as a passivation barrier as well as the catalyst for reaction. Therefore, a much enhanced photocurrent and stability for PEC measurements can be realized, compared with perovskite photoanodes without the Ni passivation layer. However, only 20% of the photocurrent remains after the stability measurement at 1000 s, which is still insufficient for the PEC application. Our group also demonstrates that hydrophobic tertiary and quaternary alkyl ammonium cations can be successfully assembled on the perovskite surface as efficient water-resisting layers via a facile surface functionalization technique.12 Such surface-modulated perovskite solar cells can retain power conversion efficiencies over 15% under high relative humidity (90 ± 5%). In this case, we anticipate that deposition of the Ni passivation layer on our surface-functionalized perovskite photoelectrodes should enhance its stability in PEC water splitting.
Herein, we used a surface-functionalized treatment with hydrophobic alkyl ammonium cations on the perovskite electrode as previously reported. After the fabrication of a standard multilayer perovskite solar cell configuration, an ultrathin Ni passivation layer was vapor-deposited on top of the cells. Experimental results confirm that the as-prepared perovskite electrode modified with tetra-ethyl ammonium (TEA) exhibited a stable photocurrent after PEC measurement for more than half an hour, mainly due to the fact that the TEA treated surface will serve as a second protective layer against water molecules. On the contrary, the photocurrent of the sample treated with tetra-butyl ammonium (TBA) rapidly decayed to zero once the measurement began. It was because of the pinholes that resulted from the TBA treatment which caused detriment to the coverage of the Ni passivation layer (Fig. 1). Our results demonstrate that a local surface electron modulation compound with a surface passivation layer will synergistically contribute to the long-term stability of efficient perovskite photoanodes in PEC water oxidation.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of pristine and hydrophobic alkyl ammonium cation functionalized perovskite films with an ultrathin Ni passivation layer. The surface modulation can serve as a second shield against water molecules. The roughness of the TBA treated film will impair the final Ni coating, leading to significant penetration of water into the device. 
Planar heterojunction configured solar cells (FTO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag) were fabricated based on pristine, TBA and TEA modified perovskite films, as recorded in the cross-section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the solar cell (Fig. 2A). Meanwhile, the morphology measurements were also performed for both pristine and hydrophobic alkyl ammonium modified perovskite films and shown in Fig. 2B–D. The conventional CH3NH3PdI3 film exhibits a smooth and flat surface (Fig. 2B), similar to previous reports about perovskite films synthesized via the anti-solvent method.13 Interestingly, the perovskite film functionalized with TEA (Fig. 2C) displays an analogous surface morphology as that of pristine sample. More significantly, slight dissolution phenomena can be observed and contribute to a smoother surface than that of a traditional anti-solvent film. On the contrary, Fig. 2D exhibits the drastic alteration in the morphology of the TBA-modified perovskite film, in which the smooth surface disappears and branched structures can be obtained. It should be noted that such a rough surface should influence the coverage of the further-coated protective layers.16 As expected, Fig. 2E and F compare the morphologies of Ni-coated perovskite films functionalized with TEA and TBA, from which nearly 100 percent coverage of Ni can be observed in the TEA-functionalized film and lots of pin holes exist in the TBA-modified film. Therefore, we figure that the stability of TBA-modified perovskite film during PEC measurement should be in question, even if the TBA-modified perovskite powder exhibits superior resistance to humid air.17
 Fig. 2  SEM images measured for pristine, TEA and TBA modified perovskite. (A) Cross-section image indicated the planar structure of as-synthesized perovskite device. (B–D) Surface morphology of these perovskite films. The pristine sample displays the typical smooth surface of the anti-solvent film. The TEA-treated sample exhibits a similar surface as that of the pristine one and slight dissolution can be observed. Drastic alternation occurs in the morphology of the TBA-treated film with branch structures. (E and F) Ultrathin Ni proactive layer on TEA and TBA functionalized films. 
The crystal structures of all perovskite samples were analysed through X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in Fig. 3A, all the peaks in the XRD patterns can be well indexed to those of pristine perovskite, which suggests that the substitution of ammonium ions only occurs on the surface and they are not embedded into the bulk perovskite crystals lattices.18–20 The UV-vis absorbance spectra in Fig. 3B present similar light harvesting capacities for all samples, while a slight decline in absorbance of the surface modified films can be observed compared with the pristine perovskite electrode. The loss of perovskite upon its dissolution in the isopropanol solution should account for the diminished light absorption.
 Fig. 3  (A) XRD pattern for pristine, TEA and TBA functionalized perovskite films. Similar curves for each samples suggest that surface treatment will not influence the bulk perovskite film. (B) UV-vis absorption for pristine, TEA and TBA functionalized perovskite films. Similar light patterns for three samples can be observed. (C) 1H-NMR plots for TEA and TBA treated perovskite films. Peaks of (a) and (b) (shown in blue) are typical signals of TEA while peaks of (e)–(h) (shown in green) indicate the presence of TBA. (D) Photoluminescence spectra for three electrodes. Surface functionalization can cause a slight increase in charge recombination, especially for the TBA treated sample. 
The existence of ammonium ions was then confirmed through 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements, in which the signals of TEA and TBA could be verified, as presented in Fig. 3C.21 The peaks of (a) and (b) (shown in blue) are typical signals of TEA while the peaks of (e)–(h) (shown in green) indicate the presence of TBA. Moreover, the possibility of physical absorption has been ruled out because of the repeated washing process after the modification. Actually, the tertiary and quaternary alkyl ammonium cations usually function as capping agents in chemical synthesis, bonding with crystal surfaces via chemical interaction.22,23 Therefore, the modification should contribute to chemically absorbed ammonium cations rather than physically absorbed ones. The photoluminescence measurements were also performed to investigate the influence of surface modification on the perovskite film. As shown in Fig. 3D, a slight increase in the peak of TBA and TEA treated samples indicates that the TEA and TBA treatment, to some degree, do increase the recombination rate of the perovskite films, even if we can observe in the spectra that the change is not significant. The highest PL peak for TBA-treated film indicates significant charge recombination, which should be attributed to the branched surface serving as recombination centers for light-induced charges.
The photocurrent density–photovoltage (J–V) curves of typical solar cells based on pristine, TEA and TBA modified films were measured under irradiation with air mass (AM)-1.5 global simulated sunlight at an intensity of 100 mW cm−2 (Fig. 4A). All scans were taken from forward bias to short circuit with a scan rate of 0.15 V s−1. A typical device based on a pristine perovskite film has a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 19.36 mA cm−2, an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1018.51 mV and a fill factor (FF) of 0.57, yielding a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 11.23%. In the same batch, the typical device based on the TEA film exhibits a Jsc of 18.61 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1028.78 mV, a FF of 0.57 and a PCE of 10.85%, while the TBA device gives a Jsc of 17.90 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1049.07 mV, a FF of 0.56 and a PCE of 10.69%. A slightly decreased efficiency for TEA and TBA modified solar cells should result from the loss of perovskite upon its dissolution in the isopropanol solution as well as the slightly increased charge recombination rates. We still can conclude that the surface functionalization has negligible influence on the performance of solar cells.
 Fig. 4  (A) Current density–voltage curves for the multilayered CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells with and without surface treatment. (B) Comparison of two multilayered CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells before and after the Ni passivation. (C) Current–potential curves measured for pristine, TEA and TBA treated perovskite electrodes. (D) Photocurrent density at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl of pristine and TEA-treated perovskite photoanodes for water splitting. All the measurement were performed with AM 1.5G simulated sunlight. 
The Ni passivation layer was subsequently vapor-deposited on pristine, TEA and TBA modified solar cells, serving as both a proactive layer and catalyst for water oxidation. Fig. 4B compares the J–V plots for TEA modified solar cells with and without Ni coating, in which similar curves can be observed, delivering analogous PCEs of 10.85% and 10.18% for the two devices. The ultrathin Ni layer will not impact the PCEs of conventional (previous demonstrated) or our surface-functioned solar cells. Afterwards, the edges of the as-prepared perovskite electrodes were encased with epoxy resin, preventing the permeation of solution from the edge. The multilayered perovskite electrodes were then utilized as photoanodes and measured by a CHI 660e electrochemical workstation in a three-electrode configuration using Pt foil (2 cm2) as the counter electrode and an Ag/AgCl as reference electrode with an aqueous solution of Na2S (0.1 M) as the electrolyte and hole sacrificial reagent. As shown in Fig. 4C the pristine perovskite electrode performs water splitting with photocurrent of 2.44 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl, while those of TEA and TBA treated electrodes are 2.08 and 0.42 mA cm−2, respectively. The slight decrease in the photocurrents of the TEA functionalized perovskite films are in accordance with the J–V curves measured for the solar cells, while the drastically decreased current for the TBA sample should result from the penetration of the solution into the electrode. The electrochemistry impedance spectra (EIS) measurements were further performed for all perovskites photoanodes in the Na2S solution at their open potentials. The similar diameters of the arcs in Fig. S1† illustrate the almost equivalent valves of Rct for each photoanode, which should derive from the simultaneous deposition of ultrathin Ni passivation layers, serving as an efficient catalyst for water splitting. Meanwhile, the Rs in each film are almost the same for pristine and TEA-modified samples and a slightly increased Rs in the TBA treated film should again be caused by the imperfections of the surface of the perovskite film. These parameters cannot account for the diminished PEC performance for the TBA treated film, considering that the divergences of Rs and Rct are not significant and the performance of the TBA-treated solar cells are competitive as that of pristine solar cells.
The stability measurement for PEC water splitting performed at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl with pristine and TEA functionalized perovskite films after Ni passivation are displayed in Fig. 4D. Apparently, the pristine sample exhibits the highest photocurrent of 3 mA cm−2, but maintaining only 20% of its origin photocurrent after the 30 min PEC measurement. Surprisingly, the TEA modified perovskite film shows extraordinary stability, with a slight decrease in the photocurrent (0.5 mA cm−2) compared with the pristine sample and no decay for around half an hour. Despite the superior resistance to humidity for TBA-treated perovskite films, the roughness of the drastically altered anti-solvent film impaired the coverage of the ultrathin Ni layer, which crucially limits its application in PEC measurements. As expected, the perovskite film promptly turned to yellow and peeled off once being immersed into the Na2S solution, indicating the rapid dissolution of as-prepared film. Consequently, the photocurrent of the TBA-modified film steeply drops to 0.2 mA cm−2 in 100 s (Fig. S2†).
To illustrate the contribution of surface functionalization to the stability of the perovskite film during the PEC measurement, SEM images were further recorded for pristine and TEA treated electrodes after the measurement (Fig. S3†). As expected, a collapse can be observed for the pristine perovskite film with the Ni proactive layer, which should account for the fading performance during the measurement. In stark contrast, no significant alteration occurred in TEA modulated electrode after the chronoamperometry measurement. Therefore, we infer that the ultrathin Ni proactive layer can block the majority of the water so that only Ni passivation can temporarily preserve the perovskite film. Water molecules can somehow penetrate through the Ni coating, dissolving the interior perovskite film and hampering the PEC performance. The hydrophobic alkyl ammonium cation modulated surface has been previously demonstrated to hinder water adsorption, which functions as a second shield against the water molecules. Consequently, combination of Ni passivation and surface functionalization can significantly improve the stability of perovskite films.
In summary, both the strategies of Ni passivation and surface-functionalized treatment with hydrophobic alkyl ammonium cations were applied, which synergistically contributed to the enhanced resistance of perovskite electrodes to water. The TEA treated perovskite electrode was capable of performing stable PEC water oxidation for nearly 0.5 h and the untreated perovskite film with Ni passivation quickly forfeited its activity. The cross-section SEM images recorded for these electrodes after the stability measurements illustrate that the TEA modification can energetically inhibit the collapse of the perovskite film during the PEC measurement, leading to the enduring photocurrent for water oxidation. Furthermore, we anticipate that the integration of these two passivation strategies can open up an alternative avenue for efficient and stable PEC water splitting systems.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (21373083 and 21573068), Program of Shanghai Subject Chief Scientist (15XD1501300), SRF for ROCS, SEM, SRFDP, Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WD1313009) and 111 Project (B14018).
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, 353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Wang, S. Yang, W. Q. Fang, P. Liu, H. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. L. Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, J. Reddy and J. Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989 CAS .
P. Gao, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2448 CAS .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 11414 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, H. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. II Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Zheng, S. Yang, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Hou and H. G. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5116 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. II Seok, Nature, 2015, 348, 1234 CAS .
P. Da, M. Cha, L. Sun, Y. Wu, Z. Wang and G. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y. B. Cheng, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15016 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalar, M. Grätzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 CAS .
T. Kollek, D. Gruber, J. Gehring, E. Zimmermann, L. Schmidt-Mende and S. Polarz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 54, 1341 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liang, D. B. Mitzi and M. T. Prikas, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 403 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulovic and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08812kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of pristine and hydrophobic alkyl ammonium cation functionalized perovskite films with an ultrathin Ni passivation layer. The surface modulation can serve as a second shield against water molecules. The roughness of the TBA treated film will impair the final Ni coating, leading to significant penetration of water into the device.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images measured for pristine, TEA and TBA modified perovskite. (A) Cross-section image indicated the planar structure of as-synthesized perovskite device. (B–D) Surface morphology of these perovskite films. The pristine sample displays the typical smooth surface of the anti-solvent film. The TEA-treated sample exhibits a similar surface as that of the pristine one and slight dissolution can be observed. Drastic alternation occurs in the morphology of the TBA-treated film with branch structures. (E and F) Ultrathin Ni proactive layer on TEA and TBA functionalized films.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) XRD pattern for pristine, TEA and TBA functionalized perovskite films. Similar curves for each samples suggest that surface treatment will not influence the bulk perovskite film. (B) UV-vis absorption for pristine, TEA and TBA functionalized perovskite films. Similar light patterns for three samples can be observed. (C) 1H-NMR plots for TEA and TBA treated perovskite films. Peaks of (a) and (b) (shown in blue) are typical signals of TEA while peaks of (e)–(h) (shown in green) indicate the presence of TBA. (D) Photoluminescence spectra for three electrodes. Surface functionalization can cause a slight increase in charge recombination, especially for the TBA treated sample.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Current density–voltage curves for the multilayered CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells with and without surface treatment. (B) Comparison of two multilayered CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells before and after the Ni passivation. (C) Current–potential curves measured for pristine, TEA and TBA treated perovskite electrodes. (D) Photocurrent density at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl of pristine and TEA-treated perovskite photoanodes for water splitting. All the measurement were performed with AM 1.5G simulated sunlight.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ta08812k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
