Charge generation and energy transfer in hybrid polymer /infrared quantum dot solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE24175G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE24175G
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 769-775Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsCharge generation and energy transfer in hybrid polymer/infrared quantum dot solar cells†

        
          
            Elisabeth 
            Strein
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Adam 
            Colbert
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Selvam 
            Subramaniyan
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hirokazu 
            Nagaoka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cody W. 
            Schlenker
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Janke
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Samson A. 
            Jenekhe
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            David S. 
            Ginger
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Washington, Box 351700, Seattle, Washington 98195-1700, USA. E-mail: ginger@chem.washington.edu
bDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Washington, Box 351750, Seattle, Washington 98195-1750, USA
Received 
      24th November 2012
    , Accepted 2nd January 2013First published on 4th January 2013AbstractConjugated polymers blended with nanocrystal quantum dots are interesting as solution processable active layers for infrared light harvesting in thin film solar cells. We study photocurrent generation processes in hybrid polymer/quantum dot photovoltaics by comparing device performance and photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectra across blends of three different conjugated polymers, poly(2,3-bis(2-(hexyldecyl)-quinoxaline-5,8-diyl-alt-N-(2-hexyldecyl)-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole) (PDTPQx-HD), poly[(4,4′-bis(3-(2-hexyl-decyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,5-bis(3-(2-ethyl-hexyl)thiophen-2yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole)] (PPEHTT), and poly[(4,4′-bis(2-octyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′3′-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,5-bis(3-octylthiophen-2yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole)] (PSOTT) with PbS quantum dots. The PIA spectra and device performance provide evidence for long-lived photoinduced charge separation and bulk heterojunction device operation for blends of both PDTPQx-HD and PPEHTT with PbS. In contrast we find that PSOTT/PbS blends can produce viable solar cells without any evidence for long-lived charge transfer in the PIA spectra. Even so, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of PSOTT/PbS solar cells indicate that the polymer plays a significant role in light harvesting. We use photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy to confirm that the polymer funnels energy to the PbS quantum dots via energy transfer, and speculate that these blends may operate as PbS Schottky diodes sensitized by energy transfer from the semiconducting polymer host.

Broader context
Photovoltaics have unrivaled potential to meet civilization's growing need for secure, carbon free electricity sources. However, the adoption of photovoltaic electricity generation on terawatt scales will require advances to bring down costs and improve efficiencies. Flexible, solution processed hybrid films of polymers and inorganic nanoparticles are attractive in that they combine the potential advantages of both organic and inorganic semiconductor materials. However their performance has tended to lag that of both purely organic and purely inorganic devices. Here, we compare the basic photocurrent generation mechanisms across several new families of organic semiconductor hosts. We find that while some blends appear to behave as traditional bulk heterojunctions, others do not. Based on evidence of strong energy transfer from a polymer host to PbS quantum dots we propose that hybrid films may operate in part as energy-transfer-sensitized Schottky diodes. These results suggests new ways one could optimize both hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells and improve light harvesting in inorganic quantum dot based solar cells.

1 Introduction
The last decade has seen dramatic progress in the use of solution-processed lead chalcogenide quantum dots as IR light harvesters in both imaging sensors and solar cells.1–4 As the power conversion efficiency of IR band gap colloidal quantum dot solar cells has climbed from under 1%5,6 to over 7%,7 the field has also demonstrated impressive scientific achievements such as the observation of hot electron transfer,8 and the demonstration of internal quantum efficiencies over 100% in photovoltaic mode.9,10 These advances have been achieved through improvements in quantum dot surface chemistry,11–14 control of doping levels,15–18 and improved device architecture,19 often by utilizing interlayers20–23 and other strategies commonly used with organic photovoltaic devices.
While the majority of recent PbS and PbSe quantum dot-based device studies have focused on inorganic heterojunction concepts,3,9,23,24 hybrid heterojunctions between organic semiconductors and lead chalcogenide quantum dots are of significant interest,25–30 both from a processing/mechanical stability standpoint, and because of the possibilities to rapidly extract carriers from excited dots at a heterointerface,31 or to harness novel physics—like singlet fission10—occurring in the organic component. The range of hybrid organic/inorganic architectures of interest includes planar donor/acceptor heterojunctions,10 ternary donor/acceptor/acceptor bulk heterojunction blends,29,32–34 and binary donor acceptor blends.26–28,30,35–37 These combinations exhibit the possibility for a rich range of photophysics, including various combinations of charge and energy transfer, and a range of different pathways could result in the generation of photocurrent.
Early binary bulk heterojunction devices made with IR-band gap quantum dots such as PbSe or PbS and widely used conjugated polymers such as polythiophenes or poly-p-phenylene-vinylene derivatives as host matrices exhibited disappointingly low performance compared with blends made with CdSe quantum dots.25 However, we recently showed that the use of new host polymers can support long-lived (microsecond and longer) photo-induced charge transfer,27 and that blends exhibiting characteristic long-lived photoinduced charge separation at the organic/PbS interface can exhibit dramatic (∼100×) improvements in photocurrent compared to blends that do not.26,27
Herein, we seek to understand photocurrent generation mechanisms in conjugated polymer/PbS blends in more detail by comparing the spectroscopic properties and photovoltaic behavior of blends of PbS quantum dots with three recently developed organic semiconductor hosts, including the newly reported conjugated polymers poly[(4,4′-bis(3-(2-hexyl-decyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyrrole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,5-bis(3-(2-ethyl-hexyl)thiophen-2yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole)] PPEHTT, and poly[(4,4′-bis(2-octyl)dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]silole)-2,6-diyl-alt-(2,5-bis(3-octylthiophen-2yl)thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole)] (PSOTT38,39) with the previously reported bulk heterojunction blend PDTPQx-HD.26 We find that PDTPQx-HD and PPEHTT quantum dot blends both exhibit signatures consistent with classic polymer/quantum dot bulk heterojunctions,26,27,40,41 including long-lived photoinduced charge transfer. On the other hand, the operating mechanism of PSOTT/PbS blends seems different. We hypothesize this blend may operate as a Schottky diode sensitized by energy transfer from the polymer host. Such a mode could open new possibilities for engineering device structures for light harvesting in low bandgap quantum dot solar cells.
2 Experimental methods
2.1 Synthesis of polymers
The synthesis of PDTPQx-HD27 and PSOTT38,39 are described elsewhere. PPEHTT was synthesized from 2,5-bis-[5-bromo-(2-ethyl-hexyl)-thiophen-2yl]-thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole38 and 2,6-di(trimethyltin)-N-(1-hexyldecyl)dithieno[3,2-b:30-d]pyrrole42 by Stille polycondensation reaction. Details are given in the ESI.† PDTPQx-HD, PPEHTT and PSOTT had number average molecular weights (Mn) of 8.1, 8.4 and 10.8 kDa and a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.6, 1.6 and 3.3, respectively, as determined by performing gel permeation chromatography (GPC) relative to polystyrene standards in chlorobenzene at 60 °C.
2.2 Synthesis of PbS quantum dots
PbS quantum dots were synthesized, extracted and washed following the route of Hines and Scholes43 and modified as previously reported.26 To vary the quantum dot size the injection temperature and reaction time were varied as needed. The largest quantum dots (band gap = 0.7 eV) had precursor injected at 165 °C and were grown for one hour. The smallest quantum dots (band gap = 1.6 eV) had precursor injected at 100 °C and the reaction was immediately immersed into an ice bath. All other synthesis fell within these two bounds (for example, an injection at 140 °C and growth for 2 min yielded dots with a band gap of ∼1.25 eV). Prior to blending the quantum dots with the polymers, the oleic acid ligands passivating the as-synthesized PbS quantum dots were exchanged for butylamine as described elsewhere.26 Quantum dot synthesis and ligand exchange were performed using standard air free techniques outside of the glove box. The quantum dots were then suspended in either anhydrous chlorobenzene or anhydrous dichlorobenzene (Sigma Aldrich) at high concentrations between 150 and 450 mg mL−1. Typically, quantum dots were synthesized, ligand-exchanged, and incorporated into devices within 24 hours of synthesis. All solution processing was done in the glove box.
2.3 Device fabrication and testing
Pre-etched ITO substrates were initially cleaned by sonicating in acetone and isopropyl alcohol, followed by air-plasma cleaning for 5 min in a Harrick Plasma Cleaner PDC-32G, 18 W applied. We then spin coated 40 nm of PEDOT:PSS (Baytron® P VP Al 4083, filtered with 0.45 μm PVDF filter) onto the ITO. The PEDOT layer was then annealed under nitrogen flow for 15–20 min at 120 °C. All subsequent fabrication steps took place in the glovebox. First, the active area solution was spin-coated and the resulting film was thiol treated by drop-casting a solution of 100 mM ethanedithiol in acetonitrile onto the surface and then wicking the drop away. Electrical contacts of LiF (0.7 nm) and Al (65 nm) were deposited by thermal evaporation at a base pressure of less than 1 × 10−6 Torr. The PDTPQx-HD and PPEHTT solutions were prepared at 25 mg mL−1 w/v using anhydrous chlorobenzene (Sigma Aldrich) as the solvent and heated to 45 °C. The polymer solution was typically prepared 24 hours prior to use. The solutions were always filtered immediately prior to use with a 0.2 μm filter. PDTPQx-HD and PPEHTT polymer/quantum dot blend solutions were spin coated at room temperature.
PSOTT solutions were prepared at a concentration of 6 mg mL−1 w/v in dichlorobenzene and heated to 130 °C for at least one hour before use. PSOTT and quantum dot solutions were filtered separately prior to mixing, and the blended solution was returned to heat at 120 °C before spin-coating from the hot solution onto the PEDOT layer. In all cases we used a 9:1 quantum dot:polymer (w/w) loading by mixing appropriate volumes of polymer and quantum dot solution.
All external quantum efficiency (EQE) testing was carried out under dynamic vacuum. Photocurrent was recorded with a Keithley 2400. Monochromated light (Acton) from a 100 W tungsten halogen bulb (Oriel) provided the illumination source. EQEs were calculated using a calibrated Si-photodiode (OSI optoelectronics) for wavelengths between 400 and 980 nm and with a calibrated InGaAs photodiode (Thorlabs) for all wavelengths greater than 980 nm. The device pixels and the calibrated photodiode are masked to identical active areas.
2.4 Photoinduced absorption
PIA samples were made by spin coating the active-area solution onto clean glass slides in the glovebox and treating them with ethanedithiol as described above. Standard lock-in techniques were used to obtain PIA spectra.25,41 Light from a filtered 447 nm light-emitting diode (LED; Luxeon Rebel, 700 mA, LXML-PR01) was modulated with an Agilent 33120A waveform generator and used as an optical pump to excite the sample. Long-lived signals were monitored by a monochromated tungsten halogen lamp which served as the probe beam. A Si/InGaAs dual-band photodetector (Thorlabs, DSD2) was used to collect signal. At each energy probed, data are reported as fractional change in transmission (dT/T). The lock-in is phased to the chopper modulation so that fast absorptions appear as a negative dT/T signals in the in-phase channel while fast bleaches are positive in X. The reported signal was corrected for sample photoluminescence (PL) and any scattered light. All PIA measurements reported here were carried out under dynamic vacuum at room temperature.
2.5 Photoluminescence excitation measurements
Photoluminescence excitation (PLE) samples were made by spin coating on glass in the same way as the PIA samples. Since EDT treatment tends to quench the signal44 we need to monitor (the quantum dot photoluminescence) the presented samples were left untreated. The same monochromated tungsten halogen lamp used for PIA spectroscopy was used as the excitation source and sample photoluminescence intensity was monitored with the same Si/InGaAs dual-band photodetector (ThorLabs, DSD2). A 900 nm long pass filter was used to filter excitation light in the pristine PSOTT spectrum, and a 1300 nm long pass filter was used to filter both scattered excitation light and polymer PL in the pristine PbS, PSOTT/PbS, and pristine PSOTT control samples. Samples were held under dynamic vacuum with the film facing the excitation light. Emitted light was wave-guided from the side of the glass substrate and focused using two aspheric lenses mounted in front of the photodetector. A fraction of the excitation light was split with a glass microscope slide to monitor the excitation intensity with an amplified silicon (λ ≤ 1000 nm) or an amplified InGaAs (λ > 1000 nm) photodetector. All spectra were normalized to the excitation intensity. Spectra for pristine PbS and PSOTT/PbS were normalized to the nanocrystal exciton peak at ∼1160 nm. The pristine PSOTT spectra were scaled to match the blend intensity at 600 nm.
3 Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows absorption spectra for typical PbS samples as well as the chemical structures, absorption, and photoluminescence spectra for all three studied polymers. As indicated in the chemical structures, there is variation in side chain topology: PSOTT is unique because it does not include any branched side chains. Fig. 1 also includes a plot of the approximate energy levels relevant for charge separation for all materials as derived from a combination of cyclic voltammetry (see SI.1†), optical absorption, and literature reports.45 From these energy levels, we expect that photoinduced electron transfer should be energetically favorable from all three polymers to a wide range of PbS quantum dot sizes, making each blend a promising candidate for a hybrid bulk heterojunction device structure. Nevertheless, previous work has shown that solution-derived energy level schemes are not always successful in predicting charge transfer in solid state quantum dot/polymer blends.25–27 This is likely because excited state redox potentials are better predictors of electron transfer in molecular systems than the ground state energy offsets,46 and perhaps also due to differences in solvation and surface dipole effects between the solution electrochemistry and solid state film environments of the quantum dots and polymers.
 Fig. 1  Absorption, photoluminescence and energy levels characterizing the donor and acceptor materials. (a) Shows absorption spectra for the PbS quantum dots with a TEM image of a typical batch in the inset. In this work, features associated with the quantum dots shift in energy depending on the size of the quantum dots used in for a given polymer/quantum dot sample. (b)i–iii Shows the photoluminescence (dashed lines), absorption (solid lines) and chemical structures of the polymers studied, PDTPQx-HD, PPEHTT and PSOTT respectively. (c) Gives energy level values for the quantum dots and polymers. Note: more quantum dot batches were synthesized than are included in the figure. Energy levels for the PbS quantum dots are taken from literature tabulated from the convention of Hyun et al. in which the LUMO is determined from cyclic voltammetry (CV) data on oleic acid capped PbS quantum dots with a Ag/AgCl reference in NaCl that is assumed 4.7 eV below vacuum and the HOMO is calculated by subtracting the band gap measured for the quantum dots. No corrections were made due to the exciton binding energy.45 Ground state ionization energy levels for the polymers are as determined by CV with a SCE reference that is assumed 4.4 eV below vacuum (see SI.1†). The excited state ionization energy (dashed lines) was assigned using the optical bandgap determined from the intersection point of the photoluminescence and absorption traces. 
We have found photoinduced absorption (PIA) spectroscopy to be a better predictor of polymer/quantum dot device performance than comparison of the energy levels via cyclic voltammetry.26,27 We thus performed PIA on blends of all three polymers with PbS quantum dots. We repeatedly prepared 9:1 (w/w) blends of each polymer with varying sizes of PbS quantum dots. After deposition all films were treated with ethanedithiol as described in the Methods section.

Fig. 2a–c shows the resulting PIA spectra recorded on PDTPQx-HD/PbS, PPEHTT/PbS, and PSOTT/PbS blend films at room temperature under vacuum. The PDTPQx-HD/PbS blend in Fig. 2a shows a broad photoinduced absorption feature below the polymer bandgap at ∼1.1 eV, consistent with our previous work, and with the PIA spectra of PDTPQx-HD/fullerene blends (see SI.3†). The PPEHTT/PbS blend also shows a broad photoinduced absorption in the polymer bandgap, with PIA peaks at 1.24 and 1.68 eV. Based on the similarity of these PIA features with those observed in PPEHTT/fullerene blends (see SI.3†) we assign these features to positive polarons on the PPEHTT polymer. We thus conclude that both PDTPQx-HD/PbS and PPEHTT/PbS blends yield long lived charge carriers when irradiated with light.
 Fig. 2  In-phase signal from photoinduced absorption (PIA) for quantum dot/polymer blends. Figure (a) is blended with PDTPQx-HD, (b) is with PPEHTT and (c) is with PSOTT. Absorption at the pump frequency for these samples was 0.589, 0.587, and 0.258 respectively. It should be noted that in earlier studies we found significant polaron signal (>60 ppm) for the PDTPQx-HD/PbS blend with an absorption of 0.273 at the pump frequency.27 Also of note, the quantum dot bleach feature is not observed in (a) because smaller sized dots were used and the bleach feature does not out-compete the polaron absorption feature. The polaron feature is absent in (c), the PSOTT/PbS blend, suggesting that upon excitation no significant charge transfer takes place between this polymer and the quantum dot. 

Fig. 2c shows the PIA spectrum for a PSOTT/PbS blend at room temperature. In contrast with the other two polymers, we observe no long-lived photoinduced absorption features in the PSOTT blend. However, a reference PSOTT/PC71BM blend does show a clear polaron peak at ∼1.1 eV, indicating that the PSOTT polaron exhibits an absorption feature in this energy window (see SI.3†). Although polymer/PC61BM blends do exhibit a weak radical anion peak at ∼1.2 eV that is typically buried under the polymer radical cation, PC71BM radical anions exhibit a weak absorption at ∼0.9 eV (again often buried under the larger polymer cation absorption).47 We thus assign the peak at 1.1 eV in the PSOTT/PC71BM to a polymer polaron. The absence of this polaron feature in the PSOTT/PbS blends when irradiated with light suggests one of two possibilities: (1) there is virtually no polaron formation within this material system or (2) polarons form but immediately undergo very fast (≪1 μs) recombination. While these results suggest ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy experiments could be interesting to pursue for this system, we find the second possibility less likely given that the PSOTT/fullerene blend exhibits a long lived polymer polaron feature, and that the recombination times in the polymer quantum dot blends are usually slower than recombination lifetimes in polymer/fullerene blends due to carrier trapping on the quantum dots.27 In any case, both possibilities – a lack of polaron formation, or fast recombination – would tend to limit the efficiency in PSOTT/PbS blends.
To test the photocurrent response of these blends, we fabricated classic sandwich device structures using ITO/PEDOT:PSS bottom and LiF/Al top contacts, and the EDT treated polymer/PbS blend (Fig. 3d). As with the PIA samples we repeatedly prepared 9:1 (w/w) blends of each polymer with varying sizes of PbS quantum dots to yield active area films of ∼40 to 60 nm thickness.
 Fig. 3  (a–c) EQE device data (solid line) overlayed with absorption data (dashed lines) for the component materials used in each respective device. The active layer is PDTPQx-HD/PbS in (a), PPEHTT/PbS in (b), and PSOTT/PbS in (c). The IR portion of the EQE data are highlighted in the inset with the quantum dot absorption scaled to the peak in the EQE data. (Axes titles for the insets are not shown but follow the titles for the full spectrum data.) Note that in all cases the increase in EQE shoulder maps to the absorption of the respective polymer. The effect is particularly pronounced for the PSOTT/PbS system. (d) shows the device architecture for all the devices: ITO-coated glass as one contact, 40 nm of PEDOT:PSS, 40–60 nm of active area, 0.7 nm LiF and 65 nm Al for the other contact. As pictured, the sample is illuminated from the bottom. (Note: not drawn to scale.) 

Fig. 3a–c show the resulting external quantum efficiency vs. wavelength plots for the PDTPQx-HD/PbS, PPEHTT/PbS, and PSOTT/PbS blends, respectively. The data in Fig. 3a–c show substantial photocurrents from the visible out to the near IR for all three blends.

Fig. 3a–c also include absorption spectra of the respective polymer and quantum dot batches used in each device. By comparing these plots with the EQE curves in Fig. 3, we conclude that all three blends show photocurrent contributions from both the quantum dot and polymer components. Indeed at the absorption onset of the polymer the EQE curves tend to show increased photocurrent, and these are particularly pronounced in the case of the PSOTT/PbS blend. The response in EQE to polymer absorption is to be expected because the quantum dot components are weaker absorbers on a per-volume basis than the conjugated polymers.
These EQE results are significant because, to our knowledge, only three polymers26,28,37 have ever yielded photoresponses greater than a few percent EQE when blended with PbS quantum dots.6 The functionality demonstrated by PSOTT and PPEHTT have thus expanded the library of polymers that give significant photoresponse in binary blends with lead chalcogenide quantum dots by two-thirds.
Perhaps more importantly, these results are intriguing because, based on our previous experiments26 we would expect only those blends that produce long-lived polaron signatures in a PIA experiment, namely the PDTPQx-HD/PbS and PPEHTT/PbS blends, to produce substantial photocurrents. The PSOTT/PbS blend, with no detectable PIA signal, would thus be expected to be a poor performer.
In order to explain the photocurrent in the PSOTT/PbS blend, we hypothesize that it may be possible for a polymer/PbS blend to exhibit a photocurrent in the absence of a type-II heterojunction between the polymer and the quantum dots, if the quantum dots exist at sufficient loading in the film to form an effective percolation pathway between the dots and both electrodes, thereby forming a Schottky diode cell suspended in the polymer (see SI.5† for a schematic diagram). This hypothesis is consistent with the fabrication differences between the current films and our earlier studies.26 In contrast with our earlier work, the current devices were post-treated with EDT, a cross-linking dithiol that has been shown to dramatically improve the performance of PbS films in Schottky diode cells (indeed, without the EDT treatment, PSOTT/PbS devices show negligible photocurrent, see SI.6†).
However, while this Schottky-diode-within-a-blend picture is consistent with the modest photocurrents observed in the IR portion of the spectrum, it cannot by itself account for the dramatic increase in EQE we observe at the polymer absorption edge. We thus speculate that the polymer may also be acting as an energy funnel by undergoing rapid energy transfer to the quantum dots (for a visual representation of this process see SI.5†). Such a circumstance would explain both the PIA data and the device photocurrent for the PSOTT/PbS device. The EQE spectrum unequivocally demonstrates polymer participation in photocurrent generation – energy transfer events from the polymer to the quantum dot would certainly promote the circumstance of increased photocurrent generation as the polymer starts absorbing light. Energy transfer would also explain the lack of long-lived signal in the PIA spectrum: while PIA is a powerful tool for detecting charge transfer, it is blind to the occurrence of energy transfer events.
To test the plausibility of this energy transfer hypothesis, we collected photoluminescence excitation (PLE) spectra by monitoring the quantum dot photoluminescence signal while sweeping the excitation light on the following three different films: pristine PSOTT, neat PbS and a PSOTT/PbS blend. Fig. 4 shows the resulting PLE data. As expected, the PLE trace for the pristine quantum dot film detected at the quantum dot emission peak (dashed green line) tracks the quantum dot absorption spectrum. Likewise the neat PSOTT polymer film shows no detectable emission at the quantum dot emission peak (thin gray line), and a PLE trace that follows the polymer absorption spectrum when detected at the polymer emission peak (dotted blue line). Notably, the PLE trace for the PSOTT/PbS quantum dot blend (collected at the quantum dot emission) shows a strong feature that exactly matches the polymer absorption peak, providing strong evidence that energy transfer can indeed occur from PSOTT to PbS quantum dots in this size range.
 Fig. 4  Photoluminescence excitation data. The red (solid) line is signal from light detected at wavelengths greater than 1200 nm for PSOTT blended with PbS. The blue (dotted) line is signal from light detected at wavelengths greater than 900 for pristine PSOTT. The green (dashed) line is signal from light from neat PbS detected at wavelengths greater than 1200 nm. The gray (thin solid) line shows that no signal is detected from pristine PSOTT at wavelengths greater than 1200 nm. 
While it seems clear from the PIA experiments that the three polymers studied, PDTPQx-HD, PPEHTT, and PSOTT behave differently, we note that there are several differences – both energetic and structural – between the PSOTT polymer and the other two that might play a role in their different behaviors when blended with PbS quantum dots. We note that side-chain branching has been shown to influence organic solar cell device performance,38,48 and PSOTT possesses linear side chains, while the PDTPQx-HD and PPEHTT polymers possess branched side chains. Additionally, the PSOTT used in these studies had both a higher average molecular weight and polydispersity relative to the other two polymers. Finally, the differences in the balance of charge and energy transfer could result from variations in the different polymer energy levels as they align with the quantum dot energy levels. We note that of the three studied polymers, the measured ground state ionization energy of PSOTT (−5.09 eV) is roughly isoenergetic with that of the PbS quantum dots. These factors, alone or in combination, could all be expected to impact charge transfer in these blends.
4 Conclusion
From a scientific and technical standpoint, hybrid heterojunctions offer the potential to combine the best of both organic and inorganic materials, including chemical tailorability of energy gaps and interfacial states, single-step solution processing, mechanical flexibility, and long-term stability. These properties would be extremely advantageous for efficient single and tandem solar energy harvesting devices. Here, we have compared the photophysical and device properties of several different polymer/IR quantum dot blends. Importantly, we have shown that it is possible to fabricate a hybrid thin film device that exhibits strong photocurrent contribution from absorption on both the polymer and quantum dot components, but does not exhibit the typical spectral signature of large populations of long-lived (microsecond–millisecond) photoinduced charge residing on the polymer. Since photoluminescence excitation data show that strong energy transfer occurs from the polymer to the PbS quantum dots in this blend we thus propose that these devices may be operating as energy-transfer-sensitized quantum-dot Schottky diodes. If such behavior can be realized with other organic sensitizers, it might be possible to adopt an energy-relay strategy49,50 to sensitize quantum dot solar cells for improved light harvesting, especially just blue of the excitonic peak, where most inorganic quantum dot solar cells presently exhibit a marked dip in their spectral response.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Material Sciences, under Award DE-FG02-07ER46467. C.W.S. acknowledges partial support from the NSF SEES fellowship program (GEO-1215753). The authors wish to acknowledge the Nanotechnology User Facility for the use of the TEM and Keiko Munechika for imaging the PbS quantum dots included in Fig. 1.
Notes and references
K. M. Noone and D. S. Ginger, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 133–135 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. McDonald, P. W. Cyr, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 2089–2091 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fu and S. W. Tsang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2187–2201 RSC .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 577–582 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Tisdale, K. J. Williams, B. A. Timp, D. J. Norris, E. S. Aydil and X. Y. Zhu, Science, 2010, 328, 1543–1547 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. M. Luther, S. Choi, H.-Y. Chen, J. Gao, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Science, 2011, 334, 1530–1533 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Luther, M. Law, Q. Song, C. L. Perkins, M. C. Beard and A. J. Nozik, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 271–280 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Jeong, J. Tang, H. Liu, J. Kim, A. W. Schaefer, K. Kemp, L. Levina, X. Wang, S. Hoogland, R. Debnath, L. Brzozowski, E. H. Sargent and J. B. Asbury, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 89–99 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. D. Klem, D. D. MacNeil, P. W. Cyr, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 183113/1–183113/3 CrossRef CAS .
O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, P. Stadler, Z. Ning, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8448–8455 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shim and P. Guyot-Sionnest, Nature, 2000, 407, 981–983 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mocatta, G. Cohen, J. Schattner, O. Millo, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Science, 2011, 332, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Zhitomirsky, S. Hoogland, J. Tang, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 151112/1–151112/3 CAS .
I. J. Kramer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8506–8514 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Brown, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, D. D. Wanger, L.-Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. D. Klem, C. W. Gregory, G. B. Cunningham, S. Hall, D. S. Temple and J. S. Lewis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 173109/1–173109/4 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, B. E. Lassiter, R. R. Lunt, G. Wei and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 023307/1–023307/3 CAS .
R. Brown Patrick, R. Lunt Richard, N. Zhao, P. Osedach Timothy, D. Wanger Darcy, L.-Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, I. J. Kramer, A. R. Barkhouse, X. Wang, G. Konstantatos, R. Debnath, L. Levina, I. Raabe, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3374–3380 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Noone, N. C. Anderson, N. E. Horwitz, A. M. Munro, A. P. Kulkarni and D. S. Ginger, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1345–1352 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Noone, E. Strein, N. C. Anderson, P. T. Wu, S. A. Jenekhe and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2635–2639 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Noone, S. Subramaniyan, Q. Zhang, G. Cao, S. A. Jenekhe and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24403–24410 CAS .
J. Seo, M. J. Cho, D. Lee, A. N. Cartwright and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3984–3988 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jarzab, K. Szendrei, M. Yarema, S. Pichler, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1988–1992 CrossRef CAS .
K. Szendrei, F. Cordella, M. V. Kovalenko, M. Boberl, G. Hesser, M. Yarema, D. Jarzab, O. V. Mikhnenko, A. Gocalinska, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, P. W. M. Blom, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 683–687 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schaller, M. Sykora, S. Jeong and V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25332–25338 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rauch, M. Boberl, S. F. Tedde, J. Furst, M. V. Kovalenko, G. Hesser, U. Lemmer, W. Heiss and O. Hayden, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
G. Itskos, A. Othonos, T. Rauch, S. F. Tedde, O. Hayden, M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss and S. A. Choulis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 802–812 CrossRef CAS .
S. ten Cate, J. M. Schins and L. D. A. Siebbeles, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8983–8988 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, N. Kopidakis, D. C. Olson, D. S. Ginley and G. Rumbles, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 239–242 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dayal, M. O. Reese, A. J. Ferguson, D. S. Ginley, G. Rumbles and N. Kopidakis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2629–2635 CrossRef CAS .
C. Piliego, M. Manca, R. Kroon, M. Yarema, K. Szendrei, M. R. Andersson, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24411–24416 RSC .
S. Subramaniyan, H. Xin, F. S. Kim, S. Shoaee, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 854–860 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, S. Subramaniyan, T.-W. Kwon, S. Shoaee, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Jenekhe, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1995–2001 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, Synth. Met., 1999, 101, 425–428 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 10622–10629 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ahmed, S. Subramaniyan, F. S. Kim, H. Xin and S. A. Jenekhe, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7207–7219 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Nelson and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7592–7595 CrossRef CAS .
B.-R. Hyun, Y.-W. Zhong, A. C. Bartnik, L. Sun, H. D. Abruna, F. W. Wise, J. D. Goodreau, J. R. Matthews, T. M. Leslie and N. F. Borrelli, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2206–2212 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ren, C. W. Schlenker, E. Ahmed, S. Subramaniyan, S. Olthof, A. Kahn, D. S. Ginger and S. A. Jenekhe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201201470 .
A. Sperlich, M. Liedtke, J. Kern, H. Kraus, C. Deibel, S. Filippone, J. L. Delgado, N. Martin and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2011, 5, 128–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Szarko, J. C. Guo, Y. Y. Liang, B. Lee, B. S. Rolczynski, J. Strzalka, T. Xu, S. Loser, T. J. Marks, L. P. Yu and L. X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5468–5472 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, B. E. Hardin and M. D. McGehee, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 3893–3904 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yum, B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, E. Baranoff, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, T. Torres, M. D. McGehee and M. Gratzel, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 657–661 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Includes PPEHTT synthesis, cyclic voltammograms of the three polymers, photoinduced spectroscopy measurements on (1) neat quantum dots, (2) polymer/fullerene blends, and (3) PSOTT/quantum dot blend compared against a sample of neat PSOTT, a schematic diagram of PSOTT/PbS Schottky diode, EQE data from a PSOTT/PbS device that did not undergo post-film ligand exchange, and light IV curves for all devices reported in the paper. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee24175gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Photovoltaics have unrivaled potential to meet civilization's growing need for secure, carbon free electricity sources. However, the adoption of photovoltaic electricity generation on terawatt scales will require advances to bring down costs and improve efficiencies. Flexible, solution processed hybrid films of polymers and inorganic nanoparticles are attractive in that they combine the potential advantages of both organic and inorganic semiconductor materials. However their performance has tended to lag that of both purely organic and purely inorganic devices. Here, we compare the basic photocurrent generation mechanisms across several new families of organic semiconductor hosts. We find that while some blends appear to behave as traditional bulk heterojunctions, others do not. Based on evidence of strong energy transfer from a polymer host to PbS quantum dots we propose that hybrid films may operate in part as energy-transfer-sensitized Schottky diodes. These results suggests new ways one could optimize both hybrid bulk heterojunction solar cells and improve light harvesting in inorganic quantum dot based solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Absorption, photoluminescence and energy levels characterizing the donor and acceptor materials. (a) Shows absorption spectra for the PbS quantum dots with a TEM image of a typical batch in the inset. In this work, features associated with the quantum dots shift in energy depending on the size of the quantum dots used in for a given polymer/quantum dot sample. (b)i–iii Shows the photoluminescence (dashed lines), absorption (solid lines) and chemical structures of the polymers studied, PDTPQx-HD, PPEHTT and PSOTT respectively. (c) Gives energy level values for the quantum dots and polymers. Note: more quantum dot batches were synthesized than are included in the figure. Energy levels for the PbS quantum dots are taken from literature tabulated from the convention of Hyun et al. in which the LUMO is determined from cyclic voltammetry (CV) data on oleic acid capped PbS quantum dots with a Ag/AgCl reference in NaCl that is assumed 4.7 eV below vacuum and the HOMO is calculated by subtracting the band gap measured for the quantum dots. No corrections were made due to the exciton binding energy.45 Ground state ionization energy levels for the polymers are as determined by CV with a SCE reference that is assumed 4.4 eV below vacuum (see SI.1†). The excited state ionization energy (dashed lines) was assigned using the optical bandgap determined from the intersection point of the photoluminescence and absorption traces.	 

 	Fig. 2  In-phase signal from photoinduced absorption (PIA) for quantum dot/polymer blends. Figure (a) is blended with PDTPQx-HD, (b) is with PPEHTT and (c) is with PSOTT. Absorption at the pump frequency for these samples was 0.589, 0.587, and 0.258 respectively. It should be noted that in earlier studies we found significant polaron signal (>60 ppm) for the PDTPQx-HD/PbS blend with an absorption of 0.273 at the pump frequency.27 Also of note, the quantum dot bleach feature is not observed in (a) because smaller sized dots were used and the bleach feature does not out-compete the polaron absorption feature. The polaron feature is absent in (c), the PSOTT/PbS blend, suggesting that upon excitation no significant charge transfer takes place between this polymer and the quantum dot.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–c) EQE device data (solid line) overlayed with absorption data (dashed lines) for the component materials used in each respective device. The active layer is PDTPQx-HD/PbS in (a), PPEHTT/PbS in (b), and PSOTT/PbS in (c). The IR portion of the EQE data are highlighted in the inset with the quantum dot absorption scaled to the peak in the EQE data. (Axes titles for the insets are not shown but follow the titles for the full spectrum data.) Note that in all cases the increase in EQE shoulder maps to the absorption of the respective polymer. The effect is particularly pronounced for the PSOTT/PbS system. (d) shows the device architecture for all the devices: ITO-coated glass as one contact, 40 nm of PEDOT:PSS, 40–60 nm of active area, 0.7 nm LiF and 65 nm Al for the other contact. As pictured, the sample is illuminated from the bottom. (Note: not drawn to scale.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoluminescence excitation data. The red (solid) line is signal from light detected at wavelengths greater than 1200 nm for PSOTT blended with PbS. The blue (dotted) line is signal from light detected at wavelengths greater than 900 for pristine PSOTT. The green (dashed) line is signal from light from neat PbS detected at wavelengths greater than 1200 nm. The gray (thin solid) line shows that no signal is detected from pristine PSOTT at wavelengths greater than 1200 nm.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Includes PPEHTT synthesis, cyclic voltammograms of the three polymers, photoinduced spectroscopy measurements on (1) neat quantum dots, (2) polymer/fullerene blends, and (3) PSOTT/quantum dot blend compared against a sample of neat PSOTT, a schematic diagram of PSOTT/PbS Schottky diode, EQE data from a PSOTT/PbS device that did not undergo post-film ligand exchange, and light IV curves for all devices reported in the paper. See DOI: 10.1039/c2ee24175g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
