Deep levels, charge transport and mixed conductivity in organometallic halide perovskites   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00311H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00311H
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1413-1425Deep levels, charge transport and mixed conductivity in organometallic halide perovskites†

        
          
            Artem 
            Musiienko
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Pavel 
            Moravec
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Roman 
            Grill
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Petr 
            Praus
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Igor 
            Vasylchenko
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jakub 
            Pekarek
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jeremy 
            Tisdale
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Katarina 
            Ridzonova
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eduard 
            Belas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lucie 
            Landová
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Hu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Lukosi
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Mahshid 
            Ahmadi
          
        
      *b
aCharles University, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Institute of Physics, Ke Karlovu 5, CZ-121 16, Prague 2, Czech Republic. E-mail: musienko.art@gmail.com
bJoint Institute for Advanced Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA. E-mail: mahmadi3@utk.edu
cInstitute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic
dElectrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic
eJoint Institute for Advanced Materials, Department of Nuclear Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
Received 
      26th January 2019
    , Accepted 12th March 2019First published on 12th March 2019AbstractUnderstanding the type, formation energy and capture cross section of defects is one of the challenges in the field of organometallic halide perovskite (OMHP) devices. Currently, such understanding is limited, restricting the power conversion efficiencies of OMHP solar cells from reaching their Shockley–Queisser limit. In more mature semiconductors like Si, the knowledge of defects is one of the major factors in successful technological implementation. This knowledge and its control can make a paradigm shift in the development of OMHP devices. Here, we report on deep level (DL) defects and their effect on the free charge transport properties of the single crystalline methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3) perovskite. To determine DL activation energy and capture cross section, we used photo-Hall effect spectroscopy (PHES) with enhanced illumination in both steady-state and dynamic regimes. This method has shown to be convenient due to the direct DL visualization by sub-bandgap photo-excitation of trapped carriers. DLs with activation energies of EV + 1.05 eV, EV + 1.5 eV, and EV + 1.9 eV (or EC − 1.9 eV) were detected. The hole capture cross section of σh = 4 × 10−17 cm2 is found using photoconductivity relaxation after sub-bandgap photo-excitation. Here, our experimental results demonstrate the existence of DL defects responsible for non-radiative recombination and their positions inside the bandgap for the first time. Additionally, the transport properties of single crystal MAPbBr3 are investigated by Time of Flight (ToF) measurements at several biases. These measurements further confirm the increase of Hall mobility and the enhancement of hole transport produced by sub-bandgap illumination in MAPbBr3 devices. The analysis of charge carrier transport by ToF measurements in combination with the energy of DLs identified by PHES can explain the long hole carrier lifetime in MAPbBr3 devices, while the electron carrier lifetime is largely affected by trap-assisted recombination. Here, our studies provide strong evidence for deep levels in OMHPs and open a richer picture of the role and properties of deep levels in MAPbBr3 single crystals as a system model for the first time. The deeper knowledge of the electronic structure of OMHPs could open further opportunities in the development of more feasible technologies. Indeed, knowledge of the exact positions of DLs is beneficial in controlling these defects by crystal growth modification to eliminate these defects as was done for classical inorganic semiconductors, for example, in Si, GaAs, and CdTe development.

Broader context
Organometallic halide perovskites (OMHPs) have recently undergone a remarkable development as highly efficient optoelectronic materials for a variety of applications particularly solar cells, light emitting diodes and photodetectors. To fully use the potential of OMHPs, several important challenges must be overcome. One of these challenges is the understanding and control of their defect structures. The available data from multiple research studies suggest that trap-assisted recombination exists in OMHPs despite their large carrier lifetimes, which makes these materials highly attractive, and this has resulted in the perovskite boom over the last decade. Conventional spectroscopy faces serious obstacles in OMHPs due to their low defect concentrations and capture cross section, and therefore the electronic structure of such semiconductors remains poorly understood. By using highly specialized photo-Hall effect spectroscopy, we visualized the deep level defects responsible for non-radiative recombination and established their parameters in the MAPbBr3 perovskite. The presented deep level model in combination with Time of Flight measurements demonstrated that the electron transport is mostly affected by the trap-assisted recombination. Meanwhile, holes are only influenced by the partially filled deep level. The presented electrical and charge transport properties are crucial for informing the processing conditions towards the elimination of these defects as was done for classical inorganic semiconductors.

Introduction
Since the important work of Kojima et al.1 in 2009 showing the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 3.81% for solid-state perovskite solar cells, organometallic halide perovskites (OMHPs) have undergone a remarkable development as highly efficient optoelectronic materials for a variety of applications particularly solar cells,2 light emitting diodes3 (LEDs) and photodetectors.4 Recently, it has been shown by several groups that the outstanding intrinsic properties of OMHP single crystals can empower a new generation of ionizing radiation sensors with a remarkably high mobility–lifetime product.5,6 One notable property of OMHPs is the low-temperature solution growth, which is considerably lower than high-temperature melt growth techniques commonly used for classical inorganic semiconductors (e.g., Si, CdTe, GaAs, Ge, etc.). However, one can expect a relatively high concentration of defects introduced during low-temperature growth of a single crystal OMHP and its polycrystalline thin films. So far, there has been limited information on the properties and electronic impact of defects on OMHP device performance. In general, defects can change the electric field distribution and charge transport in a device and/or response time and reduce device signal integrity. The semiconducting properties, controlled by shallow and deep traps, can be described using three parameters: (i) majority charge carriers, (ii) mobility, and (iii) charge carrier lifetimes. Based on impedance spectroscopy and numerical analysis, it has been shown that OMHPs are, in fact, intrinsic semiconductors, robust against accidental extrinsic doping.7 This is attributed to the physicochemical mechanism related to band structure, requiring a large formation energy of deep traps within the band structure, effectively protecting the perovskite semiconductor from being extrinsically doped. While shallow level defects can be ionized at room temperature and act as a dopant, which affects free carrier concentration and conductivity, deep level defects can pin the Fermi level and limit charge carrier transport. In more mature semiconductors like Si, the knowledge of defects is one of the major factors in successful technological implementation.8 Therefore, understanding the type, formation energy, and capture cross-section of defects is critical and can lead to further development of OMHP devices.
Several studies have explained that the main intrinsic defects coupled to efficient OMHP devices are shallow level defects leading to long carrier diffusion lengths and carrier lifetimes which is coupled with an efficient OMHP devices suggest a class of materials with low concentrations of defects and/or high defect tolerance.9–11 The low concentration of deep level defects is attributed to Schottky type defects created when a quasi-neutral space charge results from nearly-equal concentrations of anion and cation vacancies in the material. However, it was revealed that the performance of OMHP devices is mainly limited by Shockley–Read–Hall (SHR) recombination, confirming that defects are dynamic elements and have a critical role in the development of OMHP devices.9,12,13 Although maybe benign, it is crucial to fundamentally understand how deep levels can explain the long carrier lifetime and how this characteristic can be used in the practical development of OMHP devices.
Non-radiative, defect-assisted carrier recombination is particularly important for operation of solar cells with higher Voc and in achieving high charge collection efficiency in ionizing radiation sensors.14 According to DFT calculations, deep level defects in OMHPs have high formation energies and are related to growth conditions.15 It was predicted that Pb and halide interstitials and antisites can create deep level defects.9,12,15–17 The shallow acceptor defects with low formation energies were identified as VPb2−, VMA1−, and Ii1−, and the shallow donor defects as VI1+, MAi1+, and Pbi2+,9,18,19 which can intrinsically dope OMHPs as p-type or n-type, respectively.9,16 Still, experimental verification of computationally predicted deep level (DL) states within the bandgap and their effect on charge transport is needed to realise the full potential of these materials and to further improve OMHP device performance.
Understanding the nature of defects and their impact on the charge transport properties of OMHPs requires sensitive spectroscopic probes. Several different deep level spectroscopy methods have been used to identify deep-level ionization energy20–24 and capture cross section20,25 in conventional inorganic semiconductors. These methods face serious obstacles in organic and hybrid semiconductor materials due to their low DL concentrations and capture cross sections,18,26 and therefore the electronic structure of such semiconductors remains poorly understood. It is also a common problem in both organic and hybrid semiconductors to identify relative deep level (DL) positions inside the band gap, i.e. whether the DL energy locates below or above the Fermi energy. The knowledge of DL positions inside the band gap plays a crucial role in semiconductor development,25 and therefore, appropriate methods must be applied to identify DLs in OMHPs.
The classical Hall effect measurement is a unique technique in probing the charge transport properties and comprehensive characterization of semiconductors and semi-insulators. However, this technique is limited to high resistivity materials such as OMHPs due to their large signal to noise ratio. Using this technique, Chen et al. have studied charge transport and carrier trapping in OMHP devices27 and organic field-effect transistors.28 In this method, photoexcitation with photon energies higher than the band gap was applied to generate free electrons and holes. The generation of both carrier types leads to a low Hall signal. Therefore, the authors used a rotating magnetic field in combination with a lock-in amplifier to amplify the signal. However, this can complicate the Hall measurement set-up. In addition, light illumination with photon energies higher than band gap energy can mix hole and electron signals, which makes information on a single carrier property unavailable. Here, we develop a photo-Hall effect spectroscopy (PHES) technique without a rotating magnetic field and based on sub-bandgap photoexcitation to enhance Hall signals. The sub-bandgap photoexcitation allows free carrier generation in the bulk of the material and hence is used to overcome the limit of classical Hall effect measurements. Further, the variation of photon energy can be used to probe the electronic structure of the material. Recently, we have shown that PHES modified by amplified sub-bandgap illumination can be used as an effective tool to study DL defects, including the properties of recombination-like levels in CdTe based detectors.29,30
In general, PHES is a straightforward technique based on the direct visualization of deep states by free carriers’ excitation. In this method, the enhanced photon flux produced using a filtered white laser is used to generate free charge carriers via sub-bandgap photo-excitation of DLs where low absorption is typically observed.26,31 The PHES measurements can be divided into three main groups: (i) the Hall signal measurements with different illuminating photon energies, which allow DL threshold energy detection, (ii) the Hall mobility and photo-Hall conductivity (PhC) as functions of illumination intensity, and (iii) the relaxation time of photoconductivity, allowing determination of DL recombination properties. In this manuscript we examine the electronic structure, mixed conductivity, and recombination properties of MAPbBr3 single crystals by PHES in both steady-state and dynamic regimes to determine the energy and capture cross section of DLs in this material for the first time.
Further, we apply current waveforms (CWF) time of flight (ToF) measurements to investigate the transport properties of MAPbBr3 single crystals. The Time of Flight (ToF) technique has been widely used to study charge carrier drift mobility in OMHP devices.32–36 The CWF recorded in ToF are induced by photo-generated charge carriers drifting through the sample under applied biases. When the above-bandgap laser light pulses are used for charge carrier generation, several transport parameters of semiconductors can be evaluated, including the transit time, charge carrier mobility and lifetime of free carriers. The drift mobility measured by ToF is used to examine mixed conductivity in MAPbBr3 single crystal devices.
Experimental results
In the family of OMHPs, wide-band-gap absorbers/emitters including MAPbBr3 are especially interesting for light emitting diodes (LEDs), tandem solar cells37–40 and high radiation energy detectors36,41,42 and are currently the subject of intensive research focus. Therefore, single crystals of MAPbBr3 are selected as a system model in this study. Details of MAPbBr3 single crystal growth and optical properties can be found in the ESI† and Fig. S1. To discover the electronic structure and to find DL properties in MAPbBr3 single crystal devices, photo-Hall effect spectroscopy (PHES) with enhanced monochromatic sub-bandgap illumination is performed. A scheme of the PHES measurements and an image of the device tested are provided in Fig. 1(a) and (c). A more detailed description of the Hall effect setup is given in the ESI,† Fig. S2.
 Fig. 1  (a) The basic physical principles of the PHES method. (b) Competing deep level models 1 and 2 in the case of donor-like and acceptor-like DLs, respectively. Solid and dashed arrows show direct and secondary carrier generation processes correspondingly. EF shows the Fermi level position in the p-type material. (c) A photo of a typical solution-grown MAPbBr3 single crystal with Au contacts in a 6-probe/Hall bar geometry. The scale shows centimeters. 
To generate free carriers in MAPbBr3 single crystal devices, a powerful white laser with a maximal filtered output photon flux of 1.3 × 1015 cm−2 s−1 is used. Here the intensity of sub-bandgap photoexcitation is 1 mW cm−2, significantly less than photoexcitation intensity in photovoltaic operation,43 and does not lead to a photo-induced material degradation.44 The laser source provides a nearly constant photon flux in the 0.5–2.4 eV energy region,45 which is in the strongest interest for DL spectroscopy. The sharp increase of the laser intensity near 1090 nm (spectral width of 25 nm)45 is skipped by a monochromator and the spectral resolution of the monochromator is measured using an Ocean Optics spectrometer. The resolution (defined by the FWHM) grows nearly linearly from 0.01 eV at 0.5 eV up to 0.15 eV at 2.4 eV. Linear interpolation of these values is used to correctly determine the DL threshold energies at intermediate energies. The DL photo-excitation mechanisms are presented in Fig. 1(b). The monochromatic illumination activates defects, creating free charge carriers. The type of charge carrier is dependent on the nature of the activated deep level. The photo-generated carriers are affected by Lorentz forces, and the observed changes in Hall measurements enable the evaluation of the DL trap properties.
In principle, the Hall voltage can be found under the steady-state conditions. The longitudinal voltage V, the current I, and the transverse Hall voltage VH were measured directly from the experiment. Fig. 2 presents the evolution of the Hall signal under sub-bandgap illumination. MAPbBr3 samples show a poor Hall signal under dark conditions as illustrated in Fig. 2(a), where a signal to noise ratio of 0.7 is observed. The Hall voltage signal is significantly enhanced by sub-bandgap illumination as evidenced from Fig. 2(b) and (c). Therefore, the reliable Hall effect data can be extracted starting from the photon energy of 1.35 eV where a Hall mobility of 1.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 is measured.
 Fig. 2  (a) The evolution of the Hall voltage measured (a) under dark conditions, (b) under illumination with a photon energy of 1.3 eV, and (c) under illumination with a photon energy of 1.9 eV for sample no. 1. A photon flux of 1015 cm−2 s−1 is used for both photon energies. Vertical grids represent time regions where the magnetic field is set to 0 T, 1 T, and −1 T, respectively. 
The material's electronic structure can be probed for the presence of DLs by Hall mobility and photoconductivity measurements in combination with sub-bandgap illumination. All measurements are performed under steady state conditions with a constant magnetic field necessary for correct material characterization. The conductivity σ, the Hall coefficient RH and the Hall mobility μH were obtained by the following relations: (1) (2) (3)where S, L, and d are the cross section, the distance between conductivity probes, and the thickness of the sample, respectively. Note that the obtained value of μH is determined by the VH/V ratio. Therefore, μH remains unaffected by the contingent transversal inhomogeneity of the sample induced, for example, by surface leakage current.
The photoconductivity is defined as the difference between the conductivity σ(I) under the photon flux I and dark conductivity σ(0): PhC = σ(I) − σ(0)(4)
The bipolar Hall mobility is given by the relation μH = (Apμp2p − Anμn2n)/(μpp + μnn)(5)where μe, μp, n, and p are the electron mobility, hole mobility, and electron and hole concentrations, respectively. The scattering parameters Ap and An are constants, and here we use the assumption that Ap = An = 1. According to eqn (5), the energy level of the DL traps inside the band gap can be detected by the observed change in the Hall mobility and photoconductivity. However, due to the higher quality of the PhC signal compared to the Hall mobility signal, which is few orders of magnitude lower, the detection of DL activation energy is usually based on photoconductivity spectra. When a photon energy is enough to activate deep levels, free carriers, electrons or holes are generated. The lowest energy where PhC response or enhancement is detected is considered as the activation energy. Note that PhC does not contain information on the nature of photo-excited free charge carriers and as a result on the relative positions of DLs in the band gap. Therefore, the Hall mobility in PHES is used to show free carriers’ nature, whether free holes or electrons are generated. The Hall mobility increases in a p-type material due to free hole generation assisted by photo-excited acceptor-like DL, model 2, and the free electron generation assisted by photo-excited donor-like DL, model 1, leads to a decrease in the Hall mobility; both processes are shown in Fig. 1(b). Note that free electron generation also leads to a conversion of the Hall voltage from a positive to a negative sign.
Deep-level parameters detected by photo-Hall effect spectroscopy (PHES)
PHES was performed on two single crystals of MAPbBr3. The photoconductivity and Hall mobility spectra in the energy range of 1.0–2.4 eV are shown in Fig. 3. The two single crystal samples show very similar PHES results. The MAPbBr3 crystals show no photocurrent response upon illumination with a photon energy less than 1.05 eV, which is where the first DL threshold energy is observed. The second and third threshold energies are detected at 1.5 eV and 1.9 eV, respectively. Note that Fig. 3(a) is shown on a logarithmic scale to present the whole photoconductivity spectrum. The PhC spectra on a linear scale can be found in Fig. S3 (ESI†). As can be seen in Fig. S3 (ESI†) the initial photon energies start from 0.6 eV when the first increase is detected at 1.05 eV.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photoconductivity and (b) Hall mobility spectra of two single crystals of MAPbBr3 as a function of photon energy. Vertical arrows show the deep level threshold energies. The inset in (b) shows the corresponding Hall coefficient as a function of photon energy. 
The Hall mobility enhancement correlates with an increase in photoconductivity, and the second DL threshold energy coincides with the threshold energy detected from the photoconductivity spectrum. The Hall coefficient RH also increased under sub-bandgap illumination as shown in the inset in Fig. 3(b). The Hall voltage, and as a result the Hall coefficient, shows the positive sign of the polarity, which is evidence of the dominant hole concentration and p-type conductivity of the material. The photoconductivity and μH enhancements are therefore assigned to free hole generation. Note that the increase of the Hall coefficient contradicts the classical single carrier relation RH = 1/(qep), where the increase of the free hole concentration, p, leads to a decrease in RH. The alternative model, the parallel free electron activity,27 also fails to explain the Hall mobility and Hall coefficient increase, especially under sub-bandgap illumination conditions where only one type of carrier is generated. Such deviation can be explained by mixed ionic–electronic conductivity in this class of materials and needs to be carefully considered.
The Hall coefficient and conductivity can be explicitly found from the solution of the Boltzmann46 equation where all moving carriers, including low mobility ions, are considered in the model. The mixed conductivity, σ, of a p-type material with dominant ion concentration, Ni, can be presented by the following equation: σ = qe(μpp + μiNi)(6)where μi and qe are the ion mobility and elementary charge respectively. The Hall mobility, μH, and the Hall coefficient, RH, can also be modified considering ionic conductivity as follows: (7) (8)
In the case of a material with multiple types of ions, we assume that a single ion type has a maximal μiNi product which dominates in eqn (6)–(8). If the hole drift mobility μp is known, eqn (6) and (7) can be further resolved to find the hole carrier concentration (p) as well as the μiNi product. In this study, we do not differentiate ions from mobile defects19 (or the defect + polaron system47), which may both be present in OMHPs, and the term “ion” is applied in the sense of low mobility charge carriers.
As is evident from eqn (7), the increase of the hole concentration, p = p0 + Δp, created by light induced photocarriers, Δp, leads to an increase of RH in a material with mixed conductivity due to much higher hole mobility. As the value of RH is proportional to VH, the free hole generation leads to Hall signal enhancement as is also theoretically predicted by eqn (7) and experimentally proven in Fig. 2(b) and (c). A detailed discussion of the Hall coefficient and mobility enhancement is shown in the ESI† and Fig. S4 and S5. The lower energy Hall data in Fig. 3(b) are affected by the noise and ion suppression due to the low concentration of free holes, which can generate the Hall signal. According to eqn (8), under intense illumination, the value of μH overwhelms ionic contribution due to photo-induced free hole generation and strives to the value of μp. Note that the PHES deep level detection concept based on the direct visualization of deep states by the free carriers’ excitation is still valid for a material with mixed electronic/ionic conductivity. Because of this free hole generation, the threshold energies detected from photoconductivity and Hall mobility spectra can be assigned as deep states D1 and D2 with activation energies of EV + 1.05 eV and EV + 1.5 eV, as shown in Fig. 4. Energy regions I and II indicated in Fig. 3 correspond to the sub-bandgap light excitation of DLs, D1 and D2, respectively. The increase in photoconductivity in these energy regions is attributed to an increase in the available density of states (roughly ) at the edge of the valence band.48 The photoconductivity saturation tendency at 1.3–1.43 eV can be explained by a known dependence of a photon capture cross-section on photon energy49,50 and also by the depletion of excited DLs. The notable increase in the photoconductivity in energy region III (hv > 1.9 eV) is attributed to shallower level,38 D3, and further phonon-assisted band-to-band absorption. The interpretation of DL D3 is more complicated due to the proximity of the level to one of the bands. The excitation of D3 and consequent hole generation can be achieved by two excitation mechanisms. The first one is based on the direct photon absorption and electron transition to the DL with an activation energy of EV + 1.9 eV followed by free hole generation. The second mechanism is based on the photo-excitation of DL D3 (alternative model) with an activation energy of EC – 1.9 eV where hole generation is reached by thermal detrapping and the secondary photo-excitation of electrons in the valence band as shown in Fig. 4. The shallow states with activation energies of Et < 0.3 eV were also detected in previous studies.51,52 The observed drop in photoconductivity for the incident light above 2.1 eV is associated with absorption at the edge of the bandgap where the light is preferably absorbed on the surface. A bandgap energy of 2.2 eV is estimated considering the spectral resolution of the light source in that energy region, which agrees with UV-Vis and photoluminescence emission spectra shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.†
 Fig. 4  Experimentally estimated DL transitions in MAPbBr3. Full upward black arrows delineate principal optical excitation. The dashed arrow shows the alternative secondary hole generation process. 
The single crystal samples were originally grown in the lab in the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, USA. To ensure that the visualized DLs do not belong to these specific samples, the authors grow MAPbBr3 single crystals with a slightly different growth method in the lab of Czech Technical University in Prague (details can be found in the Materials section). Despite the lower quality of the single crystals in the second method and lower resistivity, the measured spectra show the same trends and the same DL activation energies (ESI,† Fig. S6), confirming the inherent properties of MAPbBr3 single crystals.
To ensure that the single crystal devices don’t undergo degradation during the measurements, device resistivity was tested by four probe resistivity measurement before and after the experiment. More details can be found in the ESI.† Negligible changes in resistivity are observed, suggesting that within the time frame of the measurements upon exposure to ambient conditions, in terms of apparent resistivity, the environmental molecules have not infiltrated into the bulk of single crystals and as a result have not influenced the resulting DLs. In addition, the low-intensity sub-bandgap photoexcitation can absorb into the bulk of the material, where the free holes generated by the DLs travel into the bulk of the material and can’t be affected by possible surface degradation. This is indeed one of the advantages of PHES as compared to other optical measurements where signals are generated at the surface of the material.
Charge transport properties and mixed conductivity in MAPbBr3
Due to the same trends in PHES results for all samples, hereafter sample no. 1 is chosen for more detailed study. To evaluate the ionic contribution to the measured conductivity under high illumination, photoconductivity and Hall mobility (Hall coefficient) were studied as functions of photon flux at 1.46 and 1.9 eV photon energies (Fig. 5(a and b)). Both the photoconductivity and μH show a non-linear increase in response to illumination intensity. The maximal value of μH, 87.1 ± 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, is achieved at a photon energy of 1.92 eV and a photon flux of 1.7 × 1016 cm−2 s−1. The relationship between the photoconductivity and the photon flux I can be estimated by ∼Iα, where α ≈ 1.5. This reveals a super-linear relationship when the power dependence (α) is α > 1. The superlinear increase of μH indicates that the actual hole mobility can be higher than the maximal value reached using the PHES set-up. To find the hole mobility, the time of flight (ToF) method was performed.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photoconductivity and (b) Hall mobility as functions of photon flux at 1.46 eV and 1.92 eV high-flux illumination in MAPbBr3. The horizontal line in (b) represents the maximum Hall mobility. 
The semiconductor characterization by current waveforms (CWF) ToF is based on the carrier generation using a short above-bandgap laser pulse focused at the center of the anode. Details of this measurement can be found in the ESI.† The photo-generated free holes (electrons) are collected on the negatively (positively) biased electrode. The current transient induced by moving holes (electrons) is expressed by a single exponent relation:53 i(t) ∝ e(−t/τh(e)),(9)where τh (τe) is the lifetime of holes (electrons) characterizing their passing through the device thickness. The hole generated CWFs with different dc biases are plotted in Fig. 6(a). As can be seen in Fig. 6(b), a constant profile of the electric field is found in the device verified by the transit time vs. the electric field. The hole mobility μp can be found from the transit time tr and the bias U according to (10)where L is a detector thickness. The transit time is found from the inflection point of the current waveform, which gives a typical error of 10% in the mobility value.54
 Fig. 6  (a) CWF ToF measurements of MAPbBr3 single crystals with different applied voltages. The inset shows electron photocurrent fitted by a single exponential relation. (b) Transit time as a function of applied voltage. 
The transit time represents the time needed for photo-induced holes to pass through the device thickness, and typically tr ≠ τ. Here, the calculated ToF hole mobility is 162 ± 17 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the hole lifetime deduced from the transit region and eqn (9) is 140 μs. Further, the electron CWF is measured at −25 V as shown in the inset in Fig. 6(a). In general, information on the electron transport of MAPbBr3 is less available as this material has shown much better hole transport properties independent of the growth conditions. The electron signal does not reveal a transit time due to the drastically lower lifetime of 7 μs, and because of the unknown transit time, the electron mobility cannot be resolved by a single ToF measurement. The lifetime value measured by ToF is mainly controlled by DLs. Here, the bimolecular recombination is low due to only hole transport and low electron concentration.
Since the Hall data can be extracted using light illumination, the Hall relations in eqn (6) and (7), which include ionic contributions, can be used to find p and μiNi. It is known that for semiconductors and for MAPbBr3, in particular, the drift mobility is affected by phonons or polarons.55–58 To activate additional scattering mechanisms (charged and neutral defects), either a large concentration of charged defects should be present, or a high photoexcitation intensity should be applied. Therefore, the limitation of drift mobility caused by the enhanced ionized defect scattering is not significant at room temperature when the ionized defect density is below 1017 cm3.59,60 Consequently, the constant drift mobility can be reliably used to calculate the ionic impact on the total material conductivity. Therefore, the hole drift mobility measured by the ToF technique is used in the calculations. The data in Fig. 5 were used to find ionic and free carrier contributions at high illumination intensity, and the data in Fig. 3 were used in the case of low illumination intensity. The corresponding points used in the calculations are highlighted with red brackets in Fig. 3 and 5. The ionic parameter μiNi = 2 × 1011 cm−1 V−1 s−1 and the hole concentration p = 8 × 108 cm−3 are found at the point of maximal Hall mobility. The ionic impact on the overall conductivity is estimated to be around 62% at high illumination intensity and increases up to 98% at low light intensity, where μiNi = 2 × 1010 cm−1 V−1 s−1 and p = 6 × 105 cm−3. We assume that the values of μiNi and p at low illumination intensity slightly deviate from their actual values in the dark. The ion mobility is estimated to be in the range of 10−10–10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1 considering ion61 or mobile vacancy concentrations in the range 1017–1020 cm−3 calculated by Frost et al.62 Therefore, the diffusion coefficient of 10−12–10−9 cm2 s−1 is estimated from the found ionic mobility. The contribution of ions to Hall measurements is further explained in detail in the ESI† (Fig. S4).
Deep level recombination parameters
The Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) theory and photoconductivity relaxation can be used to determine the capture cross section of DL traps.29,30 The kinetic equation of the SRH hole recombination rate for a single DL can be found using eqn (11), which describes hole relaxation after the continuous excitation is switched off. (11)where Nt, pt, and νh are the total DL concentration, the hole density at the DL, and the thermal velocity of holes, respectively. Assuming holes previously excited from a single DL, which was filled by holes in the dark, the charge neutrality requires that eqn (12) be fulfilled, where p0 is the hole density in the dark. Nt − pt = p − p0(12)Substituting eqn (12) into eqn (11) we obtain the solution for p (13)where pmax is the hole density at the time when photo-induced excitation ceases. The hole density parameters p0 and pmax are defined by the experiment using measured conductivity and considering the ionic conductivity, 98%, at low illumination intensity identified previously. By using the calculated hole mobility from ToF measurements (162 cm2 V−1 s−1), νh, from the well-known formula,63 and the effective hole mass of 0.11me64,65 for OMHPs, the hole capture cross section σh remains the only unknown parameter.
Photoconductivity relaxations measured at 1.13 eV, 1.23 eV, 1.41 eV, and 1.67 eV, where DL excitation is observed, are presented in Fig. 7. The characteristic time of the hole density relaxation τh > 20 s was deduced from the light ON/OFF photoconductivity. The long lifetime of photo-induced holes is assigned to hole recombination with D1 (Et1) that has a rather low hole capture cross-section σh. The relaxation of photoconductivity is used to determine σh of the excited DL. The kinetic equation, eqn (13), describing the hole relaxation after the excitation was switched off is expressed as the single parameter fit shown by the red solid line in Fig. 7(a)–(c) with a constant σh = 4 × 10−17 cm2. This is valid for 1.13 eV, 1.23 eV, and 1.41 eV photon energies proving a single DL, denoted D1, in region I (Fig. 3). Note that the capture cross section is obtained from non-thermal measurements. Therefore the obtained capture cross section value reproduces the real capture of the free carriers.25 This “real value” of the capture cross section is hardly accessible from other methods because it is typically found from temperature dependencies.66,67
 Fig. 7  The photoconductivity relaxation after sub-bandgap illumination at (a) 1.13 eV, (b) 1.23 eV, (c) 1.41 eV, and (d) 1.67 eV photon energies measured in MAPbBr3. Vertical grids represent time regions where the light is turned ON/OFF. The circular symbols represent experimental points and the red line is the fit according to the presented single DL model. The inset in Fig. 7 (c) shows the fit residuals. 
More complicated relaxation dynamics is observed at 1.67 eV photon energy excitation and the observed photoconductivity transients cannot be fitted by the single DL model as shown in Fig. 7(d). However, part of the photoconductivity transient may be fitted by the single DL model, resulting in the same σh as in Fig. 7(a)–(c), indicating that both DLs D1 and D2 are electrically active in photoconductive decay observations in energy region II. Therefore, eqn (13) cannot be used to find the hole capture cross sections of DLs D2 and D3. On the other hand, the positions of these DLs in the bandgap principally limit significant hole recombination or trapping. The activation energy of DL D3 is too close to one of the bands. DL D2 locates far above the Fermi level, and as a result, it is completely empty. It was noted that the sample resistivity decreases by more than 100% during illumination (Fig. 3(a)) due to free carrier generation associated with intrinsic defects. The change in the conductivity immediately recovers after the light is turned off (Fig. 7), where the conductivity of the sample returns to the initial condition after illumination ruling out the possibility of photoexcitation degradation during the measurements.
Discussion
In this work, we provide profound insight into the crucial electrical and transport properties of MAPbBr3 single crystal devices. We show that the Hall signals can be enhanced by sub-bandgap illumination due to the generation of free holes activated by the deep levels. The positive sign of the Hall voltage and p-type conductivity were detected and the maximum value of μH, 87.1 ± 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1, was determined via PHES. However, due to the superlinear increase of μH, the real value of the hole mobility is expected to be higher and closer to the value found by ToF measurements, i.e. 162 cm2 V−1 s−1. A similar hole mobility was measured on single crystals of MAPbBr3 using ToF spectroscopy.36,68 Theoretical calculations predicted that the carrier mobility limited by acoustic phonon scattering can be several thousand cm2 V−1 s−1 in OMHPs.69 The dipole screening70 or large polaron formation32,36,64 were proposed to explain the discrepancy between theoretical and experimental results. The photoconductivity non-linearity with the power dependence greater than 1 observed in the photoconductivity measurements is commonly explained for inorganic semiconductors by multiple DLs in the material71,72 and cannot be observed by a single DL excitation. A power dependence with α ≈ 1 was reported by Chen et al. in MAPbI327 and considered as trap assisted recombination with one DL recombination channel involved. In the case of multiple DL recombination channels, the value of α can be greater than 1 and the photon flux dependence can principally show a more complex profile as predicted by SRH theory.30,71–73
A wide range of carrier lifetimes (μs–ms) was estimated for OMHPs using different techniques including photoluminescence (PL), photoconductivity and transient photovoltaic measurements.26,74–78 Time-resolved photoluminescent (TRPL) spectroscopy commonly used in the field of OMHPs estimates the charge carrier lifetime in the range of ns–μs.79,80 Bi et al. demonstrated that the carrier lifetime measured by TRPL can be affected by surface recombination.74 Moreover, Wenger et al. discussed that TRPL can only measure the lifetime of the trapped carriers which undergo non-radiative recombination.26 It was suggested that PL measurements cannot be a suitable technique to study the slow recombination of charge carriers in the bulk of OMHPs.26,74 Besides, the inconsistency in the reported carrier lifetime can be due to the complication in distinguishing between electron and hole carrier lifetimes. In this manuscript, using time of flight spectroscopy, we were able to measure the lifetimes of holes and electrons independently. The estimated hole lifetime of 140 μs is in agreement with a previous report.68 The calculated shorter lifetime of electrons, 7 μs, is consistent with the DL model identified by PHES. A summary of the reported charge carrier mobilities and lifetimes in OMHPs using different techniques is presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Charge carrier mobilities and lifetimes in OMHPs calculated with different techniques




Material
Mobility, cm2 V−1 s−1
Method
Lifetime
Method




MAPbBr3 SC
87 (hole)
Photo-Hall(this article)
140 μs (hole),
ToF(This article)


162 ± 17 (hole)
ToF(this article)
7 μs (electron)


MAPbBr3 SC
60 ± 5 (hole)
Hall27
2.7 ms
Photoconductivity and photo-Hall27


MAPbI3 film
8 ± 0.4
30 μs


MAPbBr3 SC
220 ± 20 (hole)
ToF36






140 ± 17 (electron)


MAPbBr3 SC
60 (hole)
Hall68
978 ns
Ultra-fast transient absorption spectroscopy68


115 (hole)
ToF68


MAPbBr3 SC




2.3–4.5 μs
Time-resolved PL5


MAPbBr3 SC
206–217 (hole)
SCLC41






190 (electron)


MAPbI3 SC
164 ± 25 (hole)
SCLC76
234 μs
Transient photovoltaic,76 impedance spectroscopy76


105 ± 35 (hole)
Hall76
198 μs


24.8 ± 4.1 (electron)
SCLC76




24.0 ± 6.8 (electron)
ToF76




MAPbI3 SC




15 μs
Time-resolved microwave conductivity74


MAPbI3 SC




1032 ± 150 ns
PL lifetime68


MAPbI3 film




10 μs
Transient photocurrent, transient absorption decay78




Using PHES measurements with tunable photon energies, we revealed the intra-bandgap electronic structure of MAPbBr3 single crystals. Deep levels with activation energies of EV + 1.05 eV (D1), EV + 1.5 eV (D2), and EV + 1.9 eV (or EC − 1.9 eV) (D3) were detected. The bandgap of 2.2 eV estimated from PHES spectra agreed with other optical measurements (Fig. S1, ESI†). The free hole generation was experimentally proven by Hall mobilities (Fig. 3(b)) in energy regions I and II; therefore, the relative positions of energy levels D1 and D2 are directly detected from this measurement. The position of DL D3 with high activation energy remained unclear due to the possible interference of optical excitation and excessive thermal excitation of charges from the respective band nearby. The measured photoconductivity in the sub-bandgap energy region is a few orders of magnitude lower than those observed in inorganic semiconductors.29,30,81,82 The lower photoconductivity may indicate a low defect concentration in the range of 109–1012 cm−3 according to SRH simulations.30 The hole capture cross section of σh = 4 × 10−17 cm2 of DL D1 with an activation energy of EV + 1.05 eV was found from photoconductivity relaxation measurements. The assignment of DLs as electron/hole traps or recombination centers is complicated due to unknown electron capture cross section, but a few important remarks can be given. Considering photoconductivity relaxations and PHES data in energy region I, we conclude that DL D1 can capture electrons and consequently generate holes. Further, after the light is turned off, this DL returns to the steady state, capturing non-equilibrium holes. As the p-type character of MAPbBr3 is clearly seen, the Fermi level should be slightly below the mid-gap energy, Eg/2:1.1 eV, shifted towards the valence band. The position of the Fermi level primarily depends on the growth conditions of MAPbBr3; however, the same electronic structure was detected for all MAPbBr3 crystals grown differently in this work. It is concluded that D1 is partially occupied depending on the Fermi level position and it can control both the electron and hole lifetimes associated with DL assisted recombination. DL D2, estimated ∼0.5 eV above the Fermi level, is unoccupied by electrons in the dark and the electron lifetime can be predominantly controlled by this DL. This is consistent with the lower lifetime of electrons, estimated by ToF measurements where the electron signal fades on the time scale of around 7 μs. Deep levels D1 and D2 capturing non-equilibrium carriers are also responsible for the space charge formation and electric field warping within the material.25,83 Level D3 localized in the near-band region induces fast trapping–detrapping of electrons or holes. The temporary delay of carriers in level D3 retards the charge carrier transport, reducing their effective drift mobility.84
Based on the current study, it is not possible to identify the chemical nature of each DL. However, it is interesting to compare the major parameters of DLs detected in this study with the possible chemical nature of DLs predicted in previous theoretical calculations. This information is summarized in Table 2. Generally, there is a controversy over the nature and energy of defects based on several density functional theory (DFT) calculations due to different details that can be applied in the calculations and the initial assumption of material processing conditions. In a DFT calculation, Buin et al. showed that the major sources of deep traps in different halide systems could have different origins and characters.15 They discussed that lead interstitials (Pbi) are the dominant source of defects in Br-based perovskites and lead antisites possess a deep-trap character in both cubic MAPbBr3 and tetragonal MAPbI3.15 According to the calculation, a PbBr antisite is a deep acceptor with very high thermal ionization energy in MAPbBr3. Additionally, halide vacancies (VBr and VCl) could act as deep-traps only in cubic MAPbBr3 and MAPbCl3 as compared to VI in tetragonal MAPbI3.15 It was elucidated that the BrPb defect complex decomposes most favorably into VBr1+ and either Pbi1+ or Pbi2+, leaving the only major deep defect as Pbi, in agreement with experimental results.85 In a different study by Shi et al., the only stable deep level complex in MAPbBr3 was shown to be PbBr1−, which decomposes into VPb2− and Bri1+ defects and the BrPb into the VBr and Pbi.68 It was mentioned that such defects tend to decompose under energy-activating mechanisms such as annealing or light soaking. According to their report, Bri in the oxidation state of +1 has a very narrow stability region, which occurs only for strongly p-type crystals, and thus Pbi is considered as the only major deep defect in MAPbBr3. Very recently, Meggiolaro et al. demonstrated that less abundant halide interstitials (iodine interstitials) are responsible for deep traps in MAPbI3.86 Here, considering DL positions in the band gap and their charging found by PHES, DL D1 can be assigned to Pbi1+ and DL D2 to Bri2+ or VBr1+. The reliable assignment of DL D3 is more complex due to multiple shallower states present in all OMHPs and the unknown relative energy position of this DL in the bandgap. Nevertheless, independent experimental studies and theoretical calculations should explore the chemical nature of the found deep defects in the future.
Table 2 Deep level properties and assignment of their origin according to theoretical calculations




Deep level in MAPbBr3
Threshold energy
Hole capture cross section (cm2)
Possible nature




D1

E
V + 1.05 eV
4 × 10−17
(Pbi1+),68 (Pbi1+)15


D2

E
V + 1.5 eV
—
(Pbi1+, Bri2+),68 (Pbi1+, VBr1+)15


D3

E
V + 1.9 eV
—
(Pbi1+, Bri1+),68 (Pbi1+, VBr0, BrPb1+),15 Pbi2+,86 (VPb)86


(EC − 1.9 eV)




Further, we demonstrated the mixed ionic–electronic conductivity in MAPbBr3 by PHES measurements. The ionic contribution to the conductivity of 98% and μiNi = 2.6 × 1010 cm−1 V−1 s−1 are found upon moderate sub-bandgap illumination, which may slightly deviate from the values in the dark. The impact of ionic conductivity decreases to 65% under extensive illumination. Although photoexcitation can enhance the ionic conductivity of OMHPs by several orders of magnitude,87 the photo-induced free hole carriers still dominate in charge transport with a much higher hole generation rate, which is in agreement with our calculations. The presence of ions or mobile defects can lead to deformation of the electric field profile inside MAPbBr3 and to its inevitable polarization. This is in agreement with the ion migration observed in many other studies31,44,62,88–90 of OMHPs. It was also theoretically shown by Azpiroz et al.19 that mobile defect vacancies can quickly drift to the metal contact on time scales of ∼1 μs, but slower ion migration was experimentally observed taking minutes or even hours.
The relatively low capture cross section found by PHES in the dynamic regime can be explained by screening from the high relative permittivity of OMHPs,18 leading to a low SRH recombination rate. The small capture cross section of defects was previously ascribed to the polaronic nature of charge carriers in OMHPs and the rearrangement of MA dipoles in the vicinity of defects.18 The defect screening produced by ions was also proposed by several groups.5,70,91
Conclusion
In summary, we show the Hall effect characteristics in MAPbBr3 single crystal devices, inaccessible in classical Hall effect measurements, using sub-bandgap photoexcitation. We further characterize the electronic structure of MAPbBr3, which has hardly been described so far. Three deep levels with activation energies EV + 1.05 eV, EV + 1.5 eV, and EV + 1.9 eV (or EC − 1.9 eV) were detected. We emphasize that in our study DLs are found by steady-state PHES, allowing the direct visualization of deep states by the free carriers’ excitation without intermediate complicated calculations. In the presented DL model, two central conclusions can be specified. The electron lifetime is mostly affected by the trap-assisted recombination as the two DLs are sufficiently empty to enhance electron recombination. Meanwhile, the hole lifetime is only influenced by the partially filled DL with an activation energy of EV + 1.05 eV. The small hole capture cross section and insufficient DL occupation in p-type MAPbBr3 can be the reason for the greater hole transport in this material. This argument is further supported considering hole and electron lifetimes of 140 μs and 7 μs, respectively, found by ToF measurements.
It was shown that PHES with enhanced illumination is an important tool which allows DL detection even in materials with low defect concentration inaccessible by other spectroscopy methods. The relatively low hole capture cross section of σh = 4 × 10−17 cm2 found by photoconductivity relaxations signifies SRH suppressed recombination in wide band gap MAPbBr3 single crystals. We also found that ionic (or another low mobility species) conductivity prevails in the dark and the electronic conductivity prevails under the ionic part during illumination due to the higher free hole generation rate. This study opens a richer picture of the role and properties of deep levels in MAPbBr3 single crystals for the first time. The deeper knowledge of the electronic structure of OMHPs could open further opportunities in the development of more feasible technologies. The discovered deep levels and low mobility ions/defects can participate in the polarization of the bulk semiconductor and influence the free charge transport properties of OMHP devices. Strategies can consider modifying the growth of OMHPs by controlling the redox chemistry of halides by mild oxidation as well as cation and halide doping, or modifying the precursors’ ratio, precursors’ impurities and growth temperature to further restrict the deep levels.
Disclaimer
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Author contributions
A. M. and M. A. conceived the project and A. M. performed experiments directed by M. A. J. T. prepared samples in the lab in the US, and I. V. prepared metal contacts and controlled sample and contact quality for electrical measurements. A. M. performed photo-Hall effect measurements (PHES), data analysis and theoretical calculations with the assistance of P. M. and R. G. R. G. contributed to deep data analysis and theoretical models based on the Shockley–Read–Hall differential equations. P. P. performed Time of Flight (ToF) measurements with the help of J. P. and E. B., P. P. and R. G. assisted A. M. in ToF data analysis. K. R. contributed to ToF and PHES measurements for long timescales. L. A. prepared samples in Czech Republic with a slightly different method from J. T. to ensure data universalness. M. A. performed UV-Vis and PL spectroscopy. A. M. and M. A. wrote the manuscript. All co-authors contributed to experimental design and data analysis and revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content and approved the final version.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
J. T., B. H., E. L. and M. A. acknowledge financial support from the US Department of Homeland Security (grant # 2016-DN-077-ARI01). A. M., P. M., I. V., J. P., K. R. and E. B. acknowledge financial support from the Grant Agency of Charles University, Project No. 1374218 and No. 1230218, and the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic, Grant No. GJ17-26041Y. Part of this work was conducted in the Micro-Processing Research Facility, a University of Tennessee Core Facility.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shiral and M. Tsutomu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Yang, Q. Jiang, P. Wang, Z. Yin, X. Zhang, H. Tan, Y. (Michael) Yang, M. Wei, B. R. Sutherland, E. H. Sargent and J. You, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15640 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ahmadi, T. Wu and B. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605242 CrossRef .
H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, H. Wei, J. Yang, G. R. Blake, J. Huang, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600534 CrossRef .
X. Liu, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Dong, W. Jie and Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 14355 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyano, N. Tripathi, M. Yanagida and Y. Shirai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 303 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sopori, J. Electron. Mater., 2005, 31, 972 CrossRef .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Chen, X. G. Gong and S. Wei, Angew. Chem., 2014, 54, 1791 CrossRef .
A. Walsh and A. Zunger, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 964 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Braly, D. W. DeQuilettes, L. M. Pazos-Outón, S. Burke, M. E. Ziffer, D. S. Ginger and H. W. Hillhouse, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 355 CrossRef CAS .
O. von Roos and P. T. Landsberg, J. Appl. Phys., 1985, 57, 4746 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, R. Comin, J. Xu, A. H. Ip and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4405 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y. Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570 CrossRef CAS .
I. Anusca, S. Balčiūnas, P. Gemeiner, Š. Svirskas, M. Sanlialp, G. Lackner, C. Fettkenhauer, J. Belovickis, V. Samulionis, M. Ivanov, B. Dkhil, J. Banys, V. V. Shvartsman and D. C. Lupascu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700600 CrossRef .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118 RSC .
A. Castaldini, A. Cavallini, B. Fraboni, P. Fernandez and J. Piqueras, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 2121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zazvorka, P. Hlidek, R. Grill, J. Franc and E. Belas, J. Lumin., 2016, 177, 71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Franc, P. Hlídek, E. Belas, V. Linhart, S. Pospíšil and R. Grill, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2005, 52, 1956 CAS .
A. Carvalho, A. K. Tagantsev, S. Öberg, P. R. Briddon and N. Setter, hys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 075215 CrossRef .
J. Pousset, I. Farella, S. Gambino and A. Cola, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 105701 CrossRef .
A. Musiienko, R. Grill, J. Pekárek, E. Belas, P. Praus, J. Pipek, V. Dědič and H. Elhadidy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 082103 CrossRef .
B. Wenger, P. K. Nayak, X. Wen, S. V. Kesava, N. K. Noel and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 590 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, H. T. Yi, X. Wu, R. Haroldson, Y. N. Gartstein, Y. I. Rodionov, K. S. Tikhonov, A. Zakhidov, X. Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. T. Yi and V. Podzorov, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2016, 5, 034008 CrossRef .
A. Musiienko, R. Grill, P. Hlídek, P. Moravec, E. Belas, J. Zázvorka, G. Korcsmáros, J. Franc and I. Vasylchenko, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 32, 015002 CrossRef .
A. Musiienko, R. Grill, P. Moravec, G. Korcsmáros, M. Rejhon, J. Pekárek, H. Elhadidy, L. Šedivý and I. Vasylchenko, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 161502 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, Z. Li, R. Crisp, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4688 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shrestha, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet, D. Niesner, R. Hock and C. J. Brabec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 5935 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yakunin, M. Sytnyk, D. Kriegner, S. Shrestha, M. Richter, G. J. Matt, H. Azimi, C. J. Brabec, J. Stangl, M. V. Kovalenko and W. Heiss, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, K. H. Kim, D. Y. Son, D. N. Jeong, J. Y. Seo, Y. S. Choi, I. T. Han, S. Y. Lee and N. G. Park, Nature, 2017, 550, 87 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Seeger, Semiconductor Physics, Springer-Verlag, Wien,  1973 Search PubMed .
H. Wei, D. DeSantis, W. Wei, Y. Deng, D. Guo, T. J. Savenije, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 826 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot, R. May, A. Palmstrom, D. J. Slotcavage, R. A. Belisle, J. B. Patel, E. S. Parrott, R. J. Sutton, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, B. Conings, A. Babayigit, H.-G. Boyen, S. Bent, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 354, 861 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jošt, E. Köhnen, A. B. Morales-Vilches, B. Lipovšek, K. Jäger, B. Macco, A. Al-Ashouri, J. Krč, L. Korte, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, B. Stannowski and S. Albrecht, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3511 RSC .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621 RSC .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H.-H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 333 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Tisdale, T. Smith, J. R. Salasin, M. Ahmadi, N. Johnson, A. V. Ievlev, M. Koehler, C. J. Rawn, E. Lukosi and B. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 7818 RSC .
L. Cojocaru, S. Uchida, K. Tamaki, P. V. V. Jayaweera, S. Kaneko, J. Nakazaki, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11790 CrossRef .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J. K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS .
“COMPACT SUPERCONTINUUM LASER,” can be found under http://www.nktphotonics.com/lasers-fibers/en/product/superk-compact-supercontinuum-lasers/, 2017.

          M. S. Dresselhaus, Solid State Physics, Part I: Transport Properties of Solids,  2001 Search PubMed .
J. Wiktor, F. Ambrosio and A. Pasquarello, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16863 RSC .

          W. A. Harrison, Electronic Structure and the Properties of Solids: The Physics of the Chemical Bond, Dover Publications,  1989 Search PubMed .
A. Zerrai, G. Marrakchi and G. Bremond, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 4293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Blakemore, Phys. Rev., 1967, 163, 809 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guo, D. Bartesaghi, H. Wei, E. M. Hutter, J. Huang and T. J. Savenije, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4258 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Rosenberg, M. J. Legodi, Y. Rakita, D. Cahen and M. Diale, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 145701 CrossRef .
A. Musiienko, R. Grill, J. Pekárek, E. Belas, P. Praus, J. Pipek, V. Dědič and H. Elhadidy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 082103 CrossRef .
P. Praus, E. Belas, J. Franc, R. Grill, P. Hoschl and J. Pekarek, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2014, 61, 2333 Search PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 CrossRef .
K. Miyata, T. L. Atallah and X.-Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701469 CrossRef .
Y.-B. Lu, X. Kong, X. Chen, D. G. Cooke and H. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41860 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu and C. Yam, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6800 RSC .
D. Chattopadhyay and H. J. Queisser, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1981, 53, 745 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mansfield, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. B, 1956, 69, 76 CrossRef .
W. Peng, C. Aranda, O. M. Bakr, G. Garcia-Belmonte, J. Bisquert and A. Guerrero, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1477 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost and A. Walsh, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 528 CrossRef CAS .
R. Grill, J. Franc, H. Elhadidy, E. Belas, Š. Uxa, M. Bugár, P. Moravec and P. Höschl, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 2012, 59, 2383 CAS .
X. Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4758 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, T. L. Atallah and X. Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701469 CrossRef .
V. Dědič, J. Franc, H. Elhadidy, R. Grill, E. Belas, P. Moravec, J. Zázvorka and P. Höschl, J. Instrum., 2013, 8, C01008 Search PubMed .
G. Landi, H. C. Neitzert, C. Barone, C. Mauro, F. Lang, S. Albrecht, B. Rech and S. Pagano, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700183 CrossRef .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, W. Shi, J. Xi, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, Sci. Rep., 2016, 7, 19968 CrossRef .
J. Ma and L.-W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3646 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Bube, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 74, 5138 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stockmann, Phys. Status Solidi, 1969, 34, 751 CrossRef .
A. Musiienko, R. Grill, P. Moravec, P. Fochuk, I. Vasylchenko, H. Elhadidy and L. Šedivý, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 014019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bi, E. M. Hutter, Y. Fang, Q. Dong, J. Huang and T. J. Savenije, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 923 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, S. Seto, A. Iwata and M. Bingo, J. Electron. Mater., 2000, 29, 704 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, R. Lindblad, E. M. J. Johansson, I. J. McPherson, H. Rensmo, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Grancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472 RSC .
A. A. B. Baloch, F. H. Alharbi, G. Grancini, M. I. Hossain, M. K. Nazeeruddin and N. Tabet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 26805 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Li, H. Li, T. Ye, C. Wetzel, H. Li and S.-F. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 16482 CrossRef .

          S. Reynolds, M. Brinza, M. L. Benkhedir and G. J. Adriaenssens, Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, p. 1 Search PubMed .
R. Newman and W. W. Tyler, Solid State Phys., 1959, 8, 49 CAS .
T. Wu, L. Collins, J. Zhang, P.-Y. Lin, M. Ahmadi, S. Jesse and B. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11542 CrossRef CAS .

Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials, ed. S. Kasap and P. Capper, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017 Search PubMed .
I. A. Shkrob and T. W. Marin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1066 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, E. Mosconi, A. J. Barker, J. Ball, C. Andrea Riccardo Perini, F. Deschler, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 702 RSC .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckeviius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10334 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Zhao, W.-K. Zhou, X. Zhou, K.-H. Liu, D.-P. Yu and Q. Zhao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 6, e16243 CrossRef .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. Srimath Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. De Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416 CrossRef CAS .
M. Šimėnas, J. Banys and E. E. Tornau, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1487 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00311hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Organometallic halide perovskites (OMHPs) have recently undergone a remarkable development as highly efficient optoelectronic materials for a variety of applications particularly solar cells, light emitting diodes and photodetectors. To fully use the potential of OMHPs, several important challenges must be overcome. One of these challenges is the understanding and control of their defect structures. The available data from multiple research studies suggest that trap-assisted recombination exists in OMHPs despite their large carrier lifetimes, which makes these materials highly attractive, and this has resulted in the perovskite boom over the last decade. Conventional spectroscopy faces serious obstacles in OMHPs due to their low defect concentrations and capture cross section, and therefore the electronic structure of such semiconductors remains poorly understood. By using highly specialized photo-Hall effect spectroscopy, we visualized the deep level defects responsible for non-radiative recombination and established their parameters in the MAPbBr3 perovskite. The presented deep level model in combination with Time of Flight measurements demonstrated that the electron transport is mostly affected by the trap-assisted recombination. Meanwhile, holes are only influenced by the partially filled deep level. The presented electrical and charge transport properties are crucial for informing the processing conditions towards the elimination of these defects as was done for classical inorganic semiconductors.


 	Fig. 1  (a) The basic physical principles of the PHES method. (b) Competing deep level models 1 and 2 in the case of donor-like and acceptor-like DLs, respectively. Solid and dashed arrows show direct and secondary carrier generation processes correspondingly. EF shows the Fermi level position in the p-type material. (c) A photo of a typical solution-grown MAPbBr3 single crystal with Au contacts in a 6-probe/Hall bar geometry. The scale shows centimeters.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The evolution of the Hall voltage measured (a) under dark conditions, (b) under illumination with a photon energy of 1.3 eV, and (c) under illumination with a photon energy of 1.9 eV for sample no. 1. A photon flux of 1015 cm−2 s−1 is used for both photon energies. Vertical grids represent time regions where the magnetic field is set to 0 T, 1 T, and −1 T, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
PhC = σ(I) − σ(0)	(4)
μH = (Apμp2p − Anμn2n)/(μpp + μnn)	(5)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photoconductivity and (b) Hall mobility spectra of two single crystals of MAPbBr3 as a function of photon energy. Vertical arrows show the deep level threshold energies. The inset in (b) shows the corresponding Hall coefficient as a function of photon energy.	 
σ = qe(μpp + μiNi)	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Experimentally estimated DL transitions in MAPbBr3. Full upward black arrows delineate principal optical excitation. The dashed arrow shows the alternative secondary hole generation process.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photoconductivity and (b) Hall mobility as functions of photon flux at 1.46 eV and 1.92 eV high-flux illumination in MAPbBr3. The horizontal line in (b) represents the maximum Hall mobility.	 
i(t) ∝ e(−t/τh(e)),	(9)
	(10)

 	Fig. 6  (a) CWF ToF measurements of MAPbBr3 single crystals with different applied voltages. The inset shows electron photocurrent fitted by a single exponential relation. (b) Transit time as a function of applied voltage.	 
	(11)
Nt − pt = p − p0	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 7  The photoconductivity relaxation after sub-bandgap illumination at (a) 1.13 eV, (b) 1.23 eV, (c) 1.41 eV, and (d) 1.67 eV photon energies measured in MAPbBr3. Vertical grids represent time regions where the light is turned ON/OFF. The circular symbols represent experimental points and the red line is the fit according to the presented single DL model. The inset in Fig. 7 (c) shows the fit residuals.	 

MAPbBr3 SC	87 (hole)	Photo-Hall(this article)	140 μs (hole),	ToF(This article)
162 ± 17 (hole)	ToF(this article)	7 μs (electron)
MAPbBr3 SC	60 ± 5 (hole)	Hall27	2.7 ms	Photoconductivity and photo-Hall27
MAPbI3 film	8 ± 0.4	30 μs
MAPbBr3 SC	220 ± 20 (hole)	ToF36	
	

140 ± 17 (electron)
MAPbBr3 SC	60 (hole)	Hall68	978 ns	Ultra-fast transient absorption spectroscopy68
115 (hole)	ToF68
MAPbBr3 SC	
	
	2.3–4.5 μs	Time-resolved PL5
MAPbBr3 SC	206–217 (hole)	SCLC41	
	

190 (electron)
MAPbI3 SC	164 ± 25 (hole)	SCLC76	234 μs	Transient photovoltaic,76 impedance spectroscopy76
105 ± 35 (hole)	Hall76	198 μs
24.8 ± 4.1 (electron)	SCLC76	

24.0 ± 6.8 (electron)	ToF76	

MAPbI3 SC	
	
	15 μs	Time-resolved microwave conductivity74
MAPbI3 SC	
	
	1032 ± 150 ns	PL lifetime68
MAPbI3 film	
	
	10 μs	Transient photocurrent, transient absorption decay78

D1	
E
V + 1.05 eV	4 × 10−17	(Pbi1+),68 (Pbi1+)15
D2	
E
V + 1.5 eV	—	(Pbi1+, Bri2+),68 (Pbi1+, VBr1+)15
D3	
E
V + 1.9 eV	—	(Pbi1+, Bri1+),68 (Pbi1+, VBr0, BrPb1+),15 Pbi2+,86 (VPb)86
(EC − 1.9 eV)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00311h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
