A strategic review on processing routes towards highly efficient perovskite solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA08277K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA08277K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2406-2431A strategic review on processing routes towards highly efficient perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Ashish 
            Dubey
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nirmal 
            Adhikari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sally 
            Mabrouk
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fan 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ke 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shangfeng 
            Yang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Qiquan 
            Qiao
          
        
      *a
aCenter for Advanced Photovoltaics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA. E-mail: Qiquan.Qiao@sdstate.edu
bHefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Synergetic Innovation Center of Quantum Information & Quantum Physics, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), Hefei 230026, China
Received 
      19th September 2017
    , Accepted 4th January 2018First published on 4th January 2018AbstractAn organic–inorganic perovskite is comprised of an organic cation (CH3NH3+, FAI, or Cs), a metal cation (Pb2+ or Sn2+) and a halide (I−, Cl−, or Br−) molecule. Precursor salts containing these cations, molecules and halide ions dissolved in solvents are used to prepare perovskite films. Perovskite film formation takes place through the reaction of precursor elements, which is assisted by various processing conditions such as thermal annealing, moisture and solvent treatment. This review focuses on various perovskite formation and crystallization routes with respect to processing parameters including the precursor solvent, solvent mixture, temperature, time, formation of solvent led-intermediate complex species, doping and humidity. Adding water as the dopant to the precursor solvent and exposure to moisture from atmospheric humidity to improve perovskite film quality are also discussed. Processing conditions and crystallization processes are described in correlation with the perovskite film morphology, crystallinity, defects, charge transport and device performance. This article will aim to highlighting recent findings in the selection of solvents in the crystallization of perovskite films, solvent induced intermediate phases, and effects of water in assisting perovskite crystallization for improved film quality and device performance. The review will also present various structural and nanoscale characterization techniques that have been used to probe solvent based intermediate species transformation processes to the perovskite phase and understand the effects in correlation with device performance.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is an important source of renewable energy to meet the growing energy demand for future generations. Numerous technological advancements have taken place since the demonstration of the first practical photovoltaic (PV) cell at Bell labs in 1954. Silicon solar cells have become the dominant photovoltaic device among all the technologies developed with significant cost reduction in the last decade. Along with the tremendous growth in the development of silicon solar cells, there has been rapid progress in alternative light absorbing semiconducting materials for solar cell applications. They include copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS),1 copper zinc tin sulfide (CZTS),2 inorganic semiconducting quantum dots,3 conjugated polymers,4 organic small molecules,5 organic dyes6 and organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites.7,8 All these different solar cell technologies have experienced a continuous improvement in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs), along with low cost solution-based fabrication processes. Among all these technologies, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite based solar cell technology is the newest entry. It has shown tremendous potential as one of the few solar cell technologies that can compete with the well-established silicon solar cells in terms of PCE and cost.
A perovskite is an organic–inorganic hybrid with a formula ABX3. Here A and B are cations and X is a halide anion. Organic–inorganic perovskites were first studied by Weber in 1978.9,10 Perovskites were first used as photovoltaic absorber materials in 2006,11 where methylammonium lead halide functioned as the sensitizer in a mesoscopic TiO2 thin film giving a PCE of ∼2.2%. The PCE increased to 3.8% in 2009,12 6.5% in 2011,13 20.1% in 2015 (ref. 14) and 22.1% in 2017.15Fig. 1 shows a substantial increase in the PCE (%) of perovskite solar cells with time (in years). The rapid increase in the performance of perovskite based solar cells is caused by their unique properties including a low energy direct bandgap (∼1.5 eV), high absorption coefficient, balanced electron–hole mobility, long range charge diffusion length (100–1000 nm), high dielectric constant, high carrier mobility and small exciton binding energies. In the last several years, researchers have overcome many challenges facing the processing of perovskites. They include the selection of correct perovskite precursors, precursor concentrations, perovskite morphology, perovskite layer thickness and perovskite device structures.
 Fig. 1  (a) Efficiency evolution of perovskite solar cells from 2006 to 2017. Schematic of (b) n–i–p and (c) p–i–n perovskite solar cell structures. 
Two different device configurations including n–i–p and p–i–n have been adopted for fabricating perovskite solar cells. The first device architecture was n–i–p, as shown in Fig. 1b. This was adopted from the dye-sensitized solar cell device structure, where light first enters the perovskite layer from the substrate through an n-type electron transport layer such as TiO2 and ZnO. Spiro-OMeTAD, P3HT and PDPP3T are usually used as a p-type hole transport layer. The p–i–n device structure shown in Fig. 1c is complementary to the n–i–p device architecture, where light enters the perovskite layer first from a p-type layer such as PEDOT:PSS. PC60BM is typically used as an electron transport layer. The n–i–p structure using FTO/bl-TiO2/meso-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag has been explored widely in early studies for making perovskite solar cells. The n–i–p device structure has been used as both planar and mesoporous perovskite heterojunctions. The planar n–i–p structure does not use the mesoporous TiO2 nanostructure and the perovskite layer forms a planar junction with the blocking compact-TiO2 layer. On the other hand, the mesoporous-perovskite junction uses a heterojunction of mesoporous TiO2 and perovskite crystals formed inside the mesoporous TiO2 and on top of it as well. The p–i–n architecture is similar to the polymer solar cell structure with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. The deposition of perovskite films in both the n–i–p and p–i–n device architectures has been attempted through various methods such as single step spin coating of precursor solution,16 sequential deposition methods,17,18 vapor phase deposition,19–21 co-evaporation,22 spray coating,23–25 doctor blading26,27 and slot die deposition techniques.28 Single step spin coating, sequential deposition methods, and vapor phase deposition are the most widely adopted routes to prepare perovskite films. The single step spin coating method involves perovskite precursors to be mixed in a solvent or solvent mixture and spin coated on top of a charge extraction layer. The sequential deposition of a perovskite film involves two or more steps, wherein a single precursor film is first spin coated and then dipped in a second precursor solution or a second precursor solution is spin coated on top of it. The third commonly used deposition technique is vapor phase deposition, wherein an individual precursor is deposited by vaporization of precursor elements.
In this report, we will conduct a comprehensive review of perovskite film processing methods, especially the processing techniques that were adopted to crystallize organic–inorganic perovskite films. Various processing parameters including precursor solvents, processing parameters (e.g., deposition techniques and thermal annealing time and temperature), crystallization conditions, moisture and water are discussed. The characterization techniques to identify the perovskite phase and morphology and their effects on photovoltaic performance are presented. The review will focus on different perovskite film deposition strategies including one-step, two-step, solvent engineering, vapor phase, room temperature and deposition under the influence of humidity/water doping. All these deposition strategies were used to achieve an ideal morphology. The review highlighted recent advancements in the role of intermediate complex formation originating from various solvents and moisture in the atmosphere and its impacts on the perovskite phase crystallization, morphology and device performance.
2. Perovskite film crystallization routes
Thin films of the perovskite have been achieved using both solution processed and vapor phase deposition techniques. In order to achieve high quality perovskite films, careful control on several critical multidimensional processing parameters is required in both deposition techniques. The parameters such as the perovskite film thickness, crystallinity, perovskite phase purity and perovskite film morphology are important in determining the final device performance. Careful optimization of perovskite film processing parameters can lead to desired perovskite film features such as high crystallinity. The perovskite film processing parameters are different for different deposition methods. Several parameters define the quality of the perovskite layer such as the film thickness, perovskite phase purity, crystallinity, large single crystalline grains and pin-hole free smooth morphology. The perovskite film processing parameters are highly important to obtain a high quality perovskite film. For solution processed perovskite films, the processing parameters include optimization of the perovskite precursor weight fraction, precursor molar ratio, type of solvent/solvent mixture, reaction temperature, film thickness, solvent engineering, single-step or multi-step deposition, post-film formation treatment, and thermal annealing temperature and time. Herein we will focus on several solution-based processing parameters and vapor phase deposition parameters to make perovskite films. Emphasis will be on active layer perovskite film formation processes. They include the role of solvents, deposition parameters, crystallization process and post-treatment. Table 1 shows different crystallization routes and their corresponding processing variables.
Table 1 List of various crystallization routes and their respective critical processing parameters




Perovskite crystallization routes
Critical processing variables/parameters




Single-step crystallization
Role of solvents, precursor ratio, annealing temperature, film thickness


Two-step crystallization
Film thickness, solvents, precursor concentration, additives, annealing temperature, dipping time


Vapor phase crystallization
Crystallization time, substrate temperature


Room temperature crystallization
Crystallization time, effect of moisture, film morphology, film degradation


Water and moisture-assisted crystallization
Time of humidity exposure, % humidity, % water concentration




2.1 Single step crystallization of perovskite films
In a solution-processing route, the simplest way to prepare a multicomponent semiconducting thin film is to prepare a solution mixture of components, followed by spin coating on top of the substrate. Spin coating a solution mixture will result in a semiconducting thin film whose crystallization can further be enhanced by post-treatments such as thermal annealing. The final film properties including the film stoichiometry, thickness, morphology, and crystalline nature depend on various processing parameters. In this section, various processing variables involved in single-step processing of perovskite films will be discussed with respect to improving the film morphology, crystallization and device performance.

2.1.1 Role of solvents, film thickness, annealing temperature, type of precursor and their compositions. 
One of the early approaches for preparing perovskite films in both planar p–i–n16 and mesoscopic n–i–p13,29 device architectures was single-step deposition of perovskite films. Single step-deposition of perovskite films was demonstrated in one of the early reports by Im et al. in 2011.13 They reported the formation of a CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite film from a precursor solution which was prepared by mixing an equimolar ratio (1:1) of methylammonium iodide (CH3NH3I) and lead iodide (PbI2) in γ-butyrolactone (GBL) at 60 °C for 12 h. The precursor solution was filtered twice with a 0.45 μm size PVDF filter before spin coated onto a 20 nm sized nanocrystalline TiO2 film. The concentration of the precursor solution was varied from 10.05, 20.13, 30.18, 40.26 to 41.22 wt%. The precursor solution was dropped and spread on top of a nanocrystalline mesoporous TiO2 layer. This was then allowed to sit on a TiO2 layer for 1 min to penetrate into a mesoporous TiO2 layer, which was then spin coated at 2000 rpm for 40 s in an ambient atmosphere. The spin-coated CH3NH3PbI3 film was then crystallized by thermal annealing at different temperatures from 40 °C to 160 °C for 30 min. The CH3NH3PbI3 film was crystallized as a tetragonal structure having lattice parameters of a = b = 8.883 Å and c = 12.677 Å as observed from the XRD pattern. The formation of the perovskite in the mesoporous TiO2 layer was confirmed by the XRD pattern. The XRD peaks were broadened when the perovskite was deposited on a mesoporous TiO2 layer, suggesting small perovskite crystals (Fig. 2a and b). The effect of increasing weight percentages (concentration) of the perovskite precursor content was observed during the film formation. A yellow perovskite film was obtained for 10.05 wt%, which subsequently transformed to black when the wt% concentration increased to 40.26 wt% (Fig. 2c). The change in color at higher wt% was attributed to higher loading of the perovskite precursor which led to increased precursor interaction upon annealing and formation of the black perovskite phase. The UV-vis spectra of films made from different wt% of the perovskite precursor showed an increase in light absorption and an increase in the absorption onset with higher wt% (Fig. 2d). This was attributed to the perovskite film formation. Thermal annealing of the perovskite film from 40.26 wt% led to an increase in the absorption intensity for temperature 40–100 °C, beyond which the absorption intensity was observed to decrease until 160 °C (Fig. 2e). The perovskite absorbed in the nanocrystalline TiO2 was then sandwiched with platinum (Pt) counter electrodes with a liquid electrolyte filled in between. This gave a best efficiency of 6.54% for the perovskite solar cells under optimized conditions. Table 2 shows the device parameters of perovskite solar cells annealed at different temperatures of 40, 100 and 160 °C. The Jsc increased for the temperatures 40–100 °C, beyond which it decreased at 160 °C. This was indicative of the perovskite crystallization process up to 100 °C and its decomposition beyond 100 °C. This is analogous to its perovskite thin film absorption behavior at these temperatures. The precursor concentration and annealing temperature are critical as the precursor concentration determines the film morphology in terms of its density and morphology, which eventually determines the charge carrier recombination in the film thus affecting the open circuit voltage (Voc) of devices.
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 powder, (b) XRD patterns of a TiO2 layer with and without CH3NH3PbI3 coated on top of FTO glass, (c) CH3NH3PbI3 films on top of TiO2 made from an equimolar precursor mixture in GBL with different precursor wt% of 10.05%, 20.13%, 30.18%, and 40.26% in the solution, (d) absorbance spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited on top of TiO2 prepared with different precursor wt% in the solution and (e) absorbance spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 deposited on TiO2 films and annealed at 40, 100, and 160 °C. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 2 Device performance parameters of perovskite solar cells annealed at temperatures of 40, 100 and 160 °C. Adapted from ref. 13 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry




Annealing temperature (°C)
TiO2 film thickness (μm)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF

η (%)
Area (cm2)




40
5.5
13.31
0.605
0.513
4.13
0.265


100
5.5
13.76
0.557
0.557
4.73
0.267


160
5.5
10.06
0.588
0.588
3.71
0.303




Etgar et al. in 2012 reported a hole transport layer free mesoscopic CH3NH3PbI3/TiO2 heterojunction solar cell, which achieved a PCE of 5.5% and 7.3% under a light intensity of 1000 W m−2 and 100 W m−2, respectively.29 Single step coating of the perovskite layer was done by mixing precursor elements (40 wt% of equimolar CH3NH3I and PbI2) in γ-butyrolactone solvent and spin coating on top of the mesoporous TiO2 layer at 2000 rpm for 30 s in an inert atmosphere.29 The spin coated films were dried at room temperature followed by thermal annealing at ∼100 °C in an argon atmosphere.29 The formation of the perovskite was confirmed by the change in the film color when kept for drying at room temperature. One of the bottlenecks in the early studies towards achieving high efficiency was to obtain an ideal morphology of the perovskite layer. Previous studies on planar and mesoporous architectures showed that the perovskite film had pin-holes and incomplete coverage across the film, due to difference in the solubility of mixed precursors in a single solvent. This led to shunting paths and poor light absorption in the film. Eperon et al. in 2013 optimized the solution processed perovskite film formation by controlling atmospheric conditions, film annealing temperature and film thickness. This resulted in a highly dense film with a PCE of 11.4% in planar mixed halide (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) based solar cells.30 In order to understand the perovskite film morphological behavior, the perovskite film morphology was monitored by depositing it on top of an alumina scaffold with varying thicknesses. The perovskite films were annealed at 100 °C for varying times at different temperatures in a nitrogen filled glovebox.31 In the first case, the mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film coverage was studied on top of an alumina scaffold layer with varying thicknesses from 400 nm (perovskite infiltrated into the mesoporous alumina layer) to 0 nm (similar to planar heterojunctions). Fig. 3 (top row) shows SEM micrographs of perovskite films coated on the alumina scaffold. In addition to the perovskite crystallization inside the porous alumina, the perovskite layer was also formed as a capping layer on top of the alumina scaffold. The surface coverage increases when the thickness of the bottom layer alumina scaffold decreases. However, the perovskite morphology looks very different with a poor coverage in the absence of the alumina scaffold layer. Thus, the alumina scaffold layer was used to control the morphology of the perovskite layer in order to obtain high quality surface coverage of the perovskite film. To understand the origin of gap formation that leads to poor surface coverage in the absence of the mesoporous alumina layer, the perovskite film was deposited on a compact TiO2 layer, followed by annealing at 100 °C for different intervals of time (0, 10, 25, and 60 min). Freshly spin coated films without annealing (0 min) showed a high coverage with a large number of pin-holes as shown in Fig. 3 (bottom row). The pin-holes further increased and the morphology looks rougher with the formation of more voids when annealed for 60 min. The change in the perovskite film morphology with increasing annealing time was driven by the minimization of surface energy and loss in the mass of the perovskite. The perovskite solution having excess methylammonium and halide compared to lead can result in an organic halide rich film. Upon annealing, the excess organic and halide are likely to evaporate at a certain temperature until an equimolar mixture of organic, halide and metal is reached in the film. The formation of voids in the annealed films was highly dependent on the annealing temperature, solvent and mass evaporation rates and thickness of the perovskite films.
 Fig. 3  Top row: SEM images of perovskite films deposited on top of a mesoporous alumina scaffold with different thicknesses (400, 200, 140, and 0 nm); bottom row: SEM images of perovskite films deposited on compact TiO2-coated FTO glass and annealed at 100 °C for different time intervals (0, 10, 25, and 60 min). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. 
In order to further optimize the perovskite deposition processes to obtain a complete coverage, the effects of annealing temperature and film thickness on the morphology were investigated. The SEM images in Fig. 4a (top row) exhibited a decrease in the number of pores and an increase in the perovskite crystal size as the annealing temperature increased. The overall perovskite morphology appeared to be more separate and discontinuous at higher annealing temperature. The effects of perovskite thickness on the surface coverage were studied by keeping the annealing temperature fixed at 95 °C as shown in Fig. 4a (bottom row). The increase in the perovskite film thickness led to an increase in the average size of pores in the film and a smaller number of pores per unit area. Thus, the thickness had little effect on the surface coverage. The graphs in Fig. 4b and c revealed that the initial thicker films and low annealing temperatures exhibited a high perovskite surface coverage. Then the effect of solvent on surface coverage was studied by employing less volatile solvents such as dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone instead of dimethylformamide (DMF) in the preparation of perovskite films. This has led to a reduction in the perovskite surface coverage. To understand the effects of surface coverage on the device performance, planar heterojunction devices were fabricated with a perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film sandwiched between the electron and hole transport layers. The short-circuit current density (Jsc) linearly increased from 11 mA cm−2 to 18 mA cm−2 when the perovskite surface coverage increased from 56% to 94%. However, the trend in PCE was not consistent. Although Jsc is related to the perovskite surface coverage, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (FF) are not dependent on the surface coverage. They are also affected by other factors such as interfacial contact between the charge extraction layers and perovskite layer. Typically, higher PCE was obtained for higher perovskite surface coverage, whereas poor perovskite surface coverage led to a low PCE in devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) Top row: SEM images of perovskite film coverage observed at different annealing temperatures; bottom row: SEM images of surface coverage for different perovskite film thicknesses. Perovskite coverage (%) vs. (b) annealing temperature (°C) and (c) initial film thickness (nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. 
Kim et al. studied the role of mixed precursor solvent in obtaining a smooth perovskite surface with uniform crystal domains.32 A mixed precursor solution made of DMF and GBL in a ratio of 97:3 [vol%] at a concentration of 12 wt% was used to dissolve mixed precursors CH3NH3I and PbI2 at 60 °C for 12 h inside a nitrogen filled glovebox. The morphology of spin coated perovskite films made from the mixed solvent of DMF:GBL was compared with those from single solvents of GBL and DMF, respectively. All the perovskite films were deposited on a PEDOT:PSS layer. The perovskite films made from GBL showed large voids between the grains/crystals indicating poor surface coverage (Fig. 5a). The perovskite films prepared from DMF showed an improved morphology in terms of surface coverage. They had smaller voids and non-uniform crystal dimensions (Fig. 5b). However, the perovskite films prepared by mixing the precursors in a mixed solvent of DMF:GBL exhibited a smooth, interconnected and dense morphology with a uniform crystal dimension of ∼100 nm (Fig. 5c). The film made from the mixed solvent led to a smoother film with a lower root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 6.6 nm, compared to 24.53 nm and 8.88 nm for the films prepared using GBL and DMF solvents, as shown in AFM topography images (Fig. 5d–f).
 Fig. 5  SEM images (a–c) and AFM topography images (d–f) of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films made from individual solvents and a solvent mixture. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The crystallization of perovskite films made from different solvents (e.g., GBL, DMF, and GBL + DMF) is different as the rate of evaporation of each solvent varies while spin coating. A higher evaporation rate of solvent could lead to freezing of precursor elements in the film, causing a rough film morphology. Mixing different solvents not only increases solubility, but also provides an optimum evaporation rate to obtain a smooth and dense perovskite film.


2.1.2 Solvent engineering approach for perovskite film formation. 
The solubility of perovskite precursor elements in the solvent or a solvent mixture is important to obtain a smooth morphology. Another method to obtain quality perovskite films was a modified single-step method known as solvent engineering. In the precursors dissolved in a mixed solvent of GBL and dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), a solvent that does not dissolve the perovskite but is miscible with GBL and DMSO such as toluene and chloroform was dripped during the spin coating to allow the formation of a smooth intermediate complex (CH3NH3I–PbI2–DMSO) film. This intermediate film was finally converted into CH3NH3PbI3.33–35 The mechanism improved the inhomogeneity in the morphology resulted from spin casting the precursor mixture of the perovskite dissolved in solvents such as GBL and DMSO. The solvent engineering technique is a modified single-step solution processed method to prepare a crystalline, smooth and homogenous perovskite film. Solvent engineering during perovskite preparation was first reported by Jeon et al. in 2014.33 A mixed halide perovskite composition of MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 was prepared using the solvent engineering method. Bromine (Br) was introduced into the perovskite composition to substitute 10–15 mol% Br− in place of I− in MAPbI3. This led to a significant improvement in the ambient air stability without affecting the device performance as compared to MAPbI3. Solvent engineering based crystallization of the MAPb(I1−xBrx)3 film was carried out in five steps. First, a soluble mixture of precursor salts MAI, MABr, PbI2, and PbBr2 and solvents GBL and DMSO was spread on top of a substrate inside an N2 filled glovebox. Second, the substrate containing the solution mixture was spin coated at a defined speed for several seconds to evaporate the solvent mixture. Third, another solvent toluene was dripped on top of the substrate during the spin coating. Fourth, the individual precursor components were frozen to form an intermediate complex phase. Finally, the intermediate complex phase was converted to a crystalline perovskite phase by annealing the spin coated film at 100 °C for 10 min. Fig. 6a shows the steps of toluene dripping based solvent engineering to prepare a uniform, dense and crystalline perovskite film.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing the solvent engineering steps to prepare perovskite films, (b) XRD spectrum of PbI2, MAI, PbI2(DMSO)2, and MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase powders, (c) FTIR spectrum of the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase, (d) XRD spectra showing the transformation of the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase to a pure perovskite phase on thermal annealing at temperatures, room temperatures (RT), 70 °C, 100 °C and 130 °C, and (e) schematic showing the mechanism of MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase formation and its transformation to a pure perovskite phase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. 
To understand the solvent engineering process, the intermediate complex phase was analyzed by XRD (Fig. 6b). To simplify, the constituents MABr and PbBr2 were excluded and only the film based on MAI and PbI2 was studied. The XRD spectra (Fig. 6b) showed a self-organized and crystalline nature of the intermediate complex phase MAI–PbI2–DMSO. PbI2 consists of a layered structure in which Pb ions are sandwiched between hexagonal layers of iodide ions. The interlayer space can easily accommodate molecules due to the weak van der Waals interactions between adjacent layers. This could lead to an expanded interlayer space along the c axis.36 DMSO can easily coordinate with PbI2 to form a PbI2(DMSO)2 complex.37 The new unknown XRD peaks (Fig. 6b) at low 2θ angles of 6.55°, 7.21° and 9.17° between 5 and 10° can be assigned to the intermediate complex phase MAI–PbI2–DMSO. The intermediate complex phase (MAI–PbI2–DMSO) peaks at low angles suggest high interplanar distances compared to the DMSO–PbI2–DMSO complex. The presence of MAI and DMSO in PbI2 was confirmed by the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurement of the intermediate complex phase (Fig. 6c). Fig. 6c shows the presence of S–O and C–S stretching vibrations at 1012 cm−1 that originate from the DMSO coordinated to Pb2+, N–H stretching between 3200 and 3450 cm−1, and C–H stretching occurring in the range of 2800–2950 cm−1. The presence of N–H and S–O deformation modes in the intermediate complex phase suggested the intercalation of DMSO and MAI into PbI2. However, no CC mode was observed, which is an indication of toluene, suggesting the complete removal of toluene from the film.
The transformation of the intermediate complex phase (MAI–PbI2–DMSO) to a crystalline perovskite phase was studied by using XRD patterns (Fig. 6d) of in situ annealed intermediate complex phase films at different temperatures. As shown in Fig. 6d, MAI–PbI2–DMSO peaks completely disappeared and a pure perovskite phase (MAPbI3) appeared at 130 °C. However, both intermediate and pure perovskite phases coexist at 100 °C. The transformation mechanism is shown in Fig. 6e. During the initial stage of spin coating the films, the solutions were composed of MAI, PbI2, GBL and DMSO species. During the evolution of the intermediate complex phase, the GBL was evaporated and the toluene was dripped during the spin coating. This caused the freezing of the constituents by removing excess DMSO solvent, leading to the formation of a MAI–PbI2–DMSO complex phase. On annealing the MAI–PbI2–DMSO complex phase, the DMSO escapes at high temperatures (>100 °C) which led to the formation of a pure MAPbI3 perovskite phase. Solvent engineering led to a smooth and dense perovskite film obtained after the transformation of the intermediate complex phase. The perovskite film was then used to fabricate n–i–p solar cells with device layers as FTO/block-TiO2/200 nm-thick mp-TiO2-perovskite layer/perovskite upper layer/PTAA/Au. A high average device efficiency of 16.46% was obtained with a Jsc of 19.58 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.105 and a fill factor of 0.76.
Rong et al. demonstrated a wider processing window for the formation of methyl ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) perovskite films.35 The wider processing window was made possible due to the use of DMSO and DMF as a solvent mixture for dissolving precursor elements. Two films consisting of intermediate complex phases were originated from pure DMF and DMSO in a mixture of DMF/DMSO solvent, which were transformed to a pure perovskite phase on thermal annealing. The formation of intermediate complex phases slows down the crystallization process and thus provides more control on the final perovskite crystallization. Furthermore Wu et al. utilized a ternary solvent mixture of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), DMF and DMSO along with chlorobenzene (CB) as the antisolvent for the growth of a high quality Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 film.38 A Lewis acid-based adduct of NMP–PbI2 was formed which led to a homogenous nucleation and retarded the crystallization process. Use of CB as the antisolvent allows rapid crystallization as seen by the rapid change in the color of the film to black, which is contrary to using toluene as the antisolvent. Other antisolvents such as chloroform, dichloromethane, isopropyl alcohol (IPA), sec-butyl, and diethyl ether (DE) have also been reported for the fast crystallization of CH3NH3PbI3.39,40 The nature of antisolvents determines the crystallization process as antisolvents are the driving factor for perovskite film nucleation. The selection of antisolvents solely depends on the solvent mixture and ability of precursor solvents to form an adduct or intermediate phase with perovskite precursor elements. Another important factor in antisolvent treatment of perovskite films is the dripping time. The dripping time is the time at which the antisolvents are introduced onto the spinning perovskite film. It has been observed that a higher dripping time in the later part of the spinning cycle can lead to a poorer perovskite film morphology.41 Introducing antisolvents in the middle of the spinning cycle is preferable as the film is wet with sufficient precursor solvent. In contrast, introducing antisolvents in the later part of the spinning cycle leads to a poor perovskite morphology with large voids among perovskite crystals, as most of the perovskite precursor gets precipitated by the end of the spinning cycle.


2.1.3 Role of perovskite precursor elements. 
In addition to the role of solvents discussed above, many studies have been performed to achieve high quality perovskite films. One example was to use methylammonium chloride (CH3NH3Cl) as a precursor. This resulted in slowing down of the formation of the mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) leading to an improved perovskite morphology and higher carrier lifetime.42,43 The solubility of precursor elements in respective solvents is also important for obtaining a smooth and defect free morphology. Liang et al. showed that the additive of 1,8-diiodooctane in DMF enhanced the solubility of one of the precursor elements PbCl2, leading to uniform crystallization of the final mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) films. This provided an enhancement in PCE from 9% to 11.8%.44 In order to achieve higher efficiency perovskite solar cells, careful selection of perovskite precursor elements is important. The typical precursor elements used for preparing perovskite films are lead halides and methylammonium (or formamidinium) halide combination. The common halide anions are iodine (I), bromine (Br) and chlorine (Cl), which led to the formation of single halide perovskites (such as CH3NH3PbI3) or mixed halide perovskites (such as CH3NH3PbI3−xClx). In the early years of perovskite solar cell research, organic methyl ammonium cation lead iodide (MAPbI3 or CH3NH3PbI3) based perovskites were widely used. However, recently another organic cation perovskite precursor based on formamidinium (NH2CHNH2+ or FA) lead iodide (FAPBI3) has been used due to its enhanced absorption and improved charge transport properties.45 Wang et al. reported the use of a novel precursor element HPbIx to fabricate solution processed planar n–i–p perovskite based solar cells with the device structure of FTO/compact TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag.45 HPbIx was synthesized by reaction between lead iodide (PbI2) and hydroiodic acid (HI) in a DMF solvent. The perovskite film was prepared by single step spin coating of a precursor mixture of HPbIx/formamidinium iodide (FAI) solution in DMF. In comparison to the FAPbI3 films prepared from FAI and PbI2 precursors, the HPbIx based perovskite films exhibited a highly pure crystalline phase with a strong (110) orientation. Higher crystallinity was attributed to the slow reaction involving exchange of H+ and FA+ ions inside the PbIx octahedral structure. The improved crystallinity in FAPbI3 films led to a high efficiency of 17.5% (Fig. 7(i)) with an average PCE of 15.4% under AM1.5 illumination for devices made from the FAI/HPbI3 precursor combination.
 Fig. 7  (i) Short-circuit (SC) to forward bias (FB) and FB to SC J–V curves of the best FAPbI3 based solar cell prepared from the FAI/HPbI3 precursor combination. (ii) XRD spectra of FAPbI3 films crystallized using a precursor mixture of FAI/PbI2, FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI (57 wt% in H2O) and FAI/HPbI3, respectively. (iii) SEM images of FAPbI3 films crystallized using a precursor mixture of FAI/PbI2 (a, b), FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI (57 wt% in H2O) (c, d) and FAI/HPbI3 (e, f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. 
Three different precursor mixtures were used to prepare perovskite films (FAPbI3) on top of a compact TiO2 layer. Perovskite films were prepared by using a mixture of FAI/PbI2, FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI (57 wt% in H2O) and FAI/HPbI3, respectively. All the precursor mixtures led to the formation of FAPbI3 phase films, but with different surface morphologies and crystallinities. Fig. 7(ii) shows the XRD patterns of all three perovskite films prepared by different combinations of precursor elements. The XRD spectra confirmed the formation of perovskite films as seen from the presence of a (110) orientation peak at 13.9°. The FAI/HPbI3 prepared perovskite films showed the highest crystallinity due to the intense (110) peak. To understand the cause of high crystallinity, the films were studied as a function of annealing time. It was observed that the films prepared from FAI/PbI2, FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI and FAI/HPbI3 were completely converted to the perovskite in ∼20 min, 5 min and 40 min, respectively. It was proposed that the formation of FAPbI3 was driven by the intercalation of FAI inside the layered PbI2 structure.46 In the case of FAPbI3 formation from FAI/HPbI3 for a duration of 40 min, the intercalation was hindered by the hydrogen bonds existing between H+ ions and Pb–I octahedra. This caused slow crystallization. Slow crystallization between precursor elements is beneficial for the formation of dense and highly crystalline perovskite films.30,34
Comparing the film formation using FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI and FAI/HPbI3, the latter provides a high concentration of H+ and I− ions without any H2O molecule in the DMF solution. The perovskite formed using FAI/HPbI3 showed the highest thermal stability. This was confirmed by no change in the perovskite phase peaks after annealing at 160 °C for 80 min. Fig. 7(iii) shows the SEM images of all the perovskite films prepared from a mixture of FAI/PbI2, FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI (57 wt% in H2O) and FAI/HPbI3. The FAPbI3 film formed from FAI/PbI2 precursor elements showed incomplete coverage across the film (Fig. 7(iii)a & b), whereas the FAPbI3 formed from FAI/PbI2 precursor elements with a 5 vol% HI additive showed better coverage across the film with a grain size of ∼0.4 μm (Fig. 7(iii)c & d). The FAPbI3 films prepared from FAI/HPbI3 showed a uniform and dense morphology with tightly packed microrods having a diameter of ∼0.3 μm and a length of 1.5 μm (Fig. 7(iii)e & f).
Zhao et al. reported the use of CH3NH3Cl (MACl) along with traditional precursors CH3NH3I and PbI2 with an equimolar ratio to fabricate CH3NH3PbI3. Four different films of CH3NH3PbI3 were prepared with different amounts of MACl (0 MACl (0 g), 0.5 MACl (0.05 g), 1 MACl (0.1 g), and 2 MACl (0.2 g)), which were added with CH3NH3I and PbI2 precursors mixed in 2.75 g DMF. Perovskite films prepared without MACl (0 MACl) turned to brown color films in a minute upon annealing them at 100 °C. With increasing MACl, the process slowed down to 25 minutes for 2 MACl before the film turned dark brown. However, with increasing MACl, the perovskite crystallization did slow down, but the film turned much darker compared to the 0 MACl based film. It was observed that the addition of MACl induced the formation of a temporary intermediate phase MAI·PbI2·MACl, which decomposed and sublimed during thermal annealing to form a stable perovskite. Therefore, a higher MACl concentration slows down the crystallization process and allows a slower nucleation rate, resulting in a darker and higher quality perovskite film. In order to understand the role of MACl in perovskite film formation, a separate film was prepared by mixing MACl and PbI2 in the absence of MAI. The film was subjected to annealing at 100 °C for different time periods. It was observed that with increasing annealing time (>20 minutes), the film started turning yellow in color, which indicated the formation of PbI2. It was concluded that the reaction between MACl and PbI2 was not stable and the perovskite film decomposed quickly. Also it was observed that a molar ratio larger than 1:1 for MACl and PbI2 led to an insoluble solution of the precursor mixture. This confirmed the volatile nature of MACl in the film which escapes from the intermediate phase upon complete crystallization of the CH3NH3PbI3 film.
Further advancement in the one-step crystallization of perovskite films was achieved by use of different lead precursors mixed with the MAI precursor. It was observed that achieving high quality large grain pin hole free perovskite films is still a challenge. Previous studies have suggested that the use of an excess organic precursor component (MAI) led to large grains,47 but the role of an excess organic precursor needs to be understood. Zhang et al. have studied alternative lead precursors such as PbI2, PbCl2 and lead acetate (Pb(Ac)2) with a 3 molar excess of MAI.48 It was observed that the use of the Pb(Ac)2 precursor led to the formation of a smooth and dense perovskite film in a short period of time compared to films made from PbCl2 and PbI2. The conversion to the perovskite phase is described by the following equation.PbX2 + 3CH3NH3I → CH3NH3PbI3 + 2CH3NH3X (X = Cl, I, Ac)
The above reaction involves solvent evaporation, byproduct (CH3NH3X) formation, nucleation and growth of crystals. The crystallization time for a lead acetate precursor based perovskite film was shorter, which indicates the ease of by product (CH3NH3X) formation and its escape from the final crystallized perovskite film. CH3NH3Ac was found to be less thermally stable and is easy to remove from the film. This led to rapid nucleation and growth of a perovskite film made from the lead acetate precursor, leading to a large number of small densely packed grains in the crystallized phase. Compared to CH3NH3Cl, CH3NH3I took a longer annealing time to be removed, thus making the crystallization process slower. This led to lower nucleation density and large grain size formation.

2.2 Two-step crystallization of perovskite films
In addition to the single-step deposition methods discussed above, perovskite films have also been reported to be deposited by using the two-step sequential deposition technique.17,49 Sequential deposition refers to the deposition of precursor layers in sequence, implying that individual precursor layers are deposited separately and react with each other to form a perovskite film. Sequential deposition was widely reported in n–i–p based perovskite solar cells wherein a PbI2 film is dipped in a MAI solution of IPA, leading to the formation of the perovskite phase. Burschka et al. reported sequential deposition of a perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) film as an alternative route to single-step deposition of perovskite films.17 In order to deposit the perovskite in a n–i–p device structure the precursor PbI2 (462 mg ml−1) was first dissolved in 1 ml DMF solvent and the solution was then drop casted on top of a mesoporous TiO2 layer at 6500 rpm for 90 s, followed by annealing the PbI2 film at 70 °C for 30 min. The PbI2 film was cooled down to room temperature and then dipped in a 10 mg ml−1 methyl ammonium iodide (MAI) solution in IPA for 20 s, followed by rinsing in isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and annealing at 70 °C for 30 min. This leads to the formation of the perovskite phase. Dipping the PbI2 film in the MAI–IPA solution led to a sudden change in the color from the yellow PbI2 film to a brown perovskite film indicating the formation of a pure perovskite phase. The formation of the perovskite occurs through reaction between MAI and PbI2 precursors, wherein the MAI not only reacts with surface PbI2, but also penetrates into the bulk of PbI2 during the passage of dipping time. Therefore, the critical parameter in the conversion of the perovskite phase by sequential deposition is the dipping time. The conversion of the perovskite phase with respect to time was studied by absorption, photoemission and XRD analyses. Fig. 8a shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the glass/FTO/TiO2 + PbI2 film, wherein the PbI2 film is completely infiltrated inside the mesoporous TiO2 layer with no separate layer of PbI2 on top of the mesoporous TiO2 layer. The interaction of PbI2 with MAI towards the formation of the perovskite phase was studied by various methods. Optical absorption spectra (Fig. 8b) show a sudden increase in the absorption intensity at 550 nm within a few seconds, indicating quick conversion to the perovskite phase. Furthermore, a small increase in the absorption intensity on a longer time scale indicates morphological changes, contributing towards enhanced light scattering. The conversion to the perovskite phase was confirmed by the quenching of PbI2 emission at 425 nm (Fig. 8c) and an increase in luminescence at 775 nm (Fig. 8d). The conversion of the PbI2 film to the perovskite phase via exposure to MAI was confirmed by XRD analysis. The XRD patterns of PbI2 and CH3NH3PbI3 films were collected on top of mesoporous TiO2 and glass substrates, keeping the deposition conditions the same in both cases. The PbI2 deposited from a DMF solution was crystallized as a hexagonal 2H polytype (Inorganic Crystal Structure Database, collection code 68819; http://www.fiz-karlsruhe.com/icsd.html). The XRD spectra of the PbI2 film on glass and TiO2 surfaces show that the growth orientation is towards the c axis, leading to only four diffraction peaks corresponding to (001), (002), (003) and (004) lattice planes as shown in Fig. 8e (black curve). Compared to the XRD patterns of PbI2 films coated on mesoporous TiO2 (Fig. 8e, green curve), three additional peaks were observed. This indicated that the anatase TiO2 layer introduces a new crystal orientation during the PbI2 crystallization, which is shown by the peaks labelled (2) and (3), corresponding to (110) and (111) lattice planes of the 2H polytype. The peak labelled (1) in the green curve corresponds to a different PbI2 form, which is not in the scope of this work. The CH3NH3PbI3 film on top of the TiO2 film showed new peaks that correspond to the tetragonal phase of the perovskite. In comparison, the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) film deposited on the glass substrate showed incomplete conversion with a lot of unreacted PbI2 even after dipping the PbI2 film in the MAI solution for 45 min. However, the PbI2 film deposited on the mesoporous TiO2 film showed immediate conversion to the perovskite phase on the exposure to the MAI solution.
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of FTO/mesoporous TiO2/PbI2 layers, (b) change in absorbance vs. time at 550 nm during the conversion process of the perovskite, (c) photoluminescence (PL) intensity change vs. time at 520 nm, (d) PL intensity change vs. time at 775 nm, and (e) XRD spectrum of PbI2 and CH3NH3PbI3 films on top of mesoporous TiO2 and glass substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. 
The size of PbI2 particles was restricted to ∼22 nm inside the mesoporous TiO2 film. This enhanced the reaction and led to quick conversion to the perovskite. The morphology of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) film is mainly dictated by that of the PbI2 film. By restricting the size of PbI2 crystals in mesoporous TiO2, the conversion process of the perovskite by reacting with MAI (CH3NH3I) was highly facilitated. The two-step deposition was proceeded by the difference in the bulk lattice energy of two different materials. The seed layer crystal lattice served as a template to guide the reaction of perovskite formation. In the PbI2–MAI two-step deposition, the introduction of organic MAI cations was guided through the layered PbI2 structure, which comprised of three repeating planes, I–Pb–I.36 Previous reports showed that the weak interlayer van der Waals interaction and strong intralayer bonding facilitated the accommodation of the guest molecule in between the layers.50–52 The formation of the perovskite occurred due to the high perovskite formation energy along with the nanoscopic morphology of PbI2. This enhanced the reaction kinetics and led to a quick conversion to the perovskite phase.
The above two-step deposition of the CH3NH3PbI3 film in an n–i–p device structure gave a PCE of ∼15%. This two-step deposition of the perovskite film was further employed in a planar structure by Liu et al.53 The planar heterojunction was prepared by first spin coating a PbI2 layer on top of a ZnO layer and then converting it to the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) phase in a second step. A high PCE of 15.7% was obtained from the ZnO blocking layer based planar heterojunction device. Later Docampo et al. reported a planar perovskite solar cell using the two-step deposition of a mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film.42 The mechanism behind using chlorine in CH3NH3PbI3 was to increase the diffusion lengths of charges. The addition of chlorine led to an increase in charge diffusion lengths. When used in planar devices where charges need to diffuse through the entire film to reach the interface, the diffusion length should be in the order of hundreds of nanometers. In the case of a bulk heterojunction such as mesoporous TiO2–perovskite, the generated charges just diffuse through a short length to reach the interface. This works effectively for single halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films. The mixed halide perovskite was deposited by a two-step method, wherein a PbI2 layer (∼200 nm) was first deposited by spin coating 100 μl of 1 M PbI2 solution in DMF at 3000 rpm for 15 s. This was then dripped while the substrate was spinning. In order to achieve an optimal film morphology and performance, the PbI2 solution and substrate temperature were kept between 60 °C and 65 °C. The conversion to the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx phase was achieved by dipping the spin coated PbI2 film in a heated solution mixture of methylammonium iodide (MAI) and methylammonium chloride (MACl) in IPA with a concentration of 10 mg ml−1 at 60 °C for 5 min.
The SEM images of FTO/non-porous TiO2/PbI2 showed a flat PbI2 layer across the cross section (Fig. 9a and b). The top view of the PbI2 film showed a smooth film with complete coverage across the film (Fig. 9c and d). After reaction with MAI or MACl, the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film showed a crystal size ranging between ∼100 and 600 nm with complete coverage across the film (Fig. 9g and h). A planar device structure was fabricated using the mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film made from varying concentrations of MACl (0, 1, 5, 7.5, 10, and 15 wt%). Fig. 10a shows the J–V curves of perovskite solar cells made from varying wt% of MACl in the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx film. A highest PCE of ∼15% was achieved for the 5 wt% MACl with a Jsc of 22.8 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 1 V at 104 mW cm−2.
 Fig. 9  (a, b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PbI2 film coated on top of a FTO coated TiO2 film. Top view SEM image of the PbI2 film with (c) high magnification and (d) low magnification. (e, f) SEM cross-sectional image of the converted perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film sandwiched between layers. SEM image of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx with (g) high magnification and (h) low magnification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. 
 Fig. 10  (a) J–V curves of planar perovskite solar cells with varying wt% concentrations of MACl in the dipping solution. The inset table lists the photovoltaic parameters of each cell. (b) Efficiency variation with varying concentrations of MACl recorded among 30 and 40 working devices (each box represents statistical distribution of 30–40 working devices fabricated under similar conditions, symbol ‘X’ representing minimum and maximum values, small square box represent mean value and line crossing it represents the median value). (c) Time-resolved PL decay (excitation wavelength 507 nm) of perovskite films with different concentrations of MACl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. 
The average PCE for the optimized MACl concentration of 5 wt% was observed to be 10.5% (Fig. 10b), which is quite high in comparison to the average PCE of 5.5% for the MAPbI3 based device (0 wt% MACl). Beyond 5 wt% concentration of MACl, the Jsc and Voc start to decrease. This was attributed to the increase in the crystal size and the presence of voids between the crystals with higher concentration of MACl. The series resistance (Rs) decreased from ∼14 to ∼7 Ω cm2 from the single halide perovskite (0 wt% MACl) to the mixed halide perovskite (>0 wt% MACl). This led to an increase in the fill factor (FF) of the devices. The higher series resistance (Rs) in the single halide perovskite was attributed to the larger grain size and use of a TiO2 blocking layer. These factors increased Rs.
Time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) decay measurements were conducted on perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) films made from varying concentrations of MACl. The curves shown in Fig. 10c were fitted with a biexponential decay, where Afast, Aslow, τfast and τslow represents the amplitude and lifetime for fast and slow decay components. Table 3 shows the fitted parameters for all concentrations of MACl in perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) films. Time-resolved PL decay measurements help to study the lifetime of excited species and determine the diffusion length.43,54 The slow decay component represents a longer diffusion length, which is proportional to charge collection efficiency for a film at a certain thickness. Since the exciton binding energy of the perovskite is very low (Eb ∼ 50 meV), the charge recombination process is easy for PL.55–57 All perovskite films were found to give biexponential decays, which could be an indication of varying perovskite crystal sizes from 100 nm to 1 μm. The addition of chloride by MACl led to longer lifetime values of 300 ns for films made by dipping in 5 wt% MACl. Longer lifetime values were not found for higher concentrations of MACl, suggesting an optimum chloride concentration in the perovskite structure was beneficial.
Table 3 Table showing parameters extracted by fitting the decay curves biexponentially42




MACl (wt%)

A
fast [A.U.]

τ
fast [±1 ns]

A
slow [A.U.]

τ
slow [±1 ns]




0
1205
18
3494
55


1
2900
22
932
74


2.5
1150
33
1325
112


5
919
91
401
316


10
1018
90
400
364


20
537
80
1016
262




Another two-step sequential deposition method was reported by Xiao et al. to crystallize a perovskite film by an interdiffusion method in a planar perovskite device architecture.58 A continuous dense CH3NH3PbI3 film was prepared by stacking two spin coated layers of precursor elements (MAI and PbI2). The interdiffusion of the precursor elements was performed by mixing PbI2 in DMF and MAI in isopropyl alcohol (IPA). The sequential stacking of layers was done on top of PEDOT:PSS by first spin coating a solution of PbI2 in DMF followed by MAI in IPA. The PbI2 layer coated underneath the MAI layer was not affected as PbI2 has a very low solubility in IPA. The stacked bilayer was annealed at 100 °C for varying time periods. The interdiffusion method in stacked bilayers is different than the two-step dip coating method described above. The interdiffusion reaction between precursor elements is driven by thermal annealing, whereas in dip coating, the interdiffusion was carried out by the penetration of MAI into a porous PbI2 layer coated on top of a mesoporous TiO2 layer. The two-step spin coated bilayer showed unreacted PbI2 after the spin coating, which was further reduced by allowing interdiffusion through thermal annealing. The interdiffusion of the precursor led to a high quality pin hole free perovskite film having excellent charge transport properties. Planar perovskite solar cells (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al) were fabricated giving a highest efficiency of 15.4% with a fill factor of ∼80%. A high reproducibility was achieved with more than 85% of the devices showing an efficiency of above 14.5%. This indicated that the interdiffusion method to crystallize the perovskite film led to a reproducible high quality crystalline perovskite film with excellent photovoltaic properties.
2.3 Vapor phase crystallization of perovskite films
In addition to the single-step and sequential-step deposition methods, the vapor phase deposition technique is another approach to make perovskite films. The vapor phase deposition is either carried out by co-evaporation of individual precursor elements or sequential evaporation of precursor elements to prepare perovskite films. One of the early reports by Liu et al. showed a planar n–i–p heterojunction device with a mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) layer deposited by co-evaporation of precursor elements (MAI and PbCl2).59 They compared the co-evaporated perovskite film with a solution processed one. Vapor deposited perovskite films were deposited by simultaneously evaporating CH3NH3I and PbCl2 precursors on top of a compact TiO2 layer. The precursors were evaporated with a molar ratio of 4:1 in a vacuum under a pressure of 10−5 mbar resulting in a dark reddish-brown color film. The co-evaporated perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) films were thermally annealed to completely crystallize into the perovskite phase.

Fig. 11a shows the schematic of the co-evaporation process, which was carried out by dual source thermal evaporation for simultaneously evaporating MAI and PbCl2. The vapor deposited and solution processed perovskite films were studied using XRD (Fig. 11b). The XRD patterns of both vapor-deposited and solution processed films showed characteristic perovskite phase peaks at 14.12°, 28.44° and 43.23°, corresponding to the 110, 220 and 330 planes. This indicates the formation of a mixed-halide perovskite phase with an orthorhombic crystal structure.47 However, there was a small characteristic peak of the (001) plane at 12.65° for the vapor deposited films. The XRD patterns did not show any peaks at 15.68°, which is related to the presence of CH3NH3PbCl3. This indicates the formation of a pure mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) phase. The vapor deposited films showed a complete and uniform coverage with the grain size in hundreds of nanometers (Fig. 11c), while the solution processed perovskite films showed a non-uniform film with voids between large perovskite grains at a size of tens of micrometer (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the dual source evaporation mechanism for vapor deposited perovskite films. (b) XRD patterns of solution processed and vapor deposited perovskite films. SEM images (top-view) of (c) vapor deposited and (d) solution processed perovskite films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. 
The planar n–i–p device architecture was used to fabricate solar cells using vapor deposited and solution processed films. A PCE of 15.4% was obtained for the vapor deposited perovskite solar cell, which was much higher than the PCE of 8.6% from the solution processed perovskite solar cells. The reason was the larger area uniformity in vapor deposited films than that in solution processed perovskite films. Another advantage that vapor deposited films have is that they can be deposited on a large area with high uniformity. This helps to deliver consistent performance.
Another approach to prepare perovskite films was a modified vapor deposited method. Abbas et al. showed the preparation of a perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) film by sequential vaporization of PbI2 and MAI to form a planar n–i–p solar cell.19 In their work, PbI2 was first evaporated in a vacuum on n-layer compact TiO2, followed by vapor assisted deposition of MAI on the PbI2 layer. The PbI2 layer was evaporated in a vacuum at a rate of 1 Å s−1 with a thickness of ∼200 nm (Fig. 12a). The PbI2 films were then transferred to a nitrogen-filled glovebox and two separate routes were adopted to deposit MAI on the PbI2 layer. In the first route, the MAI precursor powder was kept near the PbI2 coated substrate inside a covered Petri dish (Fig. 12b). The Petri dish was placed on a hot plate with a temperature of ∼150 °C. At this high temperature, the MAI precursor powder started to evaporate and formed a vapor inside the Petri dish. The vapor was then deposited on the PbI2 layer and thereby converted the yellow PbI2 film into a dark brown CH3NH3PbI3 film in three hours. In the second route, the PbI2 film was kept in a graphite container having MAI powder on the side of the substrate (Fig. 12c). The graphite container was kept on a hot plate to vaporize the MAI powder. A high density and a low density grade graphite container were used. The high density grade graphite container gave highly reproducible results as the MAI vapor was not absorbed by the high density graphite walls. However, the MAI vapor was absorbed when using the low density graphite container. The high density graphite container resulted in perovskite films with higher reproducibility and uniformity than those obtained by vaporization using a Petri dish as the container. This was attributed to the fact that graphite is a conductor and does not build up any static charge during the MAI sublimation process. However, in a glass Petri dish, static charge is built up and the agglomeration of MAI occurs on the PbI2 coated substrate. In both cases, the perovskite was formed at 150 °C. The excess MAI was removed by keeping the substrate in a high vacuum (∼10−6 Torr) for 24–48 h. The sequentially evaporated perovskite films showed a highly crystalline, continuous morphology with ∼500 nm size grains.
 Fig. 12  Schematic of (a) thermal evaporation of PbI2 in a vacuum chamber; vapor-assisted deposition process of MAI on top of PbI2 in (b) a covered glass Petri dish and (c) graphite vessel. AIP Materials, Vol. 3, 016105, (2015); used in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.19 
The vapor deposition of precursor films using non-vacuum precursor deposition methods was reported by Chen et al. as a vapor-assisted solution process (VASP) method. They deposited an inorganic PbI2 layer using a precursor solution and then deposited MAI vapor by heating MAI powder in a Petri dish in an inert atmosphere.21 The formation of the perovskite occurred upon 150 °C annealing for 2 h in a N2 ambient. Perovskite films prepared through the VASP gave a highly continuous and uniform film with a grain size up to micrometers. The VASP perovskite solar cells obtained a PCE of 12.1%.
2.4 Room temperature crystallization of perovskite solar cells
In all the above described deposition methods, the perovskite was crystallized by post-thermal annealing for a certain time inside an inert atmosphere (e.g., glovebox) making the processing expensive. Thermal annealing leads to rapid formation of a crystalline perovskite but makes it difficult to control the perovskite morphology. Recently, there have been reports of room temperature, annealing free crystallization of perovskite films. This processing also led to high device performance. Zhou et al. demonstrated a room temperature crystallization of perovskite thin films via solvent–solvent extraction (SSE).60 In the SSE method (Fig. 13(i)), first the single halide methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite was stoichiometrically dissolved in a high boiling point (204 °C) solvent N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and then spin coated on a substrate. This resulted in a clear MAPbI3 film, which was then dipped immediately in a bath of low boiling point (35 °C) solvent diethyl ether (C2H5OC2H5 or DEE) at room temperature. Diethyl ether removes the excess NMP in the film and allows rapid crystallization to the perovskite phase. The formation of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) occurs within two minutes of dipping the film. Then the films were taken out from bath and dried at room temperature. The SSE crystallization method was highly controllable and repeatable.
 Fig. 13  (i) Schematic of the SSE process for room temperature crystallization of perovskite films. (ii) (A) XRD and (B) low-magnification and (C) high-magnification SEM images of an ∼250 nm thick CH3NH3PbI3 film coated on a glass substrate. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The XRD plots (Fig. 13(ii)a) of the crystallized perovskite films using the SSE method showed a pure β-MAPbI3 phase (space group I4/mcm61). The SEM images (Fig. 13(ii)b & c) showed a continuous uniform and dense morphology with a grain size of ∼100 nm.
In order to monitor and understand the perovskite crystallization process using the SSE method, XRD (Fig. 14a–c) and FTIR (Fig. 14d) spectra were recorded immediately after the deposition for 2 seconds and after a 2 minute delay of SSE. Fig. 14a shows the XRD spectra of the as-spin coated CH3NH3PbI3 films in which no pure perovskite phase was present. After 2 seconds of SSE, the film showed perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) phase peaks (Fig. 14b), which became sharper and narrower after 2 min of SSE (Fig. 14c). The FTIR spectra (Fig. 14d) of the films after 2 seconds exhibited a CO stretching band at ∼1700 cm−1, indicating the presence of NMP solvent in the film. The CO stretching band disappeared after 2 minutes of SSE, suggesting a complete removal of NMP by diethyl ether (DEE) solvent. The removal of NMP starts to occur from the moment the film came into contact with DEE. Initially it occurred in localized patches due to the variation in the composition of the films and the contact with DEE. With time, NMP was completely removed from the films by DEE. This caused a rapid crystallization into the perovskite phase. After complete crystallization, the perovskite phase was achieved and retained as the perovskite was insoluble in non-polar DEE. The low boiling point (35 °C) of DEE enabled a complete escape of DEE from the film at room temperature. The mechanism of SSE is shown in the schematic in Fig. 14e.
 Fig. 14  (A) XRD pattern of the as-deposited CH3NH3PbI3 film, (B) after 2 seconds, and (C) after 2 minutes of SSE with diethyl ether, (D) FTIR spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 film after 2 s (red) and 2 min (black) of SSE, and (E) schematic of the SSE mechanism of CH3NH3PbI3 film formation. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another approach for room temperature perovskite crystallization was reported by Xiao et al. which involved fast crystallization-deposition (FDC) of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films.62 The approach involved spin-coating a solution of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) in DMF onto a dense TiO2 layer. The perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films were exposed to another solvent chlorobenzene (CBZ) to complete the crystallization. This method resulted in a fast single-step deposition of perovskite films with highly crystalline single grains, which were then used in fabricating planar heterojunction solar cells. The device achieved a PCE of 16.2% with an average efficiency of 13.9 ± 0.7% among 10 devices under AM1.5 illumination.
Chen et al. reported a non-thermal annealing route to crystallize perovskite films.63 The heating free crystallization of the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) was achieved by adding a small amount of NH4Cl in the precursor solution of PbI2 and CH3NH3I. The precursors CH3NH3I, PbI2 and NH4Cl were mixed with a molar ratio of 1:1:0.5 in DMF and were spin coated to form the perovskite phase. The perovskite films turned out to be smooth and had a dark brown color with full surface coverage. The addition of NH4Cl drastically affects the crystallization process of the perovskite and acts like a glue to connect separate CH3NH3PbI3 grains in the film. This led to a complete coverage of the perovskite film. However, the role of chlorine in controlling the perovskite film morphology is still unclear.64–66 Another report showed that ammonia can reversibly intercalate inside or coordinate with the perovskite crystal lattice.67 The addition of NH4Cl led to quick formation of an intermediate crystal structure of PbI2·CH3NH3I⋯xNH4Cl upon reaction with precursor elements (CH3NH3I and PbI2). The removal of NH4Cl from the intermediate crystal structure occurs during the spin coating of the precursor solution at room temperature, resulting in a smooth perovskite film. The loss of chloride from the perovskite films prepared using several precursor combinations such as PbCl2 + 3CH3NH3I and PbI2 + CH3NH3I + xCH3NH3Cl has been a matter of focus.64,65,68 Possible loss of chloride could be from the decomposition of CH3NH3Cl into hydrochloric acid (HCl) and methylamine (CH3NH2). Using NH4Cl in the precursor solution mixture, the chloride could be removed from the intermediate species PbI2·CH3NH3I⋯xNH4Cl by the release of NH3 and HCl, which was easily decomposed from highly volatile NH4Cl. The decomposition of NH4Cl was attributed to the low vapor point of NH4Cl and low pressure during the spin coating process of the perovskite. The release of chloride assisted in the crystallization of CH3NH3PbI3 and led to structural rearrangements that affected the perovskite film morphology.
Dubey et al. reported a much simpler route for room temperature crystallization of perovskite films into perovskite nanorods.7 The room temperature crystallization and perovskite nanorod formation were achieved by keeping spin coated perovskite films in ambient air having 40% relative humidity (RH) at room temperature for a certain time. The perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films gradually changed their color from transparent immediately after spin coating to dark brown at the end of 5 hours at room temperature in ambient air. Perovskite films were prepared by mixing the precursor elements (CH3NH3I and PbI2) in a solvent mixture of γ-butyrolactone (GBL):DMSO (7:3 v/v), followed by spin coating on a hole transport layer (PEDOT:PSS) with toluene dripping.33Fig. 15a shows the schematic of the processing to make perovskite nanorods. This process included freezing of perovskite films by the removal of GBL and dripping toluene to remove excess DMSO from the final perovskite films. The remaining residual DMSO in the films coordinates highly with the PbI2 precursor element, leading to the formation of a transparent intermediate complex (CH3NH3I–DMSO–PbI2) phase. This transparent intermediate complex phase was then converted to a dark brown perovskite phase film by keeping the films in an ambient 40% RH humidity environment at room temperature. These perovskite crystallization behaviors were studied using UV-Vis absorption (Fig. 15b) and XRD patterns (Fig. 15c) obtained for perovskite films crystallized at different intervals of time (1, 3, 5, 8, and 10 h) in air and were compared with control samples crystallized using thermal annealing. 5 h was found to be the optimal time.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the perovskite nanorod film deposition method, (b) UV-Vis and (c) XRD spectra of perovskite films crystallized for 1, 3, 5, 8, and 10 h in air at room temperature, and (d) surface topography of the 5 h air crystallized nanorod perovskite film. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Keeping the crystallized perovskite film beyond 5 h in ambient air resulted in the decomposition of the perovskite phase. The film exhibited high aspect ratio nanorod shape features for the fully crystallized perovskite film for 5 h (Fig. 15d). Planar p–i–n devices with a structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/rhodamine/Ag were fabricated.69 A PCE of 16.83% was achieved for room temperature air grown perovskite nanorod films, which was significantly higher than that of 11.94% obtained from traditional thermal annealed perovskite films. Fig. 16a shows the J–V curves obtained for devices made with perovskite films prepared at different intervals of time. Fig. 16b shows the forward and reverse scans of devices made from 5 h air and control sample crystallized films.
 Fig. 16  (a) J–V characteristic of the air crystallized perovskite nanorod film and control sample and (b) forward and reverse scans of 5 h air crystallized and control sample based devices. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.5 Water and moisture assisted perovskite crystallization
As discussed above, the morphology of the perovskite film plays an important role in achieving high device performance.70,71 The reaction kinetics between lead iodide and methyl ammonium iodide can be controlled using water based additives or exposing the prepared perovskite films to a controlled humidity. This section will focus on strategies adopted for the crystallization of perovskite films assisted by moisture and/or water. The strategies for exposing perovskite films to moisture from atmospheric humidity and doping of water directly in perovskite precursor solutions to prepare perovskite films will be discussed in relation to film formation and device performance.
The crystallization and film quality of the perovskite films have been improved using various additives such as H2O, HBr, 1,8-diiodooctane (DIO), 1-chloronaphthalene (CN), and ammonium chloride (NH4Cl).44,63,72 These additives helped to reduce the number of pin-holes and increased the quality of perovskite films.73 To achieve quality perovskite films, post treatments of the as-deposited films have been performed, wherein the perovskite films are exposed in controlled moisture conditions. The performance of the perovskite films can be increased due to water molecules induced by ambient environments that assisted the crystallization of the perovskite and resulted in a large grain size with reduced defects due to a decrease in the total grain boundary area.35,74–76 The reaction mechanism between MAPbI3 and water is critical as humidity plays a crucial role in the stability and crystallization mechanism of perovskite films.76–79 Adhikari et al. reported that the crystallinity of perovskite films could be increased by directly adding water in methyl ammonium iodide for perovskite film formation. Water molecules permeate the perovskite structure and form monohydrate (CH3NH3PbI3·H2O) and di-hydrate ((CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O) reactive phases. The monohydrated phases quickly transform to the perovskite when exposed to air instantaneously.77 Furthermore, the use of water improves the perovskite film growth processes from the contact between H2O and MAPbI3, such as hydrogen bonding interaction.
Numerous methods have been adopted to control humidity during perovskite film fabrication and post-treatment. Eperon et al. used a humidity-controlled chamber, a spin-coater and a hotplate to study the critical role of moisture exposure during metal halide perovskite thin film fabrication.80 Moisture exposure results in an increase in the performance of perovskite solar cells due to an increase in Voc and longer photoluminescence lifetimes. This is due to the reduction in trap state density, which may be caused by partial solvation of the methylammonium component with water or moisture.76 In 2015, Yang et al. studied the effect of moisture with a custom built humidity controller to measure the decomposition rate of perovskite films.81Fig. 17 shows the schematic of the relative humidity chamber with a gas flow controller to maintain the set humidity. They used the relative humidity (RH) controller instrument with a precise flow controller. Saturated water vapor was mixed with a diluent carrier gas and its flow was controlled to achieve the desire relative humidity. The actual humidity in the perovskite solar cell fabrication process was monitored using an RH sensor placed on a custom-built sample holder. In addition, this arrangement also provided a way to measure in situ UV-Vis absorbance during the decomposition of perovskite phases. They found that the hole transport layer plays a significant role in protecting the underneath layer of the perovskite from decomposition. This has enhanced device lifetimes and resistance to humidity. They found the formation of a hydrated intermediate containing isolated PbI64− octahedra in the first step of the decomposition process using in situ grazing incidence XRD (GIXRD). The degradation of perovskite films occurs extremely quickly at 98% RH and the absorption reduced to half of its original value in just 4 h. However, when the film was exposed to lower RH (20%) humidity, the degradation time of the perovskite films was estimated to be 10000 h by extrapolating the observed data. These results helped to understand the fundamental decomposition pathways in organolead halide perovskite films.81,82
 Fig. 17  Schematic of the relative humidity equipment with a gas flow controller. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
There have been studies that proved water as a source of dissociation of CH3NH3PbI3 into lead iodide and methyl ammonium iodide, which also affects photovoltaic performance.83,84 The formation of methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3) perovskite films occurs through the intercalation of methylammonium ions into the PbI2 octahedral layered space. Upon exposure to excess water molecules in the form of humidity or direct addition of water, the polar organic constituent CH3NH3+ is separated from the perovskite structure. This results in the formation of separate species PbI2 and CH3NH3I.79 Water plays dual roles. Water can either assist in perovskite growth or perovskite decomposition/degradation. This totally depends on the number of water molecules exposed. Therefore, it is critical to understand the optimal amount of water required to achieve a smooth and pin-hole free perovskite film.

2.5.1 Understanding the role of moisture in perovskite crystallization or degradation. 
The fundamental material properties of organolead halide perovskites and device operation with humidity have not been fully understood.83,84 Organolead halide perovskites have shown promising efficiency in solar cells; however their commercial production has been questioned due to poor stability against moisture.77,85 There are attempts to use hydrophobic hole transport materials to enhance the stability of perovskite solar cells. These protective materials possess some drawback such as interfacial defects and can change electronic and optical properties of the devices.76,78,79 An understanding of the degradation mechanism is critical in developing materials design and engineering strategies to achieve long-term stability. Grain boundaries are defect sites in semiconductors. Crystal defects and impurities in grain boundaries create localized energy states within the band gap. These states act as recombination centers to capture electrons and holes from the bulk material and therefore decrease the device performance.
Adhikari et al. showed that the addition of 5% volume of water in the lead iodide precursor helps to reduce the defects in perovskite solar cells.8Fig. 18 shows the surface potential profile obtained from the Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy (KPFM) measurements of perovskite films prepared by adding 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7% water content in the MAI solution. The highest surface potential was obtained for the perovskite film prepared by adding 5% water in the MAI solution. However, the surface potential decreases when the water concentration in the MAI solution exceeded 5%. The decrease in the surface potential above 5% is due to the dissociation of the perovskite into lead iodide and methyl ammonium iodide. This forms dangling bonds and traps for electrons and holes. Dangling bonds in the perovskite originate from the loosely bonded exposed iodine atoms. The highest surface potential was from the perovskite film prepared from 5% water, which was caused by self-doping of water during perovskite film formation. The small amount of water helps the reconstruction of the perovskite surface and reduces the structural defects.31
 Fig. 18  Nanoscale surface potential distribution of perovskite films prepared from 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7% water in the MAI solution. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.5.2 Effect of water as a dopant on the perovskite film morphology. 
The direct addition of water in the device fabrication process has been studied by different groups.83,86–89 Water is one of the main factors related to the stability issue in perovskite films. Controlled humidity could assist in the growth of a larger grain perovskite film with a lower defect density, resulting in a higher device performance. However, water was also reported to be harmful to perovskite films because water molecules decompose CH3NH3PbI3 into lead iodide (PbI2) and (MAI) methyl ammonium iodide (CH3NH3I). Thus, water plays a dual role. Water helps to increase film crystallinity when an optimum amount of water is added, but dissociates the perovskite when an extra amount of water is used.
Wu et al. showed that the addition of a small amount of water (2% by volume in a PbI2 solution in DMF) in PbI2 affects the surface coverage of PbI2 and perovskite films.73 The device performance of perovskite solar cells increased from 0.0063% to 18%. The PbI2 film prepared from the PbI2 solution in DMF with 2 wt% water has the smoothest film with the largest grains. The high quality PbI2 films gave a compact and smooth perovskite film when dipped in a methylammonium iodide solution. This may be caused by the homogeneous precursor solution of PbI2 in DFM by adding a small amount of water. Water is compatible with DMF. The DMF polarity, dielectric constant and solubility change after adding a small amount of water. The solubility parameter of DMF with a small amount of H2O is close to that of lead iodide. Fig. 19 shows SEM images of perovskite films prepared from various amounts of water in the PbI2 solution. The perovskite films prepared from 2% water in the PbI2 solution in DMF (Prov-2) exhibited a compact and large grain size.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of perovskite films prepared from various amounts of water in the PbI2 solution. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Gong et al. controlled the crystallization process in mixed halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) films using water as an additive in the perovskite precursor solution.90 The perovskite films showed an improved coverage and film morphology by adding a small amount (2%) of deionized water to the DMF solution. The efficiency increased from 12.13% to 16.06% by adding water as an additive in the DMF solution. The water doped devices were more stable under ambient conditions because the water doping helps to form stable perovskite hydrates during the fabrication process and thus increased the crystallization. The hydrated phase of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx·nH2O resists the corrosion of the perovskite film by water molecules. These hydrated phases were produced during the annealing process. Fig. 20 shows the SEM images of perovskite films with different amounts of deionized water in DMF. The perovskite films containing only DMF (Fig. 20a) showed many small pin-holes and voids, leading to inefficient charge transport and poor light absorption. The increase in the grain size and disappearance of voids were obtained using a small amount of water as an additive in the DMF solution. A continuous perovskite film with a smaller grain boundary area was obtained using 2% H2O (Fig. 20c) in the DMF solution during perovskite film formation.
 Fig. 20  SEM images of perovskite films with and without water doping in DMF solutions: (a) % H2O, (b) 1% H2O, (c) 2% H2O, (d) 3% H2O, (e) 5% H2O, (f) 7% H2O, and (g) 10% H2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. 
Adhikari et al. demonstrated that an optimum amount of water (5% by volume of IPA added to methyl ammonium iodide during perovskite film formation) led to improved crystallinity and device efficiency.8Fig. 21a–d show AFM images of annealed perovskite films prepared by adding 1, 3, 5 and 7 vol% of water in MAI solution, which was then used for two step-sequential dip coating. The AFM images show that the grain size of perovskite films increased from 200 nm for 1% water, to 358 nm for 3% water and to 630 nm for 5% water in the MAI solution. The perovskite film prepared from 7 vol% water in MAI exhibited a lower average grain size of 330 nm, which was caused by dissolution of large crystals on exposure to excess water in MAI solution.
 Fig. 21  AFM images of annealed perovskite films prepared from (a) 1%, (b) 3%, (c) 5% and (d) 7% water solutions.8 Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2016, Clegg et al. reported that the performance of perovskite solar cells decreased with the addition of a small concentration of water to the PbI2 precursor solution. However, the addition of water was found to improve the long term stability of solar cells. They also found that the addition of water increased the scan rate and introduced direction dependent hysteresis. They explained that the addition of water to the precursor solution increased the concentration of mobile ions in perovskite films, which migrated under the bias and caused increase in the hysteresis.91

3. Conclusions and future direction
Advances in perovskite based solar cells have led to an increase in the efficiency of single junction perovskite solar cells beyond 22%. The enhancement in device performance has been fueled by an improvement in the multicomponent perovskite film morphology through various crystallization routes. As a photo-absorbing material, the quality of the perovskite layer determines the device performance and therefore understanding the crystallization processes of the perovskite layer becomes important. This review focuses on the background of perovskite solar cells, the evolution of perovskite solar cells and various perovskite crystallization routes adopted to fabricate high performance perovskite solar cells. Perovskite solar cells have gained extensive attention and recent research progress is summarized in Table 4. The effects of the solvent:precursor ratio, film thickness, temperature, growth conditions, humidity and additives on high quality perovskite films were reviewed. To obtain a high quality defect free perovskite film, various aspects of perovskite film formation were described. Different synthesis routes and crystallization techniques to prepare perovskite films were compared. Recent findings related to the formation of intermediate complex phases and the conversion to a pure perovskite phase were introduced. Various techniques used for room temperature crystallization of perovskite films were discussed in detail. Finally, the role of water and moisture in the crystallization of perovskite films was described.
Table 4 Compilation of solar cell device performance parameters (Jsc, Voc, FF and efficiency (η)) with respect to the perovskite crystallization technique and device configurationa




Crystallization technique
Device structure
Photovoltaic performance





a Abbreviations: bl = blocking layer, c = compact layer, mp = mesoporous, NR = nanorods, Np = nanoparticles, LPCVD = low pressure chemical vapor deposition, RT = room temperature processing, spiro-OMeTAD = 2,2′-7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene, P3HT = poly(3-hexylthiophene), PCBM = [6,6]phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester, PCBTDPP = poly[N-9-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-3,6-bis-(thiophen-5-yl)-2,5-dioctyl-2,5-dihydropyrrolo[3,4-]pyrrole-1,4-dione], and PTAA = poly(triarylamine).





Single-step
FTO/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBTDPP/Au

J
sc = 13.86 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.83 V, FF = 48%, η = 5.55% (ref. 92)


FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

J
sc = 17.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.88 V, FF = 62%, η = 9.7% (ref. 93)


FTO/c-TiO2/mp-Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 17.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V, FF = 63%, η = 10.9% (ref. 47)


FTO/mp-TiO2 + mp ZrO2/(5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3/C

J
sc = 22.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.85 V, FF = 66%, η = 12.84% (ref. 94)


FTO/TiO2/mp-Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 21.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.02 V, FF = 71%, η = 15.9% (ref. 95)


FTO/graphene–TiO2/mp-Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 21.9 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V, FF = 73%, η = 15.6% (ref. 96)


FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3/PTAA/Au

J
sc = 19.3 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.91 V, FF = 70.2%, η = 12.3% (ref. 31)


FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au

J
sc = 16.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.99 V, FF = 72.7%, η = 12.0% (ref. 97)


ITO/PEIE/Y:TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

J
sc = 22.75 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.13 V, FF = 75.01%, η = 19.3% (ref. 98)


FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 23.83 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.08 V, FF = 76.2%, η = 19.71% (ref. 99)


Sequential deposition
FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/PTAA/Au

J
sc = 24.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.06 V, FF = 77.5%, η = 20.2% (ref. 14)


FTO/ZnO-NR/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

J
sc = 20.08 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.99 V, FF = 56%, η = 11.3% (ref. 100)


FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

J
sc = 20 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.99 V, FF = 73%, η = 15% (ref. 17)


FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

J
sc = 22.9 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V, FF = 69%, η = 15.41% (ref. 42)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC71BM/Ca/Al

J
sc = 19.98 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.05 V, FF = 78%, η = 16.31% (ref. 101)


ITO/ZnO-Np(RT)/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 20.4 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, FF = 74.9%, η = 15.7% (ref. 53)


FTO/TiOx/PCBM-60/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au

J
sc = 21 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.11 V, FF = 76.6%, η = 17.9% (ref. 102)


Solvent engineering
FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au

J
sc = 19.58 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.105 V, FF = 76.2%, η = 16.5% (ref. 33)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al

J
sc = 20.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.83 V, FF = 60%, η = 10.11% (ref. 35)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/rhodamine 101/LiF/Ag

J
sc = 17.72 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.01 V, FF = 73%, η = 13.2% (ref. 69)


Vapor phase
FTO/bl-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 21.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.07 V, FF = 67%, η = 15.4% (ref. 59)


FTO/bl-TiO2/perovskite/P3HT/Au

J
sc = 21.76 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.96 V, FF = 65.3%, η = 13.7% (ref. 19)


FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 19.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.92 V, FF = 66.3%, η = 12.1% (ref. 21)


ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Ag

J
sc = 13.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.8 V, FF = 50%, η = 5.4% (ref. 103)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polyTPD/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Au

J
sc = 16.12 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.05 V, FF = 67%, η = 12.04% (ref. 104)


FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 (LPCVD)/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 21.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.91 V, FF = 64.5%, η = 12.73% (ref. 105)


Room temperature
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 20.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.08 V, FF = 68%, η = 15.2% (ref. 60)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Ca/Al

J
sc = 13.11 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.91 V, FF = 78.11%, η = 9.32% (ref. 63)


FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3-RT/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 21.1 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V, FF = 63%, η = 13.8% (ref. 62)


ITO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag

J
sc = 19.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, FF = 76%, η = 15.6% (ref. 106)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC60BM/rhodamine/Ag

J
sc = 23.98 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.95 V, FF = 73.91%, η = 16.83% (ref. 7)


Water doping assisted
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (2% H2O)/PC61BM/Bphen/Ag

J
sc = 21.67 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.95 V, FF = 78%, η = 16.06% (ref. 90)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 (2% H2O)/PC71BM/Ca/Al

J
sc = 20.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, FF = 85%, η = 18% (ref. 73)


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 (1% H2O)/PCBM/Al

J
sc = 17.19 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.94 V, FF = 66%, η = 10.8% (ref. 91)


ITO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (1–10% H2O)/P3HT/Au
Stabilized efficiency (η) ∼9% (ref. 107)




Future progress in perovskite solar cells is envisioned by further improvement in the device architecture and perovskite film morphology with an aim to address long term stability against temperature, moisture and toxicity issues. The compositional (e.g., inorganic cations and environment friendly metal cations) and structural (e.g., layered 2D perovskite) modification of the widely used organic–inorganic hybrid CH3NH3PbI3 will allow researchers to address the existing perovskite challenges. Various solution-processing parameters towards high quality perovskite thin film crystallization will be optimized for achieving highly efficient and low cost solar cells. This comprehensive review attempts to highlight the widely used perovskite crystallization routes and their respective critical processing parameters to assist the future development of highly stable and efficient perovskite solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the NSF IGERT (DGE-0903685), NSF MRI (1428992), NASA EPSCoR (NNX15AM83A), U.S. – Egypt Science and Technology (S&T) Joint Fund, and Pakistan-US Science and Technology Cooperation Program.
References
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3134–3159 CAS .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kan, M. Li, Q. Zhang, F. Liu, X. Wan, Y. Wang, W. Ni, G. Long, X. Yang, H. Feng, Y. Zuo, M. Zhang, F. Huang, Y. Cao, T. P. Russell and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3886–3893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu and N. Robertson, Frontiers of Optoelectronics, 2016, 9, 38–43 CrossRef .
A. Dubey, N. Kantack, N. Adhikari, K. M. Reza, S. Venkatesan, M. Kumar, D. Khatiwada, S. Darling and Q. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10231–10240 CAS .
N. Adhikari, A. Dubey, E. A. Gaml, B. Vaagensmith, K. M. Reza, S. A. A. Mabrouk, S. Gu, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2693–2703 RSC .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., 1978, 33b, 1443–1445 CAS .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch., 1978, 33b, 862–865 CAS .

          A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Novel Photoelectrochemical Cell with Mesoscopic Electrodes Sensitized by Lead-halide Compounds, Cancun, Mexico,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Jeng, Y.-F. Chiang, M.-H. Lee, S.-R. Peng, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen and T.-C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727–3732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan, S. Gu, D. Khatiwada, Q. Wang, L. Mohammad, M. Kumar and Q. Qiao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 145(3), 193–199 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Abbas, R. Kottokkaran, B. Ganapathy, M. Samiee, L. Zhang, A. Kitahara, M. Noack and V. L. Dalal, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 016105 CrossRef .

          R. Kottokkaran, H. Abbas, G. Balaji, L. Zhang, M. Samiee, A. Kitahara, M. Noack and V. Dalal, Highly reproducible vapor deposition technique, device physics and structural instability of perovskite solar cells,  2015 Search PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H.-S. Duan, H.-H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Borchert, H. Boht, W. Franzel, R. Csuk, R. Scheer and P. Pistor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19842–19849 CAS .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. F. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 CAS .
S. Das, B. Yang, G. Gu, P. C. Joshi, I. N. Ivanov, C. M. Rouleau, T. Aytug, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 680–686 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Jung, K. Hwang, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, D.-Y. Kim and D. Vak, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, E. Peng, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1544–1550 CAS .
Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 578–583 RSC .
K. Hwang, Y.-S. Jung, Y.-J. Heo, F. H. Scholes, S. E. Watkins, J. Subbiah, D. J. Jones, D.-Y. Kim and D. Vak, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1241–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Etgar, P. Gao, Z. Xue, Q. Peng, A. K. Chandiran, B. Liu, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17396–17399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Kim, H. Choi, J. Jeong, S. Kim, B. Walker, S. Song and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6679–6683 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, A. Islam, X. Yang, C. Qin, J. Liu, K. Zhang, W. Peng and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2934–2938 CAS .
Y. Rong, Z. Tang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhong, S. Venkatesan, H. Graham, M. Patton, Y. Jing, A. M. Guloy and Y. Yao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10595–10599 RSC .
P. A. Beckmann, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2010, 45, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiroshi, N. Yoshinaho and N. Miharu, Chem. Lett., 1980, 9, 663–664 CrossRef .
T. Wu, J. Wu, Y. Tu, X. He, Z. Lan, M. Huang and J. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2017, 365, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. Song, L. Zhang, F. Niu, Y. Hao, P. Zeng, H. Niu, J. Huang and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8554–8561 CAS .
K.-M. Lee, C.-J. Lin, B.-Y. Liou, S.-M. Yu, C.-C. Hsu, V. Suryanarayanan and M.-C. Wu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, C. Wu and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, F. C. Hanusch, S. D. Stranks, M. Döblinger, J. M. Feckl, M. Ehrensperger, N. K. Minar, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and T. Bein, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400355 CrossRef .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-W. Liang, C.-Y. Liao, C.-C. Chueh, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, X.-K. Xin, J. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3748–3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Yu, H. Xu and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1120–1126 CrossRef CAS .

          D. B. Mitzi, in Prog. Inorg. Chem., John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2007, pp. 1–121,  DOI:10.1002/9780470166499.ch1 .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hu, J. Peng, W. Wang, Z. Xia, J. Yuan, J. Lu, X. Huang, W. Ma, H. Song, W. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Tang, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 547–553 CrossRef CAS .
N. Preda, L. Mihut, M. Baibarac, I. Baltog and S. Lefrant, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, 8899 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Gurina and K. V. Savchenko, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 909–915 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Warren and W. Y. Liang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1993, 5, 6407 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Hamilton, R. S. Meltzer, M. D. Sturge and T. Ishihara, J. Lumin., 1994, 60, 269–274 Search PubMed .
V. D'Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Gao and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2619–2623 CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Yang, W. Wu, A. L. Vasiliev, K. Zhu and N. P. Padture, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8178–8184 CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhao and Z. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1448–1451 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Williams, F. Zuo, C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao, P.-W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10640–10654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1605–1607 RSC .
N. Pellet, P. Gao, G. Gregori, T.-Y. Yang, M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3151–3157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, J. Chang, F. H. Isikgor, P. Li and J. Ouyang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 896–900 RSC .
L. Zuo, S. Dong, N. De Marco, Y.-T. Hsieh, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15710–15716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, Z. Gu, L. Zuo, T. Ye and H. Chen, Sol. Energy, 2016, 133, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, W. Wang, P. Sun, W. Ma and Z.-K. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 033901 CrossRef .
C.-G. Wu, C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2725–2733 CAS .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
D. Khatiwada, S. Venkatesan, N. Adhikari, A. Dubey, A. F. Mitul, L. Mohammad, A. Iefanova, S. B. Darling and Q. Qiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25747–25753 CAS .
J. Shi, X. Xu, D. Li and Q. Meng, Small, 2015, 11, 2472–2486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Bass, R. E. McAnally, S. Zhou, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson and B. C. Melot, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15819–15822 RSC .
J. Yin, D. Cortecchia, A. Krishna, S. Chen, N. Mathews, A. C. Grimsdale and C. Soci, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1396–1402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and T. L. Kelly, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4229–4236 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, B. J. Bruijnaers, J. J. van Franeker, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Pathak, R. J. Sutton, G. Grancini, D. S. Ginger, R. A. J. Janssen, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9380–9393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 255–275 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cui, P. Fu, D. Wei, M. Li, D. Song, X. Yue, Y. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Li and J. M. Mbengue, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 75622–75629 RSC .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
V. W. Bergmann, S. A. L. Weber, F. Javier Ramos, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, D. Li, A. L. Domanski, I. Lieberwirth, S. Ahmad and R. Berger, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, A. T. Barrows, D. G. Lidzey and T. Wang, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2016, 79, 026501 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 CAS .
M. K. Gangishetty, R. W. J. Scott and T. L. Kelly, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6300–6307 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 311–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gong, M. Li, X. B. Shi, H. Ma, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6671–6678 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clegg and I. G. Hill, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 52448–52458 RSC .
B. Cai, Y. Xing, Z. Yang, W.-H. Zhang and J. Qiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1480–1485 CAS .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, M. Saliba, T. Leijtens, A. Abate and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1142–1147 CAS .
J. T.-W. Wang, J. M. Ball, E. M. Barea, A. Abate, J. A. Alexander-Webber, J. Huang, M. Saliba, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 724–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H.-j. Kim, A. Sarkar, K. NazeeruddinMd, M. Gratzel and S. I. Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Son, J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16567–16573 CAS .
C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng and C.-G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15897–15903 CAS .
C. Tao, S. Neutzner, L. Colella, S. Marras, A. R. Srimath Kandada, M. Gandini, M. D. Bastiani, G. Pace, L. Manna, M. Caironi, C. Bertarelli and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2015, 8, 2365–2370 CAS .
H. Hu, D. Wang, Y. Zhou, J. Zhang, S. Lv, S. Pang, X. Chen, Z. Liu, N. P. Padture and G. Cui, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 28964–28967 RSC .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
P. Luo, Z. Liu, W. Xia, C. Yuan, J. Cheng and Y. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2708–2714 CAS .
B. Yang, O. Dyck, J. Poplawsky, J. Keum, S. Das, A. Puretzky, T. Aytug, P. C. Joshi, C. M. Rouleau, G. Duscher, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 15075–15078 CrossRef .
B. Conings, A. Babayigit, T. Vangerven, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H.-G. Boyen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19123–19128 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Efficiency evolution of perovskite solar cells from 2006 to 2017. Schematic of (b) n–i–p and (c) p–i–n perovskite solar cell structures.	 

Single-step crystallization	Role of solvents, precursor ratio, annealing temperature, film thickness
Two-step crystallization	Film thickness, solvents, precursor concentration, additives, annealing temperature, dipping time
Vapor phase crystallization	Crystallization time, substrate temperature
Room temperature crystallization	Crystallization time, effect of moisture, film morphology, film degradation
Water and moisture-assisted crystallization	Time of humidity exposure, % humidity, % water concentration

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD patterns of the as-prepared CH3NH3PbI3 powder, (b) XRD patterns of a TiO2 layer with and without CH3NH3PbI3 coated on top of FTO glass, (c) CH3NH3PbI3 films on top of TiO2 made from an equimolar precursor mixture in GBL with different precursor wt% of 10.05%, 20.13%, 30.18%, and 40.26% in the solution, (d) absorbance spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 films deposited on top of TiO2 prepared with different precursor wt% in the solution and (e) absorbance spectra of CH3NH3PbI3 deposited on TiO2 films and annealed at 40, 100, and 160 °C. Reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

40	5.5	13.31	0.605	0.513	4.13	0.265
100	5.5	13.76	0.557	0.557	4.73	0.267
160	5.5	10.06	0.588	0.588	3.71	0.303

 	Fig. 3  Top row: SEM images of perovskite films deposited on top of a mesoporous alumina scaffold with different thicknesses (400, 200, 140, and 0 nm); bottom row: SEM images of perovskite films deposited on compact TiO2-coated FTO glass and annealed at 100 °C for different time intervals (0, 10, 25, and 60 min). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Top row: SEM images of perovskite film coverage observed at different annealing temperatures; bottom row: SEM images of surface coverage for different perovskite film thicknesses. Perovskite coverage (%) vs. (b) annealing temperature (°C) and (c) initial film thickness (nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 30.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images (a–c) and AFM topography images (d–f) of perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) films made from individual solvents and a solvent mixture. Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing the solvent engineering steps to prepare perovskite films, (b) XRD spectrum of PbI2, MAI, PbI2(DMSO)2, and MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase powders, (c) FTIR spectrum of the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase, (d) XRD spectra showing the transformation of the MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase to a pure perovskite phase on thermal annealing at temperatures, room temperatures (RT), 70 °C, 100 °C and 130 °C, and (e) schematic showing the mechanism of MAI–PbI2–DMSO intermediate phase formation and its transformation to a pure perovskite phase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 7  (i) Short-circuit (SC) to forward bias (FB) and FB to SC J–V curves of the best FAPbI3 based solar cell prepared from the FAI/HPbI3 precursor combination. (ii) XRD spectra of FAPbI3 films crystallized using a precursor mixture of FAI/PbI2, FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI (57 wt% in H2O) and FAI/HPbI3, respectively. (iii) SEM images of FAPbI3 films crystallized using a precursor mixture of FAI/PbI2 (a, b), FAI/PbI2 with 5 vol% HI (57 wt% in H2O) (c, d) and FAI/HPbI3 (e, f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 45.	 
PbX2 + 3CH3NH3I → CH3NH3PbI3 + 2CH3NH3X (X = Cl, I, Ac)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of FTO/mesoporous TiO2/PbI2 layers, (b) change in absorbance vs. time at 550 nm during the conversion process of the perovskite, (c) photoluminescence (PL) intensity change vs. time at 520 nm, (d) PL intensity change vs. time at 775 nm, and (e) XRD spectrum of PbI2 and CH3NH3PbI3 films on top of mesoporous TiO2 and glass substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a, b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the PbI2 film coated on top of a FTO coated TiO2 film. Top view SEM image of the PbI2 film with (c) high magnification and (d) low magnification. (e, f) SEM cross-sectional image of the converted perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3−xClx) film sandwiched between layers. SEM image of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx with (g) high magnification and (h) low magnification. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) J–V curves of planar perovskite solar cells with varying wt% concentrations of MACl in the dipping solution. The inset table lists the photovoltaic parameters of each cell. (b) Efficiency variation with varying concentrations of MACl recorded among 30 and 40 working devices (each box represents statistical distribution of 30–40 working devices fabricated under similar conditions, symbol ‘X’ representing minimum and maximum values, small square box represent mean value and line crossing it represents the median value). (c) Time-resolved PL decay (excitation wavelength 507 nm) of perovskite films with different concentrations of MACl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42.	 

0	1205	18	3494	55
1	2900	22	932	74
2.5	1150	33	1325	112
5	919	91	401	316
10	1018	90	400	364
20	537	80	1016	262

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the dual source evaporation mechanism for vapor deposited perovskite films. (b) XRD patterns of solution processed and vapor deposited perovskite films. SEM images (top-view) of (c) vapor deposited and (d) solution processed perovskite films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of (a) thermal evaporation of PbI2 in a vacuum chamber; vapor-assisted deposition process of MAI on top of PbI2 in (b) a covered glass Petri dish and (c) graphite vessel. AIP Materials, Vol. 3, 016105, (2015); used in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license.19	 

 	Fig. 13  (i) Schematic of the SSE process for room temperature crystallization of perovskite films. (ii) (A) XRD and (B) low-magnification and (C) high-magnification SEM images of an ∼250 nm thick CH3NH3PbI3 film coated on a glass substrate. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) XRD pattern of the as-deposited CH3NH3PbI3 film, (B) after 2 seconds, and (C) after 2 minutes of SSE with diethyl ether, (D) FTIR spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 film after 2 s (red) and 2 min (black) of SSE, and (E) schematic of the SSE mechanism of CH3NH3PbI3 film formation. Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the perovskite nanorod film deposition method, (b) UV-Vis and (c) XRD spectra of perovskite films crystallized for 1, 3, 5, 8, and 10 h in air at room temperature, and (d) surface topography of the 5 h air crystallized nanorod perovskite film. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) J–V characteristic of the air crystallized perovskite nanorod film and control sample and (b) forward and reverse scans of 5 h air crystallized and control sample based devices. Reproduced from ref. 7 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of the relative humidity equipment with a gas flow controller. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Nanoscale surface potential distribution of perovskite films prepared from 0, 1, 3, 5 and 7% water in the MAI solution. Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of perovskite films prepared from various amounts of water in the PbI2 solution. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  SEM images of perovskite films with and without water doping in DMF solutions: (a) % H2O, (b) 1% H2O, (c) 2% H2O, (d) 3% H2O, (e) 5% H2O, (f) 7% H2O, and (g) 10% H2O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90.	 

 	Fig. 21  AFM images of annealed perovskite films prepared from (a) 1%, (b) 3%, (c) 5% and (d) 7% water solutions.8 Reproduced from ref. 8 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


Single-step	FTO/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBTDPP/Au	
J
sc = 13.86 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.83 V, FF = 48%, η = 5.55% (ref. 92)
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
J
sc = 17.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.88 V, FF = 62%, η = 9.7% (ref. 93)
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI2Cl/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 17.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V, FF = 63%, η = 10.9% (ref. 47)
FTO/mp-TiO2 + mp ZrO2/(5-AVA)x(MA)1−xPbI3/C	
J
sc = 22.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.85 V, FF = 66%, η = 12.84% (ref. 94)
FTO/TiO2/mp-Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 21.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.02 V, FF = 71%, η = 15.9% (ref. 95)
FTO/graphene–TiO2/mp-Al2O3/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 21.9 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V, FF = 73%, η = 15.6% (ref. 96)
FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3/PTAA/Au	
J
sc = 19.3 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.91 V, FF = 70.2%, η = 12.3% (ref. 31)
FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au	
J
sc = 16.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.99 V, FF = 72.7%, η = 12.0% (ref. 97)
ITO/PEIE/Y:TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
J
sc = 22.75 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.13 V, FF = 75.01%, η = 19.3% (ref. 98)
FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 23.83 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.08 V, FF = 76.2%, η = 19.71% (ref. 99)
Sequential deposition	FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/perovskite/PTAA/Au	
J
sc = 24.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.06 V, FF = 77.5%, η = 20.2% (ref. 14)
FTO/ZnO-NR/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
J
sc = 20.08 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.99 V, FF = 56%, η = 11.3% (ref. 100)
FTO/c-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
J
sc = 20 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.99 V, FF = 73%, η = 15% (ref. 17)
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
J
sc = 22.9 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.98 V, FF = 69%, η = 15.41% (ref. 42)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC71BM/Ca/Al	
J
sc = 19.98 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.05 V, FF = 78%, η = 16.31% (ref. 101)
ITO/ZnO-Np(RT)/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 20.4 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, FF = 74.9%, η = 15.7% (ref. 53)
FTO/TiOx/PCBM-60/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
J
sc = 21 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.11 V, FF = 76.6%, η = 17.9% (ref. 102)
Solvent engineering	FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/PTAA/Au	
J
sc = 19.58 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.105 V, FF = 76.2%, η = 16.5% (ref. 33)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Al	
J
sc = 20.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.83 V, FF = 60%, η = 10.11% (ref. 35)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PCBM/rhodamine 101/LiF/Ag	
J
sc = 17.72 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.01 V, FF = 73%, η = 13.2% (ref. 69)
Vapor phase	FTO/bl-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 21.5 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.07 V, FF = 67%, η = 15.4% (ref. 59)
FTO/bl-TiO2/perovskite/P3HT/Au	
J
sc = 21.76 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.96 V, FF = 65.3%, η = 13.7% (ref. 19)
FTO/c-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 19.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.92 V, FF = 66.3%, η = 12.1% (ref. 21)
ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/C60/Ag	
J
sc = 13.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.8 V, FF = 50%, η = 5.4% (ref. 103)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/polyTPD/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/Au	
J
sc = 16.12 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.05 V, FF = 67%, η = 12.04% (ref. 104)
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3 (LPCVD)/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 21.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.91 V, FF = 64.5%, η = 12.73% (ref. 105)
Room temperature	FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 20.7 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.08 V, FF = 68%, η = 15.2% (ref. 60)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/Ca/Al	
J
sc = 13.11 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.91 V, FF = 78.11%, η = 9.32% (ref. 63)
FTO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3-RT/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 21.1 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V, FF = 63%, η = 13.8% (ref. 62)
ITO/c-TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
J
sc = 19.8 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, FF = 76%, η = 15.6% (ref. 106)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PC60BM/rhodamine/Ag	
J
sc = 23.98 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.95 V, FF = 73.91%, η = 16.83% (ref. 7)
Water doping assisted	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (2% H2O)/PC61BM/Bphen/Ag	
J
sc = 21.67 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.95 V, FF = 78%, η = 16.06% (ref. 90)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 (2% H2O)/PC71BM/Ca/Al	
J
sc = 20.6 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.03 V, FF = 85%, η = 18% (ref. 73)
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 (1% H2O)/PCBM/Al	
J
sc = 17.19 mA cm−2, Voc = 0.94 V, FF = 66%, η = 10.8% (ref. 91)
ITO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx (1–10% H2O)/P3HT/Au	Stabilized efficiency (η) ∼9% (ref. 107)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
