Three-dimensional macro-structures of two-dimensional nanomaterials  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00218H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00218H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5541-5588Three-dimensional macro-structures of two-dimensional nanomaterials

        
          
            Khurram 
            Shehzad†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Xu†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Gao
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Xiangfeng 
            Duan
          
          
        
      b
aCollege of Information Science and Electronic Engineering and State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China. E-mail: yangxu-isee@zju.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry and California Nanosystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA
cMOE Key Laboratory of Macromolecular Synthesis and Functionalization, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
Received 
      16th March 2016
    First published on 27th July 2016AbstractIf two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials are ever to be utilized as components of practical, macroscopic devices on a large scale, there is a complementary need to controllably assemble these 2D building blocks into more sophisticated and hierarchical three-dimensional (3D) architectures. Such a capability is key to design and build complex, functional devices with tailored properties. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the various experimental strategies currently used to fabricate the 3D macro-structures of 2D nanomaterials. Additionally, various approaches for the decoration of the 3D macro-structures with organic molecules, polymers, and inorganic materials are reviewed. Finally, we discuss the applications of 3D macro-structures, especially in the areas of energy, environment, sensing, and electronics, and describe the existing challenges and the outlook for this fast emerging field.
Khurram Shehzad
Dr Khurram Shehzad received his MSc and MPhil in Chemistry from the University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China. From 2011–2013, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Center for Nano and Micro Mechanics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the College of Information Science and Electronics, Zhejiang University, China. He is the recipient of several awards including the International Young Scientist Fellowship from NSF China, Nanchang University Fellowship, CAS President Fellowship, and the Cultural Exchange Fellowship. His current research interests include hetero-structures and the macro-assemblies of two-dimensional materials for their applications in energy, healthcare, and electronics.
Yang Xu
Dr Yang Xu received his BS degree in ECE from Tsinghua University, Beijing, and MS and PhD degrees in ECE from the University of Illinois at Urbana and Champaign. He is a Fellow of Churchill college at the University of Cambridge, UK, and a visiting professor at UCLA. He is now with the College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. His current research interests include emerging low-dimensional smart sensors and actuators for the internet-of-things and flexible electronics.
Chao Gao
Chao Gao is a professor in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University, China. He earned his PhD degree in Polymer Materials from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2001. He successively became a Lecturer and Associate Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2001 and 2002, respectively. He then spent several years (2003–2006) at the University of Sussex, UK and Bayreuth University, Germany, as a postdoctoral fellow and Alexander von Humboldt research fellow. He joined the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University in 2008 and was promoted as a full Professor. He has received several awards, including the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars, and the National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China. His current research interests include graphene chemistry, liquid crystal and macroscopic self-assembly, and hyperbranched polymers.
Xiangfeng Duan
Xiangfeng Duan is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interests include nanoscale heterostructures and devices. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology and China (USTC) in 1997, MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was previously a founding scientist at Nanosys Inc. before joining UCLA.
1. Introduction
The discovery of graphene just over one decade ago1 completes the dimensionality spectrum of sp2 bonded carbon materials, including zero-dimensional (0D) fullerenes,2,3 one-dimensional (1D) nanotubes,4,5 two-dimensional (2D) graphene,6 and three-dimensional (3D) graphite7 (Fig. 1). Ever since its first discovery, graphene has quickly become the central focus of research across multiple disciplines including chemistry, physics, materials science, device engineering and nanotechnology. Graphene consists of a single layer of honeycomb lattice of covalently bonded carbon atoms with fully conjugated pi-electrons, which endows it with excellent mechanical, chemical, thermal, and electronic properties.8–13 Beyond graphene, a wide range of two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs),14–21 including silicene, black phosphorous, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), metal oxides and hydroxides, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and metal carbides (MXenes), have been discovered.22–26 These 2DLMs typically consist of covalently bonded atomic layers that are weakly bonded together by van der Waals forces and can be isolated into single or few atom thick nanosheets. A variety of techniques including mechanical exfoliation,27 liquid exfoliation,28,29 as well as plasma assisted fabrication,30 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD)31–33 have been employed to synthesize these 2D materials. This broad library of 2D materials can readily allow us to access different electronic properties, including those of metals, semiconductors or insulators. For example, graphene and MXenes are conductors, many TMDs are typically semiconductors with tunable band gaps, and the h-BN nanosheet is an insulator.23–26
 Fig. 1  Dimensionality spectrum of sp2 carbon materials. (a) Fullerene (inside red circle) trapped inside the cavity of a MWCNT.34 (b) STM images of a SWNT exposed at the surface of a rope.35 (c) Photograph (in normal white light) of a relatively large multilayer graphene flake with thickness ∼3 nm on top of an oxidized Si wafer.36 (d) A piece of natural graphite. (a′ and b′) Structure models of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphene, and graphite, respectively. All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a) Copyright 2007 American Physical society. (b) Copyright 1998 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of the Science. 
Despite the tremendous efforts and considerable progress in the synthesis and fundamental property investigation of graphene and related 2D materials, their technological potential has not yet been realized fully. Previous research efforts in low-dimensional materials such as 1D materials (nanotubes)4,5,37–39 and 0D materials (quantum dots)40,41 have also generated considerable excitement and extraordinary promise at the time of their discovery, but these materials have not lived up to their potential to date. If the 2D materials are ever to be utilized as key components in practical, macroscopic devices on a large scale, approaches must be developed for the controllable assembly of 2D materials into more sophisticated hierarchical architectures. In other words, the 2D materials need to be arranged into spatially well-defined configurations in order to design integrated systems with predictable attributes. Such a capability is the key to build complex devices with desirable functions.
Importantly, studies to date have shown that the 2D nanosheets can function as versatile building blocks for the assembly of various superstructures, including 1D fibers,42–44 2D thin films,45,46 or 3D porous networks47–51 (Fig. 2). Sophisticated functionalities or nanodevices may be designed through the selection of nanosheets and precise control over their arrangement at the molecular scale. In particular, the construction of 3D hierarchical assemblies from 2D nanosheets has attracted considerable attention and is expected to play a central and defining role in commercializing their applications. It is even possible to decorate these superlattice-like assemblies by incorporating a wide range of materials such as organic molecules, polymers, and inorganic/metal nanoparticles into the nanosheet assemblies. However, the task of construction of 3D hierarchical assemblies of the 2D nanosheets is not trivial as the creation of hierarchical structures of 2D materials might invoke inter-plane coupling, which can make these materials lose their unique properties. Therefore, a key challenge to make 3D macrostructures from 2D materials is to prevent layer-by-layer restacking and thus preserve their unique 2D properties. To this end, considerable efforts have been devoted to the fabrication of 3D macrostructures from 2D nanosheets using the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process in the gas phase or the self-assembly process in the solution phase. The resulting 3D macro-structures are self-supporting and substrate free with extraordinary surface area, electronic properties, and chemical activity, allowing the construction of substrate-free devices/components for tremendous applications in energy storage devices, supercapacitors, sensors and electrochemical reactions. Here we present a forward-looking review article that discusses the synthesis, structure, and applications of 3D macro-structures of 2D materials. We review in detail the CVD and solution based synthesis of such structures. Owing to the importance of the CVD technique to obtain high quality 3D structures, the main emphasis of the review will be on CVD grown structures. We highlight the properties and advantages of these 3D CVD structures in detail. We further discussed the details of the synthesis of the composites of 3D structures with polymers, metals, metal oxides and hydroxides, and carbon materials. Finally, we highlight the applications of these 3D structures related to energy, environment, electronics, and bio-related fields.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM images of graphene oxide (GO) fibers with single knot (b) cross section of a mechanically scrolled 150 μm diameter GO fiber.52 (c) Typical fracture morphology of GO fibers.42 (d) Photo of two pieces of filtered free-standing chemically converted graphene (CCG) paper.53 SEM images of graphene paper in (e) top-view and (f) side-view.53 (g) Photograph of ultra-flyweight solution processed 3D aerogels of graphene.48 (h) SEM image of the micro-structures of the self-assembled graphene hydrogels (SGH).48 (i) SEM image of the micro-structures of CVD grown 3D structures of graphene (unpublished). All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. (d–f) Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. (g and h) Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
2. Synthesis methods for the 3D structures of 2D materials and their classification
Different terms in the literature have been associated with the 3D structures of 2D materials depending on the structure, method of synthesis, or the choice of the authors. The list of commonly used terms includes but is not limited to foams, networks, monoliths, paper, sponges, scaffolds, aerogels, hydrogels, frameworks, etc. In this review, these terms will be used interchangeably with reference to the 3D structures of 2D materials. The methods of synthesis are crucial to the structure and properties of 3D structures, hence, are of great importance in the context of this field. Synthesis techniques for 3D structures can be generally classified as “solution based and CVD based” or “template based and template-free”. Both of these classification types are summarized in Chart 1. Template based techniques can be further classified as hard-, and soft-template based ones. Another possible way to characterize these techniques is on the basis of morphology of the porous structures they produce as 3D porous structures can be categorized as micro-porous (pore size <2 nm), mesoporous (2 nm < pore size < 50 nm) and macro-porous (pore size > 50 nm) structures, depending on the size of the pores. Solution based techniques require 2D materials to be dispersed readily in common solvents as good dispersion is a pre-requisite for their chemical processing into the 3D architectures. Solution based methods offer advantages of scalability, high yield, and cost-effectiveness. However, solution based techniques induce a significant number of defects in the lattice structure of 2D materials which limit their fascinating physical properties. On the other hand, CVD based methods involve high temperature which makes them less cost effective but allows the growth of 3D structures with high quality and excellent physical properties. With regard to template based and template-free growth, template directed structures have better control over pore size, pore density, and distribution of pore size. While template-free growth bears the advantage of self-assembly but lacks the control over the porous structure. In the next sections, we will describe in detail the synthesis methods of 3D structures on the basis of classification type 1 given in Chart 1. We will also discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each technique and will elucidate the effects of synthesis techniques on the structure and properties of 3D structures.
 Chart 1  Summary of the synthesis methods for the 3D structures of 2D materials. 
3. Solution based synthesis of 3D structures of graphene
The versatility of solution based techniques not only permits the facile and scalable synthesis of 3D structures but also allows the simultaneous elemental doping, or decoration (with metal, metal oxide, polymers, organic molecules, etc.) of these structures. Therefore, solution based synthesis of both the 3D structures and their doped or decorated forms will be discussed under the same heading, when applicable, and separate sections are not provided.
3.1. Template based synthesis

3.1.1. Colloidal-sphere based synthesis. 
Spheres of polymers such as polystyrene (PS) or polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), or silica can serve as ideal hard templates to grow macroporous materials of 2D materials. The general strategy involves preparing the composites of the spheres and the 2D material followed by the removal of the spheres to obtain the porous 3D structures. The pore diameter of porous 3D structures can be easily controlled by the size of the spheres. The intrinsic flexibility of graphene sheets allows the formation of curvature of the pores and the overall porous structure. Due to the interconnected 3D frameworks of 2D materials, the porous architectures do not collapse after the removal of the template. Silica sphere templates offer the advantages of tunable morphology, narrow pore size distribution, high mechanical strength, and good chemical as well as thermal stability. Methyl group grafted silica particles mixed with reduced GO [authors term it as chemically modified graphene (CMG)] in aqueous suspension have been used to prepare 3D structures of graphene.54 The hydrophobic nature of both GO and silica leads them to self-assemble into lamellar-like structures. Subsequent annealing of filtered GO@silica powder reduced the GO. Silica spheres were etched by using HF to leave behind 3D porous structures, which were subsequently deposited with MnO2 for supercapacitor applications.
Apart from the silica spheres, polymeric sphere templates have also been successfully employed to fabricate the 3D structures of graphene. Free-standing GO/PS55,56 and GO/PMMA57 sphere composites were assembled by filtering the mixed solution of GO and polymer spheres (PS and PMMA). Polymer spheres from self-assembled composites can be removed by solvent or/and high temperature burning to obtain the self-supporting 3D macro-porous structures. High temperature burning can also help reduce the GO and improve the overall properties of the porous structures. The obtained graphene framework has been demonstrated as a good support for metal oxide materials (MnO2, CO3O4, etc.), as shown in the scheme of Fig. 3. Rich polymer chemistry also allows for the in situ synthesis of the polymer spheres. In one such example, PS spheres were synthesized in situ by using styrene as a monomer and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP) as a stabilizing agent in the presence of GO to obtain GO coated PS spheres. GO was reduced by hydrazine to generate graphene-coated PS spheres. Finally, porous graphene materials with the pores surrounded by graphene walls were fabricated by thermal treatment of the composites.58 Generally, colloidal template synthesis does not involve as high temperature as in the CVD based process; however, the quality (structural robustness) and electrical conductivity of the graphene framework are generally lower than the ones fabricated by using the CVD process.
 Fig. 3  (scheme 1) Schematic illustration of the procedure to fabricate 3D macro-porous film and its composites by using PS templates.55 (a) Low-magnified and (b) high-magnified cross-sectional SEM images of e-CMG film. (c and d) TEM images at different magnifications of e-CMG film.55 (A) Photographic images of freeze-dried monoliths prepared by the ISISA technique. PSS-G/PVA monoliths: (a) before removal from the syringe, showing the different sections investigated (X (immersion end), Y, and Z); (b) at 1:5 weight ratio; (c) at 1:10 weight ratio; (d) at 3:20 weight ratio; (e) GO/PVA monolith at 3:20 weight ratio. SEM images of (B and C) longitudinal sections and (D and E) cross-sections of a PSS-G/PVA freeze-dried monolith. Scale bars: (B, D and E) 10 μm and (C) 5 μm. Arrows indicate (B and C) the direction of freezing, (B and D) region X showing the layered structure, and (C and E) region Y with macropores.59 All figures are reproduced with permission. (scheme 1a–d) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (A–E) Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons. 


3.1.2. Ice template. 
Rapid freezing of aqueous dispersions containing amphiphilic polymers, also termed as ice-segregation-induced self-assembly (ISISA), has been employed to produce porous architectures of different materials. The same approach has been used to fabricate 3D structures of graphene, where rapid freezing of solution containing GO, with59–61 or without62 the other additives, is performed by immersing the aqueous solution in liquid nitrogen. Ice crystals formed during the freezing process serve as templates, and the morphology of the graphene porous structures can be readily controlled by the freezing temperatures. During the freeze drying process, GO sheets are ejected from the ice crystals and are entrapped between neighboring ice crystals by advancing water crystal front, yielding highly ordered inter-connected layers which eventually lead to the formation of continuous graphene networks. The morphology of 3D porous structures fabricated by ISISA is generally not uniform throughout the structure, which is primarily attributed to the local differences in the freezing rate and associated temperature gradients. For example, SEM images in Fig. 3A show that the macro porous scaffolds of the GF/polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and GF/polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) monoliths prepared by the ice template method are highly textured, and arranged with different motifs, depending on their position in the monolith.59 Within region X (Fig. 3B and D), ordered lamella spaced at around 5 μm could be observed, while channel-like structures with pores from 5 to 25 μm in size were predominant in the middle section (Y zone, Fig. 3C and E). 3D graphene/nanoparticle (Pt)60 and 3D graphene/polymer (Chitosan, PSS, PVA)59,61 composites have also been synthesized by using the ISISA strategy.


3.1.3. Hydrothermal template synthesis. 
Hydrothermal template synthesis utilizes the hydrothermal strategy in combination with a porous foam like template.63 This foam template can be a metal (for example, metal foam templates similar to ones used for CVD growth) or a polymer. Templates are soaked into GO dispersion and the whole mixture is hydrothermally treated to deposit GO on the template walls. Next, GO is reduced chemically, and the templates are removed. For the removal of metal templates, chemical etching is performed, while for the removal of polymer templates, solvent dissolution or thermal decomposition is usually preferred. Since templates are usually sacrificed after the process, the use of expansive metal templates can increase the overall cost of the process. The use of inexpensive polymer templates (like commercially available polyurethane foams) can make the process more cost effective. In this type of synthesis, the quality of the 3D GF is generally compromised due to the stacking of GO. Moreover, it is also difficult to control the final morphology of the structures.


3.1.4. Carbonization of polymer frameworks. 
The carbonization of organic precursor materials is the simplest and the most basic technique for the facile large scale production of carbon-rich materials. Carbonization of non-sacrificial 3D cross-linked frameworks/hydrogels/aerogels templates of conjugate polymers can possibly grow 3D graphene like networks.64 This possibility has already been demonstrated by high temperature thermal annealing (carbonization)/activation of 3D structures of conjugated polyaniline (PANI). It is further possible to obtain the doped 3D graphitic structures by using the composite hydrogels. For example, the composite hydrogels of PANI with phytic acid have been employed as precursors to fabricate a three-dimensional nitrogen (N) and phosphorous (P) co-doped mesoporous foam for Zn–air battery applications (scheme 2 in Fig. 4).65 The carbonization technique allows us to fabricate 3D hierarchically porous graphitic carbon frameworks with high surface area, large pore volume, high electrical conductivity (3 times higher than typical activated carbons), and good pore connectivity.
 Fig. 4  (scheme 1) Schematic drawings illustrating the steps and mechanism for chemical conversion of amorphous porous carbon to 3D graphene by using lithographic patterning method.66 (A and B) Amorphous carbon template without and with graphene grown on it, respectively.66 (scheme 2) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the N and P co-doped foams. An aniline (i)-phytic acid (ii) complex (iii) is formed.65 All figures are reproduced with permission. (scheme 1A and B) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (scheme 2) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.1.5. Lithographical template synthesis. 
The lithography process allows the construction of distinct and well-controlled periodic structures, which can be used for a variety of applications, including as templates. Xiao et al.66 have exemplified the use of lithographic templates to grow 3D structures of graphene (scheme 1 in Fig. 4). Pre-defined 3D paralyzed photoresist films (PPFs) were converted into well-defined free-standing porous amorphous carbon, which acted both as a template and the carbon source of graphene growth. Next, the Ni metal catalyst was sputtered onto the amorphous carbon surface and annealing was performed to obtain the 3D graphene networks. Removal of nickel through acidic etching left behind a porous graphene structure with a pore size of 500 nm (Fig. 4A and B), about two orders of magnitude smaller than that reported by Cheng's group.67 This method suffers from certain drawbacks such as being tedious in nature, not cost-effective, requires extensive chemical treatments, and being difficult to scale up.

3.2. Template-free synthesis of 3D structures of graphene
Template-free synthesis (self-assembly) is an effective bottom up strategy for the growth of 3D structures of 2D materials. Scalability of graphene and its derivative combined with their unique structure and properties makes them an ideal choice as building blocks to construct controllably assembled sophisticated and hierarchical architectures. Graphene oxide (GO) or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) are the most commonly used building blocks for constructing the 3D structures of graphene. GO for this purpose is mostly synthesized from graphite powder by using the Hummer's method68 and its modified forms69,70 due to their scalability and high yield. Recently, Gao and co-workers71 have reported an iron based green approach for large scale production of single layer graphene oxide and processed it into 3D graphene aerogels. The iron based green strategy developed by employing a strong oxidant K2FeO4, with ultra-low cost, and shorter reaction times not only avoids the introduction of polluting heavy metals and toxic gases in preparation and products but also enables the recycling of environmentally hazardous sulphuric acid. Chemically obtained GO/rGO can be assembled into 3D structures by various template free strategies such as hydrothermal reduction, chemical reduction, cross-linking, filtration, and laser patterning. In the following discussion we will elucidate the details of these strategies.

3.2.1. Hydrothermal assemblies. 
A key step to construct 3D structures in solution-based strategies is the dispersion of GO or rGO in the solvent (mostly water). GO dispersion in water is a system in equilibrium due to the balance of attractive and repulsive forces including electrostatic repulsion, hydrophobic effect, hydrogen bonding, etc.72 Thanks to the carboxyl moieties on the edges, and hydrophilic hydroxyl and epoxy groups on basal planes, GO can form a stable aqueous dispersion in water with concentrations as high as 10 g L−1. Ionized carboxylic groups on GO are critical as they provide important mutual repulsion between graphene basal planes to keep them suspended. Gelation of GO dispersions can be induced by simply changing the electrostatic repulsion forces between the GO sheets. Reduction of GO can eliminate the number of carboxylic groups and significantly decrease the electrostatic repulsion and thus trigger the gelation process. Reduction of GO by using the hydrothermal method (at high pressure and temperature), reported by Shi's group,48,73 leads to partial overlapping or coalescing of the reduced GO sheets. Therefore, self-assembled hydrogels (SGHs) were formed through π–π stacking-induced cross-linking of GO sheets at the graphene basal planes. Such π–π stacking interactions were also helpful to grant self-assembled hydrogels (SGHs) their mechanical strength, thermal stability, and electrical conductivity. Interestingly, the SGH structure was mechanically strong enough to support the weight which was several orders of magnitude more than its own weight (Fig. 5A).
 Fig. 5  (Panel A) (a) Photographs of a 2 mg ml−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h, (b) photographs of a strong SGH allowing easy handling and supporting weight, (c–e) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures, (f) room temperature I–V curve of the SGH exhibiting ohmic characteristics.48 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
In the hydrothermal method, it is possible to control the morphology of the porous structures by simply changing the GO concentration, hydrothermal reaction time, or addition of other catalyzers (e.g. Au, Pt, Ir, or Ru).74 Furthermore, the versatility of hydrothermal methods not only allows adding other precursors to GO dispersion to make its 3D composites with organic and inorganic materials but also makes it possible to dope the graphene lattice with other elements. For example, SGHs have been decorated with several nanomaterials including nanoparticles (NPs), nanowires (NWs), nanofibers (NFs) of metals, metal oxides and polymers,75 and have also been doped or co-doped with elements such as nitrogen (N) or boron (B).76–79 Wu et al.80 hydrothermally treated an aqueous GO dispersion containing iron acetate and polypyrrole (PPy) to obtain the N-doped GO gel with the simultaneous decoration of Fe3O4 nanoparticles. The hydrothermal approach has also been extended to the solvothermal process where an organic solvent is used in place of water.81–85 It greatly extends the possibility of incorporating other materials in 3D graphene structures as some chemicals are only stable or soluble in organic solvents.
Generally, common drying and freeze drying techniques are employed to get rid of water from hydrogels. For an ordered porous structure freeze drying is preferred.80,86,87 In the first step, freeze drying solvent is frozen to act as the pore forming agent. In the second step, under low atmosphere pressure frozen water is allowed to sublimate directly from the solid to the vapor phase, leaving behind an ordered 3D porous structure of GO.


3.2.2. Chemical reduction induced assembly. 
Apart from hydrothermal reduction, in situ reduction of GO by chemical reducing agents has also been used effectively to fabricate the 3D porous structure. The mechanism of self-assembly is the same as in hydrothermal reduction where the elimination of oxygen containing groups triggers the gelation of GO. A variety of organic and inorganic reducing agents including acids,86,88–91 reducing salts,92 hydrazine,93 and metals/metal oxides94,95 has been reported in the literature for this purpose. Generally, a reducing agent is added in GO suspension before heating to complete the reduction reaction. Stirring is avoided as it will impede stacking of graphene layers in an orderly fashion. The choice of reducing agents has also been found to affect the mechanical strength, low density, thermal stability, high electrical conductivity, and specific capacitance of the resulting 3D porous structures. For example, mild reducing agents such as vitamin C (ascorbic acid),86,89,96 due to their slow reduction reaction (without producing large quantity of gases), produce a more uniform 3D structure. Recently Gao and co-workers47 reported CNT and graphene hybrid ultra-flyweight aerogels (UFAs) through the hydrazine reduction of post freeze-dried CNT/GO hybrid aerogels (Fig. 6). Such UFAs had ideal interconnected porous structures with outstanding temperature-invariant elasticity, ultralow density, excellent thermal stability, good electrical conductivity, and high absorption capacities.
 Fig. 6  Macroscopic and Microscopic structures of UFAs. (a–c) Digital photograph of UFAs with diverse shapes. (d and e) Microscopically porous architecture of a UFA at different magnifications, showing CNT-coated graphene cell walls. (f–h) SEM images of different interconnections for CNT-coated graphene (graphene@CNTs) cell walls: overlapping (f), twisting (g), and wrapping.47 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. 


3.2.3. Cross-linking induced assemblies. 
Addition of different molecules can promote the gelation of GO dispersions. After gelation, these entities will form chemical or physical cross-linkers that not only strengthen the 3D structure but also help tune the porous morphology, and impart new functionalities to the resulting material. For example, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), a hydroxyl rich water soluble polymer is considered as an efficient cross-linker for the graphene porous architectures.59,97 Strong hydrogen bonding between the hydroxyl groups of the PVA and the oxygen containing groups on GO facilitates the formation of cross-linking, which facilitates the generation of a stable composite gel. Different types of bonding (including hydrogen, covalent, and electrostatic interactions) between a polymer cross-linker and GO can be confirmed via FTIR and XPS.98 The schematic representation of possible bonding types between a nitrogen containing polymer polyethylenimine (PEI) and GO is presented in Fig. 7.98 Similarly, the addition of Ni2+ increased the cross-linking of GO sheets through co-ordinate covalent bonding within the network, which strengthened the 3D graphene structure to endure more than 3500 times of its bulk weight without any deformation significantly superior to the architectures without the presence of Ni2+.99 Molecules such as polymers [polypyrrole (PPy),100 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT),100 polyaniline (PANi),100 poly(N-isopropylacrylamine) (PNIPAM),101etc.], bio-molecules (proteins,100 DNA,102 chitosan,103etc.), organic molecules104–107 (quaternary ammonium slats, ferrocene, tetracationic cyclophanes, mercaptoacetic acid, etc.), and bivalent and trivalent metal ions74,103,108,109 (Pd2+, Pt2+, Au2+, Ca2+, Mg2+, La3+, CO2+, and Ni2+, etc.) have been reported as efficient cross-linkers of GO gelation.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of GO–PEI cross-linked hydrogel.98 The figure is reproduced with permission, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4. Filtration assisted assembly. 
Filtration/vacuum filtration (VF) is a basic, simple, and efficient technique to separate solids from liquid. The filtration assisted assembly has advantages of easy processing, low cost, film homogeneity, easy thickness control, and high yield. Principally, dispersions of GO or its modified forms are filtered through a filtration media (membrane or filter paper) to obtain thin paper like films (Fig. 8A). Water molecules in wet films act as spacers between the graphene sheets; however, once dried serious aggregation and re-stacking of graphene sheets will occur due to the inter-sheet van der Waals attractions in the films which consequently compromise many of the unique properties of graphene.
 Fig. 8  (Panel A) Schematics of the synthesis of free-standing graphene films based on vacuum filtration (VF).110 (Panel B) SEM images of chemically converted graphene (CCG)/(EMIMBF4) films of various packing densities. The relation between the volume fraction of EMIMBF4 and the packing density of CCG (left axis).110 (Panel C) (a) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of MEGO with KOH. (b) Low-magnification SEM image of a 3D a-MEGO piece.111 (Panel D) Fabrication procedure of free-standing VF–graphene film using a leavening strategy. (a and b) Cross-sectional SEM images of rGO foams formed after 10 h in an autoclave at 90 °C with 80 μL hydrazine monohydrate.112 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A and B) Copyright 2013 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (C) Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (D) Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons. 
To address the re-stacking problem, Li et al.110 used CCG hydrogel films and exchanged water with a mixture of volatile (water) and non-volatile [sulfuric acid, and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIMBF4)] solvents. Volatile solvents were selectively dried in the vacuum oven to leave behind the CCG films with non-volatile solvents. The presence of non-volatile solvents ensured that sheets do not restack while selective removal of volatile solvent resulted in highly compact CCG porous films (Fig. 8B).
Post-filtration processing of VF GO films by techniques such as leavening112 or chemical activation111,113 can also eliminate the re-stacking of graphene sheets and help transform the films into 3D porous structures. Leavening is a process usually applied for increasing the volume of breads/cakes, before or during baking/steaming, by forming the porous structures. In this technique GO films obtained by filtration are mixed with a leavening agent (such as hydrazine monohydrate) and heated at a specific temperature for a certain time. After the leavening process, GO films experience up to 50 fold volume expansion due to the release of gases (H2, CO2). Volume expansion leads to the porous structure of rGO with pore sizes in the range of sub-micrometers to several micrometers (Fig. 8D). The chemical activation method111,113 of VF GO films also produced graphene porous structures with a surface area of up to 3100 m2 g−1, high electrical conductivity, and low oxygen and hydrogen content. GO powder was first activated thermally or by microwave and was dispersed in aqueous KOH. GO/KOH dispersion was filtered, dried and activated by heating up to at 800 °C for 1 hour in a horizontal tube furnace (50 mm diameter), with an argon flow of 150 sccm and a working pressure of ∼400 Torr (Fig. 8C).


3.2.5. Laser scribed patterning. 
The light scribing method involves the patterning of GO using a laser.114–117 For this purpose, aqueous GO dispersions were first drop-cast onto a thin substrate with the size of a CD/DVD media disc and dried for 24 hours. Irradiation of the film with an infrared laser inside an inexpensive commercially available light-scribed CD/DVD optical drive reduces the GO to laser-scribed graphene (LSG) and restores the aromatic sp2 structure of graphene resulting in a change of color from golden brown to black. Rapid release of the gases during the reduction process caused the LSG to exfoliate and expand simultaneously to form a porous structure (see the schematics of the process in Fig. 9). LSG porous structures are found to be mechanically robust, with high electrical conductivity (1738 Siemens per meter) and specific surface area (1520 m2 g−1), rendering the films applicable for electrochemical capacitor applications. Principally, the laser scribing method is similar to the leavening or the chemical activation process described in Section 2.2.4. The only difference is that leavening and chemical activation processes employ chemical means, while laser scribing uses the laser light as a source to reduce and expand the volume of GO films.
 Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors.115 All the figures are reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. 


3.2.6. Breath figure method. 
The breath figure method118,119 is a bio-inspired, facile, low-cost, green, scalable, and universal technology to fabricate honeycomb like porous structures with narrow pore size distribution. To execute the breath figure method, GO requires to be in the organic phase. To disperse the hydrophilic GO in organic solvents for subsequent casting on a suitable substrate cationic surfactants such as dimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium bromide (DODA·Br) are required to electrostatically adsorb and self-assemble onto the surface of the highly negatively charged GO to form a GO/surfactant complex.120 Under highly humid conditions (85% relative humidity), water condenses on the surface of GO/surfactant films in the form of hexagonally packed water molecules. Interestingly, during subsequent steps of solvent evaporation, these water droplets act as templates to form ordered honeycomb films with porous structures. (For detailed schematics of the process see Fig. 10A).
 Fig. 10  (Panel A) Schematics of breath-figure process to form honeycomb structures composed of graphene sheets.120 (Panel B) (a) Fabrication procedure of 3D graphene structures based on centrifugal vacuum evaporation. (b–e) SEM images of CVE–graphene obtained at 40 °C.121 (Panel C) (a) Schematics of the synthesis of graphene foam based on a sugar-blowing technique. (b–e) High and low magnification SEM images of graphene foam.122 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (C) Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.2.7. Centrifugal vacuum evaporation. 
Centrifugal vacuum evaporation (CVE) has been introduced as a scalable approach to obtain 3D porous structures of GO without the need for substrates, electrodes, or further drying steps.121 As the name suggests, this strategy combines centrifugal force and vacuum evaporation to promote the solvent evaporation without the loss of samples due to foaming or bumping. More dominant outward centrifugal force at lower temperature assembles the GO in 3D macro-porous structures, while a more dominant upward evaporation force at higher temperatures generates GO films (see Fig. 10B for details of the process).


3.2.8. Sugar blowing method. 
A sugar blowing approach has also been reported in the literature to prepare porous interconnected graphene structures.122,123 Typical synthesis involves mixing of kitchen sugar, glucose or sucrose with NH4Cl and the resulting mixture is gradually heated (for the detailed process see Fig. 10C). Molten syrup gradually polymerizes and gases from NH4Cl blew glucose-derived polymers, such as melanoidin, and made the bubbles. These bubbles finally burst with elimination of small molecules from the polymers to leave behind pores. Polymer walls were graphitized at higher temperature into the ultrathin graphitic walls. In this process the heating rate is detrimental to morphology as both the cell size and the strut width decrease with an increase in the heating rate (Fig. 10C–e) and the bubbles become more distorted at a faster heating rate.


3.2.9. Electrochemical leavening synthesis. 
The electrochemical leavening process described by Zhang et al.124 uses graphite paper rather than GO as a starting material. It avoids the complex and long chemical procedures used to synthesize GO. The electrochemical leavening process is a one step process in which ions intercalate between the graphene layers and expand the graphite paper to form self-supported 3D graphene with a surface area as high as 110 m2 g−1. The electrochemical leavening process is similar to the leavening process described in Section 3.2. The only difference is that leavening involves volume expansion due to the release of gases, while in electrochemical leavening volume expansion is the result of ion intercalation.


3.2.10. Three-dimensional printing. 
3D printing is widely considered a revolutionary manufacturing technology, with significant promise in a broad range of fields including tissue and organ engineering. Direct ink writing is an extrusion-based 3D printing technique involving the deposition of a liquid material ink that rapidly solidifies upon extrusion and allows the fabrication of 3D objects layer-by-layer. Jakus et al.125 demonstrated a 3D printable graphene composite consisting of majority graphene and minority polylactide-co-glycolide, a biocompatible elastomer, from a liquid ink (see Fig. 11 for the detailed process). 3D printed graphene exhibited structures as small as 100 μm composed of as few as two layers (<300 μm thick object) or many hundreds of layers (>10 cm thick object). Moreover, the structures were mechanically robust and flexible while retaining the electrical conductivities greater than 800 S m−1, an order of magnitude increase over previously reported 3D-printed carbon materials. Such scaffolds were not only suitable for human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC) adhesion, viability, proliferation, and neurogenic differentiation with significant upregulation of glial and neuronal genes but were also deemed to be appropriate for a wide range of functional, electronic, biological, and bioelectronic medical and nonmedical devices.
 Fig. 11  Schematics of graphene ink synthesis, printing of 3D structures and their applications.125 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 

4. Solution based synthesis of 3D structures of 2D materials other than graphene
Similar to graphene, methods to synthesize 3D structures of other 2D materials (BN, TMDs) can also be classified as CVD and non-CVD or template and non-template based methods. Interestingly, 3D BN aerogels have been reported long before the discovery of graphene.126,127 Synthetic routes for BN aerogels and related mesoscale assemblies have included the gelation of colloidal BN suspensions,128 templated growth from existing porous structures (such as zeolites,129 graphene aerogels,130 and metal foams131), and non-templated growth (including various high-temperature reactions of boron and nitrogen containing compounds,126,127,132–135 and freeze casting136). BN aerogels have also been prepared by using graphene aerogels via carbothermal reduction of boron oxide and simultaneous nitridation.137 The color and chemical composition of the original gel change dramatically, while structural features down to the nanometer scale are maintained, suggesting a direct conversion of the carbon lattice to boron nitride. Scanning and transmission electron microscopies revealed the foliated architecture of wrinkled sheets, a unique morphology among low density, porous BN materials. The converted gels display a high degree of chemical purity (>95%) and crystalline order and exhibit unique cross-linking structures (Fig. 12e and f).
 Fig. 12  (a and b) Illustration of the preparation of 3D g-CN structures.143 (e and f) Photograph of a precursor graphene aerogel (left) and a converted BN aerogel (right). The color of the aerogel undergoes a significant color change, from pitch black to bright white, indicating a major change in the chemical composition.137 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a–c) Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (a–c) Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Compared to graphene and BN, reports of monolithic assemblies of TMD analogues remain extremely limited. There has been considerable success with the creation of microporous (<2 nm pores) zeolitic chalcogenide structures,138,139 as well as macro-porous (>50 nm) materials created by sphere-templating strategies.140,141 However, in contrast, attempts to prepare similarly ordered mesoporous (2 to 50 nm) materials of metal chalcogenides have met with less success. Brock and co-workers142 reported chalcogenide aerogels based entirely on semiconducting II–VI or IV–VI frameworks, fabricated by using a general strategy that involves the oxidative aggregation of metal chalcogenide nanoparticle building blocks followed by supercritical solvent removal. The resultant materials are mesoporous, exhibit high surface areas, can be prepared as monoliths, and demonstrate the characteristic quantum-confined optical properties of their nanoparticle components. Similarly, Worsley et al.144 described the synthesis and characterization of monolithic, ultralow density WS2 and MoS2 aerogels, as well as a high surface area MoS2/graphene hybrid aerogel (Fig. 13a–i). The monolithic WS2 and MoS2 aerogels were prepared via thermal decomposition of freeze-dried ammonium thio-molybdate (ATM) and ammonium thio-tungstate (ATT) solutions, respectively. The densities of the pure dichalcogenide aerogels represent 0.4% and 0.5% of full density MoS2 and WS2, respectively, and can be tailored by simply changing the initial ATM or ATT concentrations. Similar processing in the presence of the graphene aerogel results in a hybrid structure with MoS2 sheets conformally coating the graphene scaffold. This layered motif produces an approximately 50 wt% MoS2 aerogel with a BET surface area of ∼700 m2 g−1 and an electrical conductivity of 112 S m−1. The MoS2/graphene aerogel shows promising results as a hydrogen evolution reaction catalyst with low onset potential (approximately 100 mV) and high current density (100 mA cm−2 at 260 mV). A macroscopic 3D porous architecture of 2D graphitic carbon nitride (g-CN) has also been reported by one-step thermal polymerization of urea inside the framework of a commercial melamine sponge (Fig. 12a and b).143 3DCN exhibited improved photocatalytic water-splitting performance for hydrogen evolution compared to g-CN powder due to the 3D porous interconnected network, larger specific surface area, better visible light capture, and superior charge-separation efficiency.
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis scheme for MoS2 and WS2 aerogels. SEM images of (b) ATM, (c) ATT, (d and f) MoS2, and (e and g) WS2 aerogels. TEM images of (h) MoS2 and (i) WS2 aerogels. The inset in images h and i is the magnification of the white box and is 10 nm in width.144 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
5. Comments on the structure, properties, and applications of solution based 3D structures of 2D materials
Amongst solution based techniques, hydrothermal/solvothermal, cross-linking, and chemical reduction based assemblies are the most common and well-reported. Synthesis techniques can be detrimental to the structure, properties and, consequently, the applications of these structures. Even for one technique, pH,97,145 the nature of reducing agents, drying methods, temperature, or the nature of additives can have significant effects. For example, freeze dried graphene aerogels have metal luster, could support at least 14000 times their own weight with Young's moduli of 1.2–6.2 MPa, while graphene aerogels obtained from supercritical CO2 drying could only support 3300 times their own weight, possess a larger surface area (512 m2 g−1) and pore volume (2.48 cm3 g−1) as well as higher conductivity than those of the aerogels prepared using freeze-drying.86 For the freeze-drying method, the freezing temperature is crucial for structural control. For example, when the freezing temperature was decreased from −10 °C to −170 °C, the pore size decreased to 10–15 μm from 700–800 μm, depicting a 70 times decrease.146 The unique structure and properties of 2D materials, and the novel morphology of the bulk three-dimensionally linked 2D materials grant these bulk materials unique properties, such as high surface area,103,147–149 high electrical and thermal conductivity,106,148–153 being ultra-lightweight, light responsive/driven150,154,155 (Fig. 14A), and extremely elastic/compressible with zero Poisson's ratio (Fig. 14B).47,106,156
 Fig. 14  (Panel A) (a) Different vertical propulsion heights of the same sample at different light wavelengths, (b) different power densities, (c) three-dimensional histogram showing the rotation speed of the graphene sponge sample, showing a distinct positive correlation with power density and frequency of the laser.178 (Panel B) (a) The compressive stress to reach 90% strain plotted as a function of cycle number for 1000 cycles in air. (b) The compressive stress needed to reach 90% strain at an engineering strain rate of 20% strain s−1 is plotted as a function of cycle number for 200 cycles.62 (c) Poisson's ratio in air and acetone as a function of the number of compression and release cycles along the axial direction.156 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (Ba and Bb) Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (Bc) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Such a unique set of properties makes these materials applicable for energy,152,157–161 environment,158,162 electronics,157 catalysis,163,164 and bio-medical fields165 as sorbent materials,146 electrodes for supercapacitors,55,81,106,149,163,166–172 and batteries,173–175 light controlled materials,150,154,155 cell capture-release/tissue growth scaffold,125,150,176 light-controlled liquid microvalves,154 sensors,177etc. Owing to the availability of some application related reviews on solution based 3D graphene structures,159,160 and the fact that the applications of CVD grown and solution based structures are similar, we avoid detailed applications of solution grown 3D structures here and instead explained these applications with the example of CVD grown structures in Section 9 of the review.
6. CVD synthesis of 3D structures of 2D materials
6.1. CVD synthesis of 3D graphene
While the solution grown structures have been referred to by a variety of names (aerogels, hydrogels, monoliths, etc.), CVD based structures in the literature are mostly referred to as “foams” or “networks”, and we will also use these two terms preferably. 3D CVD synthesis of graphene is principally similar to the growth of single and few layer planar graphene sheets, where a catalytic metal substrate is used and a carbon source is decomposed on the metal substrates to form graphene.31,179–183 In the CVD growth of 3D graphene structures, a 3D metal scaffold or foam, instead of a metal thin film, is used both as a catalytic surface and a sacrificial template. The graphene foam (GF) replicates the morphology of the interconnected 3D metal template which makes it easier to tailor the morphology of the GF by simply changing the shape, size and porous structure of the metal template (Fig. 15A–C). While for the thin film CVD growth of graphene a range of metal substrates such as Ni, Co, Ru, Ir, and Cu31,179–183 have been used; however, for 3D growth only Ni and Cu based metal scaffolds have been reported in the literature so far. Generally, Ni based 3D growth of graphene foam is preferred over the Cu based due to the reason that graphene grown on Ni has few layer graphene structures which renders stability to the graphene foam structures.67 Cu based growth leads to thin walls of graphene foam with a single layer structure which cannot self-support its interconnected 3D network and will collapse readily even under the slightest weight during the processing.67 The difference in the number of graphene walls, which consequently determines the self-supporting capability of the foams, comes from the different mechanisms for Ni and Cu based growth of graphene. It has been proposed that CVD growth of graphene on Ni occurs by a carbon segregation or precipitation process whereas graphene on Cu grows by a surface adsorption process.6,181,182,184 We believe that the self-supporting capability of Ni or Cu grown foams can be improved by decreasing the pore size of metal template foams that will ultimately increase the inter-connectivity amongst the porous graphene networks to distribute the load transfer more efficiently. For this purpose, metal template foams with sub-micron pore size may be used but these are not readily available commercially. Commercially available metal foams have a pore diameter of 200–500 μm and a branch size of 50–100 μm. However, commercially available macroporous metal foams can be pressed before CVD growth to make them denser (Fig. 15D). He et al.187 claimed that before the growth of graphene on Ni foam, pressing of Ni foam can bring three advantages: (1) maintenance of the 3D structure for the graphene networks, with no cracks or collapse owing to the strength and ductility of Ni metal; (2) reduction of the size of the pores and the thickness of the Ni foam, which results in a lower volume for the 3D graphene network; (3) improvement of the flexibility of the 3D graphene network and its ability to suffer a large deformation. Graphene foams synthesized on these pressed Ni foam substrates are flexible, have curved properties, and show a negligible effect of bending on their electrical properties, with a bending angle range of 0 to180°.
 Fig. 15  (Panel A) (a–f) Schematics of CVD graphene growth on Ni foam templates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. (Panel B) photographs of (a) Ni foam before and after the growth of graphene, and (b) 3D graphene networks obtained in a single CVD process after the removal of the Ni foam. SEM images of (c) 3D graphene networks grown on Ni foam after CVD, and (d) 3D graphene networks after the removal of Ni foam.185 (Panel C) Photographs of the Ni foam template in different geometries.186 (Panel D) (a) Digital photographs of Ni foams with (1) and without (2) pressed and graphene-coated Ni foams before (3) and after (4) the removal of the Ni networks.187 (Panel E) SEM image of the interconnected Ni nanowires covered by graphene after CVD.188 (Panel F) (a–d) Procedure for porosifying Ni–Cu catalysts.189 (Panel G) Schematic illustration of the procedure used to produce 3D graphene foam utilizing 3D Ni nanowire foam as a catalyst for CVD growth.190 (Panel H) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for a 3D few-layer graphene GF.191 (Panel I) Fabrication schematic of 3D graphene grown on a hybrid SiO2/Ni template.192 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. (C and D) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (E and G) Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (F) Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (H) Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (I) Copyright 2015 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. 
Some groups have fabricated the metal templates in the lab with the customized pore size.189–191,193 For example, Ning et al.189 prepared a binary metal (Cu–Ni) foam template based on electrochemical etching with a relatively small pore size of 5–100 μm (Fig. 15F). Importantly, they were able to control pore morphology, size, and density of metal foam by adjusting the applied potential, pH value, reaction time, and temperature. Correspondingly, GFs grown on these metal foams also had smaller and variable pore size and subsequently a larger surface area compared to the commercially available Cu or Ni foams. Lee et al.191 have come up with an interesting strategy to fabricate nano-porous graphene foams using polymer/Ni precursor films and the CVD technique (Fig. 15H). In a typical synthesis, PVA–NiCl2 solution was spin coated on a SiO2/Si substrate. Annealing at high temperature of the coated precursor leads to carbonization of the PVA and removal of the 70–80% of carbon. Removal of carbon in large quantities left behind nano-porous Ni foam carbonized with the remaining 20–30% carbon. The remaining carbon was used as a carbon source to grow graphene under the regular CVD process. A 3D network of nanowires (NWs) has also been employed as a template for bulk scale growth of CVD graphene.188 Ni NWs were synthesized on a large scale by the reduction of Ni ions under an applied magnetic field, and then assembled into a 3D film by filtering a bulk Ni NW solution or/and by pressing Ni nanowire powder. An additional CVD process was conducted to develop graphene on the 3D Ni NW foam (see Fig. 15G for details of the process and Fig. 15E for GFs grown on Ni NWs) at 670 °C, which is considerably lower than the conventional growth temperatures of around 1000 °C. Recently, hybrid templates consisting of a metal and a non-metal have also been reported where the non-metal part such as SBA-15 acts as a template while the metal (Ni) acts as a catalyst for graphene growth (Fig. 15I).192
The carbon source for the CVD grown 3D structures of graphene is usually methane, ethanol or acetylene. A solid, cheap, easily spreadable and environmentally benign precursor of butter has also been reported to successfully synthesize graphene on Ni-foams in plasma assisted CVD process. Growth temperature for the CVD process is usually high (in the range of 900–1000 °C). In a typical synthesis,67,185,194 firstly, metal foam of suitable size is placed inside a quartz tube furnace and temperature is gradually increased to the required level. Metal foams are then annealed for certain time (∼5 min) at sufficiently high temperature (∼1000 °C) under the H2/Ar atmosphere with a fixed flow rate ratio of gases. The purpose of annealing the graphene foams is to clean the surface and remove any oxide layers. After the annealing, carbon source can be introduced into the quartz tube to initiate the growth step with a time span of 5–10 min. After successful synthesis of graphene, the samples are rapidly cooled down (usually the rate of 100 °C min−1) to room temperature. To obtain the Ni free graphene structures, either the Ni foam (NF) is etched straightaway to obtain the free-standing graphene foams or is firstly coated with polymers such as PMMA by immersing in the polymer solution followed by Ni etching. PMMA coating is subsequently removed by immersing in hot acetone. It is preferable to have a PMMA free process as it introduces the impurities due to its incomplete removal in acetone, and subsequently diminishes the electronic properties of resulting graphene structures. In some cases, NF is not etched away but is retained to grant support to otherwise relatively fragile 3D graphene foams. Such a 3DG@NF is suitable for its application as an electrode.195 Various metal etchants can be used to get rid of the metal scaffold after the growth of graphene. The choice of the etchant is critical to the final properties of GFs. This can be exemplified by the report of Ruoff's group196 where they used Ni etchants such as HCl, FeCl3/HCl (1 M/1 M mixture), Fe(NO3)3 and NH2S2O8 and found that the time of annealing and the type of etchant have significant effects on the properties of the obtained graphene foams. Slower etchants such as Fe(NO3)3 and NH2S2O8 produced better quality GFs. For example, the thermal conductivity of GFs increased from 0.26 to 1.7 W m−1 when the etchant was changed from aggressive hydrochloric acid to a slow ammonium proxy bisulfate etchant.
The versatility of the CVD technique also allows us to controllably dope the GFs with other elements such as nitrogen (N) or boron (B).195,197,198 B-doped graphene on Ni template foams can be grown using toluene and triethyl borate as the carbon and boron source.198 For N-doped graphene a mixture of CH4 and NH3198 or a single source of ethylene diamine194 has been used, with nitrogen doping levels of 3.1 and 2.71%, respectively, suggesting that the mixture of gases is a more efficient source in doping the GF. For the B-doped graphene foam the boron doping level was 2.1 atom%. For graphene co-doped with N and B, melamine diborate was used as a source for the CVD growth, which can be synthesized by mixing melamine and boric acid at specific temperature and time conditions. Melamine diborate acted as a single source of C, N, and B. For co-doped graphene foams, the doping levels of B and N were 3 atom% and 4.5 atom%, respectively.198
Apart from GFs, another form of vertically CVD grown 3D graphene has been reported.199,200 Such graphene does not need a template to grow in the vertical direction (can grow up to 38 μm in the vertical direction) but instead the application of a strong electric field forces graphene to grow vertically on a planar substrate. Microwave plasma enhanced CVD (MPECVD) is the only way to directly grow vertical graphene sheets standing on the substrate.200
6.2. CVD synthesis of 3D graphene related materials
3D structures of graphene related materials, such as h-BN, can also be grown using template based CVD methods. Templates can be either metallic131 or non-metallic.201 In a typical example of a boron nitride foam (BNF) grown on the Ni foam template131 by CVD, borazane vapors (obtained by heating solid borazone) formed BN film on the surface of the Ni skeleton due to polyreaction, cross-linking, and dehydrogenation reaction process.202,203 In this process, borazine was first converted to polyborazylene, which diffused onto the surface of Ni foam and underwent a cross-linking reaction of B–H and N–H groups on adjacent chains; finally, the unaligned chain branches of polyborazylene were dehydrogenated and ultimately formed the white colored hexagonal BNF (Fig. 16A).202,203 To get rid of the metal template to obtain the self-supporting BNF, PMMA assisted etching was performed on the same lines as explained for GFs in Section 6.1.
 Fig. 16  (Panel A) (a) Photograph of a free-standing BN foam. (b) SEM image of a BNF network.131 (Panel B) Carbon aerogel template (left) and BN aerogel (right). The aerogels show a significant color change from black to white, which indicates an obvious change in their chemical composition. The BN aerogel maintains the cylindrical shape of the carbon aerogel template. (Panel C) SEM and TEM images of the carbon aerogel template (a and c) and BN aerogel (b and d).201 (Panel D) Schematic of the 2 stage synthesis process of 3D-BNC: first, patches of h-BN are grown on Ni foam using the CVD process. Second, graphene is grown on the empty patches of the uncovered Ni foam, with some etches overlapping the BN patches and forming the stacking/overlapping junctions. (Panel E) (a–c) EDX mapping of 3D-BNC with different BN:C ratios (25:75, 50:50 and 75:25), with red (color) corresponds to carbon, blue (color) to nitrogen and green (color) to boron-peaks.204 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (B and C) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (D and E) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
Since commercial Ni templates restrict the size and morphology of the BN foam, in-house synthesis of templates to obtain the BNFs with customized morphology has also been reported. Carbon aerogels consisting of graphene–carbon nanotube composites have been used as templates to grow BNFs (Fig. 16B and C).201 Carbon aerogels were fabricated by freeze-drying the aqueous solutions of CNTs and giant graphene oxide (GGO) sheets followed by chemical reduction of GGO to graphene with hydrazine vapor. BN aerogels were grown on carbon aerogels using borazine as the BN precursor. BN aerogels replicated the exact structure of carbon aerogels, both at macro- (foam like structure in Fig. 16B) and nanoscales (graphene sheet structure and carbon nanotube tubular structures in Fig. 16C). An attractive aspect of using the carbon aerogel as a template is that it allows the growth of BNFs without the use of a metal catalyst. After the growth, carbon aerogel can be easily removed in flowing oxygen at 600 °C to obtain BN aerogels with a continuous 3D network structure.
6.3. CVD synthesis of composite 3D structures of different 2D materials
The crystalline structure of graphene and h-BN closely matches with one another, leading to the material properties which are similar (very high thermal conductivity, high temperature stability, excellent mechanical properties) as well as contrasting (electrical conductivity, dielectric permittivity) at the same time. Furthermore, due to the close lattice matching (<2% mismatch) of these two constituent materials, there is a possibility of obtaining the composites of these two 2D materials which could possibly retain particular properties of each 2D material while having tuning capabilities with others. The 3D composites of graphene and h-BN (3D-BNC or BNC foam) using CVD have been fabricated via a two-step process under low pressure in order to achieve good controllability of C:BN composition (Fig. 16D and E).204 In a typical growth example, BN is first introduced by sublimating borazane at 120 °C, and subsequently, ethanol is bubbled into the quartz tube. Fig. 16D shows the proposed growth mechanism and the formation of 3D-BNC. First, BN growth is initiated by heating the borazane at 120 °C, and the pressure is kept constant at 60 Pa. After BN growth is terminated, the system is allowed to stabilize for 5 min, and ethanol is bubbled into the quartz tube with additional Ar flow for graphene growth. The growth duration for each procedure determines the C:BN composition.
7. Structure and properties of CVD grown 3D structures of 2D materials
7.1. Structure
The 3D foam like structure of 2D materials typically has five hierarchical orders; foam like macro structure, porous network structure with a specific pore size, branches and nodes, branch walls consisting of few layers of 2D material and atomic structure of the 2D material. A schematic of this structural hierarchy is given in Fig. 17. Such structural features at different length scales impart specific characteristics and properties to these structures. The presence of pores makes these 3D structures ultra-light in weight. For example, the GF concentration of 0.7 vol% has an ultralow density of ∼5 mg cm−3 close to that of the lightest aerogel (2–3 mg cm−3), and correspondingly high porosity (∼99.7%), and a high specific surface area (∼1200 m2 g−1). Similarly, a CVD grown BNF has also been reported with a high specific surface area (Fig. 18c), and density as low as 0.6 mg cm−3, much lower than that of air.201 A comparison of the properties of CVD grown GFs and BNFs with those grown by other non-CVD techniques has been presented in Table 1 (some of the values in Table 1 are taken directly from a previous literature report152). Given that the template morphology is fixed, exact values of the density and surface area of 3D foam structures depend upon the growth conditions. For example, an increase in growth time will lead to higher numbers of 2D material layers in the structure, which will subsequently lead to higher density but lower specific surface area (shown in Fig. 18a and b).
 Fig. 17  Hierarchy of the 3D structure of 2D materials (with the example of graphene). 
 Fig. 18  (a) Raman spectra of 3D graphene networks. The inset shows the change in the number of GF layers with an increase in CH4 concentration.67 (b) Specific surface area and density of a BNF against CVD growth time.201 (c) The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the BNF at 77 K.201 (d) Electrical conductivity of GFs and GF/PDMS composites as a function of the number of graphene layers.67 (e) Plot of electrical conductivity as a function of C volume fraction, percolation threshold is found to be 0.2.204 (f) Ratio of the dielectric constant of the BNF at 100 kHz to that of air as a function of the strain.131 All the figures are reproduced with the permission. (b–d, and the inset in a) Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (f) Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Properties of CVD grown 3D structures of 2D materials prepared by solution and CVD methods




Type
Template
Method
Pore size
Surface area (m2 g−1)
Electrical conductivity (S m−1)
Ref.




Graphene paper (GP); graphene network (GN); graphene foam (GF); graphene framework (GFW); chemical vapor deposition (CVD); hydrothermal synthesis (HS), solvothermal synthesis (SS); electro-deposition deposition (ED); atomic layer deposition (ALD); vacuum filtration (VF); VF-leavening (VF-LV); laser-scribing (LS); hydrothermal-gelation (HG); vacuum freeze-drying (VFD); centrifugal vacuum evaporation (CVE); electrochemical leavening synthesis (ELS); sugar blowing synthesis (SBS); self-assembly (SA); thermal polymerization (TP); melamine sponge (MS).




GF
Ni foam
CVD
200–500 μm
∼850
∼1000

67



GF
Ni–Cu foam
CVD
5–100 μm
500–1200
∼900

189



GF
Porous Ni film
CVD
5–10 μm
980
∼1100

193



GF
Cu mesh
CVD
200–800 μm
—
—

205



GF
Silica
CVD
1.8–3.5 nm
1900
360

195



GFW
Polystyrene spheres
VF
1–2 μm
142
∼1204

56



GFW
Silica sphere
SA
60–120 nm
851
—

54 and 56



GN
Carbon template
CVD
500 nm
—
—

66



GF
Ni foam
HS
200–500 μm
500–900
—

63



GP
No
VF
20–500 nm
466
687

53 and 206–210



GP
No
VF-LV
2–5 μm
—
500–800

112



GP
No
VF-LS
50–500 nm
1520
1738

114 and 115



GN
No
HG-VFD
1–10 μm
249
450–800

48 and 78



GFW
No
HG-VFD
0.5–10 μm
280
1000–1400

76



GFW
No
HG
1–10 μm
1000
600–1000

169



GFW
No
CVE
0.5–50 μm
—
100–200

121 and 211



GF
No
ELS
1–5 μm
110
—

124



GFW
No
SBS
20–200 μm
1005
20000

212



BN
Graphene aerogels
CVD
2–100 nm
1051



201



BN
Ni
CVD
∼300 μm
—



131



BCN
Ni
CVD
250 μm
—



204



g-CN
MS
TP
4–170 nm
78



143





One of the biggest advantages of CVD grown 3D structures of 2D materials is the high structural quality. CVD grown 3DGF structures are found to be of high structural quality as proved by weak or no presence of defect induced Raman D band at ∼1350 cm−1 (Fig. 18a). However, the intrinsic grains and wrinkles of graphene sheets are well remained without any observable crack or break, indicating a continuous network of graphene.67 Wrinkles on the surface of GFs probably result from the difference in the thermal expansion of metal and graphene.
7.2. Properties

7.2.1. Electrical properties. 
Since the CVD grown GF has fewer defects when compared to the solution processed GF, the expected exceptional physical properties of graphene can be mirrored in its CVD grown 3D structures. The electrical conductivity of CVD grown 3D GFs can reach as high as 1000 S m−1,3 which is comparatively higher than solution processed 3DG structures. However, the exact value of the electrical conductivity depends upon the number of graphene layers. CVD allows us to conveniently control the number of layers and thus the electrical conductivity of GFs by changing the growth parameters (Fig. 18a and d). In contrast to GFs, BNFs are insulating, which make them potential candidates for low-k materials. Like most porous low-k materials, the porosity of BNFs not only makes them light in weight but also extends the dielectric constant well into the ultralow-k region. A three-dimensional hierarchical BNF with a permittivity of 1.03 times that of air and density of 1.6 mg cm−3 has been reported (Fig. 18f). Moreover, the BNF is thermally more stable (up to 1200 °C)144 compared to the silica aerogels and graphene based porous materials which are stable up to a comparatively low temperature of 600 °C.201,213–215
The electrical conductivity of BNC composites depends upon the ratio of C to BN content in the composites (Fig. 18e). At higher contents of BN in the composites conducting C paths are blocked by insulating BN patches which hinders the long term charge carrier transport and increases the resistance of composites. With increasing C concentration, at a certain composition of C, the conductivity rises sharply, transforming the composite into a conducting material. The conductivity at this point can be explained by the percolation theory and power law σ ∝ (p − pc)t, where σ is the electrical conductivity, p is the fraction of C, pc is the fraction of C at the percolation threshold, t is the critical exponent and its value is 2 for ideal 3D systems.216 Linear fitting of the log–log plot of the equation finds the percolation threshold (pc) at 0.2 volume fraction of C. The value of t obtained is 6.2 which is far from the universal value of 2, indicating a relatively steep insulating–conducting transition. Variation in electrical conductivity values with concentration of individual constituents in BNC composites allows tuning of the conductivity of the 3D composite foams which is an important feature of these composites.


7.2.2. Thermal properties. 
It is believed that 3D graphene-based architectures hold great promise as thermal interface and heat spreading materials that meet the requirements of both the thermal conductivity and mechanical compliance for thermal management of electronic devices as well as thermal storage and electromechanical devices.196 Bulk graphite and bulk BN are known to have very high cross-plane thermal conductivities of around 10 W m−1 K−1 and 30 W m−1 K−1, respectively.217,218 The highest cross-plane thermal conductivity measured on GFs is only 2.28 W m−1 K−1 due to its high porosity and low density.196 However, compared with composite polymer/nano-carbon (such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene) at the same loading fraction, the thermal properties of GFs are actually several times higher.219,220 The reason is the 3D interconnected nature of GFs which provides better transport characteristics compared to dispersed nano-fillers such as CNTs and graphene. The density of GFs controlled by the CVD growth time and metal etchants plays a crucial role in their thermal properties. The thermal conductivity of the GFs can be increased by reduction of pore size but without a change in strut wall thickness.196 For low-density foams, an enhancement in thermal conductivity by more than a factor of 6 can be achieved with the use of a slow etching process of the sacrificial Ni support.196 As 3D-BNC (or BNCF) is a composite of C and BN, its cross-plane thermal performance should be comparably high as well. The thermal conductivities of GFs and BNFs are relatively close in value since graphene and h-BN both have high thermal conductivities due to their similar phonon spectrum.221 The slight difference observed between the two is due to the almost absence of electronic contribution to the overall thermal conductivity for BNFs; however, the difference is minor as acoustic phonons have a far more significant role, as shown for the case of graphene.196,222 For 3D-BNC, their thermal conductivities are measured to be between 0.9 ± 0.18 and 0.84 ± 0.22 W m−1 K−1. It is lower as compared with GFs (2.28 W m−1 K−1) probably due to the presence of an interface between C and h-BN domains.223


7.2.3. Mechanical properties. 
Nano-compression results have shown that the hardness (19.9–26.1 kPa) and elastic modulus (1.2–1.5 MPa) of the graphene foams are relatively low (Fig. 19A and B).224 The main reason for the low compression modulus is that during compression the main deformation mechanism is graphene branch bending and branch wall elastic depression (Fig. 19A). Such a mechanism does not allow utilizing the exceptional in-plane mechanical properties of graphene. However, the elastic modulus under the tensile loading is high owing to graphene branch alignment which enables branches to bear load along the high strength in-plane direction of graphene (Fig. 19B). In situ SEM results also indicate the alignment of ductile graphene branches by rotating at 0.59 degree per second, while the brittle mode junctions become aligned abruptly at 3.08 degree per second. The tensile modulus of graphene monoliths (GMs) has been calculated in the range of 195–1172 GPa while the exact value depends upon the crystal orientation, the type of graphene nanoribbon (zigzag or armchair), and the thickness of the nanoribbons. Other theoretical estimates based on the simple volume fraction calculation predict the elastic modulus of 69.9 ± 16.9 GPa for the bulk foam. Exploration of the basic structure and properties of these GMs is still in the early stages and few experimental reports are available on the basic physical properties of these networks.
 Fig. 19  (Panel A) Schematic illustrating the deformation mechanisms during nanoscale compression of graphene foam via nanoindentation and the typical nanoindentation curve of GFs.224 (Panel B) (a and b) Graphene foam branch bending during in situ SEM tensile tests, rotates about 7° in 12 s (tensile force is applied in the vertical direction), (c and d) graphene branch bending at the base of the node, from nearly 0° to 40° in 13 s, and the typical stress–strain curve showing peaks and valleys induced by alignment and fracturing of GF branches,224 (e) Demonstration of the flexibility of the freestanding 3D-BNC structure.204 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A and Ba–Bd) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (Be) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
Jiang et al.225 had shed some light on the probable structure of graphene networks in such porous structures and had predicted some of the mechanical and electronic properties using first-principles calculations. For the construction of graphene structures, zigzag or armchair ribbons as building blocks were connected with sp3 carbon chains as junction nodes. It is important to mention that in CVD grown structures building blocks of graphene may not be exactly the size of ribbons used in the study, but this is only one of few available theoretical studies that comes close enough to determine the structure–property relationship of these graphene networks. The prefect match between the sp2 nanoribbons and sp3 linkers results in favorable energy and mechanical and dynamic stability. The results of the theoretical calculations suggest that such networks are semiconductors with a direct band gap in the range of 0.49 eV to 2.78 eV; the exact value depends on the structure and size of the nanoribbon building blocks. Cheng and co-workers67 mentioned the conductivity of the structures in the range of 7–10 S cm−1, while the exact value depends on the number of graphene layers in the structures. We believe that such a difference between experimental and theoretical conductivity values is from the fact that in the case of Jiang et al.225 building blocks were single layer graphene nanoribbons which inherently have a band gap. In fact, making nanoribbons of graphene is one of the commonly used methods to open a band gap in otherwise a gapless graphene. The single layer nanoribbon structure of building blocks most probably led to their semiconducting properties. While experimental studies report poor compression properties of GFs, ultra-light BNFs have been reported with good compression properties exhibiting full recovery even after compression up to 70% as shown in Fig. 18e and f. However, compression after 70% strain can introduce permanent residual deformation. This structural stability of BNFs can be attributed to a unique hollow branch structure, which utilizes the material with balanced rigidity and elasticity, and the absence of solvent surface tension while removing the PMMA. Not only the structure of BF foam was mechanically stable but its dielectric properties were also not affected by the compression of up to 70% in three compression cycles. The structural stability of BNFs also makes it possible to grant structural stability in its BNC composites. Actually, freestanding lightweight BNC foam has been found to be mechanically stable and flexible (Fig. 19D(e)).204

8. Composites of CVD grown 3D structures
Pores in 3D structures of 2D materials can act as hosts for a wide range of materials such as organic molecules, polymers, and inorganic materials. Introduction of these materials can impart new functionalities to these 3D materials and render them applicable for energy storage and conversion devices, environmental applications, sensing, etc. In this section we will discuss in detail the composite fabrication techniques of 3D structures of 2D materials with metals, metal oxides and hydroxides, polymers, carbon materials, organic molecules and other related materials. The focus of our discussion will be on the composite of CVD grown GFs.
8.1. Composites with polymers
CVD grown 3D structures, especially of graphene, are mechanically not very stable and can easily collapse under compression. Introduction of polymers in the pores of 3D porous structures will provide much needed mechanical stability and improve their handling compared to pristine 3DGFs (Fig. 20). GFs in return will reinforce the different physical properties of the polymers. Moreover, depending on the polymer properties (conducting, non-conducting, bio-compatible, hydrophobic, etc.), required functionalities can be imparted to these composites.
 Fig. 20  Optical images of the handleability of (a) GF (arrows pointing to the fractured portions of the GF), (b) PVDF, (c) PCL, (d) PVDF/GF, and (e) PCL/GF scaffolds when placed in a pair of tweezers.229 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
Polymers can be infiltrated into the porous structures of GFs through in situ polymerization of polymers,226,227 or by diluted polymer solutions using techniques such as impregnation,228 spin-coating,229 drop-casting,67,230 or dip-coating231 (see Fig. 21 for example). PMMA coating is generally used to support the GFs before the metal etching step to avoid the breakage of interconnected 3D networks in GFs. However, coating of the polymer, for which the composites are to be made of, instead of PMMA, will serve the dual purpose of support coating, as well as the polymer matrix for the composite fabrication. It has been found that coating of polymers such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), epoxy, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and polycaprolactone (PCL)227–229 before the etching does not hinder the metal etching process, and subsequently a negligible metal content is found in the final GF/polymer composites. Such a strategy will simplify the composite fabrication to a single step only.
 Fig. 21  (Panel A) Flowchart for the preparation of impregnated GF/epoxy composites.228 (Panel B) Schematic of the procedure for fabricating dip-coated graphene/PDMS foam composites.231 (Panel C) (a and b) SEM image of 3D graphene foam. (c and d) SEM image of 3D graphene foam coated with in situ synthesized PANI.226 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (B) Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (C) Copyright 2012, Elsevier. 
In contrast to traditional polymer composites, where the filler dispersion in the polymer matrix is the major challenge, for 3DGF/polymer composites the biggest challenge is to completely infiltrate the polymer into the porous structures. In most of the reported cases, GF/polymer composites are found to be porous with porosity as high as 95%. The porosity of the composites does not affect the overall conductivity of the composites and instead these composites due to their high porosity possess the characteristics of ultra-light conductive composites. However, the presence of pores might limit the application of these composites for structural applications. The CVD grown GF has wrinkles on its surface due to the different thermal expansion coefficients of metal and graphene when subjected to cooling.194 These wrinkles offer mechanical interlocking sites with polymers due to their high surface area and friction forces between the polymer and graphene, thus providing the superior GF–polymer interface. Enforcing the capability of the GF to the polymers, due to the superior interface, has been demonstrated by an extraordinary increase in the glass transition temperature (Tg) of polymers. In 3DGF/epoxy composites, with GF content as low as 0.2 wt%, an extraordinary surge of 31 °C was observed in the Tg of epoxy.228
The following factors are likely responsible for the efficient restriction of polymer mobility and augmented thermal stability, resulting in remarkable Tg enhancement. (i) The regularly spaced cellular structure of the GF significantly boosted the interactions with epoxy while totally eliminating detrimental re-agglomeration of graphene in the matrix.232 (ii) The network structure of the GF had a large surface area allowing interface contacts with the polymer matrix. This naturally created a substantial interphase region around the percolated GF where the mobility of the polymer chains was constrained.233 (iii) The nanoscale surface roughness of the GF with many ripples likely resulted in enhanced mechanical interlocking with the polymer chains and consequently better interfacial adhesion,234 which had a positive influence on the thermal stability of the matrix.
8.2. Composites with metals
Composites of GFs with metals can be prepared by techniques such as electrochemical deposition, chemical reduction, and hydrothermal reduction. In the following discussion, we will explain these techniques with examples from the literature.

8.2.1. Electrochemical deposition. 
Electrochemical deposition is a simple, fast, and green technique that can be used to form graphene–nanoparticle composites while preventing the contamination of the synthesized materials. In addition, it is of low cost, easy to miniaturize and automate, highly stable, and reproducible.235,236 As such, by utilizing electrochemical deposition, the size and shape of the nanoparticles deposited can be precisely controlled by simply altering the conditions of electrochemical deposition. In particular, electrochemical deposition methods have been developed extensively for the fabrication of graphene–inorganic nanoparticle composites, with the vast majority of composites formed using this method are of noble metals such as Au,237–239 Ag,240,241 Pt,239,242–244 Pd,239 as well as the bimetallic metals. In a typical electrochemical deposition experiment, there are three steps wherein (1) the graphene sheets are first assembled onto an electrode, (2) the graphene-coated electrode is then immersed in an electrolytic solution containing metallic precursors, and (3) a potential is applied. In the case of 3DGF structures, the first step of graphene assembly on the electrode is not required as the 3DGF structure can itself act as an electrode or can be easily fixed on an electrode. Pt, Pd, and Au NPs have been electrochemically deposited on the 3DGF structures. As shown in Fig. 22, variables such as the metal ion concentration, pH, reaction time, and potential scan rate can readily tune the morphology and shape of the metal NPs. Pulsed electrodeposition of metal NPs on 3D GFs with controlled size and dispersion is also possible. Maiyalagan et al.244 demonstrated that pulse deposition with 200 pulses led to well defined spherical type Pt particles uniformly dispersed on a 3D graphene surface, ranging from 10 to 30 nm in size.
 Fig. 22  SEM images of Pt nanostructures grown on the 3D graphene substrate using different pHs: (A) pH 1.7, (B) pH 2.7 and (C) pH 4.5. SEM images of potential-controlled Pd NPs on 3D graphene: (D) 0.1 V, (E) −0.2 V and (F) −0.65 V. SEM images of Pd NPs on 3D graphene following different deposition times: (G) 150 s, (H) 250 s and (I) 500 s. SEM images of Au NPs on 3D graphene using different HAuCl4 concentrations: (J) 0.1 mM, (K) 0.5 mM and (L) 1 mM.239 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


8.2.2. Chemical reduction. 
Graphene–metal nanoparticle composites are most frequently fabricated via chemical reduction (electroless-deposition) of metallic salts (e.g., HAuCl4, AgNO3, and K2PtCl4) using chemical agents such as ethylene glycol, sodium citrate, and sodium borohydride.245 In general, for electroless-deposited metal–3D graphene composites, the shape, volume, and size of the metal NPs can be systematically varied by controlling the solution pH, metal ion concentration, and temperature. Qiu et al.245 have reported Pt/GF composites by the electroless-deposition technique using acidic H2PtCl6 solutions of different pHs (1.6, 2.7, and 4.5). The highest and most uniform Pt coverage was observed at low pH values. The size of Pt nanoparticles increased from 3 nm sharp spikes to 80 nm rough particles when the pH of the solution was changed from 1.6 to 4.5. Similarly, bimetallic (PtRu) nanoparticles were deposited via chemical reduction from their acidic solutions.190 Typically, in an experimental trial, the Pt and Ru precursors were first dissolved in deionized (DI) water; citric acid was added in the solution as a capping agent to prevent nanoparticle agglomeration, pH of solution was adjusted to 7.0 using 0.1 M NaOH solution, and finally NaBH4 was used as a reducing agent to obtain PtRu nanoparticles.


8.2.3. Hydrothermal reduction. 
The hydrothermal method is another technique commonly used to synthesize inorganic nanoparticles with high crystallinity and narrow size distribution on graphene sheets. This method also allows for the formation of nanoparticles on graphene without the need for post annealing and calcination.246 In general, the process involves the use of high temperatures and pressures, which induce the growth of nanocrystals. In most cases, reducing agents are added to ensure the complete reduction of chemical species.247 The hydrothermal method is widely used to prepare graphene–metal oxide composites. However, this method is equally advantageous for the preparation of graphene–noble metal nanoparticle composites. In a typical example of GF/Ag composites fabricated by hydrothermal reduction, the 3DGF was firstly handled with 1.0 mg ml−1 sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (SDBS) solution to activate the hydrophobic surface of graphene. Then, the 3DG was transferred into 50 ml autoclave containing sodium citrate, silver nitrate, PVP, ethylene glycol, and reacted for 60 min at 160 °C. Afterwards, the composite materials were washed with deionized water to remove impurities, and dried in an oven to obtain Ag NP/GF composites.248

8.3. Composites with metal oxides and hydroxides
Introduction of metal oxides to the 3D GF porous structure has been found to render the hybrid materials suitable for application as supercapacitor electrodes,244,249 batteries,71,194,250 solar cells,194 or sensors.194,251–253 Oxides and hydroxides of various metals (CuO, Co2O3, Co3O4, NiO, ZnO, WO3, MnO2, Mn3O4, MnO, Ni(OH)2, etc.) and various shapes (flowers, nanosheets, nanorods, nanoneedles, etc.) have been deposited on 3DGF structures for a variety of applications (see Fig. 23). Two of the most common techniques used for introducing the metal oxides to 3DGF structures are electrochemical deposition252 and the hydrothermal method.194,254–256 Other less common techniques are atomic layer deposition (ALD)194 and the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method.194 In the following text, we will describe each of the method with an example from the literature. Basic details of electrodeposition and the hydrothermal methods are the same as explained in Section 8.2. In an example of electrodeposition, Mn3O4/GF composites were fabricated252 using an electrochemical workstation equipped with a conventional three-electrode system, with a 3DGF as a working electrode, Pt foil as a counter electrode and Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode. Under room temperature, a constant potential of 0.5 V was applied in an aqueous solution of 0.01 mol L−1 manganese acetate for 600 s to achieve the uniform coating of manganese oxide (MnOx) on the skeleton of the 3DGF. The product was then washed with double-distilled water several times and dried by ultra pure nitrogen flow. Finally, the sample was calcined at 400 °C in air for 5 h to obtain the highly crystalline Mn3O4 on the 3DGF. By changing the electrodeposition conditions, the morphology of the deposits can be changed readily. For example, Dong et al.187 controlled the shape of MnO2 by simply changing the acidity of the solution (Fig. 24a–d).
 Fig. 23  (a and b) CuO flowers at low and high resolution,257 (c) Co3O4 nanosheets,250 (d) ZnO nanorods,258 (e) WO3 nanowires,259 (f) NiCo2O4 nanoneedles.260 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (c and e) Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and f) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 24  (a–d) FESEM and TEM (inset) images of different morphologies of MnO2 deposited on the surface of 3D graphene foams at various magnifications, left and right panels are shown at different magnifications.187 SEM images of 3DG/ZnO nanorods with different growth times: (e) 1 h, (f) 2 h and (g) 6 h.258 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a–d) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e–g) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
In a typical example of the hydrothermal method, the ZnO nanorod/GF composite was prepared by a hydrothermal reaction in two steps. Firstly, the ZnO seed layer was prepared by soaking the GF into zinc acetate solution which was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate [Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O] into ethanol (0.5 M), and then mixed with 2-methoxyethanol–monoethanolamine solution (0.5 M) at the same volume at room temperature. In the final step, the as-prepared sample was placed in a 50 ml teflon-lined stainless steel autoclave with a 30 ml supersaturated aqueous solution of 0.025 M Zn(CH3COO)2/0.05 M NaOH and was heated to 80 °C for a certain time to obtain the ZnO nanorod/GF composite (Fig. 24e–g).
In an example of the ALD technique,261 the graphene foams were treated with oxygen plasma and then were directly transferred to the ALD chamber for ZnO deposition. The ALD ZnO-coated graphene foams were immersed into a mixture of FeCl3 (30 mM) and glucose solution (30 mM) for 24 h to convert ZnO completely into FeOOH. Then, the samples were annealed in an Ar atmosphere at 400 °C for 2 h in order to transform FeOOH into Fe3O4 and, simultaneously, glucose into amorphous carbon.
SILAR, a well-known, simple and reproducible chemical method, has been successfully employed to synthesize novel nickel foam-graphene/nickel oxide (NF-G/NiO) in which the NiO nanostructures are anchored uniformly onto the surface of the graphene. SILAR is a stepwise chemical deposition technique based on immersion of the substrate into separately placed cationic and anionic precursors, and rinsing after every immersion cycle with deionized water to avoid homogeneous precipitation.262–264 The cationic precursor for NiO deposition was a mixture of 0.01 M Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and aqueous ammonia. The anionic precursor source was a hot water bath. When the substrate was immersed in the precursor solution (0.01 M Ni(NO3)2·6H2O), Ni ions were adsorbed onto the substrate surface. The substrate was then transferred to the hot water bath at a temperature of 90 °C for another 30 s to convert it into NiO, after which it was rinsed in distilled water for 30 s to remove the loosely bound or excess Ni hydroxyl ions. The SILAR steps were repeated for 60 cycles and the final NF-G/NiO composite contained 26 wt% NF-G and 74 wt% NiO. The important parameters in the SILAR technique are the concentration and pH of the precursor solution, temperature, and the time for adsorption and rinsing.
Apart from simple oxides and hydroxides of metals, composites of GFs with core–shell structures of metal hydroxides have also been reported. Core–shell structures of the metal oxides/hydroxides with a highly conductive thin shell can be useful in enhancing the electron/ion transport kinetics and structural stability. Ni3S2 nanorod@Ni(OH)2 nanosheet core–shell nanostructures on a three-dimensional graphene network were fabricated hydrothermally from a solution of 25 mg of thioacetamide (TAA, C2H5NS).265 In this particular case, the Ni metal foam template was not etched away after the growth of GFs but instead was retained as a precursor for the formation of Ni based compounds in the Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2 structure. By changing the reaction time of hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 6, 12, and 24 h, Ni3S2/3DGN, Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2/3DGN, and Ni(OH)2/3DGN structures were obtained, respectively (see Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  (a) TEM image of Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2. (b and c) HRTEM images of Ni3S2 nanorods and Ni(OH)2 nanosheets from the white square areas highlighted in (a). (d) The corresponding SAED patterns of Ni3S2 and Ni(OH)2. (e and f) EDS spectrum and mapping results from a single hybrid nanostructure, conforming to the Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2 core–shell hierarchical structure.265 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
8.4. Composites with other materials
Composites of GFs with CNTs have been achieved by both deposition and direct growth of CNTs. As an example of the deposition method, the binary composites of 3DGNs with MWCNTs (3DGN/MWCNT) have been prepared by the electrophoretic deposition method (EPD)266 from a MWCNT dispersion containing Mg(NO3)2·6H2O and isopropyl alcohol (IPA).243 Similarly, ternary composites of GFs, CNTs and MnOx have also been reported by a two-step hydrothermal method,267 where the COOH-functionalized-MWNT/MnOx composite was first fabricated by a hydrothermal process and then the CVD-grown GF was soaked into the composite solution for 24 h to obtain the GF/MWNT–COOH/MnOx ternary composites.
CNTs can also be grown directly on GFs by the CVD process.194 In a typical example, after growing graphene on Ni foam, the graphene–Ni substrate was immersed for about 2 min into 10% (w/w) polyethylene glycol–ethanol solution containing 0.1 mM Ni(NO3)2 as the precursor of the CNT growth catalyst (Ni particle), and subsequently dried in air. Using ethanol as the carbon source, CNTs were CVD-grown at 750 °C for 40 min. The bulk density of the Ni free graphene–CNT hybrid foam is about 6.92 mg cm−3. The resulting hybrids had the property of being reversibly bent with a large angle. Similarly, other carbon materials such as graphene nano-sheets (GNs) and graphene quantum dots (GQDs) have been anchored on the 3DGF by using the spin coating.268 GNs were prepared by Hummer's method and the GQDs were prepared from GO suspension using the pulsed laser reduction technique.269 A dispersion of GNs and GQDs in 2-propanol was spin coated on the GF to fabricate hybrids for solar cell applications.
By using CVD, other 2D TMD materials such as MoS2 can also be grown on 3D GF frameworks. For this purpose, a GF was dip casted into the MoS2 precursor solution [(NH4)2MoS4 in dimethylformamide (DMF)], before it was transferred into the CVD chamber for annealing at 400 °C for 1 h to obtain discontinuous micrometer scale MoS2 flakes.270 Using an almost similar technique GF/MoSx composites with MoSx in the form of nanometer-scaled structure and almost full coverage on GFs have been reported.271 In an example of lithium based compounds on GFs, LiFePO4/GF composites were fabricated by immersing the GF in the LiFePO4 suspension in NMP with the LiFePO4:GF ratio of 95:5 by weight. Afterwards the NMP solvent was evaporated through gentle stirring for 0.5 h at 80 °C, leaving behind the composite structures.272 More examples of similar composites can be found in Tables 2 and 3.
Table 2 Performance of GF and its composites as supercapacitor and battery electrodes




Ref.
Material
Application
Mass density (mg cm−2)
Electrochemical properties





268

GF + Li4Ti5O12
Li-ion battery
2–5
135–170 mA h g−1 at 200–1C



268

GF + LiFePO4
Li-ion battery
2–5
98 mA h g−1 at 50C



272

GF + LiFePO4
Li-ion battery
12–36
109–158 mA h g−1 at 10–0.2C



186

GF + LiFePO4
Li-ion battery
12–36
36–158 mA h g−1 at 1280–16 mA g−1



281

GF + V2O5/PEDOT
Li-ion battery
1.5–2
115–297 mA h g−1 at 80–1C



308

GF + Si
Li-ion battery
>0.3
550–850 mA h g−1 at 4–2 A g−1



287

GF + Si
Li-ion battery
0.4–1.5
513–983 mA h g−1 at 0.4–1.5 mg cm−2



288

GF + CNTs
Li-ion battery
0.5–1
236–2640 mA h g−1 at 75–0.5C



270

GF + MoS2
Li-ion battery


665–877 mA h g−1 at 500–100 mA g−1



261

GF + Fe3O4
Li-ion battery
0.5–4
350–785 mA h g−1 at 50–1C



285

GF + Fe3O4
Li-ion battery
∼0.3
300–1200 mA h g−1 at 20–1C



195

MnO2 NFs@GF
Li-ion battery
1
500–1200 mA h g−1 at 0.5–5 A g−1



250

GF + Co3O4
Li-ion battery
0.08–0.15
2453 mA h g−1 at 0.1 mA cm−2



286

GF + Co3O4
Li-ion battery


130–710 mA h g−1 at 5–0.2C



309

GF + S
Li-ion battery
3.3–10.1
450 mA h g−1 at 6 A g−1



310

GF + Co3O4
Na-ion battery
∼2.8
82.3–523.5 mA h g−1 at 500–25 mA g−1



189

GF + Ni(OH)2
Alkaline battery
0.2–0.5
241–480 mA h g−1 at 12–1.5 A g−1



195

N-doped GF
Supercapacitor
0.5
790 F g−1 at 1 A g−1



256

GF + Ni(OH)2
Supercapacitor
2–4
111–166 F g−1 at 10–0.5 A g−1



251

GF + Co3O4
Supercapacitor
2–2.5
1100 F g−1 at 10 A g−1



279

GF + CoO
Supercapacitor
∼2
231 F g−1 at 1 A g−1



278

GF + Co(OH)2
Supercapacitor
2–4
1139 F g−1 at 10 A g−1



253

GF + MnO2
Supercapacitor
1–1.5
670 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1



280

GF + NiO
Supercapacitor
∼10
300–425 F g−1 at 10–2 A g−1



187

GF + MnO2
Supercapacitor
0.1
465 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1



194

GF + ZnO
Supercapacitor
5–15
316 F g−1 at 6.7 A g−1



57

GF + MnO2
Supercapacitor
1–2
560 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1



265

GF + Ni3S2/Ni(OH)2
Supercapacitor
2–10
1037 F g−1 at 5.1 A g−1



263

GF + CNT
Supercapacitor


286 F g−1 at 1.78 mA cm−2



185

GF + NiO
Supercapacitor
1–2
816 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 scan rate



307

GF + CoMoO4
Supercapacitor
∼3
1101–3741 F g−1 at 85.71–1.43 A g−1



226

GF + PANI
Supercapacitor
1.5–2
346 F g−1 at 4 A g−1



193

GF + Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT
Supercapacitor
2.5–3
360–400 F g−1 from 40–2 A g−1



311

GF + NiO
Supercapacitor
—
783 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 scan rate



254

GF + Ni(OH)2
Supercapacitor
0.9
1791–2860 F g−1 at 30–2 A g−1



312

GF + Ag NW
Supercapacitor
1
213 F g−1 at 3 mV s−1



260

GF + NiCo2O4
Supercapacitor
—
1588 F g−1 at 1 A g−1



205

GF + PPy
Supercapacitor
—
403–660 F g−1 at 5.2–0.34 A g−1



255

GF + Ni(OH)2
Supercapacitor
1
890–1440 F g−1 at 80–10 A g−1




Table 3 Sensing performance of GF and its composites




Ref.
Sensing material
Sensitivity (μA mM−1 cm−2)
Detection limit (μM)
Linear detection range
Response time (s)
Sensing




Ferricyanide (FCN), dopamine (DA), Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), polydopamine (pDA), thionine (TH), nafion (NF), carbon nanotubes (CNT), multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs), nanowire (NW), nanofiber (NF), graphene foam (GF), ascorbic acid (AA).





194 and 333

GF
619.6
0.025
25 μM


DA


0.003
60 μM
UA



252

Mn3O4/GF
360
10
0.1–8 mM


Glucose


1030
1
2–6.5 μM
H2O2



243

PtNP/GF


0.125
0.167–7.486 μM
1.4
H2O2



243

MWNT/PtNP/GF


0.0086
0.025–6.3 μM
1.5
H2O2



243

MnO2/GF


0.27
0.38–13.46 μM
4
H2O2



257

CuO NF/GF
2060
0.43
0.43–200 μM
3
AA



259

WO3 NW/GF
1306
0.238
Up to 150 μM
4
DA



328

Ag NP/GF
1094
14.9
0.03–16.21 mM


H2O2



194

ZnO/GF
0.07
0.1
Up to 800 μM


FCN


15.18
1.0
2.0 μM
DA



330

pDA/GF
Short incubation time (30 min)
∼90 pg ml−1
0.1–750 ng ml−1


Immuno-sensor



190

PtRU/GF
1023.1
0.4
0.005–0.02 mM


H2O2



334

(pDA)/(TH)/GF
169.7
0.8
0.4–660 μM
3
H2O2



335

N-doped GF
9870
0.0001
3–100 μM


DA



289

GF/CNT
470.7
0.02
2–64 μM


DA



289

GF/CNT/NF/HRP
137.9
1
10 μM–1 mm


DA



251

GF/Co3O4
3390
<0.025
Up to 300


Glucose



329

GF/Ni(OH)2
3490
0.24
0.024–1200 μM


Glucose



328

GF/Ni(OH)2
2650
0.34
1–1170 μM


Glucose



267

MWNT–COOH/MnOx/GF






UV



336

GF/HfO2
79H






pH



337

PMMA/GF
200 ppm






NO2



318

GF
ppm level






NH3, NO2




9. Applications of CVD grown 3D structures
9.1. Li-ion batteries
Among the various secondary batteries, lithium ion batteries (LIBs) due to their attractive advantages of high energy density, low maintenance, relatively low self-discharge, high working voltage, and low toxicity are ideal candidates to meet the increasing demand of the energy conversion and storage devices for smart phones, laptop computers, digital cameras, wireless home appliances, and other portable electronic products.273 Nevertheless, LIBs still fall behind the increasing demand in large volume and high-powered applications. Electrode materials play a key role in the electrochemical lithium storage of LIBs and essentially determine the overall battery performance parameters such as the voltage, charge/discharge capacity, rate ability, and cycle stability.
Graphene based anodes or cathodes can deliver higher storage capacity and better high-rate performance.158 Though graphene outperforms the traditional graphite in the performance but the issue of its re-agglomeration and re-stacking coupled with huge irreversible capacity affects the overall electrochemical performance of graphene based LIBs.274–276 Graphene materials with 3D macro-porous structures, which can essentially avoid the issues of re-agglomeration and re-stacking of graphene, are favorable electrode candidates for lithium ion batteries.277 A robust 3D framework of graphene provides highly conductive networks with large surface area and short diffusion length for the transport of lithium ions which can greatly facilitate the ion diffusion and transport kinetics. The porous structures of metals and metal oxide composites of GFs are also considered to benefit the diffusion of electrolyte ions and to reduce the damage caused by the volume change of metals or metal oxide nanoparticles during charge–discharge cycles. Solution processed 3D graphene structures and their composites in the form of laminate, bilayer or array structures have been employed as lithium ion battery electrodes.152 The higher conductivity of CVD grown 3DGFs, mainly due to the high quality graphene constituents, may help them outperform their solution processed counterparts. Deposition of active materials including metal oxides,251,256,278–280 lithium based compounds186,196,272 or polymer on CVD grown GFs combines the advantages of active materials and GFs for further improved LIB electrode (both as a cathode and an anode) performance as shown in Fig. 26 and 27. For example, the layered structure of MoS2 and the weak van der Waals interaction between its layers enable the easy intercalation of Li ions without any significant increase in the volume and exhibit high Li storage capacities (∼670 mA h g−1 with 4 mol of Li+ insertion per formula).282,283 However, their cyclic stability and rate performance are still not satisfactory. Composites of MoS2 with 3DGFs (MoS2/GF), as an anode material for lithium-ion batteries, show good cycling performance compared with MoS2 with reversible capacities of 877 and 665 mA h g−1 during the 50th cycle at current densities of 100 and 500 mA g−1, respectively (Fig. 27d–f). Moreover, the MoS2/3DGN composite also exhibits excellent high-current-density performance, e.g. depicts a 10th cycle capacity of 466 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 4 A g−1. Wang et al.284 reported similar performance improvement for their MoS2/3DGN composites which had 85.8% retention of capacity after 60 cycles, better than the transitional bulk MoS2. Similarly, GF composites with lithium containing Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) nanosheets (LTO/GF) fabricated by the hydrothermal method exhibited specific capacities of ca. 170 and 160 mA h g−1 at 1 °C and 30 °C respectively, and observed no capacity degradation even cycling at 30 and 100 °C for 500 cycles, which was considerably better than the LTO without the presence of GFs.268
 Fig. 26  Li-ion battery cathodes. Morphology and electrochemical performance of (a–c) 3D/GF/Co3O4,250 (d–f) 3DGF/V2O5/PEDOT core/shell nanobelt,281 and (g–i) UGF/LFP composites.97 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (g–i) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 27  Li-ion battery anodes. Morphology and electrochemical performance of (a–c) 3DGF/Fe3O4,261 (d–f) 3DGF/MoS2,270 and (g–i) Si/graphene/3DGF composites.287 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a–c) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (g–i) Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. 
Binary composites of GFs with various metal oxides (such as Co3O4, Fe3O4, MnO2),56,195,285,286 silicon,287 CNTs212,288,289 (as shown in Fig. 26 and 27) have also shown great promise as electrode materials for high performance LIB applications. In order to further improve the performance of GF based electrodes, ternary composites of GFs containing a metal oxide and a polymer or a CNT have also been reported. To increase the electric conductivity and protect the anchored active materials, Fan and co-workers employed PEDOT as a conductive and protective layer for constructing GF/V2O5–PEDOT integrated electrodes (Fig. 26d–f).281 V2O5 nanoarrays were fabricated directly on current collectors and were coated with a mesoporous thin layer of conducting polymer PEDOT. This “all-in-one” integrated electrode outperformed all V2O5-based LIB electrodes with much enhanced high voltage percentage in high voltage windows (more than 3 V vs. Li/Li+), and exhibited an ultra-stable cycling performance at high rate (60 °C) for 1000 cycles. Similarly, ternary composites containing GFs, Fe2O3, and CNTs have been reported where Fe2O3 nanorods were assembled on CNTs forming a porous 3D Fe2O3/CNT–GF hierarchical nanostructured electrode,290 which provided higher surface area and high active material loading compared to the GF supported Fe2O3 electrode.
There is growing interest in thin, lightweight, and flexible energy storage devices to meet the special needs of next-generation, high-performance, flexible electronics.291,292 Li et al.293 have demonstrated a thin, lightweight, and flexible lithium ion battery containing a LiFePO4 cathode and a Li4Ti5O12 anode made from 3D interconnected graphene foam. Battery showed high-rate performance and energy density when repeatedly bent to a radius of 5 mm without structural failure and performance loss (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematic of a flexible battery containing a cathode and an anode made from 3D interconnected GFs. (b) Photograph of a bent battery encapsulated by PDMS, showing its good flexibility. (c) Lighting a red LED device under bending. (d–g) Electrochemical performance and cyclic performance of a flexible LTO/GF//LFP/GF full battery.293 Copyright 2014 PNAS. 
9.2. Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors owing to their high power density, high rates of charge–discharge, long cycling life, and a higher capacitance than normal capacitors are ubiquitous as energy storage devices.294–296 Based on the charge storage mechanism, supercapacitors can be categorized as electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs)297,298 and pseudocapacitors.299,300 While, EDLCs work in a non-faradaic mode through the separation of electronic and ionic charges at the interface of the electrode and the electrolyte, pseudocapacitors operate through fast and reversible faradaic reactions. Though, in the recent years, great progress has been made in the field of supercapacitors through understanding of charge storage mechanisms and the development of high-quality materials, however, to achieve high energy density without sacrificing the high power density is still a major bottleneck in establishing supercapacitors as the primary power source. Amongst all the components of a full supercapacitor device (electrodes, separator, and electrolyte), electrodes are key components which greatly affect the performance of supercapacitors.295,296 Hence, designing and fabricating high-quality electrode materials play a decisive role in developing next-generation high-performance supercapacitors. Nano-carbon materials such as the activated carbon, CNTs, and graphene have been widely used as supercapacitor electrodes due to their high electrical conductivity, high surface area and low cost.93,296,301–303 3D porous graphene (e.g. graphene hydrogels,48 template-based 3DGs,253,278,279 hollow CGs,304,305 and VGs,306) as an electrode not only provides the possibility of improved accessibility of the electrolyte to the electrode surface but its conductive porous structure can also host a variety of active materials to enhance the performance of both EDLCs and supercapacitors.306 Since the conductivity of the 3D graphene electrode is key to the performance of a supercapacitor, the CVD grown 3DGF due to its near perfect structure and good electrical conductivity may prove to be a better choice as an electrode material compared to solution processed 3D graphene structures. One of the first reports on the use of a 3DGF as a supercapacitor electrode came from Cao et al.185 and Dong et al.57 where they deposited active oxide materials NiO and Co3O4 on GFs using the hydrothermal method. The GF/Co3O4 integrated electrodes presented a high capacitance of more than 1000 F g−1.57 The GF/NiO in integrated electrodes exhibited a specific capacitance of as high as 745 F g−1280 (Fig. 29A–C), much higher than the Ni foam/NiO electrode (305 F g−1). Specific capacitance as high as 1600 has been reported for metal oxide/GF electrodes307 where a binary metal oxide (CoMoO4) was used as an active material. There have been other reports where the GF has been composited with various active metal oxides and hydroxides, such as Ni(OH)2/GF,193,256 GF/Co3O4,289 GF/Fe3O4,193 GF/CoO,279 GF/Co(OH)2,289 GF/MnO2,186,187,253 GF/CoMoO4,307GF/NiO,280 and GF/NiCo2O4,260 for their use as supercapacitor electrodes. Flexible metal oxide/GF supercapacitors with good flexibility and high performance have also been reported for their use in flexible electronics.267
 Fig. 29  (A–C) SEM images and supercapacitor properties of NiO/3D graphene composites.185 (D–F) TEM, HRTEM images and supercapacitor properties of Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2/3D graphene composites.265 (G–I) TEM images (SAED pattern in inset TEM images and supercapacitor of 3D graphene/Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT core–shell nanowire structure).193 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A–E) Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. (D–F) Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (G–H) Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Despite the successful examples of metal oxide/hydroxide composites with GFs for supercapacitor applications, metal oxides/hydroxides have an intrinsic drawback of low electrical conductivity which can affect the overall performance of the supercapacitor electrodes. Core–shell structures of the metal oxides/hydroxides with a highly conductive thin shell can be useful in enhancing the electron/ion transport kinetics and the structural stability. Core–shell structure strategy is also applicable for the cases where huge volume expansion occurs during repeated ion insertion/extraction. Three component GF/Ni3S2–Ni(OH)2265 and four component GF/Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT193 electrodes with core–shell structures have been reported in the literature. In the case of GF/Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT, reported by Fan and co-workers, the Co3O4 nanowire was the core, and the shell was a composite of the conducting polymer (PEDOT) and metal oxide (MnO2). The composite shell renders a synergistic effect and assures high capacitance and good conductivity. The GF supported Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT integrated electrodes exhibited a capacitance of 400 F g−1, and maintained 90% of it after 20000 cycles (Fig. 29G–I).
Similarly, Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2/3DGN core–shell composite electrodes synthesized by using one-step hydrothermal reaction exhibited a high specific capacitance (1277 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 and 1037.5 F g−1 at 5.1 A g−1) and high areal capacitance (4.7 F cm−2 at 2 mV s−1 and 3.85 F cm−2 at 19.1 mA cm−2) with good cycling performance (99.1% capacitance retention after 2000 cycles) (Fig. 29D–F).
Apart from metal oxides, conducting polymers such as PANI or PPy can also be introduced into GF pores to functionalize these GFs for supercapacitor electrode applications.205,249 Supercapacitor electrodes based on 3D-graphene PANI hybrids exhibited the high specific capacitance (346 F g−1), while those based on PPy showed a maximum specific capacitance of 660 F g−1, suggesting that these light and inexpensive composites are promising candidates for energy storage. A summary of supercapacitor and battery electrodes based on GFs and their composites is provided in Table 2.
9.3. Sensing

9.3.1. Gas sensing. 
The electrical properties of graphene sheets are very sensitive to various gaseous adsorbents including NH3, NO2, H2O, Cl2, CO, etc.313–317 This sensitivity of graphene can help construct ultra-sensitive gas sensor devices. Compared to individual graphene sheets, 3D graphene foams have very high specific area and large porosity for gas molecules to infiltrate uniformly into the entire structure, resulting in their high sensitivity towards gas sensing and stable operation of the devices. Yavri et al.318 have reported the use of 3D graphene foam structures to sense the gases on the principle of measuring the changes in the electrical conductance of the foam due to the gas adsorption/desorption process (Fig. 30A). The limit of detection of the GF for NO2 and NH3 gases was as low as 20 ppm at room temperature. The change in relative resistance (R/R0) for 20 ppm concentration of NO2 and NH3 was 4% and 5%, respectively. The sensitivity of GF sensors for these gases was superior to some of the already reported sensors. For example, commercially available conducting polymer sensors319 undergo an ∼30% resistance change in 5–10 minutes when exposed to ∼1% (10000 ppm) of NH3 at room temperature. Desorption of the gases from GFs under vacuum was not fully achieved leading to poor reversibility; however, the joule heating expelled the chemisorbed NH3 and NO2 from the surface of GFs leading to complete reversibility (Fig. 30B).
 Fig. 30  (Panel A) Normalized change in electrical resistance of the GF as a function of (a) time for the detection of ∼1000 ppm of NH3 in three cycles, (b) time for different concentrations of NH3 in air, (c) time for different concentrations of NO2 in air.318 (Panel B) Change in the normalized resistance of the GF as a function of time during the adsorption of ∼1000 ppm of NH3 and desorption using (a) room temperature degassing and (b) high temperature degassing. (c) Adsorption and desorption curve by using joule heating.318 Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing group. 


9.3.2. Biosensing. 
Biosensors are analytical devices that utilize biological sensing elements to detect and/or quantify a particular target analyte or family of analytes. As such, biosensors are important for virtually every conceivable analytical task in the biomedical field, which can range from applications in medical diagnostics to drug discovery, food safety, environmental monitoring, and defense. The performance of biosensors is judged by parameters such as sensitivity, the limit of detection (LOD), linear dynamic ranges, reproducibility or precision of its response, selectivity, response time, operational and storage stability, ease of use, re-usability (multiple measurements), and portability.320,321 The corresponding adsorption and desorption response is obtained by using Joule heating of the sample during the desorption step.318
Based on the working mechanism of detection, graphene based biosensors can be classified as electronic, electrochemical, and optical sensors. As porous GFs due to their porous structure, mechanical stability and flexibility, and high conductivity are ideal candidates for use as electrode materials in electrochemical sensing, most of the bio-sensing performed by using the porous 3DGF involves the electrochemical sensing. Electrochemical sensing is especially attractive to analyze the content of a biological sample due to the direct conversion of a biological recognition event to an electrical signal. A typical electrochemical sensor consists of a sensing (or working) electrode that has a biological recognition element and a counter electrode that are separated by a layer of electrolytes. Electrochemical biosensors can be divided into two main categories based on the nature of the biological recognition process, i.e. catalytic sensors and affinity sensors. Catalytic devices incorporate nanoparticles, enzymes, whole cells or tissue slices that recognize the target analyte and produce electroactive species. On the other hand, affinity sensors rely on a selective binding interaction between the analyte and a biological component such as an antibody, nucleic acid, or a receptor. Immunosensors and DNA hybridization biosensors with electrochemical detection are examples of affinity sensors. The amount of analyte that is either reduced or oxidized at the sensing electrode would then strongly correlate with the concentration of the target analyte present. In particular, various forms of voltammetry (e.g. linear sweep, differential pulse, squarewave, stripping) and amperometry are commonly used for the electrochemical detection of biomolecules.322 Pristine GFs have been used to detect bio-molecules such as dopamine (DA) with excellent sensitivity (619 μA mM cm−2), low detection limit (0.025 μM), and a wide range of linear detection (up to 25 μM).194 Composites of GFs with other materials can prove even more advantageous for the bio-sensing purposes. These materials can have different roles in electrochemical sensing platforms; for example, they can (1) immobilize biomolecules, (2) catalyze electrochemical reactions, or (3) act as reactants. As such, by incorporating graphene–nanoparticle hybrid structures, one can impart unique and advantageous properties to electrochemical biosensors resulting in the exhibition of the advantages provided by the individual nanoparticle and graphene components as well as synergy from the hybrid. GF composites with metals, metal oxides, or organic compounds have been reported with excellent performance. For example, Dong et al.,251 using a simple hydrothermal procedure, fabricated 3D graphene/Co3O4 nanowire composites and employed the composites as the monolithic free-standing for the enzymeless electrochemical detection of glucose with an ultrahigh sensitivity of 3.39 mA mM−1 cm−2 and a remarkable lower detection limit of <25 nM (S/N = 8.5). The high conductivity of the GF ensured rapid charge transfer and its enormously high specific area allowed the enormously high active area even after the deposition of Co3O4 nanowires. Despite the extraordinarily high sensitivity it achieved, the Co3O4/3DGF biosensor offered a relatively small linear response range (up to 80 μM) due to the thick coating layer of Co3O4. Moreover, Co3O4/3DGF could not be used for the detection of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). A more sensitive and enzymeless Mn3O4/3DGF composite sensor for the detection of both glucose and H2O2 was reported by the same group.252 The Mn3O4/3DGF-based biosensor achieved high sensitivity, large linear range and low detection limit for the detection of both analytes (Fig. 31), due to the synergistic effects of the two materials, which combines the high electrocatalytic activity of the nanostructured Mn3O4 network, and high conductivity coupled with the large surface area of 3DGFs. This enzymeless biosensor also exhibited excellent performance for the real-time detection of both glucose and H2O2 in serum and food samples. The Mn3O4/3DGF-based H2O2 sensor achieved a dynamic linear range of 2 μM to 6.5 mM, with a high sensitivity of 1.03 mA mM−1 cm−2, and a detection limit of 1 μM (S/N = 3). The sensitivity of the Mn3O4/3DGF-based sensor is apparently superior to previously reported H2O2 biosensors that used manganese oxide as an electrode material.323,324 For glucose sensing, Mn3O4/3DGF depicted a high sensitivity of 360 μA mM cm−2 and a large linear range of 0.1–8 mM which is much superior to enzymatic or enzymeless glucose sensors based on chemically derived graphene.325–327 Moreover, the selectivity of the Mn3O4/3DGF was also good as demonstrated by the negligible current response to the addition of 0.1 mM uric acid (UA), ascorbic acid (AA) and acetaminophen (AP), common electroactive species coexisting in blood. Flexible Mn3O4/3D graphene foam composites on a PET substrate for flexible non-enzymatic biosensing of glucose and H2O2 in serum and blood have also been reported.252 These composites showed good mechanical strength and good flexibility to render them useful as flexible biosensors. Similarly, other metal oxides and hydroxides (NiO, ZnO, CuO,WO3etc.) in the form of nanoflowers, nanorods, and nanowires have been fabricated for sensing biomolecules such as dopamine, glucose, ascorbic acid, and hydrogen peroxide.244,253,311,328,329 Immunosensing using GFs and polydopamine composites (pDA)330 has also been performed with a sensitivity of ∼90 pg ml−1 and a detection limit of 0.1–750.0 ng ml−1.
 Fig. 31  (a–d) Sensing performance of Mn3O4/3DGF based composites for glucose and hydrogen peroxide.252 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A–E) Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from metal oxides and polymers, metal based GF composites have also been proved to be effective as a biosensing platform. Metal particles such as Pt, Au, Pd, and Ag present excellent catalytic activity for H2O2.331,332 Compositing these metal NPs with GFs exhibited more efficient sensing of H2O2. Amongst reported metal/GF composites for H2O2 sensing, Pt/GF composites had a better detection limit (0.125 μM) than Ag based composites (14.9 μM).241,243,328 When MWNTs were added to the Pt/GF composites to form tertiary composites of MWNT/Pt/GF, H2O2 sensing performance further improved with the detection limit as low as 0.0086 μM and the linear detection range of 0.025–6.3 μM. A bimetallic PtRu/GF composite190 has also been reported for H2O2 sensing. However, its detection limit (0.4 μM), sensitivity (1023.1 μA mM cm−2) and linear range (0.005–0.02 mM) were inferior to Pt/GF composites. A summary of the sensing performance of the GF and its various composites is provided in Table 3.

9.4. Fuel cells, solar cells and hydrogen production
Fuel cells hold great promise as future energy conversion devices due to their high-efficiency and clean energy conversion. However, kinetic sluggishness of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a major bottleneck in realizing the full commercial potential of fuel cells. Hence, highly active catalysts for the ORR become key to optimize the performance of these devices. 3DGFs due to their porosity and high electrical conductivity favor electron transport and are attractive candidates as electrodes for fuel cell applications, but might offer a limited improvement in ORR kinetics. Considering the fact that carbon materials doped with heteroatoms such as boron, nitrogen, and phosphorus are found to be efficient carbon-based ORR catalysts, porous graphene materials doped with heteroatoms become an attractive choice as electrode materials for more efficient fuel cells. Xu et al.198 have reported B-, and N-, doped 3DGFs with enhanced electrocatalytic activities. The presence of B and N atoms in the 3D network of GFs improves the electrocatalytic efficiency by providing the active sites for favorable electron transfer, lowering the bad gap energy, and enhancing the electroactive surface area significantly. Compared to un-doped and B-doped GFs, N-doped GF electrodes exhibit improved electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR in terms of both the onset/peak potentials and the peak current. The B and N co-doped GF electrode was found to be the most active amongst all the electrodes and was even slightly better than the Pt–C/GC electrode in terms of the reduction in the peak current (Fig. 32A).
 Fig. 32  (A) Voltammograms of the undoped GF/GC electrode, the B-GF/GC electrode, the N-GF/GC electrode, the BN–GF/GC electrode, and the Pt–C/GC electrode.198 (B) The cyclic voltammetry (CV) of the carbon cloth anode and the graphene/PANI anode in the MFC, at the scan rate of 30 mV s−1. The inset shows the semiderivative (SD) CV of the selected voltage range where the dashed line indicates the baseline.227 (C) Schematic illustration of the interface between the 3D graphene/PANI monolith electrode and S. oneidensis MR-1 bacteria. Electrochemical characterization of the carbon cloth anode and the graphene/PANI anode in MFC.227 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B and C) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Another strategy to improve the electrocatalytic activity of the 3DGF as an ORR catalyst is compositing it with active metal or polymer catalysts. Pt has been the choice of the electrode material for electrocatalysis due to its excellent stability and efficiency. The Pt decorated GF has achieved high-catalytic efficiency towards the ORR.244,245 Chronoamperometric measurements of Pt/3D-graphene show that under a given potential of 0.6 V, Pt/3D-graphene shows a higher initial current and a slower decay of the peak current with time, suggesting a better catalytic activity and stability than Pt/CF.244 Similarly, GF/PANI composites have been used as anodes for microbial fuel cell (MFC) applications (Fig. 32B and C).227 They impressively outperform the commonly used carbon cloth owing to their higher bacterial biofilm loading, higher extracellular electron transfer (EET) efficiency due to the large specific surface area of the 3D graphene/PANI electrode, its ability to integrate with bacterial biofilms three-dimensionally, and large surface area to accept electrons from riboflavin molecules (electron shuttles released by S. oneidensis MR-1), realization of direct electron transfer from OmcA cytochrome proteins on the cell membrane, and the multiplexing highly conductive pathways provided by the graphene network. In addition, this 3D anode is promising for practical large scale MFCs because its lightness ensures high specific power density and its power output can be boosted simply by increasing its thickness.
Due to their high efficiency, low-cost, and easy fabrication, dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are the most attractive technology among all the organic solar cells. Generally, a DSSC device is composed of a dye, an electrolyte, a working electrode, and a counter electrode. Each of these elements is strongly correlated with the performance of the DSSCs. The counter electrode (CE) is of critical importance in enhancing the energy conversion efficiency and reducing the cost of DSSCs. The CE of the GF for DSSCs has shown almost the same performance as the Pt CE (Fig. 33a).191 Both CEs exhibited similar open circuit voltages (VOC) of B0.7 and short circuit current densities (JSC) of B12.1. However, the GF CE [authors mention the GF as a three-dimensional nano-foam of few-layer graphene (3D-NFG)] cell shows a bit lower fill factor (FF) than does the Pt CE (60% vs. 69.2%). Moreover, the energy conversion efficiency (η) of 5.2% is obtained for the 3D-NFG CE when the value for the Pt CE is 5.7%. The reasonable performance of the GF CE could originate from the large surface area resulting from the nano-porous nature of 3D-NFG. However, issues such as insufficient adhesion of the 3D-GF structure onto the non-flat surface of the FTO substrate and a bit lower conductivity of the 3D-GF limited the efficiency of the 3D-NFG CE. Solving these issues by optimizing the several conditions for device fabrication can further improve the performance of these DSSCs. Apart from the 3DGF, its hybrid with graphene nanosheets as an efficient counter electrode (CE) for DSSCs has also been reported (Fig. 33b).268 Large size heat-reduced graphene nanosheets (H-GNs) and small-sized laser-reduced graphene quantum dots (L-GQDs) were incorporated into a 3D GF network. The DSSC with this hybrid CE had a η value of 7.70% which is comparable to that of the conventional Pt CE (η = 7.68%).
 Fig. 33  (a) Photocurrent–voltage (I–V) curves for DSSCs using 3D-NFG CE and Pt CE.191 (b) Photocurrent–voltage characteristics of DSSCs with various CEs.268 (c) Comparison of the I–V characteristics of DSSCs based on the 3DGT-0.5, 3DGT-0.85, 3DGT-1.5 and TiO2 NPs film electrodes.338 (d) J–V curves of the DSSCs with different photoanodes.339 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a) Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Zhi et al.,338 by employing 3D graphene decorated with nanocrystalline TiO2 films (3DGT) as an anode on plastic substrates, fabricated highly flexible DSSCs with enhanced performance at room temperature (Fig. 33c). Owing to the enhanced charge transportation and increased surface area from the 3D conductive graphene skeleton, the 13 mm-thick 3DGT-0.85 (0.85 wt% 3D graphene plus TiO2 nanoparticles) anode achieves a power conversion efficiency of 6.41%, which is 56% higher than the pristine TiO2 based anode. This efficiency was among the highest values for the previously reported TiO2 photoanodes on plastic substrates. Tang et al.339 fabricated 3DG with P25 (photoanode material made of TiO2 NPs) to form the photoanode of DSSCs (Fig. 33d). Compared to that of pure P25 photoanode based DSSCs, the η increases 32.7% under AM-1.5G one sun light intensity when the 3DGN (1 wt%)–P25 photoanode is adopted (from 4.96% to 6.58%). After optimizing the thickness of the added 3DGN, the η further increases to 6.87%. Moreover, DSSCs with the 3DGN based counter electrode are also fabricated, and a slight degradation in η is observed in comparison with a Pt counter electrode under identical conditions.
9.5. Applications in electronics (flexible conductors, EMI shielding, LEDs, dielectric materials)
Electromagnetic waves emitted by electronic devices pose a serious problem interfering with sensitive electronic circuits and affecting the human health. Flexible and light-weight materials are needed for effective and practical electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding applications especially in areas of aircraft, aerospace, automobiles, and fast-growing next-generation flexible electronics such as portable electronics and wearable devices.340 Compared to traditional metal based materials, polymer composites due to their lightweight, resistance to corrosion, flexibility, good processability, and low cost are ideal choice as EMI shielding materials. The EMI shielding effectiveness of the polymer composites depends critically on the contents and networks of fillers in the polymer matrix.340–350 The interconnecting networks and high conductivity of 3DGFs can improve the EMI shielding performance of polymer composites. In the pioneering study of GFs, Cheng and co-workers67,231 have used the PDMS as an infiltrating material in GF pores to fabricate the GF/PDMS composites. Even with a GF loading as low as 0.5 wt%, GF/PDMS composites showed a relatively high electrical conductivity of 10 S cm−1, which is 6 orders of magnitude higher than chemically derived graphene-based composites and also much higher than those of carbon nanotube (CNT) composites at the same loading fraction, showing great advantages of GFs in the use of composites for electrical applications.352 They also showed excellent electromechanical stability under stretching and bending cycles. The change in the resistance of these composites under stretching and bending conditions was relatively small (Fig. 34), rendering their use as stretchable conductors for flexible electronics. The density of such composites can be as low as ∼0.06 g cm−3, about 20 times smaller than a common solid polymer composite. Due to their excellent electric properties, EMI shielding effectiveness of GF/PDMS composites can reach as high as 30 dB for a very low graphene content ∼0.8 wt%. The specific EMI shielding effectiveness of graphene/PDMS foam composites with ∼0.8 wt% graphene loading can reach 500 dB cm3 g−1 in the 30 MHz–1.5 GHz frequency range and 333 dB cm3 g−1 in the X-band frequency range,231 which is about one order of magnitude higher than those of typical metals and carbon/polymer composites.340,353,354 Moreover, the graphene/PDMS foam composites show excellent flexibility, and their shielding effectiveness is almost unchanged after repeatedly bending to a radius of ∼2.5 mm for 10000 times. Similarly, Chen et al.351 have reported highly conductive and stretchable composites by backfilling the 3D graphene–PEDOT:PSS skeleton with PDMS. The electrical conductivity can reach 24 S cm−1 with only 1.5 wt% graphene and 1.5 wt% PEDOT:PSS loading, and its resistance increased only 35% when stretched to 80% strain (Fig. 35). Owing to its high electrical conductivity, CVD grown 3D graphene has also been used as a transparent conductive electrode for GaN-based light-emitting diodes with enhanced optical and electrical performance.355
 Fig. 34  (a and b) Electrical-resistance variation of GF/PDMS composites during bending cycles. (c) Electrical-resistance change of a composite after 50% stretching cycles. (d) Electrical-resistance variation of the composite as a function of uniaxial tensile strain until fracture.67 All the figures are reproduced with permission. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 35  Electrical-resistance variation of: (a) GF–PEDOT:PSS–PDMS (CGPP) and GF–PDMS(CGP) films as a function of tensile strain; (b) CGPP film as a function of stretching–releasing cycles with 50% strain; (c) CGPP film as a function of the number of bends.351 All the figures are reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
While the GF is electrically conductive and its composites find applications as conductors, its non-conductive counterpart BNF can find applications as an ultra-low dielectric material. The porosity of the dielectric material not only makes it light in weight but it is also a pre-requisite to extend the dielectrics well into the ultralow-k region. Yin et al.131 have reported a 3D hierarchical BNF obtained by CVD on a Ni foam template with a permittivity of 1.03 times that of air, a density of 1.6 mg cm−3, and a thermal stability up to 1200 °C. This BN foam exhibits complete recovery after cyclic compression exceeding 70% with permittivity within 1.12 times that of air. Gathering all these exceptional characteristics, the BN foam should create a breakthrough development in flexible ultralow-permittivity dielectrics and ultra-light materials.
9.6. Hydrophobic materials and environmental applications
Hydrophobic surfaces are extremely water-repellant and have many applications ranging from self-cleaning and anti-fouling surfaces to low-drag coatings as well as surfaces for water harvesting and efficient dropwise condensation. Solution processed graphene suffers from the disadvantage of poor control over the porosity and structure of the deposited graphene film. Non-uniformity in the porosity or roughness distribution of the surface can result in the loss of hydrophobicity in practical situations, like droplet impact. A CVD grown 3D GF with a macroscopic graphene structure composed of an integrated foam-like network of graphene sheets with well-controlled microscale porosity and roughness might display stable superhydrophobic behavior under both static and well as dynamic (impact) conditions. Singh et al.230 have explored the hydrophobic GF/teflon composite structures by drop casting the teflon solution on the GF. The advancing water contact angle on the foam surface was 163 degrees. Despite the large pore size, water repellency is maintained under droplet impact conditions. The authors explain that in contrast to the teflon coated graphene foam, teflon coated Ni foams did not provide stable super hydrophobic behavior especially under droplet impact conditions which indicates that the flexibility of the graphene foams could play an important role. The graphene foam can store elastic strain energy as it is deformed by the impacting drop and then deliver it back to the drop which could assist with the rebound process. Such flexible and mechanically robust graphene foams which display a stable superhydrophobic behavior could find a wide range of applications in self-cleaning, anti-fouling technologies and as low-friction coatings for micro-fluidics and lab-on-chip applications.
The hydrophobic nature of GFs and BNFs also makes them suitable for selective adsorption of hydrophobic liquids such as oil which can be used for water cleaning and environmental protection. BNFs are demonstrated to absorb up to 160 times its own weight in cyclohexane within 5 seconds, while repelling water (Fig. 36).201 This value of oil absorption is 33-fold higher than porous BN nanosheets described previously. The high temperature oxidation resistance of BNFs makes it possible to burn the oil-saturated BN aerogel in air for cleaning. After burning the BN aerogel turns partially black as a result of the carbon residue. This is common for organics burning in air. Subsequently, the cleaned BN aerogel with a carbon residue was reused for a second oil absorption as shown in Fig. 36(f) and (g). The BN aerogel exhibited equal oil absorption properties after burning in the air, indicating its complete regeneration which makes BNFs efficient and easy recyclable absorbers for oils with applications in water treatment and environmental protection. It is especially relevant to high temperature oxidation conditions.
 Fig. 36  (a–d) Absorption and burning process of cyclohexane (stained with Sudan Red II and floating on water) by the BN aerogel within 5 s. (e–h) BN aerogel after burning in air reused for the absorption of cyclohexane.201 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing group. 
10. Conclusions and outlook
Conclusions
2D materials have attracted more and more attention due to their unique set of electrical, thermal, mechanical, and chemical properties. To fully exploit the potential of 2D materials as components of practical macroscopic functional devices on a large scale, there is a complementary need to controllably assemble these materials into more sophisticated and hierarchical architectures. However, arranging 2D materials into complex structures is not a trivial task, as 2D materials tend to re-agglomerate, resulting in a dramatic decrease in surface area and loss of excellent physical properties. We have summarized various methods to produce large-area 3D structures and have classified these methods as “solution based and CVD based” with a sub-classification of “template and template less” synthesis. Amongst the available methods to fabricate such structures, solution based methods offer advantages of scalability, high yield, commercially viable, cost-effective, and easy to execute methods. However, solution processed 3D structures have a significant amount of structural defects leading to poor electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties. The CVD method offers great potential for easy and scalable fabrication of 3D structures with excellent structural quality and properties. However, drawbacks such as, high temperature synthesis conditions, use of a sacrificial template which increases the overall cost of methods, limited pore size and density of commercially available metal foam templates, and the relatively poor mechanical stability of CVD based structure also limit the use of this method. In terms of template based and template-less synthesis, template synthesis is convenient as it allows better control of porous structures but the reaction temperature is usually very high and the templates need to be sacrificed after reaction. The template-less method has the advantages of commercial scalability, mild synthesis conditions, and cost-effectiveness; however, it lacks the control over pore morphology and size.
The real application potential of such 3D structures lies when composited with other materials such as metals, metal oxides, polymers, and carbon materials. Depending upon the guest materials and functionality, these composite materials can find applications in various fields including energy, environment and bio-related fields. One of the most promising applications of such composites is as electrode materials in supercapacitors and Li-ion batteries. A summary of the types, synthesis and applications of 3D structure composites is given in Fig. 37.
 Fig. 37  Summary of types, synthesis methods, and applications of the 3D structures of 2D materials and their composites. 
Outlook

1. Synthesis front. 
On the synthesis front, despite the recent progress in the synthesis of such structures, precise control over surface area, interconnected pore size and density, distribution of pore size, and the issue of mechanical stability still remains a large scientific and technological challenge. Moreover, the large scale, cost effective fabrication of 3D structures with high structural quality is another bottleneck that can limit their applications. Since the properties and application of 3G structures are determined by synthesis methods, the development of cost effective, continuous, and scalable synthesis methods which can provide 3D frameworks with high structural quality and allow tuning the porous structures to micro-, meso-, and macro-scales should be the focus of the future research in the field. To improve the capacity of the current or future synthesis methods to controllably dope these structures with other elements, functionalize with active groups, and decorate with nanospecies is another task which will define the focus of future research. Such 3D interconnected structures can also provide significant potential in the field of polymer composites. Poor dispersion of fillers in polymers is a major challenge that limits their properties and applications. Impregnation of polymers into pre-fabricated interconnected networks of 3D structures should be explored for the fabrication of composites with well determined filler dispersion, revolutionizing the field of polymer composites.


2. Property front. 
The properties of 3D structures stem from their structures which in turn are determined by the method of synthesis. The lack of structural control and the poor understanding of the structure–property relationship are the major bottlenecks in obtaining the 3D structures with improved properties. An improvement in the electrical and mechanical properties of solution and CVD based structures, respectively, would significantly enhance the scope of applications for these structures. The range of properties of 3D structures can and should be further extended through the incorporation of hetero-atoms, functional polymers, inorganic nanostructures, and carbon nano-materials to yield a variety of composites. 3D structures and their composites with simultaneous attributes of flexibility, stretchability, and compressibility need to be urgently realized for the emerging market of flexible and wearable electronics.


3. Application front. 
On the application front, though many interesting applications have been reported, especially in energy, environment, and bio-related fields, the applications of these 3D structures are overall still underexplored. For example, compared to other absorbents, environmental applications of the 3D structures of 2D materials still remain at the initial stage. Most studies on these structures have focused on traditional pollutants such as dyes, oils, organic metals, and heavy metals, but studies on the removal of emerging pollutants such as persistent organic pollutants and typical anionic perchlorate are still rarely studied. Due to their porous nature, these 3D structures also hold great potential as bio-scaffolds for the growth of various kinds of cells and tissues, especially for bone regeneration/repairing. The scope of the applications can be further broadened by focusing on basic property research of 2D materials and understanding the synergistic effect between 3D graphene networks and host (active) materials both experimentally and theoretically. Materials based on the 3D structures of 2D materials are becoming increasingly competitive and the future looks bright. This review is anticipated to encourage more future work to push forward the applications of these 3D structures in a variety of fields.

Glossary

0DZero-dimensional
1DOne-dimensional
2DTwo-dimensional
3DThree-dimensional
h-BNHexagonal boron nitride
TMDsTransition metal dichalcogenides
MXenesMetal carbides
CVDChemical vapor deposition
GOGraphene oxide
CCGChemically converted graphene
SGHSelf-assembled graphene hydrogels
PSPolystyrene
PMMAPolymethyl methaacrylate,
CMGChemically modified graphene
PVPPoly(vinylpyrrolidone)
ISISAIce-segregation-induced self-assembly
PVAPolyvinyl alcohol
PSSPolystyrene sulfonate
rGOReduced graphene oxide
NPsNanoparticles
NPNanoparticle
NWNanowire
NFNanofiber
PPyPolypyrrole
STEMScanning transmission electron microscopy
UFAsUltra-flyweight aerogels
BN-GAsBoron and nitrogen doped graphene aerogels
PEDOTPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PANiPolyaniline
PNIPAMPoly(N-isopropylacrylamine)
EMIMBF4Sulfuric acid, and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
LSGLaser-scribed graphene
DODA·BrDimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium bromide
ATMAmmonium thio-molybdate
ATTAmmonium thio-tungstate
GGOGiant graphene oxide
BNFBoron nitride foam
GFGraphene foam
GGOGraphene oxide

p
c
Percolation threshold
GMGraphene monoliths

T
g
Glass transition temperature
SDBSSodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate
ALDAtomic layer deposition
SILARSuccessive ionic layer adsorption and reaction
GNsGraphene nanosheets
GQDsGraphene quantum dots
DMFDimethyl formamide
LIBsLithium ion batteries
EDLCsElectric double layer capacitors
DADopamine
UAUric acid
AAAscorbic acid
APAcetaminophen
ORROxygen reduction reaction
EETExtracellular electron transfer
MFCMicrobial fuel cell
3D-NFGThree-dimensional nano-foam of few-layer graphene
DSSCsDye sensitized solar cells
CECounter electrode
H-GNsHeat-reduced graphene nanosheets
L-GQDsLaser-reduced graphene quantum dots

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Prof. Erping Li, Prof. Jikui Luo, Prof. Weiqiu Chen, Prof. Andy Godfrey, Prof. Xianming Zhang, Prof. Wenyan Yin, Prof. Yahong Xie, Prof. Chongwu Zhou, Dr Tawfique Hasan, Prof. Tianling Ren, Prof. Liming Dai, Prof. Tao Xie, Prof. Zhongze Gu, Prof. Shurong Dong, Prof. Jizhou Song, Prof. Liwei Liu, Prof. Min Qiu, Prof. Liming Tong, Dr Yuan Liu, Prof. Litao Sun, Prof. Xinran Wang, Prof. Jianbin Xu, Prof. Wencai Ren, Prof. Mingsheng Xu, Dr Mengling Ding, Prof. Cheng-de Lin, Prof. Xinsheng Peng, Prof. Zhiyuan Cheng, Prof. Jianyi Yang, Prof. Hongsheng Chen, Dr Chen Wang, Dr Zhen Xu, Prof. Xiaozhi Wang, Prof. Yubo Lee, Prof. Fengqiu Wang, Prof. Yan Han, Prof. Yang Liu, Prof. Hao Jin, Prof. Ran Hao, Ayaz Ali Hakro, Akeel Qadir, Dr Rizwan-Ur-Rahman Sagar, Tauseef Anwar, Prof. Tajamal Hussain, Prof. Asma Tufail Shah, Prof. Mirza Nadeem Ahmad, Prof. Mudassir Abbas, Prof. Adnan Mujahid, Prof. Muhammad Mumtaz, Dr Dehui Li, for helpful discussion and comments. This work is supported by NSFC (Grant No. 61274123, 61474099, 21325417, 51533008 and Key Project No. 61431014), US National Science Foundation (EFRI-1433541), and micro-/nano-fabrication platform of ZJU University, National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFA0200200), NSFC of Zhejiang Province (LR12F04001), National postdoc Foundation of China (2015M571868), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2016XZZX001-05). This work is also supported by ZJU Cyber Scholarship and Cyrus Tang Center for Sensor Materials and Applications, the Open Research Fund of State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Southeast University, the Open Research Fund of State Key Laboratory of Nanodevices and Applications at Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. 14ZS01), and Fellowship of Churchill College at University of Cambridge.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. A. Dubonos, I. Grigorieva and A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O'Brien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162–163 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kratschmer, L. D. Lamb, K. Fostiropoulos and D. R. Huffman, Nature, 1990, 347, 354–358 CrossRef .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Ebbesen and P. M. Ajayan, Nature, 1992, 358, 220–222 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. G. Acheson, US Pat., 568,323,  1896 Search PubMed .
M. J. McAllister, J.-L. Li, D. H. Adamson, H. C. Schniepp, A. A. Abdala, J. Liu, M. Herrera-Alonso, D. L. Milius, R. Car, R. K. Prud'homme and I. A. Aksay, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4396–4404 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami and M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109 CrossRef .
R. Zhaodi, M. Nan, S. Khurram, X. Yang, Q. Shaoxing, Y. Bin and J. K. Luo, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 065706 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
M. Chhowalla, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2584–2586 RSC .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
P. Miro, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .
X. Peng, L. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
Y. Sun, S. Gao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 530–546 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
X. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8187–8199 RSC .
R. Mas-Ballest, C. Gomez-Navarro, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 20–30 RSC .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. Booth, V. Khotkevich, S. Morozov and A. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, Chem. Commun., 1996, 229–230 RSC .
T. Sasaki, M. Watanabe, H. Hashizume, H. Yamada and H. Nakazawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8329–8335 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang, M. Y. Zhu, R. A. Outlaw, X. Zhao, D. M. Manos, B. C. Holloway and V. P. Mammana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 1265–1267 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Sutter, J.-I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Land, T. Michely, R. J. Behm, J. C. Hemminger and G. Comsa, Surf. Sci., 1992, 264, 261–270 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and C. Zhou, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, F. Ding, K. Jiao and B. I. Yakobson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 175503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Odom, J.-L. Huang, P. Kim and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1998, 391, 62–64 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sandler, M. Shaffer, T. Prasse, W. Bauhofer, K. Schulte and A. Windle, Polymer, 1999, 40, 5967–5971 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, U. Khan, W. J. Blau and Y. K. Gun'ko, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1624–1652 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Spitalsky, D. Tasis, K. Papagelis and C. Galiotis, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 357–401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chico, M. L. Sancho and M. Munoz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 1278 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, H. Sun and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3249–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, P. Li and C. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7103–7113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mattevi, G. Eda, S. Agnoli, S. Miller, K. A. Mkhoyan, O. Celik, D. Mastrogiovanni, G. Granozzi, E. Garfunkel and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2577 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1922–1945 RSC .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
X. W. Haoyi Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2015, 58, 1792–1799 CrossRef .
R. Cruz-Silva, A. Morelos-Gomez, H.-I. Kim, H.-K. Jang, F. Tristan, S. Vega-Diaz, L. P. Rajukumar, A. L. Elías, N. Perea-Lopez, J. Suhr, M. Endo and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5959–5967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Huang, K. Qian, J. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Li, C. Z. Yu and D. Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4419–4423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Choi, S. J. Chang, Y. B. Lee, J. S. Bae, H. J. Kim and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5924–5930 RSC .
X. Dong, X. Wang, J. Wang, H. Song, X. Li, L. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, C. M. Li and P. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4865–4870 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fan, Y. Liu, J. He, Y. Zhou and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1396–1402 RSC .
J. L. Vickery, A. J. Patil and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2180–2184 CrossRef CAS .
L. Estevez, A. Kelarakis, Q. Gong, E. H. Da'as and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6122–6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. M. Li and T. T. Y. Tan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yin, Y. L. Wu, B. Hu, Y. Wang, P. Cai, C. K. Tan, D. Qi, L. Zheng, W. R. Leow and N. S. Tan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300043 CrossRef .
J. W. F. To, Z. Chen, H. Yao, J. He, K. Kim, H.-H. Chou, L. Pan, J. Wilcox, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 68–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, T. E. Beechem, M. T. Brumbach, T. N. Lambert, D. J. Davis, J. R. Michael, C. M. Washburn, J. Wang, S. M. Brozik, D. R. Wheeler, D. B. Burckel and R. Polsky, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3573–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers Jr and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 771–778 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, Z. Xu, Z. Liu, Y. Wei, H. Sun, Z. Li, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5545–5551 CAS .
C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3992–4012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 4707–4711 CrossRef .
Z. Niu, L. Liu, L. Zhang, Q. Shao, W. Zhou, X. Chen and S. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3681–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Y. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 11533–11537 CrossRef .
P. Chen, J.-J. Yang, S.-S. Li, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249–256 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tian, C. Xu, J. Li, G. Zhu, P. Li, J. Dai and Z. Shi, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2015, 7, 1415–1423 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17249–17254 RSC .
G. Srinivas, J. W. Burress, J. Ford and T. Yildirim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11323–11329 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xu, M. Du, J. Sun, L. Gao, P. Zhang, H. Yao and C. Lin, Small, 2014, 10, 2260–2269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Burress, S. Gadipelli, J. Ford, J. M. Simmons, W. Zhou and T. Yildirim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8902–8904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Yang, R. Vajtai, X. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5160–5165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Sui, B. Xu, S. Yue, Y. Luo, W. Zhan and B. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6494–6497 RSC .
Z. Han, Z. Tang, P. Li, G. Yang, Q. Zheng and J. Yang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5462–5467 RSC .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
Z. Sui, X. Zhang, Y. Lei and Y. Luo, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4314–4321 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Shi, J. Fan, Y. Ge, J. Yin and G. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22459–22466 RSC .
M. Chen, C. Zhang, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Zhang, X. Xu, F. Xia, W. Wang and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2869–2877 CAS .
K.-X. Sheng, Y.-X. Xu, L. Chun and G.-Q. Shi, New Carbon Mater., 2011, 26, 9–15 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kou, Z. Liu, T. Huang, B. Zheng, Z. Tian, Z. Deng and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 4080–4087 RSC .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wu, M. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Yan, W. Wang and J. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7612–7621 CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Yin, S. Wu, X. Yang, W. Xia, Y. Shen, Y. Huang, A. Cao and Q. Yuan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1240–1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. Wang and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2376–2378 RSC .
Z.-Y. Sui, Y. Cui, J.-H. Zhu and B.-H. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9172–9179 CAS .
G. Wei, Y. E. Miao, C. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, W. W. Tjiu and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7584–7591 CAS .
C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962–4964 RSC .
S. Sun and P. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4095–4097 RSC .
Y. Xu, Q. Wu, Y. Sun, H. Bai and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, P. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Lu and W. Zhan, Small, 2013, 9, 1397–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. H. Luan, J. S. Chung, E. J. Kim and S. H. Hur, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 246, 64–70 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Tien, N. T. M. Hien, E.-S. Oh, J. Chung, E. J. Kim, W. M. Choi, B.-S. Kong and S. H. Hur, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 208–211 Search PubMed .
W. Ai, Z. Z. Du, J. Q. Liu, F. Zhao, M. D. Yi, L. H. Xie, N. E. Shi, Y. W. Ma, Y. Qian, Q. L. Fan, T. Yu and W. Huang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12204–12209 RSC .
S. Park, K.-S. Lee, G. Bozoklu, W. Cai, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 572–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, S. Lü, X. Zhang and Z. Shao, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 4609–4615 RSC .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. Zhu, H. Ji, S. Murali, Y. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1475 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, Y. Shu, X.-F. Wang, M. A. Mohammad, Z. Bie, Q.-Y. Xie, C. Li, W.-T. Mi, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, C. Li, M. A. Mohammad, Y.-L. Cui, W.-T. Mi, Y. Yang, D. Xie and T.-L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5883–5890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Franois, O. Pitois and J. Franois, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 1041–1044 CrossRef .
G. Widawski, M. Rawiso and B. Francois, Nature, 1994, 369, 387–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Kong, C. Zou, C. M. Li, X. Lu, J. Ma, F. Y. C. Boey and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3831–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu and T. S. Seo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhi, X. Wang, D. Tang, Y. Xu, Q. Weng, X. Jiang, M. Mitome, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2905 Search PubMed .
X.-F. Jiang, X.-B. Wang, P. Dai, X. Li, Q. Weng, X. Wang, D.-M. Tang, J. Tang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Ang, Y. Zeng, N. Xiao, Y. Gao, W. Liu, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9651–9658 RSC .
A. E. Jakus, E. B. Secor, A. L. Rutz, S. W. Jordan, M. C. Hersam and R. N. Shah, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4636–4648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Paine, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym., 1992, 2, 183–195 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Borek, W. Ackerman, D. W. Hua, R. T. Paine and D. M. Smith, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 2844–2846 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Jung, H. Y. Jung, M. S. Dresselhaus, Y. J. Jung and J. Kong, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 849 Search PubMed .
S. Schlienger, J. Alauzun, F. Michaux, L. Vidal, J. Parmentier, C. Gervais, F. Babonneau, S. Bernard, P. Miele and J. B. Parra, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 88–96 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, S. Chen, B. A. Chambers, G. G. Andersson and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4234–4241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, X. Li, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3232–3236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jie, L. Jing, X. Xuewen, Z. Xinghua, X. Yanming, M. Jiao, M. Zhaojun, F. Ying, H. Long, Y. Xiaojing, Z. Jun, M. Fanbin, Y. Songdong and T. Chengchun, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 155603 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, J. Han, M. Seo, S. Kang, D. Kim and J. Ihm, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1014–1017 CAS .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, C. Zhi, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dibandjo, L. Bois, F. Chassagneux and P. Miele, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 27, 313–317 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, L. Ye, S. Yu, R. Sun, J. Xu and C.-P. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5849–5855 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rousseas, A. P. Goldstein, W. Mickelson, M. A. Worsley, L. Woo and A. Zettl, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8540–8546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. Laine, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 1999, 283, 1145–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zheng, X. Bu and P. Feng, Nature, 2003, 426, 428–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Park, J. S. King, C. W. Neff, C. Liddell and C. J. Summers, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2002, 229, 949–960 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Vlasov, N. Yao and D. J. Norris, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 165–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Mohanan, I. U. Arachchige and S. L. Brock, Science, 2005, 307, 397–400 CAS .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, X. Yu, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4634–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, S. J. Shin, M. D. Merrill, J. Lenhardt, A. J. Nelson, L. Y. Woo, A. E. Gash, T. F. Baumann and C. A. Orme, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4698–4705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, D. Z. Y. Tng, C. X. T. Lim, P. Liu, S. T. Nguyen, P. Xiao, A. Marconnet, C. Y. H. Lim and H. M. Duong, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 445, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, Y. Zhou, H. Bi, K. Yin, S. Wan and L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2117 Search PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, T. Y. Olson, J. R. Lee, T. M. Willey, M. H. Nielsen, S. K. Roberts, P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher Jr and T. F. Baumann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 921–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, D. Kong, C. Zhang, W. Lv, M. Wang, B. Li, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Carbon, 2014, 69, 169–177 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, J. Gao, C. Li, J. Chen and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9196–9201 CAS .
W. Li, J. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6737–6743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, D. Z. Y. Tng, S. T. Nguyen, J. Feng, C. Lin, P. Xiao, L. Lu and H. M. Duong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 561–562, 92–96 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Xia, D. L. Chao, Y. Q. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 785–807 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher Jr and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Zhu, Y. Lu, J. Peng, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4017–4022 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wang, M. S. Desai and S.-W. Lee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2826–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, N. Yi, L. Huang, T. Zhang, S. Fang, H. Chang, N. Li, J. Oh, J. A. Lee, M. Kozlov, A. C. Chipara, H. Terrones, P. Xiao, G. Long, Y. Huang, F. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Lepró, C. Haines, M. D. Lima, N. P. Lopez, L. P. Rajukumar, A. L. Elias, S. Feng, S. J. Kim, N. T. Narayanan, P. M. Ajayan, M. Terrones, A. Aliev, P. Chu, Z. Zhang, R. H. Baughman and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, Z. Feng and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 31–54 CAS .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564–1596 CAS .
J. Zhang, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen and L. Qu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3112–3126 RSC .
J. Chen, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1244–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, Y. Liang, H. Cheng, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 912–916 CAS .
Y. Shen, Q. Fang and B. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 49, 67–84 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zuo, Z. Jiang and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13476–13483 CAS .
L. Peng, Y. Zheng, J. Li, Y. Jin and C. Gao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3387–3392 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao and H. Duan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 65, 404–419 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, K. Sheng, P. Luo, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4569–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. Shi and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1666–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, C.-Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, C. Lee, X. Xu, C. Wang, Y. Huang, M. I. Shakir and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4605–4610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5779–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 CAS .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, J. Shen, K. Fan and C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhong, B. Papandrea, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5435–5440 CrossRef .
O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi, S. A. Shirazian and R. Rahighi, Carbon, 2016, 97, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuan and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10078 CAS .
T. Zhang, H. Chang, Y. Wu, P. Xiao, N. Yi, Y. Lu, Y. Ma, Y. Huang, K. Zhao, X.-Q. Yan, Z.-B. Liu, J.-G. Tian and Y. Chen, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 471–476 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marchini, S. Günther and J. Wintterlin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 075429 CrossRef .
L. Elena, C. B. Norman, J. F. Peter and F. M. Kevin, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 093026 CrossRef .
Q. Yu, J. Lian, S. Siriponglert, H. Li, Y. P. Chen and S.-S. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 113103 CrossRef .
A. Reina, X. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, W. Cai, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4268–4272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 174–182 CrossRef PubMed .
B. H. Min, D. W. Kim, K. H. Kim, H. O. Choi, S. W. Jang and H.-T. Jung, Carbon, 2014, 80, 446–452 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ning, X. Xu, C. Liu and D. L. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15768–15773 CAS .
C.-C. Kung, P.-Y. Lin, F. J. Buse, Y. Xue, X. Yu, L. Dai and C.-C. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 52, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, H.-J. Ahn, J.-C. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 7938–7943 RSC .
T. Lin, I.-W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, D. Chao, Z. Fan, C. Guan, X. Cao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1651–1658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dong, X. Wang, L. Wang, H. Song, H. Zhang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3129–3133 CAS .
J. Deng, L. Chen, Y. Sun, M. Ma and L. Fu, Carbon, 2015, 92, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Pettes, H. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, R. M. Yadav, L. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220–12226 RSC .
J. R. Miller, R. Outlaw and B. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Du, S. Tang, P. Liu, S. Deng, J. Chen and N. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 015202 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, B. Li, S. Yang, G. Ding, C. Zhang and X. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, C. Hamsen, X. Jia, K. K. Kim, A. Reina, M. Hofmann, A. L. Hsu, K. Zhang, H. Li, Z.-Y. Juang, M. S. Dresselhaus, L.-J. Li and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4134–4139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Fazen, E. E. Remsen, J. S. Beck, P. J. Carroll, A. R. McGhie and L. G. Sneddon, Chem. Mater., 1995, 7, 1942–1956 CrossRef CAS .
M. Loeblein, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang, W. B. Ng and E. H. Teo, Small, 2014, 10, 2992–2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chabi, C. Peng, Z. Yang, Y. Xia and Y. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 3999–4008 RSC .
S. Park, J. An, R. D. Piner, I. Jung, D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6592–6594 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. Lu, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, M. B. Mueller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Chung, G. Oh and T. S. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 922–927 CAS .
W. Wang, S. R. Guo, M. Penchev, I. Ruiz, K. N. Bozhilov, D. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. S. Ozkan, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schmidt and F. Schwertfeger, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 364–368 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, S. Ryu, M. R. Tomasik, E. Stolyarova, N. Jung, M. S. Hybertsen, M. L. Steigerwald, L. E. Brus and G. W. Flynn, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1965–1970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yamamoto, T. L. Einstein, M. S. Fuhrer and W. G. Cullen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8335–8341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Pike and C. H. Seager, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1974, 10, 1421–1434 CrossRef .
A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 569–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Bresnehan, M. J. Hollander, M. Wetherington, K. Wang, T. Miyagi, G. Pastir, D. W. Snyder, J. J. Gengler, A. A. Voevodin, W. C. Mitchel and J. A. Robinson, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 459–471 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. F. Shahil and A. A. Balandin, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 861–867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, C. H. Liu, Y. Wu and S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1652–1656 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Michel and B. Verberck, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2009, 246, 2802–2805 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yiğen, V. Tayari, J. O. Island, J. M. Porter and A. R. Champagne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 241411 CrossRef .
M. Loeblein, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang, W. B. Ng and E. H. T. Teo, Small, 2014, 10, 2992–2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nieto, B. Boesl and A. Agarwal, Carbon, 2015, 85, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, J. Zhao, Y.-L. Li and R. Ahuja, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5846–5853 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Dong, J. X. Wang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. G. Li, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 576–580 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yong, X.-C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394–2400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, X. Sun, X. Lin, X. Shen, Y. W. Mai and J. K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5774–5783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Wang, G. M. Xiong, M. Zhu, B. Ozyilmaz, A. H. Castro Neto, N. S. Tan and C. Choong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8275–8283 CAS .
E. Singh, Z. Chen, F. Houshmand, W. Ren, Y. Peles, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Small, 2013, 9, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, C. Xu, C. Ma, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1296–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Rittigstein, R. D. Priestley, L. J. Broadbelt and J. M. Torkelson, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 278–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bansal, H. Yang, C. Li, K. Cho, B. C. Benicewicz, S. K. Kumar and L. S. Schadler, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 693–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fang, K. G. Wang, H. B. Lu, Y. L. Yang and S. Nutt, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7098–7105 RSC .
G. H. A. Therese and P. V. Kamath, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1195–1204 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bijani, L. Martínez, M. Gabás, E. A. Dalchiele and J. R. Ramos-Barrado, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19482–19487 CAS .
L. Ding, Y. P. Liu, J. P. Zhai, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 121–128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. Jin, P. Wu, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 56, 491–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sattayasamitsathit, Y. E. Gu, K. Kaufmann, W. Z. Jia, X. Y. Xiao, M. Rodriguez, S. Minteer, J. Cha, D. B. Burckel, C. M. Wang, R. Polsky and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1639–1645 CAS .
A. Moradi Golsheikh, N. M. Huang, H. N. Lim, R. Zakaria and C.-Y. Yin, Carbon, 2013, 62, 405–412 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bello, M. Fabiane, D. Dodoo-Arhin, K. I. Ozoemena and N. Manyala, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2014, 75, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Claussen, A. Kumar, D. B. Jaroch, M. H. Khawaja, A. B. Hibbard, D. M. Porterfield and T. S. Fisher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3399–3405 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Z. Zeng, W. Shi, P. Yep, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maiyalagan, X. C. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286–5290 RSC .
H. Qiu, X. Dong, B. Sana, T. Peng, D. Paramelle, P. Chen and S. Lim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 782–787 CAS .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Q. Bao, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Zhong and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2950–2956 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Zhan, C. B. Liu, H. X. Shi, C. Li, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and X. C. Dong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 243704 CrossRef .
X. Dong, J. Wang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. Li, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2012, 134, 576–580 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. Li, Z. Wang, J. Qiao, D. Rooney, W. Sun and K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1504–1510 CAS .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Si, X.-C. Dong, P. Chen and D.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 110–115 RSC .
U. M. Patil, J. S. Sohn, S. B. Kulkarni, H. G. Park, Y. Jung, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Kim and S. C. Jun, Mater. Lett., 2014, 119, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Ma, W. J. Chen, P. Zhang, F. Teng, J. Y. Zhou, X. J. Pan and E. Q. Xie, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 47609–47614 RSC .
T. Xiao, X. Hu, B. Heng, X. Chen, W. Huang, W. Tao, H. Wang, Y. Tang, X. Tan and X. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 549, 147–151 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, L. L. Zhang, H. Ji, Y. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6237–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, M. Zhao, B. Cai, W. Wang, Z. Ye and J. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 59, 384–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Li, Z. K. Wang, Y. F. Qiu, Q. M. Pan and P. A. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 620, 31–37 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, M. Zhao, B. Cai, W. Wang, Z. Ye and J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11135–11138 RSC .
M. Yu, J. Chen, J. Liu, S. Li, Y. Ma, J. Zhang and J. An, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 151, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Liu, Z. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Lin, Z. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Lokhande, B. R. Sankapal, H. M. Pathan, M. Muller, M. Giersig and H. Tributsch, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2001, 181, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chung, J. Myoung, J. Oh and S. Lim, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2012, 73, 535–539 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Wu, M. J. Wang and J. J. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3950–3955 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Zeng, W. H. Shi, Y. Y. Zhu, Q. Y. Yan, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2216–2221 CAS .
S. Santhanagopalan, F. Teng and D. D. Meng, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 561–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Moon, D. Kim, G. Lee, S. Y. Hong, K. K. Kim, S. M. Park and J. S. Ha, Carbon, 2015, 81, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Chang, L. Huang, J. Z. Wang, Z. J. Ma, P. P. Li, Y. Yan, J. X. Zhu, S. H. Xu, L. Shen, Q. Chen, Q. J. Yu and W. Z. Shi, Carbon, 2015, 85, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, Y. Liu, L. C. Ji, Y. Q. Xie, T. Wang and W. Z. Shi, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2431–2436 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, X. Rui, Q. Yan, J. Kong and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chang, C. T. Lin, T. Y. Chen, C. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, W. Zhang, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 756–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, F. Huang, H. Bi, Z. Liu and D. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 130–134 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 CAS .
J. Chen, Materials, 2013, 6, 156–183 CrossRef .
P. Guo, H. Song and X. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Shao, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moore and B. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15384–15402 RSC .
R. U. R. Sagar, N. Mahmood, F. J. Stadler, T. Anwar, S. T. Navale, K. Shehzad and B. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 156–163 CrossRef .
U. M. Patil, S. C. Lee, J. S. Sohn, S. B. Kulkarni, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and S. C. Jun, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 334–342 CrossRef CAS .
W. Deng, W. Lan, Y. Sun, Q. Su and E. Xie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 433–438 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, S. Deng, H. Wang, Y. Sun, J. Liu and H. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1106–1112 CAS .
D. Chao, X. Xia, J. Liu, Z. Fan, C. F. Ng, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5794–5800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ding, D. Zhang, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 95–98 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Liu, D. Chao, J. Yan, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7162–7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, M. Ma, M. Zeng, Y. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Xue, T. Zhang, X. Ai, R. G. Mendes, M. H. Rümmeli and L. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22527–22533 CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Yu, M. Ahmad, D. Nan and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 118, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ji, H. Ji, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Cohn, L. Oakes, R. Carter, S. Chatterjee, A. S. Westover, K. Share and C. L. Pint, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4669–4675 RSC .
X. Dong, Y. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Huang, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, L. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17044–17048 RSC .
M. Chen, J. Liu, D. Chao, J. Wang, J. Yin, J. Lin, H. Jin Fan and Z. Xiang Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 364–372 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, K.-H. Choi, W.-S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H.-R. Jung, H.-C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414–2423 CAS .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Chen, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
P. Sharma and T. Bhatti, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 2901–2912 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
L. Feng, Y. Zhu, H. Ding and C. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 430–444 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Bakker, R. M. Frazier, S. Burkett, J. E. Bara, N. Chopra, S. Spear, S. Pan and C. Xu, Nanomater. Energy, 2012, 1, 136–158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, B. Zheng, T. Huang and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9399–9404 RSC .
T. Huang, B. Zheng, Z. Liu, L. Kou and C. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1890–1895 CAS .
L. Kou, T. Huang, B. Zheng, Y. Han, X. Zhao, K. Gopalsamy, H. Sun and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3754 CAS .
J. Luo, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1464–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Mao, Z. Wen, Z. Bo, J. Chang, X. Huang and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9881–9889 CAS .
D. H. Seo, Z. J. Han, S. Kumar and K. Ostrikov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1316–1323 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1044–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Güneş, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 1678–1685 RSC .
G. Zhou, L. Li, C. Ma, S. Wang, Y. Shi, N. Koratkar, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 356–365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Cheng, H. Sun, H. Arandiyan, J. Li and M. Ahmad, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 878–884 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bello, K. Makgopa, M. Fabiane, D. Dodoo-Ahrin, K. I. Ozoemena and N. Manyala, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 6707–6712 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhi, W. Zhao, X. Y. Liu, A. R. Chen, Z. Q. Liu and F. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2013–2019 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yavari, C. Kritzinger, C. Gaire, L. Song, H. Gulapalli, T. Borca-Tasciuc, P. M. Ajayan and N. Koratkar, Small, 2010, 6, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Fowler, M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, Y. Yang, R. B. Kaner and B. H. Weiller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, S. Park, K. Yu, R. S. Ruoff, L. E. Ocola, D. Rosenmann and J. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1154–1164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Robinson, F. K. Perkins, E. S. Snow, Z. Wei and P. E. Sheehan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3137–3140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dan, Y. Lu, N. J. Kybert, Z. Luo and A. T. C. Johnson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1472–1475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari, Z. P. Chen, A. V. Thomas, W. C. Ren, H. M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 166 Search PubMed .
J. J. Miasik, A. Hooper and B. C. Tofield, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1986, 82, 1117–1126 RSC .
P. T. Yin, S. Shah, M. Chhowalla and K.-B. Lee, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2483–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Ronkainen, H. B. Halsall and W. R. Heineman, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 1747–1763 RSC .
B. V. Chikkaveeraiah, A. A. Bhirde, N. Y. Morgan, H. S. Eden and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6546–6561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, M. L. Ye, Y. X. Yu and W. D. Zhang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2010, 674, 20–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schachl, H. Alemu, K. Kalcher, H. Moderegger, I. Svancara and K. Vytras, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1998, 362, 194–200 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, J. Wang, H. Wu, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and Y. Lin, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 901–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Zhu, Y. X. Fang, D. Wen and S. J. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16911–16917 RSC .
M. Pumera, A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, E. L. K. Chng and H. L. Poh, Trends Anal. Chem., 2010, 29, 954–965 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhan, C. Liu, H. Shi, C. Li, L. Wang, W. Huang and X. Dong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 243704 CrossRef .
I. Shackery, U. Patil, M.-J. Song, J. S. Sohn, S. Kulkarni, S. Some, S. C. Lee, M. S. Nam, W. Lee and S. C. Jun, Electroanalysis, 2015, 27, 2363–2370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liu, J. Wang, T. S. Wang, D. Li, F. N. Xi, J. Wang and E. K. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 281–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, X. Qi, L. Yang, G. Hao, J. Li and J. Zhong, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3884–3889 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Kuo, W.-J. Lan and C.-H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 334–341 RSC .
H. Y. Yue, H. Zhang, J. Chang, X. Gao, S. Huang, L. H. Yao, X. Y. Lin and E. J. Guo, Anal. Biochem., 2015, 488, 22–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. N. Xi, D. J. Zhao, X. W. Wang and P. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 26, 81–84 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Feng, Y. Zhang, J. H. Zhou, Y. Li, S. F. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. W. Ma, L. H. Wang and X. H. Yan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2427–2432 RSC .

          S. K. Ameri, P. K. Singh and S. R. Sonkusale, Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems (TRANSDUCERS), 2015 Transducers – 2015 18th International Conference on, 2015.
G. Yang, C. Lee and J. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, B160–B163 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhi, H. L. Cui, A. Chen, Y. Xie and F. Q. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 281, 404–410 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, G. X. Hu, H. Y. Gao and Z. X. Shi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 60–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. C. Gupta, K. L. Dudley and R. W. Lawrence, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2131–2134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. L. Chung, Carbon, 2001, 39, 279–285 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fletcher, M. C. Gupta, K. L. Dudley and E. Vedeler, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 953–958 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Wang, B.-K. Tay, K.-Y. See, Z. Sun, L.-K. Tan and D. Lua, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1905–1910 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shehzad, J.-W. Zha, Z.-F. Zhang, J.-K. Yuan and Z.-M. Dang, J. Adv. Phys., 2013, 2, 70–74 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-M. Dang, K. Shehzad, J.-W. Zha, A. Mujahid, T. Hussain, J. Nie and C.-Y. Shi, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2011, 72, 28–35 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Zha, K. Shehzad, W.-K. Li and Z.-M. Dang, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 014102 CrossRef .
K. Shehzad, Z.-M. Dang, M. N. Ahmad, R. U. R. Sagar, S. Butt, M. U. Farooq and T.-B. Wang, Carbon, 2013, 54, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shehzad, M. N. Ahmad, T. Hussain, M. Mumtaz, A. T. Shah, A. Mujahid, C. Wang, J. Ellingsen and Z.-M. Dang, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 064908 CrossRef .
K. Shehzad, A. A. Hakro, Y. Zeng, S.-H. Yao, Y. Xiao-Hong, M. Mumtaz, K. Nadeem, N. S. Khisro and Z.-M. Dang, Appl. Nanosci., 2015, 5, 969–974 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shehzad, A. Ul-Haq, S. Ahmad, M. Mumtaz, T. Hussain, A. Mujahid, A. T. Shah, M. Y. Choudhry, I. Khokhar and S. Ul-Hassan, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 3737–3744 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, S. Duan, L. Zhang, Z. Wang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3169–3172 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. B. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Zhang, Q. Yan, W. G. Zheng, Z. He and Z. Z. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 918–924 CAS .
X. Shui and D. D. L. Chung, J. Electron. Mater., 1997, 26, 928–934 CrossRef CAS .
B.-J. Kim, G. Yang, M. J. Park, J. S. Kwak, K. H. Baik, D. Kim and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 161902 CrossRef .

Footnote† Both authors have equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Khurram Shehzad
	Dr Khurram Shehzad received his MSc and MPhil in Chemistry from the University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, and PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing, China. From 2011–2013, he was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Center for Nano and Micro Mechanics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the College of Information Science and Electronics, Zhejiang University, China. He is the recipient of several awards including the International Young Scientist Fellowship from NSF China, Nanchang University Fellowship, CAS President Fellowship, and the Cultural Exchange Fellowship. His current research interests include hetero-structures and the macro-assemblies of two-dimensional materials for their applications in energy, healthcare, and electronics.

Yang Xu
	Dr Yang Xu received his BS degree in ECE from Tsinghua University, Beijing, and MS and PhD degrees in ECE from the University of Illinois at Urbana and Champaign. He is a Fellow of Churchill college at the University of Cambridge, UK, and a visiting professor at UCLA. He is now with the College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. His current research interests include emerging low-dimensional smart sensors and actuators for the internet-of-things and flexible electronics.

Chao Gao
	Chao Gao is a professor in the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University, China. He earned his PhD degree in Polymer Materials from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2001. He successively became a Lecturer and Associate Professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 2001 and 2002, respectively. He then spent several years (2003–2006) at the University of Sussex, UK and Bayreuth University, Germany, as a postdoctoral fellow and Alexander von Humboldt research fellow. He joined the Department of Polymer Science and Engineering at Zhejiang University in 2008 and was promoted as a full Professor. He has received several awards, including the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars, and the National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China. His current research interests include graphene chemistry, liquid crystal and macroscopic self-assembly, and hyperbranched polymers.

Xiangfeng Duan
	Xiangfeng Duan is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interests include nanoscale heterostructures and devices. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology and China (USTC) in 1997, MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was previously a founding scientist at Nanosys Inc. before joining UCLA.

 	Fig. 1  Dimensionality spectrum of sp2 carbon materials. (a) Fullerene (inside red circle) trapped inside the cavity of a MWCNT.34 (b) STM images of a SWNT exposed at the surface of a rope.35 (c) Photograph (in normal white light) of a relatively large multilayer graphene flake with thickness ∼3 nm on top of an oxidized Si wafer.36 (d) A piece of natural graphite. (a′ and b′) Structure models of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphene, and graphite, respectively. All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a) Copyright 2007 American Physical society. (b) Copyright 1998 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of the Science.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM images of graphene oxide (GO) fibers with single knot (b) cross section of a mechanically scrolled 150 μm diameter GO fiber.52 (c) Typical fracture morphology of GO fibers.42 (d) Photo of two pieces of filtered free-standing chemically converted graphene (CCG) paper.53 SEM images of graphene paper in (e) top-view and (f) side-view.53 (g) Photograph of ultra-flyweight solution processed 3D aerogels of graphene.48 (h) SEM image of the micro-structures of the self-assembled graphene hydrogels (SGH).48 (i) SEM image of the micro-structures of CVD grown 3D structures of graphene (unpublished). All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons. (d–f) Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. (g and h) Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Chart 1  Summary of the synthesis methods for the 3D structures of 2D materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  (scheme 1) Schematic illustration of the procedure to fabricate 3D macro-porous film and its composites by using PS templates.55 (a) Low-magnified and (b) high-magnified cross-sectional SEM images of e-CMG film. (c and d) TEM images at different magnifications of e-CMG film.55 (A) Photographic images of freeze-dried monoliths prepared by the ISISA technique. PSS-G/PVA monoliths: (a) before removal from the syringe, showing the different sections investigated (X (immersion end), Y, and Z); (b) at 1:5 weight ratio; (c) at 1:10 weight ratio; (d) at 3:20 weight ratio; (e) GO/PVA monolith at 3:20 weight ratio. SEM images of (B and C) longitudinal sections and (D and E) cross-sections of a PSS-G/PVA freeze-dried monolith. Scale bars: (B, D and E) 10 μm and (C) 5 μm. Arrows indicate (B and C) the direction of freezing, (B and D) region X showing the layered structure, and (C and E) region Y with macropores.59 All figures are reproduced with permission. (scheme 1a–d) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (A–E) Copyright 2009 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (scheme 1) Schematic drawings illustrating the steps and mechanism for chemical conversion of amorphous porous carbon to 3D graphene by using lithographic patterning method.66 (A and B) Amorphous carbon template without and with graphene grown on it, respectively.66 (scheme 2) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the N and P co-doped foams. An aniline (i)-phytic acid (ii) complex (iii) is formed.65 All figures are reproduced with permission. (scheme 1A and B) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (scheme 2) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (Panel A) (a) Photographs of a 2 mg ml−1 homogeneous GO aqueous dispersion before and after hydrothermal reduction at 180 °C for 12 h, (b) photographs of a strong SGH allowing easy handling and supporting weight, (c–e) SEM images with different magnifications of the SGH interior microstructures, (f) room temperature I–V curve of the SGH exhibiting ohmic characteristics.48 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Macroscopic and Microscopic structures of UFAs. (a–c) Digital photograph of UFAs with diverse shapes. (d and e) Microscopically porous architecture of a UFA at different magnifications, showing CNT-coated graphene cell walls. (f–h) SEM images of different interconnections for CNT-coated graphene (graphene@CNTs) cell walls: overlapping (f), twisting (g), and wrapping.47 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of GO–PEI cross-linked hydrogel.98 The figure is reproduced with permission, copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (Panel A) Schematics of the synthesis of free-standing graphene films based on vacuum filtration (VF).110 (Panel B) SEM images of chemically converted graphene (CCG)/(EMIMBF4) films of various packing densities. The relation between the volume fraction of EMIMBF4 and the packing density of CCG (left axis).110 (Panel C) (a) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of MEGO with KOH. (b) Low-magnification SEM image of a 3D a-MEGO piece.111 (Panel D) Fabrication procedure of free-standing VF–graphene film using a leavening strategy. (a and b) Cross-sectional SEM images of rGO foams formed after 10 h in an autoclave at 90 °C with 80 μL hydrazine monohydrate.112 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A and B) Copyright 2013 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (C) Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science. (D) Copyright 2012 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of laser-scribed graphene-based electrochemical capacitors.115 All the figures are reproduced with permission. Copyright 2012 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  (Panel A) Schematics of breath-figure process to form honeycomb structures composed of graphene sheets.120 (Panel B) (a) Fabrication procedure of 3D graphene structures based on centrifugal vacuum evaporation. (b–e) SEM images of CVE–graphene obtained at 40 °C.121 (Panel C) (a) Schematics of the synthesis of graphene foam based on a sugar-blowing technique. (b–e) High and low magnification SEM images of graphene foam.122 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons. (C) Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematics of graphene ink synthesis, printing of 3D structures and their applications.125 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) Illustration of the preparation of 3D g-CN structures.143 (e and f) Photograph of a precursor graphene aerogel (left) and a converted BN aerogel (right). The color of the aerogel undergoes a significant color change, from pitch black to bright white, indicating a major change in the chemical composition.137 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a–c) Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. (a–c) Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis scheme for MoS2 and WS2 aerogels. SEM images of (b) ATM, (c) ATT, (d and f) MoS2, and (e and g) WS2 aerogels. TEM images of (h) MoS2 and (i) WS2 aerogels. The inset in images h and i is the magnification of the white box and is 10 nm in width.144 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (Panel A) (a) Different vertical propulsion heights of the same sample at different light wavelengths, (b) different power densities, (c) three-dimensional histogram showing the rotation speed of the graphene sponge sample, showing a distinct positive correlation with power density and frequency of the laser.178 (Panel B) (a) The compressive stress to reach 90% strain plotted as a function of cycle number for 1000 cycles in air. (b) The compressive stress needed to reach 90% strain at an engineering strain rate of 20% strain s−1 is plotted as a function of cycle number for 200 cycles.62 (c) Poisson's ratio in air and acetone as a function of the number of compression and release cycles along the axial direction.156 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (Ba and Bb) Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (Bc) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (Panel A) (a–f) Schematics of CVD graphene growth on Ni foam templates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. (Panel B) photographs of (a) Ni foam before and after the growth of graphene, and (b) 3D graphene networks obtained in a single CVD process after the removal of the Ni foam. SEM images of (c) 3D graphene networks grown on Ni foam after CVD, and (d) 3D graphene networks after the removal of Ni foam.185 (Panel C) Photographs of the Ni foam template in different geometries.186 (Panel D) (a) Digital photographs of Ni foams with (1) and without (2) pressed and graphene-coated Ni foams before (3) and after (4) the removal of the Ni networks.187 (Panel E) SEM image of the interconnected Ni nanowires covered by graphene after CVD.188 (Panel F) (a–d) Procedure for porosifying Ni–Cu catalysts.189 (Panel G) Schematic illustration of the procedure used to produce 3D graphene foam utilizing 3D Ni nanowire foam as a catalyst for CVD growth.190 (Panel H) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for a 3D few-layer graphene GF.191 (Panel I) Fabrication schematic of 3D graphene grown on a hybrid SiO2/Ni template.192 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. (C and D) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (E and G) Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (F) Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (H) Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (I) Copyright 2015 The American Association for the Advancement of the Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  (Panel A) (a) Photograph of a free-standing BN foam. (b) SEM image of a BNF network.131 (Panel B) Carbon aerogel template (left) and BN aerogel (right). The aerogels show a significant color change from black to white, which indicates an obvious change in their chemical composition. The BN aerogel maintains the cylindrical shape of the carbon aerogel template. (Panel C) SEM and TEM images of the carbon aerogel template (a and c) and BN aerogel (b and d).201 (Panel D) Schematic of the 2 stage synthesis process of 3D-BNC: first, patches of h-BN are grown on Ni foam using the CVD process. Second, graphene is grown on the empty patches of the uncovered Ni foam, with some etches overlapping the BN patches and forming the stacking/overlapping junctions. (Panel E) (a–c) EDX mapping of 3D-BNC with different BN:C ratios (25:75, 50:50 and 75:25), with red (color) corresponds to carbon, blue (color) to nitrogen and green (color) to boron-peaks.204 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society (B and C) Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (D and E) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  Hierarchy of the 3D structure of 2D materials (with the example of graphene).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Raman spectra of 3D graphene networks. The inset shows the change in the number of GF layers with an increase in CH4 concentration.67 (b) Specific surface area and density of a BNF against CVD growth time.201 (c) The N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of the BNF at 77 K.201 (d) Electrical conductivity of GFs and GF/PDMS composites as a function of the number of graphene layers.67 (e) Plot of electrical conductivity as a function of C volume fraction, percolation threshold is found to be 0.2.204 (f) Ratio of the dielectric constant of the BNF at 100 kHz to that of air as a function of the strain.131 All the figures are reproduced with the permission. (b–d, and the inset in a) Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (e) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (f) Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 


GF	Ni foam	CVD	200–500 μm	∼850	∼1000	
67

GF	Ni–Cu foam	CVD	5–100 μm	500–1200	∼900	
189

GF	Porous Ni film	CVD	5–10 μm	980	∼1100	
193

GF	Cu mesh	CVD	200–800 μm	—	—	
205

GF	Silica	CVD	1.8–3.5 nm	1900	360	
195

GFW	Polystyrene spheres	VF	1–2 μm	142	∼1204	
56

GFW	Silica sphere	SA	60–120 nm	851	—	
54 and 56

GN	Carbon template	CVD	500 nm	—	—	
66

GF	Ni foam	HS	200–500 μm	500–900	—	
63

GP	No	VF	20–500 nm	466	687	
53 and 206–210

GP	No	VF-LV	2–5 μm	—	500–800	
112

GP	No	VF-LS	50–500 nm	1520	1738	
114 and 115

GN	No	HG-VFD	1–10 μm	249	450–800	
48 and 78

GFW	No	HG-VFD	0.5–10 μm	280	1000–1400	
76

GFW	No	HG	1–10 μm	1000	600–1000	
169

GFW	No	CVE	0.5–50 μm	—	100–200	
121 and 211

GF	No	ELS	1–5 μm	110	—	
124

GFW	No	SBS	20–200 μm	1005	20000	
212

BN	Graphene aerogels	CVD	2–100 nm	1051	
	
201

BN	Ni	CVD	∼300 μm	—	
	
131

BCN	Ni	CVD	250 μm	—	
	
204

g-CN	MS	TP	4–170 nm	78	
	
143


 	Fig. 19  (Panel A) Schematic illustrating the deformation mechanisms during nanoscale compression of graphene foam via nanoindentation and the typical nanoindentation curve of GFs.224 (Panel B) (a and b) Graphene foam branch bending during in situ SEM tensile tests, rotates about 7° in 12 s (tensile force is applied in the vertical direction), (c and d) graphene branch bending at the base of the node, from nearly 0° to 40° in 13 s, and the typical stress–strain curve showing peaks and valleys induced by alignment and fracturing of GF branches,224 (e) Demonstration of the flexibility of the freestanding 3D-BNC structure.204 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A and Ba–Bd) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (Be) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 20  Optical images of the handleability of (a) GF (arrows pointing to the fractured portions of the GF), (b) PVDF, (c) PCL, (d) PVDF/GF, and (e) PCL/GF scaffolds when placed in a pair of tweezers.229 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (Panel A) Flowchart for the preparation of impregnated GF/epoxy composites.228 (Panel B) Schematic of the procedure for fabricating dip-coated graphene/PDMS foam composites.231 (Panel C) (a and b) SEM image of 3D graphene foam. (c and d) SEM image of 3D graphene foam coated with in situ synthesized PANI.226 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (B) Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (C) Copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM images of Pt nanostructures grown on the 3D graphene substrate using different pHs: (A) pH 1.7, (B) pH 2.7 and (C) pH 4.5. SEM images of potential-controlled Pd NPs on 3D graphene: (D) 0.1 V, (E) −0.2 V and (F) −0.65 V. SEM images of Pd NPs on 3D graphene following different deposition times: (G) 150 s, (H) 250 s and (I) 500 s. SEM images of Au NPs on 3D graphene using different HAuCl4 concentrations: (J) 0.1 mM, (K) 0.5 mM and (L) 1 mM.239 All the figures are reproduced with permission, copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a and b) CuO flowers at low and high resolution,257 (c) Co3O4 nanosheets,250 (d) ZnO nanorods,258 (e) WO3 nanowires,259 (f) NiCo2O4 nanoneedles.260 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2014 Elsevier. (c and e) Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d and f) Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a–d) FESEM and TEM (inset) images of different morphologies of MnO2 deposited on the surface of 3D graphene foams at various magnifications, left and right panels are shown at different magnifications.187 SEM images of 3DG/ZnO nanorods with different growth times: (e) 1 h, (f) 2 h and (g) 6 h.258 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a–d) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (e–g) Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) TEM image of Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2. (b and c) HRTEM images of Ni3S2 nanorods and Ni(OH)2 nanosheets from the white square areas highlighted in (a). (d) The corresponding SAED patterns of Ni3S2 and Ni(OH)2. (e and f) EDS spectrum and mapping results from a single hybrid nanostructure, conforming to the Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2 core–shell hierarchical structure.265 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


268
	GF + Li4Ti5O12	Li-ion battery	2–5	135–170 mA h g−1 at 200–1C

268
	GF + LiFePO4	Li-ion battery	2–5	98 mA h g−1 at 50C

272
	GF + LiFePO4	Li-ion battery	12–36	109–158 mA h g−1 at 10–0.2C

186
	GF + LiFePO4	Li-ion battery	12–36	36–158 mA h g−1 at 1280–16 mA g−1

281
	GF + V2O5/PEDOT	Li-ion battery	1.5–2	115–297 mA h g−1 at 80–1C

308
	GF + Si	Li-ion battery	>0.3	550–850 mA h g−1 at 4–2 A g−1

287
	GF + Si	Li-ion battery	0.4–1.5	513–983 mA h g−1 at 0.4–1.5 mg cm−2

288
	GF + CNTs	Li-ion battery	0.5–1	236–2640 mA h g−1 at 75–0.5C

270
	GF + MoS2	Li-ion battery	
	665–877 mA h g−1 at 500–100 mA g−1

261
	GF + Fe3O4	Li-ion battery	0.5–4	350–785 mA h g−1 at 50–1C

285
	GF + Fe3O4	Li-ion battery	∼0.3	300–1200 mA h g−1 at 20–1C

195
	MnO2 NFs@GF	Li-ion battery	1	500–1200 mA h g−1 at 0.5–5 A g−1

250
	GF + Co3O4	Li-ion battery	0.08–0.15	2453 mA h g−1 at 0.1 mA cm−2

286
	GF + Co3O4	Li-ion battery	
	130–710 mA h g−1 at 5–0.2C

309
	GF + S	Li-ion battery	3.3–10.1	450 mA h g−1 at 6 A g−1

310
	GF + Co3O4	Na-ion battery	∼2.8	82.3–523.5 mA h g−1 at 500–25 mA g−1

189
	GF + Ni(OH)2	Alkaline battery	0.2–0.5	241–480 mA h g−1 at 12–1.5 A g−1

195
	N-doped GF	Supercapacitor	0.5	790 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

256
	GF + Ni(OH)2	Supercapacitor	2–4	111–166 F g−1 at 10–0.5 A g−1

251
	GF + Co3O4	Supercapacitor	2–2.5	1100 F g−1 at 10 A g−1

279
	GF + CoO	Supercapacitor	∼2	231 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

278
	GF + Co(OH)2	Supercapacitor	2–4	1139 F g−1 at 10 A g−1

253
	GF + MnO2	Supercapacitor	1–1.5	670 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1

280
	GF + NiO	Supercapacitor	∼10	300–425 F g−1 at 10–2 A g−1

187
	GF + MnO2	Supercapacitor	0.1	465 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1

194
	GF + ZnO	Supercapacitor	5–15	316 F g−1 at 6.7 A g−1

57
	GF + MnO2	Supercapacitor	1–2	560 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1

265
	GF + Ni3S2/Ni(OH)2	Supercapacitor	2–10	1037 F g−1 at 5.1 A g−1

263
	GF + CNT	Supercapacitor	
	286 F g−1 at 1.78 mA cm−2

185
	GF + NiO	Supercapacitor	1–2	816 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 scan rate

307
	GF + CoMoO4	Supercapacitor	∼3	1101–3741 F g−1 at 85.71–1.43 A g−1

226
	GF + PANI	Supercapacitor	1.5–2	346 F g−1 at 4 A g−1

193
	GF + Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT	Supercapacitor	2.5–3	360–400 F g−1 from 40–2 A g−1

311
	GF + NiO	Supercapacitor	—	783 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 scan rate

254
	GF + Ni(OH)2	Supercapacitor	0.9	1791–2860 F g−1 at 30–2 A g−1

312
	GF + Ag NW	Supercapacitor	1	213 F g−1 at 3 mV s−1

260
	GF + NiCo2O4	Supercapacitor	—	1588 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

205
	GF + PPy	Supercapacitor	—	403–660 F g−1 at 5.2–0.34 A g−1

255
	GF + Ni(OH)2	Supercapacitor	1	890–1440 F g−1 at 80–10 A g−1



194 and 333
	GF	619.6	0.025	25 μM	
	DA
0.003	60 μM	UA

252
	Mn3O4/GF	360	10	0.1–8 mM	
	Glucose
1030	1	2–6.5 μM	H2O2

243
	PtNP/GF	
	0.125	0.167–7.486 μM	1.4	H2O2

243
	MWNT/PtNP/GF	
	0.0086	0.025–6.3 μM	1.5	H2O2

243
	MnO2/GF	
	0.27	0.38–13.46 μM	4	H2O2

257
	CuO NF/GF	2060	0.43	0.43–200 μM	3	AA

259
	WO3 NW/GF	1306	0.238	Up to 150 μM	4	DA

328
	Ag NP/GF	1094	14.9	0.03–16.21 mM	
	H2O2

194
	ZnO/GF	0.07	0.1	Up to 800 μM	
	FCN
15.18	1.0	2.0 μM	DA

330
	pDA/GF	Short incubation time (30 min)	∼90 pg ml−1	0.1–750 ng ml−1	
	Immuno-sensor

190
	PtRU/GF	1023.1	0.4	0.005–0.02 mM	
	H2O2

334
	(pDA)/(TH)/GF	169.7	0.8	0.4–660 μM	3	H2O2

335
	N-doped GF	9870	0.0001	3–100 μM	
	DA

289
	GF/CNT	470.7	0.02	2–64 μM	
	DA

289
	GF/CNT/NF/HRP	137.9	1	10 μM–1 mm	
	DA

251
	GF/Co3O4	3390	<0.025	Up to 300	
	Glucose

329
	GF/Ni(OH)2	3490	0.24	0.024–1200 μM	
	Glucose

328
	GF/Ni(OH)2	2650	0.34	1–1170 μM	
	Glucose

267
	MWNT–COOH/MnOx/GF	
	
	
	UV

336
	GF/HfO2	79H	
	
	
	pH

337
	PMMA/GF	200 ppm	
	
	
	NO2

318
	GF	ppm level	
	
	
	NH3, NO2

 	Fig. 26  Li-ion battery cathodes. Morphology and electrochemical performance of (a–c) 3D/GF/Co3O4,250 (d–f) 3DGF/V2O5/PEDOT core/shell nanobelt,281 and (g–i) UGF/LFP composites.97 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a and b) Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (g–i) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  Li-ion battery anodes. Morphology and electrochemical performance of (a–c) 3DGF/Fe3O4,261 (d–f) 3DGF/MoS2,270 and (g–i) Si/graphene/3DGF composites.287 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a–c) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d–f) Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. (g–i) Copyright 2013 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematic of a flexible battery containing a cathode and an anode made from 3D interconnected GFs. (b) Photograph of a bent battery encapsulated by PDMS, showing its good flexibility. (c) Lighting a red LED device under bending. (d–g) Electrochemical performance and cyclic performance of a flexible LTO/GF//LFP/GF full battery.293 Copyright 2014 PNAS.	 

 	Fig. 29  (A–C) SEM images and supercapacitor properties of NiO/3D graphene composites.185 (D–F) TEM, HRTEM images and supercapacitor properties of Ni3S2@Ni(OH)2/3D graphene composites.265 (G–I) TEM images (SAED pattern in inset TEM images and supercapacitor of 3D graphene/Co3O4/MnO2–PEDOT core–shell nanowire structure).193 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A–E) Copyright 2011 John Wiley and Sons. (D–F) Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (G–H) Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (Panel A) Normalized change in electrical resistance of the GF as a function of (a) time for the detection of ∼1000 ppm of NH3 in three cycles, (b) time for different concentrations of NH3 in air, (c) time for different concentrations of NO2 in air.318 (Panel B) Change in the normalized resistance of the GF as a function of time during the adsorption of ∼1000 ppm of NH3 and desorption using (a) room temperature degassing and (b) high temperature degassing. (c) Adsorption and desorption curve by using joule heating.318 Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing group.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a–d) Sensing performance of Mn3O4/3DGF based composites for glucose and hydrogen peroxide.252 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A–E) Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 32  (A) Voltammograms of the undoped GF/GC electrode, the B-GF/GC electrode, the N-GF/GC electrode, the BN–GF/GC electrode, and the Pt–C/GC electrode.198 (B) The cyclic voltammetry (CV) of the carbon cloth anode and the graphene/PANI anode in the MFC, at the scan rate of 30 mV s−1. The inset shows the semiderivative (SD) CV of the selected voltage range where the dashed line indicates the baseline.227 (C) Schematic illustration of the interface between the 3D graphene/PANI monolith electrode and S. oneidensis MR-1 bacteria. Electrochemical characterization of the carbon cloth anode and the graphene/PANI anode in MFC.227 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (A) Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. (B and C) Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Photocurrent–voltage (I–V) curves for DSSCs using 3D-NFG CE and Pt CE.191 (b) Photocurrent–voltage characteristics of DSSCs with various CEs.268 (c) Comparison of the I–V characteristics of DSSCs based on the 3DGT-0.5, 3DGT-0.85, 3DGT-1.5 and TiO2 NPs film electrodes.338 (d) J–V curves of the DSSCs with different photoanodes.339 All the figures are reproduced with permission. (a) Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b and c) Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a and b) Electrical-resistance variation of GF/PDMS composites during bending cycles. (c) Electrical-resistance change of a composite after 50% stretching cycles. (d) Electrical-resistance variation of the composite as a function of uniaxial tensile strain until fracture.67 All the figures are reproduced with permission. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 35  Electrical-resistance variation of: (a) GF–PEDOT:PSS–PDMS (CGPP) and GF–PDMS(CGP) films as a function of tensile strain; (b) CGPP film as a function of stretching–releasing cycles with 50% strain; (c) CGPP film as a function of the number of bends.351 All the figures are reproduced with permission. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a–d) Absorption and burning process of cyclohexane (stained with Sudan Red II and floating on water) by the BN aerogel within 5 s. (e–h) BN aerogel after burning in air reused for the absorption of cyclohexane.201 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing group.	 

 	Fig. 37  Summary of types, synthesis methods, and applications of the 3D structures of 2D materials and their composites.	 
0D	Zero-dimensional
1D	One-dimensional
2D	Two-dimensional
3D	Three-dimensional
h-BN	Hexagonal boron nitride
TMDs	Transition metal dichalcogenides
MXenes	Metal carbides
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
GO	Graphene oxide
CCG	Chemically converted graphene
SGH	Self-assembled graphene hydrogels
PS	Polystyrene
PMMA	Polymethyl methaacrylate,
CMG	Chemically modified graphene
PVP	Poly(vinylpyrrolidone)
ISISA	Ice-segregation-induced self-assembly
PVA	Polyvinyl alcohol
PSS	Polystyrene sulfonate
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
NPs	Nanoparticles
NP	Nanoparticle
NW	Nanowire
NF	Nanofiber
PPy	Polypyrrole
STEM	Scanning transmission electron microscopy
UFAs	Ultra-flyweight aerogels
BN-GAs	Boron and nitrogen doped graphene aerogels
PEDOT	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)
PANi	Polyaniline
PNIPAM	Poly(N-isopropylacrylamine)
EMIMBF4	Sulfuric acid, and 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
LSG	Laser-scribed graphene
DODA·Br	Dimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium bromide
ATM	Ammonium thio-molybdate
ATT	Ammonium thio-tungstate
GGO	Giant graphene oxide
BNF	Boron nitride foam
GF	Graphene foam
GGO	Graphene oxide

p
c
	Percolation threshold
GM	Graphene monoliths

T
g
	Glass transition temperature
SDBS	Sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
SILAR	Successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction
GNs	Graphene nanosheets
GQDs	Graphene quantum dots
DMF	Dimethyl formamide
LIBs	Lithium ion batteries
EDLCs	Electric double layer capacitors
DA	Dopamine
UA	Uric acid
AA	Ascorbic acid
AP	Acetaminophen
ORR	Oxygen reduction reaction
EET	Extracellular electron transfer
MFC	Microbial fuel cell
3D-NFG	Three-dimensional nano-foam of few-layer graphene
DSSCs	Dye sensitized solar cells
CE	Counter electrode
H-GNs	Heat-reduced graphene nanosheets
L-GQDs	Laser-reduced graphene quantum dots
Footnote
† Both authors have equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
