Viologens: a versatile organic molecule for energy storage applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA07201C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA07201C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 27215-27233Viologens: a versatile organic molecule for energy storage applications

        
          
            Murugavel 
            Kathiresan
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Bebin 
            Ambrose
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Natarajan 
            Angulakshmi†
, 
      
        
          
            Deepa Elizabeth 
            Mathew
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dhavamani 
            Sujatha
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Arul Manuel 
            Stephan
          
          
        
      *
      CSIR – Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630003, India. E-mail: kathiresan@cecri.res.in; amstephan@cecri.res.in
Received 
      23rd August 2021
    , Accepted 16th November 2021First published on 17th November 2021AbstractOrganic redox compounds are a fascinating class of active materials used in energy storage applications. The structural diversity as well as ability to be molecularly tailored assists in fine-tuning of their electrochemical properties at the molecular level, which is highly desired for performance improvement. In reality, it is very challenging to achieve the desired physicochemical properties. Viologens represent a unique class of redox-active molecules that undergo two one-electron reductions in steps. Their redox properties have been highly explored in various fields such as electrocatalysis, electrochromism, photochromism, herbicides, and to some extent in energy storage systems. Their redox behavior as well as cationic charges are highly useful for improving device performance in energy storage systems. Different energy systems require different states of viologens, i.e., dicationic, monocation radical, or redox couple. For example, viologen dication shows electrostatic attraction towards polysulfides in Li–S batteries, and similarly, dication radical prevents Li dendrite growth in Li-ion batteries. In the case of redox flow batteries, such as supercapacitors and Li–air batteries, the redox behavior of viologens is useful for improving the performance. Despite these advantages, there are some challenges existing in viologen-based systems that must be conquered at the molecular level. In this regard, a systematic study on structure–activity relationships becomes crucial to address the bottlenecks. This review comprehensively analyses the role of viologens in various energy storage systems and the mode of chemical interactions responsible for enhancing the overall performance of electrochemical storage devices.Murugavel KathiresanDr Murugavel Kathiresan graduated from the University of Madras with a Bachelor's degree (2004) as well as a Master's degree (2006), and received his PhD from the University of Osnabrück, Germany, in 2010 under the guidance of Prof. Lorenz Walder. He then moved to the University of Basel, Switzerland, to conduct his postdoctoral research with Prof. Marcel Mayor. He was awarded the DST-INSPIRE Faculty award in December 2013. From March 2014 to April 2017, he worked as a DST-INSPIRE faculty member, and since April 2017, he has been working as a Scientist at the Electro Organic & Materials Electrochemistry Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. His current research interests include viologen-based supramolecular chemistry, along with investigation of their photophysical applications, electro-organic synthesis, electrochemical CO2 reduction, and conversion to useful organics, metal–organic frameworks, and porous organic polymers for sensing and energy-related applications.Bebin AmbroseBebin Ambrose received his bachelor's and master's degrees in chemistry from Scott Christian College, affiliated to Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, India. He qualified for the UGC-JRF in December 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the guidance of Dr M. Kathiresan at the Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. His current research mainly focuses on viologen-based supramolecules and their electrochemical applications.Natarajan AngulakshmiDr Natarajan Angulakshmi is currently working as a Brain-Pool Research Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Gyeongsang National University, South Korea. She also served as a Scientific Researcher at Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P. R. China with Prof. Yinghe Zhou. She was a visiting researcher (with Prof. Claudio Gerbaldi) at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Politechnico de Torino, Italy and Department of Chemistry (with Prof. Edward Bormashenko) Ariel University, Israel. Her areas of interest include lithium–sulfur batteries and polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries.Deepa Elizabeth MathewDeepa Elizabeth Mathew has completed her post-graduate work in Chemistry from Loyola College, Chennai, India and is currently pursuing her PhD under the supervision of Prof. A Manuel Stephan and Prof. Sabu Thomas at the CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, India. Her current research interests include polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries and permselective separators for Li–S batteries.Dhavamani SujathaDhavamani Sujatha graduated from Alagappa University, India and currently pursuing her PhD at the CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, India. Her research interests include materials synthesis and characterization.Arul Manuel StephanDr Arul Manuel Stephan is a Senior Principal Scientist in the Electrochemical Power Sources Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (India). He undertook a STAJSPS fellowship to work with Prof. Yuria Saito at Osaka National Research Institute (Japan) and served as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Chemistry, University of Tulsa (USA) with Prof. Dale-Teeters. He worked at Chonbuk National University (South Korea) as a visiting scientist for two years (with Prof. Kee Suk Nahm) and Politecnico de Torino (Italy) in association with Prof. Roberta Bongiovanni. His current research interests include advanced materials for lithium–sulfur batteries, fast charging of lithium-ion batteries, and polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium–polymer batteries.
1. Introduction
1.1. Structure and properties

N,N′-Disubstituted-4,4′-bipyridinium salts are also known as viologens, which is the term coined by Michaelis in 1932 due to their unique purple color upon one-electron reduction. Viologens are distinctive organic salts that undergo reversible two-electron reduction in steps, i.e., the first step consists of a dication (pale yellow or off-white) to monocation radical (violet/green color), and the second step involves a monocation radical to neutral molecule (colorless), as illustrated in Scheme 1.1,2 The color of the monocation group is substituent dependent, i.e., if the pendant group is alkyl, an intense blue/violet color is observed, whereas when the terminal group is aromatic, an intense green color is observed.3 In addition, the solubility of these salts depends on the counteranion; e.g., chloride, bromide, and iodide salts are soluble in water and methanol, whereas PF6−, TFSI−, BF4−, and OTf− salts are soluble in organic solvents such as dimethyl formamide (DMF), acetonitrile (AN), or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO).3 This one- or two-step reduction can be carried out in the presence of chemical reagents or using external stimuli such as the application of potential or light.
 Scheme 1  Different redox states of viologen. 
The chemical/electrochemical/photochemical reduction of viologen dication to monocation radical is simplistic and produces an intensely blue/violet/green colored compound. The monocation radical displays intramolecular optical charge-transfer complexation showing high molar absorption coefficient values, and hence, these salts have been widely explored for their application in electrochromic and photochromic devices. Because viologens possess strong electron-accepting ability (first reduction potential −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl electrode (close to 0 V)), they are often used as electron acceptors. In electron-rich systems, viologens form strong donor–acceptor/charge-transfer complexes, and such interactions can be easily monitored by UV-vis spectroscopy.4
Apart from charge-transfer interactions, viologens also show hydrophilic/hydrophobic, ion–dipole interactions with cucurbit[n]urils, cyclodextrins, and calix[n]arenes.5–7 The distinctive π-framework and the positive charge of the bipyridyl nucleus makes it possible for it to interact with other electron-rich aromatics, oppositely charged nuclei, and electrode structures via π–π, charge-transfer complexation, ion–dipole, and electrostatic interactions. Thus, viologen-based supramolecular architectures are fabricated by employing one of these approaches.8
1.2. Merits and demerits
Typically, the first one-electron reduction on viologen produces monocation radical, and this process is usually reversible (Scheme 1). Intramolecular charge-transfer complex formation among adjacent monocation radicals leads to dimer formation.9,10 When the conversion of dimer to monomer (monocation radical) is reversible, the physico-chemical properties will be retained. However, prolonged oxidation–reduction sometimes leads to the formation of an irreversible dimer, wherein two monocation radicals are covalently interlinked.10 Such a process results in the formation of a new dimer species with altered physico-chemical properties, i.e., a reduction in redox-mediating efficiency as well as a decrease in molar absorption coefficient values.10 As a result, the efficacy of viologens in different applications such as electrochromism, redox-mediator, energy storage devices, and molecular electronics decreases after several oxidation–reduction cycles.
In order to overcome this problem, viologens are often modified with pendant groups such as trialkyl ammonium groups that are known to hamper dimerization via electrostatic repulsions, or viologens are allowed to form guest–host complexes with suitable host molecules.11–13 The bulky nature of the supramolecular complexes hinders the dimerization process. Introduction of bulky groups at the periphery is also known to obstruct this dimerization process via steric interactions. These systematic functionalization strategies provide ample choice to expand viologen-based functionalized systems in electrochromic, molecular electronics, and energy storage applications.14
1.3. Synthesis
As a general strategy, viologens can be synthesized from their precursor 4,4′-bipyridine via N-alkylation with suitable alkyl groups or 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene to yield the corresponding N-alkylated salt or zincke salt. Thus, N-alkylation and zincke reactions are the extensively used synthetic approaches to prepare simple viologens. The N-alkylation approach results in unconjugated viologens, whereas the zincke reaction approach yields fully conjugated viologens. The zincke approach requires pre-activation of 4,4′-bipyridine with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene for further reaction with primary amine-substituted aromatics/heteroaromatics, where the first step is an aromatic nucleophilic substitution, and the second step involves the addition nucleophilic ring opening and ring closure (ANRORC) mechanism. Instead, the N-alkylation approach involves the direct preparation of viologen salts by reacting 4,4′-bipyridine and corresponding iodo/bromo/chloro alkanes (Scheme 2). Further details on the synthetic methods and preparation of various viologen derivatives are given in the references and are cited therein.1,8,9
 Scheme 2  Commonly used synthetic methods for the preparation of viologens. 
1.4. Applications
The very first application of viologens as herbicides was based on their electron-accepting ability, i.e., when used as a herbicide, viologens interrupt the single electron transfer reaction in biological systems due to its strong electron-accepting nature.15 Viologens are also toxic to human beings and animals due to their interference in one-electron-transport chains, which commonly instigates cell death. The mode of action consists of viologen inducing the formation of peroxide radicals or hydrogen peroxide by a series of chain reactions, and the redox cycling reaction involves one-electron transfers from reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to viologen and converts the molecular oxygen into superoxide anions. This causes NADPH depletion, excessive reverse oxygen species (ROS) production, and damage to cellular macromolecules such as lipids, proteins, and DNA, which results in cell death.16 After studying their electrochemical reversibility and distinctive characteristics, viologens are often applied in molecular electronics, electrochromic devices, electron storage, and charge-storage devices.17–21
Viologens are also used as redox mediators, where the reduced monocation radical efficiently transfers the electron to other substrates. This redox-mediating behaviour has been used to develop electrochemical sensors to detect certain analytes.22 Specifically, this behaviour was also utilized in Li–air batteries to reduce oxygen to superoxide, which was shown to reduce electrode passivation.23,24 Furthermore, viologens have been used as redox mediators to assist in the process of electrochemical hydrogen evolution from water using a MoS2 embedded metal–organic framework (MOF).25 It was shown that the use of viologen as a redox mediator enhanced the turnover frequency by 20-fold, indicating an effective electron transfer to electrochemically non-addressable MoSx moieties. In another study, viologen-based covalent–organic polymer (COP) was interfaced with graphene and tested for its effectiveness in a pseudocapacitive energy storage system. In the interface engineering of COP with graphene, its electrochemical activity has been retained even after prolonged cycling compared to native systems that rapidly degrade in activity after a few cycles.26 Poly viologens were used in organic radical batteries due to their mechanical flexibility and greater stability.27
Viologens have been recently used as negolytes in aqueous organic redox-flow batteries (AORBs).28 Because of their ease of synthesis, enhanced water solubility, lower reduction potential, extraordinary stability of the monocation radical, low cost, decreased toxicity, and ability to operate at neutral pH, it is advantageous to use viologens for AORBs.29,30 Because of their structural tunability, viologen-based redox-flow systems can easily resolve the challenges and shortcomings of prior AORB systems. Investigation of an initial methyl viologen system revealed the problem of dimerization, and this was fixed by the introduction of a trimethyl ammonium group on the side arms. Quaternary ammonium groups on the side arms imparted electrostatic repulsion, and hence the dimerization became unfavorable.11,31 Similarly, viologen-based supramolecular complexes with suitable host molecules were also applied in AORBs, and complexation is known to minimize the anodic reduction potential, which results in more optimal performance.
Several dedicated reviews focusing on viologen-based supramolecular architectures, electrochromic devices, molecular electronics, and synthetic strategies are currently available.1,3,8,9,32–37 To the best of our knowledge, no review is currently available that only presents the applications of viologens for energy storage devices, and therefore, our focus herein is confined to the role of viologen-based materials in energy storage applications.
2. Energy storage applications
2.1. Lithium batteries

2.1.1. Li-ion batteries. 
The escalating demand for fossil fuels and the environmental issues associated with them due to global warming have accelerated an immense research effort over the last three decades to produce viable energy conversion and storage devices.38,39 Fuel cells, supercapacitors, and lithium-ion batteries are considered as potential contenders that would adequately meet the demands from the transport and stationary power grid storage sectors. Previous review articles have delved into the working principles, types, advantages, and limitations of these energy conversion and storage systems.40,41
This review article highlights the recent advances in the electrochemical performance of different battery systems, although the working principles of different energy storage devices are not presented because it is beyond the scope of this article. Viologens with excellent redox properties and unique radical states have been identified as exceptional electrode candidates for the new generation of energy storage devices.42–44 To improve the performance and to expand the limits of organic Li-ion batteries, Stolar et al. developed a series of novel viologen derivatives with multiple stable redox centres, higher specific energy, and superior electron-accepting behaviour.45 The authors compared the performance of monomeric phosphaviologen derivatives with dimeric and polymeric phosphoviologen derivatives, as illustrated in Scheme 3a. The shortcoming of using monomeric and dimeric phosphaviologens is their increased radical solubility during cycling, which leads to electrode leaching and decreased capacity flow. Higher coulombic efficiencies (>90%) were observed with the use of polymeric phosphaviologens because of their low radical solubility. Poly(phosphaviologen) with interconnected p-xylene exhibited a maximum capacity of 73.4 mA h g−1 at 1C rate on cycle 5 and retained 82% of its initial capacity, i.e., 60 mA h g−1, even after 70 cycles, while the o-xylene interconnected polymer sample attained a maximum capacity of 70.2 mA h g−1, 89% of the theoretical capacity, at 1C rate on its 10th cycle. The attained maximum capacity was attributed to the utilization of both redox steps during charging and discharging. The use of both redox steps also decreased the mass per charge of the materials and doubled the electron capacity per molecule, and thus, they are deemed as materials that are superior when compared to the conventional viologens.
 Scheme 3  Structure of various phosphaviologens. 
The same research group also reported the synthesis of two new highly electron-deficient phosphaviologen derivatives, phosphaviologen sulfide (PVS) and P-methyl phosphaviologen (PVM) (Scheme 3b).46 Electrochemical investigations revealed that at high reduction potentials, PVS and PVM accept two and three electrons, respectively. PVM undergoes a 3 e− reduction in two steps between 3 to 3.6 V vs. Li/Li+. The equivalent weight is 102 g mol−1 e−, and the specific capacity is 262 mA h g−1, and therefore, it is a favourable candidate for viable carbon-based electrode material with high specific energy density. Li-ion batteries produced using PVM as the cathode displayed high voltage, but the high solubility of PVM reduced the total capacity and life of the battery. In a different study, functionalized phosphaviologen with pendant pyrene moieties was interfaced with single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) and used as a stable cathode (Scheme 3c).47 The redox-active phosphaviologens anchored on the surface of CNTs prevented electrode dissolution via attractive π-stacking interactions. With phosphaviologen as the cathode, the hybrid batteries displayed a high operating voltage (1.95–3.5 V) vs. Li/Li+ and remained stable even after 500 cycles of charge–discharge.
Li et al. recently studied a new series of poly(chalcogenoviologen)s with multiple, stable, and reversible redox centres as anodes for high-performance organic radical Li-ion batteries (ORLIBs) (Scheme 3d).48 Incorporation of heavy chalcogens into the bipyridine ring has been shown to reduce the HOMO–LUMO gap, resulting in increased electron density and improved electrical conductivity. Among the different chalcogenoviologens (S, Se, and Te), poly(Te-viologen) displayed a more optimal performance due to its larger mass and polarizability (Fig. 1). The maximum discharge capacity reached 684 mA h g−1 (current density 100 mA g−1) for poly(Te-BnV), and a stable specific discharge capacity of 502 mA h g−1 was achieved with a coulombic efficiency of 100%. The presence of heavy atoms such as S, Se, and Te prominently enhanced the cycling stability and capacity, and thus, the highest reported capacity to date was for this new viologen-based electrode.
 Fig. 1  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of 4a–d at 0.5 mV s−1. (b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of 2a–d at 100 mA g−1. (c) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of 4a–d at 100 mA g−1. (d) Rate capability of 4a–d. (e) Cycle stability of 4a–d at 100 mA g−1. (f) Proposed electrochemical reduction steps of 4d. Reproduced with permission from Wiley, ref. 48. 
Organic ionic crystals with high capacity and low electrolyte solubility are members of a striking class of active materials for rechargeable batteries, although their limited electronic conductivity and moderate voltage appear to be the major bottlenecks. Very recently, Ma et al. successfully employed two representative viologen crystals [ethylviologen iodide (EVI2) and ethylviologen diperchlorate (EV(ClO4)2)] as cathode materials for lithium batteries.49 These organic ionic materials crystallized in a monoclinic arrangement with interchanging organic EV2+ layers and inorganic I−/ClO4− layers. Their work provided a new insight in understanding the charge storage mechanism and structural evolution of viologen crystals as cathode in Li-ion batteries. Here, the EVI2 electrode exhibited a high initial discharge plateau of 3.7 V (vs. Li+/Li) because of its anion storage ability (Fig. 2). Also, by replacing the I− with ClO4−, the EV(ClO4)2 electrode showed excellent rate performance with 78% of theoretical capacity even at a 5C rate due to the satisfactory electron conduction of the ClO4− layers.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of (a) EVI2−- and (b) EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries. Voltage profiles of (c) EVI2- and (d) EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries at various rates from 0.1C to 5C. (e) Rate cyclability of EVI2- and EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries at various rates from 0.1C to 5C. (f) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of EVI2- and EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission from Wiley, ref. 49. 
Ghosh et al. explored the reversible lithium-ion storage property of N,N-di-(boron trifluoride)-4,4′-bipyridine (BTFV), a simple organic compound from the viologen family (Scheme 4a).50 The viologen displayed a reversible capacity of 175 mA h g−1 against lithium at a discharge rate of 50 mA g−1 with long cycling performance and satisfactory throughput capability. Furthermore, the reversible lithiation–delithiation property of the viologen was investigated by ex situ NMR studies. In a study reported by Yao et al., π-extended viologen (bipyridinium) derivatives were synthesized, and their utility as a negative electrode material was evaluated (Scheme 4b).51 In the half-cell configuration, the prepared negative electrode materials showed average voltages of approximately 2 V (vs. Li), which is lower than that of the previously reported viologen derivatives (approximately 2.3 V vs. Li).
 Scheme 4  Structure of different viologens and viologen polymers. 
A maximum anodic capacity of 70 mA h g−1 was observed for a benzene ring (phenylene)-inserted derivative, which corresponded to 72% of the theoretical capacity. In addition, some of the synthesized derivatives emitted fluorescence, even in the solid state, which can be applied as a SOC (state of charge) indicator. In a recent study, Chen et al. prepared conjugated viologens with N,N′-diaryl-substituted Py2TTz units (namely P1 and P2) (Scheme 4c).52 P1 denotes a conjugated microporous polymer, whereas P2 denotes a linear polymer. The use of P1 as an electrode material for organic/Li-ion batteries resulted in a high capacity of 358.8 mA h g−1 and a high current density of 800 mA g−1 even after 1000 cycles, with excellent capacity retention and cycling stability.
One of the biggest problems with Li ion batteries is the uncontrollable growth of Li dendrites, which results in low coulombic efficiency. Wu et al. addressed this issue via the interfacial coating of Li metal anode with 0.5 wt% methyl viologen (Scheme 5).53 The interfacial coating was carried out via in situ electrochemical reduction of methyl viologen in ether electrolyte, and as a result, a highly uniform, stable, as well as ionically conductive coating was achieved. A viologen-coated Li metal anode delivered extremely stable cycling with a coulombic efficiency of 99.1% for 300 cycles and 98.2% for more than 400 cycles at a current density of 1 mA cm−2. The improved performance was attributed to the development of uniform and stable SEI, which resulted in greater control over Li-ion flow and suppression of Li dendrite growth. It has been proposed that this method is effective for high energy density batteries, such as Li–S and lithium–air batteries.
 Scheme 5  (a) Two-step reduction process of MV. (b) Illustrations of the design principles using MV to form a stable interfacial coating to allow the stable cycling of lithium metal. (c) Potential viologen oligomer formation on copper surface under reducing conditions. Reproduced with permission from ACS, ref. 53. 
Prakash et al. validated the usage of simple ethylviologen hexafluorophosphate as a cathode-protecting additive.54 There was significantly improved cycling performance of the Ni-rich cathode with electrolyte additive (0.2 wt%) as compared to the reference electrolyte, i.e., a capacity retention of 81.6% of initial discharge capacity after 100 cycles was observed. The better performance is ascribed to the development of a stable passive layer by sacrificial decomposition of ethyl viologen hexafluoro phosphate (EVFP) prior to the oxidative decomposition of the electrolyte, thereby forming an effective SEI on the nickel-rich cathode surface.
It is evident that viologen plays different roles, such as an electrolyte additive, redox mediator, and component of electrode materials for Li-ion batteries. The positive charge on the viologens and their strong electron affinity contributes to the improved performance in these systems that could provide strong electrostatic repulsion for Li dendrite formation until their decomposition, or sacrificial decomposition of viologen prior to the oxidative decomposition of the electrolyte. Because of the limited number of works on viologens in relation to Li-ion batteries, it is difficult to understand the role of viologens in such systems and thus, thorough investigations on various aspects are required so that in-depth understanding is possible for further commercialization.


2.1.2. Li–S batteries. 
The multi-step redox reactions of Li–S unfortunately comprise the complex conversions between S and Li2S, where polysulfides of shorter chains were formed.55 This complex reaction involves sluggish redox kinetics and severely affects the performance of Li–S systems. The use of a redox mediator in such cases is known to promote kinetics as well as cycle stability. In the review of Huang et al., the progress and prospects of heterogeneous/homogeneous mediators for use in high energy density Li–S batteries were discussed.56
Rational design of efficient mediators and their introduction into a working battery emerges as a promising method because the mediators can enhance the redox kinetics and reaction efficiency of Li–S systems to construct high-energy-density Li–S batteries. Our group has successfully synthesized and fused naphthylviologen in a sulfur cathode to improve the electrochemical performance of the Li–S cell.57 The viologen added to the Li–S cell resulted in higher discharge capacity as compared to the unladen one. The boosted performance of the viologen-laden sulfur cathode was credited to the electrostatic interaction between viologen and the polysulfides, which was further validated by UV-visible spectroscopy. Furthermore, the XPS analysis of the cathode and anode surfaces clearly indicated restricted migration of the polysulfides to the anode side (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Illustration of a viologen-laden sulfur cathode for the confinement of polysulfides in Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission from ACS, ref. 57. 
An upgraded Li–S battery design using ethylviologen diperchlorate (redox mediator), which possesses multi-electron redox activities occurring at different potentials to mediate the successive multistep Li–S reactions, was reported by Lee et al. (Fig. 4).58 The combined chemical and electrochemical charging and discharging of the sulfur cathode enabled the Li–S flow battery to operate closer to the full potential of the Li–S chemistry without an additive or a soluble cathode.
 Fig. 4  A schematic illustration of the working of the redox-targeting lithium–sulfur flow batteries (RTLSFB) (black arrows denote the discharge process, and green arrows denote the charge process). Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, ref. 58. 


2.1.3. Li–air batteries. 
Due to its high theoretical energy density and combined advantages of fuel cells and Li-ion batteries, Li–air batteries may find applications in hybrid electric vehicles and stationary power grid applications.59 However, detrimental cathode discharge products, unpredictable side reactions of the electrolyte, and development of Li dendrites in the anode remain major blockades to commercialization for this system.60 A Li–air battery is composed of a Li metal anode and a carbon-assisted air cathode divided by a Li-ion conducting electrolyte, wherein the solvent is expected to play a major role.61 To minimize the side reactions and high overpotentials, catalysts (redox mediators) have been developed to facilitate Li2O2 oxidation during recharging. The catalysts are known to decompose Li2O2.62
Dialkyl viologens were recognised as excellent mediators for the oxygen reduction reaction in lithium–oxygen batteries due to their redox potential (EtV+˙/EtV2+ = 2.65 V).62 The change in potential between the mediator and Li2O2 significantly affects the formation and degeneration of Li2O2. Furthermore, exceptional benefits such as low oxygen overpotentials enhance the O2 reduction activity and subsequently decrease the superoxide lifetime, which prevents the degradation of Li2O2via the reduction of superoxide (Fig. 5).63 Viologen facilitates two-electron oxygen reduction (oxygen to superoxide and superoxide to peroxide) and prevents electrode passivation.23 Lacey et al. demonstrated the use of viologen as a redox mediator to catalyze oxygen reduction in the Li–air battery.23 The most optimal redox mediator in the ionic liquid electrolyte used in lithium cells was ethyl viologen ditriflate (EtV (OTf)2), due to its high solubility and stability. The EtV (OTf)2 in the electrolyte played a crucial role in converting superoxide to Li2O2, a more desirable product of oxygen reduction (Fig. 5, right column). A low concentration of EtV viologen in 0.3 M LiTFSI in BMPTFSI offered an efficient redox cycling over multiple voltammetric cycles.
 Fig. 5  Use of diethyl viologen as a redox mediator and subsequent performance of a Li–air battery (left) and its oxygen reduction mechanism (right). Reproduced with permission from RSC, ref. 63. 
Yang et al. discussed the development of the lithium–oxygen battery, which occurred by suppressing the degradation reactions that are initiated by superoxide.63 He demonstrated that with the addition of ethylviologen, which catalyses the reduction of superoxide to peroxide, the lifetime of superoxide was drastically decreased. This was the first report on the introduction of a soluble redox couple in a lithium–oxygen battery to minimize the superoxide lifetime by promoting two-electron reduction of oxygen.
Our group has prepared viologens with varying positive charges (monomeric (2+), dimeric (4+), and trimeric (6+)) and successfully employed them as catalysts in carbon-assisted air cathodes of Li–O2 cells.59 Monomeric viologen with two positive charges showed significant catalytic activity. The cell composed of monomeric viologen showed the highest discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency, which was attributed to its low molecular weight and more optimal reversibility of redox behavior. In contrast, unwanted dimerization reactions occurred with the dimer and trimeric viologens, which decreased their redox activity and overall performance in these systems.


2.1.4. Na–air batteries. 
Frith et al. used the EtV redox mediator to enhance the performance of Na–O2 batteries, which increased the capacity by the reduction in electrode passivation and enhanced the discharge potential via faster kinetics.24 Na–O2 batteries are reasonable candidates due to their low cost, high energy density, and electrochemical reversibility. The use of EtV redox mediator resulted in decreased overpotential of ORR with an enhancement in the capacity. The addition of EtV boosted the capacity by 50% and prevented rapid saturation of NaO2. Eqn (1) shows the mechanism of formation of NaO2 in Na–air batteries. O2 + Na+ + e− → NaO2(1)

2.2. Aqueous batteries
In the exploration of new energy storage devices, the interaction between charge carrier and the electrode structure is considered to be very important. Wei et al. reported the topotactic intercalation of molecular ion, methyl viologen (1,1′-dimethyl-4, 4′-bipyridinium, MV2+), into a highly crystalline, 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) electrode.64 The large MV2+ reversibly intercalated in the PTCDA electrode with a reversible specific capacity of 105 mA h g−1 and an excellent rate performance of 67 mA h g−1 at the current rate of 2000 mA g−1.
The characterizations carried out showed that the inclusion of methyl viologen on the PTCDA electrode caused phase alteration of the organic host, and resulted in a strong guest–host interaction beyond ionic bonding further supported by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. The strong interaction between the guest and host molecule increased the operation potential and lessened the overpotentials. Furthermore, the results provide insight into the design of battery materials by considering the ion/electrode intermolecular interactions, which have a direct influence on the capacity, rate capability, and stable cycle-life.
2.3. Redox-flow batteries

2.3.1. Non-aqueous organic redox flow batteries. 
The practical application of redox-active organic materials in redox flow batteries (RFBs) is challenging because the structural diversity of these materials results in difficulties in achieving the appropriate redox potential, solubility, and stability.65,66 A promising strategy to enhance the performance of non-aqueous organic material-based redox flow batteries (NAORFBs) is to (i) increase the molecular size of the electroactive compound because this suppresses the diffusion over the membrane via a physical blocking mechanism, and (ii) use membranes with high solvent compatibility, low resistance, and high ion selectivity to lessen the ion crossover.67 Chai et al. used this strategy to increase the molecular weight of viologens via PEGylation without forfeiting their electrochemical properties and to increase the permeability of redox materials in the catholyte (PEGylated phenothiazine) and anolyte (PEGylated viologen) for long cycle capability.67 Combined with a composite nanoporous aramid nanofiber separator, the PEGylated NAORFB displayed exceptional cyclability, with a retention capacity of 99.90% per cycle and an average coulombic efficiency of 99.7%, whereas NAORFBs using semi-PEGylated as well as non-PEGylated electrolytes displayed lower cyclability attributed to the crossover of non-PEGylated materials. This work opens up a new possibility for exploiting the PEGylation strategy in the upcoming redox flow battery technology and highlights the importance of molecular engineering in NAORFBs.
Chen and co-workers reported the design of (CH2)5CH3-substituted viologen molecules and their application as anolyte material for organic RFBs that are well-suited for operation with Li-ion electrolytes.68 Designing new viologens, i.e., functionalizing 4,4′-bipyridine with suitable alkyl chains, offers the opportunity to develop steady anolytes with high solubility and low reduction potentials. A feasible electrochemical performance has been attained by combining an anolyte of (CH2)5CH3-substituted 4,4′-bipyridine with a catholyte based on an iron complex (Fig. 6). The DFT calculations showed that a (CH2)5CH3-substituted viologen molecule exhibited a low reduction potential of 2.74 V vs. Li/Li+, and offered satisfactory operational stability due to its excellent solubility in carbonate-based electrolytes (1.3 M) and effective charge delocalization between the two pyridinium rings.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the (CH2)5CH3-substituted Vio2+|Fe-tpy RFB with the corresponding cell reactions in the anolyte (left) and catholyte (right). Reproduced with permission from RSC, ref. 68. 
Hu et al. reported the use of methyl viologen bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonamide (MVTFSI) as a redox mediator in non-aqueous supporting electrolyte (Fig. 7).69 With (ferrocenylmethyl)trimethylammonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (FcNTFSI) as the catholyte, the MVTFS/FcNTFSI NOARFB system displayed a theoretical energy density of 24.9 W h L−1 and a cell voltage of up to 1.5 V. A porous Daramic separator and a highly conductive LiTFSI/CH3CN supporting electrolyte were used. The redox flow battery exhibited outstanding cycling performance with an energy efficiency of 68.3% at 40 mA cm−2, and even after 100 cycles provided a total capacity retention of 88%.
 Fig. 7  Two-electron utilization of methyl viologen anolyte in a non-aqueous organic redox flow battery. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier. Ref. 69. 
Non-aqueous electrolyte has the benefits of molecular tailoring, lower equivalent weight, multi-electron transfer, fast kinetics, and extraordinary chemical stability. However, its usage is problematic because it is expensive and requires non-eco-friendly solvents that must be transported and are unsafe.70


2.3.2. Aqueous organic redox flow batteries. 
Developing organic materials with high stability and reversible redox-activity over several cycles is a crucial challenge for attaining economical and sustainable aqueous organic redox flow batteries (AORFBs).71,72 Water is seen as advantageous over organic solvents, due to its eco-friendly nature, non-flammability, cost-effectiveness, and high ion mobility. Among the various organic redox-mediators used, viologen attracts unique attention due to its positive charge, higher solubility in aqueous media, and structural tunability73,74
A novel polymer-based AORFB was developed via incorporation of viologens and 2,2,4,4-tetramethylpiperidine N-oxide (TEMPO) on organic polymer by Janoschka et al.28 The redox-mediator-incorporated polymers were tuned to be highly charged, and this significantly increased their solubility in water, allowing the utilization of a water-based NaCl electrolyte. Due to the high ion mobility of water, current densities of up to 100 mA cm−2 were obtained, with realistic charge–discharge cycles of up to 40 mA cm−2.
Liu et al. recently reported an approach using α-CD as the molecular spectator, wherein α-cyclodextrin with a suitable cavity size weakens the intermolecular interaction between viologen monocation radicals and suppresses the dimerization in AORFBs (Fig. 8).75 This work affords a simplistic and effective strategy to stabilize the viologen radicals for AORFB applications. Viologen derivatives have been developed as negative electrolyte for neutral AORFBs. However, the structure–property–performance relationship remains unclear. Liu et al. used hydroxylated viologens as examples to explain the influence of the structure of viologens on their electrochemical behavior and performance in flow batteries.29 The authors synthesized a series of hydroxylated viologens, and investigated their redox potential, kinetics, and their potential application in neutral AORFBs. DFT calculations were carried out to unravel the underlying correlation between the molecular configuration, the electronic structure of molecules, and battery performance.
 Fig. 8  Concept illustration of α-CD as the molecular spectator to suppress EV radical cation dimerization (top panel) and cycling performance of 1 M EV + α-CD/FcNEBr cell at static mode using galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling at 10 mA cm−1 with capacity utilization of 80%. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, ref. 75. 
Viologens were utilized as two-electron storage materials along with TEMPO (4-trimethylammonium-TEMPO) catholyte due to their high negative redox potentials upon pairing (Fig. 9).76 The AORFB delivered a cell voltage of >1.5 V. Viologen bearing a propyl-(trimethylammonium) group on either side was used as anolyte material, and this group resulted in hydrophilicity and greater aqueous solubility. The neutral aqueous flow battery delivered a power density of 130 mW cm−2 with a capacity retention of 99.99% per cycle and an energy efficiency of 65% at 60 mA cm−2. DFT calculations were then carried out to understand the material nature, and they showed that the one- and two-electron reduced states of viologens were stabilized via high charge delocalization of frontier SOMOs (singly occupied molecular orbitals) or HOMOs (highest occupied molecular orbitals).
 Fig. 9  Operational data for the [(NPr)2V]Cl4/NMe-TEMPO AORFB (0.05 and 0.1 M). (A) Cyclic voltammograms of 4.0 mM [(NPr)2V]Cl4 (−0.35 and −0.72 V) and 4 mM NMe-TEMPO (1.0 V) in 0.5 M NaCl aqueous electrolyte (solid curves). The dashed curve is a cyclic voltammogram of only the 0.5 M NaCl electrolyte, and labels are given for the onset potentials for the hydrogen evolution reaction (−1.00 V) and oxygen evolution reaction (1.50 V). (B) Battery reactions for the [(NPr)2V]Cl4/NMe-TEMPO AORFB. (C) Extended 50-cycle data for the [(NPr)2V]Cl4/NMe-TEMPO AORFB show discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency versus cycle number at 60 mA cm−2. Inset: representative charge and discharge curves from the experiment. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, ref. 76. 
Hu et al. recently reported the preparation and use of 1,1′-bis[3-(trimethylammonium)propyl]-4,4′-(1,4-phenylene)bispyridinium tetrachloride (APBPyCl4) as a two-electron storage mediator with high stability and capacity (Fig. 10).77 The rotating phenyl ring between the two pyridinium rings forms a switchable conjugation. In the oxidized state, the conjugation is lost, and the two bipyridinium rings perform independently. As a result, two electrons are transferred at the same potential. On the contrary, in the reduced state, conjugation is retained, and thus, there is effective charge delocalization lowering the Lewis basicity and increasing chemical stability. When paired with a 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl oxyl derivative, APBPyCl4 offered a high specific capacity of 10.0 A h L−1 and a high standard cell voltage of 1.73 V with exceptional high energy efficiency of 80.8% at 80 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 10  (a) CVs of 4.0 × 10−3 m (APBPy)Cl4, [(NPr)2V]Cl4, and (TBABPy)Cl3 in 0.50 m KCl solution at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (b) LSVs of 1.0 × 10−3 m (APBPy)Cl4 and [(NPr)2V]Cl4 in 0.50 m KCl at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from Wiley, ref. 77. 
Wu et al. reported the use of methyl viologen dibromide, wherein the bipolar redox electrolyte methyl viologen acted as a bromine-complexing agent, and in addition, exhibited self-trapping behavior for use in pH-neutral redox flow battery applications.78 The low solubility of the [MV](Br3)2 complex during the charging process simultaneously resolved tribromide species crossover as well as addressed the toxicity issues related to bromine. Furthermore, this 1.53 V bipolar AORFB system (10.2 W h L−1) delivered a power density of 133 mW cm−2 with a capacity retention of 100% at 60 mA cm−2. The use of iodide salt instead of bromide salt of methyl viologen also resulted in similar performance, i.e., instead of a tribromide/bromide couple, a triiodide/iodide couple was generated, and the crossover problem was prohibited.79 The MVI2 battery at 1.02 V displayed an energy efficiency of 89.44% and a high voltage efficiency of 90.3% even after 450 cycles.
Thus, the latest works on aqueous redox flow batteries using viologens indicate that viologens possess the superior property of structural tenability, and the introduction of SO3− or NR3+ groups enhances the aqueous solubility as well as the molecular stability. Furthermore, such modifications allow the system to be utilized at high temperature. Additionally, extension of π-conjugation allows for the utilization of a two-electron storage material, and when iodide counter ion is used, it can serve as a bi- or trifunctional electroactive material. Despite these strategies, introduced host molecules form supramolecular complexes, which shifts the reduction potential to the negative side. Thus, the introduction of such molecular spectators results in unfavorable dimerization via enhancing radical stability. Despite these synthetic and molecular design approaches, the use of viologens in large scale AORFBs remains unsuccessful.

2.4. Miscellaneous systems

2.4.1. Magnesium batteries. 
Due to their superior theoretical energy density, low-cost, and inherent safety upon contact with air and moisture, magnesium batteries are considered as the most promising ‘post-lithium-ion’ energy storage technologies. Lu et al. reported a new cathode for magnesium batteries based on ethyl viologen (EV) that offered a fast redox couple EV2+/EV0 as well as excellent coupling with two redox-active anions (I−), realizing a total of four-electron storage.80 Under a high areal loading of 5 mg cm−2, nearly 80% material utilization was achieved at 1.0C rate. The EV cathode demonstrated superior rate performance at 10C rate and remained at 65.3% and 73.6% capacity post 500 cycles.
Ikhe et al. described a polyviologen, poly(hexyl viologen dichloride) (PHV–Cl), as a high energy density cathode material with excellent electrochemical properties for magnesium-ion batteries.81 The blend of relatively high operating potential (1.33 V) and reversible capacity (171 mA h g−1) in ‘all phenyl complex’ (APC) electrolyte resulted in a PHV–Cl cathode for magnesium-ion batteries. Repeated charge–discharge did not suggestively aggravate the performance, and the battery retained 89% of its initial energy density. The high ionic conductivity of APC electrolytes and the amorphous nature of PHV–Cl contributed to exceptional ion diffusivity, with a diffusion coefficient of 10−8 cm2 s−1.
Apparently, the electrochemical performance of different energy storage systems has increased, although the incorporation of viologen may adversely affect the electrode and electrolyte interfacial properties. More importantly, the safety issues for electrolytes containing viologen must be systematically examined.


2.4.2. Polymer electrolytes based on viologens. 
Ikeda and co-workers explored the use of poly(oxytetramethylene) ionene (POTM) viologen as a matrix of polymer solid electrolyte.82 Compared to the ionic conductivity studies evaluated by doping with LiN(SO2CF3)2, LiClO4, or CF3SO3Li, the LiN(SO2CF3)2-doped polymer electrolyte showed the highest reported ionic conductivities of 1.6 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C and 8.1 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 60 °C. This POTM-based solid polymer electrolyte remained thermally stable up to 200 °C.
It has also been demonstrated that viologens are charge carriers in polymeric battery anodes. In a study reported by Palmore and co-workers, both electrostatic and covalent incorporation of viologens as dopants in polypyrrole films was explored for increasing the charge storage capacity of the film at increasingly negative voltages.83 Electrodeposited films composed of viologen covalently bound to the polypyrrole backbone exhibited the maximum capacity and the most optimal cycle life (Scheme 6). An anode consisting of polypyrrole (pPy) doped with viologen and coupled to a cathode containing pPy doped with 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) yielded a polymer-based battery with a maximum capacity of 16 mA h g−1, and energy density of 15 W h kg−1.
 Scheme 6  Electro-deposited films of polypyrrole. Reproduced with permission from ACS, ref. 83. 
In a study by Wang et al., a large-area, air-stable, free-standing viologen-linked ionic porous polymer (IPP-V) film was developed through in situ electrochemical polymerization.84 This film was applied to a device by sandwiching it amongst indium tin oxide (ITO) and Au. Subsequently, thermal pyrolysis of the IPP-V film at 500 °C produced IPP-V-500 film, which was used as an electrode for a microsupercapacitor with an ultrahigh volumetric capacitance. This work established a new and appropriate strategy towards the development of large-area ionic porous polymer films for memoristor, as well as new porous polymer-derived carbon film for energy storage applications.

2.5. Supercapacitors
In the last three decades, electrochemical capacitors, electrochemical supercapacitors (SC), or ultracapacitors have gained significant attention as energy storage devices due to their extremely high power density, excellent cycling stability, fast charging and discharging ability (in a few seconds), and additional optimal safety and temperature characteristics.85,86 Batteries are complimented or replaced by supercapacitors for potential applications in uninterrupted power supplies and load-levelling. The safety and reliability of supercapacitors have been substantiated in aviation industries by their use in the emergency doors of the Airbus A380. Generally, supercapacitors are classified based on the type of charge storage mechanism and nature of the materials used. The typical architecture and working principles of supercapacitors can be understood from review articles and textbooks.87,88
There has been recent interest in redox-active electrolytes in the field of SCs.85 Redox-active electrolytes increase the energy density of supercapacitors due to faradaic reactions. Niu et al. enhanced the energy density of a customary electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC) by introducing an organic redox-active material.89 Ethyl and benzyl viologens with TSFI groups were used as redox mediators, and these materials exhibited satisfactory organic solubility. The addition of these viologen additives to the electrolyte increased the energy density by faradaic reactions during charging and discharging. Because of its small molecular size, a more optimal performance was obtained by EV as compared to benzyl viologen (BV), despite the smaller HOMO–LUMO gap of BV. The larger size of BV imparts steric hindrance, which leads to decreased capacity. Furthermore, these additives have the drawback of dimerization on the electrode surface as a result of disproportionation reaction, which arises from the side reactions of viologen radicals. To overcome this deficiency, they prepared π-conjugated ethyl viologen (π-EV), and DFT calculations revealed a lower HOMO–LUMO gap than that of EV. The lower HOMO–LUMO gap contributed to fast kinetics, and as a result, the capacitor with π-EV displayed a specific capacity of 59.1 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1, and the corresponding energy density reached 34.0 W h kg−1 at a power density of 856 W kg−1. This work clearly established the advantage of molecular tailoring of viologen and designing of material using DFT calculation.
Wang et al. prepared viologen-bridged polyaniline film (VBP) and fused it onto indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass via a one-step electropolymerization approach, and in situ synthesized gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were sandwiched between the VBP films to produce heterofilms (VBP|Au|VBP) as active materials.90 A simple layer-by-layer method was used to assemble the VBP|Au|VBP-based electronic memory device and the all-solid-state supercapacitor, which exhibited bistable nonvolatile rewritable memory with a high ON/OFF current ratio of 105, and high volumetric capacitance up to 6.22 F cm−3. Jinho Chang et al. reported the use of di-(3-diaminopropyl)-viologen (DAPV) as a foreign molecule within the electrolyte, which was then electrodeposited with MnO2.91 A drastic increase in current density was noted, due to the oxygen evolution generated by MnO2–V, which was further justified by the surface morphology. The MnO2–V electrode exhibited a specific capacitance (SC) of 229 F g−1, which was approximately five times higher than that of MnO2 without DAPV and MnO2–N (48 F g−1) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Furthermore, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy displayed a lower contact resistance for MnO2V.
For the advancement of sustainable pseudocapacitors, innovation of cutting-edge organic materials is much anticipated. Boota et al. recently reported the use of a quinone-functionalized viologen molecule hybridized with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) sheets as a high capacitance/rate pseudocapacitive organic electrode material.92 When combined with rGO sheets, the as-produced quinone-functionalized viologen hybrids exhibited pronounced redox characteristics under positive potentials. The improved hybrid electrodes were paired with two-dimensional titanium carbide MXene to build multielectron redox asymmetric supercapacitors. The as-developed devices exhibited an ultra-high rate performance, with approximately 77% capacitance retention from 10 to 1000 mV s−1, and capacitance retention of 80% after 10000 charge/discharge cycles. The authors also noted that the charge storage mechanisms of single electrodes as well as asymmetric devices were predominantly capacitive at the lowest tested scan rates.
Sathyamoorthi et al. proposed the use of 1,1-diethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium bromide (viologen) as a redox-active electrolyte in 1.0 M H2SO4 for supercapacitor applications due to its two-fold cathodic and anodic redox behavior.93 This molecule exhibited a combination of redox behaviors from the bromide and 1,1-diethyl-4,4′-bipyridinium ions, and it is a single redox entity that concomitantly enhanced the performance of both electrodes. A maximum specific capacitance of 114.0 F g−1 and a specific energy of 6.4 W h kg−1 were attained for the EDLC with a neat electrolyte, while pseudocapacitive involvement of bromide increased the specific capacitance to a maximum value of 408.0 F g−1 and specific energy of 23.0 W h kg−1 at 0.25 A g−1 for a viologen-mediated supercapacitor. The π–π interaction between the viologen and the carbon material resulted in selective surface adsorption of bipyridinium cation on the negative electrode, which contributed to an improved specific capacitance of up to 1000 cycles.
2.6. Viologen-based photosystems
Although solar cells are considered as energy conversion devices, they are widely integrated with energy storage systems such as batteries and supercapacitors. Therefore, the applications of viologens in solar cells are reviewed here, although the fundamental aspects of solar cells, their types, advantages, and disadvantages are described elsewhere.94–97 Substituted viologens are recognized as electron mediators and electron scavengers that function on the acceptor side of photosystem I.98 Similarly, fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) reactions were studied employing fluorescent organic and inorganic compounds and viologens.99
In pioneering research, Aono et al. invented the photoreduction of viologens, such as methylviologen (MV2+) and zwitterionic viologen propanesulfonate (PVS), with Zn(TPPS)33−.100 The authors also studied the quenching rate constant, the back-electron-transfer rate constant, and the charge separation efficiencies, and confirmed the complex formation between Zn(TPPS)33− and viologen by laser flash photolysis. Lee et al. successfully synthesized triruthenium carbonyl clusters {[Ru3(Br)(CO)11]−, [Ru3(μ2-Br) (CO)10]−, and [Ru3(μ3-NPh) (Br)(CO)9]−} on di(3-aminopropyl)viologen (DAPV)/indium tin oxide (ITO) using a surface reaction in a ruthenium(III) carbonyl [Ru3(CO)12] solution, and applied them to photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) at the molecular level.101 A quantum yield of 0.8% was realized for Ru-3/DAPV/ITO. Time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy revealed that the photoinduced electron transfer process occurred from Ru clusters to viologen.
The performance of photovoltaic cells employing a layered g-zirconium phosphate (g-ZrP) semiconductor film containing Ru(bpy)3 and bipyridinium ions (viologens) as electron relays was studied by Atienzar et al.102 The incorporation of Ru(bpy)3 complex as well as bipyridinium in the intergallery spaces of g-ZrP was monitored by powder XRD (analyzing the d100 peak). A g-ZrP-based photovoltaic cell containing Ru(bpy)3 exhibited similar VOC (0.5 V) and fill-factor values (0.3–0.4), but with different current densities. Although a maximum efficiency was obtained for materials containing high dyad loading (JSC ¼ 0.383 mA cm−2, efficiency 0.1%), photoresponse spectrum studies revealed that the photosensitization of the semiconductor by the dye remained inadequate, and was attributed to the high negative flat band potential of g-ZrP.
Perera et al. assembled a prototype nano solar cell composed of mycobacterial channel protein MspA with an octameric transmembrane channel protein from Mycobacterium smegmatis that is highly stable.103 MspA is known to form double units due to its nanoscopic surfactant nature, and eight ruthenium(II) aminophenanthroline–viologen maleimide dyads (Ru–Dyads) were successfully bound to the MspA mutant MspAA96C via cysteine–maleimide bonds. The formed nanostructured layer by (Ru–Dyad)8MspA at the TiO2 electrode was found to be photochemically active. The ensuing ‘protein nano solar cell’ exhibited an incident photon conversion efficiency of 1% at 400 nm, which is regarded as a proof-of-principle that stable proteins can be integrated into the design of solar cells.
Poly viologens, which are organic polycationic polymers, can exceptionally accept electrons from a primary donor such as photoexcited photosynthetic protein complex, photosystem I (PSI), and subsequently donate them to a secondary acceptor. Poly viologens possess similar electronic properties due to their monomer counterparts, with the added advantages of shuttling electrons in the solid state. Generally, photosynthetic protein complex can be photoexcited with a quantum efficiency very close to unity and can be integrated into solar energy conversion devices such as photoactive electrodes. The incorporation of PSI into conducting polymer frameworks not only enhanced the conductivity but also the orientational control in the photoactive layer.
In recent years, monomeric viologens, such as methyl viologen, have been extensively used as diffusible mediators in wet PSI-based photoelectrochemical cells due to their redox potentials for accepting electrons. Dervishogullari and co-workers successfully deposited poly viologen directly onto a film of PSI protein, and this significantly enhanced the photocurrent due to the electron transport in the material.104 The polymer film appreciably enhanced the photocurrent by electron transfer and also protected the protein film underneath. Additionally, the composite polymer–PSI assembly improved the charge-shuttling processes from individual protein molecules within the PSI multilayer and reduced the charge-transfer resistances.
Lengthening the photoresponse ranges of semiconductors to the entire ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis)–shortwave near-infrared (SWIR) region (approximately 200–3000 nm) has been identified as a potential technique to reduce the complexity and price of photodetectors or to support the power conversion efficiency of solar cells in recent years.105 Nevertheless, the observed upper limit of the photoresponse for organic-based semiconductors is approximately 1800 nm, which is far from covering the UV-vis–SWIR region. Yu and co-workers developed a novel cyanide-bridged layer-directed intercalation approach and obtained a series of two viologen-based 2D semiconductors with multispectral photoresponse. The infinitely π-stacked redox-active N-methyl bipyridinium cations with near-planar structures were successfully sandwiched by cyanide-bridged Mn II–Fe III or Zn II–Fe III layers. Such layers inherently exhibited an increased photocurrent response in the range of at least 355–2400 nm, which is much higher than the values reported thus far with known single-component organic-based semiconductors.
3. Conclusion and perspective
With the increase in the evolution of organic materials as replacements for conventional technologies, extensive optimizations are essential before executing them in any practical applications prior to commercialization. Viologens, a well-known redox couple, are no longer exceptional, although these molecules are diversely applied due to their unique physico-chemical properties, durability, and further optimizations that can be accomplished as a result of side reactions. Hence, further research and development are essential to resolve the critical issues so that the viologen-based system can be elevated to higher levels.
In order to conquer these challenges, it is important to fine-tune the synthetic procedures of viologens that alter their electronic and photophysical properties. Ideally, the design of these materials must include easy processability and environmental benignity. Current research involves incorporating viologens within electrochromic devices, molecular machines, and various energy storage systems. Modified viologens have recently gained much attention as entities that underwent further improvements to their already impressive properties. It is evident that bridging specific heteroatoms with viologens can be a potential key to improving the overall properties of materials.
Despite their advantages, there are certain drawbacks that can be resolved by proper understanding of the structure–activity relationships. Thus far, very few studies employing viologens have executed such a strategy, whereas a majority of the studies focused on the use of a single viologen entity for desired applications. In general, the substituent on the viologen plays a key role in determining its solubility and limiting radical dimerization, and the spacer group between the two pyridyl rings also plays a unique role. Additionally, the counter anion and the host molecules play roles in determining the physicochemical properties of these systems.
The applications of viologen as additives in energy storage devices are at an early stage, and therefore, there are few reports in this particular area. Although recent publications reveal enhanced electrochemical performance in energy storage devices upon the incorporation of viologen, it may adversely affect the electrode/electrolyte interfacial properties. More importantly, the safety issues associated with viologen-added electrolytes have to be systematically investigated. It is necessary for the facile synthesis of inexpensive viologens to be urgently explored. Thus, proper fundamental understanding of the structure–activity relationships at the molecular level supported with theoretical investigations would benefit researchers and encourage improvisation of viologen-based energy storage systems.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
CSIR-CECRI manuscript communication number: CECRI/PESVC/Pubs./2021-150.
References
K. Madasamy, D. Velayutham, V. Suryanarayanan, M. Kathiresan and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4622–4637 RSC .
T. Škorjanc, D. Shetty, M. A. Olson and A. Trabolsi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6705–6716 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Striepe and T. Baumgartner, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16924–16940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Madasamy, D. Velayutham and M. Kathiresan, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 8528–8538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Madasamy and M. Kathiresan, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1, 354–359 CrossRef CAS .
K. Madasamy, V. M. Shanmugam, D. Velayutham and M. Kathiresan, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1354 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Madasamy, S. Gopi, M. S. Kumaran, S. Radhakrishnan, D. Velayutham, P. M. Mareeswaran and M. Kathiresan, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 1175–1182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, C. Zheng, L. Wang, C. Lu, B. Zhang, Y. Chen, M. Li, G. Zhai and X. Zhuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23337–23360 RSC .
K. Murugavel, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 5873–5884 RSC .
M. R. Geraskina, A. S. Dutton, M. J. Juetten, S. A. Wood and A. H. Winter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9435–9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Beh, D. De Porcellinis, R. L. Gracia, K. T. Xia, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
A. Korshunov, A. Gibalova, M. Grünebaum, B. J. Ravoo, M. Winter and I. Cekic-Laskovic, Batteries Supercaps, 2021, 4, 923–928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng and A. E. Kaifer, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhuang, W. Zhao, L. Wang, F. Li, W. Wang, S. Liu, W. Huang and Q. Zhao, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 1632–1644 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lewinsohn and J. Gressel, Plant Physiol., 1984, 76, 125–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. R. Roede and G. W. Miller, in Encyclopedia of Toxicology, ed. P. Wexler, Academic Press, Oxford, 3rd edn,  2014, pp. 202–204 Search PubMed .
V. Kolivoška, M. Gál, L. Pospíšil, M. Valášek and M. Hromadová, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 11422–11429 RSC .
W. Haiss, H. van Zalinge, H. Höbenreich, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin, S. J. Higgins and R. J. Nichols, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7694–7702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kathiresan and L. Walder, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 8563–8574 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ronconi, J. F. Stoddart, V. Balzani, M. Baroncini, P. Ceroni, C. Giansante and M. Venturi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 8365–8373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, J. Klein, B. Khezri, L. Walder and M. Pumera, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3434–3441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Ghica and C. M. A. Brett, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 532, 145–151 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lacey, J. T. Frith and J. R. Owen, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 26, 74–76 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Frith, I. Landa-Medrano, I. Ruiz de Larramendi, T. Rojo, J. R. Owen and N. Garcia-Araez, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12008–12011 RSC .
H. Noh, C.-W. Kung, K.-i. Otake, A. W. Peters, Z. Li, Y. Liao, X. Gong, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9848–9858 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Singh, S. Chakraborty, S. Dhiman, S. Sampath, S. J. George and M. Eswaramoorthy, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 8089–8094 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Cao, S. Sadaf, S. M. Beladi-Mousavi and L. Walder, Eur. Polym. J., 2013, 49, 1923–1934 CrossRef CAS .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, U. Martin, C. Friebe, S. Morgenstern, H. Hiller, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Nature, 2015, 527, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, P. Zuo, Q. Chen, G. Tang, P. Sun, Z. Yang and T. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2245–2249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, S. Kim, J. Kang and H. R. Byon, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1988–2001 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, Y. Tang, J. Luo, G. Grove, Y. Guo and T. L. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6871–6874 RSC .
X.-H. Zhou, Y. Fan, W.-X. Li, X. Zhang, R.-R. Liang, F. Lin, T.-G. Zhan, J. Cui, L.-J. Liu, X. Zhao and K.-D. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 1757–1767 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Shah, S.-X. Wang, D. X. Soo and J. Xu, Polymers, 2019, 11, 1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Papadakis, Molecules, 2020, 25, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wanda, B. Barbara and G. Tomasz, Curr. Org. Chem., 2007, 11, 497–513 CrossRef .
J.-K. Sun, X.-D. Yang, G.-Y. Yang and J. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 533–560 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sagara and H. Tahara, Chem. Rec., 2021, 21, 2375–2388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Gür, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2696–2767 RSC .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, S. Sadaf, A. M. Mahmood and L. Walder, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8730–8740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, L. Liu, P. Zhang and H. Chen, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 24429–24435 RSC .
M. Stolar, C. Reus and T. Baumgartner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600944 CrossRef .
C. R. Bridges, A. M. Borys, V. A. Béland, J. R. Gaffen and T. Baumgartner, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 10483–10487 RSC .
C. R. Bridges, M. Stolar and T. Baumgartner, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 268–274 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, B. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Zhao, W. Ma, L. Xu, W. Zhang, K. Zhou, Y. Du and G. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 8468–8473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, L. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Lu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11533–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh and S. Mitra, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105632–105635 RSC .
M. Kato, H. Sano, T. Kiyobayashi and M. Yao, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 2379–2385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Zhu, Y. Zhang, G. Gao, W. Xue, S. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Zhang and X. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 18506–18514 RSC .
H. Wu, Y. Cao, L. Geng and C. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3572–3579 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Prakasha, K. Madasamy, M. Kathiresan and A. S. Prakash, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 28604–28610 CrossRef .
X. Wu, N. Liu, B. Guan, Y. Qiu, M. Wang, J. Cheng, D. Tian, L. Fan, N. Zhang and K. Sun, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-W. Zhang, H.-J. Peng, M. Zhao and J.-Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707536 CrossRef .
S. Suriyakumar, K. Madasamy, M. Kathiresan, M. H. Alkordi and A. M. Stephan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27843–27849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Yang, B. Yuan, G. Li and J. Y. Lee, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 15–21 CrossRef .
A. Natarajan, K. Murugavel, K. Madasamy, S. Suriyakumar, N. Illayaraja, N. Anupriya, M. Christy, K. S. Nahm, Y. Zhou and A. M. Stephan, Ionics, 2019, 25, 3837–3845 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Valery, A. C. Luntz, S. R. Gowda, G. M. Wallraff, J. M. Garcia, T. Mori and L. E. Krupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2989–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Christy, A. Arul, A. Zahoor, K. U. Moon, M. Y. Oh, A. M. Stephan and K. S. Nahm, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 825–835 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Kwak, H. Kim, Y. K. Petit, C. Leypold, T. T. Nguyen, N. Mahne, P. Redfern, L. A. Curtiss, H.-G. Jung, S. M. Borisov, S. A. Freunberger and Y.-K. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1380 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, J. T. Frith, N. Garcia-Araez and J. R. Owen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1705–1708 RSC .
Z. Wei, W. Shin, H. Jiang, X. Wu, W. F. Stickle, G. Chen, J. Lu, P. Alex Greaney, F. Du and X. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3227 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi, S. Sadaf, A.-K. Hennecke, J. Klein, A. M. Mahmood, C. Rüttiger, M. Gallei, F. Fu, E. Fouquet, J. Ruiz, D. Astruc and L. Walder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13554–13558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Vaid and M. S. Sanford, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11037–11040 RSC .
J. Chai, A. Lashgari, X. Wang, C. K. Williams and J. J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15715–15724 RSC .
C. Chen, S. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Qian, Z. Niu, J. Ye, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 18762–18770 RSC .
B. Hu and T. L. Liu, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1326–1332 CrossRef .
P. Leung, A. A. Shah, L. Sanz, C. Flox, J. R. Morante, Q. Xu, M. R. Mohamed, C. Ponce de León and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 243–283 CrossRef CAS .
V. Medabalmi, M. Sundararajan, V. Singh, M.-H. Baik and H. R. Byon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 11218–11223 RSC .
B. Hu, C. DeBruler, Z. Rhodes and T. L. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1207–1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Janoschka, N. Martin, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14427–14430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, C. Xie, L. Shi, Y.-G. Zhou and X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4801–4804 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. Yao, Z. Wang and Y.-C. Lu, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105897 CrossRef CAS .
C. DeBruler, B. Hu, J. Moss, X. Liu, J. Luo, Y. Sun and T. L. Liu, Chem, 2017, 3, 961–978 CAS .
S. Hu, T. Li, M. Huang, J. Huang, W. Li, L. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Fu, X. Li and Z. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, J. Luo, F. Wang, B. Yuan and T. L. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2891–2897 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, M. Zhou, T. Ma, J. Liu, Q. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Liang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 1690–1693 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Zou and Y.-C. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1903002 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Ikhe, N. Naveen, K.-S. Sohn and M. Pyo, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ikeda, M. Ikeda and F. Ito, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 169, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sen, J. Saraidaridis, S. Y. Kim and G. T. R. Palmore, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7825–7830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Ding, S. Sun, B. Zhang, X. Tian, J. Zhu, S. Song, B. Liu, X. Zhuang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701679 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, S. Yang, J. Chang, D. Zhao, J. Wang, C. Yang and B. Cao, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-E. Chun, B. Evanko, X. Wang, D. Vonlanthen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Niu, J. Niu, Y. Ma and L. Zhi, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, S. Sun, Y. He, N. He, F. Zhang, Y. Yao, B. Zhang, X. Zhuang and Y. Chen, Eur. Polym. J., 2018, 98, 125–136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, S. Lee, T. Ganesh, R. S. Mane, S. Min, W. Lee and S.-H. Han, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 624, 167–173 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boota, M. Rajesh and M. Bécuwe, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 18, 100532 CrossRef .
S. Sathyamoorthi, M. Kanagaraj, M. Kathiresan, V. Suryanarayanan and D. Velayutham, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4562–4569 RSC .
Q. An, F. Zhang, J. Zhang, W. Tang, Z. Deng and B. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 281–322 RSC .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
T. Ameri, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2390–2413 RSC .
T. F. Schulze and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 103–125 RSC .
T. Bennett, H. Niroomand, R. Pamu, I. Ivanov, D. Mukherjee and B. Khomami, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 8512–8521 RSC .
H. Liu, Y. Lv, S. Li, F. Yang, S. Liu, C. Wang, J.-Q. Sun, H. Meng and G.-G. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9383–9388 RSC .
S. Aono, I. Okura and A. Yamada, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1593–1598 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Lee, M.-S. Lee, I. Lim, S. H. Kang, Y.-C. Nah, W. Lee and S.-H. Han, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 9879–9884 CrossRef CAS .
P. Atienzar, M. de Victoria-Rodriguez, O. Juanes, J. C. Rodríguez-Ubis, E. Brunet and H. García, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4718–4726 RSC .
A. S. Perera, N. K. Subbaiyan, M. Kalita, S. O. Wendel, T. N. Samarakoon, F. D'Souza and S. H. Bossmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6842–6845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dervishogullari, E. A. Gizzie, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 15658–15664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Q. Yu, C. Sun, B.-W. Liu, M.-S. Wang and G.-C. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Present address: Department of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang National University, 501 Jinju-daero, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Murugavel Kathiresan	Dr Murugavel Kathiresan graduated from the University of Madras with a Bachelor's degree (2004) as well as a Master's degree (2006), and received his PhD from the University of Osnabrück, Germany, in 2010 under the guidance of Prof. Lorenz Walder. He then moved to the University of Basel, Switzerland, to conduct his postdoctoral research with Prof. Marcel Mayor. He was awarded the DST-INSPIRE Faculty award in December 2013. From March 2014 to April 2017, he worked as a DST-INSPIRE faculty member, and since April 2017, he has been working as a Scientist at the Electro Organic & Materials Electrochemistry Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. His current research interests include viologen-based supramolecular chemistry, along with investigation of their photophysical applications, electro-organic synthesis, electrochemical CO2 reduction, and conversion to useful organics, metal–organic frameworks, and porous organic polymers for sensing and energy-related applications.
Bebin Ambrose	Bebin Ambrose received his bachelor's and master's degrees in chemistry from Scott Christian College, affiliated to Manonmaniam Sundaranar University, India. He qualified for the UGC-JRF in December 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the guidance of Dr M. Kathiresan at the Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. His current research mainly focuses on viologen-based supramolecules and their electrochemical applications.
Natarajan Angulakshmi	Dr Natarajan Angulakshmi is currently working as a Brain-Pool Research Professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering, Gyeongsang National University, South Korea. She also served as a Scientific Researcher at Wuhan University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P. R. China with Prof. Yinghe Zhou. She was a visiting researcher (with Prof. Claudio Gerbaldi) at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Politechnico de Torino, Italy and Department of Chemistry (with Prof. Edward Bormashenko) Ariel University, Israel. Her areas of interest include lithium–sulfur batteries and polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries.
Deepa Elizabeth Mathew	Deepa Elizabeth Mathew has completed her post-graduate work in Chemistry from Loyola College, Chennai, India and is currently pursuing her PhD under the supervision of Prof. A Manuel Stephan and Prof. Sabu Thomas at the CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, India. Her current research interests include polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries and permselective separators for Li–S batteries.
Dhavamani Sujatha	Dhavamani Sujatha graduated from Alagappa University, India and currently pursuing her PhD at the CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute, India. Her research interests include materials synthesis and characterization.
Arul Manuel Stephan	Dr Arul Manuel Stephan is a Senior Principal Scientist in the Electrochemical Power Sources Division, CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research Institute (India). He undertook a STAJSPS fellowship to work with Prof. Yuria Saito at Osaka National Research Institute (Japan) and served as a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Chemistry, University of Tulsa (USA) with Prof. Dale-Teeters. He worked at Chonbuk National University (South Korea) as a visiting scientist for two years (with Prof. Kee Suk Nahm) and Politecnico de Torino (Italy) in association with Prof. Roberta Bongiovanni. His current research interests include advanced materials for lithium–sulfur batteries, fast charging of lithium-ion batteries, and polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium–polymer batteries.

 	Scheme 1  Different redox states of viologen.	 

 	Scheme 2  Commonly used synthetic methods for the preparation of viologens.	 

 	Scheme 3  Structure of various phosphaviologens.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of 4a–d at 0.5 mV s−1. (b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of 2a–d at 100 mA g−1. (c) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of 4a–d at 100 mA g−1. (d) Rate capability of 4a–d. (e) Cycle stability of 4a–d at 100 mA g−1. (f) Proposed electrochemical reduction steps of 4d. Reproduced with permission from Wiley, ref. 48.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams of (a) EVI2−- and (b) EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries. Voltage profiles of (c) EVI2- and (d) EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries at various rates from 0.1C to 5C. (e) Rate cyclability of EVI2- and EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries at various rates from 0.1C to 5C. (f) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of EVI2- and EV(ClO4)2-based lithium batteries at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission from Wiley, ref. 49.	 

 	Scheme 4  Structure of different viologens and viologen polymers.	 

 	Scheme 5  (a) Two-step reduction process of MV. (b) Illustrations of the design principles using MV to form a stable interfacial coating to allow the stable cycling of lithium metal. (c) Potential viologen oligomer formation on copper surface under reducing conditions. Reproduced with permission from ACS, ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of a viologen-laden sulfur cathode for the confinement of polysulfides in Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission from ACS, ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 4  A schematic illustration of the working of the redox-targeting lithium–sulfur flow batteries (RTLSFB) (black arrows denote the discharge process, and green arrows denote the charge process). Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 5  Use of diethyl viologen as a redox mediator and subsequent performance of a Li–air battery (left) and its oxygen reduction mechanism (right). Reproduced with permission from RSC, ref. 63.	 
O2 + Na+ + e− → NaO2	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the (CH2)5CH3-substituted Vio2+|Fe-tpy RFB with the corresponding cell reactions in the anolyte (left) and catholyte (right). Reproduced with permission from RSC, ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 7  Two-electron utilization of methyl viologen anolyte in a non-aqueous organic redox flow battery. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier. Ref. 69.	 

 	Fig. 8  Concept illustration of α-CD as the molecular spectator to suppress EV radical cation dimerization (top panel) and cycling performance of 1 M EV + α-CD/FcNEBr cell at static mode using galvanostatic charge–discharge cycling at 10 mA cm−1 with capacity utilization of 80%. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 9  Operational data for the [(NPr)2V]Cl4/NMe-TEMPO AORFB (0.05 and 0.1 M). (A) Cyclic voltammograms of 4.0 mM [(NPr)2V]Cl4 (−0.35 and −0.72 V) and 4 mM NMe-TEMPO (1.0 V) in 0.5 M NaCl aqueous electrolyte (solid curves). The dashed curve is a cyclic voltammogram of only the 0.5 M NaCl electrolyte, and labels are given for the onset potentials for the hydrogen evolution reaction (−1.00 V) and oxygen evolution reaction (1.50 V). (B) Battery reactions for the [(NPr)2V]Cl4/NMe-TEMPO AORFB. (C) Extended 50-cycle data for the [(NPr)2V]Cl4/NMe-TEMPO AORFB show discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency versus cycle number at 60 mA cm−2. Inset: representative charge and discharge curves from the experiment. Reproduced with permission from Elsevier, ref. 76.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) CVs of 4.0 × 10−3 m (APBPy)Cl4, [(NPr)2V]Cl4, and (TBABPy)Cl3 in 0.50 m KCl solution at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (b) LSVs of 1.0 × 10−3 m (APBPy)Cl4 and [(NPr)2V]Cl4 in 0.50 m KCl at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Reproduced with permission from Wiley, ref. 77.	 

 	Scheme 6  Electro-deposited films of polypyrrole. Reproduced with permission from ACS, ref. 83.	 
Footnote
† Present address: Department of Materials Engineering and Convergence Technology, Gyeongsang National University, 501 Jinju-daero, Jinju 52828, Republic of Korea.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
