Realizing artificial photosynthesis  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1FD00110H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1FD00110H
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 9-26Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRealizing artificial photosynthesis

        
          
            Devens 
            Gust
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Thomas A. 
            Moore
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ana L. 
            Moore
          
        
      
Department of Chemistry and Center for Bio-Inspired Solar Fuel Production, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85202, USA. E-mail: gust@asu.edu
Received 
      9th September 2011
    , Accepted 12th September 2011First published on 14th September 2011AbstractArtificial photosynthesis comprises the design of systems for converting solar energy into useful forms based on the fundamental science underlying natural photosynthesis. There are many approaches to this problem. In this report, the emphasis is on molecule-based systems for photochemical production of fuels using sunlight. A few examples of typical components of artificial photosynthetic systems including antennas, reaction centres, catalysts for fuel production and water oxidation, and units for photoprotection and photoregulation are presented in order to illustrate the current state of the field and point out challenges yet to be fully addressed.
Introduction
“On the arid lands there will spring up industrial colonies without smoke and without smokestacks; forests of glass tubes will extend over the plains and glass buildings will rise everywhere; inside of these will take place the photochemical processes that hitherto have been the guarded secret of the plants, but that will have been mastered by human industry which will know how to make them bear even more abundant fruit than nature, for nature is not in a hurry and mankind is” – Giacomo Ciamician (1912).1 Realization of Ciamician's dream, championed over the years by luminaries such as Melvin Calvin2–4 and George Porter,5 is increasingly urgent as the smokestack emissions threaten the climate worldwide and nations pay the price of vying with one another over dwindling fossil fuel supplies. The attraction is undeniable. Sunlight bathes the earth in energy at a rate 10000 times greater than that at which humans use technological energy. Solar energy is available everywhere, completely sustainable, and in principle can be converted to forms that meet society's needs in ways that are environmentally relatively benign. In practice, we are not there yet, but good progress is being made. Here, we will consider the requirements for efficient artificial photosynthesis, explore the current state of the problem, and speculate a bit on future directions. Although the examples of artificial photosynthetic systems referenced below come almost exclusively from our laboratories, thousands of artificial photosynthetic constructs have been reported over the last 30 years or so, and the field has developed due to the combined efforts of many laboratories worldwide. A variety of reviews are available.6–14
What is artificial photosynthesis?
Although sunlight is abundant, light as such is a virtually useless form of energy, and must be changed to some other type. This is the role of photosynthesis: to convert sunlight into biologically useful energy such as electrochemical potential or protonmotive force and store it in fuels such as carbohydrate, lipids, or even hydrogen gas. In the broadest sense, artificial photosynthesis means exploiting the physics and chemistry underlying natural photosynthesis to harvest solar energy for technological purposes. The term has been applied to almost any method of and system for converting sunlight to another form of energy. Examples are photovoltaic cells based on inorganic semiconductors for electricity production, dye-sensitized solar cells, photovoltaics based on organic semiconductors, systems for fuel production based on these types of devices, a large variety of devices for direct photochemical conversion of light excitation energy to a fuel using organic or inorganic molecular photocatalysts, natural organisms or their components interfaced to synthetic materials, and combinations of these approaches. For the purposes of this discussion, we will consider artificial photosynthesis to be a process that uses molecular species to store energy from sunlight in a useful fuel. This is what natural photosynthesis does.
Before discussing the process of artificial photosynthesis, it is worth considering why we need solar fuels at all. Commercial photovoltaics, although currently too expensive to compete with fossil fuels in most places, are quite practical and readily available. However, they produce only electricity, and produce it only when illuminated. Because sunlight is available at most for just part of each day and electricity is not readily stored as such, some other form of energy storage is necessary. In addition, solar energy is diffuse. Practical land or air transportation using solar electricity directly is impossible because of the large surface areas that would be required. Energy storage could be mechanical, thermal, in chemical bonds or in batteries, but the very high energy density of hydrocarbon fuels helps explain their dominance in the transportation area. Thus, the preparation of fuels using sunlight is an important research area.

Fuel production requires more than just energy. Generally speaking, a useful fuel can be oxidized with oxygen from the air, with concomitant energy release. Thus, making a fuel requires a source of electrons and a material that can be chemically reduced with these electrons. If artificial photosynthesis is to contribute to filling society's energy needs on a large scale, the electrons must be obtained from water oxidation. This is the source used by green plant, algal and cyanobacterial photosynthesis. Water oxidation produces hydrogen ions, and reduction of these yields hydrogen gas, which is potentially a useful fuel whose oxidation in air regenerates water. The result is a sustainable cycle that is environmentally relatively benign and generates no by-products. Some living organisms produce and/or use hydrogen gas as a fuel. Alternatively, a carbon source such as carbon dioxide from the atmosphere can be reduced to a carbon-based fuel. Combustion of such a fuel regenerates carbon dioxide and water. This sustainable cycle is the one generally used by oxygenic photosynthesis, and is an attractive goal for artificial photosynthesis.
Artificial photosynthetic systems
A typical artificial photosynthetic design for water splitting, based on the natural paradigm, is shown schematically in Fig. 1. The design features four major components.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of an artificial photosynthetic system for water splitting. An antenna absorbs sunlight and transfers excitation energy to a reaction centre (RC) which generates a charge separated state by photoinduced electron transfer. Electrons from the reaction centre enable reduction of hydrogen ions to hydrogen gas at the proton reduction catalyst (PRC). The oxidized reaction centre is regenerated by electrons from the water oxidation catalyst (WOC), which converts water to oxygen gas and hydrogen ions. 
• Antenna. In natural photosynthesis, most of the sunlight is harvested by antenna systems. These are collections of chromophores that absorb light and transfer excitation energy among one another, and eventually to the next component, the reaction centre. Antennas collect light efficiently throughout the portion of the solar spectrum that is used by photosynthesis and deliver excitation energy to the reaction centre at an optimal rate for reaction centre function. Antenna systems are also involved in photoregulation and photoprotection of the photosynthetic apparatus. Artificial antennas can perform all these roles. They are likely to be necessary for artificial photosynthetic systems that can effectively harvest sunlight across the entire spectral range that is potentially useful for fuel production (from about 400 nm out to beyond 1000 nm).
• Reaction centre. In a reaction centre, excitation energy drives photoinduced electron transfer to an electron acceptor, thereby generating a charge-separated state that preserves some of the photon energy as electrochemical potential energy. Thus, reaction centres are essentially nanoscale photovoltaic devices. Reaction centres reside in biological membranes and carry out charge separation across the thickness of the membrane. In effect, this places the reducing equivalents resulting from charge separation on one side of the membrane and the oxidizing equivalents on the other. These moieties can then drive fuel production. Artificial reaction centres carry out photoinduced charge separation, as do their natural counterparts. They need not reside in membranes, but they do need to be designed so that the charge separated states live long enough that their oxidizing and reducing power can be transferred to catalysts for fuel production.
• Fuel production catalyst. In photosynthesis, the reducing equivalents from the reaction centre are ultimately used to power the organism, and to store energy in the form of carbohydrate, lipid, hydrogen, or some other reduced material. A variety of catalysts (enzymes) are involved. A major challenge in artificial photosynthesis is to devise efficient, inexpensive catalysts for producing hydrogen, hydrocarbons, or other fuels.
• Wateroxidationcatalyst. Oxidizing equivalents from the reaction centre must be used to oxidize water to oxygen gas and hydrogen ions, and in the process rejuvenate the oxidizing side of the reaction centre. In photosynthesis, this is done by an oxygen evolving complex which contains four manganese atoms and a calcium atom at the active site. A structure of the oxygen evolving complex has recently been determined to high resolution by X-ray crystallography,15 but its mechanism of action whereby four oxidizing equivalents are accumulated and used to oxidize water is not yet well understood. The search for artificial water oxidation catalysts that are useful in artificial photosynthesis is very active.
A functional artificial photosynthetic device
Is it possible to design and prepare devices that functionally mimic the natural photosynthetic process? This can be done, although the systems prepared to date are far from optimal or practical. An example prepared in the laboratory of T. Mallouk is shown schematically in Fig. 2.16 The system is a photoelectrochemical cell for water splitting. The photoanode, immersed in water, features a nanoparticulate titanium dioxide electrode such as those used in dye sensitized solar cells.17 The titanium dioxide is a wide band gap semiconductor that does not absorb visible light. Its mesoscopic nature provides a large surface area exposed to the solution. The electrode surface is coated with a ruthenium-based chromophore that does absorb visible light. Excitation of the ruthenium complex generates an excited state that injects an electron into the TiO2, leading to charge separation. Thus, the ruthenium complex and TiO2 mimic the functions of the natural photosynthetic antenna (light absorption) and reaction centre (photoinduced electron transfer). Oxidizing equivalents on the oxidized ruthenium complex are then transferred to an attached iridium oxide nanoparticle, regenerating the original ruthenium complex. The IrO2 accumulates the oxidizing equivalents as additional photons are absorbed by the ruthenium complex. It has been known for some time that IrO2 is a good water oxidation catalyst.18 In the cell, oxygen is evolved from the nanoparticles when the photoanode is illuminated. The electrons injected into the TiO2 by the ruthenium complex migrate to an underlying indium tin oxide transparent conductive electrode, and hence to a platinum cathode, where hydrogen ions are reduced to hydrogen gas. Because the open circuit voltage of the cell is only about 1 V, an external bias of a few hundred mV is required to observe oxygen and hydrogen formation.
 Fig. 2  A photoelectrochemical water splitting cell. The nanoparticulate TiO2 photoanode is sensitized with a ruthenium complex that also binds an iridium oxide nanoparticle. The excited ruthenium complex injects electrons into the TiO2, from whence they travel to the cathode and reduce hydrogen ions to hydrogen gas when a small bias voltage is applied. The oxidized ruthenium complex in turn oxidizes an iridium oxide nanoparticle that serves as a water oxidation catalyst. 
The device shown in Fig. 2 demonstrates conclusively that artificial photosynthesis can work. It is also an excellent embodiment of the problems that must be overcome if artificial photosynthesis is to become practical for solar energy conversion. The problems arise because none of the components of the system are optimized.
• Antenna function. The quantum yield of water splitting is only ∼0.9%, and the solar conversion efficiency is much smaller. One reason for this is that the ruthenium complex does not absorb light effectively at wavelengths longer than 500–550 nm. Thus, much of the solar spectrum is wasted.
• Reaction centre function. Although electron injection from the ruthenium complex into the TiO2 is efficient, recombination of the resulting charge separated state by migration of an electron back to the oxidized ruthenium complex is rapid (τ = 0.37 ms) compared to the rate of electron transfer from the IrO2 particle to the oxidized chromophore (τ = 2.2 ms). The rapid charge recombination may also be partially responsible for the fact that a small bias potential must be applied to the cell in order to observe hydrogen production. In addition to this kinetic problem, there is a thermodynamic shortcoming. The conduction band of TiO2 is not positioned correctly for efficient reduction of hydrogen ions.
• Protonreductioncatalyst. Platinum is a good catalyst, with low overpotential (activation energy) and rapid turnover for proton reduction to hydrogen gas, but it is a rare and expensive element. Solar fuel production on the scale of human energy usage (∼15 TW) will not be possible unless cheaper, more abundant catalysts are identified.
• Wateroxidationcatalyst. Although IrO2 is an effective and stable water oxidation catalyst, it does require significant overpotential, and iridium is the least abundant element on earth. Thus, IrO2 is not suitable for large scale solar water oxidation systems.
• Stability. The ruthenium dye decomposes under irradiation, presumably due to nucleophilic attack on the oxidized dye. Practical solar fuel production systems must have long service lives.
Designing artificial photosynthetic systems
The solar water splitting system described above illustrates most of the major problems faced in designing artificial photosynthetic systems. Natural photosynthesis suggests possible solutions to all of these problems. Below, we will discuss each component of an artificial photosynthesis system, and illustrate some of the important principles that have emerged from the study of both artificial and natural photosynthesis.

Antennas. 
The chlorophylls found in the reaction centres of organisms that carry out oxygenic photosynthesis typically absorb sunlight at wavelengths shorter than ∼680 nm. These wavelengths carry about 45% of the solar energy reaching the earth. The ruthenium complexes and porphyrins often used in artificial photosynthesis are generally limited to these or shorter wavelengths. Silicon solar cells, on the other hand, function with light to about 1100 nm, and can absorb about 76% of the total energy of sunlight. Moreover, silicon absorption is well-matched to the theoretical best absorption range for a single junction photochemical solar energy converter.19 The efficiency of artificial (and natural) photosynthesis is limited by the narrow wavelength range over which light is absorbed. In addition, most chromophores such as chlorophylls, porphyrins and ruthenium complexes do not have high extinction coefficients at all wavelengths within their spectral ranges. How can these problems be addressed?
Photosynthetic organisms achieve efficient absorption of sunlight in the visible and to wavelengths as long as 680 nm in two ways. First, they use antennas containing many chlorophyll molecules to absorb sunlight and deliver it to each reaction centrevia singlet-singlet energy transfer, thus in effect increasing the absorption cross section of the reaction centre. Secondly, they employ auxiliary chromophores such as carotenoid polyenes, phycoerythrins, and phycocyanins to absorb light in regions where chlorophyll is not a strong absorber and transfer the energy to chlorophylls and eventually to the reaction centre.
Similar strategies can be employed in artificial photosynthesis. An example is molecule 1 (Fig. 3), which consists of a rigid hexaphenylbenzene core that organizes a set of antenna chromophores.20 The two bis(phenylethynyl)anthracene (BPEA) moieties absorb in the blue spectral region around 430–475 nm. The two borondipyrromethene (BDPY) chromophores absorb strongly in the 475–530 nm region. The two zinc porphyrins absorb in the 420 nm (Soret band) region, with less intense Q-band absorption in the red region out to about 660 nm. Thus, the three kinds of chromophores together cover the visible spectrum out to about 660 nm. Time resolved spectroscopic studies show that both the BPEA and BDPY excited states transfer singlet excitation energy to the porphyrins with time constants ≤15 ps and quantum yields ≥96%. Energy transfer occurs both by hopping of excitation from one chromophore to another ortho to it, and by direct transfer across the central ring of the hexaphenylbenzene. Thus, the auxiliary chromophores are highly efficient antennas for the porphyrins. This efficiency was obtained by tuning both the thermodynamics of the various energy transfer steps and the chromophore separations and orientations in accord with the Förster energy transfer theory.21,22 Once the excitation energy is localized on the porphyrins, it can be used to initiate photoinduced electron transfer in an artificial reaction centre. In 1, this has been achieved by self-assembly of a fullerene electron acceptor bearing two pyridine coordination groups to the two zinc porphyrins.20
 Fig. 3  Artificial photosynthetic antenna 1, which consists of two bis(phenylethynyl)anthracenes, two borondipyrromethenes, and two zinc porphyrins, all organized by a hexaphenylbenzene core. 
It was mentioned above that photosynthesis and many artificial photosynthetic systems only absorb light at wavelengths < ∼700 nm, and that this also limits efficiency. One obvious solution to this problem is to use chromophores with absorptions at longer wavelengths. This approach has proven useful in artificial photosynthetic constructs based on both ruthenium complexes and cyclic tetrapyrroles. However, the strategy has limitations with regard to water splitting. Thermodynamically, conversion of water to hydrogen and oxygen requires 1.23 eV. This corresponds to photons at ∼1000 nm. However, kinetics imposes much more restrictive limits on the process. Separating charge rapidly enough to compete with relaxation of excited states by other mechanisms requires significant thermodynamic driving force, and prevention of rapid charge recombination to yield either the ground state or original excited state necessitates the sacrifice of additional energy. In addition, catalysts for water oxidation and for proton reduction require overpotential (activation energy) in order to function. These energetic considerations require photons of significantly more than 1.2 eV to actually perform water splitting.
One potential strategy for achieving efficient water splitting while still using photons of wavelengths as long as 1000 nm is to design a tandem artificial photosynthetic cell. The tandem arrangement uses two photosystems, and thus two photons to generate the electrochemical potential necessary for water splitting, and has been implemented in systems based on inorganic semiconductors.23 In such an artificial photosynthetic device, one antenna-artificial reaction centre, absorbing from, say, 400 nm to 700 nm, would be used to generate the redox potential necessary to oxidize water at a catalyst. A second photosystem, electrochemically in series with the first and absorbing in the 700–1000 nm spectral region, would generate the potential necessary to drive catalytic hydrogen ion reduction to hydrogen gas.
Natural oxygenic photosynthetic organisms do in fact use two photosystems operating in series, but the absorption spectra of these photosystems overlap, rather than complement one another, the potentials generated by the two photosystems do not add linearly, and only photons of wavelengths of ∼680 nm or shorter contribute to photosynthesis. It has been suggested that this apparent inefficiency in the natural system could be addressed by clever synthetic biology.24


Artificial reaction centres. 
In the reaction centre, excitation energy resulting from light absorption or singlet energy transfer from antennas initiates photoinduced electron transfer to generate a charge-separated state that stores some of the photon energy as electrochemical potential energy. As described by theories originated by Marcus,25,26 Hush,27,28 and Levich29 and since expanded upon by many researchers, photoinduced electron transfer rates are functions of thermodynamic driving force, solvent and internal reorganization energies, temperature, and the electronic coupling between the initial and final states. The coupling is related to the orbital overlap between donor and acceptor orbitals and therefore the donor–acceptor separation, among other factors. Thus, when designing artificial reaction centres, some relevant factors are the match between the absorption spectrum of the chromophore and the solar spectrum, the energies of the excited state and various charge-separated states, reorganization energies, and the electronic interaction between donor and acceptor. One of the best ways to control this electronic interaction is by covalent linkage of the donor and acceptor. In such situations, the electronic coupling interactions usually occur via the chemical bonds of the linkage, rather than simply through the space between moieties. Initial artificial reaction centre research was performed using covalently linked porphyrin-quinone dyads in which the porphyrin excited singlet state donates an electron to the quinone acceptor.31,32 However, a relatively large number of donor and acceptor moieties have now been investigated.
Molecular triad 2 (Fig. 4) is an example of an artificial reaction centre.30 It consists of a hexaphenylbenzene bearing two porphyrin electron donor moieties and a fullerene electron acceptor in a macrocyclic arrangement involving a ring of 42 atoms. The two porphyrins are closely spaced, in an arrangement reminiscent of that of the special pair of bacteriochlorophyll molecules in bacterial photosynthetic reaction centres. The molecule is produced by an unusual cyclization reaction that yields mainly a product with C2 symmetry and trans-2 disubstitution at the fullerene. The macrocycle maintains a rigid, highly-constrained structure which in turn establishes a fixed electronic coupling among the components.
 Fig. 4  Triad artificial reaction centre 2, wherein a hexaphenylbenzene bears two zinc porphyrins which in turn are linked to the same fullerene derivative. (a) Chemical structure. (b) Molecular model in which the bromine and methoxy groups have been replaced by hydrogen in order to facilitate calculations.30 
Excitation of a porphyrin generates the first excited singlet state 1P-C60-P. In 2-methyltetrahydrofuran solvent, very rapid photoinduced electron transfer from the porphyrin to the fullerene (τ = 1.1 ps) yields a charge-separated state P˙+-C60˙−-P. The same state is produced by light absorbed by the fullerene moiety (τ = 15 ps). The electron transfer rate constants are much larger than the rates for decay of 1P-C60-P and P-1C60-P by other pathways (2.2 ns and 1.2 ns, respectively), so the quantum yield of charge separation from either excited state is essentially unity. The charge separated state has a lifetime of 2.7 ns. Cyclic voltammetric measurements allow estimation of the energy of P˙+-C60˙−-P as 1.46 eV. The energies of 1P-C60-P and P-1C60-P are 2.06 eV and 1.71 eV. Thus, the charge-separated state retains a reasonable fraction of the photon energy.
Note that charge recombination in 2 is over 2000 times slower than charge separation. Covalently linked porphyrin–fullerene artificial reaction centres, which have been studied since the mid 1990s,33 typically demonstrate rapid charge separation and slow recombination relative to many other types of artificial reaction centres due to their small reorganization energies for electron transfer.34–36 A small reorganization energy for electron transfer tends to locate the photoinduced electron transfer reaction in a part of the “normal” region of the Marcus rate vs. free-energy-change relationship where electron transfer is rapid, and the charge recombination to the ground state in a part of the “inverted” region where transfer is slow.
Although charge recombination in 2 is slow relative to charge separation, the lifetime of the charge separated state is still rather short relative to the time scales required for molecular diffusion or other processes that might be used to harvest the chemical potential of the charge separated state and use it to make a fuel. Natural reaction centres face the same dilemma: photoinduced charge separation must be rapid to compete with decay of excited states by other pathways, but the electronic coupling necessary for such rapid charge separation also leads to rapid charge recombination. Photosynthetic organisms have solved this problem using a multistep electron transfer strategy. Following the initial photoinduced electron transfer event, the electron is moved through a series of intermediate donor–acceptor moieties before reaching the final acceptor. Each step in this electron transfer cascade is rapid due to relatively strong electronic coupling within each donor–acceptor pair. However, at the end of the process, the electron and hole (which has remained on the original chlorophyll donor or migrated to a nearby moiety) are spatially well separated, the electronic coupling between them is weak, and the lifetime of the state is long.
This multistep electron transfer strategy has been demonstrated in artificial reaction centres since the mid 1980s.37–39 A more modern example of its application is molecular triad 3 (Fig. 5).40 The molecule consists of a porphyrin light absorber and primary electron donor linked to both a fullerene electron acceptor and a carotenoid secondary donor. Excitation of the porphyrin leads to formation of the first excited singlet state, C-1P-C60. In the absence of photochemistry, this singlet state would decay in about 10 ns (step 1 in Fig. 5b), but in the triad it decays in 32 ps in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran at ambient temperatures to yield the C-P˙+-C60˙− charge separated state with at quantum yield of essentially unity (step 2). This state can decay to the ground state with a time constant of 3.3 ns (step 3). However, electron transfer from the carotenoid to the porphyrin radical cation (step 4, sometimes referred to as hole transfer) is much faster (τ = 125 ps). This charge shift reaction produces a final C˙+-P-C60˙− charge separated state with an overall quantum yield of 95%, based on light absorbed by the porphyrin. The C˙+-P-C60˙− state stores about 1.0 eV of the photon energy, and has a lifetime of 57 ns. It could in principle decay to either the ground state (step 5) or to yield the carotenoid triplet state, which lies at lower energy than the charge-separated state (step 6). In 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, most of the decay yields the carotenoid triplet, but the partitioning between the two pathways depends upon the solvent and temperature.41,42 The 3C-P-C60 has a lifetime of 4.7 μs (step 7) in the absence of oxygen. At low temperatures, the lifetime of C˙+-P-C60˙− increases to several hundred ns. At all temperatures, the lifetime of C˙+-P-C60˙− is very sensitive to small magnetic fields.41–43 Magnetic field dependence of the lifetimes of charge-separated states has been observed in photosynthetic reaction centres, and may play a role in the navigation of birds and other animals.41
 Fig. 5  
Carotene–porphyrin–fullerene triad 3. (a) Structure of the triad. (b) Transient states of the triad and the relevant interconversion pathways. The state energies are estimated from spectroscopic and cyclic voltammetric data. The energy of 3C in this molecule is not known, but is substantially below that of singlet oxygen at about 1 eV. 
Triad 3 illustrates the multistep electron transfer route for obtaining long-lived charge-separated states. Over the last 25 years, many examples of the application of these ideas have been reported, and energetic charge separated states with lifetimes of hundreds of μs or even a few ms have been reported.6–14 In principle, such lifetimes allow ample time for harvesting the stored energy by chemical reactions.

Electron transfer reactions can be facilitated by coupling the electron transfer to proton movement. The effect has been observed in porphyrin-quinone triad molecules,44,45 and proton coupled electron transfer46–48 can be especially useful for coupling the charge-separated states formed by reaction centres to catalysts for water oxidation or fuel generation. For example, the transfer of an electron necessarily increases negative charge on the acceptor and decreases negative charge on the donor. Compensation of this charge by accompanying proton transfer can lower product energies and activation energies. In photosystem II of oxygenic photosynthesis, a photo-oxidized reaction centre P680˙+ in turn oxidizes the oxygen-evolving complex, which is the catalyst for water oxidation. A tyrosine residue in the protein is thought to serve as a redox mediator between these two species. The P680˙+ oxidizes this tyrosine, and during this process, a phenolic proton is transferred to a hydrogen-bonded histidine residue. This change in the protonation state of the tyrosine is thought to facilitate electron transfer by poising the redox of the tyrosine between that of P680˙+ and the manganese cluster in the oxygen evolving complex.
The synthetic system illustrated in Fig. 6 mimics this part of the natural photosynthetic electron flow.49 Molecule 4 consists of a porphyrin chromophore and primary electron donor (PF10) linked to a benzimidazole bearing a phenol (BiP). The phenolic proton bound to oxygen is also hydrogen bonded to one of the nitrogen atoms of the benzimidazole. Although in general phenols are difficult to oxidize and show irreversible electrochemical behaviour in cyclic voltammetry, the phenol-benzimidazole moiety of 4 shows quasi-reversible electrochemistry and is oxidized at a potential whereby it can act as an electron donor to the porphyrin radical cation of 4. Compound 4 is designed such that when adsorbed to a TiO2 nanoparticle (Fig. 6) and excited with visible light, rapid photoinduced electron transfer occurs from the porphyrin excited singlet state (1PF10) into the conduction band of the attached semiconductor. The BiP is thermodynamically poised (1.00 V vs.SCE) to quench the resulting high-potential porphyrin radical cation (PF10˙+) (1.35 V vs.SCE) via a secondary electron transfer, yielding the final charge separated state (BiP˙+-PF10-TiO2˙−). In EPR experiments, porphyrin excitation with light was found to result in transfer of an electron to the TiO2 particle, and localization of 95% of the positive charges on the phenol/benzimidazole BiP moiety, in accord with this design. These holes are thermodynamically capable of water oxidation, and constructs similar to 4 may therefore be useful in artificial photosynthetic systems for water splitting.
 Fig. 6  A synthetic model system for photoinduced electron transfer (PET) and proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) as is observed in photosynthetic water oxidation. 



Fuel production catalyst. 
The proton reduction catalyst used in the device shown in Fig. 2 is platinum, which is an excellent catalyst that functions at low overpotential. Platinum, however is too rare and expensive for use in very large scale artificial photosynthetic systems for hydrogen production. Living organisms carry out hydrogen production and oxidation using hydrogenase enzymes, which have catalytic sites that contain iron, or iron and nickel atoms. These catalysts function at overpotentials as low as or lower than that of platinum, and some of them have very rapid turnover rates.50 Thus, nature has proven that rare metals are not required for active proton reduction catalysts.
It is possible to use hydrogenases directly as catalysts in artificial photosynthesis. An example is shown in Fig. 7.51 In this photoelectrochemical cell, two electrodes are immersed in a buffer solution. The photoanode is the same type of nanoparticulate TiO2 electrode used in the water splitting cell shown in Fig. 2. However, the sensitizer is 5-(4-carboxyphenyl)-10,15,20-tris(4-methylphenyl)porphyrin. When the transparent photoanode is illuminated, the porphyrin excited singlet states inject electrons into the TiO2, from whence they flow to a cathode consisting of a microporous carbon support to which is adsorbed an [Fe–Fe]-hydrogenase, CaHydA from C. acetobutylicum. The enzyme is electrically connected to the supporting electrode, and electrons flowing from the TiO2 photoanode are used by the hydrogenase to produce hydrogen gas, which bubbles off the enzyme-bearing electrode. Meanwhile, the oxidized porphyrin on the photoanode is regenerated by electron donation from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide in its reduced form (NADH). After two electron donations, NADH is converted to NAD+ with concomitant release of a hydrogen ion. In this construct, the biofuel NADH provides electrons, a proton and some of the potential energy needed for hydrogen production. The remaining energy necessary to overcome overpotentials and make hydrogen is provided by light. In this cell, platinum cathodes and enzymatic cathodes produced hydrogen at comparable rates.51,52
 Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical biofuel cell for producing hydrogen gas from a biofuel. The NADH biofuel shown here can be regenerated through addition of a dehydrogenase enzyme and a more traditional biofuel such as methanol, ethanol or glucose. 
The NADH is, of course, not a useful biofuel, but if a fuel such as methanol, ethanol or glucose and a suitable dehydrogenase enzyme are added to the photoanode solution of such a cell, the dehydrogenase regenerates NADH by reduction of the coenzyme NAD+ and oxidizes the biofuel substrate.53 For example, methanol has been oxidized to carbon dioxide in such a cell using a suitable enzyme system.
Hydrogenases are relatively large, complex enzymes, and are sensitive to deactivation by oxygen. Thus, they are not ideal catalysts for artificial photosynthetic hydrogen production. There have been many attempts to produce analogs of the hydrogenase active site and hundreds of these are known, although their activity varies.54 A variety of other catalytic materials for hydrogen production are also being investigated, and much progress is being made. However, the idealproton reduction catalyst which uses inexpensive and abundant elements, is stable, and operates with high turnover rate near the thermodynamic potential for the hydrogen production/oxidation redox couple has not yet been discovered.



Water
oxidation
catalyst
          . 

Water
oxidation
catalysts based on iridium oxide, platinum, ruthenium complexes and other rare and expensive elements sometimes work well, but are not practical for very large-scale use. They may be useful for smaller, specialty applications. Catalysts that use abundant, inexpensive elements are, of course, more desirable. Here again, natural photosynthesis demonstrates that such catalysts are possible. The oxygen evolving complex found in oxygenic photosynthesis includes four manganese atoms and a calcium atom coordinated by the amino acid side chains of the surrounding protein.15 This complex is clearly a successful catalyst, as it provides the energetic electrons that power nearly all life, has operated successfully for several billion years, and is responsible for the oxygenated atmosphere of the earth. The development of artificial water oxidation catalysts that employ abundant elements is a very active research field, but as yet an inexpensive, robust catalyst that functions with very little overpotential (and is therefore reversible) has yet to be discovered. Cobalt oxide materials appear to be very promising,55–57 and preliminary results with manganese58,59 and other metal60oxides are intriguing.



            Photoprotection
          . 
The high energy of visible photons, the photochemical reactivity of biomolecules, and the necessity to perform at least parts of photosynthesis in an oxygenated environment raise questions of stability in both natural and artificial photosynthesis. Indeed, photosynthetic organisms do suffer photodamage, and as a result have developed various photoprotection and repair mechanisms. It seems probable that artificial photosynthetic systems could benefit from photoprotection as well. The research effort devoted to mimicking photoprotection has been small compared to that expended in developing functional artificial photosynthetic reaction centres and catalysts, but some progress has been made. As with the other aspects of artificial photosynthesis discussed above, the natural process can provide useful paradigms.
Much of the photodamage in photosynthesis occurs when the photon flux causes the initial events of photosynthesis to occur more rapidly than later, dark reactions can use the redox potential produced. If the high-energy intermediates resulting from photoinduced electron transfer are not rapidly consumed to further the normal photosynthetic chemistry, they will react with other components of the organism, causing photodamage.
One example is found in reaction centres, where the result of stepwise photoinduced electron transfer is a chlorophyll radical cation and a reduced quinone. In the normal course of events, the reduced quinone leaves the reaction centre and is replaced prior to new photoinduced electron transfer events. However, at high light levels the initial steps of charge separation can recur before replacement of the reduced quinone. Thus, the electron produced by photoinduced electron transfer cannot migrate completely down the redox chain, and instead recombines with the oxidized chlorophyll to generate a chlorophyll triplet state. Chlorophylls, porphyrins and many other chromophore triplet states are excellent sensitizers for production of singlet oxygen from ground-state oxygen by an energy transfer process. If this occurs in the reaction centre, the singlet oxygen attacks lipids and other tissues, causing photodamage.
Photosynthetic organisms limit such photodamage by using carotenoid polyenes as photoprotective agents. The carotenoids rapidly quench chlorophyll triplets by triplet–triplet energy transfer, generating low-energy carotenoid triplet states which cannot sensitize singlet oxygen production and decay to the ground state within a few μs with the liberation of heat. Carotenoids can also quench singlet oxygen after it has been formed, further limiting tissue damage.
These photoprotective effects of carotenoid polyenes were first mimicked in molecular constructs for artificial photosynthesis some time ago.61–66 For example, carotenoporphyrin (C–P) 5 (Fig. 8) features a carotenoid polyene (C) linked to a tetra-arylporphyrin (P) via an amide group.63 In deoxygenated toluene solution, excitation of the porphyrin moiety with a laser pulse at 590 nm generates the porphyrin excited singlet state C-1P. Time-resolved fluorescence studies show that this state decays with a time constant of 5.2 ns. One of the products of this decay is the porphyrin triplet state, C-3P. In general, porphyrin triplet states are excellent singlet oxygen sensitizers. However, in 5, transient absorption studies with excitation of the porphyrin at 650 nm show that C-3P is converted into the carotenoid triplet state 3C–P by triplet–triplet energy transfer with a time constant smaller than the time resolution of the spectrometer (τ <10 ns). It may in fact be that the rate constant for triplet energy transfer is greater than that for decay of the porphyrin singlet state. The 3C–P state decays to the ground state with a time constant of 5.7 μs in the absence of oxygen. Because C-3P is quenched much more rapidly by energy transfer to the carotenoid than by diffusional quenching by molecular oxygen in oxygenated solutions, this carotenoporphyrin cannot generate singlet oxygen, and is photoprotected. Triplet–triplet energy transfer requires orbital overlap of the chromophores, and the dependence of the transfer rate on the nature of the linkage between the carotene and porphyrin and on the presence or absence of intramolecular motions is strong, as discussed in the articles referenced above.
 Fig. 8  A covalently linked carotenoporphyrin dyad that demonstrates photoprotection from singlet oxygen damage via rapid quenching of the porphyrin triplet state by the carotenoid through triplet–triplet energy transfer. 
Another type of photoprotection found in photosynthetic organisms is non-photochemical quenching (NPQ). Under low light conditions, the organism tunes its systems to maximize light absorption and photosynthetic yield. If ambient light levels increase, overdriving of photosynthesis can lead to the build-up of toxic intermediates that destroy vital cellular components. Plants limit such damage by down-regulating the fraction of absorbed light energy available for photosynthesis in the reaction centre as light levels increase.
In cyanobacteria, NPQ is thought to involve orange carotenoid protein (OCP) in the phycobilisome antennas that provide excitation energy for water oxidation.67,68 The OCP exists in a thermally stable form that absorbs blue-green light, and has no effect on the singlet excited states of chlorophylls. However, light absorption by the carotenoids of these proteins leads to structural changes, producing a red-light-absorbing form that can thermally revert to the stable form. This red form of the protein quenches chlorophyll excited singlet states, preventing them from transferring excitation energy to reaction centre chlorophylls where photoinduced electron transfer occurs. The ratio of the two forms of OCP is controlled by the intensity of blue-green light and the temperature, and therefore at high light levels photosynthesis is down regulated.
A synthetic molecule that mimics this process has been reported.69 Pentad 6 (Fig. 9a) includes five photochemically active components. The central porphyrin (P) is linked to a fullerene electron acceptor (C60) and two BPEA antennas. In addition, it bears a quinoline-derived dihydroindolizine photochrome (DHI). The closed, spirocyclic form of the photochrome (see 6c) is the thermodynamically more stable isomer. Thermal isomerization at ambient temperatures favours this form of the molecule, in which the DHI has no effect upon the photochemistry of the rest of the pentad. The open, betaine isomer (BT, see structure 6o) is generated by photoisomerization initiated by light absorption in the UV and blue light portions of the spectrum. The absorption spectrum of BT and its spatial arrangement relative to the remainder of the molecule are tuned so that it can rapidly quench the excited states of the porphyrin and BPEA antennas by singlet-singlet energy transfer.
 Fig. 9  (a) Self-regulating artificial photosynthetic reaction centre. (b) Quantum yield of charge separation in 6 (solid circles) at different light intensities (open circles). 
The pentad behaves in the following way. At relatively low intensities of white light irradiation of 6 in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran solution, the BPEA moieties absorb in the 430–475 nm region and efficiently (Φ = 1.0) transfer excitation energy to the porphyrin (τ = 4.0 ps) to yield the porphyrin first excited singlet state. The porphyrin excited state, formed by energy transfer or by direct absorption of light, decays by photoinduced electron transfer to the fullerene (τ = 2.4 ns) to yield the P˙+-C60˙− charge-separated state with a quantum yield of 0.82. The charge separated state has a lifetime of 14.0 ns. Thus, the molecule acts as a typical artificial photosynthetic antenna–reaction centre unit, and the DHI moiety has no influence. As the light intensity is increased, an increasing fraction of the sample is in the betaine form (6o). In 6o the lifetime of the porphyrin first excited singlet state is reduced to 33 ps due to singlet-singlet energy transfer to the BT. This quenching reduces the quantum yield of the P˙+-C60˙− state to only 1%.
The photochemistry of 6 allows it to act as an adaptive, self-regulating molecular nonlinear transducer that functionally mimics the role of the orange carotenoid protein in cyanobacteria. This is illustrated in Fig. 9b. Along the abscissa are plotted the results of experiments carried out on a solution of 6 in deoxygenated 2-methyltetrahydrofuran. Each point was obtained after 20 s of white light illumination of the solution of 6c at relative intensities indicated by the open circles. The fluorescence emission from the porphyrin, excited at 480 nm, was immediately measured at each point, and the quantum yield of charge separation was determined (solid circles). Due to the increasing fraction of 6 present in the quenched form 6o as the light level is increased, the quantum yield of charge separation decreases smoothly as the white light intensity increases, dropping from 82% at low light levels to 37% at the highest levels of white light employed in this particular experiment. When the white light intensity is reduced, the quantum yield rises, eventually returning to its initial value at low light.
Another kind of NPQ is found in green plants. A consequence of photoinduced electron transfer in reaction centres is release of protons into the thylakoid lumen, leading to a pH and charge gradient (membrane potential ΔΨ) across the photosynthetic membrane. The chemical potential stored in this gradient powers many of the subsequent reactions of energy conversion. At high light levels the lumen pH drops, signalling that electron transfer, which produces reactive high-energy intermediates, is outpacing the fuel-producing reactions that consume the pH gradient. Low pH activates NPQ, which down regulates reaction centre function by converting excitation energy into heat before it can reach the reaction centre and initiate electron transfer. The process by which this occurs is not fully understood, but is known to involve chemical modification of a carotenoid polyene. The modified polyene quenches chlorophyll excited states, possibly by electron and/or energy transfer.68,70–75 Recently, the formation of short-lived exciton states has been proposed as a mechanism of NPQ in some natural and artificial antenna systems.66,76
Synthetic hexad 7 (Fig. 10) functionally mimics the role of the antenna system in green plant NPQ.77 The molecular hexad comprises five zinc porphyrins and a pH-sensitive dye organized by a hexaphenylbenzene core. When the hexad is dissolved in an organic solvent, the zinc porphyrin antenna moieties absorb light, rapidly exchange excitation energy, and ultimately decay by normal photophysical processes (τ = 2.1 ns). The dye moiety is in the spirocyclic form (see 7c) which does not absorb light in the visible and has no effect on the porphyrin artificial antenna system. The zinc porphyrin excited state lifetimes are long enough to permit harvesting of the excitation energy for photoinduced charge separation or other work. However, when acid is added, the dye moiety is converted to the open form (in 7o), which rapidly (τ < 40 ps) quenches all of the porphyrin excited states, converting the excitation energy to heat and rendering the porphyrins kinetically incompetent to readily perform useful photochemistry. The hexad is functionally analogous to NPQ in the antenna, but does not mimic the role of the reaction centre in producing a proton gradient.
 Fig. 10  Acid-regulated artificial photosynthetic antenna. The pH-sensitive dye moiety is converted from the spirocyclic form in 7c to the open, protonated form in 7o by addition of an acid H–X. In 7o, the dye rapidly quenches the excited singlet states of all of the porphyrins. 


Device design. 
Useful artificial photosynthesis requires not only design of suitable components for a fuel production system as discussed above, but also ultimately combining these components in a functional overall system or device. The system must be optimized for sunlight collection, transport of electrons from reaction centres to fuel production catalysts, transport of oxidizing equivalents from reaction centres to water oxidation catalysts, accumulation of oxidation and reduction equivalents for the necessary mutielectron processes, separation and removal of products, prevention of charge recombination and other energy wasting reactions, overall efficiency and ultimately stability and cost. Investigating such systems engineering requires complete fuel production devices such as that shown in Fig. 2, and artificial photosynthesis research is only recently reaching the stage of maturity that will permit investigation of these considerations. Thus far, most research has focused mainly on the individual components of a system.
In this connection, there are two extremes in the design spectrum. The first is a modular approach: the development of discrete reaction centres and catalysts, with electrical connections between them made by conventional conductors or semiconductors. The second approach is monolithic, wherein integrated nanoscale devices carry out light absorption and oxidative and reductive catalysis. The modular approach has the advantage that individual components can be optimized in the absence of the other units and easily replaced as better systems are developed. The second approach could offer advantages in terms of materials utilization and expense, but optimization of all parts of a monolithic device concurrently could be difficult. In addition, physical separation of oxygen and a fuel such as hydrogen gas is certainly desirable and could require additional engineering and energetic costs. Of course, hybrid approaches are possible, and may prove most successful. For example, reaction centres that produce high energy excited states or dangerously strong oxidizing equivalents could be integrated with water oxidation catalysts so as to reduce the potential for oxidative damage, while reducing equivalents from these same reaction centres could be transported by conductors to a separate compartment for fuel production. Photosynthesis uses this strategy. In photosystem II, the reaction centre generating oxidation potential and the water oxidation catalytic site are closely coupled in the same enzyme, whereas reductive chemistry for fuel production occurs at more distant sites.

Conclusions
As illustrated by the examples above, artificial photosynthesis has progressed far since the early photochemistry of Ciamician's time. However, much more research is needed before artificial photosynthesis can compete with other technologies for practical energy production. For those working in the field, there are two inescapable facts that guide and inspire. First, fuel production using solar energy must become practical if human society is to prosper and endure while avoiding environmental catastrophe. Secondly, the powering of our biosphere by natural photosynthesis operating at about 130 TW demonstrates that environmentally benign, sustainable solar fuel production at tremendous scale is possible.
D. G. thanks the Center for Bio-Inspired Solar Fuel Production, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award Number DE-SC0001016 for support of this work.
References
G. Ciamician, Science, 1912, 36, 385 CAS .
M. Calvin, Acc. Chem. Res., 1978, 11, 369 CrossRef CAS .
M. Calvin, J. Membr. Sci., 1987, 33, 137 CrossRef CAS .
M. Calvin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1983, 37, 349 CrossRef CAS .
G. Porter, Nature, 1980, 288, 320 CrossRef .

          D. Gust and T. A. Moore, in The Porphyrin Handbook, ed. K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, Academic Press, New York,  2000, vol. 8, ch. 57, pp. 153–190 Search PubMed .
T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1989, 22, 163 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Redmore, I. V. Rubtsov and M. J. Therien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8769 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 435 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40 CrossRef CAS .
M. Falkenstrom, O. Johansson and L. Hammarstrom, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2007, 360, 741 CrossRef .
S. Fukuzumi and H. Imahori, Electron Transfer in Chemistry, 2001, 2, 927 CrossRef CAS .
L. Flamigni, N. Armaroli, F. Barigelletti, V. Balzani, J.-P. Collin, J.-O. Dalbavie, V. Heitz and J.-P. Sauvage, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5936 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harriman, I. J. Pickering, J. M. Thomas and P. A. Christensen, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2795 RSC .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terazono, G. Kodis, P. A. Liddell, V. Garg, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 7147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55 CrossRef .
T. Förster, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7 RSC .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265 CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Can. J. Chem., 1959, 37, 155 CrossRef CAS .

          N. S. Hush and J. Ulstrup, Some historical notes on chemical charge transfer, School of Chemistry, The University of Sydney,
Australia,  1997 Search PubMed .
N. S. Hush, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1961, 57, 557 RSC .
V. Levich, Adv. Electrochem. Electrochem. Eng., 1966, 4, 249 CAS .
V. Garg, G. Kodis, M. Chachisvilis, M. Hambourger, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2944 CrossRef CAS .

          J. L. Kong and P. A. Loach, in Frontiers of Biological Energetics: From Electrons to Tissues, ed. P. L. Dutton and H. Scarpa, Academic Press, New York,  1978, pp. 73–82 Search PubMed .
I. Tabushi, N. Koga and M. Yanagita, Tetrahedron Lett., 1979, 20, 257 CrossRef .
P. A. Liddell, J. P. Sumida, A. N. Macpherson, L. Noss, G. R. Seely, K. N. Clark, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, Photochem. Photobiol., 1994, 60, 537 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuciauskas, P. A. Liddell, S. Lin, S. Stone, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4307 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004, 2, 1425 CAS .
D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 22 RSC .
T. A. Moore, D. Gust, P. Mathis, J. C. Mialocq, C. Chachaty, R. V. Bensasson, E. J. Land, D. Doizi, P. A. Liddell, W. R. Lehman, G. A. Nemeth and A. L. Moore, Nature, 1984, 307, 630 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, P. Mathis, A. L. Moore, P. A. Liddell, G. A. Nemeth, W. R. Lehman, T. A. Moore, R. V. Bensasson, E. J. Land and C. Chachaty, Photochem. Photobiol., 1983, 37S, S46 Search PubMed .
S. Nishitani, N. Kurata, Y. Sakata, S. Misumi, A. Karen, T. Okada and N. Mataga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 7771 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kodis, P. A. Liddell, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2004, 17, 724 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. B. Henbest, F. Cintolelsi, I. Kuprov, C. T. Rodgers, P. A. Liddell, D. Gust, C. R. Timmel and P. J. Hore, Nature, 2008, 453, 387 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, C. J. Wedge, J. G. Storey, K. B. Henbest, P. A. Liddell, G. Kodis, D. Gust, P. J. Hore and C. R. Timmel, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6563 RSC .
D. Kuciauskas, P. A. Liddell, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 10880 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Hung, A. N. Macpherson, S. Lin, P. A. Liddell, G. R. Seely, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 1657 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, D. Gust, S.-C. Hung and A. N. Macpherson, Photochem. Photobiol., 1994, 59S, 45S Search PubMed .
J. Stubbe, D. G. Nocera, C. S. Yee and M. C. Y. Chang, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 2167 CrossRef CAS .
P. Faller, C. Goussias, A. W. Rutherford and S. Un, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 8732 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Mayer, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 363 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Moore, M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, O. G. Poluektov, T. Rajh, D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10466 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Vincent, A. Parkin and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4366 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, D. Svedruzic, P. W. King, D. Gust, M. Ghirardi, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2015 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, G. Kodis, M. Vaughn, G. F. Moore, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9979 RSC .
M. Hambourger, A. Brune, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Photochem. Photobiol., 2005, 81, 1015 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Barton, M. T. Olsen and T. B. Rauchfuss, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 292 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Huang, Z. Luo, Y. V. Geletii, J. W. Vickers, Q. S. Yin, D. Wu, Y. Hou, Y. Ding, J. Song, D. G. Musaev, C. L. Hill and T. Q. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2068 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2920 RSC .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Bensasson, E. J. Land, A. L. Moore, R. L. Crouch, G. Dirks, T. A. Moore and D. Gust, Nature, 1981, 290, 329 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Moore, A. M. Joy, R. Tom, D. Gust, T. A. Moore, R. V. Bensasson and E. J. Land, Science, 1982, 216, 982 CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, C. Devadoss, P. A. Liddell, R. M. Hermant, R. A. Nieman, L. J. Demanche, J. M. DeGraziano and I. Gouni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 3590 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Kuciauskas, P. A. Liddell and B. D. Halbert, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1998, 43, 209 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kodis, C. Herrero, R. Palacios, E. Mariño-Ochoa, S. L. Gould, L. de la Garza, R. van Grondelle, D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and J. T. M. Kennis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 414 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kloz, S. Pillai, G. Kodis, D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, R. van Grondelle and J. T. M. Kennis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7007 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wilson, G. Ajlani, J. M. Verbavatz, I. Vass, C. A. Kerfeld and D. Kirilovsky, Plant Cell, 2006, 18, 992 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wilson, C. Punginelli, A. Gall, C. Bonetti, M. Alexandre, J. M. Routaboul, C. A. Kerfeld, R. van Grondelle, B. Robert, J. T. M. Kennis and D. Kirilovsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 12075 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Straight, G. Kodis, Y. Terazono, M. Hambourger, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 280 CrossRef CAS .
P. Horton and A. V. Ruban, J. Exp. Bot., 2004, 56, 365 CrossRef .
A. A. Pascal, Z. F. Liu, K. Broess, B. van Oort, H. van Amerongen, C. Wang, P. Horton, B. Robert, W. R. Chang and A. Ruban, Nature, 2005, 436, 134 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Ruban, R. Berera, C. Ilioaia, I. H. M. van Stokkum, J. T. M. Kennis, A. A. Pascal, H. van Amerongen, B. Robert, P. Horton and R. van Grondelle, Nature, 2007, 450, 575 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Holt, G. R. Fleming and K. K. Niyogi, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 8281 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berera, C. Herrero, L. H. M. van Stokkum, M. Vengris, G. Kodis, R. E. Palacios, H. van Amerongen, R. van Grondelle, D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and J. T. M. Kennis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 5343 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kulheim, J. Ågren and S. Jansson, Science, 2002, 297, 91 CrossRef .
P. N. Liao, S. Pillai, D. Gust, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and P. J. Walla, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 4082 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Terazono, G. Kodis, K. Bhushan, J. Zaks, C. Madden, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, G. R. Fleming and D. Gust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2916 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of an artificial photosynthetic system for water splitting. An antenna absorbs sunlight and transfers excitation energy to a reaction centre (RC) which generates a charge separated state by photoinduced electron transfer. Electrons from the reaction centre enable reduction of hydrogen ions to hydrogen gas at the proton reduction catalyst (PRC). The oxidized reaction centre is regenerated by electrons from the water oxidation catalyst (WOC), which converts water to oxygen gas and hydrogen ions.	 

 	Fig. 2  A photoelectrochemical water splitting cell. The nanoparticulate TiO2 photoanode is sensitized with a ruthenium complex that also binds an iridium oxide nanoparticle. The excited ruthenium complex injects electrons into the TiO2, from whence they travel to the cathode and reduce hydrogen ions to hydrogen gas when a small bias voltage is applied. The oxidized ruthenium complex in turn oxidizes an iridium oxide nanoparticle that serves as a water oxidation catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 3  Artificial photosynthetic antenna 1, which consists of two bis(phenylethynyl)anthracenes, two borondipyrromethenes, and two zinc porphyrins, all organized by a hexaphenylbenzene core.	 

 	Fig. 4  Triad artificial reaction centre 2, wherein a hexaphenylbenzene bears two zinc porphyrins which in turn are linked to the same fullerene derivative. (a) Chemical structure. (b) Molecular model in which the bromine and methoxy groups have been replaced by hydrogen in order to facilitate calculations.30	 

 	Fig. 5  
Carotene–porphyrin–fullerene triad 3. (a) Structure of the triad. (b) Transient states of the triad and the relevant interconversion pathways. The state energies are estimated from spectroscopic and cyclic voltammetric data. The energy of 3C in this molecule is not known, but is substantially below that of singlet oxygen at about 1 eV.	 

 	Fig. 6  A synthetic model system for photoinduced electron transfer (PET) and proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) as is observed in photosynthetic water oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical biofuel cell for producing hydrogen gas from a biofuel. The NADH biofuel shown here can be regenerated through addition of a dehydrogenase enzyme and a more traditional biofuel such as methanol, ethanol or glucose.	 

 	Fig. 8  A covalently linked carotenoporphyrin dyad that demonstrates photoprotection from singlet oxygen damage via rapid quenching of the porphyrin triplet state by the carotenoid through triplet–triplet energy transfer.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Self-regulating artificial photosynthetic reaction centre. (b) Quantum yield of charge separation in 6 (solid circles) at different light intensities (open circles).	 

 	Fig. 10  Acid-regulated artificial photosynthetic antenna. The pH-sensitive dye moiety is converted from the spirocyclic form in 7c to the open, protonated form in 7o by addition of an acid H–X. In 7o, the dye rapidly quenches the excited singlet states of all of the porphyrins.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
