Flow battery recharging by thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3SE00451A View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3SE00451A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, Advance Article Flow battery recharging by thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation†
Yohei Matsui*ab, 
Yuki Maedaa, 
Makoto Kawasea, 
Takahiro Suzukib and 
Shohji Tsushimab
aEnergy Chemistry Division, Energy Transformation Research Laboratory, Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry, Yokosuka, 240-0196, Japan. E-mail: y-matsui@criepi.denken.or.jp
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita, 565-0871, Japan
Received 
7th April 2023
, Accepted 28th May 2023First published on 27th June 2023AbstractThermally regenerative flow batteries have attracted attention as thermo-electrochemical conversion devices because they enable not only the utilization of low-grade heat but also energy storage. Thermally regenerative flow batteries previously reported, however, are complicated systems because the charging process generates gases and requires evaporators and condensers for solvents. In this work, we proposed a thermally rechargeable flow battery based on a new concept, which is a liquid–liquid phase separation of the electrolyte in response to temperature. The proposed flow battery achieved stable charge–discharge cycles by using a small temperature difference between 60 °C and room temperature (approximately 23 °C). The thermal efficiency of the cell was estimated to be 0.9%, which was 8.1% relative to that of the Carnot cycle (11.1%). This concept can enhance the simplicity and safety of thermally regenerative redox flow batteries. Moreover, the operation temperature and cell performance can be flexibly tuned by designing an electrolyte with a large number of candidates for solvents exhibiting phase separation in response to temperature.
Introduction
Utilization of low-grade heat is an expected approach for the decarbonization of the energy sector. Notably, heat sources with temperatures below 100 °C, such as geothermal heat, solar heat, and emitted heat from industrial processes, are widely available.1 To use these heat sources effectively, researchers have developed various thermo-electrochemical conversion systems based on different concepts.2–16 Among these systems, thermally regenerative flow battery systems have attracted attention.7,8,12–14,16 An advantage of thermally regenerative flow batteries is that they store energy by reserving electrolytes regenerated by thermal processes. The charging process of thermally regenerative flow batteries previously reported has been based on the vapor–liquid separation processes of solvents or ammonia. Because the vapor–liquid phase separation requires evaporators and condensers, the charging process is complicated.
In this work, we show a novel flow battery rechargeable by liquid–liquid phase separation that occurs in response to temperature, termed as thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. As the charge–discharge cycle of the electrolyte utilizes the variation of solvation of the redox species, we call the flow battery a solvation difference flow battery (SDFB). Because the separation and mixing of solvents acts as a charging process, the proposed system does not require electrical energy for charging, unlike conventional batteries.17–20 Furthermore, the all-liquid charging process is safe and simple, unlike the vapor–liquid separation processes of other thermally regenerative flow batteries. In this study, we designed electrolytes for the prototype system, focusing on both electrochemical and thermoresponsive behaviors. The effects of electrolyte components on the cell voltage and operating temperature were investigated. From these results, requirements for operating the SDFB were discussed. Finally, we successfully conducted a proof-of-concept demonstration and proved that the SDFB worked with a small temperature difference, which is essential for the utilization of low-grade heat sources.
Results and discussion
Theory of the charge–discharge cycle
Fig. 1 shows the concept of the charge–discharge cycle of the proposed flow battery. The electrolyte solvent comprises two components: the main solvent and the additive. The anolyte and catholyte have different additive concentrations. The discharge process (left panel of Fig. 1) is the same as that of the usual redox flow battery, but the anolyte and catholyte have the same redox couple (X/X+). The anolyte has X (reductant) and an additive in the main solvent, and the catholyte has X+ (oxidant) in the main solvent. In this situation, the difference in the solvation free energy caused by the presence of the additive is the driver of the electrochemical reaction. In detail, the reverse redox reactions of the same redox couple proceed spontaneously owing to the difference in the solvation state of the redox couple between the anolyte and catholyte, which is caused by the difference in the concentration of the additive. Thus, X is oxidized to X+ in the anolyte, and X+ is reduced to X in the catholyte. Consequently, the discharged anolyte has X+ and an additive in the main solvent, and the discharged catholyte has X in the main solvent after discharging. A detailed explanation of the electrochemical reaction induced by the difference in solvation is provided in our previous work.16
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the charge (right) and discharge (left) of the SDFB recharging by the thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. The discharge is a redox reaction caused by the difference in solvation states of X/X+ between the anolyte and catholyte. The charge is a thermally regenerative process using the LCST behavior of the discharged anolyte. In the discharging process, the charged anolyte (A) and charged catholyte (B) are spent electrochemically, resulting in the discharged anolyte (C) and discharged catholyte (D), respectively. In the charging process, the discharged anolyte (C) is thermally regenerated as the charged catholyte (B), and vice versa. In this figure, we assume that the additive is completely isolated from the main solvent phase in the liquid–liquid phase separation process for simplicity. 
The charging process (right panel of Fig. 1) differs from that of the usual redox flow battery. The recovery of the discharged anolyte and catholyte is achieved by the separation and transfer processes of the additive without the input of electrical energy. For the charging process, the main solvent and additive are selected to have a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) or upper critical solution temperature (UCST). LCST-type liquid mixtures are miscible in all mixing ratios below the LCST, whereas UCST-type mixtures are miscible above the UCST. Fig. 1 shows an SDFB using the LCST-type electrolyte as an example. In an LCST-type electrolyte, phase separation occurs above the phase separation temperature. In this situation, the warming of the discharged anolyte, which comprises X+ and the additive in the main solvent, above the phase separation temperature generates two liquid phases, the main solvent and the additive, through an endothermic reaction. If X+ is transferred not to the additive but to the main solvent, one phase has the additive and the other has X+ in the main solvent. The latter phase after releasing heat is the recharged catholyte. When the former phase is mixed with the discharged catholyte, which comprises X in the main solvent, it becomes a recharged anolyte after releasing heat. Thus, the discharged anolyte and catholyte are recovered to the charged catholyte and anolyte, respectively, by the liquid–liquid phase separation. Overall, part of the thermal energy received through the LCST behavior is converted to electrical energy through the electrochemical reaction induced by the difference in the solvation energy. When the UCST-type electrolyte is used instead, phase separation occurs below the phase separation temperature; the discharged anolyte is cooled in the charging process to induce the liquid–liquid phase separation.
Although we assumed in Fig. 1 that the additive was completely separated from the main solvent in the phase separation described, in practice, the electrolyte is separated into two phases with different ratios of the additive in the main solvent (additive-rich and additive-lean phases). The ratio of the additive in phase separation is described in the phase diagram in Fig. 2. The curve in the phase diagram of the LCST-type liquid mixture is convex downward.21–23 In this case, high- and low-temperature (TH and TL) thermal reservoirs are used for phase separation and mixing. The regeneration of the discharged anolyte as the charged catholyte is shown in the left panel of Fig. 2. When the discharged anolyte is warmed to TH (state (i) → (ii)), the anolyte is separated into two phases: additive-lean phase with X+ and additive-rich phase. The additive-lean phase with X+ is isolated (state (ii) → (iii)) and cooled to TL (state (iii) → (iv)). As a result, the discharged anolyte (state (i)) is converted to the charged catholyte (state (iv)) by the liquid–liquid phase separation. In the recovery process of the discharged catholyte to the charged anolyte (right panel of Fig. 2), the discharged catholyte is mixed with the cooled additive-rich phase produced during the phase separation of the discharged anolyte (state (iv′) → (i′)).
 Fig. 2  Phase diagram of the LCST-type electrolyte explaining the charging–discharging cycle. The blue and red regions represent one-phase and two-phase systems, respectively. The left and right panels represent the recovery of the discharged anolyte to the charged catholyte and that of the discharged catholyte to the charged anolyte, respectively. (A)–(D) in the panels correspond to those in Fig. 1. The concentrations of the additive in the additive-rich and lean phases are determined by the curve in the phase diagram. 
Electrolyte design focusing on electrochemical reaction
As a proof-of-concept demonstration, water was employed as the main solvent. Additionally, 2,6-lutidine (LT) or 2-butoxyethanol (BE) was selected as the additive. SDFBs using the electrolytes are hereafter called the water–LT system or water–BE system. The binary mixtures of water–LT and water–BE have an LCST at 34 °C (ref. 21) and 48 °C,24,25 respectively. For the redox species, ferro-/ferricyanide ions (Fe(CN)64−/3−) were used. The solvation free energy of Fe(CN)64−/3− is mainly influenced by the electron acceptability of the solvent rather than permittivity, and the redox potential shifts negatively in solvents with weak electron acceptability.26–29 This behavior can also be observed in mixed solvents,28,29 which indicates that an employment of the main solvent and additive with a large difference in the electron acceptability can provide a large cell voltage (Fig. 3a). Note that the difference in the solvation structures caused by the additives should not be large because LT and BE are weak ligands. Even such a minor difference in solvation is enough to generate a difference in the thermodynamic properties such as solvation free energy. The previous study indicates that the addition of solvents with weak electron acceptability (alcohol) can affect the solvation free energy of Fe(CN)63− in aqueous solutions.29 Because of its solubility in the binary mixtures, the ammonium ion was employed as the counterion of Fe(CN)64−/3−.
 Fig. 3  Mechanism of the generation of an electromotive force. (a) Electrochemical cell employing the electrolytes with different concentrations of the additive. In the cell, the cation exchange membrane is used as the separator and the ammonium ion works as a carrier ion. The yellow regions of the electrodes denote the redox potentials of Fe(CN)64−/3−. In this case, because the additive with weak electron acceptability decreases the redox potential, oxidation occurs in the electrolyte with a high concentration of the additive. The subscripts “Anolyte” and “Catholyte” in the overall reaction equation represent where the ions exist. Notably, the image of the solvation structures of Fe(CN)64−/3− does not represent accurate solvation structures. (b) Potential shift of Fe(CN)64−/3− caused by the increase in the additive (LT or BE). The aqueous solution containing 0.01 mol L−1 (NH4)4Fe(CN)6 and 0.01 mol L−1 (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 was prepared, and the additive was added to adjust the molar ratio in the solvent. 
Fig. 3b shows the dependence of the redox potential of Fe(CN)64−/3− on the molar ratio of the additive in the solvents. The relationship between the redox potential and volume ratio of the additive is also shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.† The redox potential was shifted in the negative direction by increasing the molar ratio of the additive. Therefore, an electrolyte with a high concentration of the additive functions as the anolyte. This indicates that the electron acceptability of LT or BE is weaker than that of water; the acceptor number of water is larger than that of most organic solvents.26 Moreover, the negative shift in the redox potential was larger in the water–LT system than that in the water–BE system. This result implies that the combination of water (main solvent) and LT (additive) results in a large difference in the electron acceptability between the anolyte and catholyte solvents, contributing to the large cell voltage of the SDFBs.
Electrolyte design focusing on thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation
Fig. 4a shows the water–LT mixtures at temperatures below and above the cloud point. The above and below pictures are the binary mixture of water–LT without Fe(CN)63− and water–LT electrolyte with Fe(CN)63−, respectively. The LCST behavior was also observed in the presence of Fe(CN)63−. The mixtures above the cloud point resulted in clear phase separation into the top and bottom layers, driven by the difference in density. In this case, the top and bottom layers were the additive-rich and additive-lean phases, respectively, because the density of the additive (LT) is lower than that of the main solvent (water). Here, the oxidant (Fe(CN)63−) must be transferred to the additive-lean phase to be reused as the charged catholyte. The different colors between the two phases demonstrate that most of the Fe(CN)63− was successfully transferred to the additive-lean phase (below picture in Fig. 4a). The cyclic voltammograms of the diluted additive-rich and additive-lean phases also indicate the transfer of Fe(CN)63− to the additive-lean phase (Fig. S2 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Charging process by thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. (a) LCST behaviors of the water–LT mixtures. The above and below pictures are the binary mixture of water–LT without (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 and water–LT electrolyte with 0.01 mol Lwater−1 of (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 before and after phase separation, respectively. The molar ratio of the LT in water was 0.10. (b) Cloud point of the electrolyte for the water–LT system. The concentrations of (NH4)4Fe(CN)6 and (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 were both 0.01 mol Lwater−1. (c) Effect of the concentration of Fe(CN)64−/3− on the cloud point of electrolytes in the water–LT system (left) and water–BE system (right). The molar ratio of the additive was 0.10 in both systems. The red and blue regions represent the operable temperature range for TH and TL, respectively, where the thermodynamic requirements for the phase separation and heat release in the charging process are fulfilled. The extent of the region varies with the additive and redox couple concentration. Thermal reservoirs in the white region are not useable for the charging process. In the water–LT system, the electrolyte with 0.04 mol Lwater−1 of Fe(CN)64− was unable to be a homogeneous system because the cloud point was lower than the room temperature. 
From the viewpoint of the charging process of SDFBs, the cloud point of the electrolyte determines the applicable temperature of the thermal reservoir (TH and TL). Fig. 4b shows the cloud point of the electrolytes for the water–LT system with Fe(CN)64−/3−. Because the LCST of the binary mixture of water and LT is 34 °C,21 the result of Fig. 4b indicates that the presence of Fe(CN)64−/3− decreased the cloud point. Moreover, Fig. 4c shows the cloud point of the electrolytes with Fe(CN)64− or Fe(CN)63− for the water–LT (left) and water–BE (right) systems. The electrolyte with Fe(CN)63− had a higher cloud point than that with Fe(CN)64−. Because the discharged anolyte, which undergoes phase separation in the charging process, is Fe(CN)63− rich, the TH is required to be higher than the cloud point of the electrolyte with Fe(CN)63− (red region in Fig. 4c). Likewise, because the charged anolyte, generated by the mixing process, is Fe(CN)64− rich, the TL is required to be lower than the cloud point of the electrolyte with Fe(CN)64− (blue region in Fig. 4c). In practice, to generate a significant difference in the additive concentration between the two phases in the separation process, TH must be higher than the cloud point of the electrolyte with Fe(CN)63− (Fig. S3 in the ESI†).
It is noteworthy that the requirement for TH and TL can be tuned by a combination of additives, redox couples, and their concentrations. For instance, the cloud point of the water–BE is higher than that of the water–LT system (Fig. 4c). Additionally, the cloud point decreases with an increase in the concentration of the redox species (Fig. 4c). Furthermore, the effect of inorganic salts on the cloud point depends on the ionic species.24,25,30,31 In previous studies of diverse research fields, many solvent systems have been reported to show the LCST or UCST behaviors, which include not only molecule solvents21,24,25,31 but also ionic liquids22,23,30,32–39 and polymers.23,40–42 The large number of candidates for the electrolyte components enable the flexible tuning of the operation temperature, which will contribute to the utilization of low-grade heat sources in a wide temperature range.
Proof-of-concept demonstration
In the demonstration of the charge–discharge cycle, the main focus was the water–LT system because we expected to obtain a larger cell voltage than that of the water–BE system (Fig. 3b). The flow cell system is shown in Fig. 5a. The electrolytes in the initial condition were prepared in accordance with the procedure in the Experimental section. The electrolytes in the reservoirs were circulated by peristaltic pumps through the flow cell. The details of the cell assembly are shown in the Experimental section and Fig. S4 in the ESI.† After discharging, the electrolytes in the flow cell were recollected in the reservoirs and regenerated using the procedure described in Fig. 1. The discharged anolyte was warmed to 60 °C to induce phase separation. The separated liquid phases were isolated using a burette (Fig. 5b). The isolated additive-lean phase was reused as the charged catholyte after cooling to room temperature (∼23 °C). Thus, TH and TL were 60 and 23 °C, respectively, in this demonstration. TH is lower than that for the charging processes of thermally regenerative ammonia batteries14 and copper–acetonitrile systems.13 The discharged catholyte was mixed with the isolated additive-rich phase and reused as the charged anolyte after cooling to room temperature. The relationship between the flow cell and burette in this experiment is described in Fig. S5 in the ESI.† From the reduction peak current density in Fig. S2,† the ratio of the concentration of Fe(CN)63− in the additive-lean phase was estimated to be 13 times higher than that in the additive-rich phase (0.015 and 0.0012 mol L−1). The details for the estimation are detailed in Fig. S2 and Table S1 in the ESI.† Additionally, the concentrations of LT in the anolyte and catholyte were evaluated from the phase diagram (Fig. S6 in the ESI†). The molar ratio of LT was 0.10 for the anolyte and 0.01 for the catholyte in the initial condition.
 Fig. 5  Charge–discharge cycle of the water–LT system. (a) Flow cell system used for the demonstration. (b) Experimental setup used for the isolation of the additive-rich and lean phases after the thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. (c) Charge–discharge cycle of the SDFB. The horizontal axis represents the total discharged quantity during the four discharging processes. For the initial anolyte, the molar ratio of LT was 0.10, and the concentrations of (NH4)4Fe(CN)6 and (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 were both 0.01 mol Lwater−1. The initial catholyte was prepared according to the procedure described in the Experimental section. The discharging current density was 1.4 A m−2. For the third and fourth discharges, the flow cell was discharged at the constant voltage of 1 mV after the constant-current discharge to adjust the discharged quantity. (d) Polarization curve and power density of the flow cell in the fully charged condition. 
Fig. 5c shows the result of four charge–discharge cycles, which supports the validity of the concept. The initial open circuit voltage (OCV) of the flow cell (44 mV) was consistent with the difference in the potential between the anolyte and catholyte (Fig. S7 in the ESI†), indicating that the driver of the discharge reaction was not the flow of the electrolytes but the difference in the redox potential caused by the additive. According to the result in Fig. 3b and the difference in the additive concentration between the anolyte and catholyte (Fig. S6†), the resulting difference in the potential was estimated to be between 33 and 66 mV, which was also consistent with the initial OCV of the flow cell. Moreover, cell voltage was successfully regenerated by thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. In addition, stable discharging behavior was observed after charging. This result indicates that electrical energy was successfully produced from thermal energy that caused the liquid–liquid phase separation.
Fig. 5d shows the current–voltage (iV) characteristics of the prototype flow cell using the water–LT system in the fully charged condition. The definition of the fully charged condition is detailed in the Experimental section. An OCV of 87 mV and a maximum power density of 0.15 W m−2 were observed. The water–BE system also achieved stable charge–discharge cycles (Fig. S8 in the ESI†). The molar ratios of BT in the initial anolyte and catholyte were estimated as shown in Fig. S9 in the ESI,† which indicates the validity of the initial OCV. However, the power density of 0.08 W m−2 was lower than that of the water–LT system (Fig. S10 in the ESI†) due to the small OCV.
We revealed that the combination of the main solvent and additive affected the cell voltage and power density in the water–LT and water–BE systems (Fig. 5d and S10†). In addition, it has been known that the selection of the redox couple is also crucial for improving the cell voltage of the SDFB.16 Thus, an improvement in performance is possible owing to the flexibility of the electrolyte design. Optimization of the cell structure is also critical, as studied in other redox flow battery systems.43–46 Furthermore, the effect of heating temperature and ratio of the additive on the cell performance should be clarified for further developments.
The thermal efficiency (η) of the water–LT system was estimated. η was calculated using eqn (1). 
η = L/Qin
(1)In eqn (1), Qin and L denote the thermal energy received from the high-temperature thermal reservoir and the electrical energy produced by the discharging reaction, respectively. To estimate Qin, we assumed an ideal heat transfer that allows heat exchange between two fluids with an infinitely small temperature difference. Additionally, we assumed that the heat capacity of the discharged anolyte before and after the liquid–liquid phase separation was equivalent. Given these assumptions, all the sensible heat for raising the temperature can be covered by the heat exchange between the discharged anolyte before and after the phase separation (see Fig. S11 in the ESI†). Hence, Qin was estimated to be the amount of endothermic enthalpy, which is latent heat for the liquid–liquid phase separation of the discharged anolyte. The endothermic enthalpy can be measured from the peak area of the differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) curve,47 as shown in Fig. 6a. Additionally, L was estimated from the experimental relationship between OCV and the discharged quantity from the fully charged state to the discharged state (Fig. 6b). Hence, the area of the region surrounded by the horizontal and vertical axes and the experimental curve of the OCV was defined as L. As a result, Qin and L were estimated to be 2.15 J g−1 and 1.94 × 10−2 J g−1, respectively; the thermal efficiency was calculated to be 0.9% from eqn (1), which is 8.1%, compared to that of the Carnot cycle, which is 11.1%.
 Fig. 6  Estimation of the thermal efficiency of the water–LT system. The compositions of the initial anolyte and catholyte used for the estimation were equal to those for the charge–discharge tests in Fig. 5. (a) DSC curve of the discharged anolyte at a heating rate of 2 °C min−1. Qin was estimated from the red peak area. (b) Experimental relationship between the OCV and discharged quantity from the fully charged state to the fully discharged state. L was estimated from the blue area. 
Comparison with other systems
The features of the SDFB are compared with other thermo-electrochemical conversion systems: thermally regenerative electrochemical cycles5,6 and previous thermally regenerative flow batteries.7,8,12–14,16 Thermally regenerative electrochemical cycles are thermo-electrochemical conversion systems that utilize the temperature difference between the charging process and discharging process. Therefore, electrical energy is required to charge in addition to thermal reservoirs. Thermally regenerative flow batteries previously studied can recharge without using electrical energy. However, evaporators and condensers are required for their charging processes. Additionally, generation of toxic gas is inevitable in some systems, such as thermally regenerative ammonia batteries7,8,14 and copper–acetonitrile systems.13 As demonstrated, the SDFB can also be recharged without electrical energy. Moreover, the all-liquid charging process of the SDFB requires neither evaporators nor condensers and does not generate toxic gases. Therefore, the concept in this study is expected to enhance the simplicity and safety of thermally regenerative flow batteries.
Conclusions
We proposed a novel flow battery system that can recharge via the thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation of the electrolyte for the utilization of low-grade heat. The proposed flow battery is a simpler, safer power generation system than the thermally regenerative flow batteries reported in the literature. The flow battery successfully worked and achieved four stable charge–discharge cycles using two thermal reservoirs with a small temperature difference (60 and 23 °C). The thermal efficiency of the prototype system was estimated to be 0.9%. Furthermore, the flexibility of the electrolyte design owing to the abundant candidates for the LCST- or UCST-type electrolytes will provide diverse approaches for improving the performance and application to heat sources in a wide temperature range. The proposed concept will create new research avenues for applying LCST or UCST behavior to thermo-electrochemical conversion.
Experimental setup
Materials
All reagents were purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd. Aqueous solutions of (NH4)4Fe(CN)6/(NH4)3Fe(CN)6 were prepared using the cation exchange process reported in the literature.48 In the process, a cation exchange resin (DOWEX MONOSPHERE 650C (H), Dow Chemical Company) and a 10% ammonia aqueous solution were used for the replacement of K+ with NH4+ in aqueous solutions of K4Fe(CN)6/K3Fe(CN)6. The aqueous solutions after the cation exchange were used to prepare the electrolytes by adjusting the concentration of Fe(CN)64−/3− with pure water.
Flow cell system
A cation exchange membrane (SELEMION™ CMVN, AGC Group) was sandwiched between 5 cm2 of two carbon paper electrodes (38AA, SGL Group). The electrodes were sealed with a 0.2 mm-thick polytetrafluoroethylene gasket. Serpentine flow channels for the electrolytes were carved onto graphite plates. The current collectors were gold-coated copper plates. The flow cell, peristaltic pumps, and electrolyte containers were connected to silicon tubes. The flow rate of the electrolytes was approximately 13 mL min−1 during all discharging processes.
Charge–discharge cycle test
We prepared the electrolytes for the charge–discharge cycle tests according to the following procedure. First, the electrolyte with a high concentration of the additive was prepared by adding the additive (LT or BE) to an aqueous solution of Fe(CN)64−/3−, which was divided into two equal volumes. One part was employed as the initial anolyte without any additional treatment. The other electrolyte was warmed with hot water to induce thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. The temperature of the hot water was 60 °C for the water–LT system and 70 °C for the water–BE system. After warming, the electrolyte was transferred into a preheated burette (Fig. 5b), and the two phases were extracted separately. The isolated top liquid layer (additive-rich phase) was removed. Next, the remaining bottom layer (additive-lean phase) was applied as the initial catholyte after cooling to room temperature. During the discharging test, the current and voltage were controlled using a potentiostat/galvanostat system (SP-50, BioLogic).
Electrochemical measurement
Electrochemical measurements were conducted using the same potentiostat/galvanostat system as that in the charge–discharge cycle tests. For the basic measurements, the Pt disk electrode with a diameter of 3 mm and Ag|AgCl electrode (in saturated KCl aqueous solution) were used as the working electrode and reference electrode, respectively.
For the evaluation of the iV characteristics, the initial anolyte and catholyte were prepared by the same procedure as that used in the charge–discharge cycle tests. Before the evaluation, the flow cell with the initial electrolytes was fully discharged until the OCV decreased to approximately 1 mV. After full discharge, the discharged anolyte and catholyte were thermally regenerated using the aforementioned procedure. The full discharge maximizes the difference in the ratio of Fe(CN)64−/3− between the discharged anolyte and the catholyte. Therefore, the electrolytes are regenerated to the fully charged condition by thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation (see Fig. S12 in the ESI†). During the evaluation of the iV characteristics, the fully charged flow cell was discharged at constant current densities for 2 min. During the discharge, cell voltages were recorded every 1 s, and the average values in the last 10 s are plotted in the graph in Fig. 5d and S10 in the ESI.† Before advancing to the next current condition, the flow cell was recharged by the reverse current of the discharge to recover the state of charge.
Evaluation of cloud point
The electrolyte in the glass test tube was warmed in a hot water bath, and a K-type thermocouple was inserted. As the temperature increased, the transparent electrolyte became cloudy by separating into two liquid phases. The cloud point was defined as the temperature at which the electrolyte near the tip of the thermocouple turned cloudy and was evaluated visually from the recorded videos.
DSC measurement
The heat-flux DSC (DSC6220, Hitachi High-Tech Corporation) was used. A pan made of aluminum with chromate treatment was used, which was closed to avoid the evaporation of solvents (maximum permissible inner pressure was 0.3 MPa). An empty pan was used as the reference. The temperature-controlling program was as follows: (1) retention at 25 °C for 30 min, (2) elevation from 25 to 70 °C at a rate of 2 °C min−1, and (3) retention at 70 °C for 1 h.
Author contributions
Y. Matsui and M. Kawase proposed the charge–discharge cycle of the flow battery. Y. Matsui and Y. Maeda performed the experiments and analyzed the data. All authors have discussed the results. Y. Matsui, T. Suzuki and S. Tsushima were involved in the thermodynamic interpretation of the proposed flow battery. Y. Matsui wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declared a patent application related to this work. Patent applicant (institution): Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry. Name of inventors: Yohei Matsui and Makoto Kawase.
ReferencesC. Forman, I. K. Muritala, R. Pardemann and B. Meyer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 1568–1579 CrossRef .M. F. Dupont, D. R. MacFarlane and J. M. Pringle, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6288–6302 RSC .B. Yu, J. Duan, H. Cong, W. Xie, R. Liu, X. Zhuang, H. Wang, B. Qi, M. Xu, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, Science, 2020, 370, 342–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .N. F. Antariksa, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 11929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Gao, S. W. Lee and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2326–2334 CrossRef CAS .R. Long, B. Li, Z. Liu and W. Liu, Energy, 2015, 87, 463–469 CrossRef .F. Zhang, J. Liu, W. Yang and B. E. Logan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 343–349 RSC .R. Springer, N. R. Cross, S. N. Lvov, B. E. Logan, C. A. Gorski and D. M. Hall, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 070523 CrossRef CAS .T. I. Quickenden and Y. Mua, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3985–3994 CrossRef CAS .J. Duan, G. Feng, B. Yu, J. Li, M. Chen, P. Yang, J. Feng, K. Liu and J. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5146 CrossRef PubMed .Y. Liang, T. Yamada, H. Zhou and N. Kimizuka, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 773–780 RSC .I. Facchinetti, R. Ruffo, F. La Mantia and D. Brogioli, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 1, 100056 CrossRef .S. Maye, H. H. Girault and P. Peljo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2191–2199 RSC .F. Vicari, A. D'Angelo, Y. Kouko, A. Loffredi, A. Galia and O. Scialdone, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2018, 48, 1381–1388 CrossRef CAS .Y. Ding, X. Guo, K. Ramirez-Meyers, Y. Zhou, L. Zhang, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3370–3379 RSC .Y. Matsui, M. Kawase, T. Suzuki and S. Tsushima, Sci. Rep., 2022, 12, 3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. F. Peters, M. Baumann, B. Zimmermann, J. Braun and M. Weil, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 491–506 CrossRef CAS .B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, C. Suh, S. Er, M. R. Gerhardt, C. J. Galvin, X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Kumar, S. K. Rajouria, S. B. Kuhar and D. K. Kanchan, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 312, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .M. A. Fetcenko, S. R. Ovshinsky, B. Reichman, K. Young, C. Fierro, J. Koch, A. Zallen, W. Mays and T. Ouchi, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 544–551 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Korotkevich and H. J. Bakker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2021, 125, 287–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Qiao, W. Ma, N. Theyssen, C. Chen and Z. Hou, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6881–6928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. Kohno, S. Saita, Y. Men, J. Yuan and H. Ohno, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 2163–2178 RSC .M. Erol, M. Kocak, P. Richer, A. Steiger and F. Becker, Berichte der Bunsen-Gesellschaft für Physikalische Chemie, 1987, 91, 731–737 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Ellis, J. Chem. Educ., 1967, 44, 405–407 CrossRef CAS .U. Mayer, V. Gutmann and W. Gerger, Monatsh. Chem., 1975, 106, 1235–1257 CrossRef CAS .G. Gritzner, K. Danksagmüller and V. Gutmann, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1976, 72, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .P. K. Mascharak, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 247–248 CrossRef .Y. Marcus, Pure Appl. Chem., 1990, 62, 899–940 CrossRef CAS .D. Dupont, D. Depuydt and K. Binnemans, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 116, 7252–7258 Search PubMed .V. Balevicius and H. Fuess, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 1507–1510 RSC .Y. Zhao, H. Wang, Y. Pei, Z. Liu and J. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 23238–23245 RSC .Q. Zhao, T. S. Herng, C. X. Guo, D. Zhao, J. Ding and X. Lu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15731–15734 RSC .Y. Kohno and H. Ohno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 5063–5070 RSC .Y. Fukaya, K. Sekikawa, K. Murata, N. Nakamura and H. Ohno, Chem. Commun., 2007, 29, 3089–3091 RSC .Y. Kohno, H. Arai, S. Saita and H. Ohno, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 1560–1567 CrossRef CAS .K. Fukumoto and H. Ohno, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1852–1855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Takahashi, K. Akiya, T. Niizeki, M. Matsumoto and T. Hoshina, Colloids Surf., A, 2022, 639, 128372 CrossRef CAS .A. S. L. Gouveira, C. E. S. Bernardes, A. S. Shaplov, E. I. Lozinskaya, J. N. Canongia Lopes and I. M. Marrucho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 25236–25242 RSC .Y. Kohno, Y. Deguchi and H. Ohno, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11883–11885 RSC .C. Zhao, Z. Ma and X. X. Zhu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 90, 269–291 CrossRef CAS .Q. Zhang and R. Hoogenboom, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 48, 122–142 CrossRef CAS .S. Tsushima and T. Suzuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 020553 CrossRef CAS .A. Parasuraman, T. M. Lim, C. Menictas and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 101, 27–40 CrossRef CAS .M. Messaggi, P. Canzi, R. Mereu, A. Baricci, F. Inzoli, A. Casalegno and M. Zago, Appl. Energy, 2018, 228, 1057–1070 CrossRef CAS .Y. Shi, C. Eze, B. Xiong, W. He, H. Zhang, T. M. Lim, A. Ukil and J. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2019, 238, 202–224 CrossRef CAS .Y. Cai, W. Shen, J. Wei, T. H. Chong, R. Wang, W. B. Krantz, A. G. Fane and X. Hu, Environ. Sci.: Water Res. Technol., 2015, 1, 341–347 RSC .J. Luo, B. Hu, C. Debruler, Y. Bi, Y. Zhao, B. Yuan, M. Hu, W. Wu and T. L. Liu, Joule, 2019, 3, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .
Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3se00451aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the charge (right) and discharge (left) of the SDFB recharging by the thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. The discharge is a redox reaction caused by the difference in solvation states of X/X+ between the anolyte and catholyte. The charge is a thermally regenerative process using the LCST behavior of the discharged anolyte. In the discharging process, the charged anolyte (A) and charged catholyte (B) are spent electrochemically, resulting in the discharged anolyte (C) and discharged catholyte (D), respectively. In the charging process, the discharged anolyte (C) is thermally regenerated as the charged catholyte (B), and vice versa. In this figure, we assume that the additive is completely isolated from the main solvent phase in the liquid–liquid phase separation process for simplicity.	 

 	Fig. 2  Phase diagram of the LCST-type electrolyte explaining the charging–discharging cycle. The blue and red regions represent one-phase and two-phase systems, respectively. The left and right panels represent the recovery of the discharged anolyte to the charged catholyte and that of the discharged catholyte to the charged anolyte, respectively. (A)–(D) in the panels correspond to those in Fig. 1. The concentrations of the additive in the additive-rich and lean phases are determined by the curve in the phase diagram.	 

 	Fig. 3  Mechanism of the generation of an electromotive force. (a) Electrochemical cell employing the electrolytes with different concentrations of the additive. In the cell, the cation exchange membrane is used as the separator and the ammonium ion works as a carrier ion. The yellow regions of the electrodes denote the redox potentials of Fe(CN)64−/3−. In this case, because the additive with weak electron acceptability decreases the redox potential, oxidation occurs in the electrolyte with a high concentration of the additive. The subscripts “Anolyte” and “Catholyte” in the overall reaction equation represent where the ions exist. Notably, the image of the solvation structures of Fe(CN)64−/3− does not represent accurate solvation structures. (b) Potential shift of Fe(CN)64−/3− caused by the increase in the additive (LT or BE). The aqueous solution containing 0.01 mol L−1 (NH4)4Fe(CN)6 and 0.01 mol L−1 (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 was prepared, and the additive was added to adjust the molar ratio in the solvent.	 

 	Fig. 4  Charging process by thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. (a) LCST behaviors of the water–LT mixtures. The above and below pictures are the binary mixture of water–LT without (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 and water–LT electrolyte with 0.01 mol Lwater−1 of (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 before and after phase separation, respectively. The molar ratio of the LT in water was 0.10. (b) Cloud point of the electrolyte for the water–LT system. The concentrations of (NH4)4Fe(CN)6 and (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 were both 0.01 mol Lwater−1. (c) Effect of the concentration of Fe(CN)64−/3− on the cloud point of electrolytes in the water–LT system (left) and water–BE system (right). The molar ratio of the additive was 0.10 in both systems. The red and blue regions represent the operable temperature range for TH and TL, respectively, where the thermodynamic requirements for the phase separation and heat release in the charging process are fulfilled. The extent of the region varies with the additive and redox couple concentration. Thermal reservoirs in the white region are not useable for the charging process. In the water–LT system, the electrolyte with 0.04 mol Lwater−1 of Fe(CN)64− was unable to be a homogeneous system because the cloud point was lower than the room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge–discharge cycle of the water–LT system. (a) Flow cell system used for the demonstration. (b) Experimental setup used for the isolation of the additive-rich and lean phases after the thermoresponsive liquid–liquid phase separation. (c) Charge–discharge cycle of the SDFB. The horizontal axis represents the total discharged quantity during the four discharging processes. For the initial anolyte, the molar ratio of LT was 0.10, and the concentrations of (NH4)4Fe(CN)6 and (NH4)3Fe(CN)6 were both 0.01 mol Lwater−1. The initial catholyte was prepared according to the procedure described in the Experimental section. The discharging current density was 1.4 A m−2. For the third and fourth discharges, the flow cell was discharged at the constant voltage of 1 mV after the constant-current discharge to adjust the discharged quantity. (d) Polarization curve and power density of the flow cell in the fully charged condition.	 

η = L/Qin
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Estimation of the thermal efficiency of the water–LT system. The compositions of the initial anolyte and catholyte used for the estimation were equal to those for the charge–discharge tests in Fig. 5. (a) DSC curve of the discharged anolyte at a heating rate of 2 °C min−1. Qin was estimated from the red peak area. (b) Experimental relationship between the OCV and discharged quantity from the fully charged state to the fully discharged state. L was estimated from the blue area.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3se00451a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
