Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence spectroscopy  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00169J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00169J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3962-3979Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence spectroscopy

        
          
            Jian-Feng 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chao-Yu 
            Li
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ricardo F. 
            Aroca
          
          
        
      *bc
aMOE Key Laboratory of Spectrochemical Analysis and Instrumentation, State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, iChEM, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Department of Physics, Research Institute for Biomimetics and Soft Matter, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: Li@xmu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario N9B 3P4, Canada
cDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. E-mail: arocarf@gmail.com
Received 
      6th March 2017
    First published on 22nd June 2017AbstractFluorescence spectroscopy with strong emitters is a remarkable tool with ultra-high sensitivity for detection and imaging down to the single-molecule level. Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence (PEF) not only offers enhanced emissions and decreased lifetimes, but also allows an expansion of the field of fluorescence by incorporating weak quantum emitters, avoiding photobleaching and providing the opportunity of imaging with resolutions significantly better than the diffraction limit. It also opens the window to a new class of photostable probes by combining metal nanostructures and quantum emitters. In particular, the shell-isolated nanostructure-enhanced fluorescence, an innovative new mode for plasmon-enhanced surface analysis, is included. These new developments are based on the coupling of the fluorophores in their excited states with localized surface plasmons in nanoparticles, where local field enhancement leads to improved brightness of molecular emission and higher detection sensitivity. Here, we review the recent progress in PEF with an emphasis on the mechanism of plasmon enhancement, substrate preparation, and some advanced applications, including an outlook on PEF with high time- and spatially resolved properties.
Jian-Feng Li
Jian-Feng Li is a Professor of Chemistry at Xiamen University. He received a BSc in chemistry from Zhejiang University, and a PhD in chemistry from Xiamen University. Professor Li is the principal inventor of shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS). His research interests include surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, surface-enhanced fluorescence, core–shell nanostructures, surface plasmon resonance, electrochemistry and surface catalysis.
Chao-Yu Li
Chao-Yu Li is now pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Qun Tian and Prof. Jian-Feng Li at Xiamen University. His research is focused on spectroelectrochemistry, synthesis of plasmonic nanostructures, and plasmon-enhanced single-molecule spectroscopy.
Ricardo F. Aroca
Dr Ricardo Aroca is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Windsor, and Adjunct Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Chile. In 2003 he was honoured with the Gerhard Herzberg Award in recognition of outstanding achievement in the science of spectroscopy. In 2005 he was elected Fellow of the Chemical Institute of Canada. Since 2009, he has also been a Member Correspondent of the Chilean Academy of Sciences. His research is on plasmon enhanced spectroscopy.
1. Introduction
Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence (PEF) was observed1–3 and recognized,4–6 soon after the discovery of surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS),7–9 as a member of the family of surface-enhanced spectroscopy techniques. However, the experimental and theoretical research of PEF has truly exploded in recent years leading to a broad spectrum of new developments and applications. The field has grown exponentially thanks to an extremely productive symbiosis of plasmonics10,11 and spectroscopy12,13 (spectro-plasmonics) realizing to a large extent the ultimate goal of achieving control over spontaneous emission.
In spectroscopy, molecular fluorescence is luminescence which occurs only during the irradiation of a fluorophore by monochromatic electromagnetic radiation or white light. Molecular luminescence is formally divided into fluorescence and phosphorescence depending on the nature of the excited state.13 In contrast, metal nanoparticles such as gold or silver nanoparticles when excited by monochromatic electromagnetic radiation show extremely weak metal photoluminescence,14 and the dominant observed light is elastic scattering. In other words, the commonly shown broad plasmon spectrum is observed for excitation with white light. However, the optical extinction cross section (absorption + scattering) of plasmonic nanostructures can be several orders of magnitude higher than that of molecular fluorophores. Plasmon excitation provides enhanced optical fields in the vicinity of metal nanostructures, and these high local fields enrich optical spectroscopy with new capabilities for photon-driven processes. The observed augmented spectral intensity is credited to the local field enhancement associated with the excitation of localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) in the metal nanostructures which can increase the sample's absorption and emission cross sections. Most importantly, the coupling between the frequencies emitted by the fluorophore and the resonance of the metal particle can cause the metal to radiate light (with enhanced intensity) at the same frequency (elastic scattering) as the luminescence emitted by the fluorophore. The latter justifies the term “metal-enhanced fluorescence (MEF)”.15
Experimentally, the overlap between the LSPR of a metal nanoparticle and the molecular absorption and emission spectra of the fluorophore is predicted to yield the highest fluorescence enhancement factor.16 With these new developments, the objective is to gain control over light absorption, emission and scattering using plasmonic nanostructures.17 One net result is to provide enhanced optical signals for analytical techniques,18 such as SERS, surface-enhanced resonance Raman scattering (SERRS), tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS),19 tip-enhanced fluorescence (TEF),20 shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS),21 shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced fluorescence (SHINEF),22 enhanced phosphorescence,23 enhanced bioluminescence,24 and enhanced chemiluminescence.25 In particular, fluorescence enhancement by a plasmonic nanostructure increases the sensitivity of single molecule fluorescence and imaging resolution,26 allowing us to extend single-molecule detection studies to weakly emitting species which are not detectable by conventional single-molecule fluorescence techniques.27,28 Apart from fluorescence molecules, the single quantum emitter that couples to a plasmonic nanostructure can be a fluorescent semiconductor quantum dot (QD),29,30 with a wide range of applications, ranging from biological labelling to photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices. Similarly, the studies of competitive environmentally friendly fluorescent carbon dots (CDs) are carried out for potential applications in bioimaging and biomedicine.31,32 Spectro-plasmonics not only encompasses many linear and non-linear spectral techniques, but it has also opened a wide scope for applications, for instance, enhanced photochemistry,33,34 enhanced performance of solar cells35 and organic-photovoltaic devices,36 potential diagnostic applications in biomedicine,37 and expansion of chemi-sensors and biosensors;38,39 a list of examples of applications of plasmonic biosensors for detection of chemical and biological species can be found in the review by Spackova et al.40 In addition, spectro-plasmonics has and will enable the realization of new optical components41 as well as innovative optical instrumentation.42,43
Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence studies follow a pattern common to all enhancing techniques. For a target fluorophore, the extinction and emission spectra are first recorded in a suitable environment: gas, solution or solid state structure. The next step, in PEF research, is the differentiation and fabrication of the enhancing plasmonic nanostructure to be used.44 The peculiarity in the properties to be originated in the nanostructure can be explored using computational techniques.45 Analytical methods and powerful numerical techniques like the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method, the discrete dipole approximation (DDA), and the finite element method (FEM) are now routinely used by the spectro-plasmonic community, allowing us to examine the enhancing properties as a function of nanostructure material, shape, size, the dielectric environment, and the excitation wavelength. Once the required nanostructure is identified, its fabrication and characterization will be in itself a challenging venture, and in many instances this is the objective of the research project. In this review we dedicate a special section to the fabrication of substrates for plasmon-enhanced fluorescence, in particular, fabrication of specific nanostructures with well-tailored enhancing properties. In addition to the computational work carried out to support nanostructure design, there is theoretical computational work aimed at understanding the interactions or coupling between plasmonic nanomaterials and individual quantum emitters; the methodology is based on quantum electrodynamics and ab initio electronic structure,46 and quantum plasmonics.47
PEF has also grown under different headings. Surface-enhanced fluorescence (SEF) was the first name given to PEF as one of the surface-enhanced spectroscopy techniques.6 Metal-enhanced fluorescence15 is also now a widely used term for experimental48 and theoretical studies of PEF.23 Here, we present a review of recent developments in plasmon-enhanced fluorescence, underlining the impact of PEF in stimulating new protocols in the field of analytical detection, single molecule detection and imaging, diagnostics and nanostructure fabrication. In particular, an attempt is made to correlate the role of different elements in the PEF experiment, such as the external excitation frequency and polarization, the optical properties of the emitter (extinction coefficient, lifetimes and quantum yield), spatial orientation, and coupling to localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPR) and hotspots.
A key point here is that by varying the molecule–nanoparticle distance a continuous transition from fluorescence enhancement to fluorescence quenching is observed.49 Notably, the history of fluorescence on metal surfaces starts with the distance-dependent decay rate of a fluorophore in front of a mirror that was captured in the elegant work of Drexhage and co-workers50 in the 1960s. A classical theory that explains the variation of the lifetime when energy transfer is important is a fundamental reference point in the discussion of metal-excited molecules.51 There are many specific studies of the energy transfer from excited molecules to metal and dielectric surfaces, with the net effect of “quenching” the molecular emission.52,53 A molecule directly attached to the metal surface shall facilitate the energy transfer and effective quenching, or may form a surface complex, and then a “new molecule” with quite different electronic states. This metal–molecule distance dependence is the signature of electromagnetic origin of the plasmonic component, and has been demonstrated throughout the PEF history by various groups. Wokaun et al. (1983)5 studied Basic Fuchsin dye on Ag islands, where the dye is separated from the metal surface by a thin layer of SiOx. When the spacer layer thickness is increased from d = 0, an increase in the luminescence intensity is observed reaching a maximum luminescence enhancement of 200. Aroca et al. (1988)54 controlled the radiantionless energy transfer from the excited phthalocyanine monolayer to the nearby silver island film surface by using Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) spacer layers of non-fluorescent arachidic acid. The maximum enhancement obtained with spacer layers of arachidic acid was approximately 400. Anger et al. (2006)49 discussed the enhancement and quenching in single-molecule fluorescence, demonstrating the continuous transition from fluorescence enhancement to fluorescence quenching of a single molecule on a gold nanoparticle. The gold particle diameter was 80 nm and the optimal distance dependence for maximum enhancement was 5 nm. In addition to specific studies of PEF distance dependence, the conditions that determine the rate of energy transfer from a dye to a nanoparticle are also studied as part of the general problem of excitation energy transfer, as found, for example, in the work of Saini et al.55 Distance dependence studies (Geddes, 2012) in metal-enhanced fluorescence56 are reported to be in close agreement with the theoretical distance-dependent decay of the local electric field intensity of excited nanoparticles. These findings have been extended to other emitters,23 and will be revisited in the section of PEF mechanism.
2. Mechanism of plasmon-enhanced fluorescence
2.1 The fluorescence spectrum
The most common fluorophores are organic dye molecules, characterized by aromatic rings or conjugated carbon chains. The singlet and triplet electronic states are split into vibrational and rotational sub-levels represented in the Jablonski diagram shown in Fig. 1. “Fluorescence emission generally results from a thermally equilibrated excited state, that is, the lowest energy vibrational state of S1”.13 The largest cross section corresponds to the process of optical absorption, which is also very fast (in the femtosecond regime). The emission from an isolated fluorophore is characterized in terms of two observables: the quantum yield (Q0) and the lifetime (τ). Substances with the largest quantum yields, approaching unity, such as rhodamines, display the brightest emissions. These optical quantities are defined in terms of the radiative decay rate (kr) and the non-radiative decay rate (knr), and . For simplicity, the non-radiative rate  includes all processes that lead to non-radiative decay to the electronic ground state.13 The measured lifetime is simply given by . The relaxation pathway (within picoseconds) involves internal conversion from higher vibrational states to the lowest vibrational level of the first excited singlet state. This is followed by radiative decay (nanoseconds) with the emission of a light which is the mirror image of S0 to S1 absorption, not of the total absorption spectrum. Since relaxation is rapid, emission spectra are usually independent of the excitation frequency. Experimentally, for dilute solutions, when Beer's law applies, the measured absorbance is A = εbc = logP0 − logP, where ε is the molar absorption coefficient (M−1 cm−1) of the analyte, b is the optical path length of the sample, c is the concentration of the analyte, and P0 is the excitation power (photons s−1). The corresponding measured fluorescence signal F (in photons s−1) for a given analyte concentration is F = QP0(1 − 10−εbc) ≈ QP0εbc, and the fluorescence will increase linearly with the intensity of the excitation power and concentration, before saturation. In short, for a given analyte the product P0εQ determines the sensitivity of fluorimetry. The absorption cross section is σ(m2) = 3.825 × 10−24ε. Notice that the concrete measurement of intensity will also depend on the collection efficiency of the optical instrumentation. Since light absorbance is measured as the difference in intensity, fluorescence is more sensitive because the intensity is measured directly, without comparison with a reference beam, and has permitted single-molecule detection and imaging.58 Fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) provides measurements that are independent of fluorophore concentration, a feature that expands the realm of applications.
 Fig. 1  Jablonski diagram showing the electronic and vibrational energy levels of an organic dye molecule. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group. 
To detect non-fluorescent molecules, fluorescent tags are used with numerous applications in sensing, in particular DNA technology (such as DNA sequencing/hybridization).59 The number of these reports continues to grow exponentially. Epifluorescence microscopy is one of the most widely used tools in the biological sciences, and there has been a rapid growth in the use of microscopy due to advances in several technologies, including confocal optics to provide confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). There are also astonishing developments in ‘super-resolution’ far-field optical microscopy (nanoscopy) techniques addressing the problem of the limited spatial resolution of far-field optical microscopy,60 such as stimulated emission depletion (STED), ground state depletion (GSD), reversible saturated optical (fluorescence) transitions (RESOLFT), photoactivation localization microscopy (PALM), stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM), structured illumination microscopy (SIM) or saturated structured illumination microscopy (SSIM).
2.2 PEF enhancement contributions
The cartoon shown in Fig. 2 is an attempt to provide a simplified picture of PEF. P0 is the excitation power to be absorbed by both the fluorophore and the nanoparticle leading to an excited electronic state of the molecule and a LSPR in the nanostructure. The molecule is far enough from the metal surface to avoid energy damping (quenching) of the exited state. Therefore, it can be assumed that the nonradiative decay rate (knr) is not strongly affected by the presence of the metal nanostructure. LSPRs are collective oscillations of conduction band electrons that generate intense electromagnetic local fields in their vicinity with exponential spatial variation on the nanometer scale, and their coupling to the emitter could improve the absorption and emission quantum efficiency.10,13,61 The surface average of the near field intensity enhancement, , can be easily calculated,62 leading to a new excitation power in the region of the local field: 〈|E|2〉·P0. Furthermore, the local field of the nanostructure may increase the radiative decay rate (kr) of the fluorophore.13 All experimental results have shown consistently that enhanced intensities go together with a decrease in the lifetime τ = (kr + knr)−1 for fluorophores located in the near field of the nanostructure.2 The latter could lead to a new value for the quantum yield, Qloc, and the fluorophore enhanced emission would be proportional to Fenhanced ≈ (〈|E|2〉·P0)εQloc. In addition, there is the power radiated by the induced dipole in the nanoparticle.61 In the simple case of a sphere of radius a, the applied field induces a dipole moment inside the sphere proportional to E0. , where ε, εm, and ε0 are the dielectric function of the metal, medium and vacuum respectively.10 The resonant enhancement takes place under the condition that |ε + 2εm| is a minimum.
 Fig. 2  Cartoon of simplified plasmon enhanced fluorescence. 
Therefore, to understand the sources of the enhanced fluorescence intensity recorded in the far field it is important to keep in mind that single frequency excitation of metal nanoparticles leads to the observation of elastic light scattering. After coupling frequencies from emitters, this elastic scattering by plasmons is the source of the electromagnetic enhancement contribution as was defined for SERS by Moskovits:12 “…The enhanced re-radiated dipolar fields excite the adsorbate, and, if the resulting molecular radiation remains at or near resonance with the enhancing object, the scattered radiation will again be enhanced (hence the most intense SERS is really frequency-shifted elastic scattering by the metal). Under appropriate circumstances the field enhancement will scale as E4, where E is the local optical field.” Plasmon-enhanced fluorescence can only benefit from the local field enhancement of the incident field and the field enhancement will scale as E2.63 Therefore, the plasmonic nanoparticle serves as a transmitting optical antenna to transfer the near field to the far field at the fluorescence frequency. Since nanostructures are powerful scatterers, under appropriate conditions, the re-radiation by the plasmonic structure is the central component of the observed PEF. It should be pointed out that the scattering profile is specific for each metal nanoparticle and is a sensitive function (the Purcell effect) of the environment, as can be seen in Fig. 3 for silver nanoparticles in different solvents, i.e. changes in plasmon location with the dielectric constant of the environment.64 In fact, the dependence of LSPR wavelength on the refractive index (nm) of the medium is approximately linear at optical frequencies:65λLSPR = λp(2nm2 + 1), where λp is the wavelength corresponding to the plasma frequency of the bulk metal.
 Fig. 3  Extinction spectra of periodic particle arrays in different solvents. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society. 
In addition, the scattering profile depends on the nanoparticle size and shape.10 The scattering profile plays a central role when tuning PEF for maximum enhancement and this is a common factor in the PEF reports. We illustrate the idea with a few examples. Work from Halas' group:66 “Both experimental observations and theoretical analysis involving nanoparticles of different plasmon resonance energies and scattering properties show that fluorescence enhancement is optimized by increasing particle scattering efficiency while tuning the plasmon resonance to the emission wavelength of the fluorophore”. Work from Gedddes' group:67 “The findings strongly suggest that surface plasmons can radiate a fluorophore's vibrational structure”. From the report of Ginger et al.:68 “We use single-particle dark-field scattering and fluorescence microscopy to correlate the fluorescence intensity of the dyes with the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) spectra of the individual metal nanoparticles to which they are attached. For each of three different dyes, we observe a strong correlation between the fluorescence intensity of the dye and the degree of spectral overlap with the plasmon resonance of the nanoparticle”. From Lakowicz's group:69 “It suggests that the optical absorption and scattering properties of metallic nanostructures can be used to control the radiative decay rate and direction of fluorophore emission”. Clearly, the reradiation rate of the plasmonic nanostructure is determined by the absorption and scattering cross sections at the emission wavelength. Under resonance conditions, LSPRs lead to light scattering that can be several orders of magnitude more intense than the fluorescence from efficient quantum emitters. The reradiation or elastic scattering contribution to the enhanced fluorescence is also experimentally observed in what has been termed spectral profile modification70 or SPM. It is the modulation of the shape of the fluorescence spectrum by the scattering profile of the nanostructure due to reradiation.71 Although dissecting the observed enhanced intensity into its components is not an easy task, the basic elements are enhanced absorption, enhanced radiative decay (decrease in lifetimes and increase in quantum yield), and elastic scattering by the metal of emitter's frequencies.
The role of the quantum yield of the isolated molecule has been investigated in many instances, and there is evidence that fluorophores with lower Q stand to benefit the most from the enhancement.72 However, a review of the literature on the reported PEF enhancement factors does not support the generalization of this trend. To illustrate the point, in Table 1, we select and reproduce data from Gartia et al.73 for PEF enhancement factors of a series of molecules with different Q values. In fact, a review of the reported experimentally determined PEF EFs indicates that high Q of fluorophores is not a deterrent to achieve emission enhancements, and one should look at other factors, such as nanostructure size and shape, hotspot formation by aggregation or other means, fluorophore orientation and light polarization, to tune the intensity enhancement.
Table 1 Lifetimes, quantum yields and PEF enhancement factors73




Fluorophore

τ (ns)

Q


τ
mod (ns)

Q
mod

EF




R6G
4.11
0.90
0.219
0.992
20.5


Fluorescein
4.38
0.95
0.182
0.991
100


Acridine orange
2.04
0.29
0.443
0.753
8.34


Rhodamine-B
1.67
0.41
0.104
0.857
5.13


Eosin-Y
1.31
0.32
0.277
0.845
4.3




2.3 PEF and the hotspots
PEF average enhancement factors for a given PEF substrate are commonly in the order of magnitude shown in Table 1, ten to a few hundred fold. However, there is a unique class of nanostructures capable of producing super-hot local electric field sites or hotspots.74,75 These super-enhancing locations have been probed,76 and can be engineered in small nanoparticle dimers and aggregates. Given the electromagnetic nature of PEF, the highest enhancement factors have been achieved on hotspots. Using gold bowties in 2009, with excitation at 780 nm, an enhancement factor of 1340 for single molecule's fluorescence was reported for near-infrared dye N,N0-bis(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-1,6,11,16-tetra-[4-(1,1,3,3-tetramethylbutyl)phenoxy]quaterrylene-3,4:13,14-bis(dicarboximide) (TPQDI).77 The authors estimate an enhanced quantum efficiency of about 9, that multiplied by the field enhancement factor (∼181) should account for the observed EF of 1340. Gill and Le Ru in 2011 reported the enhancement of the fluorescence emitted from dye-labeled DNA using Ag nanoparticle aggregates excited at 532 nm.72 They observed a maximum average SEF enhancement factor of 740 for Atto 540Q-labeled DNA, a fluorophore with a low quantum yield; Q = 1.6 × 10−3. The highest PEF EF reported for single molecule fluorescence was achieved when the fluorophore is placed in one of the many “hot spots” engineered in a three-dimensional plasmonic nano-antenna-dots array [Disk-coupled dots-on-pillar antenna array (D2PA)]; the fluorescence is enhanced by a staggering 4 × 106-fold, with excitation at 785 nm.78
Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the nano-antenna-dots array used in this work is shown in Fig. 4,78 where the gold nanodots rested on the silica nanopillar sidewalls are clearly seen. The total spacer thickness separating the fluorophore from the metal was 6.5 nm. The measured average fluorescence enhancement for integrated fluorescence intensities was 7220-fold. Notably, the average fluorescence enhanced spectrum has a much broader full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) than the fluorescence spectrum, which is consistent with the plasmonic resonance spectrum. The FWHM of the IRDye800CW fluorescence is ca. 30 nm, while the FWHM of the plasmonic nanostructure is about 165 nm. The same nano-antenna-dots array D2PA was used to test the PEF of two infrared molecular dyes, indocyanine green (ICG) and IR800 (dimethyl f4-[1,5,5-tris(4-dimethylaminophenyl)-2,4-pentadienylidene]-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-ylideneg ammonium perchlorate).79 The SiO2 spacer thickness was optimum at 5 nm. The new nanoplasmonic structure, D2PA, provides a large average fluorescence integrated enhancement, of 2360 for the ICG dye molecule and 4.5 × 106 fold for the single molecule placed at a hotspot. The observed fluorescence enhancement for IR800 is about 600. There is no EF reported for single molecule IR800. Again it is found that the observed fluorescence enhanced spectrum has a rather wide bandwidth, a spectral profile modification, which is determined by the plasmon resonance spectrum of D2PA. For work in solution, a maximum enhancement of 2530-fold for IRDye 800CW labeled streptavidin (SAv-800CW) on citrate-stabilized Ag nanoparticles has been reported.80 Here, the labelled carrier protein at a certain pH will interact with negatively charged Ag colloids to form dimers, trimers, and other low order Ag aggregates creating hotspots. The reported PEF EF value represents ensemble enhancement as opposed to the enhancement of individual fluorophores.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of nano-antenna-dots array. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
A very interesting result was attained using chemically synthesized single gold nanorods, where large enhancements of single-molecule fluorescence, up to 1100 times, were reported.27 Here such high enhancement was achieved by selecting a dye with significant overlap with the surface plasmon of nanorods, and excitation at 633 nm. A follow-up detailed study was published recently81 using super-resolution localization and defocused fluorescence microscopy on resonantly coupled single-molecule, single-nanorod hybrids. The findings of this work help in the understanding of the PEF mechanism: “defocused microscopy on chemically labelled molecule–antenna hybrids unravelled the dominating role of the nanorod antenna in the coupled molecular emission to the optical far field. Such observations emphasize the nanorods dual roles to enhance fluorescence signals and to dominate the fluorescence emission at the far field via efficient coupling. Our results emphasize the role of plasmonic nanostructures as optical antennas in the plasmon-enhanced microscopy on a resonantly coupled optical system. The antenna effects have to be considered in optical and spectroscopic studies of interactions between molecules and metallic nanostructures, particularly in super-resolution studies”. Notably, the high EF is observed on an individual nanoparticle, and the enhancement is shown to depend on molecular orientation with regard to the nanorod axis. Such observations highlight the fact that, via efficient coupling, the nanoparticle not only enhances fluorescence signals but also controls the fluorescence emission at the far field.
3. Substrate fabrication for plasmon-enhanced fluorescence
3.1 The development of substrate preparations
Motivated by the discovery of the surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) phenomenon of pyridine on a roughened Ag electrode surface,7,9 Ritchie and co-workers observed for the first time the fluorescence of fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and rhodamine 6G (R6G) adsorbed on roughened silver island films (SIFs). Previously, the luminescence of these molecules had been undetectable on a smooth Ag film.3,82 Later, Glass and coworkers systematically studied the relationship between fluorescence intensity and the degree of overlap in the absorption spectrum of dye and Ag particle film.1 The authors found emission intensity to be strongest when the plasmon resonance of the Ag particle film overlaps with the absorption peak of the dye.
To explore the effect of metal surfaces on fluorophores, Barnes examined various local densities of state, which induced variation in the spontaneous emission rate of the fluorophore as the emitter approached the planar metal surface.83 Along with developments in nanoparticle synthesis, noble metal nanoparticles with different morphologies have been designed and used as flexible substrates in plasmon-enhanced spectroscopy.84–89 To further utilize the strong electromagnetic field in wet chemically synthesized colloidal metal aggregation, Cotton and co-workers modified metal colloids on glass slides to produce colloidal metal films (CMFs). This type of substrate exhibits a strong fluorescence enhancement with a fluorescein-labelled phospholipid.90 In 2004, Geddes and co-workers developed core–shell nanoparticles for surface-enhanced fluorescence experiments, in which, they encapsulated a silver sphere in a silica shell attached to Cy3-labeled streptavidin.53 Three years later, the Halas group used Au shell–silica core nanoparticles to enhance near-IR-emitting fluorophores.66 To prepare the periodic nanoparticle array on a fixed substrate for PEF, the Moerner group adopted the micro/nano-fabrication method. Using elaborate “top-down” preparation techniques, they obtained the gold nanobowtie, nanorod, and gap-antenna-inside nanoaperture with finely controlled gap sizes to achieve a high enhancement in single-molecule detection.77,91–93 One year after the invention of the SHINERS method, the Aroca group introduced the shell-isolated mode for plasmon-enhanced fluorescence, in which the isolated-nanoparticle consists of a metal core and a compact dielectric shell.22,94 In 2014, the Halas group synthesized a gold nanomatryoshka to utilize the near-field Fano property for emission enhancement. This nanomatryoshka consists of an Au core and a thin silica shell. Subsequently, the authors capped an outer Au shell and doped the silica shell with dyes.95
3.2 Synthesis and characterization of substrates in PEF
To describe the synthesis and characterization of the substrates in PEF in detail, in the subsections below we introduce substrates including metal films with roughened surface morphologies, a periodic nanoparticle array prepared using the micro/nano-fabrication method, and wet chemically synthesized nanoparticles with different morphologies.

3.2.1 Metal films with roughened surface morphologies. 
Roughened metal island films (SIFs). 
In their pioneering work, Ritchie and coworkers prepared Ag island films with nanometer scale roughness by the deposition of Ag on glass slides in vacuum conditions.82,96 Following the work of Lackowicz, to prepare Ag island films, silver nitrate solution (in which a glass slide is immersed) is mixed with 5% NaOH solution to form a precipitate. Then, ammonium hydroxide is dropped slowly to redissolve the precipitate. After submersion in an ice bath, D-glucose is added and the mixture is warmed to 30 °C. Upon completion of these processes, the glass slide is removed and washed with H2O, ready for the experiments.97,98Fig. 5a shows an atomic force microscope (AFM) image of the SIFs on quartz.
 Fig. 5  (a) AFM image of SIFs on quartz. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2002, Elsevier. (b and c) SEM image of the Ag colloid coated substrate and the corresponding extinction spectra, respectively, when immersed in (i) benzene; (ii) hexane; (iii) 2-propanol (dotted line); (iv) water; (v) air. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 1995, American Chemical Society. 
Colloid coated substrates (CMFs). 
First, a glass slide is silanized with (3-mercaptopropyl)trimethoxysilane (MPS) in 2-propanol. After silanization, the glass slide is immersed in an Ag sol, prepared using the Lee–Meisel method,99 in which sodium citrate solution is added to a strongly stirred boiling AgNO3 solution, and then stirred for ∼1 h. Fig. 5b and c show a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image and the extinction spectra of Ag colloid coated substrates, respectively.


3.2.2 Periodic nanoparticle array prepared with the micro/nano-fabrication method. 
Periodic Au nanoparticle arrays on fixed substrates can be obtained using micro/nano-fabrication techniques.77,92,93 The Moerner group prepared gold bowtie nanoantennas by electro-beam lithography onto a ITO-covered glass slide, as shown in Fig. 6a. First, a 50 nm-thick ITO layer is coated on a quartz slide, and then a 50 nm-thick PMMA layer is spun on the slide. Subsequently, a standard E-beam exposure and a further treatment in 1:3 MIBK:IPA is carried out to obtain the bowtie shaped holes. A 2 nm-thick Ti along with a 20 nm-thick Au layer is then deposited. In the lift-off step, this substrate is subjected to sonication in acetone to form the bowtie gold arrays. This substrate can be used for PEF in the near-IR regime, due to the scattering band appearing around 800 nm.77 In addition, gold nanorod (NR) arrays of different rod lengths can also be fabricated via negative-tone electron-beam lithography.92 For a novel ‘antenna-in-box’ plasmonic platform, a nanoantenna can be milled by the focused ion beam (FIB) method in a 50 nm-thick Au film (gold film can be obtained through thermal evaporation) on a glass slide (as shown in Fig. 6b). The gap size can be changed from 12 to 40 nm.93
 Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) gold bowtie nanoantennas on ITO slide and (b) ‘antenna-in-box’ nanoaperture. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 


3.2.3 Wet chemically synthesized nanoparticles with different morphologies. 
Bare metal nanospheres. 
Gold nanospheres are commonly synthesized using the Frens' method, in which an amount of fresh sodium citrate is added into a boiling HAuCl4 solution. Different concentration ratios of the gold precursor and citrate reducing agent will yield different nanoparticle sizes. Typically, mono-dispersed nanospheres can be obtained with diameters smaller than ∼50 nm, as shown in Fig. 7a.100 For a larger diameter, a seed-mediated growth method is necessary.86 To obtain silver nanospheres, a similar citrate reduction method developed by Lee and Meisel can be used.99 However, we note that the dispersion of the morphology of Ag nanoparticles is relatively poor in the absence of a strong capping agent, as compared to that of Au nanoparticles.
 Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) Au nanospheres, (b) nanorods, (c) nanocubes, and (d) Ag nanocubes. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2008, Wiley. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. Panel (c) is reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2002, American Chemical Society. Panel (d) is reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2002, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Nanorods. 
Nanorods are mesmerizing in PEF due to their tunable scattering band with different aspect ratios.27,92 In the wet chemical synthesis method, gold nanorods can be prepared using the seed-mediated growth method pioneered by the Murphy group and the El-Sayed group.87,88 Typically, a gold seed sol is obtained by reducing HAuCl4 with an ice-made NaBH4 solution, in which the surfactant trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) has been introduced as a capping agent. Next, a growth solution is used, consisting of small amounts of AgNO3, CTAB, and gold precursor. Before the addition of gold seeds, an ascorbic acid reducing agent is used to obtain intermediate Au+ species. With the addition of seeds, the mixture solution gradually changes from colourless to brownish, which indicates the growth of Au nanoparticles. Fig. 7b shows an SEM image of Au nanorods.
Nanocubes. 
Au nanocubes with a high yield were obtained by the Murphy group.89 Initially, gold seeds are synthesized by the reduction of HAuCl4 with NaBH4 solution. Then, an amount of HAuCl4 is reduced by ascorbic acid to serve as the growth solution. With the addition of seeds, the gold nanocrystal begins to evolve into nanocubes in the presence of CTAB, which is introduced as the surface capping agent to protect the Au(100) surface during the growth. For Ag nanocubes, silver nitrate is reduced by ethylene glycol and heated to 160 °C in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP).101 Here PVP can selectively protect the Ag(100) facet and the final morphology can be controlled by the ratio of the amounts of Ag precursor and PVP. Fig. 7c and d show SEM images of as-prepared Au and Ag cubes, respectively.
Dielectric shell–metal core nanoparticles by the Stöber method. 
To prepare dielectric shell-coated nanoparticles, the metal core can be synthesized via a reducing Ag+ precursor with NaBH4 or sodium citrate. Then, the silane agent 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APS) is used to functionalize the Ag surface with siloxy groups. Subsequently, a sodium silicate solution is added for silica deposition.85,102 Several days later, a silica shell with a controllable thickness is obtained. It should be noted that the silica shell obtained using the Stöber method is porous and the ions can diffuse toward the metal core. Fig. 4a shows an SEM image of Ag@SiO2 nanoparticles. This silica shell coating method can also be carried out using ethanol rather than an aqueous solution, whereby the silicate solution is replaced with tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS) solution, and amounts of NH4OH and water are used to adjust the hydrolysis rate.53
Metal shell–silica core nanoparticles (including the nanomatryoshka). 
To prepare metal shell–silica core nanoparticles, a silica nanoparticle is synthesized according to the Strober method. The silane agent 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) is introduced to functionalize the Ag surface with amino groups. Then, a suspension of very small gold sol (diameter is ∼2 nm) is added. As a result, the small gold nanoparticles are covalently attached onto the silica core surface. Because the formation of the gold-nanoparticle shell is not continued in this step, a subsequent gold deposition is required. Hence, a mixture of HAuCl4 and K2CO3 solution is added with NaBH4 solution for the formation of a uniform gold shell. Fig. 8b and c show SEM images of the gold nanoshell obtained initially and after the shell growth is complete. With this gold nanoshell, the SPR absorption peak can be tuned to wavelengths of more than 800 nm.66,103 Based on this, a fluorescent nanoparticle known as the nanomatryoshka was developed. First, gold nanospheres with a diameter of ∼40 nm are coated with silica shells of ∼16 nm thickness via the Stöber method. Next, the small gold nanoparticles (∼2 nm) are sprinkled onto the silica shell surface while dyes are doped simultaneously. Finally, the gold shell is completed with subsequent Au atom deposition. Fig. 8d shows an SEM image of the as-prepared nanomatryoshka.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) Ag@SiO2 prepared by the Stöber method; (b) Au nanoshell initially obtained; (c) Au nanoshell obtained after shell growth is complete; (d) Au nanomatryoshka; (e) to (h) shell-isolated Au nanosphere, Au nanocube, Au nanorod, and Ag nanosphere, respectively. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 1998, American Chemical Society. Panels (b and c) are reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 1998, Elsevier. Panel (d) is reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Panel (e) is reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. Panels (f and g) are reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. Panel (h) is reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4 Shell-isolated nanoparticles. 
In contrast to the more common Stöber method, the method used to prepare compact and ultra-thin dielectric shells is known as the shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman scattering (SHINERS) method, which was developed in 2010.38,94,105–108 For shell-isolated gold nanoparticles, the gold core is synthesized via the Frens' method, in which HAuCl4 is reduced by sodium citrate. The ratio between the amounts of HAuCl4 and citrate can be tuned to obtain Au NPs with different sizes. In the coating procedure with the SHINERS method, the Au NPs are modified with siloxy groups with APTES solution at room temperature. Next, sodium silicate solution is introduced as the silica precursor rather than TEOS. After ∼5 min stirring, the gold sol is heated in a 90 °C water bath for different time periods to yield different silica shell thicknesses. Typically, a 30 min heating time will result in a ∼2 nm silica shell. A longer reaction time yields a thicker shell. After the silica shell growth, the gold sol is centrifuged twice with ultrapure water and condensed in a tube. The condensed Au SHINs can be dispersed with water again and then spread as “smart dusts” to assemble on the substrate for the following SHINEF experiments. The schematic diagram of the synthesis of Au SHINs and their application in SHINEF is revealed in Fig. 9. Concurrently, to tune the plasmon resonance band in a wider visible range, the core morphology can be changed from nanosphere to nanocube or nanorod, and the material can be replaced with silver, as shown in Fig. 8e–h.
 Fig. 9  The schematic diagram of the synthesis of Au SHINs and the application in SHINEF. 

4. Advanced applications of PEF
Although fluorescence spectroscopy is widely used in biological analysis, the scope of its application has suffered due to the energy quenching effect at the interface. With optimized nanostructures, the photostability, emission intensity, and radiative decay rate are all significantly enhanced. Plasmon-mediated fluorescence can facilitate spectroscopic analysis even down to the single-molecule level, and exhibits excellent capabilities in material characterization and active site analysis of catalysts, and in the investigation of kinetics of DNA hybridization.
4.1 Single molecule detection (SMD)
Mechanistic investigation is important for exploring and clarifying chemical reactions, single molecular behaviours and micro-environments. In addition, the materials used in the study of bio-chemistry and genetics are at the nano-level, and the number of active sites available for catalysis is less than 1% of those in bulk catalysts. As such, it is critical to develop reliable single-molecule detection methods for these ultra-sensitive analyses.
Since the first report on SMD from the Moerner group in the 1980s, plasmon resonance has been a matter of great interest with respect to SMD due to its ability to confine the optic field.109–111 In the work by the W. E. Moerner group, the authors utilized electron-beam lithography to fabricate bowtie nanoantennas on a 50 nm-thick ITO-coated quartz as the substrate for plasmon-enhanced SMD.77Fig. 10a shows schematic diagram, corresponding SEM image, and electromagnetic field simulation of aspects of the gold bowtie. In the hotspot located at the bowtie gap, the electric field enhancement is more than 100-fold (as shown in Fig. 10b). Fig. 10c shows a confocal image of a 16 bowtie array, in which each bright spot represents an enhanced single molecule (SM) around the bowties. Fig. 10d shows the corresponding SM fluorescence intensity time trace, which reveals a characteristic single-step photo-bleaching property. With the greatly enhanced excitation efficiency, the authors obtained a maximum enhancement factor of 1340-fold for a single molecule, which was in good agreement with the simulation result. In the simulations, optimum PEF enhancement occurs at the center of the bowtie nanogap, and the intensity decreases gradually when approaching the triangle tip due to the large energy loss in the metal. Because strongly emitting fluorophores were observed only at the nanogap, this provided a potential way for developing a high-contrast fluorescence imaging method. In addition, the fluorescence decay lifetime was determined using a time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) analyzer, and the spontaneous emission rate was enhanced >28-fold. This substrate provides a platform for a potentially high emission-rate, single-photon source in ambient conditions, and it sheds light on the effort to balance enhancement and energy loss in plasmonic materials.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the gold bowtie substrate covered with fluorophores. (b) Simulation of electric field around a single bowtie. (c) Fluorescence confocal imaging of a gold bowtie array coated with fluorophores. (d) Fluorescence intensity time trace of the single bowtie in (c). Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of gold nanorods. (b) Simulation of near field around a single nanorod. (c) Fluorescence imaging of SMD enhanced by nanorods. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2013, Wiley. 
Usually, an ultra-low analyte concentration down to the nano-mole level is necessary to perform SMD experiments. However, this condition is difficult to achieve in practice. The Michel Orrit group reported a plasmon-enhanced single-molecule fluorescence enhancement of up to 1100-fold.27 This PEF substrate shows excellent ability to enhance the emission process of fluorophores that initially exhibit weak emission. In this simple SMD experiment, they synthesized gold nanorods by a seed-mediated growth method and then coated them onto glass. Using a CCD imaging and time tracing strategy, they determined the counts per molecule to be about 2–3, and were able to gain a large enhancement of the single molecule. Specifically, rather than 1 nM, they used 100 nM CV molecules to successfully perform the SM experiments. We note that, in this work, the concentration of the CV molecules was higher than the concentration required to keep only one molecule in the focal range, but the higher molecule concentration is more valuable in practical analysis, in which the concentration cannot be arbitrarily reduced (Fig. 11).
To explore SMD with high-spatial resolution, Cang et al.76 have used the technique of single-molecule super-resolution optical fluorescence microscopy and reported the first direct measurement of single hotspots as small as 15 nm with an accuracy down to 1.2 nm. In the field of catalysis, Peng Chen and coworkers employed a series of Au rod@mSiO2 and monitored active catalysis sites in situ in individual nanoparticles.112 They spread the Au@mSiO2 on the surface of a quartz slide, placed it in a microfluidic reactor cell, and flowed the reactant solution through the cell, where the reaction of oxidative deacetylation of the Amplex Red (S molecule) to resorufin (P molecule) takes place. They found that when a P molecule is observed, intensity bursts appear in the time trajectory spectrum. The location of a single molecule can also be examined over a few pixels as a point spread function (PSF). With the electron-multiplying charge-coupled image method, the authors identified different catalytic activities at sub-particle resolution. They also used this concept to consider the mechanism of the Au rods' growth. They verified the reaction properties of the sites on the same facet, and found the reactivity to decrease gradually from the centre to the two ends of the nanorod. Hence, this single-molecule and super-resolution catalysis imaging strategy provides greater insight into nanoscale catalysis (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the probing reaction catalyzed by the silica coated gold nanorod. (b) TEM image of a single nanorod. (c) Fluorescence intensity of SMD as a PSF. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic diagram of the Au dimer formed using the DNA origami technique. The fluorophore is indicated by the red dot located on the origami pillar between the dimer spheres. (B) Simulations of the electric field around a single Au NP (left) and an Au NP dimer (right). (C) Simulations of emission intensity enhancement within the NP gap. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Joseph R. Lakowicz and coworkers used Cy5-labeled oligonucleotides to study single molecule behaviors.113 They utilized silver island films (SIFs) to enhance the fluorescence of Cy5 molecules that had been tagged on their double-stranded DNA and the ds-DNA acted as a spacer to maintain a certain distance between Cy5 and SIFs. They immersed the SIFs into solutions of ds-DNA, and then performed their experiment using a time-resolved confocal microscope. With fluorescence images and time traces of the molecular blinking behaviors, they confirmed that they had obtained single molecule fluorescence and the SIFs showed greater intensities than the electromagnetically inert glass substrate. Hence, they demonstrated that the energy transfer process from a single molecule to the metal surface can be investigated at the molecular scale.
To date, researchers have achieved high intensity enhancement and determined the possible mechanism of the chemical action and single molecular behavior. Future work should address the relevant mechanisms associated with these processes and the design of universal spectator fluorophores for application in many different physical processes and reactions.
4.2 Detection of DNA with PEF

4.2.1 PEF with DNA origami substrates. 
Due to the specificity of DNA in hybridization, DNA strands have been introduced as a tool for fabricating PEF architecture, particularly DNA origami. DNA origami is a molecular self-assembly technique for designing and building ultra-fine discrete nano objects with nucleic acids.114,115 When immobilized on a two- or three-dimensional origami structure, the interaction between plasmonic nanoparticles and fluorophores can be manipulated and investigated with nanoscale accuracy. In the work of the P. Tinnefeld group, the authors used DNA origami to precisely arrange Au NP dimers with different inter-particle gaps, and then manipulated the plasmonic hotspot to improve the plasmon-enhanced fluorescence.116 The length of a pillar-like DNA origami strand is up to 220 nm and Au NPs were modified on the origami pillar by hybridization of the DNA strands. Hence, one or two gold nanoparticles can be bound to DNA origami structures to functionalize a single fluorescence molecule nearby one Au NP or between the NPs. A maximum 117-fold enhancement can be obtained with 100 nm dimers. Moreover, binding or unbinding events on an Au dimer-immobilized DNA origami structure have been observed in PEF experiments. These cost-effective and versatile self-assembled plasmonic nanoantennas reveal excellent capability in DNA binding assays and offer a way to conduct SMD experiments in biological micromolar regimes.


4.2.2 Kinetics of DNA hybridization study with PEF. 
PEF provides a highly sensitive platform for analyzing DNA hybridization reactions. Knoll et al.117 used plasmon-enhanced fluorescence to investigate the kinetic parameters of DNA hybridization and mismatched DNA interactions. As shown in Fig. 14, a monolayer of binary thiol is assembled onto an Au substrate, and then a monolayer of streptavidin is introduced. Subsequently, DNA-probe oligonucleotides are coupled to the matrix through a biotin group. To generate a maximum fluorescence signal, additional 15-mer thymines in the DNA-probe oligonucleotides were used as spacers to ensure an optimum distance between fluorophores and the metallic surface. The hybridization of the complementary DNA species in solution to these surface-modified oligonucleotides couples the emitter into the plasmon mode. High sensitivity is obtained by quantifying the kinetics of the hybridization and the dissociation of diverse oligonucleotides, and then detecting DNA mutations. A similar approach was applied to investigate the interactions of DNA–DNA and PNA–DNA by the Knoll group.118 The authors combined fluorescence detection schemes with plasmon to achieve highly sensitive monitoring of the hybridization process of fluorophore-labeled oligonucleotides. They found that the kinetic parameters in association and dissociation processes, along with the affinity values of base-paired hybrids, can be measured.
 Fig. 14  Illustration of the multilayer architecture for the plasmon-enhanced fluorescence detection of hybridization processes. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2001, Elsevier. 


4.2.3 Probing the hybridization process of DNA with PEF. 
Specific single-stranded DNA detection by hybridization and the use of a complementary DNA-probe have been applied in medical, genetic disorder diagnosis, and forensic tests. Recent metal nanotechnology has paved a new avenue in DNA detection. Ag NPs and Au NPs have the unique ability to amplify Raman scattering and fluorescence signals via surface enhancement effects. Miller et al.119,120 used Ag NPs as a platform to remarkably amplify the signal for label-free fluorescence-based DNA detection. The use of nanostructured Ag substrates achieved a large (∼10-fold) enhancement in the fluorescence signal upon planar gold NP substrates for equivalent amounts of the analyte. In a related study, Tang Liang et al.120 developed an innovative gold nanorod (GNR) array biochip to systematically investigate localized surface plasmon resonance coupled fluorescence for signal amplification in molecular beacon detection. As shown in Fig. 15, the authors fabricated a plasmonic substrate by an ordered GNR assembly in a vertical standing array on a glass surface, and the exposed tips in the nanoarray collectively amplified the SPR signals of neighboring particles. A fluorophore-labeled hairpin probe was then attached to the GNR. Without the presence of the target DNA, the hairpin probe is in close contact with the metal surfaces, which results in a fluorescence-quenched state by a dominant Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) effect. The introduction of analyte DNA results in hybridization with the probe DNA and then the simultaneous unfolding of the DNA hairpin. It is found that the release of the attached fluorophore from the quenching region restores the emission intensity. Plasmon-mediated fluorescence depends on competition between quenching and enhancement by the metal nanostructures. Fluorescence enhancement with the gold nanoarray was reported to significantly lower the detection limit and result in plasmon-coupled enhancement in signal amplification for ultra-sensitive DNA analysis. The authors determined the detection limit to be 10 pM. These results promise as a new paradigm in the development of a high-throughput nanobiochip with superb sensitivity for proteomics, genomics, and molecular analysis. Moreover, GNRs can be synthesized to finely tune the LSPR band from the visible to the NIR region for sensing and imaging applications in this region.
 Fig. 15  Application of the ordered-GNR-array chip in probing DNA hybridization with PEF. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 

4.3 SHINEF

4.3.1 The principle of SHINEF. 
As pointed out in the introduction, by varying the molecule–nanoparticle distance a continuous transition from fluorescence enhancement to fluorescence quenching can be observed. The requirement of an optimum molecule–metal separation to achieve enhanced fluorescence is a necessary condition that is realized using a silica layer in the shell-isolated nanoparticle enhanced fluorescence (SHINEF) approach.22 Remarkably, the control of the shell thickness (discussed in Section 3.2.4), that empowers SHINEF, comes from the invention of shell-isolated nanoparticle enhanced Raman scattering (SHINERS),94 and for a recent review on this subject see Ding et al.21 Plasmon enhancement has expanded its versatility with the introduction of shell-isolated nanoparticles, and since SHINERS and SHINEF technologies can be seen as complementary, their combination in a dual mode could profit from the advantages of both techniques under similar conditions.121 The SHINEF discussion starts with suitable characterization and description of its basic properties. The most commonly used SHINs are the SiO2 coated nanoparticles (NP) of Au and Ag with the following properties:
(i) The thickness of the SiO2 shell can be controlled with nm precision,105 according to the application, to achieve efficient prevention of the quenching effect, and enhance the fluorescence signal.
(ii) The silica shell provides good dispersity of the SHINs in organic solvents and water for applications in solution.
(iii) The SiO2 shell protects the metal core from chemical reactivity with the analytes. In addition, it can effectively reduce the potential cytotoxicity of metal nanoparticles for applications in living cells.
(iv) The size and the shape of the metal core can also be optimized for specific applications. The work, so far, has concentrated around coated spheres and nanorods, but the door is open to a core of different shapes, that could lead to higher enhancement factors. Given the role of the nanoparticle scattering in the observed SHINEF, and knowing that for spheres of radius r, the scattering scales with r6, which grows very fast with increasing particle size, larger nanoparticles would produce higher enhancement. The caveat is that the size is limited by the quality of the dipole emission, and SHINEF efficiency increases with increasing core size to a point, after which the EF decreases. The size effect has been experimentally demonstrated for both SHINERS122 and SHINEF.123 Notably, the absorption cross-section varies as r3, and consequently, absorption is more important than scattering for smaller nanoparticles.
(v) SHIN nanoparticles can be tuned to ensure ideal dimensions for practical applications. In this respect the use of SHINs of different shapes and shell thickness can help to produce SHINEF in specific spectral regions, or target specific analytes in the visible or near infrared spectrum.
(vi) The SiO2 can be doped with a target fluorophore, as has been done with Oregon Green488 isothiocyanate (OG-488),124 to fabricate a doped silica shell of variable thickness. For OG-488, a fluorophore with a quantum yield higher than fluorescein, they report an EF of 35 fold on a gold core. On the other hand, for the gold core of different sizes (40, 60 and 80 nm), but with a silica shell of similar thickness (ca. 24 nm), the fluorescence emission of the nanoparticles increased with the Au core size.
SHINEF based on silica coating can be extended to other materials, i.e., to coat Ag, Au or Cu with uniform ultrathin shells of oxides such as Al2O3 and MnO2, for specific applications.125 The challenge is to break the limitations of SHINEF substrates and fabricate shells of appropriate materials of thickness that can be controlled down to nm scale without any pinhole. For instance, the synthesis of an ultrathin and compact MnO2 shell expands the applications of SHINEF (or SHINERS) to alkaline systems, where SiO2 or Al2O3 shells can easily be dissolved.


4.3.2 SHINEF + SHINERS. 
The dual-mode SHINERS–SHINEF is an emerging analytical technique expected to be a useful tool with potential applications in biomedical fields.121 The dual-mode was used first to demonstrate with far field measurements in aqueous solution that by collecting SHINERS and SHINEF from the same molecular system, it is possible to confirm that the scattering scales as the fourth power of the local field enhancement while the fluorescence is proportional to the square of the local field enhancement.63 The latter is illustrated in Fig. 16, showing the SHINERS+SHINEF spectra of crystal violet in solution, excited with the 514.5 nm laser line.
 Fig. 16  SHINERS + SHINEF spectra of crystal violet in solution, excited with the 514.5 nm laser line. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2012, Wiley. 
The dual-mode applications, most likely, will require a specific adaptation of the SHINs to fit the task at hand. For instance, Lee et al. developed a nanoparticle that they call (SERS)-fluorescence dual modal nanoprobes (DMNPs),126 a nanostructure to be used as a probe for novel biomedical imaging. The DMNP was fabricated starting from 40 nm Au colloid. A Raman reporter is adsorbed and the first inner silica encapsulates the SERS nanoprobe. Then a fluorescent dye-labeled nanoprobe is added with a second outer silica encapsulation.
Zhang et al. developed a bifunctional nanostructured ensemble of quantum dot (QD)-decorated silica coated nanoparticles.127 Again an embedded Raman reporter, p-aminothiophenol (PATP), is introduced with a surface coverage of the Ag colloid (ca. 60 nm in diameter) of about 50% enough to yield strong SERS signals, and subsequently by coupling 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTMS) with a surface coverage of 50% to make the Ag NP surfaces vitreophilic for coating with a complete silica shell. Finally, CdS QDs are covalently attached to the surfaces of the doped SHINs. The silica shell spacer is optimized (about 9 nm) for maximum emission. The specialized SHINs are shown in Fig. 17 adapted from ref. 127. SHINs with a core of Au–Ag alloy have also been successfully tested.128 SHIN nanoparticles are fabricated by a chemical method, and the LSPR peak is controlled by adjusting the metal component of the alloy and shell thickness. SHINs with a Au–Ag alloy core were also fabricated with different silica shell thickness ranging from 2 to 35 nm.
 Fig. 17  TEM images of Ag/PATP@SiO2 with various shell thicknesses: (a) bare Ag; (b) 6 nm; (c) 9 nm; (d) 15 nm; (e) 35 nm; and (f) 60 nm. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright, 2012. Royal Society of Chemistry. 
SHINEF is now a versatile analytical technique that can be used in solution, in aqueous or organic solvents, as well as on solid surfaces. Au-SHIN nanoparticles were carefully chosen for spraying studies on Langmuir–Blodgett monolayers and Layer by Layer samples given fluorescence enhancement for high and low quantum yield fluorophores.129 In the search to maximize the SHINEF enhancement factor, an increase in emission intensity was first confirmed with shell-isolated nanoparticles of gold of about 100 nm in diameter, when, under the same conditions, they were compared with Au-SHINs of about 40 nm, for experiments in solution and on Langmuir–Blodgett films.123 The findings are in agreement with the fact that for larger Au-SHINs, an important contributing factor comes from the increase in nanoparticle scattering with the core size of the nanoparticle. The enhancement factor can be further increased by aggregation of Au-SHINs in solution. It was demonstrated for crystal violet solutions and SHINs, with the addition of different volumes of NaCl solution to promote SHIN aggregation. The SHINEF results for large Au-SHINs are shown in Fig. 18. The non-aggregated large Au-SHINs give an EF of 47-fold, whereas the aggregated large Au-SHINs give an impressive EF of 155-fold. The results are supported by computations of local field enhancement of Au-SHIN dimers, a hint to hotspot contributions.
 Fig. 18  SHINEF of CV in solution. The inset reveals the TEM image of a single large Au SHIN. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 

5. Conclusion and perspectives
5.1 Conclusion
Plasmon-mediated fluorescence provides advanced scenarios for nanoscale detection and imaging and is becoming a major spectroscopic tool in biological and materials science. In particular, the field is expanding by the inclusion of weak emitters and plasmonic design in a broad region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The theory will continue to probe deeper into the interactions between localized surface plasmons and nearby molecules, where the final objective is to understand and control the communications between plasmonic nanomaterials and individual quantum emitters. It is evident from the ongoing research that the applicability of these phenomena is penetrating biological, chemical and physical science with a big impact on ultra-sensitivity and super-resolution imaging. In particular, the radiative decay process is found to be extraordinarily accelerated via the Purcell effect. In the present review, we have focused on some recent developments in the field of PEF, that given the breadth of the field cannot be comprehensive, and we apologize for any omission of important work. Experimentally, LSPR can be tailored by designing plasmon-enhanced nanostructures of different architecture and materials providing great opportunity and potential applications including sensors. Particularly, plasmon-enhanced fluorescence with shell-isolated nanostructures will open a wealth of flexible techniques in ultra-sensitive spectroscopic analysis.
5.2 Perspectives of PEF

5.2.1 PEF in carbon nano-materials and 2D semiconductor materials. 
Due to its excellent spectroscopic properties, PEF has exceptional prospects to be used with carbon dots and two-dimensional (2D) semiconductor materials, particularly in optoelectronics. Carbon dots and 2D materials provide textbook examples to illustrate the power of PEF. Over the past decade, carbon dots and 2D materials have attracted much attention in the fields of biological imaging and nanophotonic devices.130,131
Kim and coworkers prepared a novel solar cell with carbon-dot-supported Ag nanoparticles that takes full advantage of the coupling of plasmons and excitons to improve the performance of optoelectronic devices. In the design of this cell, the plasmon resonance between silver nanoparticles and carbon dots enables additional light absorption, leading to increased power conversion efficiency from 7.53% to 8.31% compared with control devices.32 Based on these results, PEF in carbon dots could be a versatile and effective strategy for realizing better optoelectronic device performance. 2D atomic layer materials, such as thin film semiconductors and graphene, currently exhibit poor light emission and absorption and would also greatly benefit from electromagnetic enhancement in their optical processes, as determined by their nanostructures and physical properties. To address the problems of poor light absorption and emission, the Koray Aydin group effectively enhanced the photoluminescence (PL) of MoS2 by CVD over a large area by plasmonic coupling with silver nanoparticle arrays, as shown in Fig. 19.132 A comparison of the intensities of light emissions before and after modification by nanodisc arrays reveals that the light emission from large-area monolayer MoS2 using plasmonic silver nanodisc arrays enhanced PL up to 12-fold, thus providing a valid approach for boosting light interaction with newly emerging low-dimensional materials. In addition, it shows that perfect plasmonic nanostructures coupled with incident wavelength and emission of light have great potential for application in high-efficiency optoelectronic devices. Graphene, with its unusually high electron mobility, atomic thickness, broadband optical absorption, and unique flexibility, has been a popular and excellent research candidate. However, it possesses the same imperfections as other atomic layer materials with respect to light absorption and emission, which seriously hinders its optical applications. Resolving these problems has been a challenge for scientists. Now, it is possible to modify the surface of graphene with fluorescent group blocks via noncovalent functionalization to enhance the light–graphene interaction.133 Although research in the plasmon used in graphene has a long way to go, it has the potential to greatly broaden optoelectrical applications in the future.
 Fig. 19  Enhanced PL in plasmonic array/MoS2 heterostructures. (a) Schematic diagram of plasmonic/MoS2 heterostructures. (b) PL intensity comparison of selected points in each array. The inset shows the cross-section of the plasmonic/MoS2 heterostructure. (c) SEM image of fabricated nanodisc arrays. The diameter of the base unit in each array is indicated above. The scale bar is 25 μm. (d) Corresponding integrated PL map of the area displayed in panel (b). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 


5.2.2 PEF with ultra-high spatial resolution. 
Due to the limitations associated with optical diffraction, the maximum lateral resolution of optical microscopy is estimated to be about λ/2 (λ, the wavelength of light). The advent of scanning near-field microscopy (SNOM) overcame this shortcoming, achieving a resolution approaching the size of the tip. Since being introduced, SNOM has been used in fluorescence imaging with nanometer-scale resolution134 and even single molecule resolution.135 The first imaging of single molecules and dipole orientations at room temperature was achieved by Eric Betzig using near-field scanning optical microscopy.136
To explore the distance dependence effect in fluorescence, PEF with SNOM is an appropriate choice. When the fluorophore is close to a metal nanostructure, the localized electromagnetic field enhancement can enhance its excitation, radiation, and non-radiation rates. Lukas Novotny's group experimentally and theoretically investigated the relation between the fluorescence rate and its distance to a gold nanoparticle modified on the end of an optical fiber attached. The authors first experimentally revealed the transition from emission enhancement to quenching by varying these distances.49Fig. 13 shows the fluorescence rate as a function of gold NP-to-surface gap z for a vertically oriented emitter. The maximum fluorescence enhancement occurred at 5 nm. With this technique, a fluorescence image of membrane proteins can also be obtained.137
Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) is scanning probe microscopy (SPM)-based Raman spectroscopy, and can simultaneously obtain morphology and chemical information at a spatial resolution down to a single molecule, and even the inner molecular structure and conformation of an individual molecule at sub-nanometer resolution.138,139 As shown in Fig. 20c and d, chemical visualization of an individual meso-tetrakis(3,5-di-tertiarybutylphenyl)-porphyrin (H2TBPP) molecule has been achieved with scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM)-based TERS by Dong's group.140 However, to scan a single molecule with the STM technique, the distance between the tip end and the molecule needs to be kept within the tunnelling region. As a result, the fluorescence intensity is strongly quenched due to the approaching metal tip and the metal substrate. Hence, SM fluorescence imaging with sub-nanometer resolution is difficult as compared with TERS. Recently, a breakthrough of scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM)-induced luminescence in ultra-high-vacuum conditions has been reported by Dong and co-workers.138 In virtue of the ultra-high spatial resolution in STML, the visualization of coherent dipole–dipole coupling has been realized between a few zinc-phthalocyanine molecules. This will be of great help for studying intermolecular interactions at a molecular level with PEF. On the other hand, similar to SHINEF, an ultra-thin dielectric shell coated on the tip is predicted to avoid the quenching effect but maintain the excellent plasmonic property, which has been proved by shell-isolated tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SITERS).38 Li et al. are currently extending this strategy to new scanning probe microscopy tip structures for shell-isolated tip-enhanced fluorescence spectroscopy. We can expect that, along with the high emission property of the fluorophore, PEF with a shell-isolated tip will definitely facilitate surface analysis at ultra-high spatial resolutions, such as sub-nanometer fluorescence imaging, characterizing defects in 2D materials and identifying active sites in catalysts.
 Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of the experimental setup. The inset shows an SEM image of an Au NP attached to the end of an optical fiber. (b) Emission rate as a function of Au NP-to-surface distance for a vertically oriented molecule (red curve: simulated result, dotted line: experimental result). The horizontal dashed line denotes the background in the experiment. (c) Schematic diagram of STM-based TERS. (d) Chemical imaging of a single H2TBPP molecule on the Ag(111) surface with TERS. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. Panels (c and d) are reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 


5.2.3 PEF with ultra-high time resolution. 
Ordinary fluorescence or phosphorescence occurs in timescales of nanoseconds to milliseconds. However, in the presence of a plasmonic nanoantenna, both the radiative and nonradiative decays of emitters are accelerated, and the fluorescence lifetime is reduced to hundreds of picoseconds or even shorter.141 The development of ultra-high time-resolved fluorescence methods has great potential for investigating ultra-fast spontaneous emission processes. The application of PEF to nanoparticles has great potential for achieving a large Purcell factor at room temperature.141–143 Particularly, with the highly confined optic field in nanogaps, the Purcell factor is theoretically predicted to be more than 106, which implies a lifetime shorter than ∼100 femtoseconds.144 Hence, it is a remarkable challenge to directly measure ultra-fast emission processes.
Time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) is a well-established time-domain data acquisition method for determining the lifetime of an emission process and is favoured in PEF investigations.13,77,142,143,145,146 In principle, in TCSPC, the amount of detected photons is tuned to be less than one per laser pulse. The corresponding arrival time of the photon is recorded and stored to build up a photon distribution, which denotes the waveform of decay time. As illustrated in Fig. 21a, the height in the histogram represents the number of photons while the x axis is the time difference.13,146 However, due to the detection limit of electronic devices, the typical time resolution is 10–30 ps for the TCSPC technique. In the work of the Moerner group, the fluorescence lifetime of TPQDI molecules close to gold bowtie nanostructures was measured by the TCSPC technique. As shown in Fig. 14b, magenta and green curves denote the lifetime of dyes in the absence and presence of the gold bowtie nanostructure, in which the lifetime is 275 and 78 ps, respectively. While the excitation polarization is parallel or perpendicular to the long axis of the gold bowtie, the lifetime is shorter than the instrument response function (IRF, ∼10 ps). Hence, a higher time-resolution is urgent for the ultra-fast spontaneous emission in PEF. On the other hand, introducing a plasmonic nanostructure to enhance the spontaneous emission rate (Purcell effect) has provided an effective approach for making fundamental investigations of light–matter interaction and has great significance in the field of nanophotonic engineering, such as the potential application of a single photon source at room temperature.147 Ultra-high time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy will also facilitate an in-depth understanding of nano-optics in plasmonic nanocavities.
 Fig. 21  (a) Principle of the TCSPC technique. (b) Fluorescence lifetime of TPQDI measured with the TCSPC technique. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2005, Springer. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. 

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the NSFC (21522508, 21427813, and 21521004), “111” Project (B16029 and B17027), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (20720150039), and the Thousand Youth Talents Plan of China.
Notes and references
A. M. Glass, P. F. Liao, J. G. Bergman and D. H. Olson, Opt. Lett., 1980, 5, 368–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Weitz, S. Garoff, C. D. Hanson, T. J. Gramila and J. I. Gersten, J. Lumin., 1981, 24–25, 83–86 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Chen, I. Davoli, G. Ritchie and E. Burstein, Surf. Sci., 1980, 101, 363–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gersten and A. Nitzan, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 75, 1139–1152 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wokaun, H. P. Lutz, A. P. King, U. P. Wild and R. R. Ernst, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 509–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1985, 57, 783–826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fleischmann, P. J. Hendra and A. J. McQuillan, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1974, 26, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Albrecht and J. A. Creighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1977, 99, 5215–5217 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Jeanmaire and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 84, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .

          S. A. Maier, Plasmonics: fundamentals and applications, Springer Science + Business Media,  2007 Search PubMed .

          E. C. Le Ru and P. G. Etchegoin, Principles of Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (and related plasmonic effects), Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2009 Search PubMed .

          R. Aroca, Surface-enhanced Vibrational Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2006 Search PubMed .

Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, ed. J. Lakowicz, Springer, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
W. Y. Rao, Q. Li, Y. Z. Wang, T. Li and L. J. Wu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2783–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Geddes and J. Lakowicz, J. Fluoresc., 2002, 12, 121–129 CrossRef .
G. W. Lu, T. Y. Zhang, W. Q. Li, L. Hou, J. Liu and Q. H. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15822–15828 CAS .
P. Albella, R. A. de la Osa, F. Moreno and S. A. Maier, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 524–529 CrossRef CAS .

          P. H. B. Aoki, C. J. L. Constantino, O. N. Oliveira Jr and R. F. Aroca, Recent Progress in Colloid and Surface Chemistry with Biological Applications, American Chemical Society,  2015, vol. 1215, ch. 14, pp. 269–301 Search PubMed .
T. Schmid, L. Opilik, C. Blum and R. Zenobi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5940–5954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hartschuh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8178–8191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Ding, J. Yi, J. F. Li, B. Ren, D. Y. Wu, R. Panneerselvam and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1 CAS .
A. R. Guerrero and R. F. Aroca, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 665–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mishra, B. L. Mali, J. Karolin, A. I. Dragan and C. D. Geddes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19538–19544 RSC .
E. Eltzov, D. Prilutsky, A. Kushmaro, R. S. Marks and C. D. Geddes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 083901–083903 CrossRef .
M. Weisenberg, Y. Zhang and C. D. Geddes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 133103 CrossRef .
J. D. Flynn, B. L. Haas and J. S. Biteen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20512–20517 CAS .
H. Yuan, S. Khatua, P. Zijlstra, M. Yorulmaz and M. Orrit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1217–1221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Martin, B. R. Srijanto, C. P. Collier, T. Vosch and C. I. Richards, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 6719–6727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ramírez-Maureira, V. Vargas C, A. Riveros, P. J. G. Goulet and I. O. Osorio-Román, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 151, 351–356 CrossRef .
A. J. Meixner, R. Jager, S. Jager, A. Brauer, K. Scherzinger, J. Fulmes, S. Z. Krockhaus, D. A. Gollmer, D. P. Kern and M. Fleischer, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 184, 321–337 RSC .
C. Y. Li, Y. H. Zhu, X. Q. Zhang, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1765–1768 RSC .
H. Choi, S. J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J. W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J. R. Jeong, I. W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B. S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732–738 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Thrall, A. Preska Steinberg, X. Wu and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26238–26247 CAS .
S. Impellizzeri, S. Simoncelli, G. K. Hodgson, A. E. Lanterna, C. D. McTiernan, F. M. Raymo, P. F. Aramendia and J. C. Scaiano, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7281–7287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mandal and S. Sharma, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 65, 537–552 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahn, D. Rourke and W. Park, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 033001–033024 CrossRef .
J. A. Webb and R. Bardhan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2502–2530 RSC .
C. Y. Li, M. Meng, S. C. Huang, L. Li, S. R. Huang, S. Chen, L. Y. Meng, R. Panneerselvam, S. J. Zhang, B. Ren, Z. L. Yang, J. F. Li and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13784–13787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 442–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Spackova, P. Wrobel, M. Bockova and J. Homola, Proc. IEEE, 2016, 104, 2380–2408 CrossRef .
S. M. Hamidi and M. Zamani, Opt. Eng., 2015, 54, 107104–107109 CrossRef .
A. Farhang, B. Abasahl, S. Dutta-Gupta, A. Lovera, P. Mandracci, E. Descrovi and O. J. F. Martin, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2013, 84, 033107–033113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khatua and M. Orrit, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8340–8343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Forestiere, Y. Y. He, R. Wang, R. M. Kirby and L. Dal Negro, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 68–78 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. O. Pinchuk, J. M. McMahon, S. Li, L. K. Ausman, A. L. Atkinson and G. C. Schatz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1710–1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Nascimento and A. E. DePrince, J. Chem. Phys., 2015, 143, 214104–214112 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Tame, K. R. McEnery, S. K. Ozdemir, J. Lee, S. A. Maier and M. S. Kim, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
J. Asselin, P. Legros, A. Gregoire and D. Boudreau, Plasmonics, 2016, 11, 1369–1376 CrossRef CAS .
P. Anger, P. Bharadwaj and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 113002 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Drexhage, H. Kuhn and F. P. Schafer, Ber. Bunsen-Ges., 1968, 72, 329 Search PubMed .
R. R. Chance, A. Prock and R. Silbey, Adv. Chem. Phys., 1978, 37, 1–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, M. F. Arndt, S. Efrima, D. H. Waldeck and C. B. Harris, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 86, 6540–6549 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aslan, J. R. Lakowicz, H. Szmacinski and C. D. Geddes, J. Fluoresc., 2004, 14, 677–679 CrossRef CAS .
R. Aroca, G. J. Kovacs, C. A. Jennings, R. O. Loutfy and P. S. Vincett, Langmuir, 1988, 4, 518–521 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saini, G. Srinivas and B. Bagchi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1817–1832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Dragan, E. S. Bishop, J. R. Casas-Finet, R. J. Strouse, J. McGivney, M. A. Schenerman and C. D. Geddes, Plasmonics, 2012, 7, 739–744 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Lichtman and J.-A. Conchello, Nat. Methods, 2005, 2, 910–919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Dickson, A. B. Cubitt, R. Y. Tsien and W. E. Moerner, Nature, 1997, 388, 355–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schena, D. Shalon, R. W. Davis and P. O. Brown, Science, 1995, 270, 467–470 CAS .
S. W. Hell, S. J. Sahl, M. Bates, X. W. Zhuang, R. Heintzmann, M. J. Booth, J. Bewersdorf, G. Shtengel, H. Hess, P. Tinnefeld, A. Honigmann, S. Jakobs, I. Testa, L. Cognet, B. Lounis, H. Ewers, S. J. Davis, C. Eggeling, D. Klenerman, K. I. Willig, G. Vicidomini, M. Castello, A. Diaspro and T. Cordes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 443001–443035 CrossRef .
F. Emmanuel and G. Samuel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 013001 CrossRef .
P. Albella, F. Moreno, J. M. Saiz and F. Gonzalez, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 12872–12879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Guerrero, Y. Zhang and R. F. Aroca, Small, 2012, 8, 2964–2967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Jensen, M. L. Duval, K. L. Kelly, A. A. Lazarides, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9846–9853 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Mayer and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3828–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tam, G. P. Goodrich, B. R. Johnson and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 496–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Fu, M. H. Chowdhury and J. R. Lakowicz, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, K. Munechika and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 690–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, J. Zhang and J. R. Lakowicz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5540–5541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Le Ru, P. G. Etchegoin, J. Grand, N. Felidj, J. Aubard and G. Levi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16076–16079 CAS .
R. F. Aroca, G. Y. Teo, H. Mohan, A. R. Guerrero, P. Albella and F. Moreno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20419–20424 CAS .
R. Gill and E. C. Le Ru, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16366–16372 RSC .
M. R. Gartia, J. P. Eichorst, R. M. Clegg and G. L. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 023118–023122 CrossRef .
M. Moskovits and D. H. Jeong, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 397, 91–95 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, L. Y. Meng, H. Y. Shan, J. F. Li, L. H. Qian, C. T. Williams, Z. L. Yang and Z. Q. Tian, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 581–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cang, A. Labno, C. Lu, X. Yin, M. Liu, C. Gladden, Y. Liu and X. Zhang, Nature, 2011, 469, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kinkhabwala, Z. Yu, S. Fan, Y. Avlasevich, K. Muellen and W. E. Moerner, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 654–657 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Zhou, F. Ding, H. Chen, W. Ding, W. H. Zhang and S. Y. Chou, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4489–4495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Zhang, F. Ding, W. D. Li, Y. X. Wang, J. Hu and S. Y. Chou, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 225301–225309 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Furtaw, J. P. Anderson, L. R. Middendorf and G. R. Bashford, Plasmonics, 2014, 9, 27–34 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, H. F. Yuan, G. Lu, S. Rocha, M. Orrit, J. Hofkens and H. Uji-I, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2455–2466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ritchie, C. Chen and E. Burstein, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 1980, 25, 259–260 Search PubMed .
W. L. Barnes, J. Mod. Opt., 1998, 45, 661–699 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Liz-Marzán, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 32–41 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ung, L. M. Liz-Marzán and P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3740–3748 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, L. Gearheart and C. J. Murphy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Sau and C. J. Murphy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8648–8649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chumanov, K. Sokolov, B. W. Gregory and T. M. Cotton, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 9466–9471 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Fromm, A. Sundaramurthy, P. J. Schuck, G. Kino and W. E. Moerner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 957–961 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wientjes, J. Renger, A. G. Curto, R. Cogdell and N. F. van Hulst, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5 CAS .
D. Punj, M. Mivelle, S. B. Moparthi, T. S. van Zanten, H. Rigneault, N. F. van Hulst, M. F. Garcia-Parajo and J. Wenger, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 512–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Li, Y. Huang, Y. Ding, Z. Yang, S. Li, X. Zhou, F. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Zhou, D. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nature, 2010, 464, 392–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ayala-Orozco, J. G. Liu, M. W. Knight, Y. Wang, J. K. Day, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2926–2933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ritchie and E. Burstein, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 24, 4843–4846 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Biochem., 2005, 337, 171–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Lakowicz, Y. Shen, S. D'Auria, J. Malicka, J. Fang, Z. Gryczynski and I. Gryczynski, Anal. Biochem., 2002, 301, 261–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Lee and D. Meisel, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 3391–3395 CrossRef CAS .
G. Frens, Nature, 1973, 241, 20–22 CAS .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
S. J. Oldenburg, R. D. Averitt, S. L. Westcott and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
P.-P. Fang, J.-F. Li, Z.-L. Yang, L.-M. Li, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2008, 39, 1679–1687 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, X. D. Tian, S. B. Li, J. R. Anema, Z. L. Yang, Y. Ding, Y. F. Wu, Y. M. Zeng, Q. Z. Chen, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang and Z. Q. Tian, Nat. Protoc., 2013, 8, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Li, J. C. Dong, X. Jin, S. Chen, R. Panneerselvam, A. V. Rudnev, Z. L. Yang, J. F. Li, T. Wandlowski and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7648–7651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Li, S.-Y. Chen, Y.-L. Zheng, S.-P. Chen, R. Panneerselvam, S. Chen, Q.-C. Xu, Y.-X. Chen, Z.-L. Yang, D.-Y. Wu, J.-F. Li and Z.-Q. Tian, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 199, 388–393 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Li, Z.-W. Yang, J.-C. Dong, T. Ganguly and J.-F. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1601598 CrossRef PubMed .
W. E. Moerner and L. Kador, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1989, 62, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kulzer, T. Xia and M. Orrit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 854–866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Lakowicz, K. Ray, M. Chowdhury, H. Szmacinski, Y. Fu, J. Zhang and K. Nowaczyk, Analyst, 2008, 133, 1308–1346 RSC .
X. Zhou, N. M. Andoy, G. Liu, E. Choudhary, K.-S. Han, H. Shen and P. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 237–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu and J. R. Lakowicz, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6238–6245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, X. Duan and N. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6 Search PubMed .
J. J. Funke and H. Dietz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 11, 47–52 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. Acuna, F. M. Möller, P. Holzmeister, S. Beater, B. Lalkens and P. Tinnefeld, Science, 2012, 338, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liebermann, W. Knoll, P. Sluka and R. Herrmann, Colloids Surf., A, 2000, 169, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kambhampati, P. E. Nielsen and W. Knoll, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2001, 16, 1109–1118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-I. Peng, C. M. Strohsahl, K. E. Leach, T. D. Krauss and B. L. Miller, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2265–2273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mei and L. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 633–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-P. Fang, X. Lu, H. Liu and Y. Tong, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2015, 66, 103–117 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Tian, B.-J. Liu, J.-F. Li, Z.-L. Yang, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2013, 44, 994–998 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Camacho, P. H. B. Aoki, P. Albella, O. N. Oliveira, C. J. L. Constantino and R. F. Aroca, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 20530–20535 CAS .
C. Li and J. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2013, 112, 169–172 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Lin, V. Uzayisenga, J.-F. Li, P.-P. Fang, D.-Y. Wu, B. Ren and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2012, 43, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. Chon, S.-Y. Yoon, E. K. Lee, S.-I. Chang, D. W. Lim and J. Choo, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 124–129 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Kong, Z. Lv, S. Zhou and X. Du, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2198–2204 RSC .
C. Zhang, Q. Han, C. Li, M. Zhang, L. Yan and H. Zheng, Appl. Opt., 2016, 55, 9131–9136 CrossRef PubMed .
I. O. Osorio-Román, A. R. Guerrero, P. Albella and R. F. Aroca, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10246–10251 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Strauss, J. T. Margraf, C. Dolle, B. Butz, T. J. Nacken, J. Walter, W. Bauer, W. Peukert, E. Spiecker, T. Clark and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17308–17316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Butun, S. Tongay and K. Aydin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2700–2704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Le Liepvre, P. Du, D. Kreher, F. Mathevet, A.-J. Attias, C. Fiorini-Debuisschert, L. Douillard and F. Charra, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 2291–2296 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Zhang, L.-G. Chen, P. Lv, H.-Y. Gao, S.-J. Wei, Z.-C. Dong and J. G. Hou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 223118 CrossRef .
H. G. Frey, S. Witt, K. Felderer and R. Guckenberger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 200801 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Betzig and R. J. Chichester, Science, 1993, 262, 1422–1425 CAS .
C. Höppener and L. Novotny, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 642–646 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Zhang, Y.-J. Yu, Y.-M. Kuang, L. Zhang, Q.-S. Meng, Y. Luo, J.-L. Yang, Z.-C. Dong and J. G. Hou, Nature, 2016, 531, 623–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Chiang, N. Jiang, D. V. Chulhai, E. A. Pozzi, M. C. Hersam, L. Jensen, T. Seideman and R. P. Van Duyne, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4114–4120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. C. Dong, S. Jiang, C. Zhang, L. G. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Liao, J. Aizpurua, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, Nature, 2013, 498, 82–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelton, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 427–435 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Akselrod, C. Argyropoulos, T. B. Hoang, C. Ciracì, C. Fang, J. Huang, D. R. Smith and M. H. Mikkelsen, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 835–840 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Russell, T.-L. Liu, S. Cui and E. L. Hu, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 459–462 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chikkaraddy, B. de Nijs, F. Benz, S. J. Barrow, O. A. Scherman, E. Rosta, A. Demetriadou, P. Fox, O. Hess and J. J. Baumberg, Nature, 2016, 535, 127–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Berezin and S. Achilefu, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2641–2684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Becker and A. Bergmann, in Reviews in Fluorescence 2005, ed. C. D. Geddes and J. R. Lakowicz, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2005, pp. 77–108 Search PubMed .
B. Lounis and W. E. Moerner, Nature, 2000, 407, 491–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Jian-Feng Li
	Jian-Feng Li is a Professor of Chemistry at Xiamen University. He received a BSc in chemistry from Zhejiang University, and a PhD in chemistry from Xiamen University. Professor Li is the principal inventor of shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SHINERS). His research interests include surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, surface-enhanced fluorescence, core–shell nanostructures, surface plasmon resonance, electrochemistry and surface catalysis.

Chao-Yu Li
	Chao-Yu Li is now pursuing his PhD degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhong-Qun Tian and Prof. Jian-Feng Li at Xiamen University. His research is focused on spectroelectrochemistry, synthesis of plasmonic nanostructures, and plasmon-enhanced single-molecule spectroscopy.

Ricardo F. Aroca
	Dr Ricardo Aroca is Professor Emeritus in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Windsor, and Adjunct Professor in the Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Chile. In 2003 he was honoured with the Gerhard Herzberg Award in recognition of outstanding achievement in the science of spectroscopy. In 2005 he was elected Fellow of the Chemical Institute of Canada. Since 2009, he has also been a Member Correspondent of the Chilean Academy of Sciences. His research is on plasmon enhanced spectroscopy.

 	Fig. 1  Jablonski diagram showing the electronic and vibrational energy levels of an organic dye molecule. Reproduced with permission.57 Copyright 2005, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cartoon of simplified plasmon enhanced fluorescence.	 

 	Fig. 3  Extinction spectra of periodic particle arrays in different solvents. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society.	 

R6G	4.11	0.90	0.219	0.992	20.5
Fluorescein	4.38	0.95	0.182	0.991	100
Acridine orange	2.04	0.29	0.443	0.753	8.34
Rhodamine-B	1.67	0.41	0.104	0.857	5.13
Eosin-Y	1.31	0.32	0.277	0.845	4.3

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of nano-antenna-dots array. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) AFM image of SIFs on quartz. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2002, Elsevier. (b and c) SEM image of the Ag colloid coated substrate and the corresponding extinction spectra, respectively, when immersed in (i) benzene; (ii) hexane; (iii) 2-propanol (dotted line); (iv) water; (v) air. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 1995, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of (a) gold bowtie nanoantennas on ITO slide and (b) ‘antenna-in-box’ nanoaperture. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM images of (a) Au nanospheres, (b) nanorods, (c) nanocubes, and (d) Ag nanocubes. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.104 Copyright 2008, Wiley. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. Panel (c) is reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2002, American Chemical Society. Panel (d) is reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2002, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of (a) Ag@SiO2 prepared by the Stöber method; (b) Au nanoshell initially obtained; (c) Au nanoshell obtained after shell growth is complete; (d) Au nanomatryoshka; (e) to (h) shell-isolated Au nanosphere, Au nanocube, Au nanorod, and Ag nanosphere, respectively. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 1998, American Chemical Society. Panels (b and c) are reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 1998, Elsevier. Panel (d) is reproduced with permission.95 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Panel (e) is reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. Panels (f and g) are reproduced with permission.105 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. Panel (h) is reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  The schematic diagram of the synthesis of Au SHINs and the application in SHINEF.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the gold bowtie substrate covered with fluorophores. (b) Simulation of electric field around a single bowtie. (c) Fluorescence confocal imaging of a gold bowtie array coated with fluorophores. (d) Fluorescence intensity time trace of the single bowtie in (c). Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of gold nanorods. (b) Simulation of near field around a single nanorod. (c) Fluorescence imaging of SMD enhanced by nanorods. Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2013, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of the probing reaction catalyzed by the silica coated gold nanorod. (b) TEM image of a single nanorod. (c) Fluorescence intensity of SMD as a PSF. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic diagram of the Au dimer formed using the DNA origami technique. The fluorophore is indicated by the red dot located on the origami pillar between the dimer spheres. (B) Simulations of the electric field around a single Au NP (left) and an Au NP dimer (right). (C) Simulations of emission intensity enhancement within the NP gap. Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 14  Illustration of the multilayer architecture for the plasmon-enhanced fluorescence detection of hybridization processes. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2001, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Application of the ordered-GNR-array chip in probing DNA hybridization with PEF. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  SHINERS + SHINEF spectra of crystal violet in solution, excited with the 514.5 nm laser line. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2012, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  TEM images of Ag/PATP@SiO2 with various shell thicknesses: (a) bare Ag; (b) 6 nm; (c) 9 nm; (d) 15 nm; (e) 35 nm; and (f) 60 nm. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright, 2012. Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  SHINEF of CV in solution. The inset reveals the TEM image of a single large Au SHIN. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Enhanced PL in plasmonic array/MoS2 heterostructures. (a) Schematic diagram of plasmonic/MoS2 heterostructures. (b) PL intensity comparison of selected points in each array. The inset shows the cross-section of the plasmonic/MoS2 heterostructure. (c) SEM image of fabricated nanodisc arrays. The diameter of the base unit in each array is indicated above. The scale bar is 25 μm. (d) Corresponding integrated PL map of the area displayed in panel (b). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Illustration of the experimental setup. The inset shows an SEM image of an Au NP attached to the end of an optical fiber. (b) Emission rate as a function of Au NP-to-surface distance for a vertically oriented molecule (red curve: simulated result, dotted line: experimental result). The horizontal dashed line denotes the background in the experiment. (c) Schematic diagram of STM-based TERS. (d) Chemical imaging of a single H2TBPP molecule on the Ag(111) surface with TERS. Panels (a and b) are reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. Panels (c and d) are reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Principle of the TCSPC technique. (b) Fluorescence lifetime of TPQDI measured with the TCSPC technique. Panel (a) is reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2005, Springer. Panel (b) is reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
