Electronic structure modifications induced by increased molecular complexity: from triphenylamine to m-MTDATA  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CP02423A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CP02423A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 17959-17970Electronic structure modifications induced by increased molecular complexity: from triphenylamine to m-MTDATA

        
          
            T. 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            I. E. 
            Brumboiu
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            V. 
            Lanzilotto
          
        
      ae, 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Grazioli
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Guarnaccio
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            F. O. L. 
            Johansson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Coreno
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            de Simone
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Santagata
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            B. 
            Brena
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            C. 
            Puglia
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: Carla.Puglia@physics.uu.se
bSchool of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology (BIT), Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: Teng.ZHANG@bit.edu.cn
cDepartment of Theoretical Chemistry and Biology, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm 10691, Sweden
dDepartment of Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
eDepartment of Chemistry, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, I-00185, Rome, Italy
fIOM-CNR, Laboratorio TASC, Sincrotrone Trieste, Basovizza, Trieste, Italy
gISM-CNR, Tito Scalo (Pz) and Trieste LD2 Unit, Italy
Received 
      29th April 2019
    , Accepted 25th July 2019First published on 26th July 2019AbstractThe starburst π-conjugated molecule 4,4′,4′′-tris(N-3-methylphenyl-N-phenyl-amino)triphenylamine (C57H48N4, m-MTDATA), based on triphenylamine (TPA) building blocks, is widely used in optoelectronic devices due to its good electron-donor characteristics. The electronic structure of m-MTDATA was investigated for the first time in the gas phase by means of PhotoElectron Spectroscopy (PES) and Near Edge X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy. The combination of Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations with the experimental spectra provides a comprehensive description of the molecular electronic structure. Moreover, by comparing the results with previous TPA measurements, we could shed light on how the electronic structure evolves when the molecular size is increased. We found that the C 1s photoelectron spectra of m-MTDATA and TPA are similar, due to the balance of the counter-acting effects of the electronegativity of the N atoms and the delocalization of the amine lone-pair electrons. In contrast, the increased number of N atoms (i.e. N lone pairs) in m-MTDATA determines a three-peak feature in the outermost valence binding energy region with strong contributions by the N 2pz orbitals. We also obtained a decrease of the HOMO–LUMO gap for m-MTDATA, which points to improved electron donating properties of m-MTDATA with respect to TPA.
Introduction
m-MTDATA (4,4′,4′′-tris(N-3-methylphenyl-N-phenyl-amino)triphenylamine, C57H48N4) belongs to the so-called “starburst π-conjugated molecules” with triphenylamine (TPA) as the building block (Fig. 1).1–8 The TPA moieties give these molecules good electron-donating and charge-transfer properties that can be exploited in organic optoelectronic devices,9 like Organic Light Emitting Diodes (OLEDs)10,11 and Organic Photovoltaics (OPVs).12,13 m-MTDATA is used, for example, to enhance charge transport and photoelectric conversion efficiency in perovskite solar cells (PSCs).14–16 Recent studies have shown that triphenylamine based starburst hole transport materials (HTMs) can significantly increase the power conversion efficiency of PSCs to record values above 23%.17 In fact, the starburst design has a positive impact on the device performance as it ensures the formation of homogeneous amorphous and glassy molecular films with high thermal stability.18–20 The homogeneous morphology is a key property for optoelectronic devices since it prevents charge trapping typically occurring at the grain boundaries of polycrystalline materials19 with an increase of the hole injection barrier and a consequent decrease of the device performance.1,20
 Fig. 1  Molecular structure of m-MTDADA. In the inset, the complex 3D structure of the molecule is shown, where the twisting of the phenyl rings is derived from the TPA propeller-like shape. In the main figure the 14 different carbon sites are illustrated. Following the nomenclature of benzene-derived compounds, we indicate the carbon atoms as Cipso, Cortho, Cmeta and Cpara in each chemically different phenyl ring (A, B and C), resulting in 12 chemically distinct carbon atoms. Other 2 chemically different carbons are related to the methyl group, i.e. –C–CH3 (green circles) and –CH3 (red circles). 
In the mentioned organic electronic devices, the performance is strongly related to the charge transfer/separation occurring at the interface between the hole transport/electron donor material (i.e. m-MTDATA) and a semiconductor acceptor electrode. The efficiency of such processes depends on the appropriate matching of the energy levels between acceptor and donor materials. Understanding charge separation at organic/inorganic and organic/organic heterojunctions is important for the design of high-performance devices. This requires fundamental studies of the electronic structure of each component (donor, acceptor), both in the gas phase and at the interface with inorganic substrates.21 Gas phase experiments are fundamental in this regard because they provide a detailed and comprehensive description of the electronic structure of free molecules. This helps in elucidating charge redistribution and energy matching at interfaces,22 which affects the performance of optoelectronic devices where such molecules (donor, acceptor) are implemented.11
The present work is the first comprehensive characterization of the electronic structure of m-MTDATA in the gas phase by core and valence Photoelectron Spectroscopy (PES) and Near Edge X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy. Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations have also been performed to obtain a deeper understanding of the electronic structure of m-MTDATA in relation to the different C and N atoms of the molecule. Furthermore, the m-MTDATA results are compared to our previous investigation on TPA,23 the building block molecule of m-MTDATA, elucidating the differences in the electronic structure due to the increased complexity of the molecular structure. The results reveal a similar but more complex N lone pair electron delocalization effect for m-MTDATA compared to TPA. Our comparison with the building block TPA gives new insights into the significant modifications of the electronic structure of m-MTDATA of importance for its implementation in technological devices.
Experimental details
The gas phase measurements of m-MTDATA were performed at the GasPhase beamline of the Elettra Synchrotron light source in Trieste, Italy.24 The chamber was equipped with a home-made Knudsen effusion cell for in situ sublimation of powder samples.25 The PE measurements were recorded using a Scienta SES20026 spectrometer mounted at the magic angle (54.7°) with respect to the beam of linearly polarized incident light. A few mg of m-MTDATA (powder, purity 98%, Sigma Aldrich) was put into the oven nozzle and further purified by slowly increasing the temperature and maintaining it at about 453 K for some hours before measurement. Then m-MTDATA was sublimed at about 473 K, just below its melting point (482 K)18 for maximizing the molecular flux during the PES and NEXAFS measurements, resulting in a pressure in the mid 10−8 mbar range. However, some water contamination was still observed in the valence level photoemission spectra.
The C 1s (N 1s) PE spectrum was recorded with a photon energy of 392 eV (495 eV) and an overall resolution of about 280 meV (360 meV). The binding energy scale was then calibrated by simultaneously measuring a reference gas (CO2, N2).21,27,28
The NEXAFS spectra at the C and N K-edges were obtained by recording the partial electron yield (PEY) signal by means of a Channeltron electron multiplier. The NEXAFS spectra were normalized to the transmitted photon flux measured using a calibrated Si photodiode. The overall resolutions of the C K-edge and N K-edge absorption spectra were approximately 220 meV and 250 meV, respectively. The photon energy scales were calibrated using the absorption peaks of CO2 at 290.77 eV (C 1s → π*) and N2 at 401.10 eV (N 1s → π*, ν′ = 1) measured simultaneously with the m-MTDATA C and N K-edge spectra, respectively.29–31
The experimental valence photoelectron spectra of m-MTDADA were measured with a photon energy of 40 eV and a resolution of 40 meV. The Ar 3p3/2 line, set to 15.76 eV,32 was used to calibrate the valence spectrum.
For the experimental details related to the characterization of TPA, refer to our previous study.23
Computational details
The molecular structure as well as the electronic configuration of m-MTDATA was relaxed using the B3LYP functional33 in combination with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set34 as implemented in the Gaussian 1635 quantum chemistry software. Atomic orbital contributions to the valence electronic structure were computed using the c2 method,36 as performed in previous studies.37,38 The discrete eigenvalue spectrum was broadened using Gaussian functions of 0.30 eV full width at half maximum (FWHM) to facilitate the comparison to the experiments. Furthermore, the calculated valence spectra were shifted by 1.90 eV towards higher binding energies to align with the experimental results. The rigid shift is required because the calculated B3LYP HOMO eigenvalue does not represent the true ionization energy. This problem originates from the fact that the orbital self-interaction error is only partially corrected using regular hybrid functionals and from the incorrect behaviour of the exchange and correlation (xc) potential in the asymptotic limit, as discussed in more detail in ref. 39 and 40. Additionally, we performed a natural bond orbital (NBO) analysis using the B3LYP functional and the 6-31G(d,p) basis set to elucidate the nature and amount of delocalization of the outermost valence molecular orbitals involving the N atoms.
The optimized molecular structure of m-MTDATA was used to compute C K-edge and N K-edge NEXAFS spectra, obtained with the StoBe 2014 package,41 and using the PBE42 functional for exchange and correlation. A spectrum was calculated in the dipole approximation for each C (N) atom in the molecule, by relaxing the electronic structure in the presence of a half core hole (HCH) localized on that particular C (N) atom. Localizing a core-hole on a particular atom is an approximation, but it has been shown to be reliable especially on the low photon energy side of the spectrum (π* region),43,44 which we are interested in characterizing. Without this approximation, systems of the size of m-MTDATA (∼100 atoms) would not be computationally feasible. The core-excited atom was described using the IGLO-III triple zeta basis set by Kutzelnigg, Fleischer and Schindler,45 while the other atoms of the same species were described via an effective core potential (ECP) provided by the StoBe package. The remaining atoms of different species were instead described using the cc-pVTZ46 basis set. To improve the description of Rydberg and continuum states, the basis set of the core-excited atom was augmented using a large diffuse [19s19p19d] basis set47,48 as described in ref. 49.
Each individual NEXAFS spectrum was broadened using Gaussian functions of 0.40 eV FWHM and shifted such that the calculated C 1s (N 1s) eigenvalues were equal to the corresponding calculated Kohn–Sham ionization energies (KS-IE). Each KS-IE was computed by taking the energy difference between the ground state and a core-excited state obtained by adding a full core hole (FCH) on a specific C (N) site. This constitutes the so-called ΔKS (or ΔDFT) approach to calculate ionization energies. Finally, the total C (N) K-edge spectrum was obtained by summing up the individual C (N) atom contributions. Further shifts of 0.40 eV (C K-edge) and 1.60 eV (N K-edge) towards higher photon energies were performed to align the calculated π* peak to the experimental one, the same shift applied in our previous study for free TPA and DPTA in the gas phase.23
In the case of the N K-edge NEXAFS and for the valence level analysis, we resolved the N 2pz (out-of-plane) and N 2pxy (in-plane) orbitals, by projecting the individual N 2p contributions to the normal of the plane defined by the three N–C bonds (N–C3), i.e. considering the local plane to which each N atom belongs.
The calculated Kohn–Sham ionization energies of the C and N core levels were used to construct C 1s and N 1s PES spectra, respectively, as performed in a previous study.50 The discrete bar graphs were broadened using Gaussian functions of 0.40 eV FWHM to facilitate the comparison with the experimental results. In addition, the calculated C 1s and N 1s PES spectra were shifted by 1.28 eV and by 1.14 eV, respectively, towards higher binding energies to align to the measured results. We chose the PBE functional for the computation of the C 1s and N 1s PE and NEXAFS spectra to keep in line with our previous work on TPA, the building block molecule of m-MTDATA. Because core ionization energies were calculated as total energy differences (ΔKS), they are expected to be quite reliable. In comparison to other exchange and correlation functionals, the PBE functional was found to perform very well for core-ionization energies computed via a ΔKS approach.51
The shifts required to align the C 1s and N 1s calculated spectra to the measured ones may have multiple origins. Besides the choice of level of theory, DFT functional and basis set, there are several approximations made in our calculations which we enumerate here: relativistic effects and molecular vibrations are not included and only one molecular structure is used to describe the gas phase experiments. Besides these factors, in the case of NEXAFS, the particular model used to include relaxation effects (HCH, in our case) can also play a role. The relativistic corrections for the C 1s and N 1s electrons amount to 0.2 eV and 0.3 eV,52 respectively, and explain a small amount of the shifts performed here. The rest may be associated with the choice of functional, basis set, and spectroscopy model and with the description of gas phase experiments using a single molecular structure, but the question on the exact origin of these shifts remains open.
When comparing the m-MTDATA and TPA PES results, we have to consider that differences may arise from the different vibrational contributions and conformer populations for the two molecules. Indeed, our PES experimental studies were not performed with enough vibrational resolution for a full vibronic analysis that is beyond the aim of our present paper. Thus, such effects have not been included in our current analysis. The additional internal energy resulting from the higher sublimation temperature used for m-MTDATA (473 K), with respect to TPA (334 K), would be redistributed among the numerous different bonds and low energy vibrational modes in which effects are expected to be still very small, certainly comparable to or smaller than the zero-point vibrational energy corrections, which have also been neglected in the calculations of the carbon 1s and nitrogen 1s chemical shifts, as in previous works.53,54
Results and discussion
C 1s PES
As shown in Fig. 1, m-MTDATA contains three different types of phenyl rings labelled with capital letters: A for the inner rings, and B and C for the peripheral rings. The B and C rings are different because the C rings contain a methyl (–CH3) substituent at one of the meta positions. There are in total 14 chemically different C atoms, i.e. ipso, ortho, meta and para in each of the different phenyls, A, B and C (that amount to 12), plus the meta C atom bonded to the methyl group (–C–CH3), and the carbon atom of the methyl group itself (–CH3).
The C 1s PE spectrum, shown in Fig. 2, consists of two peaks, one with a higher intensity at 289.70 eV and the other with a lower intensity at 290.60 eV. In order to visualize the contributions of the 14 different carbon atoms to the experimental spectrum, we have performed a fit, also shown in Fig. 2, by using a Gaussian component (FWHM = 0.79 eV) for each of the 14 types of carbon atoms, with relative intensities according to m-MTDATA stoichiometry and with the energy positions obtained from our calculations (bars in Fig. 2), except for a rigid shift of 1.28 eV of the theoretical values to align with the experimental results. The theoretical C 1s binding energy (BE) values for the different carbon atoms are listed in Table 1.
 Fig. 2  C 1s PhotoElectron (PE) spectrum of free m-MTDATA with a fit which considered the calculated BEs of the chemically different carbon atoms. The intensity of each component is set according to the stoichiometry of the molecule. The theoretical BE values have been shifted by 1.28 eV to align with the experimental spectrum. 
Table 1 Theoretical binding energies (BEs) of the chemically different carbon atoms in m-MTDATA




BEa (eV)
Assignment
Note





a The given values have been shifted by +1.28 eV to align to the experimental C 1s PE spectrum.





289.44
C-para
High intensity peak


289.54
C-ortho


289.54
B-para


289.57
A-ortho


289.62
B-ortho


289.65
A-meta


289.82
C-meta


289.85
B-meta


290.04
–C–CH3






290.47
A-para
Low intensity peak


290.54
A-ipso


290.65
–CH3


290.78
C-ipso


290.82
B-ipso




This very simple fit can also be considered as a convolution of the calculated BEs with Gaussian curves of a FWHM of 0.79 eV. This confirms that the calculated BEs well reproduce the experimental spectrum. The DFT calculations show that the peak at higher BE corresponds to the carbons directly bonded to the electronegative N atoms, and to the carbons of the methyl groups (–CH3). By considering the BE of the carbon atoms inside the peripheral rings (B and C), it can be seen that their BEs follow the order already observed for TPA:23para < ortho < meta < ipso. This is attributed to the balance between two counter-acting mechanisms: the electron-withdrawing effect of the electronegative N atom (which scales with the N–C distance) and the effect of the delocalization of the N lone pair electrons towards the carbon atoms in the para and ortho positions (independent of the N–C distance). Such effects were already presented in our previous study on the electronic structure of the TPA/DPTA molecules.23
By comparing the B and C phenyls (Fig. 2 and Table 1), we notice that the BEs of the different C 1s of the C phenyls are always lower than the BEs of the corresponding carbons in the B ring, i.e. C-para < B-para, C-ortho < B-ortho, C-meta < B-meta and C-ipso < B-ipso. This is likely due to the additional electron-donating effect of the methyl group attached at the meta position of the C phenyls. Unlike the N, the methyl group does not have non-bonding π-electrons (lone pair) and therefore its electron donating properties have been often explained in terms of σ- or hyper-conjugation.55 In this case, electron delocalization occurs via the overlap of the pz orbitals of the phenyl carbon atoms with the C–H σ orbitals of the methyl group. In addition to its electron-donating properties, the methyl group also has an electron withdrawing character, which scales with distance. Consequently, the carbon atoms in the meta position attached to the methyl group (C–CH3) have higher BEs than the carbon atoms in all the remaining meta positions.
The C 1s BE progression observed for the carbons of rings B and C is not valid for the central phenyl ring (A). Specifically, the carbons in the A-para positions do not have the lowest BE. This is explained by the bonding of these carbon atoms to an additional N atom (of the peripheral TPA), which makes their BEs very similar to those of the A-ipso carbons.
In Fig. 3 we show the comparison between the C 1s photoelectron spectra of m-MTDATA and TPA,23 also measured in the gas phase with a similar resolution. The spectra are quite alike with a 2-peak feature, but in the spectrum of m-MTDATA there is an increased intensity of the peak at higher BE. This is explained and also confirmed by the DFT calculations as due to the contributions from the extra C–N and the methyl groups, which are not present in TPA. The C 1s PE spectra of both m-MTDATA and TPA also show similar shake-up features, possibly due to the inter- and intra-phenyl rings transitions as already discussed for the TPA case.23,56 Interestingly, the shake-ups closer to the main lines appear at different energy positions, i.e. at 3 eV for m-MTDATA and at 2.45 eV for TPA. Similarly to TPA, this shake-up can be assigned to the HOMO–LUMO transition as it is very close to the value of the HOMO–LUMO gap of m-MTDATA, estimated by optical absorption measurements (3.1 eV).9 However the noisy signal prevents any conclusive assignment.
 Fig. 3  Comparison between the C 1s PE spectra of m-MTDATA (red, a resolution of 280 meV, measured with a photon energy of 392 eV) and its building-block TPA (blue, a resolution of about 380 meV, measured with a photon energy of 382 eV23), both measured in the gas phase and on a relative binding energy scale. The arrows point to the first shake-up features from the main line. 
N 1s PES
The experimental N 1s PE spectrum of m-MTDATA measured in the gas phase is shown in Fig. 4(b), characterized by a peak at 404.65 eV with a FWHM of 0.66 eV. The DFT calculations give the energy positions of the four nitrogen atoms within m-MTDATA, shown as bars in Fig. 4(a). The N 1s levels of the peripheral N atoms contribute on the higher BE side of the peak, while the N 1s level of the central nitrogen is found on the lower BE side (−0.14 eV). The lower BE of the central N can be explained considering that it is much more influenced by the delocalization of three peripheral N lone pair electrons. On the other hand, the peripheral N atoms are less affected by this effect having, each of them, only the central N as the neighbour and the less effective electron delocalization of the methyl group. However, we also have to consider that the core hole created by the photoemission process can be differently screened at the different sites, where the N atoms have different chemical surroundings.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of the experimental N 1s PE spectrum of m-MTDATA (b) with the DFT calculated results (a), shifted by +1.14 eV to align with the experimental spectrum. In (c) the N 1s PE spectrum of gas phase TPA23 is reported. 

Fig. 4(b) also shows the fit of the experimental data considering two peaks of a pseudo-Voigt profile with a Lorentzian fraction m = 0.3,57 with BEs and relative intensities (ratio 3:1) as obtained by our DFT calculations, demonstrating a good agreement between our experimental and DFT results. The parameters used for the fitting are given in Table 2.
Table 2 Parameters used to fit the N 1s PE spectrum of m-MTDATA




Gas phase
BE (eV)
FWHM (eV)
Intensity (normalized)




N 1s (central)
404.54
0.65
1


N 1s (peripheral)
404.68
0.65
3




The gas phase N 1s PE spectrum of the building block TPA is also reported in Fig. 4(c).23 The N 1s line of m-MTDATA is at 0.31 eV lower BE compared to TPA. The slightly broader appearance of the N 1s line of m-MTDATA is due to the two non-equivalent N atoms (central and peripheral) of the molecule.
The shift of the N 1s PE line between m-MTDATA and TPA can be explained by the different chemical environments experienced by the N atoms. Compared to TPA, both the peripheral and central N atoms of m-MTDATA are shifted to lower BEs, compatible with the more effective intra-molecular screening ascribed to the larger molecular size.23,58,59
C K-edge NEXAFS
The C K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of free m-MTDATA is shown in Fig. 5 (black dotted line). The first resonance is at about 285.05 eV with a shoulder on the higher photon energy side. The second intense resonance is at 286.19 eV. The energy difference between these two features is about 1.14 eV, well reflecting the C 1s BE shift between the main line and the low intensity peak of about 1 eV (Fig. 2). This indicates that these two resonances are due to the same kind of transition (C 1s → LUMO) from the different carbon atoms. The calculated NEXAFS spectrum, also shown in Fig. 5 (black line), is in excellent agreement with the experimental data.
 Fig. 5  Experimental (black dotted line) and calculated total (black solid line) C K-edge NEXAFS spectra of a single m-MTDATA molecule obtained considering the contributions (coloured curves) from the different carbon atoms, indicated by the labels according to the notation mentioned in Fig. 1. The intensity of each kind of carbon atom is normalized to its stoichiometry within the m-MTDATA molecule. The arrow points to the experimental shoulder of the first resonance. 
As can be seen in Fig. 5, the theoretical spectrum is the sum of all contributions from the 14 chemically non-equivalent carbon atoms. The calculated spectra confirm that the first and second resonances originate from the atoms which contribute to the main and low intensity lines of the C 1s photoelectron spectrum (Fig. 2). The energy position of each resonance follows well the corresponding C 1s PES BEs, similar to the TPA case.23 Interestingly, the methyl carbons do not contribute at all to the first and second resonances, due to the poor conjugation with the C phenyl ring, as also evidenced later by the ground state molecular orbitals (Fig. 7(a)). The experimental shoulder on the high photon energy side of the first resonance (indicated by the arrow in the experimental spectrum) is mainly ascribed to the C-meta carbon atoms attached to the methyl group (–C–CH3).
The C K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of m-MTDATA is very similar to that obtained for its building block TPA:23 both the resonance energy positions and the spectral shape are quite alike. For a more detailed discussion about the empty density of states, we refer to the ground state calculation (Fig. 7(a)) showing that the LUMO is localized on the central TPA moiety of m-MTDATA and resembles the LUMO of free TPA (inset of Fig. 7(a)).
N K-edge
The N K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of free m-MTDATA is also similar to the corresponding spectrum of gas phase TPA as shown in Fig. 6(e). In the m-MTDATA spectrum, the first resonance (402.73 eV, FWHM about 0.77 eV) appears to be broader than the corresponding feature in the TPA spectrum (403.00 eV, FWHM about 0.50 eV), especially on the lower photon energy side, even if considering the high noise of the spectrum. The σ* transitions are found to be starting from about 404.30 eV onwards.
 Fig. 6  (a) Comparison between experimental (Exp., black line with markers) and calculated (Cal., solid black line filled with a grey colour) N K-edge NEXAFS spectra, resolving the contributions from the central and peripheral N atoms. The PDOS of out-of-plane (Iz, filled) and in-plane (Ixy, patterned) orbitals of central (red) and peripheral N (blue) are resolved in (b) and (c), respectively, with respect to the planes defined by each N–C3 bond. The pre-edge region (oval in (a)) is enlarged in (d). All the calculated N K-edge spectra of m-MTDATA are shifted by +1.6 eV to align with the experimental results, the same shift as applied in ref. 23. (e) Comparison between the experimental N K-edge NEXAFS spectra of m-MTDATA and TPA measured under the same conditions. 

Fig. 6(a) also shows the simulation of the N K-edge NEXAFS curve decomposed into the contributions due to the central and peripheral N atoms. Both of them are further decomposed into in-plane and out-of-plane contributions (Fig. 6(b) and (c)). Considering the plane defined by the N–C3 bonds for each N atom, the first peak would correspond to the electronic transitions into out-of-plane states, from the central N 1s to LUMO+8 and peripheral N 1s to LUMO+7. The unoccupied molecular orbitals in the ground state and in the presence of HCHs on both types of N atoms are presented in Fig. 7, which shows, as already mentioned, that the LUMO is localized on the central TPA moiety of m-MTDATA and resembles the LUMO of free TPA shown in the inset of Fig. 7(a). Compared to the molecular orbitals in the presence of the N 1s core hole, shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c), the first (main) resonance is attributed to the transitions to LUMO+7 (core hole on the peripheral N atoms) and LUMO+8 (core hole on the central N atom), even if in the ground state the first unoccupied molecular orbital with a significant N contribution would be LUMO+9. As shown in Fig. 7(b), when the core hole is located on the central N, the molecular orbitals maintain a similar shape, ordering and degeneracy to those in the ground state, except for LUMO+8 and LUMO+9 which are swapped in energy in the core-excited case.
 Fig. 7  (a) Frontier occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals of m-MTDATA in its ground state, where degenerate orbitals are grouped together by gray squares. (b) and (c) Unoccupied molecular orbitals with core holes on central and peripheral N atoms, respectively. In (b) and (c), the first unoccupied orbital with a large N contribution is marked with a blue square. Inset of (a): ground state HOMO and LUMO of TPA, from ref. 23. 
On the other hand, the core hole on the peripheral N atoms results in a more complex modification of the empty density of states because the presence of the core hole decreases the molecular symmetry from C3 to C1. In fact, the shapes and relative energy positions of the unoccupied orbitals are significantly affected and many degeneracies are lifted. With the 1s core hole on one of the peripheral N atoms, LUMO+7 becomes the first empty orbital with a significant N 2p contribution/character. These results indicate more notable core hole effects in the case of m-MTDATA compared to TPA, for which no orbital re-ordering in the presence of the core hole was observed.23
Similarly to TPA, the m-MTDATA N K-edge NEXAFS spectrum shows a pre-edge feature (at about 402.00 eV), but the intensity seems to be higher than that for TPA although within a very noisy signal. The enlargement of the calculated pre-edge region is shown in Fig. 6(d). Most of the intensity of the pre-edge comes from the peripheral N atoms, as expected from the molecular stoichiometry. For the central N, the pre-edge is entirely ascribed to the transitions to orbitals with in-plane components, as in the TPA case.23
For the peripheral nitrogen atoms, the pre-edge intensity is mostly due to the transitions to LUMO+1 and LUMO+2, having mostly in-plane (N 2pxy) contributions, although with a small out-of-plane component (N 2pz). In our previous study, we showed that the pre-edge observed in the N K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of TPA is due to the transitions to LUMO+1, +2,…, up to LUMO+4, and these orbitals have only contributions from the N 2pxy (in-plane) states.23 We therefore noticed that the pre-edge feature observed in the N K-edge NEXAFS spectrum of m-MTDATA has a different character with respect to the same feature of TPA.
Valence
The valence PE spectrum of gas phase m-MTDATA is presented in Fig. 8, with small traces of residual water (marked by arrows) at 13.77 eV and 12.59 eV due to the H2O 1b1 and 2a1 orbitals.60 As shown in Fig. 8 the calculated spectrum of m-MTDATA reproduces the experimental spectrum very well, explaining in detail the atomic and orbital contributions to the different features, in particular to the outermost three peaks. In Fig. 8(a), the C and N partial densities of states (PDOS) indicate that most of the valence features have both C and N characters. However, between 8.00 eV and 9.50 eV BE the high intensity feature has an almost exclusive C character and only a negligible N contribution.
 Fig. 8  (a) Experimental valence photoelectron spectra of m-MTDATA in the gas phase obtained with a photon energy of 40 eV along with the total theoretical spectrum (black curve). The latter has been disentangled in the C (red curve) and N (blue curve) total contributions. The outermost three peaks are marked A, B and C. (b) Contributions from the peripheral (PPH) and central (CTR) N as well as from the N 2pxy (pattern) and N 2pz (filled) orbitals are also shown. (c) Energy level alignment of occupied (valence PES) and unoccupied states (NEXAFS) for m-MTDATA. 
The outermost energy region of the spectrum is characterized by three peaks at 6.30 eV (peak A, HOMO), 6.90 eV (B) and 7.50 eV (C), i.e. typical features for m-MTDATA.13 As presented in the inset of Fig. 7(a), TPA shows a valence spectrum with only one peak at the HOMO energy position (7.17 eV).23 The significant difference between free TPA and m-MTDATA valence PE spectra is the presence of this three-peak feature in the valence of m-MTDATA, similarly predicted and observed for 4,4′,4′′-tris(N-(1-naphthyl)-N-phenyl-amino)triphenylamine thin films.13
In Fig. 8(b), the N PDOS of m-MTDATA has been decomposed into the contributions given by the central (CTR) and the peripheral (PPH) N atoms, and separately by the pxy and pz components. The results show that peak B (at 6.90 eV BE) has only contributions from the three peripheral nitrogen atoms, for which the 2p PDOS gives rise to three features of different intensities, with the central (peak B) the highest, the HOMO lower and peak C slightly lower in intensity than the HOMO. In contrast, the central N atom contributes to both peak A at 6.30 eV BE (HOMO) and peak C at 7.50 eV BE, in which the three peripheral N atoms also take part, confirming previous theoretical investigations.13
Our previous study indicated that the HOMO of TPA is mostly due to the lone pair electrons of the N atom (N 2pz orbital).23 The NBO analysis performed here confirms that peaks A, B and C of the valence photoelectron spectrum of m-MTDATA are also related to the lone pair electrons of the four N atoms and have a pure p-character. The corresponding NBOs, with an average occupation of 1.72 electrons, each act as donors to three neighbouring two-center C–C NBOs, with an average stabilization energy of 20 kcal mol−1, suggesting the delocalization of the lone pair electrons. For m-MTDATA, as introduced in the Computational details section, more care has been taken for discerning the different orbital contributions due to the more complex molecular structure, especially considering each plane defined by the N–C3 bonds. In Fig. 8(b), we can observe that the N PDOS of the HOMO, peak B and peak C are still only attributed to the N 2pz orbital without any N 2pxy contribution, as in the TPA case.23 In fact, looking at the N 2p PDOS, the valence BE < 11 eV is mostly due to the out-of-plane N 2pz components. Therefore, our calculations give new insights into the atomic and orbital characters of such valence features with respect to previous work.13 In Fig. 7(a), the higher intensity of peak B in m-MTDATA is due to the contribution from degenerate HOMO−1 and HOMO−2, which are mostly localized on different peripheral rings. Instead the HOMO and HOMO−3, which contribute to peaks A and C, respectively, are delocalized over the whole molecule.

Fig. 8(c) shows the occupied and the unoccupied valence levels of m-MTDATA, using the PE and NEXAFS results, respectively, aligned on a common energy scale, according to the method introduced by Schnadt et al.61 The result shows a HOMO–LUMO gap of 1.67 eV, which is 0.69 eV smaller than the gap of TPA estimated by the same method (2.63 eV).23 The decrease of the gap is ascribed to the decrease of the HOMO binding energy (reduced by 0.87 eV). On the other hand, the LUMO position and character of m-MTDATA remain unmodified compared to the LUMO of TPA. This means that the HOMO comes closer to the LUMO in m-MTDATA compared to TPA. This is supported both by the resemblances of the C K-edge NEXAFS (Fig. 5) spectra and by the shape of the LUMO (Fig. 7(a)) of the two molecules.
In light of our previous results,23 it seems that it is possible to tune the HOMO energy position by modifying the molecular structure, affecting then the HOMO–LUMO gap of novel molecules based on the TPA moiety. This can be done either by substitution as, for example, in the case of the DPTA molecule, where one phenyl of TPA is substituted with a thiophene ring, or by increasing the complexity of the molecular structure, as exemplified in the present study by m-MTDATA.
The more complex m-MTDATA has a reduced ionization potential (the HOMO BE) compared to the simpler TPA, but, at the same time, it is still characterized by the N 2pz character for the outermost valence features,23 recalling that the N 2pz orbitals contain lone pair contributions. Considering that the electron donating properties of a molecule are often ascribed to the HOMO ionization potential, these results point to the improved electron donor properties of m-MTDATA compared to its building block, TPA.
Conclusions
Gas phase m-MTDATA was for the first time characterized by core and valence PES and NEXAFS. DFT calculations were applied to the free molecule for a detailed analysis of the molecular electronic structure. Moreover, the results were compared with previously measured and calculated data of TPA, shedding light on the electronic structure modifications due to the increased molecular complexity of m-MTDATA. The C 1s PES and C K-edge NEXAFS results were analyzed considering the 14 chemically inequivalent carbon atoms. The C 1s PE spectrum can be correctly described by considering the balance between two counter-acting effects: the electronegativity of the N atoms and the delocalization of their lone pair electrons, similar to, but more complex than in the TPA case. In m-MTDATA we can distinguish two kinds of chemically different N atoms: central and peripheral N atoms, as used in the detailed description of the N 1s and valence PE spectra as well as in the N K-edge NEXAFS results. In addition, the valence PE spectrum of m-MTDATA shows a three peak-feature in the outermost valence region and a decrease of the HOMO ionization potential. This three-peak feature of m-MTDATA maintains the same N 2pz character (N lone pairs) as the HOMO of TPA. Both the decrease of the HOMO binding energy and the increased contributions of N pz orbitals to the outermost VB features point to a better electron donating character of m-MTDATA compared to TPA.
The present work is the first comprehensive characterization of the electronic structure of the m-MTDATA molecule in the gas phase, where we have been able to identify the fingerprinting of all the main peaks in the PES and NEXAFS measurements, in collaboration with a theoretical DFT analysis.
The changes that we describe in the occupied and unoccupied densities of states with respect to the molecular building block, TPA, are crucial for future technological applications. Our study is part of a wider project which also includes the adsorption of m-MTDATA on different kinds of substrates. The comparison between our studies for free and adsorbed molecules will enable us to identify the modifications of the molecular electronic structure due to the interaction with the surfaces. This in turn will provide unique and precious insights into identifying the best materials to be employed in important applications like in photovoltaics and organic electronics in general.
Moreover, the co-adsorption of m-MTDATA with acceptor molecules, as for example PPT in the work of Goushi et al.,10 will reveal the energy level alignment of the two kinds of molecules (donor and acceptor) for a good performance of a device. In summary, this study is the reference and the basis for coming studies on the electronic structure of the m-MTDATA molecule by means of soft X-ray spectroscopy. Having insights into the electronic structure of the gas phase molecule will play a part in identifying the best combination of donor and acceptor molecules and in the design and prediction of new molecular materials for organic electronics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Carl Trygger Foundation for financial support and for making available the VG-Scienta SES-200 photoelectron analyser at the GasPhase beamline, Elettra, Italy. T. Z. is grateful to the Vice-Chancellor of Uppsala University for financial support through the U4 collaboration. T. Z. is also grateful for the support from the Beijing Institute of Technology Research Fund Program for Young Scholars. F. J. acknowledges the Swedish Research Council for a research grant (VR 2014-6463) and Marie Skłodowska Curie Actions (Cofund, project INCA 600398). B. B. acknowledges the Swedish Research Council for a research grant (VR 2014-3776). The authors acknowledge the EU CERIC-ERIC Consortium for the access to experimental facilities and financial support. The DFT calculations were performed on resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at HPC2N. We also thank Prof. N. Mårtensson and Prof. S. Svensson for helpful discussions.
References
K. Nishimura, T. Kobata, H. Inada and Y. Shirota, Arylaldehyde and arylketone hydrazones as a new class of amorphous molecular materials, J. Mater. Chem., 1991, 1, 897 RSC .
W. Ishikawa, H. Inada, H. Nakano and Y. Shirota, Methyl-substituted Derivatives of 1,3,5-Tris(diphenylamino)benzene as a Novel Class of Amorphous Molecular Materials, Chem. Lett., 1991, 1731–1734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Higuchi, H. Inada, T. Kobata and Y. Shirota, Amorphous molecular materials: synthesis and properties of a novel starburst molecule, 4,4′,4′′-tri(N-phenothiazinyl)triphenylamine, Adv. Mater., 1991, 3, 549–550 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ishikawa, H. Inada, H. Nakano and Y. Shirota, Starburst Molecules for Amorphous Molecular Materials: Synthesis and Morphology of 1,3,5-Tris(diphenylamino)benzene and Its Methyl-substituted Derivatives, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Sci. Technol., Sect. A, 1992, 211, 431–438 CrossRef CAS .
A. Higuchi, K. Ohnishi, S. Nomura, H. Inada and Y. Shirota, Tri(biphenyl-4-yl)amine and tri(p-terphenyl-4-yl)amine as a novel class of molecules for amorphous molecular materials, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 1109 RSC .
H. Inada and Y. Shirota, 1,3,5-Tris[4-(diphenylamino)phenyl]benzene and its methyl-substituted derivatives as a novel class of amorphous molecular materials, J. Mater. Chem., 1993, 3, 319 RSC .
W. Ishikawa, K. Noguchi, Y. Kuwabaru and Y. Shirota, Novel amorphous molecular materials: the starburst molecule 1,3,5-tris[N-(4-diphenyl-aminophenyl)phenylamino]benzene, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 559–561 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naito and A. Miura, Molecular design for nonpolymeric organic dye glasses with thermal stability: relations between thermodynamic parameters and amorphous properties, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 6240–6248 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Deotare, W. Chang, E. Hontz, D. N. Congreve, L. Shi, P. D. Reusswig, B. Modtland, M. E. Bahlke, C. K. Lee, A. P. Willard, V. Bulovic, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Nanoscale transport of charge-transfer states in organic donor-acceptor blends, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1130–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Goushi and C. Adachi, Efficient organic light-emitting diodes through up-conversion from triplet to singlet excited states of exciplexes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 023306 CrossRef .
S. Wang, X. Wang, B. Yao, B. Zhang, J. Ding, Z. Xie and L. Wang, Solution-Processed Phosphorescent Organic Light-Emitting Diodes with Ultralow Driving Voltage and Very High Power Efficiency, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. J. Johansson, P. G. Karlsson, M. Hedlund, D. Ryan, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, Photovoltaic and interfacial properties of heterojunctions containing dye-sensitized dense TiO2 and tri-arylamine derivatives, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2071–2078 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. J. Johansson, M. Odelius, P. G. Karlsson, H. Siegbahn, A. Sandell and H. Rensmo, Interface electronic states and molecular structure of a triarylamine based hole conductor on rutile TiO2(110), J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 184709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, C. Liu, Z. Li, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Ruan, X. Zhang and W. Guo, Incorporating deep electron traps into perovskite devices: towards high efficiency solar cells and fast photodetectors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21039–21046 RSC .
Y.-L. Xu, W.-L. Ding and Z.-Z. Sun, How to design more efficient hole-transporting materials for perovskite solar cells? Rational tailoring of the triphenylamine-based electron donor, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20329–20338 RSC .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. Il Seok, Iodide management in formamidinium-lead-halide-based perovskite layers for efficient solar cells, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T. Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H. W. Shin, S. Il Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, A fluorene-terminated hole-transporting material for highly efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirota, T. Kobata and N. Noma, Chem. Lett., 1989, 1145–1148 CrossRef CAS .
P. Agarwala and D. Kabra, A review on triphenylamine (TPA) based organic hole transport materials (HTMs) for dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and perovskite solar cells (PSCs): evolution and molecular engineering, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1348–1373 RSC .
H. Inada, K. Ohnishi, S. Nomura, A. Higuchi, H. Nakano and Y. Shirota, Photo- and electro-active amorphous molecular materials: morphology, structures, and hole transport properties of tri(biphenyl-4-yl)amine, J. Mater. Chem., 1994, 4, 171 RSC .
T. Zhang, I. E. Brumboiu, V. Lanzilotto, J. Lüder, C. Grazioli, E. Giangrisostomi, R. Ovsyannikov, Y. Sassa, I. Bidermane, M. Stupar, M. de Simone, M. Coreno, B. Ressel, M. Pedio, P. Rudolf, B. Brena and C. Puglia, Conclusively Addressing the CoPc Electronic Structure: A Joint Gas-Phase and Solid-State Photoemission and Absorption Spectroscopy Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 26372–26378 CrossRef .
G. Balducci, M. Romeo, M. Stener, G. Fronzoni, D. Cvetko, A. Cossaro, M. Dell’Angela, G. Kladnik, L. Venkataraman and A. Morgante, Computational Study of Amino Mediated Molecular Interaction Evidenced in N 1s NEXAFS: 1,4-Diaminobenzene on Au (111), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1988–1995 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, I. E. Brumboiu, C. Grazioli, A. Guarnaccio, M. Coreno, M. De Simone, A. Santagata, H. Rensmo, B. Brena, V. Lanzilotto and C. Puglia, Lone Pair Delocalization Effect within Electron Donor Molecules: The Case of Triphenylamine and Its Thiophene-Analog, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17706–17717 CrossRef CAS .
R. Blyth, R. Delaunay, M. Zitnik, J. Krempasky, R. Krempaska, J. Slezak, K. Prince, R. Richter, M. Vondracek, R. Camilloni, L. Avaldi, M. Coreno, G. Stefani, C. Furlani, M. de Simone, S. Stranges and M.-Y. Adam, The high resolution Gas Phase Photoemission beamline, Elettra, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1999, 101–103, 959–964 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Grazioli, Photoionization experiments in the study of energy transfer in nanostructured materials and their precursors, Doctoral thesis, Università degli Studi di Trieste,  2017, http://hdl.handle.net/11368/2908130 Search PubMed .
N. Mårtensson, P. Baltzer, P. A. Brühwiler, J.-O. Forsell, A. Nilsson, A. Stenborg and B. Wannberg, A very high resolution electron spectrometer, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1994, 70, 117–128 CrossRef .
V. Myrseth, K. J. Børve, K. Wiesner, M. Bässler, S. Svensson and L. J. Sæthre, Vibrational structure and vibronic coupling in the carbon 1s photoelectron spectra of benzene and deuterobenzene, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2002, 4, 5937–5943 RSC .
T. D. Thomas and R. W. Shaw Jr., Accurate core ionization potentials and photoelectron kinetic energies for light elements, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1974, 5, 1081–1094 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tronc, G. C. King and F. H. Read, Carbon K-shell excitation in
small molecules by high-resolution electron impact, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys., 1979, 12, 137–157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tronc, G. C. King and F. H. Read, Nitrogen K-shell excitation in N2, NO and N2O by high-resolution electron energy-loss spectroscopy, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys., 1980, 13, 999–1008 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. S. Sodhi and C. E. Brion, Reference energies for inner shell electron energy-loss spectroscopy, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1984, 34, 363–372 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Turner, C. Baker, A. D. Baker and C. R. Brundle, Molecular Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Wiley-Interscience, London,  1970 Search PubMed .
A. D. Becke, Density-functional thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648–5652 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Rassolov, J. A. Pople, M. A. Ratner and T. L. Windus, 6-31G* basis set for atoms K through Zn, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 1223–1229 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, X. Li, M. Caricato, A. V. Marenich, J. Bloino, B. G. Janesko, R. Gomperts, B. Mennucci, H. P. Hratchian, J. V. Ortiz, A. F. Izmaylov, J. L. Sonnenberg, D. Williams-Young, F. Ding, F. Lipparini, F. Egidi, J. Goings, B. Peng, A. Petrone, T. Henderson, D. Ranasinghe, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. Gao, N. Rega, G. Zheng, W. Liang, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, K. Throssell, J. A. Montgomery Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. J. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. N. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, T. A. Keith, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. P. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, C. Adamo, R. Cammi, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, O. Farkas, J. B. Foresman and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 16 Revision A.03,  2016 Search PubMed .
P. Ros and G. C. A. Schuit, Molecular Orbital Calculations on Copper Chloride Complexes, Theor. Chim. Acta, 1966, 4, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Brumboiu, R. Totani, M. De Simone, M. Coreno, C. Grazioli, L. Lozzi, H. C. Herper, B. Sanyal, O. Eriksson, C. Puglia and B. Brena, Elucidating the 3d electronic configuration in manganese phthalocyanine, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 927–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Brena, C. Puglia, M. de Simone, M. Coreno, K. Tarafder, V. Feyer, R. Banerjee, E. Göthelid, B. Sanyal, P. M. Oppeneer and O. Eriksson, Valence-band electronic structure of iron phthalocyanine: an experimental and theoretical photoelectron spectroscopy study, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 74312 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Egger, S. Weissman, S. Refaely-Abramson, S. Sharifzadeh, M. Dauth, R. Baer, S. Kümmel, J. B. Neaton, E. Zojer and L. Kronik, Outer-valence Electron Spectra of Prototypical Aromatic Heterocycles from an Optimally Tuned Range-Separated Hybrid Functional, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 1934–1952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Körzdörfer, and S. Kümmel, Single-particle and quasiparticle interpretation of Kohn-Sham and generalized Kohn-Sham eigenvalues for hybrid functionals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 155206 CrossRef .

          K. Hermann, L. G. M. Pettersson, M. E. Casida, C. Daul, A. Goursot, A. Koester, E. Proynov, A. St-Amant, D. R. Salahub, V. Carravetta, H. Duarte, C. Friedrich, N. Godbout, M. Gruber, J. Guan, C. Jamorski, M. Leboeuf, M. Leetmaa, M. Nyberg, S. Patchkovskii, L. Pedocchi, F. Sim, L. Triguero and A. Vela, StoBe-deMon version 3.3,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. DeBeer George, T. Petrenko and F. Neese, Time-dependent density functional calculations of ligand K-edge X-ray absorption spectra, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2008, 361, 965–972 CrossRef CAS .
F. Weber, J. Ren, T. Petit and A. Bande, Theoretical X-ray absorption spectroscopy database analysis for oxidised 2D carbon nanomaterials, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 6999–7008 RSC .

          W. Kutzelnigg, U. Fleischer and M. Schindler, NMR Basic Principles and Progress book series (NMR), Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1990, vol. 23, pp. 165–262 Search PubMed .
R. A. Kendall, T. H. Dunning and R. J. Harrison, Electron affinities of the first-row atoms revisited. Systematic basis sets and wave functions, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 6796–6806 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ågren, V. Carravetta, O. Vahtras and L. G. M. Pettersson, Direct, atomic orbital, static exchange calculations of photoabsorption spectra of large molecules and clusters, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 222, 75–81 CrossRef .
H. Ågren, V. Carravetta, O. Vahtras, L. G. M. Pettersson and A. Hans, Direct SCF direct static-exchange calculations of electronic spectra, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1997, 97, 14–40 Search PubMed .
I. Zhovtobriukh, P. Norman and L. G. M. Pettersson, X-ray absorption spectrum simulations of hexagonal ice, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 034501 CrossRef PubMed .
I. E. Brumboiu, A. S. Anselmo, B. Brena, A. Dzwilewski, K. Svensson and E. Moons, Near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure study of the C60-derivative PCBM, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 568–569, 130–134 CrossRef .
A. Holme, K. J. Børve, L. J. Sæthre and T. D. Thomas, Accuracy of calculated chemical shifts in carbon 1s ionization energies from single-reference ab initio methods and density functional theory, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 4104–4114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Triguero, L. Pettersson and H. Ågren, Calculations of near-edge X-ray-absorption spectra of gas-phase and chemisorbed molecules by means of density-functional and transition-potential theory, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 8097–8110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tardio and P. J. Cumpson, Practical estimation of XPS binding energies using widely available quantum chemistry software, Surf. Interface Anal., 2018, 50, 5–12 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Matthews, S. Coriani and L. Cheng, Benchmark Calculations of K-Edge Ionization Energies for First-Row Elements Using Scalar-Relativistic Core–Valence-Separated Equation-of-Motion Coupled-Cluster Methods, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2019, 15, 1642–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Magnusson, CH3 and CF3 Hyperconjugation in the Second Row, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 11–16 CrossRef CAS .
C. Enkvist, S. Lunell and S. Svensson, Experimental and theoretical study of the Cls shakeup spectra from biphenyl and p-terphenyl, Chem. Phys., 1997, 214, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schmid, H. Steinrück and J. M. Gottfried, A new asymmetric Pseudo-Voigt function for more efficient fitting of XPS lines, Surf. Interface Anal., 2014, 46, 505–511 CrossRef CAS .
T. Karlsen, K. J. Børve, L. J. Sæthre, K. Wiesner, M. Bässler and S. Svensson, Toward the Spectrum of Free Polyethylene: Linear Alkanes Studied by Carbon 1s Photoelectron Spectroscopy and Theory, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7866–7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Enkvist, S. Lunell, B. Sjögren, S. Svensson, P. A. Brühwiler, A. Nilsson, A. J. Maxwell and N. Mårtensson, C1s shakeup spectrum of C60: global charge-transfer satellites and their relation to the X-ray threshold singularities in macroscopic systems, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 14629–14637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Potts and W. C. Price, Photoelectron Spectra and Valence Shell Orbital Structures of Groups V and VI Hydrides, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1972, 326, 181–197 CrossRef .
J. Schnadt, J. N. O’Shea, L. Patthey, J. Krempaský, N. Mårtensson and P. A. Brühwiler, Alignment of valence photoemission, X-ray absorption, and substrate density of states for an adsorbate on a semiconductor surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 235420 CrossRef .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Molecular structure of m-MTDADA. In the inset, the complex 3D structure of the molecule is shown, where the twisting of the phenyl rings is derived from the TPA propeller-like shape. In the main figure the 14 different carbon sites are illustrated. Following the nomenclature of benzene-derived compounds, we indicate the carbon atoms as Cipso, Cortho, Cmeta and Cpara in each chemically different phenyl ring (A, B and C), resulting in 12 chemically distinct carbon atoms. Other 2 chemically different carbons are related to the methyl group, i.e. –C–CH3 (green circles) and –CH3 (red circles).	 

 	Fig. 2  C 1s PhotoElectron (PE) spectrum of free m-MTDATA with a fit which considered the calculated BEs of the chemically different carbon atoms. The intensity of each component is set according to the stoichiometry of the molecule. The theoretical BE values have been shifted by 1.28 eV to align with the experimental spectrum.	 


289.44	C-para	High intensity peak
289.54	C-ortho
289.54	B-para
289.57	A-ortho
289.62	B-ortho
289.65	A-meta
289.82	C-meta
289.85	B-meta
290.04	–C–CH3


290.47	A-para	Low intensity peak
290.54	A-ipso
290.65	–CH3
290.78	C-ipso
290.82	B-ipso

 	Fig. 3  Comparison between the C 1s PE spectra of m-MTDATA (red, a resolution of 280 meV, measured with a photon energy of 392 eV) and its building-block TPA (blue, a resolution of about 380 meV, measured with a photon energy of 382 eV23), both measured in the gas phase and on a relative binding energy scale. The arrows point to the first shake-up features from the main line.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of the experimental N 1s PE spectrum of m-MTDATA (b) with the DFT calculated results (a), shifted by +1.14 eV to align with the experimental spectrum. In (c) the N 1s PE spectrum of gas phase TPA23 is reported.	 

N 1s (central)	404.54	0.65	1
N 1s (peripheral)	404.68	0.65	3

 	Fig. 5  Experimental (black dotted line) and calculated total (black solid line) C K-edge NEXAFS spectra of a single m-MTDATA molecule obtained considering the contributions (coloured curves) from the different carbon atoms, indicated by the labels according to the notation mentioned in Fig. 1. The intensity of each kind of carbon atom is normalized to its stoichiometry within the m-MTDATA molecule. The arrow points to the experimental shoulder of the first resonance.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Comparison between experimental (Exp., black line with markers) and calculated (Cal., solid black line filled with a grey colour) N K-edge NEXAFS spectra, resolving the contributions from the central and peripheral N atoms. The PDOS of out-of-plane (Iz, filled) and in-plane (Ixy, patterned) orbitals of central (red) and peripheral N (blue) are resolved in (b) and (c), respectively, with respect to the planes defined by each N–C3 bond. The pre-edge region (oval in (a)) is enlarged in (d). All the calculated N K-edge spectra of m-MTDATA are shifted by +1.6 eV to align with the experimental results, the same shift as applied in ref. 23. (e) Comparison between the experimental N K-edge NEXAFS spectra of m-MTDATA and TPA measured under the same conditions.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Frontier occupied and unoccupied molecular orbitals of m-MTDATA in its ground state, where degenerate orbitals are grouped together by gray squares. (b) and (c) Unoccupied molecular orbitals with core holes on central and peripheral N atoms, respectively. In (b) and (c), the first unoccupied orbital with a large N contribution is marked with a blue square. Inset of (a): ground state HOMO and LUMO of TPA, from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Experimental valence photoelectron spectra of m-MTDATA in the gas phase obtained with a photon energy of 40 eV along with the total theoretical spectrum (black curve). The latter has been disentangled in the C (red curve) and N (blue curve) total contributions. The outermost three peaks are marked A, B and C. (b) Contributions from the peripheral (PPH) and central (CTR) N as well as from the N 2pxy (pattern) and N 2pz (filled) orbitals are also shown. (c) Energy level alignment of occupied (valence PES) and unoccupied states (NEXAFS) for m-MTDATA.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2019
