Temperature-dependent charge transport in solution-processed perovskite solar cells with tunable trap concentration and charge recombination   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC02646C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC02646C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 9376-9382Temperature-dependent charge transport in solution-processed perovskite solar cells with tunable trap concentration and charge recombination†

        
          
            Xuning 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shiqing 
            Bi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jiyu 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shuai 
            You
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huiqiong 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zhiyong 
            Tang
          
        
      b
aHeeger Beijing Research and Development Center, School of Chemistry, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, P. R. China. E-mail: yuanzhang@buaa.edu.cn
bCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, P. R. China. E-mail: zhouhq@nanoctr.cn
Received 
      14th June 2017
    , Accepted 21st August 2017First published on 21st August 2017AbstractHere we investigate temperature-dependent charge transport in solution-processed methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) perovskite thin films with steady-state mobility measurements. Based on control of the thickness (L) of the MAPbI3 films, one attains tunability in the carrier mobility, trap density and recombination that lead to alterations in the device characteristics. We find that the increased hole mobility in MAPbI3 with incremental variations in L is associated with reduction in the trap concentration and Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination. By interrogating the ideality factor, we identify that the SRH charge recombination is present in the optimal solar cell. Of interest, the impact of traps on recombination becomes weakened and eventually is overwhelmed by bimolecular recombination with increasing L. Photoluminescence decay kinetics reveal that the PL related to surface and bulk recombination is longer-lived at larger L, in line with the results based on electrical analysis. The meliorated transport properties with reduced charge trapping in MAPbI3 films can correlate to the slightly enhanced crystallinity and homogeneity in the grain size distribution in thicker films. The combinatorial study shows that the transport properties alongside traps in MAPbI3 films are tunable simply by the physical parameter of L. Meanwhile, our work points to the necessity to further reduce the trap density so as to boost the photovoltaic performance using perovskite thin films.
Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic lead halide perovskites (MAPbX3) have received intensive research because of attractive applications in energy conversion and photonic devices.1–9 MAPbX3 with an ABX3 structure is composed of an organic cation (A), a metal cation (B), and halide anions (X).10 To date, state-of-the-art perovskite solar cells using mixed organic cations and halide anions have shown power conversion efficiency (PCE) results exceeding 22%.11,12 This competitive performance is attributed to the merits of a high carrier mobility, large dielectric constant, high degree of crystallinity, and excellent band-gap tunability.13–18 Along with continuous efforts to boost the device performance, there is growing interest in gaining a fundamental understanding of the optoelectronic properties in hybrid perovskites that govern the solar cell characteristics.12–15,19–21 With transient absorption spectroscopy, the intrinsic carrier mobility in MAPbI3 was probed, revealing an extreme shallow trap depth and low trap density.13 Similar optical measurements indicated that a balance between the hole and electron mobilities in MAPbI3 after charge dissociation was maintained for a timescale of up to a microsecond.22 Aided by first-principles calculations, ionic transport in MAPbI3 was investigated and identified to be driven by the vacancy in the lattice, showing an activation energy of 0.6 eV.14 Furthermore, Hall measurements revealed that the intrinsic carrier mobility in the MAPbI3 films was up to 60 cm2 V−1 s−1, which led to a very low electron–hole recombination rate.23
Although these findings are insightful, the information extracted from these techniques might not entirely reveal steady-state solar cell operation with a sandwich device architecture. For example, the charge transport direction examined by Hall mobility measurements differs from that in operating solar cells relying on an out-of-plane charge transporting path. To this end, it appears more relevant to explore the steady-state transport properties in the same direction as in solar cells using diode mobility measurements. By doing so, one simultaneously attains information on the diode mobility in the space-charge limited current (SCLC) regime and traps.24,25 Generally speaking, a sufficient carrier mobility with minimized traps is essential to attain satisfactory device characteristics. When trap-assisted (Shockley–Read–Hall, or SRH) recombination becomes dominate, unfavourable losses of photo-carriers and eventually PCEs may occur.26,27 To date, knowledge on how charge trapping affects diode transport behavior relevant to solar cell operation and recombination processes in MAPbX3 films is still lacking.
In this article, based on control of the perovskite film thickness (L), we investigate temperature (T)-dependent steady-state charge carrier transport, recombination and traps in methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) films and correlate these properties with solar cell parameters. We found that the trap concentration and charge recombination are tunable through controlling the L, leading to varied device characteristics. The carrier mobility is improved in association with reduced densities of the traps when incrementally varying L, while surprisingly a reduction in the PCEs is observed in the corresponding solar cells. The melioration of the carrier transport and charge trapping with increasing L is confirmed by PL decay kinetics and ideality factor (IF) measurements. The results indicate that the decrease in the PCE in thick cells may be ascribed to other factors e.g. the limitation of the carrier diffusion distance which highlights the necessity of further increasing the carrier mobility. More relevantly, this work points to the significance of reducing the trap concentrations so as to approach the potential of hybrid perovskite solar cells.
Results and discussion
To understand the morphology changes brought about by the variation of L in MAPbI3 films, we first used scanning electron microscopy (SEM) along with X-ray diffractometry (XRD). As shown in Fig. 1a, the 680 nm film displays a slightly enhanced crystallinity and surface uniformity with dense and flattened structures. Clearly the distribution of the grain sizes becomes more homogeneous with the film thickness (see Fig. 1b–d). This may suggest an improved film-forming quality with possibly reduced grain boundaries when using more concentrated precursor solutions. These morphological and structural merits hint that the corresponding opto-electrical properties may be modified as a function of L.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns of MAPbI3 thin films with different values of L. (b–d) Top view SEM images of the corresponding perovskite thin films. 
To examine the resultant photovoltaic behavior, we fabricated MAPbI3 solar cells adopting the inverted device architecture (see Fig. 2a), which affords high reproducibility, ease of characterization and device fabrication, although we acknowledge that this simple structure often yields lower PCEs compared to devices containing multiple interlayers or using mesoporous TiO2 structures. More importantly, this structure allows for more reproducible diode measurements which are essential for our T-dependent analysis. To reduce the complexity of the interface effects that could lead to different photophysical processes and surface recombination,28 additional electron extraction interlayers are avoided in our solar cells except for the necessary PC61BM. To attain a meaningful comparison, single-carrier devices (here defined as a hole-only device or HO) were fabricated based on the identical MAPbI3 photoactive layers with a similar architecture where a polymeric hole extraction interlayer based on P3HT was incorporated beneath the Au contact (see Fig. 2b). As a result, the electron injection can be effectively blocked, leading to so-call HO devices.
 Fig. 2  Device architecture of the (a) solar cell and (b) hole-only devices used in this study based on methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) films. (c) Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the MAPbI3 solar cells with various film thicknesses (L) measured under AM 1.5G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2). (d) Energy diagram for the MAPbI3 single-carrier (hole-only) devices. Also included is an illustration of the exponential density of states of traps within the band gap (VB: valence band, CB: conduction band; see other abbreviations defined in text). 

Fig. 2c shows the representative J–V characteristics of the MAPbI3 solar cells under AM 1.5G irradiation (100 mW cm−2), measured at room temperature (RT) in the downward scan (for bias from positive to negative) to avoid the effect of hysteresis. All of the devices were tested in a nitrogen environment without encapsulation. The detailed solar cell parameters are summarized in Table S1 in the ESI.† Among these cells, we found that the device with L = 450 nm yielded a maximal PCE over 12%, in line with previous results based on single charge extraction interlayers.29 With enlarging L (from 450 to 550 to 680 nm), we note that the short-circuit current (Jsc, from 17.47 to 14.20 to 11.94 mA cm−2), open-circuit voltage (Voc, from 0.98 to 0.92 to 0.88 V) and ultimate PCE all decrease while the fill factor (FF, from 0.72 to 0.77 to 0.78) exhibits an opposite trend to decreasing. Through enlargement of L, one might expect to obtain a gain in the photon-absorption and thus an increased Jsc. Counterintuitively, our results suggest that other restraining factors may be responsible for the reduced Jsc and Voc values in thick devices, which will be discussed below. The systematically changed solar cell parameters afford a base for investigating the optoelectronic properties of MAPbI3 films at different values of L.
Next, we focus on charge carrier transport in MAPbI3 films using single-carrier devices. As illustrated by the energy diagram in Fig. 2d, with ohmic injection (meaning the energy of the valence or conduction band matches the work function of the electrodes), transport in a semiconductor can be divided into three regimes including ohmic current at low bias due to the presence of background carriers,30 trap-filling current (TFC) at intermediate voltage where injected carriers mainly fill the traps and space-charge limited current (SCLC) where mobile carries dominate the transport. To verify this, we comparatively show the J–V characteristics (300 K) of HO devices with various values of L. Consistently, we observe three discernible curve slopes at different biases (see the lines in Fig. 3a). These transitions are reproducibly seen in J–V curves measured within a wide T range (see Fig. S1, ESI†). The background carrier density is low in our devices without intentional doping, thus the resulting ohmic behavior occurs within a very small bias regime. Beyond that, the super-linear current rapidly increases with voltage, a fingerprint for TFC.31 This behavior has also been observed in MAPbI3 single crystals even with an extremely low trap density.32 Upon further increasing the bias, the TFC gradually vanishes and the slope becomes less steep, leading to a quadratic voltage dependence indicating the SCLC. In this regime, the hole mobility (μp) can be determined using the well-established Mott–Gurney law.33 As the P3HT interlayer in the HO devices is very thin (∼20 nm), the T-dependence mainly reflects the transport situation through the MAPbI3 films.
 Fig. 3  (a) Comparison of the J–V characteristics at 300 K for the HO devices with different thicknesses in a double logarithm scale. The lines in black, blue and green are a guide for the eye with slope = 1, ohmic current, slope > 3, TFC, and slope = 2, SCLC. (b) Slope (r) of the J–V characteristics of the MAPbI3 HO devices in the TLC regime as a function of temperature (T). (c) Trap density Nt, and (d) hole mobility μp, as a function of T determined with hole-only diode measurements for the MAPbI3 films in the TLC and SCLC regimes, respectively. 
The impact of traps on the SCLC transport was first addressed by Mark and Helfrich.34 Generally, in a semiconductor with traps, the current reduces by (Nt/N)r with Nt denoting the density of trapped carriers, N denoting the total carrier density and r as a power factor related to the trap distribution. In Fig. 2d, an exponential density of states (DOS) for the traps in MAPbI3 films is illustrated with N(E) = Nv(c)exp(−E/Et), where N(E) describes the DOS, Nv(c) is the trap density at the valence band (or conduction band edge), and Et is the characteristic trap width. The TFC transport is analytically described by the equation below,37 (1)where Nc is the total allowing states, q is the elementary charge, μ is the mobility of free carriers, ε0εr (εr = 25 in our case and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity) is the dielectric constant of MAPbI3, Etc is the energetic position of the trap center (or trap depth) and Et is the trap width, and r = Et/kBT (see Fig. 2d). As shown by eqn (1), the r value can be determined from the slope of the J–V characteristics in the TFC regime in Fig. 3a. Then the parameter of Et is extracted from the slope in the plot of r vs. T.35 Based on the dark transport characteristics of MAPbI3 HO devices (see Fig. S1, ESI†), Fig. 3b shows the determined r against T for various L values. The trap width (Et) was determined by linear fitting to the plot of r vs. T in the range of 180–300 K. We obtained Et = 68, 64, and 67 meV for L = 450, 550 and 680 nm respectively. These values indicate that the trap within the band gap of the MAPbI3 films may have a narrow distribution. For comparison, the determined Et is also lower than that typically found in solution-processed semi-conductive polymers.36 Interestingly, the trap width hardly varies with L, seemingly an intrinsic parameter. It should be mentioned that from our TFC fittings using eqn (1), the parameter of Etc referring to the energetic position of the trap center in MAPbI3 (with regard to the valence band) is yet undetermined. This is mainly restrained by the unawareness of the mobility of mobile (non-trapped) carriers. Note that previous studies indicate that extremely shallow traps with a depth of ∼50 meV could be present in MAPbI3 films based on optical transient techniques.13
To enable a more quantitative estimation of these traps, we determined the total trap density Nt from the transition voltage for the linear (ohmic) to TFC behaviour (defined as Vtr, see Fig. 3a) using the following equation.32 (2)Eqn (2) was successfully applied to assess the impurities in perovskite single crystals.32 The determined Nt is plotted as a function of T in Fig. 3c for various values of L. At RT, we obtained Nt = 1.08 × 1016 cm−3, Nt = 3.8 × 1015 cm−3 and Nt = 1.4 × 1015 cm−3 for the three devices. These values in the MAPbI3 films are approximately 4 orders higher than those in the MAPbI3 single crystals, which can be attributed to larger numbers of structural defects or grain boundaries in solution-processed polycrystalline films.32 Of note, the trap density decreases with increasing L with a weak T-dependence, resulting in a negative T-coefficient within 210–300 K. This result indicates that more pronounced charge trapping is likely at lower T, which is similarly observed in planar diodes based on MAPbI3.37 Note that within 210–300 K the tetragonal phase should be dominant and phase transition is unlikely in this T range.38,39 In our case, the T-dependence for mobility in the tetragonal phase is roughly described by the Arrhenius temperature dependence which has been observed previously.40
Next, we estimate the carrier mobility in MAPbI3 in the SCLC regime. The hole mobility was determined by fitting the results in Fig. S1 (ESI†) to the Mott–Gurney law as (3)where μp is the hole mobility and Vbi is the built-in potential (mainly originating from the difference in the anode–cathode work functions). Fig. 3d shows the Arrhenius plots of the determined μp as a function of T. The mobility falls in a range of 10−2–10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 with T spanning over 200 K. It is noted that two discernible T-regimes are observed with distinct T-dependencies. In the high temperature regime (210–300 K), mobility in the MAPbI3 single-carrier devices displays a negative T-coefficient. This is likely ascribed to the containing ionic transport nature in MAPbI3 films where the ionic conductivity tends to reduce at lower T, revealed in a recent study on MAPbI3 field-effect transistors.41 At lower T values (<210 K), the weak T-dependence may reflect more intrinsically the electronic conduction in perovskite films. Of note, by simply varying L, the mobility can be tuned by about 1 order of magnitude. The observed T-dependence of the hole mobility at higher T-regimes being inversely proportional to Nt but proportional to L is in line with the general trend in the presence of traps.42
With the notion that traps play an important role in charge recombination processes and resulting carrier losses in solar cell operation,43 a relevant question arises: can the identified hole traps result in trap-assisted (or SRH) charge recombination in MAPbI3 films? By means of examining the IF, trap-assisted recombination vs. bimolecular recombination is discernible. Generally, IF = 2 indicates a dominant trap-assisted recombination while IF = 1 suggests the absence of SRH recombination or a dominant bimolecular recombination via non-trapped mobile carriers.44,45 We investigated IF based on T-dependent dark transport in MAPbI3 solar cells with various L values (see results in Fig. 4a). The current density of all devices exhibits relatively weak T-dependence with a negative T-coefficient, consistent with the observation in HO devices. The pronounced rectification is due to exclusive charge injection in solar cells. According to Schottky equations, the IF value can be determined from the diffusion current regime (in our case from 0.6 V to 0.9 V) of the J–V curves in Fig. 4a using the relation,46 (4)where kB is the Boltzmann constant. Fig. 4b shows the determined IF at different T values for the MAPbI3 solar cells. Near RT, it is obvious that the IF of the optimal cell (L = 450 nm) roughly hits 2 (see the dashed line), while that of the 550 nm device decreases to values between 1.5 and 2. When enlarging L to 680 nm, the IF decreases more, approaching unity. In all cases, the IF is slightly increased at lower T, consistent with previous observations.45,47 Of importance, the IF results provide evidence that trap-assisted charge recombination is still present in the optimal device which seems to correlate with the observed TFC behavior in HO devices. The SRH recombination attenuates with enlarging L, revealed by the decreased IF approaching unity. This result agrees with the reduction in thicker films, suggesting that in the 680 nm cell, trap-assisted SRH recombination may be less significant and instead bimolecular recombination via mobile carriers becomes more pronounced. Although the value of IF only qualitatively manifests the recombination type rather than the strength, the reduced SRH recombination with increasing L is fully consistent with the result on traps. At this moment, we cannot discern whether the SRH recombination in solution-processed MAPbI3 solar cells is radiative or non-radiative.
 Fig. 4  (a) Dark J–V characteristics (on a semi-logarithm scale) of the MAPbI3 solar cells with various L values at selected T. (b) Ideality factor (IF) determined in the diffusion current regime (within the two dashed vertical lines) of the J–V characteristics of the corresponding solar cells. The dashed horizontal lines in (b) are guides for the eye to indicate IF = 1 and IF = 2, respectively. 
To shed more light on the impact of L on the photophysical processes in MAPbI3 films, at last we measured the photo-luminescence (PL) decay kinetics. The influence of L on recombination related to the surface and bulk properties in the MAPbI3 films is further revealed. The steady-state PL spectra of the MAPbI3 films are provided in Fig. S2 (ESI†), showing red-shifts as a function of L. This is consistent with the observation of the enhanced homogeneity in grain size distribution with possibly less grain boundaries in the 680 nm film revealed by SEM (Fig. 1).48Fig. 5 shows the decays of the according PL which are characteristic of superposition of fast (τ1) and slow decay (τ2) dynamics, indicating the bi-exponential decay process. The two temporal scales can be assigned to trap states related to the surface condition (fast) and bulk transport properties with reduced trap densities (slow), respectively.49,50 Based on the fittings with the bi-exponential decay model (see the fitting parameters in Table S2, ESI†), we found that both decays become longer-lived with increasing L, e.g. τ1 is increased from 44.2 ns to 55 ns and τ2 is increased from 397 ns to 445 ns with L increased from 450 to 680 nm. The longer PL lifetime is explained by the reduced influence of the charge trapping and enhanced transporting capability in bulk. This agrees with the enhanced carrier mobility with fewer traps at larger L values. Furthermore, the percentage of the secondary longer-lived decay component increases with L, in line with the enhanced bulk transport properties at lower Nt. The PL results along with electrical measurements reveal that the charge transport and optical properties in MAPbI3 are highly tunable via the film thickness. In addition, the mitigated surface charge recombination revealed by the PL decay kinetics hints that the surface trap density is likely to decrease with increasing L which could be mainly responsible for the reduction in the total amount of traps shown in Fig. 3c.
 Fig. 5  Photoluminescence decay kinetics (open symbols) of the MAPbI3 thin films with different L probed at 778 nm. The lines are fittings using a bi-exponential decay model. 
It is not so surprising that the charge transport properties and traps densities are changed upon variation of L. While it seems counterintuitive that although an enhanced carrier mobility with reduced trap density is observed at larger L, the according photovoltaic performance is oppositely decreased, mainly suffering from a reduced Jsc and Voc. In thicker solar cells, the more severe Voc losses could be ascribed to the increased recombination current with possible enhancement of absorption and a resultant increase in photo-carriers at larger L values. In this regard, an enlargement of Jcs is expected which is, however, opposite to our observation. Another likely explanation may be related to the change in the built-in potential (Vbi) with enlargement of L. As Vbi provides a driving force for charge separation in solar cells, the reduced Vbi in thicker devices may cause more substantial losses of photo-carriers such that the Jsc is lowered. Here we emphasize that a full correlation of transport properties with according solar cell parameters may still be a challenge. Concerning the complexity of the charge generation/extraction processes, simply enlarging L to gain photocurrent seems to be unrealistic as other factors such as optical effects may play a role. More importantly, the influences of traps on charge transport and recombination in the optimal devices point to the necessity of further reducing the density of traps e.g. through optimizing the crystallinity and grain sizes in MAPbX3 films.
Conclusions
To summarize, we present a comprehensive investigation to understand charge transport, recombination and photoluminescence properties in solution-processed MAPbI3 thin films and related devices. The solar cell parameters, hole mobility and trap concentration are highly tunable via the MAPbI3 film thickness. In a wide range of temperatures (90–300 K), the hole transport in MAPbI3 exhibits evident TFC behavior. The total trap density is estimated to be around 1015–1016 cm−3 with the trap width of 64 meV. We find that the hole mobility is enhanced with increasing L, in association with reduced charge trapping and longer-lived PL. In the optimal solar cell, trap-assisted recombination is still identified and it becomes less pronounced with enlargement of L, leading to a dominant bimolecular recombination. The improved opto-electrical properties can correlate to the slightly enhanced crystallinity and homogeneity in the distribution of grain sizes in thicker films. The combinatorial results suggest that a further boost of the PCEs could be benefited from improved control on the traps in MAPbI3. This work assists to fundamentally understand the opto-electrical properties that govern the device behavior in solution-processed MAPbI3 solar cells.
Experimental
Material
PbI2 (99.999%, Sigma Aldrich) and CH3NH3I (Dyesol Ltd, Australia, purity scale: 99.8%, Dyesol) were used as received. PEDOT:PSS (AL 4083 Clevios) and PC61BM were purchased from H.C. Starck GmbH and Lumtec (Taiwan), respectively.
Device fabrication
Glass substrates (size = 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm) pre-patterned with the ITO (indium-tin-oxide) anode were sequentially cleaned with detergent solution, acetone, and isopropanol in a sonication bath. For the hole transport layer, commercial PEDOT:PSS (Al 4083) solution was spun-cast on pre-cleaned and UV-zone treated ITO/glass substrates in air at 2000 rpm for 40 s. Solutions of CH3NH3PbI3 in N,N-diethylformamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich) (concentration: 45 wt%, 50 wt% and 55 wt%) were prepared by mixing PbI2 and CH3NH3I in a molar ratio of 1:1 in DMF. The triiodide perovskite layers were obtained as follows: 35 μL of CH3NH3PbI3 solution was dropped onto the ITO substrate and then were spun-coat at 6000 rpm. At around 6 s before ending, 105 μL of chlorobenzene was dropped on the perovskite film to accelerate the crystallization. After that, spin-dying at the same rpm was applied for 30 s. The cast films were transferred to a hotplate and annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. For the electron transporting layer, 20 mg of PC61BM (Lumtec, Taiwan) was first solubilized in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. Then 20 μL of the PC61BM solution was spun-coat on the perovskite active layer with a spin-rate of 2000 rpm for 40 s. For the hole transporting layer in single carrier devices, region-regular P3HT (Lumtec, Taiwan) was deposited atop the MAPbI3 layer from the chlorobenzene solution in a concentration of 10 mg mL−1, leading to a film thickness of ∼20 nm. Finally, 100 nm of aluminium (for solar cells) or Au (for single carrier devices) top electrodes were thermally evaporated atop the PC61BM layer (solar cell) or P3HT layer (single carrier device) under vacuum (<10−6 mbar). The finished devices were kept in a nitrogen-purged glove box before testing.
Characterization
The thicknesses of the perovskite films were determined using a profilometer (KLA Tencor D-120). The morphology was characterized by a scanning electron microscope (S4800, Hitachi, Japan). The crystallinity was examined using an X-ray diffractometer (Philips X'Pert) equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5419 Å). The transmittance and absorbance spectra were obtained with a UV-vis spectrometer (PE Lambda 650/850/950 UV-vis spectrophotometer). The J–V characteristics of the solar cells were recorded using a Keithley 2400 SourceMeter under AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) provided by an Oriel solar simulator. The incident light intensity was calibrated with a certified silicon photodiode (Peccell Technologies). The steady-state PL spectra were measured by a HORIBA Fluorolog-III spectrofluoroemeter. The PL lifetime was probed by a customized spectrometer system (Fluorolog-III, HORIBA Jobin-Yvon Inc.) equipped with a diode laser (λ = 460 nm) for excitation under an operation voltage at 950 V for the detector with peak preset = 3000 counts. The single carrier devices were characterized in a vacuum probe station (LakeShore Inc.) using a Keithley 4200-SCS semiconductor parameter analyser. Low T conditions were attained using liquid nitrogen with the T adjusted by a LakeShore temperature controller.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Z. thanks the support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21674006) and the Young Talents Thousand Program, and H. Z. acknowledges the support from the Chinese Academy of Sciences (100 Top Young Scientists Program and QYZDB-SSW-SLH033).
Notes and references
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T. B. Song, H. S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Niu, X. D. Guo and L. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970 CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. N. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. X. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 CAS .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016 DOI:10.1126/science.aaf8060 .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oga, A. Saeki, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and S. Seki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckevicius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumüller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690 CAS .
H. S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N. G. Park and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 Search PubMed .
K. Sveinbjörnsson, X. Zhang, M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4259 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Lafalce, C. Zhang, X. J. Liu and Z. V. Vardeny, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35447 CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, A. Mattoni, C. Caddeo, M. I. Sabaa and P. Delugas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15352 RSC .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. R. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits and A. Stepanov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Yi, X. Wu, R. Haroldson, Y. Gartstein, Y. Rodionov, K. Tikhonov, A. Zakhidov, X.-Y. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, C. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, H. Kast, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2981 CAS .
M. Mandoc, F. Kooistra, J. C. Hummelen, B. De Boer and P. W. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 263505 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, J. Kirkpatrick, U. Rau and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115209 CrossRef .
C. S. Ponseca Jr., E. M. Hutter, P. Piatkowski, B. Cohen, T. Pascher, A. Douhal, A. Yartsev, V. Sundström and T. J. Savenije, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16043 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Berleb, A. G. Mückl, W. Brütting and M. Schwoerer, Synth. Met., 2000, 111, 341 CrossRef .
M. A. Lampert, Phys. Rev., 1956, 103, 1648 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. F. Mott and R. W. Gurney, Electronic Processes in Ionic Crystals, Dover, New York, 2nd edn,  1964 Search PubMed .
P. Mark and W. Helfrich, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 205 CrossRef CAS .

          K. C. Kao and W. Huang, Electrical Transport in Solids, Pergamon, Oxford,  1981 Search PubMed .
B. Li, J. Chen, D. Yang and D. Ma, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2011, 26, 115006 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, T. Li, Q. Wang, J. Xing, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602164 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Fang, R. Raissa, M. Abdu-Aguye, S. Adjokatse, G. R. Blake, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2378 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Baumann, S. Väth, P. Rieder, M. C. Heiber, K. Tvingstedt and V. Dyakonov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601935 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mandoc, B. de Boer, G. Paasch and P. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 193202 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2880 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wetzelaer, M. Kuik, L. M. Lenes and P. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 153506 CrossRef .
G. J. A. Wetzelaer, N. J. Van der Kaap, L. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1130 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. A. H. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Avila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wetzelaer, M. Kuik, H. Nicolai and P. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 165204 CrossRef .
D. Li, G. Wang, H.-C. Cheng, C.-Y. Chen, H. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 7, 11330 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xing, Y. C. Sun, H.-L. Yip, G. C. Bazan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 7 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02646cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns of MAPbI3 thin films with different values of L. (b–d) Top view SEM images of the corresponding perovskite thin films.	 

 	Fig. 2  Device architecture of the (a) solar cell and (b) hole-only devices used in this study based on methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) films. (c) Current density versus voltage (J–V) characteristics of the MAPbI3 solar cells with various film thicknesses (L) measured under AM 1.5G solar irradiation (100 mW cm−2). (d) Energy diagram for the MAPbI3 single-carrier (hole-only) devices. Also included is an illustration of the exponential density of states of traps within the band gap (VB: valence band, CB: conduction band; see other abbreviations defined in text).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Comparison of the J–V characteristics at 300 K for the HO devices with different thicknesses in a double logarithm scale. The lines in black, blue and green are a guide for the eye with slope = 1, ohmic current, slope > 3, TFC, and slope = 2, SCLC. (b) Slope (r) of the J–V characteristics of the MAPbI3 HO devices in the TLC regime as a function of temperature (T). (c) Trap density Nt, and (d) hole mobility μp, as a function of T determined with hole-only diode measurements for the MAPbI3 films in the TLC and SCLC regimes, respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Dark J–V characteristics (on a semi-logarithm scale) of the MAPbI3 solar cells with various L values at selected T. (b) Ideality factor (IF) determined in the diffusion current regime (within the two dashed vertical lines) of the J–V characteristics of the corresponding solar cells. The dashed horizontal lines in (b) are guides for the eye to indicate IF = 1 and IF = 2, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photoluminescence decay kinetics (open symbols) of the MAPbI3 thin films with different L probed at 778 nm. The lines are fittings using a bi-exponential decay model.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc02646c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
