Addition of adamantylammonium iodide to hole transport layers enables highly efficient and electroluminescent perovskite solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE02404A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE02404A
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3310-3320Addition of adamantylammonium iodide to hole transport layers enables highly efficient and electroluminescent perovskite solar cells†

        
          
            Mohammad Mahdi 
            Tavakoli‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Tress
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jovana V. 
            Milić
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dominik 
            Kubicki
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lyndon 
            Emsley
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Michael 
            Grätzel
          
        
      *a
aLaboratoire de photonique et interfaces (LPI) Institut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques (ISIC), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), EPFL-BCH, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: mtavakol@mit.edu; michael.graetzel@epfl.ch
bLaboratory of Magnetic Resonance (LRM), Institut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques (ISIC), Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), EPFL-BCH, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Received 
      17th August 2018
    , Accepted 19th September 2018First published on 2nd October 2018AbstractThe efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) is currently limited by non-radiative recombination losses. One potential loss channel consists of electrons recombining at the interface with the hole transport layer (HTL). We synthesized adamantylammonium halides (ADAHX, X = Cl−, Br−, I−) and demonstrated that ADAHI interacts with the perovskite surface using solid-state NMR spectroscopy. As a result, ADAHI reduces non-radiative recombination when added to the HTL, raising the PSC photovoltage to an average value of 1.185 V, the power conversion efficiency (PCE) to almost 22%, and the maximum external electroluminescence quantum yield to 2.5% at an injection current that is equal to the photocurrent under solar illumination. The lowest value measured for the loss in potential is only 365 mV with respect to the band gap, surpassing the highest-efficiency silicon solar cells. Devices with ADAHI-modified HTL show excellent operational stability for 500 hours. We show the general validity of our new approach for a variety of perovskite formulations and hole conductors.

Broader context
Metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention in the field of photovoltaics due to their rapid progress in efficiency, low-cost processing, fantastic optoelectronic properties and ease of fabrication. Non-radiative recombination losses especially at the interfaces are a big challenge in PSCs and affect the performance, stability, and reproducibility of devices. Our new findings report on a major breakthrough in PSC research to address this issue. We discovered an amazingly effective way to mitigate the radiationless recombination of charge carriers at the interface between the perovskite and the hole transporting layer (HTL) by adding a molecular modulator into the HTL solution. Among all alternatives, we found that adamantylammonium hydroiodide (ADAHI) prevents non-radiative interfacial carrier recombination drastically, resulting in a highly efficient PSC with an open circuit voltage of up to 1245 mV, an external electroluminescence yield of 2.5% and great operational stability. The loss in potential for the fabricated device using this approach is only 365 mV with respect to the band gap, which surpasses even the best silicon solar cell (372 mV). Our proposed approach opens up a new direction for fabrication of highly efficient and stable PSCs using efficient molecular modulators.

Introduction
The emergence of metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has provoked a revolution in the field of photovoltaics.1 The rapid rise in their solar-to-electric power conversion efficiency (PCE) to a certified value of 22.7%,2–4 along with ease of fabrication, low material and processing cost, and attractive optoelectronic properties, renders PSCs strong candidates for solar photovoltaic (PV) applications.5–10 The stunning PCE rise is due to innovative device architecture, optimization of the perovskite composition, and mitigation of charge-carrier recombination occurring inside the perovskite and at its interfaces with the hole and electron transport layers (HTL and ETL).11–16 Particular attention is being paid to identifying appropriate additives that improve PSC performance. These are typically dissolved in the perovskite precursor solution or in the anti-solvent or coated directly onto the perovskite surface.17–21 For instance, Bi et al. introduced the addition of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) into the anti-solvent, enabling a certified PCE of 21.0%.22 Zheng et al. employed quaternary ammonium halides, such as choline chloride, for passivation of the ionic defects at the perovskite surface, resulting in a certified PCE of 20.59%.23 Abating defects at the perovskite/HTL interface has been the subject of several recent investigations.24 Among a variety of HTLs, 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-MeOTAD) (abbreviated below as “spiro”) and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) are the two most commonly used for the fabrication of PSCs.25,26 Inorganic HTLs such as NiOx and CuSCN have also been employed, yielding somewhat lower PCEs.27,28 The operational stability of devices based on inorganic HTLs has only been shown for CuSCN by Arora et al.29 Moreover, Hou et al. employed poly[5,5′-bis(2-butyloctyl)-(2,2′-bithiophene)-4,4′-dicarboxylate-alt-5,5′-2,2′-bithiophene] (PDCBT) as the HTL in a planar PSC and reported a stable device at room temperature with a maximum PCE of 21.2% using tantalum-doped tungsten oxide as an additional layer between gold and PDCBT.30 Although the approach of introducing an additional layer has been successful in improving the performance of PSCs, it adds another step to the fabrication process that is time-consuming and costly, hampering practical applications. Moreover, despite impressive achievements, the reported PV metrics still have not reached the theoretical limit, offering ample room for further improvements by molecular design of new additives.
Adamantane and its derivatives form highly compact self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) that have been used in molecular electronics, e.g. as barrier layers in tunnel junctions and for redox switchable dyads.31 In our recent work, we have found that adding adamantane (AD) and 1-adamantylamine (ADA) as additives into the anti-solvent or spin-coating of these modulators on top the perovskite film can enhance the efficiency and stability of PSC devices.32 In this work, we synthesize protonated 1-adamantylammonium halide derivatives, i.e., ADAHX (X = I−, Cl−, Br−; Fig. 1a and b) and investigate their propensity to mitigate electronic defects at the HTL/perovskite interface. We reasoned that the ammonium group would readily insert into A cation vacancies of the ABX3 perovskite formulation (A = Cs+, formamidinium (FA), or methylammonium (MA)) present at the perovskite surface, eliminating the undesirable defects, while providing a hydrophobic surface cover. Moreover, the halide counterions were assumed to be effective in suppressing the halide defects and contributing to the overall charge neutrality and stabilization of the perovskite structure. In addition to this fine molecular design, we introduce a new approach to the passivation of perovskite thin films whereby ADAHX is added directly to the solution of the HTL prior to its deposition by spin-coating, along with 4-(tert-butyl)pyridine. We identify ADAHI as the most impactful agent and demonstrate that this passivation technique is one of the most effective methods reported until now to significantly improve the efficiency and stability of PSCs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the treated perovskite solar cell. (a) Chemical structure of ADAHX. (b) Optimized geometry (DFT B3LYP/6-31G(d)) of ADAH+. (c) Schematic of the device architecture indicating the presence of ADAHI on the surface of the perovskite film. Spiro = 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene; ADAHX = 1-adamantylammonium halide (X = I, iodide). 
Based on this rational approach, we achieve a PCE of 21.9% with the triple-cation (FAMACs) PSC formulation, which is a new record for this composition. We show that adding ADAHI to the HTL also benefits single- and double-cation formulations, confirming that our method is universally applicable. The modified HTL with ADAHI raised the VOC drastically from 1.10 to 1.245 V, which is only 365 mV below the bad gap energy (Eg) of the perovskite and is the highest value reported to date for a perovskite with a bandgap of 1.61 eV. This indicates that ADAHI is very effective at passivating electronic defect states present at the interface between the perovskite and the spiro hole conductor, as a result reducing non-radiative carrier recombination. Furthermore, solid-state NMR spectroscopy shows that ADAHI interacts with the perovskite surface, which translates to greatly improved stability of unencapsulated PSCs operating under an inert nitrogen atmosphere. We report that PCE losses after 500 h under continuous full intensity solar illumination at the maximum power point are negligible.
Results and discussion
We employ a standard n–i–p device architecture based on a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold infiltrated with a perovskite, as shown schematically in Fig. 1c. The optical properties and film morphology of the triple A-cation perovskite employed (Fig. S1, ESI†) indicate a high-quality absorber layer with a bandgap of 1.61 eV. The perovskite film was deposited using the anti-solvent method. The ADAHX-containing HTL solution was prepared by modifying the method used for the reference solution. After dissolving spiro in chlorobenzene to obtain a light-yellow solution, we added ADAHX together with a sufficient amount of 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) to produce a clear beige solution. Subsequently, the lithium salt of bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide (TFSI) was added similarly as for the reference solution. ADAHX could be dissolved in the solution only upon adding additional TBP. Previously, TBP has been shown to improve the adhesion between the perovskite and HTL, and as a result to contribute to the improvement of the photovoltaic properties of PSC devices.34 This approach has proven particularly effective for the ADAHI agent. More details can be found in the Experimental section.
The spatial distribution of iodide species in the PSC devices was investigated by mass spectrometry (MS). In the devices comprising ADAHI, the additional iodide species are mostly accumulated at the perovskite/HTL interface, as shown by the time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) technique. The depth profile of the iodide species within the device structure (Fig. S2, ESI†) indicates that there is a larger amount of iodide present within the ADAHI-modified spiro HTL as compared to the reference. The ADAHI-treated device demonstrates a smooth change in iodide concentration on going from the spiro to the perovskite layer, indicating accumulation of iodide at the interface (the rectangular area shown in Fig. S2 focuses on the interfacial region between the perovskite and the spiro layers, ESI†). On the contrary, in the reference cell the local variation of the iodide occurs abruptly, which suggests that the iodide species accumulate at the interface between the perovskite and HTL layers upon treatment, which can contribute to passivating the surface trap states formed e.g. by iodide vacancies.
The structural properties were further analysed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the spiro films with and without treatment with the ADAHI additive (Fig. 2a). The I (3d) peak in the XPS of the ADAHI-containing film indicates the presence of iodide. From the XPS analysis, the concentration of iodide species inside the ADAHI-modified spiro is in the range of 0.08–0.15 wt%. This iodide content is expected to affect the optical properties of the material, which were probed using UV-visible absorption of spiro solution with ADAHI (Fig. 2b). The results show that the absorption edge is shifted to longer wavelengths in the presence of the additive, as indicated by the colour change of the spiro solution with ADAHI.
 Fig. 2  Structural characterization of the HTL upon treatment with ADAHI. (a) XPS spectra of the reference and ADAHI-treated spiro layers. (b) UV-visible absorption spectra of spiro solutions without and with ADAHI. Top-view EBIC images of devices based on reference (c) and ADAHI modified (d) spiro HTLs. 
The effect of the treatment on the electronic properties of the interface between the perovskite layer and HTL was investigated by electron beam-induced current (EBIC) measurements (Fig. 2c and d). In this measurement, the electron beam was incident on the gold side of the PSC and the voltage and current were fixed to 10 kV and 170 pA, respectively. We have calculated the voltage required to reach the perovskite/spiro junction by a Monte Carlo simulation of the electron trajectories using CASINO (Fig. S3, ESI†).35 The EBIC image extracted from the interface between the perovskite and HTL (Fig. S3, ESI†) originates from the charge carriers excited by the electron beam in the perovskite layer. The signal is not uniform in the reference cell and some areas show strong carrier generation (Fig. 2c), while other areas exhibit poor signal with negligible intensity, implying a faster charge recombination at the interface. In contrast, the EBIC image of the material treated with ADAHI shows a strong and uniform signal, indicating that the carriers can be easily separated and extracted at the interface with a lower recombination rate (Fig. 2d). The EBIC results demonstrate that the ADAHI-modified HTL is characterised by uniform and high charge collection efficiency throughout the surface.
In order to elucidate the atomic-level origin of the effect of ADAHI on the optoelectronic properties of the perovskite/HTL interface, we carried out solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy measurements using α-FAPbI3 as a model perovskite treated by ADAHI (Fig. 3; for more details refer to the Experimental section). The nitrogen-14 magic angle spinning (14N MAS) NMR spectra of mechanochemical α-FAPbI3 feature a 14N spinning sideband (SSB) pattern, corresponding to the FA cation reorienting on the picosecond timescale. Its width is altered upon treatment with ADAHI (Fig. 3a and b). It has been previously shown that the width of the 14N SBB manifold correlates with the symmetry of the cuboctahedral cavity in which the FA reorientation takes place, whereby a narrower 14N SBB manifold indicates higher reorientation symmetry closer to cubic.36,37 The 14N MAS spectrum of mechanochemical α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI (Fig. 3b) shows a narrower SBB manifold compared to the untreated reference (Fig. 3a), which indicates that ADAHI modifies the intrinsic crystallographic symmetry of the α-FAPbI3 phase during growth. No δ-FAPbI3 phase was observed under these experimental conditions (Fig. S4, ESI†). Moreover, since the central peak in the 14N MAS spectra has an identical shift for both the reference and the treated material, we conclude that the structural modification is subtle and that the ADAHI is most likely interacting with the surface of the perovskite phase. This is in accordance with its large size, precluding incorporation of ADAHI as an A-site cation into the bulk of the perovskite.37 This hypothesis was further supported by 13C NMR spectra of α-FAPbI3 in the pristine form and treated with ADAHI. The spectra reveal no change in the 13C chemical shift of the main perovskite phase, confirming it is still present as α-FAPbI3 (dashed line, Fig. 3c and d). In addition, in the ADAHI-doped sample, a new chemical species appears around 156 ppm (red arrow, Fig. 3d, shifted by about 1 ppm down-field with respect to the reference α-FAPbI3, Fig. 3c). This corresponds to a new FA environment arising from the presence of ADAHI and suggesting that these two species are interacting on the microscopic scale, consistent with a surface-type interaction. The interaction between ADAHI and α-FAPbI3 is further substantiated by the changes in the corresponding 13C resonances of ADAHI compared to the neat ADAHI (Fig. 3e and f). In the presence of ADAHI all 13C signals are significantly broadened (fwhm: 230–1150 Hz) and shifted, consistent with significant disorder of ADAHI interacting with the surface of α-FAPbI3. Note the signature of a new chemical environment at 26.2 ppm compared to neat ADAHI (fwhm: 60–140 Hz). We conclude that treatment of the perovskite material with ADAHI alters its structure as a consequence of its interaction with the perovskite surface, which is likely to occur through interaction of the ammonium function with the surface A cation vacancies. This in turn is expected to affect the thin film morphology and device performance.
 Fig. 3  Investigation of the origin of the ADAHI effect on the perovskite structure by NMR spectroscopy. 14N solid-state MAS NMR spectra at 21.1 T, 298 K and 5 kHz MAS of (a) α-FAPbI3 and (b) α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI. 13C CP solid-state MAS NMR spectra at 21.1 T, 100 K and 12 kHz MAS of (c) α-FAPbI3 and (d) α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI (the FA spectral region), as well as (e) neat ADAHI powder and (f) α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI (the ADAHI spectral region). The red arrow indicates a new FA environment present after treatment. The asterisk indicates a spinning sideband of the FA signal. α-FAPbI3 was prepared mechanochemically and the treated sample contains 7 mol% of ADAHI. MAS = magic angle spinning; CP = cross-polarization. 
The cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image provides a view of the solar cell device architecture (Fig. 4a), which consists of an FTO glass substrate coated by a thin compact TiO2 blocking layer (BL), 150 nm-thick mesoporous TiO2 (MP-TiO2), a 400 nm-thick perovskite layer, a 150 nm-thick ADAHI-modified spiro based HTL, and a gold contact with a thickness of 80 nm. The J–V curves of the best performing reference and ADAHI-modified spiro based PSC devices measured under simulated AM1.5G solar irradiation in forward and backward voltage scanning directions are shown in Fig. 4b. The reference cell gives a short circuit current (JSC) of 23.5 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.105 V, and a fill factor (FF) of 76.8%, resulting in a PCE of 19.9% measured under reverse scan. On the contrary, the device using the ADAHI-modified HTL exhibits greatly improved photovoltaic (PV) metrics with a JSC of 24.3 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.164 V, a FF of 77.3%, and a PCE of 21.9% (Fig. 4c). The figures of merit for the champion devices are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†), indicating that ADAHI enhances all the PV parameters. Importantly, devices treated with ADAHI show negligible J–V hysteresis. These results concur with the hypothesis of reduced radiationless carrier recombination due to the suppression of interfacial traps. The hysteresis indices of the champion devices based on the equation Hhysteresis = ((PCEbackward − PCEforward)/PCEbackward) × 100 are shown in Table S1 (ESI†). The Hhysteresis for the reference cell and for the ADAHI-modified device are 4.5 and 1.9, respectively.
 Fig. 4  Photovoltaic characterizations of PSC devices based on the reference and ADAHI-containing HTLs. (a) Cross-sectional view SEM image of the PSC device with the ADAHI-modified spiro HTL. (b) J–V curves of champion PSCs, (c) maximum power point tracking of the champion device, and (d) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of devices in the presence and absence of the ADAHI additive. Statistics of the photovoltaic parameters for the reference cell (red) and ADAHI-modified spiro-based device (blue), specifically showing the difference in VOC (e), JSC (f), FF (g), and PCE (h). 
In order to validate the JSC measured under simulated sunlight, external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements for photocurrent generation were performed (Fig. 4d). The overall EQE values are larger than 80% throughout the UV-vis region, yielding a JSC of 22.5 mA cm−2 for the reference cell and 23.7 mA cm−2 for the modified device. This agrees well with the measured JSC values confirming the absence of any significant mismatch between the sun simulator and the AM1.5 standard solar emission.
Furthermore, the improvement of the PV metrics upon ADAHI treatment was shown to be reproducible. Fig. 4e–h show the statistical distributions of photovoltaic parameters for devices without and with ADAHI. The average values of all photovoltaic parameters are enhanced for the ADAHI-modified spiro-based device as compared to the reference cell. This refers to the average values of VOC and JSC that are 100 mV and 0.9 mA cm−2 higher than those of the reference device, respectively. The reported performance of ADAHI-containing samples was characterised after optimizing the ADAHI concentration, as detailed in the ESI† (Fig. S5 shows the statistical PV data for different amounts of ADAHI in 500 μL HTL solution). The PV results are very sensitive to the concentration of ADAHI and 1.5 mg in 500 μL HTL solution was found to be optimal.
Having evaluated the effect of ADAHI on the perovskite solar cell performance, we support our claim on the unique and efficient approach as compared to common passivation techniques by spin-coating a thin layer of ADAHI on top of a perovskite film followed by annealing at 120 °C for 10 min (details provided in the ESI†). The statistical PV data comparing surface passivation with the addition of the ADAHI to the HTL (shown in Fig. S6, ESI†) clearly show that spin-coating the additive onto the surface of the perovskite is much less effective in improving the PV metrics than its addition to the HTL solution. Moreover, we have explored the effect of alternative halide counter ions in ADAHX (X: Cl−, Br−, I−) as additives on the PSC performance (Fig. S7, ESI†). The statistical PV parameters of devices based on reference and ADAHX-containing devices show that the increase in VOC is most pronounced for ADAHI, while other PV parameters are comparable for all three additives. We infer from this finding that ADAHI serves as a source for supplemental iodide ions, whose likely role is to suppress iodide vacancies present due to under-coordinated Pb ions at the perovskite surface.23 Such defects are expected to trap charge carriers and promote radiationless recombination. Interestingly, unprotonated ADA also improves the PV parameters compared to the reference cell, confirming the beneficial role of 1-aminoadamantane in the operation of the PSC devices.32 To illustrate the general validity of our approach, we applied it to single and double A-cation perovskite compositions and also employed PTAA instead of spiro that was modified by ADAHI. We fabricated PSC devices based on single (MAPbI3) and double (CsFAPbI3) A-cation perovskites and the statistical data for these devices (Fig. S8 and S9, ESI†) reveal trends in the PV performance that are consistent with those observed for the triple-A cation PSCs (Fig. 4e–h). From the PV results of the modified spiro-based devices, the average values of PCE for single and double A-cation PSCs are increased by 1.8 and 1.7% as compared to the reference cells, respectively, mainly due to the VOC enhancement. Additionally, we confirm that our method is applicable to other HTLs by fabricating a triple A-cation PSC device based on PTAA as the HTL without and with ADAHI addition. The statistical PV data for the corresponding devices (Fig. S10, ESI†) reveal that the average PCE value of devices based on modified PTAA shows a 1.2% PCE enhancement compared to the reference cell, mainly due to their higher VOC. Furthermore, in order to examine the role of the chemical structure of the additive to the HTM precursor solution in the PSC performance, we explored alternative agents as well, such as choline iodide and tert-buthylammonium iodide (TBAI). However, these additives show weaker effects as compared to ADAHI (Fig. S12, ESI†). This clearly emphasizes the importance of the structural features of the modulator to achieving the performance enhancement. In summary, these PV results demonstrate that our technique based on the ADAHI additive is generally applicable to supress radiationless carrier recombination and improve the performance of PSC devices.
To further assess the suppression of radiationless carrier recombination, the VOC of devices containing ADAHI-modified spiro were measured at 20 °C without an aperture under LED light with an intensity set to deliver the same short circuit current density as under AM1.5G sunlight (Fig. 5a). We obtained a maximum VOC value of 1.245 V, which is a record value for lead-iodide based perovskite solar cells.38 Moreover, the voltage deficit was analysed, defined as the difference between the bandgap/e (e is the elementary charge) and the measured VOC. Based on the bandgap of the triple A-cation perovskite used in this work (1.61 eV), the voltage deficit is calculated to be 365 mV, which is the lowest value reported for any solution-processed solar cell and surpasses for the first time the value for the highest-efficiency silicon solar cell (372 mV, see Table 1).38 Such a low value is expected to be accompanied by high luminescence yields under open circuit conditions. To quantify this metric, we measured the electroluminescence (EL) by applying a constant current to the solar cell, which is kept in the dark and operated as an LED (the inset image in Fig. 5a illustrates a solar cell emitting in the near IR/red spectral range). The external quantum efficiency of EL reaches 2.5% for a driving current density similar to the short circuit current density (Fig. 5b), which translates into a non-radiative loss as low as 94 mV, clearly surpassing the reported record value of 120 mV33 and even the value for the best silicon solar cell (99 mV, Table 1). We measure the IPCE onset accurately using FTPS and detect an Urbach energy of 15 meV (Fig. S11, ESI†). Using this data and the reciprocity between absorption and emission, as previously reported,39 we determine a maximum theoretical VOC of 1.343 V. This value is consistent with the experimental data and the non-radiative losses. Also, the predicted PL peaking at 1.61 eV (Fig. S11, ESI†) matches with the measured EL spectrum (Fig. 5c). Interestingly, the EL reaches its maximum value after minutes (Fig. 5d), consistent with the VOC transient maximum (Fig. 5a). This is considerably slower than what is reported so far and indicates that applying a forward voltage reduces non-radiative losses, possibly because a redistribution of ions leads to a reduction of surface recombination as reported previously in the literature.40,41 After the initial increase, VOC reaches the maximum, followed by a small voltage loss of 40 mV (Fig. 5a), and stabilizes to reach a steady state after approximately 80 s, which is reflected in the stabilized power output (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 5  Open circuit voltage and electroluminescence measurements of PSCs treated by ADAHI. (a) VOC tracking over 80 s. (b) EQEELversus driving current density extracted from the plateau values of (d). (c) EL spectrum of the device showing a maximum at 770 nm (1.61 eV). (d) Photon flux from the device over time at various driving currents showing the EL stability with time. 
Table 1 Open circuit voltage (VOC) and electroluminescence results of the device based on the modified HTL by ADAHI as compared to the previous work by Saliba et al. and the record silicon solar cell




Device

V
OC max theory (mV)
EQEEL at 20 mA cm−2
Non-rad. loss (mV)

V
OC calculated (mV)

V
OC measured (mV)

E
g (eV)

E
g/e − VOC (mV)




This work
1343
2.5%
94
1249
1245
1.61
365


Saliba et al.33
1360
1%
120
—
1240
1.63
390


Best silicon devices38
837


99


738
1.11
372




For commercialisation of PSCs, however, the performance is not sufficient as stability under full sunlight, heat stress, and moisture still remain a challenge. In order to probe the effect of ADAHI addition to spiro as the HTL on the resilience against moisture of the PSC, the contact angle (CA) of a water droplet on the HTL was measured (Fig. 6a and b). Upon addition of ADAHI to the spiro, the CA of water increased sharply from 38° to 91°, suggesting a dramatic decrease in water wettability induced by the additive. Besides increasing the hydrophobicity of the HTL surface, ADAHI was shown to improve its morphology, as demonstrated by SEM images (Fig. 6c and d). After the deposition of the spiro HTL, voids are visible within the layer based on the top view SEM images (marked by red circles in Fig. 6c). On the contrary, the ADAHI-modified spiro HTL demonstrates a more uniform layer (Fig. 6d), which is likely to assist in long-term stability of the PSCs. The device stability tests under continuous light illumination and maximum power point tracking at room temperature under nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 6e) show 18% PCE loss for the reference, whereas a negligibly small performance loss of the device employing ADAHI-modified spiro is observed even after 500 h operation in full sunlight. This highlights the impact of the treatment on the operational stability.
 Fig. 6  Stability test and surface analysis of HTLs for PSC devices without and with ADAHI. Contact angle measurement of a water droplet on the surface of reference (a) and ADAHI containing spiro HTLs (b). Top-view SEM images of the spiro HTL on top of the perovskite film in the absence (c) and presence (d) of ADAHI. Red circles indicate apparent voids in the film. (e) Stability test of PSC devices based on reference and ADAHI modified spiro HTLs for 500 h under continuous full sun illumination and maximum power point tracking. 
Conclusions
In conclusion, our study presents a novel approach to improving the quality of the perovskite/hole-transporting layer interface by using an organic agent based on 1-adamantylammonium iodide that enhances the PSC performance. We demonstrated that addition of ADAHI into the HTL suppresses radiationless charge carrier recombination, increasing substantially the photovoltaic performance. Based on this approach, we achieved a PCE of 21.9% for the triple A-cation perovskite solar cell with an average VOC of 1.185 V. Moreover, this modification resulted in a significant improvement of the stability of unencapsulated devices under an inert atmosphere, enabling retention of the PCE value within a few percent after 500 h under continuous light illumination. This opens up a new avenue in perovskite solar cell research towards future applications.
Experimental
Synthesis of ADAHX (X = Cl, Br, I)
1-Adamantylamine (ADA) and HX (I, Br, Cl) were mixed with a 1:1 molar ratio and 5 mL ethanol was added into the solution. The solvent was removed using a rotary evaporator at 50 °C under vacuum in order to obtain a solid powder of ADAHX. The powder was then purified by washing with diethyl ether several times, followed by drying to obtain the final product.
Perovskite mechanosynthesis
Starting materials were stored inside a glove box under argon. Perovskite powders were synthesized by grinding the reactants in an electric ball mill (Retsch Ball Mill MM-200) using a grinding jar (10 mL) and a ball (Ø 10 mm) for 30 min at 25 Hz. The resulting powders were packed into 3.2 mm zirconia rotors and annealed at 150 °C for 10 min, transferred into the NMR probe, and the measurements were carried out under a dry nitrogen atmosphere. The amounts of reagents taken into the synthesis were based on the following molar ratios: (a) pristine FAPbI3:FAI:bI2 = 1:1, and (b) the doped material: ADAHI:FAI:PbI2 = 2:29:30.
Preparation of the HTL solution
To prepare the HTL adduct, spiro-OMeTAD was dissolved in chlorobenzene solvent with a concentration of 70 mM. Then, different amounts of ADAHI (0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5 mg) were added into the 500 μL spiro solution. To improve the solubility of the spiro solution, 32 μL of 4-tert-butyl pyridine (TBP) was added into the solution following by stirring for 30 min (11 μL more TBP was added into the solution as compared to the reference to increase the solubility of ADAHI). After obtaining a clear solution, 12.34 μL of bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide lithium salt (Li-TFSI, Sigma-Aldrich) solution (520 mg/1 mL acetonitrile) was added in order to obtain a clear yellowish adduct. In the case of PTAA-based devices, 1.5 mg of HTL powder was dissolved into 1.5 mL of toluene, followed by adding 15 μL TBP. Then, ADAHI powder was dissolved in the solution after stirring for 1 h. Afterward, 2.4 μL of Li-TFSI solution (520 mg/1 mL acetonitrile) was added into the solution to attain a clear adduct.
Preparation of the reference HTL solution
Spiro-OMeTAD powder was dissolved in chlorobenzene to obtain a solution with 70 mM concentration. Then, 21 μL of TBP and 12.34 μL of Li salt solution (520 mg/1 mL acetonitrile) were added into the spiro solution to obtain a clear solution. In the case of the PTAA-based devices, 15 mg of the HTL powder was dissolved into 1.5 mL of toluene. Then, 4 μL of TBP and 2.4 μL of Li-TFSI (520 mg/1 mL acetonitrile) were added to obtain the final HTL solution.
Preparation of substrates and the ETL
Nippon Sheet Glass (10 Ω sq−1) was selected as a substrate for the solar cell device and etched by using zinc powder and diluted HCL solution. Then, the FTO substrates were cleaned within four steps of sonification for 20 min in the following solutions, respectively: Triton X100 (1 vol% in deionized water), deionized water, acetone, and ethanol. All substrates were cleaned by UV/ozone for 15 min. Then, a precursor solution of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in anhydrous ethanol was deposited on substrates at 450 °C via spray pyrolysis, followed by 30 min annealing at this temperature to obtain a TiO2 blocking layer. Afterward, 150 nm-thick mesoporous TiO2 was spin-coated for 20 s at 4000 rpm with a ramp of 2000 rpm s−1 from a diluted TiO2 paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) and annealed at 450 °C for 30 min. The TiO2 layer was treated with Li-TFSI solution (0.1 M solution in acetonitrile) by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 40 s (2000/s ramp rate) followed by annealing at 450 °C for 30 min. After cooling down to 150 °C, all substrates were transferred into the glovebox immediately for deposition of the perovskite film.
Fabrication of perovskite films
The triple A-cation perovskite solution was prepared by dissolving the following commercial precursors to obtain the final concentration reported in brackets: formamidinium iodide (FAI) (1.15 M, Dyesol), PbI2 (1.2 M, TCI), methylammonium bromide (MABr) (0.2 M, Dyesol) and PbBr2 (0.2 M, TCI) in a mixed solvent containing DMF/DMSO (4:1 volume ratio), followed by adding 5 vol% of CsI solution (1.5 M in DMSO). The solution was prepared by heating the mixture at 120 °C for 1 h. Thereafter, the perovskite solution was deposited by spin coating in two-steps, i.e., 1000 rpm for 10 s and 6000 rpm for 30 s. 200 μL of chlorobenzene (CB) as an anti-solvent was dropped on top of the film 10 seconds before ending spinning. Then, the film was annealed at 120 °C and 100 °C for 10 min and 40 min, respectively. For the single A-cation perovskite, MAPbI3 perovskite was prepared by mixing a 1.05 to 1 molar ratio of PbI2 and methylammonium iodide (MAI) in DMF/DMSO (4:1 volume ratio) as a solvent at 75 °C. In the case of the Cs/FA double A-cation perovskite, a mixture of the following commercial precursors was employed to obtain the final concentration reported in brackets: PbI2 (1 M), PbBr2 (0.4 M), FAI (1.12 M), and CsI (0.23 M) dissolved in DMF:DMSO = 4:1 (volume ratio) solvent at 120 °C. The same spin coating process and anti-solvent technique were used for both single and double A-cation perovskite films.
Back contact deposition
After annealing of perovskite films, the HTL solution was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 20 s (with a ramp rate of 2000 rpm s−1). Finally, a gold electrode was deposited using thermal evaporation in order to get an 80 nm-thick electrode. The active area of the device was 0.16 cm2.
Passivation of the perovskite film
After annealing of the triple A-cation perovskite film, a solution of ADAHI in isopropanol (1.5 mg mL−1) was spin coated on top of the films, followed by annealing at 120 °C for 10 min. The spin coating was performed at 6000 rpm for 20 s (ramp rate: 2000 rpm s−1).
Film characterization
The morphology of perovskite and spiro layers was studied by a ZEISS Merlin high resolution scanning electron microscope (HRSEM). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained by a Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer (USA) utilizing Cu Kα radiation. For UV-vis measurement, a Varian Cary 5 was used. To analyze the HTL layer, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was employed using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher SCIENTIFIC INC., USA) with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV) as the source. Contact angle measurement was performed using a DSA100 (KRUSS).
Solid-state NMR measurements
Solid-state MAS 13C (226.3 MHz) and 14N (65.0 MHz) NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance Neo 21.1 T spectrometer equipped with a 3.2 mm low-temperature CPMAS probe. 13C chemical shifts were referenced to solid adamantane at 298 K (CH: 29.456 ppm, CH2: 38.484 ppm). 14N spectra were referenced to solid NH4Cl (0 ppm) at 298 K. Recycle delays of 0.1 s (14N), 3 s (1H–13C CP on α-FAPbI3 and α-FAPbI3 doped with ADAHI), and 1200 s (1H–13C CP on neat ADAHI) were used.
Device measurement
A digital source meter (Keithley model 2400, USA) and a 450 W xenon lamp (Oriel, USA) as a light source were employed to record the photovoltaic curves. A Schott K113 Tempax sunlight filter (Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH, Germany) was used to filter the spectral output of the lamp. A black aperture was used to mask devices with a fixed area of 0.16 cm2 and prevent any artifacts, caused by light scattering. The voltage scan rate was fixed to 10 mV s−1. To record J–V curves, the light intensity was set to 1000 W m−2 which is a standard for solar cell measurement. For J–V sweeps, the voltage range was between 0 and 1.2 V, with a step increment of 0.005 V and a delay time of 200 ms at each point. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded by employing a commercial apparatus (Arkeo-Ariadne, Cicci Research s.r.l.) based on a 300 Watt xenon lamp.
Electroluminescence and VOC measurement

V
OC and electroluminescence were measured at room temperature (20 °C) using the above LED setup. The devices were measured without an aperture under argon flow in order to prevent degradation during operation.
Electroluminescence yield
To measure the electroluminescence yield, the emitted photon flux was recorded using a calibrated standard Si photodiode (Hamamatsu S1227-1010BQ) by applying either a constant current or by applying a varying potential to the device. A Bio-Logic SP300 potentiostat was used to apply a driving voltage or current and measure the short-circuit current of the detector at a second channel.
EBIC measurement
An FEI Helios scanning electron microscope (SEM) was employed to measure the electron beam induced current (EBIC). An electron beam (10 kV with 170 pA) was applied on top of a full device including a gold electrode to excite a constant number of carriers. The required voltage in this experiment was calculated by Monte Carlo simulation using CASINO software35 in order to reach to the perovskite/spiro junction (Fig. S3, ESI†).
TOF-SIMS characterization
Cs+ primary ions (1 keV, 50 nA, and 300 × 300 μm2) were employed for TOF-SIMS measurement using ION-TOF. The sputter area was 0.02 mm2. A Bi+ pulsed primary ion beam was used for analysis (25 keV energy, 1pA current, and 48 × 48 μm2). The measurement was performed in interlaced mode with a 2.5 s sputtering time after each analysis cycle.
DFT calculations
DFT calculations were conducted with the Gaussian 09 Rev. D suite of programs,42,43 and performed on the Fidis computer cluster of EPF Lausanne. The geometry optimizations were performed at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level of theory.
Stability test
The stability of devices was studied using a Biologic MPG2 potentiostat under a full AM 1.5 Sun-equivalent white LED lamp. Herein, the maximum power point (MPP) of devices was recorded every 10 s under continuous light illumination in a nitrogen environment. To control the substrate temperature, a Peltier element was located in direct contact with the devices. To monitor the temperature, a thermocouple between the Peltier element and substrates was used. The active device area was fixed to 0.16 cm2. In order to track the variation of photovoltaic parameters, the J–V curves were measured every 15 min. The operational stability test data points were collected after initial light soaking to reach a steady state power output.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written by M. M. T., M. G., and J. V. M. through contributions of all authors. The idea of the study was conceived by M. G. and M. M. T. The device fabrication, measurement and film characterizations were performed by M. M. T. Apart from contributing to the writing and editing of the manuscript, J. V. M. performed the characterization of ADAHI and contributed to elucidating its interaction with the perovskite. W. T. conducted the luminescence spectroscopy and performed the VOC measurement. D. J. K. and L. E. performed the solid-state NMR studies to probe the interaction with the perovskite. M. G. supervised the project. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the study.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. M. T. would like to thank Research Laboratory of Electronics (RLE) at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) for their support. M. G. thanks the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST) for financial support. M. G. and J. V. M. are grateful to the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement No. 687008 (GOTSolar). W. T. acknowledges the Swiss National Science Foundation for an Ambizione Energy fellowship and also thanks Dr Terry Chien-Jen Yang and Dr Bjoern Niesen for assisting him with the FTPS measurement. D. J. K. and L. E acknowledge support from Swiss National Science Foundation Grant No. 200021_160112. M. M. T. and M. G. want to thank Dr Shaik Mohammed Zakeeruddin for his assistance in this work.
Notes and references
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, S. H. Cheung, H. C. Gokkaya, S. K. So, A. B. Djurišić, Y. Wan, X. Wu and C. Surya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, K. H. Tsui, Q. Zhang, J. He, Y. Yao, D. Li and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10287–10295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
National Center for Photovoltaics (NCPV) at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) efficiency chart http://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png.
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, L. Gu, Y. Gao, C. Reckmeier, J. He, A. L. Rogach, Y. Yao and Z. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14083 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Min, Z. G. Zhang, Y. Hou, C. O. Ramirez Quiroz, T. Przybilla, C. Bronnbauer, F. Guo, K. Forberich, H. Azimi, T. Ameri and E. Spiecker, Chem. Mater., 2014, 27, 227–234 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, A. Simchi, X. Mo and Z. Fan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1520–1525 RSC .
M. Xu, J. Feng, X. L. Ou, Z. Y. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, H. Y. Wang and H. B. Sun, IEEE Photonics J., 2016, 8, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, R. Tavakoli, S. Hasanzadeh and M. H. Mirfasih, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 19531–19536 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, R. Tavakoli, Z. Nourbakhsh, A. Waleed, U. S. Virk and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500790 CrossRef .
T. Li, Y. Pan, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12602–12652 RSC .
F. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Luo, N. Pellet, C. Yi, X. Li, X. Zhao, T. J. S. Dennis, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Gratzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606806 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, L. Tao, F. Huang, Q. Sun, X. Zhao, J. Han, Y. Shen and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell and P. Kanjanaboos, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, F. Shao, Y. Wang, T. Xu, D. Wang and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J. D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 102 Search PubMed .
W. Li, H. Dong, X. Guo, N. Li, J. Li, G. Niu and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20105–20111 RSC .
J. P. Correa-Baena, W. Tress, K. Domanski, E. H. Anaraki, S. H. Turren-Cruz, B. Roose, P. P. Boix, M. Grätzel, M. Saliba, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1207–1212 RSC .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Qin, S. Tanaka, S. Ito, N. Tetreault, K. Manabe, H. Nishino, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, E. Spiecker, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, A. Hirsch, P. Schmuki, H. P. Steinrück, R. H. Fink, M. Halik, H. J. Snaith and C. J. A. Brabec, Science, 2017, 358, 1192–1197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kitagawa, H. Matsubara, K. Komatsu, K. Hirai, T. Okazaki and T. Hase, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4275–4282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, D. Bi, L. Pan, A. Hagfeldt, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800275 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, N. Salim, Y. Wu, X. Yang, A. Islam, W. Chen, J. Liu, E. Bi, F. Xie, M. Cai and L. Han, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10738–10743,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201602822 .
D. Drouin, A. R. A. Couture, D. Joly, X. Tastet, V. Aimez and R. Gauvin, Scanning, 2007, 29, 92–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, P. Péchy, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10055–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14173–14180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, D. H. Levi, Y. Hishikawa, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger and A. W. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2017, 26, 3–12 CrossRef .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, O. Inganäs, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Graetzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400812 CrossRef .
W. Tress, M. Yavari, K. Domanski, P. Yadav, B. Niesen, J. P. C. Baena, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 151–165 RSC .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .

          J. B. Foresman and A. Frisch, Exploring Chemistry with Electronic Structure Methods, 2nd edn, Gaussian, Inc., Pittsburg,  1995 Search PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch; G. W. Trucks; H. B. Schlegel; G. E. Scuseria; M. A. Robb; J. R. Cheeseman; G. Scalmani; V. Barone; B. Mennucci; G. A. Petersson; H. Nakatsuji; M. Caricato; X. Li; H. P. Hratchian; A. F. Izmaylov; J. Bloino; G. Zheng; J. L. Sonnenberg; M. Hada; M. Ehara; K. Toyota; R. Fukuda; J. Hasegawa; M. Ishida; T. Nakajima; Y. Honda; O. Kitao; H. Nakai; T. Vreven; J. A. Montgomery Jr.; J. E. Peralta; F. Ogliaro; M. Bearpark; J. J. Heyd; E. Brothers; K. N. Kudin; V. N. Staroverov; R. Kobayshi; J. Normand; K. Raghavachari; A. Rendell; J. C. Burant; S. S. Iyengar; J. Tomasi; M. Cossi; N. Rega; J. M. Millam; M. Klene; J. E. Knox; J. B. Cross; V. Bakken; C. Adamo; J. Jaramillo; R. Gomperts; R. E. Stratmann; O. Yazyev; A. J. Austin; R. Cammi; C. Pomelli; J. W. Ochterski; R. L. Martin; K. Morokuma; V. G. Zakrzewski; G. A. Voth; P. Salvador; J. J. Dannenberg; S. Dapprich; A. D. Daniels; Ö. Farkas; J. B. Foresman; J. V. Ortiz; J. Cioslowski and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, Revision A.1, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford, CT,  2009 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee02404a‡ Present address: Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
Metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted tremendous attention in the field of photovoltaics due to their rapid progress in efficiency, low-cost processing, fantastic optoelectronic properties and ease of fabrication. Non-radiative recombination losses especially at the interfaces are a big challenge in PSCs and affect the performance, stability, and reproducibility of devices. Our new findings report on a major breakthrough in PSC research to address this issue. We discovered an amazingly effective way to mitigate the radiationless recombination of charge carriers at the interface between the perovskite and the hole transporting layer (HTL) by adding a molecular modulator into the HTL solution. Among all alternatives, we found that adamantylammonium hydroiodide (ADAHI) prevents non-radiative interfacial carrier recombination drastically, resulting in a highly efficient PSC with an open circuit voltage of up to 1245 mV, an external electroluminescence yield of 2.5% and great operational stability. The loss in potential for the fabricated device using this approach is only 365 mV with respect to the band gap, which surpasses even the best silicon solar cell (372 mV). Our proposed approach opens up a new direction for fabrication of highly efficient and stable PSCs using efficient molecular modulators.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the treated perovskite solar cell. (a) Chemical structure of ADAHX. (b) Optimized geometry (DFT B3LYP/6-31G(d)) of ADAH+. (c) Schematic of the device architecture indicating the presence of ADAHI on the surface of the perovskite film. Spiro = 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene; ADAHX = 1-adamantylammonium halide (X = I, iodide).	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural characterization of the HTL upon treatment with ADAHI. (a) XPS spectra of the reference and ADAHI-treated spiro layers. (b) UV-visible absorption spectra of spiro solutions without and with ADAHI. Top-view EBIC images of devices based on reference (c) and ADAHI modified (d) spiro HTLs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Investigation of the origin of the ADAHI effect on the perovskite structure by NMR spectroscopy. 14N solid-state MAS NMR spectra at 21.1 T, 298 K and 5 kHz MAS of (a) α-FAPbI3 and (b) α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI. 13C CP solid-state MAS NMR spectra at 21.1 T, 100 K and 12 kHz MAS of (c) α-FAPbI3 and (d) α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI (the FA spectral region), as well as (e) neat ADAHI powder and (f) α-FAPbI3 treated with ADAHI (the ADAHI spectral region). The red arrow indicates a new FA environment present after treatment. The asterisk indicates a spinning sideband of the FA signal. α-FAPbI3 was prepared mechanochemically and the treated sample contains 7 mol% of ADAHI. MAS = magic angle spinning; CP = cross-polarization.	 

 	Fig. 4  Photovoltaic characterizations of PSC devices based on the reference and ADAHI-containing HTLs. (a) Cross-sectional view SEM image of the PSC device with the ADAHI-modified spiro HTL. (b) J–V curves of champion PSCs, (c) maximum power point tracking of the champion device, and (d) external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of devices in the presence and absence of the ADAHI additive. Statistics of the photovoltaic parameters for the reference cell (red) and ADAHI-modified spiro-based device (blue), specifically showing the difference in VOC (e), JSC (f), FF (g), and PCE (h).	 

 	Fig. 5  Open circuit voltage and electroluminescence measurements of PSCs treated by ADAHI. (a) VOC tracking over 80 s. (b) EQEELversus driving current density extracted from the plateau values of (d). (c) EL spectrum of the device showing a maximum at 770 nm (1.61 eV). (d) Photon flux from the device over time at various driving currents showing the EL stability with time.	 

This work	1343	2.5%	94	1249	1245	1.61	365
Saliba et al.33	1360	1%	120	—	1240	1.63	390
Best silicon devices38	837	
	99	
	738	1.11	372

 	Fig. 6  Stability test and surface analysis of HTLs for PSC devices without and with ADAHI. Contact angle measurement of a water droplet on the surface of reference (a) and ADAHI containing spiro HTLs (b). Top-view SEM images of the spiro HTL on top of the perovskite film in the absence (c) and presence (d) of ADAHI. Red circles indicate apparent voids in the film. (e) Stability test of PSC devices based on reference and ADAHI modified spiro HTLs for 500 h under continuous full sun illumination and maximum power point tracking.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee02404a
‡ Present address: Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
