An overview of different strategies to introduce conductivity in metal–organic frameworks and miscellaneous applications thereof  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA04220A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA04220A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14992-15009An overview of different strategies to introduce conductivity in metal–organic frameworks and miscellaneous applications thereof

        
          
            Sanjeev K. 
            Bhardwaj
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Neha 
            Bhardwaj
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Rajnish 
            Kaur
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jyotsana 
            Mehta
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Amit L. 
            Sharma
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ki-Hyun 
            Kim
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Akash 
            Deep
          
        
      *ab
aCentral Scientific Instruments Organisation (CSIR-CSIO), Sector 30 C Chandigarh 160030, India. E-mail: dr.akashdeep@csio.res.in;  Fax: +91 0172-2657287;   Tel: +91 0172-2672236
bAcademy of Scientific and Innovative Research, CSIR-CSIO, Sector 30 C, Chandigarh 160030, India
cDepartment of Physics, Panjab University, Sector 14, Chandigarh-160014, India
dDepartment of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-Ro, Seoul 133-791, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kkim61@hanyang.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 2 2220 1945;   Tel: +82 2220 2325
Received 
      7th May 2018
    , Accepted 1st July 2018First published on 3rd July 2018AbstractMetal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are known to possess many interesting material properties such as high specific surface area, tailorable porosity, adsorption/absorption capabilities, post-synthetic modifications, and chemical/thermal stabilities. Because of these unique features, they have been explored for the development of sensors for a variety of analytes. A large proportion of pre-existing MOF-based sensors are well suited for optical transductions due to a lack of electrical conduction in their pristine forms. Hence, the development of MOF-based electrochemical/electrical sensors requires specialized strategies through which MOFs are modified or hybridized with enhanced conductive moieties (e.g., via doping or post synthetic modification). In this review article, we provide a comprehensive review of various synthetic and integrating strategies to improve electrical conductivity and long-range charge transport properties in MOFs. To this end, we have compiled details of different techniques that have been used to develop electrically/electrochemically active platforms for MOF-based sensing of various targets.
1. Introduction
Metal–organic frameworks are a novel class of porous materials with exceptional properties (including high surface area (e.g., up to 10000 m2 g−1), stable luminescence, thermal and chemical stabilities, tunable pore sizes (e.g., up to 5 nm), functionality on the internal surface, and high crystallinity).1–3 These unique properties of MOFs are attributed to their molecular-scale porous characteristics. MOFs can be synthesized in many desired geometries by the judicious selection of metal centers and multidentate ligands of varying lengths. Thus, a large number of MOFs are available in one- (1-D), two- (2-D), or three-dimensional (3-D) structural forms.
The strategies and principles involved in the synthesis of MOFs are well-known and can be classified as solvothermal, microwave-facilitated, mechanochemical, electrochemical, direct precipitation, and sonochemical methods.4–7 They can be obtained as powders, suspensions, or thin films. A wide range of MOF thin films have been made for sensing applications for which both in situ and post-synthetic approaches have been reported.2,8,9 The choice of the metal component in MOFs is quite important as they can coordinate with labile solvent molecules or counter ions. For instance, partial charge(s) on metal sites can endow MOFs with some specific adsorptive and catalytic properties.10–12 On the other hand, the selection of organic linkers (e.g., methyl, amine, halogen, or other substituents) influences the porosity and chemical functionality of the framework. The availability of functional groups on MOFs is of particular interest in the subsequent development of MOF-composites with other nanomaterials because these groups are crucial for in situ or post-synthetic functionalization.
In light of the many fascinating properties of MOFs, the quest for redox-active and/or electrically conductive MOFs has become an area of great scientific interest in the development of multifunctional materials. Most MOFs are known to behave as insulators (conductivity values lower than 10−10 S cm−1) due to their low-energy charge transport pathways.13 Some experimental and theoretical (first-principles band calculations based on density functional theory) studies have been carried out to explore conductivity in some MOFs.14 The results of these studies identified the lack of mobility in charge carriers as the basic reason behind the poor conductivity of MOFs. MOFs tend to exhibit an insulating behavior because electron transfer proceeds weakly between non-redox-active metal centers and organic linkers.15
The primary properties of MOFs can be modified through various routes such as composite formation, post-synthetic modification, or incorporation of guest molecules.16,17 The material structure can be modulated in different ways to produce electroactive MOFs, as explained in many earlier articles.5,14,15 For example, conductivity in MOFs for electrical applications can be introduced by hybridizing them with other conductive media.5 Alternatively, porous MOFs can be impregnated with guest molecules or mixed with other conducting/semiconducting nanomaterials (e.g., quantum dots (QDs), nanoparticles (NPs), and graphene). The use of a conductive linker molecule has also been proposed to facilitate electron-transfer in MOFs. For example, a nickel-based MOF (Ni3(HITP)2) with an electrically conducting linker showed conductivities in the range of 2 × 10−2 (pellet form) to 40 × 10−2 S m−1 (film form).18 All the above approaches have been used to impart different levels of conductivities while also preserving the important properties including high surface area, accessible porosity, and chemical/thermal stabilities.
Electrically conducting MOFs are useful in various applications such as artificial light harvesting, self-regulated environmentally responsive systems, fuel cells, thermoelectrics, resistive materials, and chemosensors (for the detection of trace chemicals in medical or security applications).19–21 MOFs are also extremely useful as catalysts and adsorbents due to their high surface area and vacant pores. If such MOFs can be tailored to include conductivity, the detailed processes of catalysis and adsorption/absorption can also be monitored through appropriate electrochemical techniques. Electroactive MOFs are also exciting materials for supercapacitor applications because the performance of supercapacitors is highly influenced by the surface area of the material.22–25 Thus, MOFs are a potential alternative to replace pre-existing carbon-based materials.
This review article is organized to critically discuss major approaches used to introduce conductivity in different MOFs. To this end, we discuss methods of synthesis and modification along with specific examples of applications. We offer the first comprehensive review of all the available options for designing and developing electroactive platforms based on MOFs and their modified forms. The incorporation of a variety of guest molecules in MOFs (e.g., metal nanoclusters, metal oxides, conducting polymers, and cationic molecules) is a potential way to impart conductivity since MOFs have abundant pores and pendant groups. MOF-hybrid composites (made with conducting polymers, graphene, graphene oxide, and carbon nanotubes) are also highly useful for enhancing optoelectronic properties. The discussion is also extended to illustrate the usefulness and emerging applications of the conducting platforms of MOFs in many fields including sensing of molecules (such as hydroquinone, catechol, glucose, parathion, atrazine, etc.), photovoltaics, and catalysis.
2. Conducting MOFs
MOFs are formed by connecting rigid metal ions to organic linkers.13 Like the latter, the former also become redox-inactive species after their binding. Thus, MOFs generally exhibit insulating properties (i.e., low conductivities in the range of <10−10 S cm−1) in the absence of free charge carriers and low-energy pathways for charge transport. Obtaining adequate levels of conductivity in MOFs is achieved through specialized strategies, such as incorporation of guest molecules, doping with redox-active compounds, and hybridization with conducting polymers (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Flow diagram depicting different strategies for the development of conducting MOFs. 
The positions of band structures in many MOFs have been explored computationally. These investigations suggest that a deliberate selection of metal ions and ligands can control the conductivity (metallic, semi-conducting, or insulating) and associated band gap behaviors.26 For instance, density functional theory (DFT) based analysis of six important MOFs (including MOF-5 and HKUST-1) established their valence band energies and reference potentials.14 Likewise, Komatsu and colleagues (2015) used DFT first-principles band calculations to predict possible ways of introducing electroactivity in MIL-140A.27 They reported that the band conduction in MOF is inhibited because of a very narrow bandwidth mismatch between the frontier orbitals of the ligand and metal ion. The width of the lowest conduction band (CB) of MIL-140A almost doubled when zirconium was replaced with titanium. Fluorination of terephthalates led to further improvement in its bandwidth. Thus, a titanium-substituted MIL-140A made using fluorinated ligands yielded an n-type semiconductor. The upcoming subsections review the status of different experimental strategies used to obtain electrically conductive MOFs.
2.1 Synthesis of conducting MOFs using specific linkers
Two-dimensional (2D) conducting MOFs can be synthesized by selecting some specific linkers that can generate charge transport pathways upon coordination with their metal ion counterparts. In some cases, such 2D structural patterns provide good charge delocalization, which, in turn, resulted in good electrical conductivity in these MOFs. [Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2] (an analogue of MOF-74) is an example of this behavior.28 This MOF was synthesized using an organic ligand (i.e., H4DSBDC) that is basically a thiolated analogue of H4DOBDC (2,5-dihydroxybenzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid). The formation of Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2 took place by the assembly of an infinite 1D metal–sulfur chain (–M–S–)∞ as opposed to (–M–O–)∞ chains in the case of MOF-74. Flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (FP-TRMC) measurements revealed a charge mobility value of 2 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the above MOF, which proved that Mn–S chains generated charge transport pathways. The same group of researchers reported the synthesis of an Fe analogue (Fe2(DSBDC)(DMF)2) of Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2.29 This MOF was synthesized by the reaction of anhydrous iron chloride (FeCl2) and H4DSBDC in a medium of N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). The electrical properties of Fe2(DSBDC)(DMF)2 were measured (two-probe current–voltage technique) after compressing it into a pellet, and the obtained results exhibited a conductivity of 3.9 × 10−6 S cm−1, which was nearly six orders of magnitude higher than that of Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2 (2.5 × 10−12 S cm−1). The higher conductivity of the Fe-MOF was attributed to the presence of loosely bound Fe2+ β-spin electrons.
The semiconducting properties of Ni (metal) and dithiolene (organic linker) based 2D conducting MOFs (s-MOGs) have been explored previously.30 To this end, these authors first synthesized Ni3(HITP)2 (HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene) by the reaction of NiCl2·6H2O with HATP (2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaaminotriphenylene) in a medium of aqueous ammonia. The conductivity of Ni3(HITP)2 was measured to be 2 S cm−1 in a compressed pellet form (two-probe measurements). In contrast, the same MOF sample deposited as a film over a quartz substrate showed an increased conductivity value of 40 S cm−1 (four-probe measurements). The conductivity of Ni3(HITP)2 was found to show a proportional increase with increasing temperatures (77–450 K). Interestingly, the original values were restored upon cooling. Similarly, a Cu-based 2D MOF (Cu3(HITP)2) that shows electrical conductivity has been proposed.18 This MOF was prepared by the precipitation method that involved the reaction of CuSO4 (ammonical solution) and 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaaminotriphenylene hexahydrochloride (HATP·6HCl). A pressed pellet of Cu3(HITP)2 exhibited an electrical conductivity of 0.2 S cm−1 (two-point-probe measurements at RT). The above 2D MOF was able to detect sub-ppm levels (detection limit = 0.5 ppm) of ammonia vapors. It was also possible to reproduce the sensing results for about 10 successive cycles, which is an indication of the possible practical extension of the developed electroactive MOF.
Apart from 2D candidates, some 3D MOFs have also been engineered as conducting materials. In this context, Usman et al. were probably the first group of researchers who reported the assembly of a Sr-based 3D MOF, i.e., [Sr(Hbtc)(H2O)]n.31 The synthesis was achieved by the reaction of equimolar amounts of Sr(NO3)2 and 1,2,4-benzenetricarboxylic acid (1,2,4-H3btc) under hydrothermal conditions. The two-probe measurement technique confirmed that the above MOF had temperature dependent electrically conductive properties. For example, a conductivity of 10−6 S cm−1 (i.e., a proportional AC conductivity of 10−9 to 10−7 S cm−1) was obtained at a temperature of 300 K. Some theoretical calculations were also carried out which suggest that the semiconducting behavior of [Sr(Hbtc)(H2O)]n was comparable to that of other commonly used semiconductor materials such as CdSe, ZnTe, and CdTe. Recently, the 3D MOF (NBu4)2-FeIII2(dhbq)3 (dhbq2−/3− = 2,5-dioxidobenzoquinone/1,2-dioxido-4,5-semiquinone) has been proposed and has the highest level of conductivity reported to date.32 Note that the above MOF used a paramagnetic semiquinoid linker. A dried pellet of this MOF was used to perform dc electrical conductivity measurements at RT, and the results showed an ohmic behavior within ±1 V. The corresponding electrical conductivity was 0.16 S cm−1. Cyclic voltammetry and magnetic susceptibility measurements were used to establish the role of mixed-valence ligands in the effective charge transport mechanism inside MOFs. The synthesis of a cadmium based redox-active MOF, Cd2.5(NO3)5(TPDAP)3(DMF)3(H2O)7.4 (TPDAP = 2,5,8-tri(4-pyridyl)1,3-diazaphenalene), was proposed by Kim et al.33 The redox-active properties of its ligand were helpful in achieving a conductivity of 1.80 × 10−8 S cm−1. Note that this MOF was also reported for humidity sensing application.33
2.2 Synthesis of conducting MOFs by incorporating dopants
The introduction of guest molecules is one of the most frequently adopted strategies to induce conductivity in an otherwise non-conducting coordination polymer. Vacant pores are frequently targeted to load a variety of guest molecules that can interconnect with secondary building units (SBUs) in a MOF.13 These guest species can be introduced during synthesis itself, or they can also be infused via post-synthetic modification (PSM). As a result, redox active sites can be created inside the network.34 Different categories of dopants that have been proposed over the years include redox active molecules (e.g., TCNQ), metal oxides, metal nanoclusters, conducting polymers, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and cationic species.

2.2.1 MOFs doped with redox-active molecules. 
The introduction of redox-active molecules like TCNQ (tetracyanoquinodimethane), ferrocene, and iodine into porous voids can result in conductive pathways inside MOFs. As discussed in the next subsections, doping with TCNQ has proven to be a way to design electroactive MOFs. Ferrocene and iodine have also been used by many researchers.
2.2.1.1 MOFs doped with TCNQ. 
Tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) is a redox active molecule with high levels of electron affinity.35 TCNQ can coordinate with metal compounds via the formation of π–π bonded charge transfer complexes. In a pioneering study, Talin and coworkers reported that TCNQ could provide sufficiently high levels of conductivity in a MOF.36 They prepared thin films of Cu3(BTC)2 on silica coated silicon wafers, which were then transferred to a saturated TCNQ solution. As the redox-active guest molecules infiltrated the nanopores of MOF, the electrical conductivity of the resulting doped thin films showed an enhancement of almost six orders of magnitude and reached a value of 7 S m−1. The above behavior was attributed to the presence of TCNQ molecules, which acted as bridging units to couple the metal ions inside the MOF structure. Thus, a pathway was created to support the electron transfer. Later, TCNQ was also used to introduce electrical conductivity in a 2D Cu-MOF, i.e., [Cu(TPyP)–Cu2(O2CCH3)4]. This MOF was synthesized by coordinating Cu2(OAc)4 with a porphyrin ligand [5,10,15,20-tetra-4-pyridyl-21H,23H porphine (H2TPyP)] under water–chloroform interfacial contact.37 During the reaction, silicon wafers (pre-modified with Ti/Au electrodes) were soaked in the reaction mixture, which allowed assembly of homogeneous MOF films over substrates. These wafers were then transferred to a saturated solution of TCNQ (in chloroform). TCNQ molecules formed a charge-transfer complex within the framework via the inclusion of their unoccupied molecular orbitals inside the HOMO–LUMO gap of the MOF. Thus, it became possible for the electrons to hop from one localized site to another under the influence of an external electrical field. The TCNQ doped thin films of Cu(TPyP)–Cu2(O2CCH3)4 displayed a conductivity in the range of 1 × 10−6 S cm−1, which was almost 3 orders of magnitude higher than that of undoped films (∼10−9 S cm−1). The process of doping did not change the intrinsic crystallinity of the MOF.
Recently, TCNQ was also reported to introduce conductivity in thin films of Cu3(BTC)2, which were initially assembled on a gold screen-printed electrode.38 This study also reported a substantial increase (i.e., from 10−12 S (in undoped) to 10−3 S (in doped)) in the conductance of Cu3(BTC)2 films. Further, the inclusion of TCNQ was also reported to enhance the hydrophobic character of the thin films of Cu3(BTC)2. Subsequently, this property was exploited for the physical adsorption of anti-prostate-specific antigen (PSA) antibodies over thin films of TCNQ–Cu3(BTC)2. The resulting immunosensor design was useful for the sensitive electrochemical detection of PSA in the broad linear analyte concentration range of 0.1–100 ng mL−1.
2.2.1.2 MOFs doped with iodine (I2). 
The introduction of I2 in the nano-channels of a host MOF can provide electronic and oxidative properties.39–41 The doping of I2 favors intermolecular interactions with the π-electron walls of the organic ligand, leading to the generation of charge carriers (holes) within the framework. The infusion of I2 or polyiodides within the channels of MOFs can also cause charge transfer via n → σ* molecular transitions. MOFs can be easily doped with I2 by their simple immersion in dopant solutions or through exposure to iodine vapors.42 Many MOFs have shown improved conductivity upon the inclusion of I2 in their micropores.43 For instance, a Zn-MOF, i.e., {[Zn3(DL-lac)2(pybz)2]·2.5DMF}n, was first desolvated by heating under vacuum and then immersed in a cyclohexane solution of I2.44 In-plane and cross-plane measurements of the above doped crystals revealed conductivities of 3.42 × 10−3 and 1.65 × 10−4 S cm−1, respectively, which were about 440 times greater than that of a solid I2 sample. This enhancement is also an indicator of successful intermolecular interactions between I2 and the π-electrons of the MOF. The induced charge transfer characteristics in the nano-channels resulted in cooperative electrical conductivity.
Eu4(BPT)4(DMF)2(H2O)8 (EuL) has been explored for its temperature-dependent conductivity behavior inherited after infiltrating the pores of the MOF with iodine.43 The modified EuL exhibited an enhancement in conductivity by nearly ten times compared to a reference sample of solid I2. This significant increase in the conductivity was attributed to the infusion of polyiodide ions within the well-arranged aromatic nano-channels which promoted n → σ* charge transfer with high efficiency. It was further revealed that the conductivity of the I2-incorporated EuL could be influenced by changes in temperature. The value changed significantly from 8.27 × 10−7 S cm−1 (at 25 °C) to 2.71 × 10−5 S cm−1 (at 80 °C). The effect of I2 doping on the conductivity of a Cu-MOF film (on a TiO2 substrate) has also been reported.45 The intermolecular interactions between the π-electrons of MOF networks and guest I2 molecules resulted in the formation of conductive pathways. As a result, the electrical conductivity of the initially insulating thin films reached a value of 2.43 × 10−6 S cm−1 after doping. These modified MOF films were also demonstrated as active layers to fabricate a solar cell with an energy conversion efficiency of 0.26%. These authors used impedance spectroscopic analysis to prove that the active layer of the I2 doped MOF was helpful in maintaining a low charge-transfer resistance at the TiO2/MOF/electrolyte interface (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Energy diagram of a TiO2-MOF system showing the appropriate energy cascade for unidirectional flow of charge carriers.45 
The thin films of Co-MOF (Co3(NDC)3), (NDC = naphthalenedicarboxylic acid), on glass substrates showed conductivities in the range of 10−6 to 10−7 S cm−1 (Fig. 3) after being left in contact with an acetonitrile solution of I2.39 Compared with the films grown using the simple Doctor Blade technique, the samples assembled via the layer-by-layer (LBL) method exhibited higher conductivities due to the presence of fewer grain boundaries. These researchers also used DFT calculations to suggest that oxidative doping with I2 in MOFs should lead to the generation of holes as charge carriers inside the frameworks. A demonstrative solar cell was also prepared to showcase the practical utility of the conducting I2-doped Co3(NDC)3 thin films.39 The photoanode was able to inject photoelectrons into the ITO or TiO2 layer when tested by PL spectroscopy due to its semiconducting and photoluminescence quenching behaviors. These types of electrically conductive MOF films showed interfacial charge transfer phenomena (i.e., successful injection of photogenerated electrons from the LUMO of the MOF to the HOMO of TiO2). As such, they can be exploited for the development of alternative light-harvesting devices.
 Fig. 3  Fabrication of a thin film of Co3(NDC)3 using Doctor Blade coating and layer-by-layer techniques.39 
In addition to the previously mentioned solution-based I2 doping methods, saturated I2 vapor has also been used for the modification of MOFs. The synthesis of I2 doped electroactive microporous Cu[Ni(pdt)2] (pdt2− = pyrazine-2,3-dithiolate) was reported for the first time using this strategy.40 Apart from an improved conductivity, the above MOF retained its original porosity as a very low concentration of I2 vapors was needed to accomplish the objective. After doping, the conductivity of this MOF increased by 104 fold, i.e., from 1 × 10−8 S cm−1 (measured at RT) to nearly 1 × 10−4 S cm−1 (measured at 50 °C). The application of I2 vapors was further reported for the modification of a tetrathiafulvalene-based covalent organic framework (TTF-COF).35 Interestingly, the above COF displayed a conductivity value which was almost three-times higher than that of pristine graphene. This improvement in conductivity was explained by the generation of paramagnetic mixed valence TTF species inside the MOF lattice after incorporation of the electron acceptor dopant. The TTF-COF was then grown as a film on a Si/SiO2 substrate, and this sample then exhibited a linear pattern of current–voltage dependency, corresponding to a conductivity of 1.2 × 10−6 S cm−1. The conductivity of the above TTF-COF thin film also showed an exposure time dependency; a value of 2.8 × 10−3 S cm−1 was obtained when the sample was exposed to I2 vapors in a closed chamber for 24 hours.
In a recent study, highly hydrophobic SURMOFs (surface anchored metal–organic frameworks) of Cu(OAc)2 (metal center) were assembled with TCNQ (organic linker) on a mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUDA) monolayer template (substrate used: F doped tin oxide (FTO)).41 The contact angle of the above SURMOF film was as high as 140°. As such, these thin films exhibited a non-ohmic electrical conductivity in the range of 10−5 S cm−1. Exposure of these films to I2 vapors for two days (at RT) resulted in a 100 fold increase in electrical conductance without any significant alteration in the hydrophobicity of the substrate (the contact angle slightly decreased to 130°).
I2 can also be doped inside the nano-channels of a MOF using polyiodide as an anion template. In one such investigation, a bipillared bilayer MOF, i.e., {[Cu6(pybz)8(OH)2]·I5−·I7−}n, was assembled over a polyiodide anion template. Accordingly, the resulting sample exhibited a conductivity value of 8.11 × 10−7 S cm−1.42
2.2.1.3 MOFs doped with ferrocene. 
Ferrocene (Fc) is an organometallic compound that can act as a redox mediator upon its incorporation into the pores of MOFs. Its doping can impart conductivity in MOFs via a charge hopping transport mechanism which causes the charge injection barrier to be depleted. As such, such a process can help improve electronic coupling between metal nodes. Heck et al. demonstrated the loading of Cu2(bdc)2(dabco) and Cu2(ndc)2(dabco) MOFs with ferrocene molecules (in vapor form).12 They reported that the redox behavior of ferrocene molecules was preserved even after their inclusion inside MOFs. Later on, Dragässer et al. proposed the growth of a ferrocene loaded HKUST-1 SURMOF over mercaptohexadecanoic acid (MHDA) modified substrates.46 To achieve this goal, the MHDA substrate was sequentially dipped in solutions of Cu(OAc)2 and benzenetricarboxylic acid. The developed SURMOF was then activated by heating and later exposed to Fc vapors at RT. Consequently, a reversible electrical conductivity of 2 × 10−9 S cm−1 was observed, which was almost 50000 times larger than that of a reference solid Fc sample. As the above experiment demonstrated, the oxidation of a MOF with Fc vapors can induce charge transfer within the nano-channels of the framework. It may however be noted here that ferrocene is not that effective a dopant to introduce conductivity in MOFs compared to other redox molecules like TCNQ and I2. Ferrocene has been reported to induce conductivity only in the range of around 10−9 S cm−1. It may thus be explained that ferrocene is a relatively large molecule with size almost comparable to that of the pores of MOFs.12 Only maximum of one ferrocene molecule can be accommodated per pore of a MOF. Therefore, only a limited number of studies are available to explore its possible role as a dopant to introduce conductivity in MOFs.
2.2.1.4 MOFs doped with metallacarboranes. 
Metallocarboranes (e.g., nickel(IV) bis(dicarbollide) (NiCB)) are generally used as redox couples in dye-sensitized solar cells. In a recent study, Farha and coworkers have introduced NiCB inside a zirconium-based MOF (NU-1000).47 This was achieved by immersing the MOF crystals in a NiCB–DMF solution for three days, followed by washing and drying steps. As this modified NiCB@NU-1000 MOF was deposited (spin-coating) as a film, its electrical conductivity was measured to be 2.7 × 10−7 S cm−1 using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy-based measurements.


2.2.2 MOFs doped with metallic species. 
Many researchers have modified MOFs with different types of metallic species, including metallic nanoparticles, metallic nanoclusters, and cationic molecules. Detailed information on these methods is provided in the following sub-sections.
2.2.2.1 MOFs doped with metal nanoparticles. 
Filling the pores of MOFs with conducting materials can compromise their porosity. However, methods have also been proposed to incorporate metal nanoclusters (NCs) inside MOFs.48 The use of such methods both supported the charge transport via tunneling mechanisms and helped maintain the intrinsic porosity of the framework. For example, a Rb-based γ-cyclodextrin MOF (Rb-CD-MOF) prepared by the reaction of RbOH and γ-cyclodextrin (γ-CD) was immersed in an acetonitrile solution of AgNO3 (48 h) to allow the deposition of Ag nanoclusters (AgNCs) within its pores.48 The conductivities of the resulting AgNC@Rb-CD-MOF crystals were 6.8 × 10−10 and 3.1 × 10−9 S cm−1, respectively, when measured at 330 and 350 K. Note that the above measurements were taken when the samples were excited with a constant light intensity of 314 mW cm−2. However, the conductivity of the same sample further improved to a value of 1.47 × 10−8 S cm−1 upon increasing the light intensity to a value of 595 mW cm−2 (at 352 K). As suggested by the above study, the light-assisted electron transport in the tunnels of the MOF may open a new area for MOF-based photodetectors.
Similar to the above example, a label-free electrochemiluminescence (ECL) immunoprobe was proposed via the application of a β-CD MOF (Pb(II)-β-CD).49 After synthesizing MOFs by the precipitation of PbCl2 and β-CD in an aqueous medium, the product was stirred in the presence of an AgNO3 solution, resulting in the formation of silver nanoparticle (AgNP) loaded Pb(II)-β-CD.50 Note that this MOF also acted as a reducing agent in the above reaction. The sample of AgNP@Pb(II)-β-CD was then drop-cast on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode. This platform was further modified with anti-PSA (prostate-specific antigen) antibodies to form a robust sensing platform for the selective detection of PSA (Fig. 4). ECL signals were monitored with respect to various concentrations of PSA using a photomultiplier tube (PMT), which was set at 800 V while the electrode potential was scanned from −2.0 to 0 V at a scan rate of 0.1 V s−1. The above AgNP@Pb(II)-β-CD assisted sensor was able to detect PSA in the linear concentration range of 0.001–50 ng mL−1 with a detection limit of 0.34 pg mL−1.49
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the fabrication of a β-CD MOF based immunosensor. 
2.2.2.2 MOFs doped with cationic molecules. 
In MOFs, ligands are mostly redox inactive and are located at a large spatial distance inside the network. Guest molecules that contain π moieties and are capable of interacting with ligands can be used to create transport pathways in MOFs. As an example of this approach, a blue-colored MOF (BMOF) was reported which consisted of redox-active N,N′-bis(4-pyridyl)-2,6-dipyrrolidyl naphthalenediimide (BPDPNDI) pillars and 1,2,4,5-tetrakis-(4-carboxyphenyl) benzene (TCPB) struts linked to Zn metal ions.50 The synthesized BMOF was assembled as a thin film on a ZnO–FTO–glass substrate and then soaked in a solution of cationic methyl viologen (MV2+) species (70 h). The influx of MV2+ into the BMOF was confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. The donor/acceptor interactions between the π-acidic MV2+ and the BPDPNDI ligands resulted in the delocalization of charge. The sample was characterized for its electrical conductivity using the four-probe method, and the doping of MV2+ in the BMOF caused an improvement in its conductivity from 6 × 10−5 S m−1 (undoped sample) to 2.3 × 10−3 S m−1 (doped sample).

2.3 MOFs loaded with conducting polymers
The free void space inside MOFs can host various types of guest molecules, including monomer units of conducting polymers. By employing this strategy, Dhara et al. demonstrated the polymerization of polypyrrole (PPy) within a fluorescent 3D MOF, i.e., [Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)]·Gx (H2NDC = 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid, HPCA = 4-pyridinecarboxylic acid, and G = guest molecules).51 Briefly, the MOF was synthesized via a solvothermal process. Then, pyrrole monomers were introduced inside the MOF matrix. A subsequent polymerization step with an oxidizing agent converted the pyrrole units into PPy. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurements proved that the inclusion of PPy inside the pores did not have any detrimental effect on the crystallinity of the MOF. In a significant achievement of the research, the parent MOF (with an insignificant conductivity of about 10−12 S cm−1) was converted into a conducting material (electrical conductivity of ∼10−3 S cm−1). This billion-fold increase in its electrical conductivity was attributed to the conducting pathways formed by the non-covalent interactions between the host and the guest moieties, which channelized the flow of electrons across the framework. Hall-effect measurements also revealed that the PPy modified MOF had excellent carrier density and mobility, which were similar to those of commonly used inorganic semiconductors, e.g., doped GaAs. A conductive porous composite of Cr-MIL-101 with PEDOT has been prepared via polymerization of 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) monomers inside the MOF matrix.52 Under the optimized conditions of the material ratio, the Cr-MIL-101/PEDOT composite could deliver an electrical conductivity of 10−1 S m−1, much larger than that of native Cr-MIL-101 (10−9 S m−1).
2.4 MOF–carbon composites
Hybridization of MOFs with carbon-based materials (like carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene oxide, graphene, quantum dots, and carbon paste electrodes (CPE)) has been reported as an effective means to enhance or add conductivity in the resulting composites. These hybridized MOFs have improved charge transfer characteristics and are usable in various electrochemical applications.53

2.4.1 MOFs modified with graphene and graphene oxide. 
Graphene and graphene oxide (GO) have been explored extensively in various electronic/electrical/electrochemical devices due to their excellent electron mobility characteristics and good surface areas. In one of the first studies on this subject, the potential of a composite of HKUST-1 with graphene-like oxidized carbon nanoparticles was investigated.53 Oxidized carbon NPs were prepared by the chemical oxidation of carbon black followed by the treatment of the product with hydrazine hydrate to yield a graphene-like structure. To prepare a composite with HKUST-1, the synthesized carbon NPs (in varying concentrations) were mixed with precursors before starting the synthesis of the MOF. Although the BET surface area of the HKUST-1/C composite was lower than that of the HKUST-1 alone, the new material (HKUST-1 + 40% C (w/w)) exhibited a considerable electrical conductivity of about 10−2 S m−1 as measured by the Van der Pauw method.54 The potential utility of MOF composites with GO and reduced GO (RGO) has been examined thoroughly.55 During processing, activated GO and RGO powders were mixed in a reaction mixture of Zn(NO3)2 and 2-methylimidazole (precursors of ZIF-8) (Fig. 5). The GO/ZIF-8 composite was still an insulating material as both components (i.e., GO and ZIF-8) behave as insulating materials. However, the sample of RGO/ZIF-8 displayed an electrical conductivity of 64 S m−1 due to the presence of RGO, which was the highest among all types of 3D microporous MOFs.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthesis of GO/ZIF-8 and RGO/ZIF-8 nanocomposites with hierarchical porosity.55 

3. Applications of electroactive MOFs
As discussed in the preceding sections, many methods and techniques can be employed to impart electrical conductivity in MOFs at various levels. Many of these electroactive MOFs have been investigated for a range of applications including electrochemical sensing, energy harvesting, energy storage, fuel cells, and photovoltaics.
3.1 Electrochemical sensors
Electrochemical sensors are one of the success stories of portable analytical instrumentation. They offer better or comparable sensitivity and efficient selectivity when compared to conventional techniques like atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS), atomic emission spectroscopy (AES), and various chromatographic techniques (e.g., GC and HPLC).56,57 Furthermore, the performance of an electrochemical electrode can be boosted by changing the surface chemistry. These modifications (physical/chemical) can improve the sensitivity as well as the selectivity of the electrode towards a specific analyte, resulting in improved detection limits. As such, researchers always try to discover and create new classes of electrode modifiers that display high specific surface area, better functionality, reproducibility, and useful electronic properties.
As already discussed in the preceding sections, various electroactive MOFs have been explored for the design of electrochemical sensors on surfaces like carbon paste electrodes (CPEs) and glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs). These systems have been employed for a variety of analysis applications as will be discussed in the next sub-sections.

3.1.1 MOF modified carbon paste electrodes (CPEs). 
During the fabrication of CPEs, graphite powder is mixed with a non-conductive binder at an appropriate ratio. CPEs are generally preferred for the development of electrochemical sensors because of their low cost, low background current, and wide potential window. The modification of CPEs with MOFs was reported to enhance the catalytic and intrinsic adsorption selectivity of the MOF on an electrochemically active platform.5 Accordingly, when MOF-5 was used to modify a CPE, the resulting electrode was used for selective sensing of Pb2+ ions based on anodic stripping voltammetry.58 The sensor offered a linear range of detection from 10−8 to 10−6 mol L−1 with a LOD of 4.9 × 10−9 mol L−1. In related research, a Cu-MOF loaded CPE was proposed for the sensing of nitrite ions.59 Before use, the Cu-MOF/CPE electrode was treated with a solution of K3Fe(CN)6 to modify it to Fe(CN)63−/Cu-MOF/CPE.59 This modified electrode was found to have a number of advantages, such as a good redox behavior, high electro-catalytic/electrochemical activity, and excellent stability. The presence of the porous and functional Cu-MOF enhanced the affinity of the electrode towards nitrite ions. Therefore, the above Fe(CN)63−/Cu-MOF/CPE sensor could be used to detect nitrite ions in the linear concentration range of 40 nM to 1.1 mM with a LOD of 40 nM.
Recently, a Cu-MOF modified CPE was also reported for the determination of 2,4-dichlorophenol.60 The redox properties of the active Cu-centers catalyzed the electrooxidation of 2,4-DCP, and the method exhibited a LOD of 9 nM (linear range: 0.04 to 1.0 μM). The analysis of 2,4-DCP was also selective in the presence of common anionic and cationic interferents. The good sensitivity of the above sensor was attributed to the high surface area of the MOF used to design the electrode. A Zn-MOF (i.e., TMU (Tarbiat Modares University)-16-NH2) modified CPE has been reported for the differential pulse voltammetry assisted selective detection of Cd2+ ions.61 This sensor showed a proportional increase in the intensity of reduction peak current with respect to varying analyte concentrations from 0.7–120 g L−1. The LOD of the method was estimated to be 0.2 g L−1, and the detection of Cd2+ ions was selective even in the presence of commonly associated ions like Pb2+, Hg2+, Co2+, Ni2+, K+, and Sn2+.


3.1.2 MOF modified glassy carbon electrodes (GCEs). 
Many researchers have reported the use of MOFs or MOF-composite modified GCEs for the electrochemical sensing of diverse analytes. For example, a composite of AuNPs with a silica-coated Cu-MOF (Au-SH-SiO2@Cu-MOF) was used to modify a GCE for sensing application.62 The resulting sensor was demonstrated for the electrochemical detection of hydrazine in spiked river and industrial waste water. The above sensor worked well over a wide linear range of analyte concentrations (0.04–500 μM) with a very low LOD (0.01 μM). A similar platform was later proposed for the electrocatalytic oxidation and detection of L-cysteine.63 Due to the involvement of the porous MOF network, the Au-SH-SiO2@Cu-MOF/GCE electrode offered a fast electron transfer process. The oxidation current showed a linear increase with the increasing L-cysteine concentration (0.02–300 μM). The sensor displayed desirable features including a fairly low LOD (0.008 μM), good reproducibility (SD: 1.3–3.2%), and high stability (no significant alteration in peak current even after 15 days).
A GCE-based electrochemical sensor modified with the Ag NPs/MIL-101 composite was reported for the detection of tryptophan (TRP).64 The modified electrode (i.e., Ag NPs/MIL-101/GCE) displayed better electrocatalytic oxidation properties towards TRP than the bare electrode. The peak potentials and peak currents recorded with the as-developed electrode were 989 mV and 19.5 μA, respectively, which were far better than those of the bare GCE (1010 mV and 6.84 μA). The δ–δ stacking between the MOF linker and TRP (along with the conductivity arising from Ag NPs) resulted in better diffusion of TRP and higher peak current during analysis. The developed sensor system was able to successfully detect TRP in spiked urine samples (recovery range of 95.1–104%). Jin et al. have developed a novel hybrid from amino-MIL-125 and tin oxide (TiO2) nanoparticles. This developed composite material was used to modify a GCE for the fabrication of a photoelectrochemical (PEC) sensor for highly selective sensing of clethodim in soil samples.65
Benzoic acid functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT-PhCOOH) have been used to synthesize hybrid inorganic–organic porous materials, which have found applications in the sensing of methyl parathion.66 Briefly, SWCNT-PhCOOH (dispersed in DMF) was mixed with Zn(NO3)2·6H2O, and the resulting reaction mixture was heated to allow the formation of an SWCNT–MOF hybrid. This composite material possessed a high surface area due to the realization of a microporous network from the coordination of intercalated Zn2+ ions between the functionalized SWCNTs. Thereafter, a sensor electrode was designed by drop-casting an aqueous suspension of SWCNT–MOF over a polished GCE. The voltammetry measurements enabled the detection of methyl parathion with a low LOD of 2.3 ng mL−1. Similarly, a cobalt-based MOF (Co-benzimidazole), modified with MWCNTs (multi-walled carbon nanotubes), was used to prepare a new GCE for the electrochemical determination of glucose.67 The use of the above composite resulted in an enhancement in the electrocatalytic oxidation properties relative to those of the parent materials. The above behavior was attributed to the presence of MWCNTs in addition to the densely packed active sites of MOFs. The sensor was then used for the electrochemical sensing of glucose within the linear concentration range of 1–400 ppb (detection limit of 0.28 ppb).
MOFs (e.g., MOF-199) can also be electropolymerized over conducting SWCNT/GCE surfaces.68 One such sensing platform has been demonstrated with good catalytic activity towards hydroquinone (HQ) and catechol (CT).68 Under optimized conditions, HQ was detected over the linear concentration range of 0.1–1453 μmol L−1 (LOD of 0.08 μmol L−1), while CT was detectable from 0.1 to 1150 μmol L−1 (LOD of 0.1 μmol L−1). Graphene and its derivatives have also been hybridized with MOFs. The resulting composite materials have been used for the modification of GCEs in pursuit of novel electrochemical biosensing platforms. One such material was indeed proposed for the electrochemical bioanalysis of glucose.69 To accomplish this, graphene nanosheets (GNs) were mixed in a mixture of p-phenylenediamine and H2PtCl6 (Fig. 6). Vigorous stirring of the above contents led to the formation of a metal coordination polymer graphene hybrid (MCPGH). This composite material was conjugated with the glucose oxidase (GOD) enzyme and then cast over the surface of a well-polished GCE. The resulting biosensor (MCPGHs/GOD/GCE) offered the cyclic voltammetry-assisted detection of glucose over the linear concentration range of 50 nM–1 mM with an LOD of 5 nM. The sensitivity of the above sensing setup was found to be better than that offered by an electrode designed with graphene alone.
 Fig. 6  Illustration of the procedure for the preparation of a graphene–metal coordination polymer composite and its application in the electrochemical biosensing of glucose.69 
A nanocomposite of GO and copper terephthalate (Cu(tpa)) was prepared through ultrasonication and was then coated over a GCE (Cu(tpa)–GO/GCE) to develop a biosensor for drug molecules.70 Prior to the analytical application, the Cu(tpa)–GO/GCE electrode was subjected to cyclic scans within a potential window of −1.5–0.6 V to transform GO into an electrochemically conducting form, i.e., RGO (Fig. 7). The electrochemically activated electrode was subsequently employed for the detection of acetaminophen (ACOP) and dopamine (DA) in linear concentration ranges of 1–100 (LOD: 0.36 μM) and 1–50 μM (LOD: 0.21 μM), respectively. The above sensor was useful for the selective detection of drugs even in the spiked serum and urine samples. A composite of graphene oxide with HKUST-1 was investigated for the sensing of ammonia.71 Prior to its use, GO was treated (amidation) with a urea (U) solution to obtain a composite of GOU. Thereafter, a composite of HKUST-1/GOU was recovered by mixing GOU with other precursors during the synthesis of the MOF. The synthesized composite was drop cast on an interdigitated electrode for the development of an ammonia sensor. This sensing material possessed a high adsorptive capacity (from HKUST-1) and good conducting properties from GO. As GO was intercalated within the framework of HKUST-1, the composite showed a lower resistance compared to a physical mixture of the above components. The resistance of the HKUST-1/GOU sensor (bias potential = 1 V) was found to increase with the increasing ammonia concentration (range: 100–500 ppm), which was associated with the depletion of charge carriers during gas–composite interactions.
 Fig. 7  Ultrasonication-assisted preparation of a composite of Cu(tpa)–GO and its application for the simultaneous determination of ACOP and DA.70 
A chitosan-functionalized GO/MOF composite coated on a GCE was proposed for the electrochemical sensing of catechol and hydroquinone.72 To prepare this composite, GO was ultrasonically mixed with an aqueous solution of chitosan (0.3% CS). After coating on a GCE, the material was subjected to cyclic scans between −1.6 and 0.6 V (in PBS buffer) for the electrochemical reduction of GO to RGO. The electrodes were then immersed in a solvothermally synthesized suspension of Cu3(btc)2 in the co-presence of EDC/NHS so that the carboxyl groups of MOFs could bind with the amine groups of CS-RGO. Finally, the Cu3(btc)2/CS-RGO/GCE electrodes were used for the electrochemical sensing of dihydroxybenzene isomers of resorcinol, catechol, and hydroquinone (Fig. 8). The simultaneous determination of different isomers was made possible due to the significant differences in the peak potential of the respective analytes. Such an enticing performance was attributed to the synergic effect arising from the use of a porous MOF in combination with highly conductive RGO.
 Fig. 8  Illustration of the construction of a Cu3(btc)2/CS-RGO/GCE and its application for the detection of resorcinol (RS), catechol (CT) and hydroquinone (HQ).72 
 Fig. 9  Schematic of the formation of a ZnO@ZIF-8 nanorod array via a self-template strategy.78 
 Fig. 10  Preparative procedures for the growth of thin films of HKUST-1.79 
Recently, the polymerization of aniline within the matrix of the as-synthesized UiO-66-NH2 MOF has been reported to yield the formation of UiO-66-NH2@PANI.73 This composite was subsequently used to modify a GCE to prepare an electrode for the electrochemical oxidation of Cd2+ ions. The application of the developed sensor was demonstrated for the determination of Cd2+ ions in the spiked samples (lake water, urine and saliva) with efficient recovery rates.73 Some MOF/metal nanoparticle composites have been explored for the electrocatalytic sensing of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2).74 A core–shell heterostructure of CuxO NPs@ZIF-8 was produced by loading CuxO nanoparticles on ZIF-8.74 The above process involved the solvothermal synthesis and capping of nHKUST-1 as the first step. The PVP-stabilized MOF was then added to a reaction mixture of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 2-methylimidazole to obtain the product of nHKUST-1@ZIF-8. Next, nHKUST-1@ZIF-8 was heated at 350 °C to yield CuxO NP@ZIF-8 (Fig. 12). An ethanolic suspension of CuxO NP@ZIF-8 was drop-cast over a GCE to create a sensor for H2O2. The presence of ZIF-8 in the composite structure provided a sieving effect to help in the selective detection of H2O2. A chronoamperometric response (in terms of current) was recorded across various concentrations of H2O2 at an applied potential of 0.7 V (vs. SCE). This sensor detected H2O2 over a wide linear range of concentrations (1.5 to 21442 μM) with a fairly low LOD (0.15 μM). Similarly, the core–shell heterostructures of the UiO-66 MOF filtrated with platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs@UiO-66) were tested for the electrocatalytic oxidation of H2O2.75 The as-synthesized Pt NPs were trapped in the UiO-66 pores during synthesis. The Pt NPs@UiO-66 sample modified GCE platform exhibited detection of H2O2 in the co-presence of other interferents in disinfected water samples. An excellent recovery rate of 102% was achieved due to an improved electrocatalytic oxidation activity.75
 Fig. 11  Application of an antibody attached Cu3(BTC)2/BDC-PANI electrochemically active immunosensing platform for the detection of atrazine in the concentration range of 0.0001 nM to 10 μM.77 
 Fig. 12  Schematic of the preparation of a composite of CuxONPs@ZIF-8.74 


3.1.3 MOFs assembled on a conducting substrate. 
Glass substrates coated with conductive layers such as indium tin oxide (ITO) or fluorine tin oxide (FTO), have been used for assembly of MOF films. In an important example, well oriented ZIF-8 thin films with controlled thickness were deposited on ITO substrates using a layer-by-layer (LBL) method.76 The thickness of the MOF layer was directly proportional to the number of growth cycles. Later on, a similar approach was used for the assembly of the thin films of a Cd based nano-MOF, namely [Cd(atc)(H2O)2]n (‘atc’ 2-aminoterephthalic acid), over the ITO surface.77 To achieve this, the ITO substrate was first modified with 2-aminobenzylamine (2-ABA), followed by sequential immersion in solutions of the organic linker and the metal ion. The pendant carboxyl groups available on the assembled nano-MOF film were used to conjugate anti-parathion antibodies, and the resulting immunosensor was then found to be valid for the impedimetric detection of parathion (from 0.1–20 ng mL−1) with a low LOD of 0.1 ng mL−1.
The assembly of a core–shell heterostructure (i.e., freestanding ZnO@ZIF-8) over FTO substrates has been reported for the detection of H2O2.78 The above system involved the galvanostatic electrodeposition-assisted decoration of ZnO nanorod arrays over FTO as the first step. These modified slides were then placed in a reaction mixture of 2-methylimidazole in DMF/H2O. As the synthesis reaction was performed (T = 70 °C, t = 24 h), ZnO rods also provided Zn2+ ions to link with the organic moiety, which resulted in the formation of ZnO@ZIF-8 nanorod arrays (Fig. 9). The above arrays proved useful for size selective detection of H2O2 in ascorbic acid-serous buffer media. Recently, TCNQ doped thin films of a Cu-MOF were assembled on a gold screen-printed electrode.38 This platform was modified with antibodies and used as a highly sensitive immunosensor for PSA (analysis range: 0.1–100 ng mL−1, LOD: 0.06 ng mL−1).
As conductive and porous structures like PANI can easily accommodate functional groups, such structures can serve as templates for the growth of MOFs. For instance,79 it was found that the imino groups of PANI can be used to support the assembly of HKUST-1. To achieve this goal, a PANI-coated substrate was immersed in a mother solution during the synthesis of HKUST-1 (Fig. 10). The presence of PANI beneath the MOF layer helped mediate the transfer of electrons towards the pores of the MOF. The transferred electrons were utilized for the electro-oxidation of aniline monomers in the micropores of the HKUST-1 MOF by cyclic voltammetry (0.2–1.0 V versus Ag/AgCl, 10 mV s−1). A similar strategy was adopted to assemble thin films of Cu3(BTC)2@SiO2 over the PANI substrate (doped with NH2-BDC). The conductance of the Cu3(BTC)2@SiO2/PANI platform was found to be 35 μS, which was significantly larger (almost 1000 times) than that observed for a thin film of Cu3(BTC)2 alone. The Cu3(BTC)2@SiO2/PANI platform was bioconjugated with anti-atrazine antibodies, and the developed immunosensor then demonstrated a detection capability toward the atrazine pesticide in the dynamic detection range of 0.01 nM to 1 μM (LOD = 0.01 nM) (Fig. 11).
In a recent study, the nanocrystals of a Zr-based MOF (MOF-525) were grown on graphene nanorods (GNRs), followed by the casting of the resulting composite material as a thin film on an ITO glass substrate. This platform was used for EIS (Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy) based electrocatalytic determination of nitrites.80 The presence of GNRs created transport channels in the cavities of the MOF for effective charge transfer. Hence, the composite showed an improved redox behavior to support the detection of nitrite ions for a concentration as low as 0.75 μM.

3.2 Photovoltaics
MOFs have been intensively explored in photocatalytic and photovoltaic applications (e.g., in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)) by taking advantage of their light absorption properties and catalytic nature.81 Many efforts have thus been focused on turning them into multifunctional polymers by introducing charge conduction properties. This goal has been achieved with the use of special ligands, doping of guest molecules, and composite formation. In this section, we cover information on recent applications (or potentiality toward applications) of electroactive MOF structures in photovoltaic devices.
Recently, an analogue of MOF-74 was developed using electron deficient naphthalenediimide (NDI), which has two terminal salicylic acid groups as ligands.82 The experimental and computational studies were carried out to demonstrate that the electronic band gap of the prepared MOF can be significantly suppressed (∼1 eV) through the intercalation of electron-rich planar tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) guest molecules between the NDI ligands. This reduction in the band gap was ascribed to facile electron delocalization between the electron deficient NDI ligands and the electron-rich TTF guest molecules. As a result, the above analogue of MOF-74 could function as a superior n-type semiconductor compared to the pristine MOF-74. The use of NDI ligands has also been reported for the synthesis of a highly crystalline and an electrochemically active Co-MOF with excellent semiconducting properties.83 This Co-MOF exhibited a dual photoresistive–photoresponsive behavior with a responsivity higher than those of other commonly used semiconductors, such as Si, InGaAs, MoS2, and GaTe. It not only absorbed light over a wide spectrum (from 300–2500 nm) but also acted as a semiconductor material. As determined with a direct voltage bias based four-wire configuration method, the above MOF displayed a very high responsivity of 2.5 × 105 AW−1.
The conversion of a Co/Ni bimetallic MOF into a composite of Ni–Co alloy@carbon microspheres has been reported recently.84 Simple control of the Co/Ni molar ratio can lead to changes in the structure, dimensions of the shell and the electrochemical performance of the above microspheres. This material exhibited an exceptional electrocatalytic activity when used as a counter electrode of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC). It is important to mention here that a variation in the doping amount of Co influenced the efficiency of the DSSC. The value of limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) for the NiCo0.2@C electrode was assessed to be 1.91 log (mA cm−2). Owing to such an efficient ion diffusion rate, the application of the NiCo0.2@C counter electrode allowed the DSSC to yield a power conversion efficiency of 9.30% which was better than that of a similar Pt based electrode (8.04%). In a recent study, the efficiency of the hybridization of two complementary deposition strategies, e.g., Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) transfer and a layer-by-layer (LBL) hybrid approach, was explored for the fabrication of the ultrathin films (10 nm thick) of an electrically conductive porous metal catecholate MOF, i.e., Cu-CAT-1.85 This new approach provided an efficient way of integrating electroactive MOFs into electronic devices.
3.3 Miscellaneous applications
Electroactive MOFs have been intensively employed for storage of gases and their subsequent sensing. For instance, the use of a cyclodextrin-based MOF (CD-MOF-2) was reported for the selective capture of CO2.86 CD-MOF-2 was synthesized by the reaction of rubidium hydroxide (RbOH) and γ-cyclodextrin in an aqueous medium. The high affinity of the hydroxyl group (present on the MOF) towards CO2 allowed the selective capture of the target gas from air mixtures. The electrochemical characteristics of CD-MOF-2 were also studied with impedance spectroscopy to detect CO2 levels. The initial conductivity value of ∼4.8 μS cm−1 (pristine CD-MOF-2) changed to 9 nS cm−1 after the infusion of CO2 in the MOF. Importantly, CD-MOF-2 also regained its original conductivity after the release of CO2. Thus, the above sensor was able to perform well during repeated cycles. Similarly, an electroactive composite of RGO/ZIF-8 was reported for the sorption of CO2. The observed CO2 adsorption capacity of 17 mmol g−1 was far superior to that attainable using ZIF-8 alone (8.5 mmol g−1).55 A Cr-MIL-101/PEDOT composite was reported to be applicable for chemiresistive sensing of NO2.52 This sensor was able to detect NO2 over the wide linear range of 0.2–10 ppm (detection limit = 0.06 ppm) with a 0.9% response rate.
4. Critical assessment of different strategies to introduce conductivity in MOFs
The unique and highly useful structural features of MOFs have contributed to the expansion of their use in diverse areas. To date, most pristine MOFs exhibit insulating or weakly conductive properties. Therefore, the applications of MOFs in electronics, electrochemical, and related areas demand the use of special approaches for structural modifications to induce charge transport. Over the past decade, enormous research efforts have been dedicated to the modification of MOFs with enhanced electroactive properties while also maintaining their essential structural properties like high surface area and porosity. Thus, it has now become possible to produce MOFs with varying degrees of electrical conductivities via various structural modifications (Table 1).
Table 1 Comparison of the conductivities of MOFs obtained via different approaches




Order
MOF name
Conductivity of the synthesized MOF (S cm−1)
Ref.





MOF synthesized with specific linkers



1
Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2
2.5 × 10−12

28



2
Fe2(DSBDC)(DMF)2
3.9 × 10−6

29



3
Ni3(HITP)2
2

30



4
Cu3(HITP)2
0.2

18



5
[Sr(Hbtc)(H2O)]n
10−6

31



6
(NBu4)2-FeIII2(dhbq)3
0.16

32



7
Cd2.5(NO3)5(TPDAP)3(DMF)3(H2O)7.4
1.80 × 10−8

33







Order
MOF name
Conductivity of the doped MOF (S cm−1)
Comparative conductivity of the undoped MOF (S cm−1)
Ref.





MOFs doped with redox active molecules



8
Cu3(BTC)2/TCNQ
7 × 10−2
10−8

36



9
Cu(TPyP)–Cu2(O2CCH3)4/TCNQ
1 × 10−6
∼10−9

37



10
Zn3(DL-lac)2(pybz)2/I2
3.42 × 10−3
Not mentioned

44



11
Eu4(BPT)4(DMF)2(H2O)8/I2
8.27 × 10−7 (25 °C)
Not mentioned

43



2.71 × 10−5 (at 80 °C)


Cu-MOF/I2
2.43 × 10−6
Insulating

45



12
Co3(NDC)3/I2
10−6
Insulating

39



13
Cu[Ni(pdt)2]/I2
1 × 10−4
1 × 10−8

40



14
TTF-COF/I2
2.8 × 10−3
1 × 10−6

35



15
Cu(OAc)2–TCNQ/I2
10−5
Not mentioned

41



16
{[Cu6(pybz)8(OH)2]·I5−·I7−
8.11 × 10−7
Not mentioned

42



17
HKUST-1/ferrocene
2 × 10−9
10−14 to 10−13

46



18
NiCB@NU-1000
2.7 × 10−7
Insulating

47







MOFs doped with metallic species



19
Rb-CD-MOF/AgNCs
1.47 × 10−8 (light intensity of 595 mW cm−2, 352 K)



48







MOFs doped with cationic species



20
MV2+-BMOF
2.3 × 10−5
6 × 10−7

50







MOFs doped with conducting polymers



21
[Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)]/PPy
1 × 10−3
∼10−12

51



22
PEDOT@Cr-MIL-101
1.1 × 10−3
∼10−11

52







MOF composites



23
HKUST-1/40% C
10−2
Insulating

53



24
RGO/ZIF-8
0.64
Insulating

55





The use of specific linkers (e.g., H4DSBDC, HITP, and semiquinoids) has allowed the formation of various electroactive MOFs. These ligands may bear some electronegative species to support better charge delocalization. Additionally, “through-space” and “through-bond” approaches have been adopted to select ligands which can offer the synthesis of electroconductive MOFs. Out of the above two, the first approach is based on π stacking interactions between electroactive moieties while the second approach involves the symmetry and energy overlap between covalently bonded components to allow good charge transport. For example, H4DSBDC has been used to synthesize “through-bond” conductive MOF-74, wherein the formation of the metal–sulfur chains proved to have a transformative effect (due to enhanced charge delocalization) on the electronic properties of the material. Furthermore, some selective combinations of metal ions and linkers can allow the synthesis of conductive MOFs. For instance, replacement of Mn2+ ions with Fe2+ ions in Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2 has resulted in a six-fold increase in the conductivity of the material. In this case, the combined effects of the spin electrons of Fe2+ and electronegativity of S atoms (present in the linker) resulted in electroconductive characteristics. The use of mixed-valence ligands was also adopted to synthesize MOFs with improved charge transfer properties; specific examples of this are [Sr(Hbtc)(H2O)]n and (NBu4)2-FeIII2(dhbq)3. In particular, (NBu4)2-FeIII2(dhbq)3 is a good example of a 3-D MOF that has a substantial conductivity of 0.16 S cm−1 in addition to a large surface area. The application of mixed-valence ligands is characterized with electronic coupling between the sites to cause rapid oscillation of charge in between them. This intervalence charge transfer process allows for long-range network semiconductivity by inducing electron-transport pathways. Note that the use of mixed-valence ligands in the construction of conducting MOFs is a relatively new avenue. This approach can be advocated to be of immense value as it can facilitate long-range charge transfer in various MOF materials. Future work is thus recommended to generate more quantitative data on the electronic delocalization in mixed-valence ligand bearing MOFs.
The potential of HTTP (e.g., in case of Ni3(HITP)2) has been demonstrated through the generation of a conducting MOF with a high conductivity (e.g., 2 S cm−1). As such, HTTP appears to be the ideal option among various specific linkers to provide such extraordinary electrical conductivity relative to unmodified or undoped MOFs (i.e., MOFs that are synthesized just using metal ions and specific linkers). Ni3(HITP)2 was formed in a 2-D material configuration so that its applications could be extended in some exciting areas such as sensor development and optoelectronic devices. In view of its excellent performance, HTTP can also be explored for the synthesis of other electroactive 3-D MOFs as well. In future, the use of more specific organic linkers should be expected to derive more specific MOFs (e.g., with respect to intrinsic electron conductivity). For example, ligands with properties like proton-coupled redox behaviors (e.g., dithiooxamido and pyrazinedithiolate) and strong electron–phonon interactions (e.g., halogens) can be explored. Likewise, nitrogen containing heterocyclic compounds and catechol derivatives also have the potential to contribute toward the acquisition of electroconductive MOFs.
The addition of graphene or CNTs in MOFs can provide them with temperature dependent conductive properties. Such modified MOFs can show better conductivity at higher temperatures and vice versa. As the literature shows, the MOF-composite with carbon nanostructures shows excellent potential in the development of electrochemical sensors for environmental pollutants. The incorporation of certain conducting dopants (e.g., redox active molecules and metallic species) into the pores of MOFs as guest molecules are also one of the most promising approaches to tailor the scale of conductivity. For example, TCNQ can act as a bridging species between the metal ions of a framework to form charge transfer complexes. The unoccupied molecular orbital of TCNQ fills the HOMO–LUMO gap of the host MOF and thus facilitates the hopping of electrons between the localized sites to enhance the material conductivity. TCNQ doping-based methods have improved the conductivity of MOFs from 10−9 S cm−1 to about 10−2 S cm−1. However, this strategy has not been reported with MOFs made with metal ions other than copper. I2 has also emerged as a useful dopant to increase charge transfer in MOFs. The intermolecular interactions of I2 with the π-electron walls of the organic ligand can induce the desired level of conductivity. Theoretically, it has been proven that the oxidative doping of I2 leads to the generation of holes (as charge carriers) within the framework. These holes can further facilitate the injection of photoelectrons into substrates, e.g., MOF-ITO, MOF-FTO, etc. Apart from I2, encapsulation of polyiodide within the aromatic nano-channels of MOFs can also promote n →σ* charge transfer with high efficiency, thereby providing enhanced conductivity in such doped MOFs. In contrast to TCNQ, the infusion of I2 has been explored for a variety of MOFs. A simple exposure of MOF crystals to I2 vapors can result in the introduction of useful levels of conductivity (e.g., 10−4 S cm−1). Incorporation of tetrathiafulvalene before the process of doping with I2 has been found to improve the conductivity. This behavior can be attributed to the excellent electron donor properties of TTF, which forms highly conductive charge-transfer crystals with electron acceptors such as I2.
Ferrocene is another useful dopant that can be encapsulated within the pores of MOFs to oxidize the substrate and mediate the charge transfer through ferrocene loaded channels. However, ferrocene has been reported for the modification of the conductivity of a MOF to 10−9 S cm−1, which is far lower than that achieved with other dopants like TCNQ and I2.
Another efficient way to introduce electroconductivity in MOFs is the incorporation of metallic species, such as silver nanoclusters. Metallic species in the framework of MOFs allow for the transportation of charge carriers via a tunneling mechanism. Nonetheless, only a relatively low conductivity (corresponding to 10−8 S cm−1) is achievable. This approach also involves an additional step of excitation for the modified MOF with a light source at an elevated temperature. Therefore, more options should be explored with other nanoparticles to improve the conductivity of MOFs with the above approach. The incorporation of cationic molecules (e.g., methyl viologen) can also help create charge transport pathways through π–π stacking of organic ligands and guest species. This technique was thus demonstrated to achieve good conductivity values in MOFs (e.g., 2.3 × 10−3 S cm−1), comparable with those obtained via the doping of redox-active molecules.
Recently, some MOFs have been modified with conducting polymers, e.g., polypyrrole and polyaniline. In these methods, post-synthetic modifications are preferred to bind the dopants with the MOFs via non-covalent interactions. As a result, the composite material showed enhanced charge density and electron mobility. This particular approach is helpful in generating a conductivity in the range of 10−3 S cm−1. Hence, many other conducting polymers can be studied in the future to design new conducting MOFs.
In a popular approach, MOFs have been transformed into a conducting matrix by hybridizing them with carbon nanomaterials (e.g., C particles, graphene, and GO). Such composite materials generally have excellent combined characteristics of efficient charge transfer and high surface area. For example, the mixing of HKUST-1 with C particles improved the native conductivity of the MOF (e.g., 10−7 S m−1) to a high value (10−2 S m−1). Furthermore, the scale of conductivity can be tuned by selecting an appropriate ratio of C particles in the composite. Because of additional structural defects in RGO than in GO, the use of the former is also an effective option to induce useful conductivities in MOF structures. In fact, RGO/ZIF-8 has been reported to possess a very high value of conductivity, i.e., 64 S m−1, which is the best among all electroactive 3-D MOFs reported to date. As such, the level of the attained conductivity in MOFs can be tuned by judicious optimization of experimental conditions. For instance, in case of the doping approach, the concentration of dopants and incubation time are key factors for control. At times, the selection of solvent may also govern the level of induced conductivity. The approach of composite formation is again based on appropriate mass ratio selection. A compromise is often required to keep a balance of parameters like electrical conductivity, particle size, surface to volume ratio, composite stability, and solution processability. The balance of all the above parameters may vary with respect to the intended application of the electroactive MOF material.
The introduction of electrical conductivity in MOFs and allied structures allows for the extension of their applications in many new areas, such as electrochemical sensing, electronics, and photovoltaics. In particular, a summary of the features of electrochemical sensing applications is presented in Table 2. It is evident that electroactive MOFs can compete with other nanomaterials in terms of their operational performance. In addition, their chemical and thermal stabilities should make devices even more competitive.
Table 2 Application of MOF-based conducting platforms for different sensing applications




Order
Material
Analyte
Linear range
LOD
Ref.





Carbon paste electrode modified sensors



1
MOF-5
Lead ions
10−8 to 10−6 mol L−1
4.9 × 10−9 mol L−1

58



2
Cu-MOF
Nitrite ions
40 nM to 1.1 mM
40 nM

59



3
Cu-MOF
2,4-Dicholorphenol
0.04–1.0 μM
9 nM

60



4
Zinc MOF (TMU-16-NH2)
Cadmium ions
0.7–120 g L−1
0.2 g L−1

61







Glassy carbon electrode modified sensors



5
Au-SH-SiO2@Cu-MOF
Hydrazine
0.04 to 500 ìM
0.01 ìM

62



6
Au-SH-SiO2@Cu-MOF

L-Cysteine
0.02–300 μM
0.008 ìM

63



7
Ag NPs/MIL-101
Tryptophan
1–50 ìM and 50–150 ìM
0.14 ìM

64



8
Amino-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2
Clethodim
0.2 to 25 ìmol L−1
10 nmol L−1

65



9
SWCNT/Zn-MOF
Methyl parathion
0.01–2.0 ìg mL−1
2.3 ng mL−1

66



10
Co-MOF/MWCNTs
Glucose
1–400 ppb
0.28 ppb

67



11
SWCNT/MOF-199
Hydroquinone (HQ) and catechol (CT)
0.1–1453 and 0.1–1150 ìmol L−1
0.08 and 0.1 ìmol L−1

68



12
MCPGHs/GOD
Glucose
50 nM to 1 mM
5 nM

69



13
Cu(tpa)–GO
Acetaminophen and dopamine
1–100 and 1–50 ìM
0.36 and 0.21 ìM,

70



14
Aminated-GO/HKUST-1
Ammonia
100–500 ppm
Not mentioned

71



15
Chitosan-RGO/Cu-MOF
Hydroquinone catechol and resorcinol
5.0–400, 2.0–200 and 1.0–200 ìM
0.44, 0.41 and 0.33 ìM

72



16
UiO-66-NH2@PANI
Cadmium ions
0.5 to 600 mg L−1
0.3 mg L−1

73



17
CuxO NPs@ZIF-8
H2O2
1.5 to 21442 ìM
0.15 ìM

74



18
Pt NPs@UiO-66
H2O2
2.5–4.75 ìM
3.06 ìM

75







MOFs assembled on a conducting substrate



19
[Cd(atc)(H2O)2]n
Parathion
0.1–20 ng mL−1
0.1 ng mL−1

77



20
ZnO@ZIF-8
H2O2
0.1–0.4 mM
Not mentioned

78



21
Cu-MOF/TCNQ
PSA
0.1–100 ng mL−1
0.06 ng mL−1

38



22
Cu3(BTC)2@SiO2/PANI
Atrazine
0.01 nM to 1 ìM
0.01 nM

87



23
MOF-525/GNR
Nitrite ions
100–2500 μM
0.75 μM

80







Miscellaneous applications



24
CD-MOF-2
Carbon dioxide
10–100%
Not mentioned

86



25
PEDOT@Cr-MIL-101
NO2
200–10000 ppb
60 ppb

52





The stability of electronic/ion conductivity of MOFs materials under damp or high humidity conditions was an important issue. However, some of the recent efforts have resolved this limitation. Nonetheless, there is a gap in establishing the effect of anhydrous conditions on the conductivity of MOFs and their composites. Consequently, there is a need to investigate and correlate the relationship between the conductivity and rate of the dehydration process. Such studies are required to scale up the application of MOFs in industrial-level electrochemical systems. There are still some other pending issues. Specifically, there is a need to ensure a cost-effective and reproducible supply of organic linkers. The synthesis of uniformly sized MOF crystals with accessible porosity also demands tight control of experimental conditions. The stability of the electroactive MOFs toward water also needs to be improved to allow for their regeneration and long shelf life.
5. Conclusions
MOFs are unique materials with potential use in various fields of next-generation technologies and devices. This projection is largely based on their intriguing and unique properties of tunable porosity, very large surface-to-volume ratio, functionality, different available geometries, and suitability for post-synthetic modification. Early on, MOFs were explored mainly for gas storage and catalysis applications. In recent years, many advanced approaches have been discovered to modify pristine MOFs (that have insulating properties) so that they are electroactive (or conductive).
The prominent methods for such modifications include (i) doping of MOFs with guest molecules and (ii) the formation of MOF–polymer hybrids and/or composites. The first strategy allows the interaction of guest molecules with open metal sites in MOFs, leading to the creation of pathways for electron transfer. The dopants are usually small-sized molecules capable of forming pi-bonds with aromatic linkers. Small sized dopants facilitate good diffusion in the MOF skeleton while their robust interaction with aromatic linkers leads to enhanced electronic conductivity through redox processes. Future efforts should focus on assessing the interactions between guest molecules and MOFs at quantum mechanical levels. Such studies can further broaden the spectrum of the types of MOFs that can be modified to obtain electroactivity. In the second approach, the integration of MOFs with other conductive media (e.g., polyaniline, graphene, and semiconducting nanoparticles) may provide a synergistic influence by combining the redox properties of the former and the electron transfer characteristics of the latter.
The utility of electroactive MOFs that can be generated via various routes introduced in this review has been realized in many areas, especially as electrochemical sensing platforms due to the combined features of enhanced electrocatalytic activity and intrinsic analyte selectivity (because MOFs have tunable pore sizes). We therefore conclude that conducting MOFs have vast potential for future research opportunities in molecular and pollutant sensing, heterogeneous photocatalysis, artificial light harvesting, and optoelectronic devices. A more comprehensive understanding of the relationship between the structure, property, and composition of hybrid MOFs should be established in the future through simulation, prediction and validation models.
In recent years, significant advancements have been achieved in exploring new ways of introducing useful levels of electronic conductivity in MOFs. To further upgrade such research efforts, there is an excellent scope of future research in areas such as synthesis of designer ligands, tuning of band gap energies by post-synthetic conjugations, improvement in the environmental stability (e.g., with respect to humid to anhydrous conditions), and controlling important material properties (e.g., surface area, porosity, and functionality). More intervention of computational tools is thus required to extend progress in establishing and stabilizing the scale of electronic communication between organic and metal building blocks. Research efforts should also be actively made toward the designing of electroconductive MOFs with tunable and size dependent charge transfer characteristics (e.g., semiconductor quantum dots).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Department of Biotechnology, India for financial support through grant no. GAP-0378. This study was also supported by a grant from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (Grant No: 2016R1E1A1A01940995). Support was also provided by the Korean Ministry of the Environment (MOE) (2015001950001) as part of “The Chemical Accident Prevention Technology Development Project”. SKB gratefully acknowledges the receipt of CSIR-SRF grant no. 31/31(0036)/2017-EMR-I.
References
T. Tsuruoka, T. Matsuyama, A. Miyanaga, T. Ohhashi, Y. Takashima and K. Akamatsu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 77297–77300 RSC .
H. Fei, S. Pullen, A. Wagner, S. Ott and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 66–69 RSC .
Y. Peng, M. Zhao, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, F. Dai, Z. Lai, X. Cui, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(3), 1705454 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Mao, M. Ge, J. Huang, Y. Lai, C. Lin, K. Zhang, K. Meng and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11873–11881 RSC .
N. Wang, T. Liu, H. Shen, S. Ji, J. R. Li and R. Zhang, AIChE J., 2016, 62, 538–546 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, S. Ji, N. Wang, L. Wang, G. Zhang and J. R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9775–9779 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Chandrasekhar, A. Mukhopadhyay, G. Savitha and J. N. Moorthy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5402–5412 RSC .
V. Chernikova, O. Shekhah and M. Eddaoudi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20459–20464 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Islamoglu, S. Goswami, Z. Li, A. J. Howarth, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 805–813 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Karra and K. S. Walton, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8620–8626 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vandichel, J. Hajek, F. Vermoortele, M. Waroquier, D. E. De Vos and V. Van Speybroeck, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 395–406 RSC .
R. Heck, O. Shekhah, O. Zybaylo, P. G. Weidler, F. Friedrich, R. Maul, W. Wenzel and C. Wöll, Polymers, 2011, 3, 1565–1574 CrossRef .
L. Sun, M. G. Campbell and M. Dincă, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3566–3579 CrossRef PubMed .
K. T. Butler, C. H. Hendon and A. Walsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2703–2706 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. D'Alessandro, J. R. Kanga and J. S. Caddy, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 718–722 CrossRef .
B. Li, M. Chrzanowski, Y. Zhang and S. Ma, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 106–129 CrossRef .
J. Lei, R. Qian, P. Ling, L. Cui and H. Ju, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2014, 58, 71–78 CrossRef .
M. G. Campbell, D. Sheberla, S. F. Liu, T. M. Swager and M. Dincă, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4349–4352 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. Azzazy, A. Shahat and H. M. Hassan, US20150369746A1, U.S. Patent Application No. 14/766,187,  2015 .
P. Kumar, A. Paul and A. Deep, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 4095–4101 RSC .
R. Chen, J. Zhang, J. Chelora, Y. Xiong, S. V. Kershaw, K. F. Li, P.-K. Lo, K. W. Cheah, A. L. Rogach and J. A. Zapien, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 5699–5708 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, W. Li and B. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 733, 8–14 CrossRef .
T. H. Chang, C. Young, M. H. Lee, R. R. Salunkhe, S. M. Alshehri, T. Ahamad, M. Islam, K. C. W. Wu, M. Hossain and A. Shahriar, Chem.–Asian J., 2017, 12, 2857–2862 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Rajak, M. Saraf, A. Mohammad and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17998–18011 RSC .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. Kamachi, N. L. Torad, S. M. Hwang, Z. Sun, S. X. Dou, J. H. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19848–19854 RSC .
C. H. Hendon, D. Tiana and A. Walsh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13120–13132 RSC .
T. Komatsu, J. M. Taylor and H. Kitagawa, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 55(2), 546–548 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun, C. H. Hendon, M. A. Minier, A. Walsh and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6164–6167 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun, T. Miyakai, S. Seki and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8185–8188 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sheberla, L. Sun, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, S. l. Er, C. R. Wade, C. K. Brozek, A. n. Aspuru-Guzik and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8859–8862 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Usman, S. Mendiratta, S. Batjargal, G. Haider, M. Hayashi, N. Rao Gade, J.-W. Chen, Y.-F. Chen and K.-L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22767–22774 CrossRef PubMed .
L. E. Darago, M. L. Aubrey, C. J. Yu, M. I. Gonzalez and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15703–15711 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, J. Y. Koo, Y. H. Lee, T. Kojima, Y. Yakiyama, H. Ohtsu, J. H. Oh and M. Kawano, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 8735–8738 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Morozan and F. Jaouen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9269–9290 RSC .
S.-L. Cai, Y.-B. Zhang, A. B. Pun, B. He, J. Yang, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, O. M. Yaghi, J. Fan and S.-R. Zheng, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4693–4700 RSC .
A. A. Talin, A. Centrone, A. C. Ford, M. E. Foster, V. Stavila, P. Haney, R. A. Kinney, V. Szalai, F. El Gabaly and H. P. Yoon, Science, 2013, 1246738 Search PubMed .
A. Sengupta, S. Datta, C. Su, T. S. Herng, J. Ding, J. J. Vittal and K. P. Loh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16154–16159 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Bhardwaj, A. L. Sharma, N. Bhardwaj, M. Kukkar, A. A. Gill, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 10–17 CrossRef .
D. Y. Lee, E.-K. Kim, N. K. Shrestha, D. W. Boukhvalov, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(33), 18501–18507 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, B. Jacobs, M. D. Allendorf and J. R. Long, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4120–4122 CrossRef .
S. Rana, R. Rajendra, B. Dhara, P. K. Jha and N. Ballav, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3(13), 1500738 CrossRef .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
Z. Hao, G. Yang, X. Song, M. Zhu, X. Meng, S. Zhao, S. Song and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 237–244 RSC .
M.-H. Zeng, Q.-X. Wang, Y.-X. Tan, S. Hu, H.-X. Zhao, L.-S. Long and M. Kurmoo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2561–2563 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, S. J. Yoon, K. N. Cho, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha and S.-H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 118, 16328–16334 CrossRef .
A. Dragässer, O. Shekhah, O. Zybaylo, C. Shen, M. Buck, C. Wöll and D. Schlettwein, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 663–665 RSC .
C.-W. Kung, K. Otake, C. T. Buru, S. Goswami, Y. Cui, J. T. Hupp, A. M. Spokoyny and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3871–3875 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, S. C. Warren, S. M. Yoon, C. D. Malliakas, X. Hou, Y. Wei, M. G. Kanatzidis and B. A. Grzybowski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8169–8175 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ma, X. Li, T. Yan, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Wu, Q. Wei and B. Du, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 79, 379–385 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, D. K. Panda, K. Maity, D. Lindsey, T. G. Parker, T. E. Albrecht-Schmitt, J. L. Barreda-Esparza, P. Xiong, W. Zhou and S. Saha, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 894–899 RSC .
B. Dhara, S. S. Nagarkar, J. Kumar, V. Kumar, P. K. Jha, S. K. Ghosh, S. Nair and N. Ballav, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2945–2950 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Le Ouay, M. Boudot, T. Kitao, T. Yanagida, S. Kitagawa and T. Uemura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10088–10091 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Alfè, V. Gargiulo, L. Lisi and R. Di Capua, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 147, 744–750 CrossRef .
O. Philips'Gloeilampenfabrieken, Philips Res. Rep., 1958, 13, 1–9 Search PubMed .
D. Kim, D. W. Kim, W. G. Hong and A. Coskun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7710–7717 RSC .
P. M. Bersier, J. Howell and C. Bruntlett, Analyst, 1994, 119, 219–232 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Jiang and X.-P. Yan, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 6115–6120 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Xie and X. Hu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 177, 1161–1166 CrossRef .
B. Yuan, J. Zhang, R. Zhang, H. Shi, X. Guo, Y. Guo, X. Guo, S. Cai and D. Zhang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2015, 10, 4899–4910 Search PubMed .
S. Dong, G. Suo, N. Li, Z. Chen, L. Peng, Y. Fu, Q. Yang and T. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 972–979 CrossRef .
M. Roushani, A. Valipour and Z. Saedi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 233, 419–425 CrossRef .
H. Hosseini, H. Ahmar, A. Dehghani, A. Bagheri, A. R. Fakhari and M. M. Amini, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 301–309 CrossRef .
H. Hosseini, H. Ahmar, A. Dehghani, A. Bagheri, A. Tadjarodi and A. R. Fakhari, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 42, 426–429 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Peng, Z. Jiang, X. Huang and Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 13742–13748 RSC .
D. Jin, Q. Xu, L. Yu and X. Hu, Microchim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1885–1892 CrossRef .
F. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Gong, L. Wen, L. Zhou and D. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11804–11810 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yiping, S. Duoliang and L. Xiaoquan, Chem. J. Chin. Univ., 2016, 37, 1082–1087 Search PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Li, L. Yang, S. Yan, M. Wang, D. Cheng, Q. Chen, Y. Dong, P. Liu and W. Cai, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2015, 899, 57–65 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Han, S. Shuang and C. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13166–13173 RSC .
X. Wang, Q. Wang, Q. Wang, F. Gao, F. Gao, Y. Yang and H. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11573–11580 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Travlou, K. Singh, E. Rodríguez-Castellón and T. J. Bandosz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11417–11429 RSC .
Y. Yang, Q. Wang, W. Qiu, H. Guo and F. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9794–9803 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Wang, W. Huang, T. Zhang, X. Hu, J. A. Perman and S. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8385–8393 RSC .
J. Yang, H. Ye, F. Zhao and B. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20407–20414 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, L. Yang and C. Xu, Anal. Chem., 2015, 87, 3438–3444 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hou, Q. Xu, J. Peng, Z. Ji and X. Hu, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 140–144 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Deep, S. K. Bhardwaj, A. Paul, K.-H. Kim and P. Kumar, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 65, 226–231 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-w. Zhan, Q. Kuang, J.-z. Zhou, X.-j. Kong, Z.-x. Xie and L.-s. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1926–1933 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lu, T. Ben, S. Xu and S. Qiu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6454–6458 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-W. Kung, Y.-S. Li, M.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Wang, W.-H. Chiang and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10673–10682 RSC .
R. Kaur, K.-H. Kim, A. Paul and A. Deep, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3991–4002 RSC .
Z. Guo, D. K. Panda, M. A. Gordillo, A. Khatun, H. Wu, W. Zhou and S. Saha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32413–32417 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Castaldelli, K. I. Jayawardena, D. C. Cox, G. J. Clarkson, R. I. Walton, L. Le-Quang, J. Chauvin, S. R. P. Silva and G. J.-F. Demets, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2139 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiang, H. Li, S. Li, S. Huang, C. Zhu and L. Hou, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 419–431 CrossRef .
V. Rubio-Giménez, M. Galbiati, J. Castells-Gil, N. Almora-Barrios, J. Navarro-Sánchez, G. Escorcia-Ariza, M. Mattera, T. Arnold, J. Rawle and S. Tatay, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(10), 1704291 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Gassensmith, J. Y. Kim, J. M. Holcroft, O. K. Farha, J. F. Stoddart, J. T. Hupp and N. C. Jeong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8277–8282 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Bhardwaj, N. Bhardwaj, G. C. Mohanta, P. Kumar, A. L. Sharma, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26124–26130 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Flow diagram depicting different strategies for the development of conducting MOFs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Energy diagram of a TiO2-MOF system showing the appropriate energy cascade for unidirectional flow of charge carriers.45	 

 	Fig. 3  Fabrication of a thin film of Co3(NDC)3 using Doctor Blade coating and layer-by-layer techniques.39	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the fabrication of a β-CD MOF based immunosensor.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the synthesis of GO/ZIF-8 and RGO/ZIF-8 nanocomposites with hierarchical porosity.55	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of the procedure for the preparation of a graphene–metal coordination polymer composite and its application in the electrochemical biosensing of glucose.69	 

 	Fig. 7  Ultrasonication-assisted preparation of a composite of Cu(tpa)–GO and its application for the simultaneous determination of ACOP and DA.70	 

 	Fig. 8  Illustration of the construction of a Cu3(btc)2/CS-RGO/GCE and its application for the detection of resorcinol (RS), catechol (CT) and hydroquinone (HQ).72	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of the formation of a ZnO@ZIF-8 nanorod array via a self-template strategy.78	 

 	Fig. 10  Preparative procedures for the growth of thin films of HKUST-1.79	 

 	Fig. 11  Application of an antibody attached Cu3(BTC)2/BDC-PANI electrochemically active immunosensing platform for the detection of atrazine in the concentration range of 0.0001 nM to 10 μM.77	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic of the preparation of a composite of CuxONPs@ZIF-8.74	 


MOF synthesized with specific linkers

1	Mn2(DSBDC)(DMF)2	2.5 × 10−12	
28

2	Fe2(DSBDC)(DMF)2	3.9 × 10−6	
29

3	Ni3(HITP)2	2	
30

4	Cu3(HITP)2	0.2	
18

5	[Sr(Hbtc)(H2O)]n	10−6	
31

6	(NBu4)2-FeIII2(dhbq)3	0.16	
32

7	Cd2.5(NO3)5(TPDAP)3(DMF)3(H2O)7.4	1.80 × 10−8	
33



MOFs doped with redox active molecules

8	Cu3(BTC)2/TCNQ	7 × 10−2	10−8	
36

9	Cu(TPyP)–Cu2(O2CCH3)4/TCNQ	1 × 10−6	∼10−9	
37

10	Zn3(DL-lac)2(pybz)2/I2	3.42 × 10−3	Not mentioned	
44

11	Eu4(BPT)4(DMF)2(H2O)8/I2	8.27 × 10−7 (25 °C)	Not mentioned	
43

2.71 × 10−5 (at 80 °C)
Cu-MOF/I2	2.43 × 10−6	Insulating	
45

12	Co3(NDC)3/I2	10−6	Insulating	
39

13	Cu[Ni(pdt)2]/I2	1 × 10−4	1 × 10−8	
40

14	TTF-COF/I2	2.8 × 10−3	1 × 10−6	
35

15	Cu(OAc)2–TCNQ/I2	10−5	Not mentioned	
41

16	{[Cu6(pybz)8(OH)2]·I5−·I7−	8.11 × 10−7	Not mentioned	
42

17	HKUST-1/ferrocene	2 × 10−9	10−14 to 10−13	
46

18	NiCB@NU-1000	2.7 × 10−7	Insulating	
47



MOFs doped with metallic species

19	Rb-CD-MOF/AgNCs	1.47 × 10−8 (light intensity of 595 mW cm−2, 352 K)	
	
48



MOFs doped with cationic species

20	MV2+-BMOF	2.3 × 10−5	6 × 10−7	
50



MOFs doped with conducting polymers

21	[Cd(NDC)0.5(PCA)]/PPy	1 × 10−3	∼10−12	
51

22	PEDOT@Cr-MIL-101	1.1 × 10−3	∼10−11	
52



MOF composites

23	HKUST-1/40% C	10−2	Insulating	
53

24	RGO/ZIF-8	0.64	Insulating	
55



Carbon paste electrode modified sensors

1	MOF-5	Lead ions	10−8 to 10−6 mol L−1	4.9 × 10−9 mol L−1	
58

2	Cu-MOF	Nitrite ions	40 nM to 1.1 mM	40 nM	
59

3	Cu-MOF	2,4-Dicholorphenol	0.04–1.0 μM	9 nM	
60

4	Zinc MOF (TMU-16-NH2)	Cadmium ions	0.7–120 g L−1	0.2 g L−1	
61



Glassy carbon electrode modified sensors

5	Au-SH-SiO2@Cu-MOF	Hydrazine	0.04 to 500 ìM	0.01 ìM	
62

6	Au-SH-SiO2@Cu-MOF	
L-Cysteine	0.02–300 μM	0.008 ìM	
63

7	Ag NPs/MIL-101	Tryptophan	1–50 ìM and 50–150 ìM	0.14 ìM	
64

8	Amino-MIL-125(Ti)/TiO2	Clethodim	0.2 to 25 ìmol L−1	10 nmol L−1	
65

9	SWCNT/Zn-MOF	Methyl parathion	0.01–2.0 ìg mL−1	2.3 ng mL−1	
66

10	Co-MOF/MWCNTs	Glucose	1–400 ppb	0.28 ppb	
67

11	SWCNT/MOF-199	Hydroquinone (HQ) and catechol (CT)	0.1–1453 and 0.1–1150 ìmol L−1	0.08 and 0.1 ìmol L−1	
68

12	MCPGHs/GOD	Glucose	50 nM to 1 mM	5 nM	
69

13	Cu(tpa)–GO	Acetaminophen and dopamine	1–100 and 1–50 ìM	0.36 and 0.21 ìM,	
70

14	Aminated-GO/HKUST-1	Ammonia	100–500 ppm	Not mentioned	
71

15	Chitosan-RGO/Cu-MOF	Hydroquinone catechol and resorcinol	5.0–400, 2.0–200 and 1.0–200 ìM	0.44, 0.41 and 0.33 ìM	
72

16	UiO-66-NH2@PANI	Cadmium ions	0.5 to 600 mg L−1	0.3 mg L−1	
73

17	CuxO NPs@ZIF-8	H2O2	1.5 to 21442 ìM	0.15 ìM	
74

18	Pt NPs@UiO-66	H2O2	2.5–4.75 ìM	3.06 ìM	
75



MOFs assembled on a conducting substrate

19	[Cd(atc)(H2O)2]n	Parathion	0.1–20 ng mL−1	0.1 ng mL−1	
77

20	ZnO@ZIF-8	H2O2	0.1–0.4 mM	Not mentioned	
78

21	Cu-MOF/TCNQ	PSA	0.1–100 ng mL−1	0.06 ng mL−1	
38

22	Cu3(BTC)2@SiO2/PANI	Atrazine	0.01 nM to 1 ìM	0.01 nM	
87

23	MOF-525/GNR	Nitrite ions	100–2500 μM	0.75 μM	
80



Miscellaneous applications

24	CD-MOF-2	Carbon dioxide	10–100%	Not mentioned	
86

25	PEDOT@Cr-MIL-101	NO2	200–10000 ppb	60 ppb	
52


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
