Robust hole transport material with interface anchors enhances the efficiency and stability of inverted formamidinium–cesium perovskite solar cells wi ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE00433J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE00433J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2567-2580Robust hole transport material with interface anchors enhances the efficiency and stability of inverted formamidinium–cesium perovskite solar cells with a certified efficiency of 22.3%†

        
          
            Rui 
            Chen‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Sanwan 
            Liu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojia 
            Xu‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Fumeng 
            Ren
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xueying 
            Tian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhichun 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinyu 
            Guanz
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zonghao 
            Liu
          
        
      *ac, 
      
        
          
            Shasha 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yiqiang 
            Zhang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yongzhen 
            Wu
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Liyuan 
            Han
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Yabing 
            Qi
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Chen
          
        
      *ac
aWuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu Road 1037, Wuhan, 430074, China. E-mail: liuzonghao@hust.edu.cn; wnlochenwei@mail.hust.edu.cn
bShanghai Key Laboratory of Functional Materials Chemistry, East China University of Science & Technology, Shanghai 200237, China
cOptics Valley Laboratory, Hubei 430074, China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan Institute of Advanced Technology, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China
eState Key Laboratory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
fEnergy Materials and Surface Sciences Unit (EMSSU), Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University (OIST), 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Kunigami-gun, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan
Received 
      6th February 2022
    , Accepted 27th April 2022First published on 27th April 2022AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) require both high efficiency and reliable long-term stability for commercialization. As important as the perovskite layer, charge transport layers and their contact with the adjacent perovskite layer also play crucial roles in the efficiency and stability of PSCs. Herein, we report the use of pyridine anchoring group functionalized poly(triarylamine) (p-PY) as the hole transport layer at buried interfaces between the conductive oxide substrate and formamidinium-cesium perovskite layer to enhance the efficiency and stability of inverted PSCs. The p-PY based device exhibited a record efficiency of 22.8% (certified efficiency of 22.3%) and maintained 97.5% of the initial efficiency after operation under 1 sun equivalent white-light light-emitting diode array illumination with maximum power point tracking at 45 °C for 1000 h, and 94% and 81% of the initial efficiencies after harsh thermal aging at 85 °C for 500 h and at 120 °C for 200 h, respectively.

Broader context
A pyridine anchoring group functionalized poly(triarylamine) (p-PY) as the hole transport layer was synthesized to enhance the efficiency and stability of inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs). When compared with PTAA, the p-PY showed good surface wettability, energy levels, benign interface defect passivation capability, and thermal/light stability for application in inverted PSCs. At last, the p-PY based MA-free device achieved a champion PCE of 22.8% (certified 22.3%). In particular, the resistance to extremely high temperature (≥120 °C) aging, aiming to resolve the hot-spot effect which is a highly risky factor for real out-door applications of PSCs, has been alleviated by taking advantage of both p-PY HTL and MA-free perovskite in this work.

Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted much attention due to their low-cost, easy fabrication and excellent power conversion efficiency of over 25%.1 To date, the highest-efficiency PSCs are based on the n–i–p architecture, in which the hygroscopic lithium salt doped 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-bis(p-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD) is commonly used as a top hole-transporting layer (HTL).2,3 However, the doped spiro-OMeTAD does not show enough intrinsic stability, which largely limits the device's long-term stability.4 By contrast, inverted (p–i–n) PSCs using intrinsically stable top electron charge transport layers such as [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) or C60 and stable metal electrodes such as Cr/Au, Bi/Ag or Cu have demonstrated superior stability,5–8 making inverted (p–i–n) PSC a promising architecture for future practical applications.9–11 However, the certified highest efficiencies of p–i–n PSCs are still in the range of 22–23%,11–18 largely lagging behind those of the n–i–p PSCs.
To improve the efficiency of p–i–n PSCs, intense research has been deployed including perovskite growth modulation,11 interface and bulk defect passivation of perovskites,12,14,16–18 interface layer engineering,15etc. However, most devices with efficiencies over 20% are based on methylammonium (MA) cation containing perovskites.19,20 Unfortunately, the MA component leads to MA based perovskites with poor thermal stability,21,22 which largely limits the corresponding device's long-term stability. Alternatively, the deployment of formamidinium–cesium (FACs) perovskites in inverted PSCs has demonstrated superior stability even under harsh 1 sun/85 °C light-heat aging conditions.5 However, the PCEs of FACs perovskite based inverted PSCs are usually less than 22%. It is thus highly desirable to further improve the efficiency of inverted FACs perovskite-based PSCs.
To achieve high-efficiency and stable PSCs, tremendous efforts have been made from the aspect of using top charge transport layers (CTLs), stable perovskites and the passivation of a perovskite top surface, etc. This is because the strengthening of the top surface of perovskites can passivate defects and improve perovskite stability;23 the top CTLs not only enable good charge extraction/transportation but also naturally protect the underneath perovskite from inward penetration of the metal electrode and H2O/O2, suppressing the removal of the volatile species from the perovskite.24 An ideal top CTL should first possess the basic functions of CTLs including suitable energy level, high conductivity and uniform morphology. Besides, it should also possess good intrinsic chemical, thermal, light, and bias stability. In general, preparing CTLs on top of a perovskite layer is technically difficult because of the brittle nature of the underneath perovskite. Thus, the deposition of top CTLs should avoid detrimental solvent, high temperatures (typically <150 °C) and high-energy electron or plasma irradiation. As important as these top layers and interfaces are, the buried interfaces between the transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrate and the perovskite layer, i.e., the TCO/CTL interface and CTL/perovskite interface, also contribute to the efficiency and stability of PSCs, especially when considering the loose interfacial contact and interfacial delamination between the hard conductive oxide substrate and soft perovskite layer induced by the interfacial built-in stress due to their mismatched coefficient of thermal expansion.25–27 This effect is particularly crucial for the thermal stability and light-heat stability of PSCs during practical application.26 Moreover, the buried interfaces of PSCs also contain numerous under-coordinated Pb2+ defects, which could lead to serious nonradiative recombination causing large open-circuit voltage (VOC) loss.28,29 In inverted PSCs, poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) is the most commonly used organic hole transport material at the buried interface for the devices with efficiencies over 20%.12,16 Nevertheless, PTAA does not have a strong chemical interaction with a conductive oxide substrate as well as perovskite, and usually sophisticated surface treatments or p-type doping is required to achieve high efficiencies on account of their hydrophobicity30,31 and low carrier mobility.32,33 This inspires us to upgrade the molecular structure of PTAA to develop a new hole transport material with the function of toughening the buried interfaces between the conductive substrate and perovskite layer as well as passivating defects at the buried interface of the perovskite layer in inverted PSCs.
Here, we introduce pyridine rings as anchoring groups into the molecular structure of PTAA to synthesize a new hole transport material (denoted as p-PY) as the HTL for Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3 perovskite based inverted PSCs. When compared with PTAA, p-PY shows improved surface wettability of the perovskite precursor solution, leading to the growth of high-quality perovskite films. p-PY also possesses enhanced hole mobility, improved energy level alignment with the perovskite, and benign interface defect passivation capability, leading to improved interfacial charge extraction and less interfacial VOC loss. As a result, p-PY based devices exhibit a high VOC value of 1.16 V, which is 60 mV higher than that of the PTAA reference ones (1.10 V) in a typical architecture of indium tin oxide (ITO)/HTL/Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3/phenethylammonium iodide (PEAI)/[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/bathocuproine (BCP)/Ag. Furthermore, the p-PY-based device achieves a champion PCE of 22.8% (certified 22.3%), which outperforms the PTAA-based device with a PCE of 20.8%. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the highest certified PCEs to date for inverted PSCs based on FACs perovskites. In addition, the p-PY HTL gives rise to superior intrinsic thermal/light stability and stronger interaction at the buried interface through the pyridine anchoring groups to release interfacial stress when compared with PTAA, which leads to a p-PY-based device with markedly improved thermal and operation stability. Particularly, the resistance to extremely high temperature (≥120 °C) aging, aiming to resolve the hot-spot effect which is a high risk factor for real out-door applications of PSCs, has been alleviated by taking advantage of both p-PY HTL and FACs perovskites in this work.
Results and discussion
Material design and characterization
To chemically modulate the structure of PTAA, the pyridine unit is considered because it is a widely-used Lewis passivator that can coordinate with Pb2+, thus substantially improving the binding strength and adhesion of the passivation layer on the perovskite surface to passivate defects.34 In addition, the pyridine unit has been employed as an anchoring group for organic dyes in dye-sensitized solar cells35 and demonstrated a strong anchoring capability on the surface of the metal oxide material as well as the ITO substrate.36 Besides, pioneering work has demonstrated the effectiveness of using a pyridine functional unit to tune the energy level of the HTM for n–i–p PSCs.37 The introduction of pyridine anchoring groups into the PTAA structure is believed to make this kind of new polymer act as a conductive and glued HTL between the conductive oxide substrate and perovskite layer, which simultaneously toughens the buried interfaces to enhance device durability and suppresses interfacial charge recombination to improve device photovoltaic performance. In addition, the introduction of a pyridine functional unit can also modulate the energy level of PTAA.
As shown in Fig. 1A, the pyridine anchoring group functionalized PTAA (denoted as p-PY) at buried interfaces is designed to enhance the efficiency and stability of inverted FACs based PSCs. The synthetic route of p-PY is depicted in Scheme S1 (ESI†). To compare the cost of p-PY with the commonly used PTAA, the lab synthesis costs of p-PY and PTAA are estimated according to previous reports (Tables S1–S3 and Scheme S2, ESI†).38,39 It is found p-PY has lower lab synthesis costs than PTAA. The corresponding 1H, 13C NMR spectra, and mass spectrometry data are shown in Fig. S1–S3, ESI.† The molecular weight (Mn) of p-PY is determined to be 5000–8000, which is lower when compared with the commercial PTAA used in this work with a molecular weight of 10000–15000.
 Fig. 1  Electronic and thermal properties of the two HTLs studied in this work. (A) The schematic illustration of the device structure based on p-PY. (B) The molecular structure of p-PY and PTAA. (C) The UPS spectra of the ITO/p-PY and ITO/PTAA samples. (D) Energy level diagram. (E) DSC curves of p-PY and PTAA during the second heating scan, which was measured at a heat ramp of 10 °C min−1. 
The optical properties of PTAA and p-PY were measured by ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) absorption spectroscopy (Fig. S4, ESI†). Both the p-PY/CHCl3 solution and film samples show conspicuous blue-shifted absorption peaks when compared with that of PTAA. This is because the pyridine units generate an inductive electron-withdrawing effect on the aromatic rings of the conjugated backbone.40 It is also found that p-PY exhibits good solubility in common organic solvents, such as chloroform (CF), dichloromethane (CH2Cl2), and tetrahydrofuran (THF), etc. However, it shows marginal solubility in highly polar solvents such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), hence ensuring good solution processability and tolerance to perovskite precursor solutions. It should be mentioned that p-PY does not show good solubility in chlorobenzene, thus we use chloroform as the solvent to prepare p-PY solution in the following study. For inverted PSCs, the excellent optical transparency of HTL is highly desirable.41 As shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†), the p-PY film on ITO shows slightly higher transparency than that of PTAA within the wavelength range of 350–400 nm and nearly identically good transparency within the wavelength range of 400–900 nm. Their optical bandgaps (Eoptg) are calculated to be 2.94 and 2.98 eV for PTAA and p-PY, respectively, based on the film absorption edges (Table S4, ESI†).
The electrochemical properties of HTLs were further characterized to determine the HOMO level and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) level (Fig. S6 and Table S4, ESI†). Ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) measurements were also used to further determine their energy levels in the solid state (Fig. 1C). The HOMO levels of p-PY and PTAA were calculated to be −5.56 and −5.15 eV, respectively, from UPS results, which are consistent with those obtained from cyclic voltammetry measurements (Table S4, ESI†). More importantly, the HOMO level of p-PY matches well with the perovskite layer (Fig. 1D), which is beneficial for hole extraction.42 Simultaneously, the LUMO level is high enough to block electron leakage. The p-PY film with a thickness around 10 nm measured by a step profiler exhibits a smooth and homogeneous surface with a low root-mean-square surface roughness (RMS) of 1.58 nm (Fig. S7, ESI†), benefiting the following multiple layer staking in device fabrication. To evaluate the hole mobilities of two HTLs, space-charge-limited-current (SCLC) measurements were conducted (Fig. S8 and Table S4, ESI†). The p-PY exhibits slightly higher hole mobility (1.93 × 10−4versus 8.07 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and higher conductivity (4.73 × 10−6versus 2.45 × 10−6 S cm−1) than the PTAA reference (Table S4 and Fig. S9, ESI†), which is likely due to the enhanced inter-chain interactions in the former case.
High intrinsic thermal stability is another essential requirement for HTL. The thermal properties of p-PY and PTAA were examined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements (Fig. 1E and Fig. S10, ESI†). It is found that both materials show high decomposition temperatures (Td, corresponding to the 5% weight loss point) larger than 400 °C, indicating the good thermal stability of p-PY and PTAA. However, the glass transition temperatures (Tg) of p-PY and PTAA were measured to be 225 and 108 °C, respectively. As a reference, doped spiro-OMeTAD is reported with a low Tg of ∼50 °C, which normally leads to the poor thermal stability of the resultant devices.43 The low Tg of PTAA makes it not able to maintain a compact morphology during heating, which is detrimental to device performance. In contrast, the much higher Tg of p-PY than that of PTAA makes the former robust enough to remain stable during the perovskite film's high-temperature annealing process and the long-term thermal stability test of PSCs, especially at the temperature of >108 °C, at which PTAA cannot sustain its property. The effect of HTLs on device stability will be discussed later. The results above confirm the propriety of p-PY as an effective HTL in inverted PSCs.
Interaction of HTLs and TCO at buried interfaces
To investigate the intermolecular interactions between HTLs and ITO substrates, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted. The samples were prepared by depositing a very thin p-PY layer and PTAA layer, respectively, with the corresponding diluted solutions on ITO substrates. As shown in Fig. 2A and B, the In 3d of the ITO in contact with p-PY show a negative energy shift when compared with the PTAA case, indicating the strong interactions between p-PY and perovskite. This result suggests the decrease of cationic charge of In ions in the p-PY/ITO sample, which is likely due to the donation of the lone electron pair on the N atom of the pyridine groups within p-PY to the empty 3d orbital of In via coordination bonding. The N 1s in the p-PY sample also shows an obvious shift when compared with PTAA. It has been reported that the pyridine is a strong anchoring group in organic light absorbers that have been used in dye sensitized solar cells to enable dye absorption on oxide semiconductors,44,45 and polymer solar cells to interact with ITO.36 The pyridine groups in p-PY are considered to interact with ITO through the chemical interaction of pyridine groups and the ITO substrate and thus improve the interface stability.
 Fig. 2  Interaction of HTLs and the perovskite films. High resolution In 3d (A) and N 1s (B) core-level XPS spectra for the ITO and HTLs atop ITO substrates. High resolution Pb 4f (C) and I 3d (D) core-level XPS spectra for the pristine perovskite film and perovskite films atop HTLs deposited on ITO substrates. 
Interaction of HTLs and perovskite at buried interfaces
The wettability of a perovskite precursor solution on the substrate and sequential perovskite growth plays an important role in determining the perovskite film quality. To study this point, contact angles of DMF (main solvent of perovskite) on two HTL films were measured (Fig. S11, ESI†). p-PY shows a much lower contact angle than that of PTAA (22.4° versus 36.1°) when in contact with DMF. This suggests p-PY has better wettability when compared with PTAA, which is beneficial to obtain perovskite films with uniform coverage.46 We further prepared perovskite films on the p-PY and PTAA substrates. As shown in Fig. S12 (ESI†), the perovskite film deposited on pristine PTAA shows incomplete coverage. Thus, PTAA requires additional DMF pre-washing or poly(9,9-bis(3′-(N,N-dimethyl)-N-ethylammoinium-propyl-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene))dibromide (PFNBr) treatment to ensure good perovskite quality. When PTAA was treated with PFNBr, the deposited perovskite showed full coverage but obvious rough regions are observed on the sample edge (Fig. S12, ESI†). By contrast, the pristine p-PY film without any treatment can support the growth of a uniform perovskite film on its top with better coverage than in the PTAA case even modified with PFNBr. The enhanced wettability is likely due to the introduction of pyridine groups in p-PY that enhance the interaction between the perovskite precursor solution and HTL. In the following study, the PTAA substrates were treated with PFNBr to ensure good perovskite quality. For the p-PY case, the devices with/without PFNBr treatment did not show any obvious difference (Fig. S13, ESI†), thus pristine p-PY substrates were used.
Furthermore, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to investigate the effect of HTLs on the morphology of the deposited perovskite films. As shown in Fig. S14 and S15 (ESI†), the perovskite film grown on p-PY exhibits slightly larger grain sizes than the PTAA case (400 nm versus 280 nm). The perovskite film on p-PY also shows a slightly smoother surface with an RMS of 13.9 nm compared with that of PTAA with an RMS of 14.5 nm (Fig. S16, ESI†). Furthermore, the higher intensity of the X-ray diffraction (XRD) peaks of the perovskite film on p-PY indicates its improved film crystallinity when compared with that of the perovskite film on PTAA (Fig. S17, ESI†). These results confirm that the use of p-PY improves perovskite film quality.
To investigate the intermolecular interactions between HTLs and a perovskite, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted. As shown in Fig. 2C, the Pb 4f peaks of the thin perovskite film in contact with p-PY show a negative energy shift when compared with the PTAA case, indicating the stronger interactions between p-PY and perovskite. This result suggests the decrease in the cationic charge of Pb2+ ions in the p-PY/perovskite sample, which is likely due to the donation of the lone electron pair on the N atom of the pyridine groups within p-PY to the empty 6p orbital of Pb2+via coordination bonding.47,48 It has been reported that the buried interface, i.e., the HTL/perovskite interface in inverted PSCs, also contains numerous under-coordinated Pb2+ defects.28 p-PY can effectively passivate such defects through its interaction with the perovskite. Likewise, the I 3d signals of the p-PY/perovskite sample exhibit similar negative shifts relative to those of the pristine perovskite film and PTAA/perovskite sample as shown in Fig. 2D, suggesting the strong coordination interactions between the pyridine group within p-PY with the Pb2+ ions of the perovskite.49
To better understand the charge-carrier dynamics, we further conducted time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurements on the HTM/PVK samples with excitation (Fig. S18, ESI†). The TRPL of the perovskite is quicklyquenched by p-PY and PTAA. The p-PY case shows a lifetime of 7.5 ns which is 37% faster than that of PTAA (Table S5, ESI†). This further confirms that the hole extraction at the HTL/perovskite interface is improved when p-PY is used. This result might be ascribed to the larger energy level offset between the HOMO level of PTAA (−5.15 versus −5.56 eV for p-PY) and the valence band of the perovskite (−5.68 eV) (Fig. S19, ESI†).
Photovoltaic performance
To study the effect of p-PY on device performance, we fabricated inverted PSCs with a configuration of ITO/p-PY/Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3/PEAI/PCBM/BCP/Ag. About 500 nm thick Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.95Br0.05)3 perovskite film was prepared by the one-step antisolvent method,50 and PEAI was used to passivate the defects at the top interface.51 The p-PY thickness was optimized to be ∼10 nm by adjusting the solution concentration and rotation speed of spin-coating. It was found that the optimal concentration of p-PY was 0.5 mg mL−1 in CF solution (Fig. S20, ESI†). The device's cross-sectional SEM image is shown in Fig. S21 (ESI†). The smooth and compact perovskite film with large crystalline grains is clearly observed.

Fig. 3A displays the current density–voltage (J–V) curves for the optimal devices under standard AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2, and the corresponding data are summarized in Table S6 (ESI†). Impressively, the p-PY-based devices deliver a champion PCE of 22.8%, with a VOC of 1.16 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 23.80 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 82.6%, which not only outperforms the control PTAA devices (20.8%), but is also one of the highest values for inverted MA-free PSCs reported to date (Table S7, ESI†). To verify the reliability of the device performance, we sent one of the non-encapsulated p-PY-based devices to the National Institute of Metrology (NIM, Beijing, China) for certification. The J–V curve was measured in air under ambient conditions with a relative humidity of 53%, giving a certified PCE of 22.3%, with a JSC of 23.7 mA cm−2, a VOC of 1.145 V and an FF of 82.0% (Fig. S22, ESI†). To further study the output characteristics of the devices and confirm the reliability of the device performance, steady-state photocurrent output measurements at the maximum power point (1.01 V for the p-PY-based device and 0.92 V for the PTAA-based device) were performed. As displayed in Fig. 3B, steady-state PCEs of 22.7% and 20.3% were obtained for the p-PY-based and PTAA-based devices, respectively, after 500 s of continuous illumination. To study the effect of HTLs on the hysteresis of the devices, we measured the J–V curves of the devices based on p-PY and PTAA at both forward scan and reverse scan with scan rates of 5, 50, 150 and 500 mV s−1. It is found that the p-PY based device shows less hysteresis with lower hysteresis indexes when compared with the PTAA case (Fig. 3C, D and Table S8, ESI†). This is likely due to the enhanced charge extraction at the HTL/perovskite interface and improved charge transportation in the HTL, which reduces the charge accumulation at the interfaces leading to less hysteresis.52 In addition, we confirmed the reproducibility of the corresponding devices as shown in Fig. 3E and Fig. S23 (ESI†).
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic performances. (A) J–V curves of the champion PSCs based on dopant-free p-PY and PTAA; (B) stabilized power output at the maximum power point (MPP) under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2; J–V curves of the (C) p-PY and (D) PTAA based devices with different voltage sweep (E) statistical performance of the PSCs based on p-PY and PTAA. (F) EQE spectra with the integrated JSC for the champion PSCs based on p-PY and PTAA. 
Moreover, we measured the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra to verify the reliability of the J–V curves. As shown in Fig. 3F, both devices possess a high photo-response throughout the entire spectrum from 300 to 800 nm, attributed to the similar absorption of the FACs perovskite with a bandgap of 1.54 eV (Fig. S24, ESI†). The integrated JSC values calculated from the full EQE spectrum are 23.58 and 23.52 mA cm−2 for the p-PY-based and PTAA-based devices, respectively, which are consistent with the values obtained from the J–V measurements.
We also checked the compatibility of p-PY with the commonly used FAMACs perovskite in p–i–n PSCs. As shown in Fig. S25 (ESI†), p–i–n PSCs based on the structure of ITO/p-PY/Cs0.05(FA0.85MA0.15)0.95Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3/PEAI/PCBM/BCP/Ag gave a PCE of 23.8%, which is also comparable with the reported highest PCEs of p–i–n PSCs (Table S7, ESI†). This result also suggests that p-PY is a promising HTL for the further improvement of efficiency of p–i–n PSCs with additional optimization strategies in the near future. From the above devices’ photovoltaic performance, we can see that the elevated VOC and FF of p-PY-based devices are the major causes of the improved PCE. The elevated VOC is related to the better energy level alignment, enhanced charge extraction and suppressed charge recombination in the p-PY-based device. The improved conductivity of p-PY leads to the higher FF of p-PY-based devices compared with the PTAA-based ones. We further analyzed the voltage deficit in the devices, which is defined as the difference between the bandgap/e (e is the elementary charge) and the measured VOC. Based on the bandgap of the MA-free perovskite used in this work (1.54 eV for the absorption threshold), the voltage deficit is calculated to be 0.38 and 0.44 V for p-PY and PTAA based devices, respectively. A low VOC loss is expected to be accompanied by high luminescence yields under open-circuit conditions. Moreover, the determination of VOC is based on the detailed balance principle of photon emission and absorption, and it could be calculated based on the following equations53 (1) (2)where q is the elementary charge, EQEPV(E) is the external quantum efficiency, ΦBB,300K is the black body emission spectrum at 300 K, Jph is the photocurrent of the device under light illumination and Jem,0 is the current of re-emitted photons at thermal equilibrium. We measured the electroluminescence (EL) of the solar cells operated as light emitting diodes (LEDs) in the dark and under a voltage bias. As shown in Fig. 4A, the p-PY-based device shows an obvious EL peak, while an extremely weak EL peak is observed for the device with PTAA. This observation indicates that the charge recombination in the p-PY-based device is much slower than the device with PTAA, which agrees well with the increase in VOC values observed for the p-PY based PSCs. In addition, it is encouraging that the p-PY based device showed an EL efficiency close to 5% for a driving current density similar to the short circuit current density (Fig. 4B). For comparison, the PTAA-based device only shows an EL efficiency of 0.5% under the same injection current. Based on eqn (2), it can be estimated that the VOC improvement (ΔVOC) is: ΔVOC = kBT/qln(EQEp-PY/EQEPTAA) = 0.054 V, which is consistent with the J–V results. Hence, we conclude that the suppressed interface recombination is an important factor that is responsible for the reduced non-radiative recombination in the device based on p-PY. This largely contributes to the improvement of VOC, which is due to the effective passivation of defects at the buried interface and the improved perovskite film quality. Moreover, the improved energy level alignment of p-PY with a perovskite could also reduce the VOC-loss due to the reduced free energy loss of the charge carrier when compared with the PTAA case (Fig. S18, ESI†). To understand the charge carrier dynamics in the devices, light-intensity dependent J–V properties were determined. It is known that the slope of the VOC value is greater than kBT/q if the VOC is strongly light intensity dependent, which could be ascribed to the trap-assisted Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination.5 By contrast, bimolecular recombination dominates when the slope of VOC is equal to kBT/q. As shown in Fig. 4C, the p-PY-based device shows a much smaller slope of 1.21kBT/q in comparison to that of the optimized PTAA-based device with a slope of 1.56kBT/q. This result indicates that the p-PY could effectively retard the monomolecular SRH recombination due to fewer defects in the perovskite film with improved quality, which results in a higher shunt resistance and enhanced device performance. To further investigate the use of p-PY on charge carrier dynamics in the devices, transient photocurrent (TPC) and transient photovoltage (TPV) measurements were conducted. It is found that the charge-recombination lifetime (τr) of the p-PY-based device was substantially longer than that of the device based on PTAA (145.4 μs versus 96.5 μs) (Fig. 4D), which further verifies the slower charge recombination of p-PY based devices, as concluded from the EL measurements. This is due to the improved perovskite quality induced by the use of p-PY and also its defect passivation capability. This result is also consistent with the higher VOC of the corresponding devices. As shown in Fig. S26 (ESI†), the p-PY-based device exhibits a faster charge transfer lifetime (τt) than that of the PTAA device (4.36 μs versus 7.86 μs), which could be attributed to the improved energy alignment of p-PY with perovskite and the enhanced conductivity of p-PY.
 Fig. 4  Carrier dynamic characterization of the p-PY and PTAA-based PSCs. (A) The EL spectrum of the p-PY and PTAA-based PSCs; (B) EQE of EL of the p-PY and PTAA-based devices while operating as LEDs; (C) VOCversus illumination intensity for the p-PY and PTAA-based devices; (D) normalized transient photovoltage decay for the p-PY and PTAA-based devices. 
In the above, p-PY has shown an improved photovoltaic performance when compared with PTAA. The fundamental mechanism of the device performance improvement is mainly assigned to three factors: the effective passivation of defects at the buried interface which benefits the improvement of VOC and JSC; the improved energy level alignment and charge transfer between p-PY and the perovskite reduce the additional VOC-loss and contribute to the improvement of JSC and FF; the improved conductivity of p-PY facilitates the charge transportation and improves the FF of the devices.
The employment of p-PY in flexible PSCs was also explored. The p-PY based flexible device gave a higher efficiency than the PTAA case (21.1% versus 19.6%) (Fig. S27 and Table S9, ESI†), which is consist with the results of the devices based on a glass/ITO substrate. The flexible devices were also subjected to the bending test and the PCE evolution was characterized (Fig. S28, ESI†). It was found that the p-PY based device showed better mechanical stability than the PTAA case. This is likely due to the interaction of p-PY with both the perovskite and ITO substrate contributing to the interface stability, which is also important for the operational stability. To further verify this point, we tested the stickiness by preparing perovskite films on p-PY and a PTAA based flexible substrate by bending experiments. No obvious creases are found on the p-PY based sample with a bending radius of 5 mm after bending 200 times, but obvious cracks were found on the PTAA based sample (Fig. S29, ESI†). To further check the microscopic morphology of the samples after bending, we tested top-view SEM and the results are shown in Fig. S30 (ESI†). Obvious cracks are observed on the PTAA based sample but the p-PY one does not show such obvious cracks. The results indicate that the use of p-PY could release the interface stress due to its glue-like interaction with both the perovskite and ITO substrate and thus improve the mechanical stability of flexible PSCs. This improvement is believed to benefit the operational stability of PSCs.
PSCs’ harsh thermal and operational stability
Besides high efficiency, simultaneously achieving long-term stability is also essential for the commercialization of PSCs. The intrinsic stability of HTLs contributes to the whole device's stability.54 In order to further explore the intrinsic stability of the two HTLs, we investigated the electrical conductivity change of the thin films against thermal stress by performing conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) measurements. As presented in Fig. 5A and B, their c-AFM difference for the fresh films matches well with their conductivity measurement. However, the conductivity of PTAA is greatly reduced relative to p-PY after aging at 120 °C for 200 h in a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 5C and D), which is suggested to be associated with crystallization of PTAA during thermal aging due to its lower Tg of 108 °C. Similar phenomena have been reported for spiro-OMeTAD even at the low temperature range of 60–80 °C.43 Indeed, 120 °C is out of the normal range required by terrestrial photovoltaic applications, but the well-known hot-spot effect can lead to solar cells reaching such a high temperature.55 Besides, the annealing temperature of a perovskite film deposited on a HTL may reach 150 °C or even higher for all inorganic perovskites, therefore, a higher Tg up to 225 °C for p-PY is beneficial for high-efficiency device fabrication and long-term thermal stability of the device.
 Fig. 5  Thermal and light stability of the p-PY and PTAA-based PSCs. c-AFM images of (A and C) p-PY and (B and D) PTAA films on ITO glass substrates before and after aging at 120 °C for 200 h; (E) thermal stability of the unencapsulated devices stressed at 120 °C in N2 atmosphere in the dark. Six identically prepared devices were aged at each condition respectively; (F) light soaking stability of unencapsulated devices under 1 sun equivalent white-light LED array illumination with continuous MPP tracking at 45 °C in N2 atmosphere. 
To further study the influence of p-PY on the devices’ thermal stability, we measured the unencapsulated device stability under harsh thermal stress at temperatures of 85 °C and 120 °C under a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 5E). The thermal aging test at 85 °C is in accordance with standard IEC 61215-1:2006 and ISOS-D-2I protocols.56 A N2 atmosphere was chosen to exclude the impact of moisture and oxygen on the device's stability caused by imperfect encapsulation. The metal electrode of the devices for the stability test is composed of Bi/Ag according to our previous work.7 This is due to the good intrinsic stability of Bi, which makes Bi a robust interfacial barrier material that can prevent the inward migration of Ag and outward diffusion of a corrosive perovskite decomposition by-product, enabling improved device stability.7 The devices with an Bi/Ag electrode showed a similar efficiency to the Ag electrode based devices (Fig. S31, ESI†). For the device performance measurements for different aging times, the devices were cooled down to room temperature and then subjected to J–V measurements. Six identically prepared devices were aged at each condition respectively. As a result, the devices based on p-PY and PTAA maintained over 94% and 89% of their initial PCEs after 85 °C thermal aging tests for 500 h under a N2 atmosphere, respectively. It seems that at a temperature below the Tg of PTAA, the difference in the two HTL based devices’ thermal stability is not so large. But in contrast, after 120 °C thermal aging tests for 200 h, the p-PY based device retained over 81% of its initial PCE, and the PTAA based device lost ∼50% of its initial PCE (Fig. 5E and Fig. S32, ESI†). The stability of the devices shows good reproducibility. These dramatically different behaviors should be mainly due to the low Tg (108 °C) of PTAA that makes it not able to maintain a good morphology and its degradation at 120 °C and also the deteriorated buried interfaces because of the mismatched coefficient of thermal expansion of the perovskite, PTAA and ITO. By contrast, the much higher Tg (225 °C) and intrinsic thermal stability of p-PY enable it to keep its uniform morphology even at high temperatures over 120 °C. Moreover, p-PY with pyridine anchoring groups could act as a glued interface layer to release the interfacial stress to improve device stability.57 Investigating the thermal stability of PSCs at such a high temperature of >100 °C has rarely been reported before. Although the ISOS standard does not involve high temperature aging at 120 °C, it is of practical importance for the outdoor application of PSCs in view of the hot-spot effect.55 Even for the commercialized Si-solar cells based on a thermally stable light-absorber, the hot-spot effect still constitutes a typical failure mechanism. In order to further improve the stability of PSCs at this extremely high temperature range in the future, we suggest beyond a thermally stable HTL like p-PY as demonstrated in this work, a thermally more stable perovskite film, a more chemically inert electrode and a non-permeable encapsulation technology should be simultaneously integrated into a single device.
During device operation, the bias poling plays a significant role in device stability, which is known to be related to the potential induced degradation (PID) of solar cells.58 We further compared PTAA and p-PY based devices’ photovoltaic behaviors under light soaking and high bias poling conditions, in which the ionic migration will be accelerated. The steady-state photocurrent output measurements at high bias poling conditions are performed as displayed in Fig. S33 (ESI†). The stepwise transient photocurrents of PSCs have been explored from 0 to 1.8 V with a step voltage (ΔV) of 0.3 V and a duration time of 50 s for each step. It is vital to note that 1.8 V is much higher than the VOC of the solar cells, which is chosen to speed up the ion migration, making it easier to recognize the difference between the two HTL based devices. At low voltages of 0.3, 0.6, and 0.9 V, the two devices show almost no non-steady photocurrent decays, but at a higher polarization bias of 1.2 V, non-steady photocurrent decay is observed for the PTAA based device, but not for the p-PY case. The non-steady photocurrent may be caused by the ion migration within the perovskite layer and/or the charging-discharge mediated by interface traps at the HTL/perovskite interface.59,60 When further increasing the bias to 1.5 and 1.8 V, non-steady photocurrent decays are observed for the p-PY based device, but the decay is much slower than that of the PTAA case, indicating that the interfacial stability of withstanding high bias poling is much improved when p-PY is used. Besides, J–V curves for these two HTL-based devices before and after different bias poling have also been measured (Fig. S34, ESI†). The J–V curves of the two devices have no significant change at a relatively low bias (0.3, 0.6 and 0.9 V). However, when the poling bias increases to >1.2 V, the PTAA based device starts to show evident hysteresis and degradation of performance parameters. By contrast, only after 1.8 V bias poling, slight hysteresis and degradation of the J–V curves is found for the p-PY based device. The results prove that the p-PY based devices possess more stable buried interfaces and can resist high bias poling. This is likely due to strong glued interactions between the pyridine groups in the p-PY, perovskite layer and ITO substrate, as well as the good intrinsic electrical stability of p-PY.
In addition, we also tested the operation stability of unencapsulated PSCs under continuous 1 sun equivalent white LED light irradiation under a N2 atmosphere at the cell temperature of ∼45 °C by referring to the ISOS-L-1I aging conditions.61 As shown in Fig. 5F, the p-PY-based device maintained over 97.5% of the initial PCE after operating for 1000 h with continuous power output at the MPP. In contrast, the PTAA-based device maintained around 81% of the initial efficiency under the same test conditions. We tested three devices for the two HTLs respectively based on the condition of the multichannel stability test system. The results of the other two devices for each case are shown in the Fig. S35 (ESI†). Both cases show a similar trend to the one in Fig. 5F, which suggests the good reproducibility of the device stability and further confirms the better stability of p-PY devices compared with that of the PTAA case. Here, we recognize that the good stability under the above thermal and operational conditions should be partially attributed to the stabilized buried interfaces and inherently stable FACs-based perovskite film. Moreover, the results in the comparison studies clearly demonstrate that p-PY indeed contributes to the improved device stability, which is due to its better intrinsic thermal/light stability compared with PTAA, its stronger interaction at the buried interfaces, and/or the improved perovskite film quality deposited atop p-PY.
Conclusion
In this work, we have developed a new HTL p-PY by the introduction of pyridine-terminated conjugation into the molecular structure of the commonly used PTAA. The p-PY possesses good surface wettability, energy levels, hole mobility, and thermal/light stability for application in inverted PSCs. Impressively, the device with a p-PY HTL showed a PCE of 22.8% (a certified efficiency of 22.3%), which is one of the highest PCEs reported to date for MA-free perovskite-based inverted PSCs. More importantly, good long-term stability was realized for the p-PY-based device, which retained 97.5% of its initial PCE after 1 sun light-soaking for 1000 h and maintained over 94% and 81% of its initial PCE after thermal stress at 85 °C and 120 °C for 500 h and 200 h, respectively. We firmly believe that our pyridine-terminated PTAA via molecular engineering is a promising HTL candidate for improving the performance of MA-free PSCs close to their theoretical efficiency limit for real outdoor applications.
Experimental procedures
Resource availability

Lead contact. 
Further information and requests for resources and materials should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Wei Chen (wnlochenwei@mail.hust.edu.cn).


Materials availability. 
This study did not generate new unique materials.


Data and code availability. 
This study did not generate any unique datasets or code.

Materials
Formamidinium iodide (CH(NH2)2I (FAI)) was synthesized according to previous reports.62 Lead(II) iodide (99.99% metals basis), lead(II) bromide (>98%), cesium bromide (>99%), and bathocuproine (>99%) were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. Poly(bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine) (PTAA) was purchased from Xi’an Polymer Light Technology Corporation. PCBM was purchased from Lumtec Co., Taiwan. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as received. Silver and bismuth with high purity (99.99%) were purchased from Sino-Platinum Metals CO., Ltd.
Synthesis of p-PY
The intermediate materials 3, N,N-diphenyl-4-(pyridin-4-yl)aniline were synthesized according to the published procedure.63 Specifically, in a 50 mL Schlenk tube, compound 1, 4-(diphenylamino)phenyl boronic acid (318.0 mg, 1.1 mmol), compound 2, 4-iodopyridine (205.0 mg, 1.0 mmol), Pd(PPh3)4 (24 mg) and dimethoxyethane (DME) (12 mL) were placed under an argon atmosphere. Sodium carbonate (318.0 mg, 3.0 mmol) was dissolved in a minimum volume of water (∼0.8 mL), then injected into the DME solution of the reactants. After stirring at room temperature for 1 h, the mixed solution was stirred at 90 °C under an argon atmosphere for 16 h. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and the resultant residue was subjected to column chromatography on SiO2 (petroleum ether:CH2Cl2 = 1:5). The second major, yellow fraction was collected, providing the required product 3 as a yellowish solid (158.4 mg, yield 49.2%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3, δ, ppm): 8.60 (d, J = 6.04 Hz, 2H), 7.52 (d, J = 8.72 Hz, 2H), 7.46–7.48 (m, 2H), 7.27–7.31 (m, 4H), 7.13–7.16 (m, 6H), 7.06–7.10 (m, 2H). Mass spectrometry (ESI-MS, m/z): [M + Na]+ calc. for C23H19N2Na: 323.1548; found: 323.1553.
The intermediate material 4, 4-bromo-N-(4-bromophenyl)-N-(4-(pyridin-4-yl)phenyl)aniline was synthesized according to a previously published procedure.64 Compound 3 (500.0 mg, 1.55 mmol), NBS, N-bromosuccinimide (608.1 mg, 3.42 mmol), 3 drops of AcOH and 16 mL chloroform were added to a 250 mL eggplant bottle. After that, the mixed solution was stirred at room temperature for 1 h under an argon atmosphere. After 18 h of continuous stirring at 50 °C, 10 mL of water was added, and the mixture was extracted with dichloromethane. The organic phases were combined together, dried over anhydrous Na2SO4 and purified by column chromatography on silica gel (petroleum ether:ethyl acetate = 5:1) to afford a yellow solid. After DCM/n-hexane recrystallization, the yellow product 4 (603.1 mg, yield 81.4%) was obtained. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3, δ, ppm): 8.62 (d, J = 5.56 Hz, 2H), 7.51–7.55 (m, 2H), 7.47 (m, J = 5.56 Hz, 2H), 7.37–7.41 (m, 4H), 7.12–7.14 (m, 2H), 6.98–7.01 (m, 2H). Mass spectrometry (ESI-MS, m/z): [M + H]+ calc. for C23H17N2Br2: 478.9758; found: 478.9760.
In a dry 250 mL three-neck round-bottom flask, 4 (724 mg, 1.52 mmol), boracyl alcohol ester (2310 mg, 9.09 mmol), potassium acetate (859 mg, 8.76 mmol), Pd(dppf)Cl2 (200 mg, 0.28 mmol), and ultra-dry 1,4-dioxane (36.4 mL) were added and stirred overnight at 90 °C. The reaction was quenched by water and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure. Column chromatography was then performed (petroleum ether:ethyl acetate = 5:1) to obtain a pale yellow solid. The solids were recrystallized with n-hexane to give a white solid 5 (0.554 g, yield 63.6%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3, δ, ppm): 8.61–8.63 (m, 2H), 7.71 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 4H), 7.53 (d, J = 8.64 Hz, 2H), 7.49–7.50 (m, 2H), 7.18 (d, J = 8.64 Hz, 2H), 7.11 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 4H), 1.35 (s, 24H). Mass spectrometry (ESI-MS, m/z): [M + H]+ calc. for C35H41B2N2O2: 575.3252; found: 575.3248.

5 (536.7 mg, 0.93 mmol), 4 (448.7 mg, 0.93 mmol), Pd(PPh3)4 (20 mg) and degassed toluene (9 mL) were added to a 50 mL Schlenk tube in a glove box. Potassium carbonate (552.0 mg, 4 mmol) was dissolved in 2 mL water and injected into the mixture. The reaction was finished after being stirred at 85 °C for 40 h under an argon atmosphere. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction mixture was dropped into 200 mL methanol. The precipitate was collected by filtration and further purified by Soxhlet extraction with methanol and acetone, then dissolved by Soxhlet extraction with chloroform to afford a yellow solid p-PY (386.6 mg).
Device fabrication
Glass/ITO substrates (15 Ω sq−1) were cleaned through sequential ultrasonication for 20 min in a detergent solution, distilled water, alcohol, and isopropanol. Then, the substrates were dried with N2 and cleaned by UV ozone for 15 min and finally transferred into a N2-filled glovebox before use. The PTAA solution was prepared with a concentration of 5 mg mL−1 in CB. The as-prepared PTAA solution was spin-coated onto the ITO substrates at 6000 rpm for 30 s and the substrates were subsequently annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. In order to increase its surface wetting, 0.5 mg mL−1 PFNBr in methyl alcohol was spin-coated onto the PTAA at 6000 rpm for 30 s. The p-PY solution was prepared with a concentration of 0.25–1.00 mg mL−1 in CHCl3. For the p-PY-based devices, the p-PY solution was spin-coated onto the ITO substrates at 1500 rpm for 30 s, and the substrates were subsequently annealed at 100 °C for 10 min. The perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 219.3 mg FAI, 619.5 mg PbI2, and 0.05 mg CsBr stoichiometrically in a 1 mL mixed solvent of DMF and DMSO with a volume ratio of 4:1. The perovskite solutions were spin-coated onto glass/ITO/HTL at 6000 rpm for 60 s. 150 μL CB was dripped onto the center of the film at 15 s before the end of spin-coating. The as-prepared perovskite films were subsequently annealed on a hotplate at 150 °C for 20 min. Then 100 μL of PEAI (1 mg mL−1 in IPA) was spin-coated onto the as-prepared perovskite films at the speed of 5000 rpm for 30 s. The film then was heated at 100 °C for 10 min. It should be noted that the PEAI solution needed to be dropped onto the perovskite film quickly. Then a chlorobenzene solution of PCBM (20 mg ml−1) was spin-coated on top of the PEAI at the rotation speed of 3000 rpm for 30 seconds and heated at 70 °C for 10 min. In the final step, the BCP (8 nm) and Ag (80 nm) were deposited at high vacuum (less than 5 × 10−4 Pa) while finely controlling the evaporation rate at 0.1, 0.1 and 0.1–0.5 Å s−1, respectively. The Bi/Ag (20 nm/80 nm) electrodes in the devices for the stability test were thermally evaporated with a controlled evaporation rate of 0.1 and 0.1 to 0.5 Å s−1, respectively.
Characterization

1H NMR, the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were obtained from a BRUKER AVANCE III 600 MHz NMR Instrument (in CDCl3). MALDI-TOF HRMS was performed on a Bruker Autoflex instrument, using 1,8,9-trihydroxyanthracene as a matrix. Cyclic voltammetry measurements were carried out under an argon atmosphere using the CHI760E voltammetric workstation with a N2-saturated solution of 0.1 M tetra-n-butyl ammonium hexafluoro phosphate (Bu4NPF6) in CH2Cl2 as the supporting electrolyte. A platinum disk working electrode, a platinum wire counter electrode, and a silver wire reference electrode were employed, and the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox couple (Fc/Fc+) was used as the reference for all measurements with a scanning rate of 50 mV s−1. TGA analysis was performed using TGA8000 (PerkinElmer Co., USA) under dry air conditions with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was recorded on a PerkinElmer 13 Diamond DSC instrument under a nitrogen atmosphere. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) measurements were conducted using a Dimension Icon Scanning Probe Microscope (Asylum Research, MFP-3D-Stand Alone) in the tapping mode. SEM images were obtained using a Nova NanoSEM 450 scanning electron microscope (FEI Co., Netherlands). An XPS system (Thermo ESCALAB 250XI) was used to acquire the XPS spectra. UPS spectra were acquired using a Thermo ESCALAB 250XI instrument equipped with a 1He ultraviolet radiation source (21.22 eV). The crystal structure of the films was characterized using XRD with an Empyrean X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (PANalytical B.V. Co., Netherlands). The UV-vis spectra of the perovskite films were characterized using a Lambda 950 UV-vis spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Co., USA). Steady-state PL spectra were recorded using an Edinburgh FLS920 fluorescence spectrometer (Edinburgh Co., UK) with an excitation source wavelength of 532 nm. The TRPL measurements were conducted using a fluorescence spectrometer with an excitation wavelength of 478 nm (DeltaFlex, Horiba), and the TRPL results were fitted by a bi-exponential rate law model according to the following function: y = A1exp(−t/τ1) + A2exp(−t/τ2) + y0, where τ1 and τ2 are the lifetimes for the fast and slow decays, respectively. Photovoltaic measurements employed a black mask with an aperture area of 0.0902 cm2 under standard AM1.5G simulated sunlight (Oriel, model 9119) and the simulated light intensity was calibrated with a silicon photodiode (Enlitech). The EQE spectra were obtained using an EQE system (Saifan, China) with monochromatic light of 1 × 1016 photons cm−2 under DC mode. The EQE-EL spectra were recorded by a LED photoluminescence quantum-yield measurement system (Shenzhen Puyan Internet Technology Co., Ltd) equipped with a Keithley 2400 Source Measure Unit. The Mott–Schottky plots, TPV and TPC plots, and space charge limited current (SCLC) plots were obtained by a Zennium electrochemistry workstation (Zahner, Germany). The thermal stability of the unencapsulated PSCs was determined by aging the devices on a hot plate at a temperature of 120 °C under a N2 atmosphere. The efficiency of the aged device was measured under a standard solar simulator in air periodically. The operational stability of the unencapsulated PSCs was performed at the MPP tracking under continuous white-light LED array illumination under a N2 atmosphere, and the light intensity was calibrated to achieve the same JSC from the PSCs measured under a standard solar simulator (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), and the cell temperature was controlled at around 45 °C.
Author contributions
R. C., S. L., and X. X. contributed equally to this work. R. C., S. L., X. X., Z. L. and W. C. conceived the project and designed the experiments. R. C., S. L., and X. X. performed and were involved in all the experimental parts. R. C., S. L., X. X., S. Z., Y. Z., L. H., Z. L., Y. W., Y. Q. and W. C. co-wrote the paper. F. R., J. Z., X. T., W. C., and X. G. contributed materials and analysis tools. Z. L., Y. W. and W. C. directed and supervised this project. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Project funding from the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2021YFB3800104), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51822203, 52002140, U20A20252, 51861145404, 62105293), the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by CAST, the Self-determined and Innovative Research Funds of HUST (2020kfyXJJS008 and 2018KFYRCPY003), the Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (ZRMS2020001132), the Shenzhen Science and Technology Innovation Committee (JCYJ20180507182257563), the Outstanding Young Talents Innovation Team Support Plan of Zhengzhou University and the Innovation Project of Optics Valley Laboratory (Grant No. OVL2021BG008). Y. B. Q. acknowledges the support from the Energy Materials and Surface Sciences Unit of the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University.
References
NREL, Best Research-cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer and M. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hawash, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1700623 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lin, N. Sakai, P. Da, J. Wu, H. C. Sansom, A. J. Ramadan, S. Mahesh, J. Liu, R. D. Oliver and J. Lim, Science, 2020, 369, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T.-W. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
7  S. Wu, R. Chen, S. Zhang, B. H. Babu, Y. Yue, H. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Huang, S. Fang, T. Liu, L. Han and W. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1161 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Deng, Z. Ni, A. F. Palmstrom, J. Zhao, S. Xu, C. H. Van Brackle, X. Xiao, K. Zhu and J. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 1949–1960 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, S. Xu, S. Chen, X. Xiao, J. Zhao and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 633–641 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, W. Zhang, S. Wu, H. Zhu, Z. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Jiang, R. Chen, J. Zhou, Q. Lu, Z. Xiao, L. Shi, H. Chen, L. K. Ono, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Qi, L. Han and W. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabg3749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Dai, S. Xu, H. Jiao, L. Zhao and J. Huang, Science, 2021, 373, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, X. Deng, F. Qi, Z. Li, D. Liu, D. Shen, M. Qin, S. Wu, F. Lin and S.-H. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20134–20142 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, X. Deng, F. Qi, Z. Li, D. Liu, D. Shen, M. Qin, S. Wu, F. Lin, S.-H. Jang, J. Zhang, X. Lu, D. Lei, C.-S. Lee, Z. Zhu and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20134–20142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, S. Ye, H. Zhang, F. Zhou, Y. Hao, H. Cai, J. Song and J. Qu, Nano Energy, 2021, 106370 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Meng, R. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Zeng, Y. Yi, W. E. Sha, Y. Long and J. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2102844 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Hou, C. Bao, J. Yin, F. Yuan, Z. Huang, K. Song, J. Liu, J. Troughton and N. Gasparini, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Degani, Q. An, M. Albaladejo-Siguan, Y. J. Hofstetter, C. Cho, F. Paulus, G. Grancini and Y. Vaynzof, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabj7930 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, L. Shen, S. Xun, J. S. Sarmiento, Y. Yang, L. Zheng, H. Li, H. Wang, J. L. Bredas and X. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2109348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, D. Cui, X. Luo, C. Zhang, Q. Han, Y. Wang and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3823–3847 RSC .
B. Liu, H. Bi, D. He, L. Bai, W. Wang, H. Yuan, Q. Song, P. Su, Z. Zang and T. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2526–2538 CrossRef CAS .
B.-w Park and S. I. Seok, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805337 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
S. He, L. Qiu, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100545 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Zhang, Z. Jiang, W. Chen, R. Chen, Y. Huang, Z. Yang, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001610 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, S. K. Yadavalli, M. Chen, A. Abbaspourtamijani, Y. Qi and N. P. Padture, Science, 2021, 372, 618–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, D. Zhong, M. Shi, S. Qu and H. Chen, iScience, 2019, 22, 534–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, C. Zhu, M. Chen, C. Jiang, J. Guo, Y. Feng, Z. Dai, S. K. Yadavalli, M. Hu and X. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–9 CrossRef .
X. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Xiang, L. Zhao, M. Anaya, Y. Shen, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y. H. Chiang and Y. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-L. Chen, S.-S. Zhang, T.-L. Liu, S.-H. Wu, Z.-C. Yang, W.-T. Chen, R. Chen and W. Chen, Rare Met., 2020, 39, 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Q. Wu, Q. Wang, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, S. Tang, Y. Deng, H. Lu, Y. Liu, T. Li and Z. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Y.-L. Cao, W.-H. Li and Z.-S. Bo, Rare Met., 2021, 1–18 Search PubMed .
K. Rakstys, C. Igci and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6748–6769 RSC .
H. D. Pham, L. Xianqiang, W. Li, S. Manzhos, A. K.-K. Kyaw and P. Sonar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1177–1209 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Wu, C. Shen, E. Li, C. Yan, W. Zhang, H. Tian, L. Han and W. H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803573 CrossRef .
J. Cui, J. Lu, X. Xu, K. Cao, Z. Wang, G. Alemu, H. Yuang, Y. Shen, J. Xu, Y. Cheng and M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16433–16440 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, S. Liu, Z. He, H.-B. Wu, W. Yang, B. Zhang and Y. Cao, Polym. Chem., 2017, 8, 6720–6732 RSC .
B. Xu, Z. Zhu, J. Zhang, H. Liu, C. C. Chueh, X. Li and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700683 CrossRef .
T. P. Osedach, T. L. Andrew and V. Bulović, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 711–718 RSC .
M. Petrus, T. Bein, T. Dingemans and P. Docampo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12159–12162 RSC .
M. Jeong, I. W. Choi, E. M. Go, Y. Cho, M. Kim, B. Lee, S. Jeong, Y. Jo, H. W. Choi and J. Lee, Science, 2020, 369, 1615–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Calió, S. Kazim, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14522–14545 CrossRef .
Q. Yao, Q. Xue, Z. Li, K. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Li, S. Yang, C. J. Brabec, H. L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, H. Na, E. H. Jung, T.-Y. Yang, Y. G. Lee, G. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. I. Seok, J. Lee and J. Seo, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 682–689 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, J. Lu, X. Xu, K. Cao, Z. Wang, G. Alemu, H. Yuang, Y. Shen, J. Xu and Y. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16433–16440 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Bolisetty, C.-T. Li, K. J. Thomas, G. B. Bodedla and K.-C. Ho, Tetrahedron, 2015, 71, 4203–4212 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
N. Ahn, D.-Y. Son, I.-H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn and M. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Hu, C. Liu, L. Tan and Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703061 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Z. Li, X. Yu, X. Wu, C. Zhong, D. Liu, D. Lei, A. K.-Y. Jen, Z. A. Li and Z. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 133, 7303–7309 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Chen, J. W. Lee, Z. Zhao, X. Xu, Y. T. Hsieh, L. Meng, P. Sun, N. D. Marco and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800568 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, L. Qiu, L. K. Ono, S. He, Z. Hu, M. Jiang, G. Tong, Z. Wu, Y. Jiang and D.-Y. Son, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 596–604 CrossRef CAS .
P. Holzhey and M. Saliba, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21794–21808 RSC .
IEC 61215-1:2016, Terrestrial Photovoltaic (PV) Modules Design Qualification and Type Approval-Part 1: Test Requirements (IEC, 2016).
H. Wang, C. Zhu, L. Liu, S. Ma, P. Liu, J. Wu, C. Shi, Q. Du, Y. Hao, S. Xiang, H. Chen, P. Chen, Y. Bai, H. Zhou, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, M. Yang, X. Zheng, C. Wu, W. Li, Y. Yan, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, K. Zhu and S. Priya, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4693–4700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, K. Fu, N. Yantara, G. Xing, S. Sun, T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500829 CrossRef .
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame and A. Di Carlo, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
K. Kowalski, N. Long, M. Kuimova, A. Kornyshev, A. Taylor and A. White, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 598–606 RSC .
J. Zhao, F. Dang, B. Liu, Y. Wu, X. Yang, G. Zhou, Z. Wu and W.-Y. Wong, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 6098–6110 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00433j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
A pyridine anchoring group functionalized poly(triarylamine) (p-PY) as the hole transport layer was synthesized to enhance the efficiency and stability of inverted perovskite solar cells (PSCs). When compared with PTAA, the p-PY showed good surface wettability, energy levels, benign interface defect passivation capability, and thermal/light stability for application in inverted PSCs. At last, the p-PY based MA-free device achieved a champion PCE of 22.8% (certified 22.3%). In particular, the resistance to extremely high temperature (≥120 °C) aging, aiming to resolve the hot-spot effect which is a highly risky factor for real out-door applications of PSCs, has been alleviated by taking advantage of both p-PY HTL and MA-free perovskite in this work.


 	Fig. 1  Electronic and thermal properties of the two HTLs studied in this work. (A) The schematic illustration of the device structure based on p-PY. (B) The molecular structure of p-PY and PTAA. (C) The UPS spectra of the ITO/p-PY and ITO/PTAA samples. (D) Energy level diagram. (E) DSC curves of p-PY and PTAA during the second heating scan, which was measured at a heat ramp of 10 °C min−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  Interaction of HTLs and the perovskite films. High resolution In 3d (A) and N 1s (B) core-level XPS spectra for the ITO and HTLs atop ITO substrates. High resolution Pb 4f (C) and I 3d (D) core-level XPS spectra for the pristine perovskite film and perovskite films atop HTLs deposited on ITO substrates.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic performances. (A) J–V curves of the champion PSCs based on dopant-free p-PY and PTAA; (B) stabilized power output at the maximum power point (MPP) under simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination at 100 mW cm−2; J–V curves of the (C) p-PY and (D) PTAA based devices with different voltage sweep (E) statistical performance of the PSCs based on p-PY and PTAA. (F) EQE spectra with the integrated JSC for the champion PSCs based on p-PY and PTAA.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Carrier dynamic characterization of the p-PY and PTAA-based PSCs. (A) The EL spectrum of the p-PY and PTAA-based PSCs; (B) EQE of EL of the p-PY and PTAA-based devices while operating as LEDs; (C) VOCversus illumination intensity for the p-PY and PTAA-based devices; (D) normalized transient photovoltage decay for the p-PY and PTAA-based devices.	 

 	Fig. 5  Thermal and light stability of the p-PY and PTAA-based PSCs. c-AFM images of (A and C) p-PY and (B and D) PTAA films on ITO glass substrates before and after aging at 120 °C for 200 h; (E) thermal stability of the unencapsulated devices stressed at 120 °C in N2 atmosphere in the dark. Six identically prepared devices were aged at each condition respectively; (F) light soaking stability of unencapsulated devices under 1 sun equivalent white-light LED array illumination with continuous MPP tracking at 45 °C in N2 atmosphere.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee00433j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
