Ion exchange membranes for vanadium redox flow battery (VRB) applications  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00770F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00770F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1147-1160Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsIon exchange membranes for vanadium redox flow battery (VRB) applications

        
          
            Xianfeng 
            Li
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Huamin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhensheng 
            Mai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongzhang 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ivo 
            Vankelecom
          
          
        
      b
aR&D center for energy storage, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 457, Zhongshan Road, Dalian, 116023, China. E-mail: lixianfeng@dicp.ac.cn; zhanghm@dicp.ac.cn
bCentre for Surface Chemistry and Catalysis, Faculty of Bioengineering Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 23 – Box 2461, 3001, Leuven, Belgium
Received 
      14th December 2010
    , Accepted 11th February 2011First published on 11th March 2011AbstractThe vanadium redox flow battery (VRB) has received wide attention due to its attractive features for large scale energy storage. The key material of a VRB is an ion exchange membrane (IEM) that prevents cross mixing of the positive and negative electrolytes, while still allowing the transport of ions to complete the circuit during the passage of current. This review focuses on all aspects related to IEMs that are of relevance to understand IEMs better. An overview of the general issues of VRBs will be given first, after which the role of the IEM will be outlined together with the material requirements for advanced alternative IEMs. Finally, the recent progress of IEMs in VRBs will be reviewed and directions will be given for the development of next-generation materials.Xianfeng LiDr Xianfeng Li was born in 1979 in China. He received his PhD in polymer chemistry and physics from Jilin University in 2006. After 3 years' postdoc with Prof. Vankelecom from K. U. Leuven, he was appointed as associate professor in Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Science. His research interests include functional membranes for different applications, nanotechnology and polymer chemistry. He currently serves on the editorial board of the Journal of Membrane Science & Technology.Huamin ZhangProfessor Huamin Zhang is the PEMFC key materials and technology group leader, the director of the DICP-SAMSUNG Fuel Cell Joint Lab and the DICP-RONGKE Redox Flow Storage Battery Joint Lab at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his PhD from Kyushu University in 1988. Afterward, he worked in Kansai Research Institute, Osaka Gas Inc. from 1995 to 2000. He is the Chief Scientist of the State 973 Key Program on Energy Storage. His research interests focus on energy and energy storage; e.g. fuel cells, regenerative fuel cells and redox flow batteries.Zhensheng MaiZhensheng Mai studied Chemical Engineering at South China University of Technology, where he graduated in 2007. Currently he is working on his doctoral degree under the guidance of Prof. Huamin Zhang and Prof. Xianfeng Li at DICP. His work involves exploring high performance ion exchange membranes for vanadium redox flow battery applications.Hongzhang ZhangHongzhang Zhang got his Bachelor degree (BSc) from Shandong University in 2008. He is presently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Huamin Zhang and Prof. Xianfeng Li. His work involves preparation and characterization of porous membranes for vanadium redox flow battery applications.Ivo VankelecomIvo Vankelecom studied Bioscience Engineering at the Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium, where he graduated in 1990. In 1994, he obtained his PhD in applied biological sciences. Until 2002, he worked at K.U. Leuven as postdoc on membrane catalysis and he spent 6 months at the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (Beersheva, Israel) and Imperial College (London, England). Since 2002, he is professor at K.U. Leuven, focusing on the development of new membranes and membrane applications for (solvent resistant) nanofiltration, reverse osmosis, gas separations, fuel cells, pervaporation, pressure retarded osmosis, and membrane (bio)reactors.

Broader context
Renewable energies become more and more important with the increasing problems of the climate change and energy shortage. The all-vanadium redox flow battery (VRB) provides an efficient solution to solve the problem of intermittent and random nature of renewable energies. As the key component of VRB, ion exchange membranes play a very important role to affect the final performance of VRB. This paper reviewed the recent progress of ion exchange membranes in VRB. Furthermore the challenge and prospect of the membranes in future was outlined.

1. Introduction
Exploration and development of renewable energy sources, like solar and wind energy, are among the hottest topics of our times. However, to be competitive with coal, natural gas, oil and nuclear power, the renewable energy needs to be cost effective and reliable. Energy storage, and especially large-scale energy storage, is the key technology to achieve this.1–5 In combination with renewable resources, energy storage can increase the quality and the stability of e.g. photovoltaic (PV) and wind-generated electricity. Energy storage can be considered as any technology that can convert and store electricity to overcome the mismatch between generation and end-use. Also, energy storage can efficiently increase the value of electric power by correcting for power fluctuations in very short time. Fig. 1 clearly shows the different storage requirements for electric power utility applications.6
 Fig. 1  
          Storage power requirement for electric power utility application. (Reproduced from http://www.electricitystorage.org/ESA/applications/). 
As one kind of energy storage technique, the vanadium redox flow battery (VRB) is well-suited for large-scale utility applications due to its attractive features such as it’s long life, active thermal management and independence from energy and power ratings.7,8
As the key part of a VRB, an ion exchange membrane (IEM) is responsible for transferring ions from the anode to cathode as well as for preventing cross mixing of the positive and negative electrolytes.9–19 The properties of the IEM greatly affect the resulting performance of the VRB. The membranes traditionally used in VRB are perfluorosulfonic acid polymers such as Dupont's Nafion®. Although they show both high proton conductivity and chemical stability, the extremely high cost and low ion selectivity of these membranes (high vanadium crossover) have limited their further commercialization in VRBs. Hence, alternative IEM materials are being sought.
Different types of polymers have thus been developed and studied for VRB applications. Although some points, like cost and even their ion selectivity, were greatly improved, there are still lots of factors that cannot meet the standard of a VRB, like the chemical stability, the balance between conductivity and mechanical stability or swelling etc. Even though different kinds of membranes have been reported for VRB, no review paper on this topic exists yet.
In this review, the material requirements for advanced alternative IEMs for VRB will be outlined, recent progress in this area will be addressed and directions for the development of next-generation materials will be provided.
2. 
        VRB overview
2.1. The principle of VRBs
The VRB is an electrochemical system that can realize the conversion between chemical energy and electrical energy. As shown in Fig. 2, VRBs have two electrolyte tanks containing active species of vanadium in different valence states (in the positive tank: the V(IV)/V(V) redox couple; in the negative tank: the V(II)/(III) redox couple). All active species are dissolved in a sulfuric acid medium. The concentrations of vanadium ions and sulfuric acid are in the range of 1–3 M and 1–2 M, respectively. During charge–discharge processes, the active species are oxidized or reduced to achieve conversion between chemical energy and electrical energy.20 The electrical balance is achieved by the transport of protons (or sulfate ions if an anion exchange membrane is used) in the electrolytes across the membrane during operation of the cell. Featured by the dissolved redox species in the recirculated solution, the flow battery differs from other batteries storing the energy in electrode structures, such as lead-acid batteries and lithium-ion batteries. The characteristic structure of VRB, namely the “non-participating electrode” structure, allows independent design of the power rating and storage capacity. VRBs have a unique advantage over other flow batteries due to the fact that their positive and negative electrolytes are identical in their discharged states. This makes shipment and storage of electrolyte more simple and inexpensive, further simplifying their management during operation. Furthermore, there is no question of ions from one electrolyte diffusing into and contaminating the other in their discharge state since the active species in both electrolytes are the same.
 Fig. 2  The principle of VRB. 
Two half cells, two solid electrodes and one IEM are the main components of a VRB single cell. The reactions occur on the surface of solid electrodes during charge and discharge. High surface area carbon materials are normally used as electrodes in VRB, the materials operate in a certain range of voltage potentials with minimal hydrogen and oxygen gas evolution. The IEMs in between isolate both electrolytes, but allow protons to migrate.
In practical applications, VRBs are constructed by assembling several cells in series to form a VRB stack (Fig. 3). The number of cells assembled is determined by the desired output voltage level of battery.
 Fig. 3  The main components of VRB stacks. 
2.2. Why vanadium?
One of the challenging issues for redox flow batteries is the cross-contamination of electrolytes with different elements, burdening the cost for electrolyte regeneration. Therefore, the same element utilized as redox couples in both negative and positive electrodes is preferred. The diverse oxidation states (+2, +3, +4, +5) of vanadium render the concept of an all-vanadium redox-flow battery possible. Besides, the wide span between the standard reduction potentials of V(III)/V(II) and V(V)/V(IV) (listed in Table 1), as well as their solubility in acidic aqueous solution, satisfies the requirements for a flow battery. A battery with vanadium solutions in both half-cells thus provides the following benefits: (1) the electrolyte can be easily regenerated after contamination; (2) the electrochemical reversibility of vanadium redox couples makes a high energy efficiency accessible. (3) Furthermore, vanadium occurs naturally in about 65 different minerals and in fossil fuel deposits,21 bringing about a promising commercial prospect.
Table 1 
Reduction potentials of vanadium redox couples





                    Redox couple

Reduction potential/V





                    VO2+/VO2+
0.999



                    VO2+/V3+
0.337



                    V3+/V2+
−0.255




2.3. Performance of a VRB

2.3.1. Rated output power. 
The power of a VRB is usually referred to as rated output power under certain discharge conditions. The value of the rated output power is mainly determined by the current density and number of single batteries assembled in a stack. The instantaneous output power of a VRB can be calculated from the current and voltage between the electrodes at a specified point of time. W = I × V(1)(W: instantaneous power; I: instantaneous current; V: instantaneous voltage)
And the mean output power can be calculated as (2) (: mean power; I: instantaneous current; V: instantaneous voltage; t: time)
The output power of a VRB is mainly determined by the valid area of the electrodes and the number of single batteries in the stack.


2.3.2 Energy storage capacity. 
The energy storage capacity of a VRB is the maximum electricity volume that can be provided by the battery under a specified condition. It is determined by the volume and concentration of the electrolyte used in the battery and is not related to the electrode area and number of stacks.


2.3.3. Efficiency. 
The VRB performance is normally determined by its efficiency, which mainly includes Coulombic efficiency (CE), voltage efficiency (VE) and energy efficiency (EE). CE is the ratio of a cell's discharge capacity (Qdis) divided by its charge capacity (Qch), described as eqn(3). In the constant current (Icon) charge–discharge mode, eqn (4) is satisfied and CE can be presented as the discharge time (tdis) divided by charge time (tch). (3) (4)
A higher CE, indicating a lower capacity loss, is mainly due to the lower rate of cross-mixed vanadium ions. During discharge, electrochemical reduction and oxidation of vanadium ions occurs, as described in reactions 1 and 2. Once vanadium ions cross-mix, the non-electrochemical side reactions (reactions 3–5)22 would happen, thus further reducing the number of active species for reactions 1 and 2. Specifically, in the positive electrolyte, VO2+ are consumed by the reduction reaction with the migrated V2+ and V3+, while V2+ in the negative electrolyte are oxidized by the migrated VO2+ and VO2+. In VRB, the cross-mix rate is mainly determined by membranes selectivity, since the membranes are responsible for isolating active species. VO+2 + e → VO2+(reaction 1) VO2+ → V3+ + e(reaction 2) VO+2 → V3+ + 2VO2+(reaction 3) 2VO+2 → V2+ + 3VO2+(reaction 4) VO2+ + V2+ → 2V3+(reaction 5)

            VE is defined as the ratio of a cell's mean discharge voltage (Vdis) divided by its mean charge voltage (Vch), presented in eqn (5). Discharge voltage and charge voltage are both determined by the thermodynamic reduction potential of the redox couples in each half cell and the overpotential of the cell. EE is calculated from VE and CE, as described in eqn (6). As an indicator of energy loss in charge-discharge processes, EE is the key parameter to evaluate an energy storage system. (5) EE = CE × VE(6)

3. The application of VRBs

        VRB, as proposed by the Skyllas–Kazacos23,24group from Australia in 1984, has received wide attention in energy storage thanks to its long cycle life, flexible design, fast response time, deep-discharge capability, and low pollutant emission. Nowadays, the VRB is becoming more and more mature and finds extensive applications in different areas, such as renewable energy, grid management (load leveling and peak shaving), emergency and back-up power stations, electric vehicle charging stations and communication base stations.
In 1984, the VRB was first developed at the University of New South Wales in Sydney (UNSW), Australia. Afterwards, more than 20 VRB demonstration systems were installed for a range of energy storage applications around the world. The subsequent demonstration programs include25
• a 15 kWh system built by UNSW in the demonstration Solar House in Thailand
• an emergency back-up system for submarines and a 450 kW/900 kWh load-leveling battery (Kashima-Kita Electric Power Corporation, Japan)
• a 170 kW/1 MWh VRB system installed by SEI in 2001 at Hokkaido Electric Power Wind farm Japan for wind turbine output power stabilization
• a 500 kW/5 MWh VRB installed by SEI in 2001 at Gwansei Gakuin University Japan for peak shaving
• a 250 kW/2 MWh VRB installed for Pacific Corp by VRB Power in 2004 in Moab, Utah, USA for voltage support, rural feeder augmentation
• a 4 MW/6 MWh VRB installed by SEI in 2005 for J Power at Subaru Wind Farm, Tomahae, Hokkaido, Japan for wind energy storage and wind power stabilization
In China, the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), belonging to the Chinese Academy of Sciences started its VRB research in 2002. In 2008, the first 100 kW VRB system in China was successfully assembled in DICP. In 2006, Dalian Rongke Power, a DICP spin-off, together with Bolong (Dalian) Industry Investment started VRB research.
At the same time, different demonstrations were built to accelerate further commercialization of VRB, which include:
• a 5 kW/50 kWh VRB system for the application of PV power generation in Tibet.
• a 60 kW/300 kWh system was built to be combined with PV, to provide the power to the R&D building of Rongke Power.
In 2010, DICP together with Rongke Power successfully explored the first 260 kW system in China (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  The 260kW VRB system developed by DICP and Rongke Power. 
Meanwhile, a 5 MW system will be constructed at a wind farm for wind turbine output power stabilization. Up to now, most applications are still in the demonstration status, where further efforts need to be made for real commercialization.
4. 
        Membrane materials for VRBs
4.1. The role of the IEM and the requirement of the IEM in a VRB
From the principle of VRBs (Fig. 2), it can be understood that the two half-cells are separated by an IEM, which is employed to separate the positive and negative electrolyte and complete the current circuit by transferring ions. The ideal IEM should possess the following properties.
(1) Good ion conductivity: the membranes need to complete the current circuit by transferring ions. A high ion conductivity is required to minimize the losses in voltage efficiency.
(2) High ion selectivity: the separator, alternatively called the membrane, must be permeable to the charge balancing ions (e.g.protons, sulfate ions) of the supporting electrolyte to complete the current circuit, but must prevent diffusion of active vanadium-species in solution which would result in self-discharge of the battery. The ideal membrane should thus exhibit low permeation rates of the active species to minimize self-discharge and allow high Coulombic efficiencies.
(3) Good chemical stability: since VRB membranes are operated in sulfuric acid medium in the presence of strong oxidizing VO2+ solutions, excellent chemical stability is needed to ensure the battery's cycle life.
4.2. 
          Membrane preparation
Different methods can be employed to prepare IEMs. One is casting of polymer solutions. The polymers can normally be prepared via normal polymerization methods, like polycondensation, but special functional anion or cation groups, such as sulfonic acid or quaternary ammoniumetc., should be introduced to provide membranes with good ion conductivity. The second method is referred to as reinforcement of ion conductive membrane with suitable backing materials. Specifically, an ion exchange resin is first introduced into a porous support, typically poly(ethylene) (PE) or polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), followed by cross-linking to reinforce the material.23,26–28 The third method is based on grafting of polymerizable monomers to films to obtain grafted membranes like poly(styrene-4-sulfonate)-graft-poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PSS-g-PVDF), poly(styrene-4-sulfonate)-graft-polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) (PSS-g-PTFE) etc.29
4.3. 
          Membrane characterization
The basic properties of the IEMs, like water uptake, swelling, ion exchange capacity and ion conductivity, can be characterized by similar methods as those reported for fuel cell proton exchange membranes.30–32 Some special characterization methods for VRBs will be introduced below.

4.3.1. Area resistance. 
The area resistance of a membrane under VRB circumstances may indicate the internal resistance of the VRB battery, which will finally determine the voltage efficiency. The area resistances of the membranes are normally measured with conductivity cells. Certain concentrations of vanadium and H2SO4 solutions are introduced into both the half cells and separated by membranes to evaluate the area resistance.13,16,33


4.3.2. 
            Oxidation stability. 
A major limiting factor in the expected life time of a VRB is the oxidation stability of the IEMs. Most polymeric membranes can not resist the strong oxidants VO2+ and sulfuric acid. Normally, three different methods are used for characterization of oxidative stability of IEMs in VRB, as listed below:24,34
1) VO2+ oxidation test: The method based on the fact that when membranes are immersed in VO2+/H2SO4 solutions, VO2+ is reduced to VO2+ as the oxidation reaction of the membrane occurs. It is believed that there is a proportional correlation between the generation rate of VO2+ and the membrane degradation rate. The concentration of VO2+ can be determined by the UV-visible spectroscopy at certain time intervals. The entire test typically takes about two months. Generally, the generation rates of VO2+ in the solution samples with perfluorinated membranes (such as Nafion and Gore Select) are lower than that with other commercial membranes (Asahi Selemion, Daramic, etc.).
2) Fenton test: Membranes are treated with Fenton's reagent, an aqueous solution formed by certain concentration of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and ferrous iron (Fe2+). The membranes are attached by large amount of free radicals (OH˙ and OOH˙) formed by H2O2 in the presence of Fe2+ and sequentially cause membrane degradation. Weight loss of the membranes is recorded to detect their stability. Most hydrocarbon membrane cannot survive for 100 h in Fenton's reagent, while perfluorinated membranes can keep quite stable.
3) “On-line” VRB test: To detect real lifetime of VRB stacks assemble by membranes. The internal resistance of the cell and the vanadium permeability through the membranes are tested at certain time intervals. Lower internal resistance or higher vanadium permeability will be as the sign for membrane degradation.
In the first two “off-line” tests, the membrane degradation behavior possibly deviates from the practical degradation process in VRB, since too many dynamic factors (the variant concentration of VO2+, the ion migration caused by the electric field, etc.) are neglected. Merely on the basis of these test results, it is difficult to determine whether an IEM qualifies the VRB application. Meanwhile, the “on-line” test is fairly time-consuming. Hence, it is quite challenging to find an effective and reliable way to characterize the oxidation stability of IEM.


4.3.3. 
            Vanadium permeability. 

            Vanadium permeability is the parameter to characterize the cross mixing of vanadium ions, as the membrane needs to isolate the electrolytes in each half cell to avoid the cross mixing of vanadium ions. The permeability can be measured with diffusion cells (Fig. 5). The left cell is filled with a H2SO4 solution of VOSO4, while the right one is filled with MgSO4 in a H2SO4 solution to equalize the ionic strengths and to minimize osmotic pressure effects.33 Magnetic stirrers are used in both cells to avoid concentration polarization at the membrane surfaces. Samples from the right cell are collected at regular time intervals. The concentration of VO2+ in the samples is measured by using a UV-vis spectrometer. The vanadium permeability can be calculated according to Fick's diffusion law.
 Fig. 5  A typical diffusion cell to measure V permeability. (Reproduced from J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 482–487). 


4.3.4. Efficiency. 
The efficiency is evaluated by assembling a single battery or battery stacks with developed membranes. Normally, four parts are included in the battery: a bipolar plate, a carbon felt, a frame and an IEM. The efficiency is obtained from the charge/discharge process of the assembled battery.

4.4. 
          Membrane materials for VRBs

4.4.1 
            Pore filled IEMs. 
Soon after the Skyllas-Kazacos group's publication in 1984, a number of already commercially available membranes were evaluated in VRBs. Except for a few which are currently too expensive for commercial use, most are not suitable due to their poor chemical stability in the vanadium solutions (e.g. the Asahi Glass' Selemion series (CMV, AMV, DMV, ASS), Dow XUS1 3204.10, etc.).23,24,26,35 One of the earliest membrane types were the pore filled membranes. This kind of membranes are normally prepared by two steps. First, a porous support is filled with an ion exchange resin or polyelectrolyte, together with a crosslinker, followed by a crosslinking reaction (Fig. 6). In these kind of membranes, the porous support provides the mechanical stability of the membrane; the ion exchange resin or polyeletrolytes filled in the pore ensure the ion conductivity. The chemical stability of the resulting membranes can be tuned by the cross linking reactions
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the preparation of pore filled membranes. 
Different porous supports can be used for this kind of membrane fabrication, most of which are polypropylene (PP), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) or Daramic (W.R. Grace) due to their excellent chemical stability and low cost. The ion exchange resin or polyelectrolytes can be any type of polymer with ion exchange functional groups.
Skyllas-Kazacos et al. introduced Amberlite CG 400 into Daramic porous supports followed by crosslinking with divinylbenzene (DVB). The composite membranes showed an EE of 75% at a current density of 40 mA cm−2 in VRB compared with only 40% for untreated Darmamic.23,26 Moreover, the membranes show a very good stability under VRB conditions. The VRB life time test was carried out on the membrane for more than 4000 h,21 without any appreciable drop in performance. Similarly, polyelectrolytes were introduced into Daramic composite membranes as well. Polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) and carboxymethyl cellulose sodium (CMCS) were selected as polyelectrolytes with Amberlite CG 400 as ion exchange resin. The modified membranes showed a much higher CE (90%) than the original materials (77%), together with excellent stability. The VRB single cell assembled with these composite membranes continuously ran for more than 8000 h without degradation.24 Miyake et al. invented another kind of composite membranes prepared viain situpolymerization of monomers in the pores. The monomer mixtures contained a vinyl compound having functional groups and a crosslinking monomer. The composite membranes were obtained by polymerization of the monomer mixture in the pore followed by decomposing part of the functional groups.36
Although this kind of membranes show excellent chemical stability in VRB, their relatively low ion conductivity limits their further applications, especially at high current density, the energy efficiency and voltage efficiency of these membranes are relatively low. To further improve their proton conductivity will be a very important topic in future. Previous investigations thus mainly focused on commercial porous support like Daramic, PTFE, PEetc. Most of these supports show relatively large pores and very hydrophobic properties. However, the pore size distribution and the hydrophilicity of the porous support can greatly affect the final properties of the resulting membranes. To further control pore size distribution and hydrophilicity of the porous support could thus be a nice solution to increase the conductivity of this kind of membranes.37
Apart from crosslinked composite membranes, polyelectrolytes with excellent ion conductivity can be directly introduced in the porous support without further crosslinking. For example, Nafion can be directly filled in Daramic membranes to increase the ion selectivity. The composite membranes efficiently reduced the self-discharge of the VRB, as confirmed by the OCV test.18
To further improve the ion conductivity and ion selectivity of pore filled membranes, PTFE reinforced pore filled membranes can be a good choice. Considering the good selectivity and stability of these membranes in PEMFC and DMFC,38,39 these kind of membranes are expected to have a good ion selectivity in VRBs. Their conductivity can be further tuned by controlling the membrane thickness.


4.4.2. Perfluorinated membranes. 
Perfluorinated membranes (like Nafion) are currently the most used membranes in VRBs. The structure that arises by incorporating perfluorovinyl ether groups terminated with sulfonate groups onto a tetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) backbone provides Nafion with a specific morphology and finally leads to its specific performance (fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Proposed structure of Nafion. 
The hydrophobic Teflon back bone provides the membranes with excellent mechanical and chemical stability, while the hydrophilic zone, originating from the assembled sulfonated groups, ensures the ion conductivity. Several models were proposed to interpret the morphology of Nafion. The first model for Nafion, called the Cluster-Network Model (Fig. 8),40 consists of an equal distribution of sulfonated ion clusters (also described as 'inverted micelles) with a 40 Å (4 nm) diameter held within a continuous fluorocarbon lattice. Narrow channels of about 10 Å (1 nm) in diameter interconnect the clusters, which form the proton transport channels.
 Fig. 8  
              Cluster-network model for the morphology of hydrated Nafion. (Reproduced from W. Y. Hsu, T. D. Gierke, J. Membr. Sci. 1983, 13, 307.) 
Currently, the most used model is the water channel model.41 In this model, the sulfonic acid functional groups self-organize into hydrophilic water channels of ∼2.5 nm diameter through which small ions can be easily transported; while the hydrophobic polymer backbone with crystallites provides the good mechanical stability (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  
Water channel model for the morphology of Nafion (reproduced from Nat. Mater., 2007, 7(1), 75–83). 

            Nafion is thus currently the most used membrane in VRBs, showing a quite good electrochemical property and chemical stability. A very high VE (around 90%) was shown with Nafion thanks to its good proton conductivity. Membranes with different thickness showed different efficiency. For example, Nafion 115 shows a CE of 94% and an EE of 84% at the current density of 80 mA cm−2. However, Nafion 112 which is around 2.5 times thinner shows a CE of 91% under the same conditions. In the charge and discharge curves (Fig. 10), shorter discharge times of Nafion 112 were shown due to the cross-over of vanadium ions. Normally, Nafion with a thickness of more than 100 μm is used, since serious vanadium crossover will happen with thinner membranes. Even though Nafion shows excellent electrochemical properties and chemical stability, its low ion selectivity and extremely high cost (600–800 USD m−2) limits their further applications in VRBs. Hence, alternative membranes are being sought.
 Fig. 10  Charge and discharge curves of Nafion 112 and Nafion 115. 


4.2.3. Modified perfluorinated membranes. 
As described above, even perfluorinated membranes exhibit excellent electrochemical properties in VRBs. Their high vanadium ions crossover or low ion selectivity is one of the biggest problems that hinders their further application in VRBs. Thus, most modified perfluorinated membranes focused on the improvement of their ion selectivity in VRBs. The general way is to block their hydrophilic clusters by using some special interaction between inorganic or organic components and the sulfonic acid groups of Nafion.
4.2.3.1. 
              Nafion/inorganic hybrid membranes. 
The idea of Nafion/inorganic membranes was inspired by the use of modified Nafion in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) applications.42–50 In DMFCs, the introduction of inorganic particles can efficiently decrease the methanol permeability of the membranes due to the fact that inorganic particles can block hydrophilic regions of membranes (Fig. 11). By using the same principle, different kinds of inorganic nanoparticles were investigated in VRB-applications to decrease the crossover of vanadium ions through Nafion membranes and, in general, to improve the performance of the VRB.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of Nafion/inorganic hybrid membranes. 
With typically simple handling procedures,14 Qiu's group successfully prepared Nafion/SiO2 hybrid membranes by using the sol–gel method. The membranes were investigated in VRBs as well, where the results showed that the incorporation of SiO2 into Nafion can effectively reduce the crossover of vanadium, because the polar clusters (pores) of the original Nafion, were filled with SiO2 nanoparticles during the in situ sol–gel reaction of tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS). The VRB with a Nafion/SiO2 hybrid membrane shows higher CE and EE than that with a Nafion only membrane. It shows a maximum EE of the VRB of 79.9% for the Nafion/SiO2 hybrid membrane and of 73.8% for the Nafion membrane, both at 20 mA cm−2. They showed that the OCV maintaining time above 1.0 V of a VRB with a Nafion/SiO2 hybrid membrane (35 h) is nearly two times longer than that of VRB with pristine Nafion membrane. The results indicated that the rate of self-discharge of the VRB, which is an indicator of vanadium crossover, with Nafion is much faster than with a Nafion/SiO2 hybrid membrane.
At the same time, other types of inorganic hybrid Nafion membranes were developed and investigated in VRBs as well. Most research focused on improving the ion selectivity of Nafion, aiming to increase the CE of the VRB. These hybrid membranes mainly include organosilica nanoparticles, organic silica modified TiO2, and zirconium phosphates (ZrP).11,15,17,51 For example, since TiO2 is not stable in VRB solutions and organic silica modification was designed and prepared to improve its stability. Organic silica modified TiO2/Nafion composite membranes showed a remarkably lower crossover of vanadium ions and water transfer behavior compared with the unmodified membrane. It was reported that the introduction of ZrP into the Nafion1135 membrane can decrease the permeability of VO2+ more than 10 times, while maintaining the same level of proton conductivity.
Two methods have mainly been used to prepare such hybrid membranes: direct blending and the in situ sol–gel method. Most of the hybrid membranes were prepared by the latter method, due to the uniform distribution of the fillers. However, the blend method allows easier control over the ratio of inorganic/organic components, while the phase separation and the particle aggregation might need special attention.
4.2.3.2. Organic/Nafion hybrid membranes. 
Organic/Nafion hybrid membranes can normally be divided in two types, both focused on improving the ion selectivity. The first type is based on Nafion composite membranes, the basic idea of which is to introduce a vanadium ions resistant top-layer on Nafion. In this structure, the Nafion itself will provide membranes with excellent chemical, mechanical stability and high ion conductivity, while the very thin top-layer will ensure the high ion selectivity or low crossover of vanadium ions (Fig. 12). The second type is based on directly blending organic components with Nafion.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of Nafion/organic composite membranes. 
4.2.3.2.1 
                Nafion/organic hybrid composite membranes. 
Luo et al. reported Nafion composite membranes prepared by interfacial polymerization. A cationic charged polyethylenimine (PEI) layer was introduced on the surface of a Nafion membrane to increase the ion selectivity. Fig. 13 shows the preparation procedure of this composite membrane. The introduction of the PEI layer effectively decreased vanadium ions crossover and minimized the water transfer across the membrane in VRB applications.13
 Fig. 13  Preparation procedure for PEI coated nafion membranesvia interfacial polymerization. (Reproduced from J. Membrane Sci., 2008, 311, 98–103.) 
However, the thin PEI layer results in a slightly higher area resistance. In the real VRB single cell test, the composite membrane showed a somehow lower charge voltage than unmodified Nafion. As a result, the modified membranes showed a much higher CE than the unmodified membranes and a slightly lower VE. The modified membranes also showed a more than twice as slow OCV decay than pure Nafion, which further confirms the high ion selectivity of the modified membranes.
Apart from PEI, other polymers can be introduced on a Nafion surface as well. It was reported that polypyrrole can be successfully introduced on the surface of Nafion by three methods – electrolyte soaking, oxidation polymerization and electrodeposition – to greatly improve the vanadium permeability and water transfer properties of the modified membranes.52 Still, inspired by the proton exchange membranes used in DMFC, it is obvious that other polymers carrying amine groups or other cationic groups can possibly be used to modify Nafion as well.53
Another type of composite membranes is based on the layer by layer (LBL) assembly. LBL deposition of polyelectrolytecomplexess (PECs) has emerged as a versatile and simple method for the construction of polymeric thin films, often with nanometre-scale control over the spatial distribution of ionized species within the film.54,55 Films prepared via this method were widely used in membrane applications, which include nanofiltration, pervaporation, solvent resistant nanofiltration and direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) application.56–58 In DMFC, the thin composite films are mainly employed to increase the methanol retention by exploiting the low swelling of PECs in different organic solvents. Inspired by this, the same thin films were also successfully introduced on Nafionvia the LBL method to improve the ion selectivity in VRBs (Fig. 14).59
 Fig. 14  Composite PEC-based membranes prepared via the LBL method. (Reproduced from J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1232–1238). 
The composite membranes effectively decreased vanadium cross over of Nafion and further increased the CE in the VRB. Still, the composition of these thin films and the membrane fabrication method can be further optimized, since the LBL process greatly depends on its preparation conditions, including pH of the polyelectrolyte solutions,60 the addition of salt,60–63etc.
The above examples indicate that the idea of introducing vanadium resistant layers on Nafion to increase its ion selectivity is truly valid. However, two issues need to be considered in order to realize the optimal membrane performance. (1) The top-layer material selection, including their chemical stability to resist the highly corrosive acid and oxidative circumstances, together with a good ion conductivity. (2) The thickness of the top-layer, affecting to a large extend the membrane resistance. A too thin layer will result in high ion crossover, while a too-thick one will lead to a too-high area resistance.
It will thus be critical to select the correct layer with suitable thickness for this type of membranes.
4.2.3.2.2 
                Nafion/organic hybrid blend membranes. 
Again inspired by DMFCs, acid–base blending can be an efficient and simple way to increase the ion selectivity of Nafion.64–68 For example, by using polymers with certain groups which have strong interaction with the sulfonated group of Nafion can effectively increase the methanol selectivity in DMFC. By using a similar method, these membranes can be used for VRB to reduce vanadium crossover.
Another type of membranes is based on blending partly or fully fluorinated polymers with Nafion. For example, addition of the highly crystalline and hydrophobic polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) effectively confined the swelling behavior of Nafion, further increasing the ion selectivity. In VRB single cell tests, the Nafion/PVDF binary membranes exhibited a much higher CE than recast Nafion at various current densities. The blend membranes showed a higher EE than pure Nafion membranes and a two times longer OCV duration than Nafion69 (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Self-discharge curves of Nafion and Nafion/PVDF membranes. (N0.8P0.2: Nafion 80%, PVDF 20%). 

4.3. Partially fluorinated IEMs
To decrease the cost of IEMs while keeping their chemical stability intact, partially fluorinated membranes were widely investigated in VRB applications. These membranes are based on fluorocarbon polymers with excellent chemical stability, such as poly(ethylene-co-tetrafluoroethylene) (ETFE) and PVDF. To provide these membranes with ion conductivity, ionic groups can be introduced on these fluorocarbon membranesvia grafting.
Radiation grafting is the most widely used method for polymer modifications. It was reported that styrene and maleic anhydride can be introduced on the PVDF membrane by irradiation followed by post-treatment with chlorosulfonic acid (Fig. 16).70 The grafted membrane showed a much lower permeability for vanadium ions and a lower OCV decay rate in VRB compared to Nafion 117.
 Fig. 16  The procedure to prepare PVDF grafted membranes. (Reproduced from J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 617–623). 
Qiu et al. also reported an IEM based on grafted ETFE (Fig. 17), prepared via γ-radiation.71,72 These membranes showed a much better ion selectivity than Nafion and cation exchanged ETFE, due to their repelling effect via Donnan exclusion of the positively charged vanadium ions. Furthermore, it was found that a higher grafting yield (GY) of the membrane is apt to reduce the area resistance (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 17  The procedure to prepare ETFE grafted membranes. (Reproduced from J. Membrane Science, 2009, 342, 215–220 and 2007, 297, 174–180). 
 Fig. 18  Area resistance of membranes as a function of the GY. (Reproduced from J. Membrane Science, 2007, 297, 174–180). 
Luo et al. proposed a solution-grafting method to synthesize a poly(vinylidene fluoride)-graft-poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PVDF-g-PSSA) membrane.29 The PVDF membrane was pre-treated with potassium hydroxide and grafted with styreneviaradical polymerization, followed by sulfonation in concentrated sulfuric acid. The PVDF-g-PSSA membrane exhibited competitive VRB performance and good stability.
It is noted that the GY significantly affects the properties of the IEMs. A higher GY generally results in a higher IEC and ion conductivity. However, too high a GY could result in a certain amount of polymer degradation. Therefore, the optimized GY is of great importance for the grafted IEM, which could be reasonably acquired by thorough investigations on the conditions for grafting, such as grafting time, irradiation dose rate and monomer concentration. Furthermore, in the procedure of fuctionalization, especially sulfonation, strong oxidative agents are commonly used, which can cause degradation to the membrane. Milder agents, such as trimethylsilylchlorosulfonate,73 could be a good choice in this procedure to prevent the membrane from deterioration.
4.4. Non fluorinated membranes
Non fluorinated membranes have received broad attention in VRBs due to their low cost, excellent mechanical and chemical stability and high ion selectivity. Non fluorinated polymers, like sulfonated poly(aryl ether ketone), sulfonated poly(aryl ether sulfone), sulfonated poly(imide) etc have already been investigated in fuel cells applications.74–80 However, their application in VRBs has just started. Basically, two types of non fluorinated polymers, poly cations and poly anions, have been investigated in previous studies.
Cation exchange membranes have been applied in VRBs since the 1980s. Skyllas-Kazacos et al. used commercial sulfonated polyethylene (PE) and sulfonated polystyrene to prepare membranes in VRBs.81,82 These cells showed a high open circuit voltage (>1.4 V) and CE (>90%, at a current density of 40 mA cm−2), suggesting a high vanadium ions selectivity. However, they suffered from a high resistivity, turning out into a poor VE. Hwang et al. prepared a series of laminated sulfonated PE membranes by chlorosulfonation with sulfuryl chloride.83 These membranes exhibited an area resistance that was comparable to Nafion 117. However, they were too thin to keep a stable ion conductivity in VO2+ solutions.
In recent years, researchers have been focusing on cationic IEMs based on sulfonated aromatic polymers, where the rigid main chain structure and less connected ionic cluster regions may provide better ion selectivity than Nafion.84 Chen et al. prepared sulfonated poly(arylene thioether ketone), sulfonated poly(fluorenyl ether ketone) and poly(arylene ether sulfone) based membranes9,85–88 (Fig. 19). Both types of membranes showed much lower VO2+ permeability and higher CE than Nafion.
 Fig. 19  Structure of poly(arylene thioether ketone) membranes. 
Sulfonated poly(tetramethydiphenyl ether ether ketone) membranes were prepared and first used in VRBs recently.33 Rigid biphenyl groups ensure their mechanical stability, while sulfonated groups provide the membrane with high conductivity (Fig. 20). Their VO2+ permeability was one order of magnitude lower than that of Nafion 115, and the SPEEK membranes exhibit a better performance than Nafion at the same operating condition. VRB single cells with SPEEK membranes showed a very high EE (>84%), comparable to that of Nafion, but at much higher CE (>97%). In the self-discharge test, the duration of the cell with the SPEEK membrane was two times longer than that with Nafion 115.
 Fig. 20  The structure of SPEEK membranes. (Reproduced from J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 482–487). 
Anion exchange non fluorinated membranes also raised attention due to their repellent effect to positive vanadium ions, which seems to be the most efficient method to minimize the vanadium cross mixing. Normally, the synthesis route of anion selective membrane is similar: pristine polymer is chloromethylated with chloromethyl ether, followed by quaternization using trimethylamine.
Hwang et al. reported that commercial anion exchange polysulfone membranes crosslinked by accelerated electron radiation.89 In a VRB cell, these materials had the highest performance with a CE of 93.5% and a VE of 87.7%. Miyabayashi et al. prepared anion exchange polysulfone membranes in which polyamine was used as crosslinker.90 The crosslinking effectively increased the CE (>97%), while the VE remained above 85%.
Jian et al. prepared anion exchanging poly(phthalazinone ether ketone/sulfone) (Fig. 21) membranes and investigated the effect of the amination agent on these polymers.91,92 The VRB performance of these membranes was comparable to Nafion 117 and the stability of the membrane could be improved with the addition of ethylenediamine.
 Fig. 21  The structure of poly(phthalazinone ether ketone/sulfone). 
Another illuminating result in their work was the increasing ability of the quaternary ammonium group to lower the vanadium permeability and simultaneously enhance the ion conductivity. As believed by many researchers, a low vanadium permeability and a high ion conductivity are not likely to co-exist in cation selective membranes, between which a compromise always needs to be made. Therefore, the anion selective membrane, which has the potential to couple both features, might be a good candidate for VRB applications.
The characteristics of anion selective membranes compared with cation selective membranes are of interest. Normally, the area resistances of the former are higher than that of the latter with similar IEC. It is possibly attributed to the fact that proton transport is dominated by Grotthuss hopping mechanism, leading to much higher conductivity compared to negative charged species. Meanwhile, the permeability of positive vanadium ions through anion selective membranes is much lower than that of cation exchange membranes. High permeability of vanadium ions through an IEM would cause imbalance of vanadium and water between two half cells. The transfer of vanadium is accompanied with water transfer (osmotic water and associated water), consequently causing water imbalance, which could bring about storage problems of the electrolyte (overflow or condensation). These technical limitations of IEMs can possibly be alleviated in the VRB system with anion selective membranes due to their lower permeability for vanadium ions.
In summary, most non-fluorinated membranes possess much lower vanadium permeability than Nafion. For the cation selective membranes, lower permeabilities are often attributed to their microstructure, which contains less continuous ionic cluster regions.33 For the anion selective membranes, the repelling effect between positive quaternary ammonium groups and vanadium ions (Donnan effect) significantly reduces the permeation rate of vanadium ions. Meanwhile, their EE is close to that of Nafion (83–87%), indicating their good potential in VRB applications. It is thus feasible to replace perfluorinated IEMs with non fluorinated ones. However, the lack of long term experiments still renders the stability of non fluorinated membranes susceptible. It is regarded that a higher ion exchange capacity, i.e. larger amount of fixed ionic groups, of a non fluorinated IEM would enhance its ion conductivity,93–95 while it is adverse to its chemical stability.96
In the rational design of novel non fluorinated IEMs for VRB, efforts should be made to further improve the cell performance and chemical stability. The introduction of new chemical structures, such as block copolymer97,98 and comb-shaped side chains,99 is helpful for a more tailor-made phase separation, which could increase the ion conductivity. For anion selective IEMs, to synthesize ionomer containing fixed ionic groups with stronger basicity, such as quaternary guanidinium, might be an effective route to enhance their proton conductivity.100 With respect to the reduction of the vanadium permeation through cation selective IEMs, positively charged layers can be incorporated on the surface via the self-assembly method or surface grafting to form a bipolar structure.101,102
The improvement of chemical stability under the oxidative operating conditions seems to be more challenging. Nevertheless, studies on proton exchange membranes for polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEMFC) have provided many worthy examples.96,103,104 In the crosslinked polymer, a great amount of covalent bonds are formed, which could significantly enhance the hydrolytic and oxidative stability of the membrane.105–109 The formation of acid–base complexes can be another solution, in which the interaction between acid and base sites mitigates the degradation.66,110 Besides, polymer blending is a facile and effective method to improve the stability via addition of a chemically more stable component to the pristine ionomer.101,111–114
5. Possible challenges
The biggest challenge for IEMs is the balance between oxidation stability and ion conductivity under VRB operating conditions. To decrease the cost of IEMs, non-fluorinated polymer membranes could be the best choices. However their oxidation stability and mechanical stability needs to be further improved. For example, for the cation exchange membranes based on sulfonated aromatic polymers, the proton conductivity can be tuned by adjusting the sulfonation degree. However, with increasing degree of sulfonation, the chemical stability of the membranes decreases. To find the balance between sulfonation degree and chemical stability is a very important issue for this kind of membranes.
Still, to meet the requirements of a VRB, one of the biggest challenges is to improve the chemical stability of cation exchange membranes with a high ion exchange capacity.
For the anion exchange membranes and pore filled membranes, another important issue besides increasing their chemical stability, is how to increase their ion conductivity under VRB conditions.
Concerning the oxidative stability of membranes under VRB operating conditions, the currently available characterization techniques are also quite limited. The normal methods described in part 4.3.2, all have their limitations, since the circumstances inside an operating VRB are quite complicated. Besides the presence of corrosive VO2+ and sulfuric acid species, the presence of an electric field may have a great influence on membrane stability as well. To find an efficient method to characterize membrane oxidation stability in real VRB conditions is quite urgent and important.
6. Possible solutions
To improve the oxidation stability of membranes, the oxidation mechanism of membranes in VRB should be further investigated and clarified in detail. For the characterization of membrane oxidation stability in VRB, the “on-line” IEM life test is too time-consuming while the “off-line” life tests neglect too many dynamic factors. Considering the complex circumstance of a VRB, it is quite necessary to build an accelerating oxidation characterization method. The detailed information about the oxidation mechanism will inspire work directed at further modifications or new designs of VRB membranes. Concerns about the balance between chemical stability and ion conductivity, the detailed morphology of VRB membranes needs to be further investigated. The morphology of IEMs plays a crucial role in determining the final performance of membranes. Normally two regions co-exist in IEMs, a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic one, which are, respectively, in charge of the membrane conductivity and the mechanical stability. The distribution of these two regions will greatly affect membrane properties like ion selectivity, ion conductivity, mechanical and chemical stability. The full understanding of the relationship between membrane morphology and membrane properties can offer very important information to guide to the most appropriate research design. With respect to the morphology of IEMs, part of the research was already carried out in the field of proton exchange membranes for fuel cells. However, no systematic research on the morphology of IEMs was carried out under VRB conditions.
7. Perspectives and conclusions
VRBs become more-and-more important as renewable energy sources get further developed and exploited. As the key component of a VRB, the IEM is still the main factor which limits further commercialization. In practice, the most often used membrane is still Nafion, which is extremely expensive and the ion selectivity of which still really needs to be further improved. Modified Nafion membranes could be a good choice to improve their selectivity, but their cost will remain a problem for further large-scale applications.

        Pore filled composite membranes could be very good candidates to replace Nafion in VRBs, due to their tunable chemical stability and ion conductivity. To select a suitable support with an appropriate pore size distribution will be very important. At the same time, the type and the amount of ion exchange resin or polyelectrolytes will be another key issue to control the membrane ion conductivity and ion selectivity.
Considering the complicated preparation procedures of perfluorinated polymers, low cost non-fluorinated IEMs are still the most important direction in VRB. Although some efforts were made already, most are limited by their chemical stability. The future work should in our opinion mostly focus on the non-fluorinated membranes with high stability in VRB.
In summary, the IEM research for applications in VRBs has just started recently, and more efforts need to be dedicated to design and prepare new polymers that combine outstanding ion conductivity with chemical stability. To realize this target, it is logical to focus on new polymers, new materials and new modification methods.
Acknowledgements
We greatly acknowledge the financial support from DICP 100 talent program, the National Basic Research Program of China (973 program No. 2010CB227202), Innovation program of DICP (No. K2010B2), Liaoning Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20102227) and Main Direction Program of Knowledge Innovation of Chinese Academy of Sciences (No. KGCX2-YW-398-1). I. F. J. V. acknowledges IWT for support with an SBO-project.
8.References

          L. Jianlin, The World of Inverters (Chinese),  2010, 6, 65–68 Search PubMed .
Z. H.-m. ZHAO Ping, W. A. N. G. Hong and G. A. O. Hong, Trans. Shenyang Ligong University (Chinese), 2009 Search PubMed .
J. P. Barton and D. G. Infield, IEEE Trans. Energy Conversion, 2004, 19, 441–448 CrossRef .
H. Lund, Energy, 2005, 30, 2402–2412 CrossRef .
H. S. Chen, T. N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Q. Tan, Y. L. Li and Y. L. Ding, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2009, 19, 291–312 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.electricitystorage.org/ESA/applications/
        .
Z. Huamin, Chin. J. Power Sources, 2007 Search PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang Huamin, Liu Zonghao and Wang Xiaoli, Progr. Chem. (Chinese), 2009 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, J. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Han and Q. Luo, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 890–897 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jia, J. Liu and C. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4380–4383 CrossRef CAS .
X. Teng, Y. Zhao, J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Qiu and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1240–1246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sukkar, J. Membr. Sci., 2003, 222, 249–264 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Chen, P. Qian and Y. Zhai, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 311, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Qiu and L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 166, 531–536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Teng Xiangguo, Xi Jingyu, Wu Zenghua, Qiu Xinping and Chen Liquan, Acta Chim. Sinica, 2009, 67, 471–476 Search PubMed .
Q. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Chen, D. You, C. Sun and Y. Zhang, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 325, 553–558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sang, Q. Wu and K. Huang, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 305, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 234, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Teng, Y. Zhao, L. Chen and X. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1232 RSC .
C. Poncedeleon, A. Friasferrer, J. Gonzalezgarcia, D. Szanto and F. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716–732 CrossRef CAS .

          http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vanadium
        .
C. Sun, J. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Han and Q. Luo, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 890–897 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mohammadi and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Membr. Sci., 1995, 98, 77–87 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mohammadi and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1997, 27, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, G. Kazacos, G. Poon and H. Verseema, International Journal of Energy Research, 2010, 34, 182–189 Search PubMed .
S. C. Chieng, M. Kazacos and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Membr. Sci., 1992, 75, 81–91 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mohammadi and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Membr. Sci., 1995, 107, 35–45 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alberti and M. Casciola, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 129–154 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Luo, Z. Z. Lu, J. Y. Xi, Z. H. Wu, W. T. Zhu, L. Q. Chen and X. P. Qiu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20310–20314 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Xing, G. P. Robertson, M. D. Guiver, S. D. Mikhailenko, K. P. Wang and S. Kaliaguine, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 229, 95–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Chen, B. B. Wang and J. C. Yang, Solvent Extr. Ion Exch., 2009, 27, 312–327 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vijayakumar, M. S. Bhuvaneswari, P. Nachimuthu, B. Schwenzer, S. Kim, Z. Yang, J. Liu, G. L. Graff, S. Thevuthasan and J. Hu, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 366, 325–334 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mai, H. Zhang, X. Li, C. Bi and H. Dai, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 482–487 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, H. M. Zhang, H. X. Zhong, X. F. Li, S. H. Xiao and Z. S. Mai, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4209–4214 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mohammadi, S. C. Chieng and M. S. Kazacos, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 133, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Miyake, US Patent, No. US 6461772 B1,  2002 .
T. Mohammadi and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Power Sources, 1995, 56, 91–96 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bi, H. M. Zhang, Y. Zhang and S. H. Xiao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 838–842 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang and H. M. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Res., 2007, 26–28, 845 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Hsu and T. D. Gierke, J. Membr. Sci., 1983, 13, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schmidt-Rohr and Q. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2007, 7, 75–83 .
H. Kim, Y. Shul and H. Han, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Lin, C.-Y. Yen, C.-H. Hung, Y.-H. Hsiao and C.-C. M. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 162–166 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ren, G. Sun, C. Li, S. Song, Q. Xin and X. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 724–726 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Rhee, Y. Kim, J. S. Lee, H. K. Kim and H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1015–1024 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Yen, C.-H. Lee, Y.-F. Lin, H.-L. Lin, Y.-H. Hsiao, S.-H. Liao, C.-Y. Chuang and C.-C. M. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. C. D. H. Junga, D. H. Pecka, D. R. Shina and J. S. Kimb, J. Power Sources, 2002, 106, 5 .
A. Aricò, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 161, 251–265 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hasani-Sadrabadi, S. R. Ghaffarian, N. Mokarram-Dorri, E. Dashtimoghadam and F. S. Majedi, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1497–1504 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, H. Kunz and J. Fenton, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 272, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
X. Teng, Y. Zhao, J. Xi, Z. Wu, X. Qiu and L. Chen, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 341, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zeng, C. P. Jiang, Y. H. Wang, J. W. Chen, S. F. Zhu, B. J. Zhao and R. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 372–375 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Smit, A. L. Ocampo, M. A. Espinosa-Medina and P. J. Sebastian, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, M. Eckle, J. Schmitt and B. Struth, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 1998, 3, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, S. De Feyter, D. J. Chen, S. Aldea, P. Vandezande, F. Du Prez and I. F. J. Vankelecom, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3876–3883 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Jiang, Z. C. Liu and Z. Q. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1068 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 945–954 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Xi, Z. H. Wu, X. G. Teng, Y. T. Zhao, L. Q. Chen and X. P. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1232–1238 RSC .
L. Krasemann and B. Tieke, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 287–290 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and J. B. Schlenoff, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1184–1192 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ahmadiannamini, X. F. Li, W. Goyens, B. Meesschaert and I. F. J. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 250–258 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, W. Goyens, P. Ahmadiannamini, W. Vanderlinden, S. De Feyter and I. Vankelecom, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 358, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jannasch, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 96–102 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kerres, A. Ullrich, T. Haring, M. Baldauf, U. Gebhardt and W. Preidel, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2000, 3, 229–239 CAS .
J. A. Kerres, Fuel Cells, 2005, 5, 230–247 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Li, R. H. He, J. O. Jensen and N. J. Bjerrum, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4896–4915 CrossRef CAS .
M. Walker, K. M. Baumgartner, M. Kaiser, J. Kerres, A. Ullrich and E. Rauchle, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 74, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Mai, H. M. Zhang, X. F. Li, S. H. Xiao and H. Z. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011 DOI:10.1016/j.jpowsour.2011.02.048 .
J. Y. Qiu, L. Zhao, M. L. Zhai, J. F. Ni, H. H. Zhou, J. Peng, J. Q. Li and G. S. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 617–623 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Qiu, M. Y. Li, J. F. Ni, M. L. Zhai, J. Peng, L. Xu, H. H. Zhou, J. Q. Li and G. S. Wei, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 297, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Qiu, M. L. Zhai, J. H. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Peng, L. Xu, J. Q. Li and G. S. Wei, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 342, 215–220 CrossRef CAS .
P. Genova-Dimitrova, B. Baradie, D. Foscallo, C. Poinsignon and J. Y. Sanchez, J. Membr. Sci., 2001, 185, 59–71 CrossRef .
M. Gil, X. L. Ji, X. F. Li, H. Na, J. E. Hampsey and Y. F. Lu, J. Membr. Sci., 2004, 234, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Xuanli Luo, Jingyu Xi, Zenghua Wu, Wentao Zhu, Liquan Chen and Xinping Qiu*, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5 .
X. F. Li, C. J. Zhao, H. Lu, Z. Wang and H. Na, Polymer, 2005, 46, 5820–5827 CrossRef CAS .
J. Roziere and D. J. Jones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 503–555 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, M. Hickner, Y. S. Kim, T. A. Zawodzinski and J. E. McGrath, J. Membr. Sci., 2002, 197, 231–242 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Fang, X. X. Guo, S. Harada, T. Watari, K. Tanaka, H. Kita and K. Okamoto, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 9022–9028 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Guo, J. H. Fang, T. Watari, K. Tanaka, H. Kita and K. I. Okamoto, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 6707–6713 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos and F. Grossmith, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2950–2953 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. Rychcik, R. G. Robins, A. G. Fane and M. A. Green, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1057–1058 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Hwang and H. Ohya, J. Membr. Sci., 1996, 120, 55–67 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. L. Yan, B. Schwenzer, J. L. Zhang, L. Y. Li, J. Liu, Z. G. Yang and M. A. Hickner, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1650–1653 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Chen, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Z. Meng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 622–628 RSC .
CN101628979-A,  2010.
D. Y. Chen, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Z. Meng, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 2816–2824 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Chen, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao, D. M. Han and Y. Z. Meng, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7701–7708 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Hwang and H. Ohya, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 132, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Mitsutaka, S. Kanji, N. Masato, F. Kouichi and S. Sumie, EP790658 (Europe), or DE69703399 (Germany), or ES2153611 (Spain)  1997. .
S. Zhang, C. Yin, D. Xing, D. Yang and X. Jian, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 363, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xing, S. Zhang, C. Yin, C. Yan and X. Jian, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 157, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, X. F. Hao, D. Xu, G. Zhang, S. L. Zhong, H. Na and D. Y. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 281, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, Z. Wang, H. Lu, C. J. Zhao, H. Na and C. Zhao, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 254, 147–155 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, G. Zhang, D. Xu, C. J. Zhao and H. Na, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 701–707 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hickner, H. Ghassemi, Y. S. Kim, B. R. Einsla and J. E. McGrath, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4587–4611 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roy, H. S. Lee and J. E. McGrath, Polymer, 2008, 49, 5037–5044 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Lee, A. Roy, O. Lane, S. Dunn and J. E. McGrath, Polymer, 2008, 49, 715–723 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Norsten, M. D. Guiver, J. Murphy, T. Astill, T. Navessin, S. Holdcroft, B. L. Frankamp, V. M. Rotello and J. F. Ding, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1814–1822 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Wang, S. H. Li and S. B. Zhang, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3890–3896 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, C. P. Liu, D. Xu, C. J. Zhao, Z. Wang, G. Zhang, H. Na and W. Xing, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
R. Devanathan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 101–119 RSC .
B. Smitha, S. Sridhar and A. A. Khan, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 259, 10–26 CrossRef CAS .
R. Souzy and B. Ameduri, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2005, 30, 644–687 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kerres, W. Zhang and W. Cui, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 1998, 36, 1441–1448 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kerres, W. Cui, R. Disson and W. Neubrand, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 139, 211–225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kerres, W. Cui and M. Junginger, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 139, 227–241 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Guo, P. N. Pintauro, H. Tang and S. O'Connor, J. Membr. Sci., 1999, 154, 175–181 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, S. Hayashi, O. Yamada, H. Kita and K. Okamoto, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 696–700 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kerres, A. Ullrich, F. Meier and T. Haring, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 125, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mokrini, M. A. Huneault and P. Gerard, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 283, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, G. H. He, X. M. Wu, Z. W. Hu, L. L. Wang, G. K. Xiao and L. Peng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 852–860 CAS .
A. Mokrini and M. A. Huneault, J. Power Sources, 2006, 154, 51–58 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, D. J. Chen, D. Xu, C. J. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Lu and H. Na, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 275, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Xianfeng Li	Dr Xianfeng Li was born in 1979 in China. He received his PhD in polymer chemistry and physics from Jilin University in 2006. After 3 years' postdoc with Prof. Vankelecom from K. U. Leuven, he was appointed as associate professor in Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Science. His research interests include functional membranes for different applications, nanotechnology and polymer chemistry. He currently serves on the editorial board of the Journal of Membrane Science & Technology.
Huamin Zhang	Professor Huamin Zhang is the PEMFC key materials and technology group leader, the director of the DICP-SAMSUNG Fuel Cell Joint Lab and the DICP-RONGKE Redox Flow Storage Battery Joint Lab at Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. He received his PhD from Kyushu University in 1988. Afterward, he worked in Kansai Research Institute, Osaka Gas Inc. from 1995 to 2000. He is the Chief Scientist of the State 973 Key Program on Energy Storage. His research interests focus on energy and energy storage; e.g. fuel cells, regenerative fuel cells and redox flow batteries.
Zhensheng Mai	Zhensheng Mai studied Chemical Engineering at South China University of Technology, where he graduated in 2007. Currently he is working on his doctoral degree under the guidance of Prof. Huamin Zhang and Prof. Xianfeng Li at DICP. His work involves exploring high performance ion exchange membranes for vanadium redox flow battery applications.
Hongzhang Zhang	Hongzhang Zhang got his Bachelor degree (BSc) from Shandong University in 2008. He is presently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Huamin Zhang and Prof. Xianfeng Li. His work involves preparation and characterization of porous membranes for vanadium redox flow battery applications.
Ivo Vankelecom	Ivo Vankelecom studied Bioscience Engineering at the Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium, where he graduated in 1990. In 1994, he obtained his PhD in applied biological sciences. Until 2002, he worked at K.U. Leuven as postdoc on membrane catalysis and he spent 6 months at the Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (Beersheva, Israel) and Imperial College (London, England). Since 2002, he is professor at K.U. Leuven, focusing on the development of new membranes and membrane applications for (solvent resistant) nanofiltration, reverse osmosis, gas separations, fuel cells, pervaporation, pressure retarded osmosis, and membrane (bio)reactors.

Broader context
Renewable energies become more and more important with the increasing problems of the climate change and energy shortage. The all-vanadium redox flow battery (VRB) provides an efficient solution to solve the problem of intermittent and random nature of renewable energies. As the key component of VRB, ion exchange membranes play a very important role to affect the final performance of VRB. This paper reviewed the recent progress of ion exchange membranes in VRB. Furthermore the challenge and prospect of the membranes in future was outlined.


 	Fig. 1  
          Storage power requirement for electric power utility application. (Reproduced from http://www.electricitystorage.org/ESA/applications/).	 

 	Fig. 2  The principle of VRB.	 

 	Fig. 3  The main components of VRB stacks.	 


                    VO2+/VO2+	0.999

                    VO2+/V3+	0.337

                    V3+/V2+	−0.255
W = I × V	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
VO+2 + e → VO2+	(reaction 1)
VO2+ → V3+ + e	(reaction 2)
VO+2 → V3+ + 2VO2+	(reaction 3)
2VO+2 → V2+ + 3VO2+	(reaction 4)
VO2+ + V2+ → 2V3+	(reaction 5)
	(5)
EE = CE × VE	(6)

 	Fig. 4  The 260kW VRB system developed by DICP and Rongke Power.	 

 	Fig. 5  A typical diffusion cell to measure V permeability. (Reproduced from J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 482–487).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the preparation of pore filled membranes.	 

 	Fig. 7  Proposed structure of Nafion.	 

 	Fig. 8  
              Cluster-network model for the morphology of hydrated Nafion. (Reproduced from W. Y. Hsu, T. D. Gierke, J. Membr. Sci. 1983, 13, 307.)	 

 	Fig. 9  
Water channel model for the morphology of Nafion (reproduced from Nat. Mater., 2007, 7(1), 75–83).	 

 	Fig. 10  Charge and discharge curves of Nafion 112 and Nafion 115.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of Nafion/inorganic hybrid membranes.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of Nafion/organic composite membranes.	 

 	Fig. 13  Preparation procedure for PEI coated nafion membranesvia interfacial polymerization. (Reproduced from J. Membrane Sci., 2008, 311, 98–103.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Composite PEC-based membranes prepared via the LBL method. (Reproduced from J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1232–1238).	 

 	Fig. 15  Self-discharge curves of Nafion and Nafion/PVDF membranes. (N0.8P0.2: Nafion 80%, PVDF 20%).	 

 	Fig. 16  The procedure to prepare PVDF grafted membranes. (Reproduced from J. Power Sources, 2008, 177, 617–623).	 

 	Fig. 17  The procedure to prepare ETFE grafted membranes. (Reproduced from J. Membrane Science, 2009, 342, 215–220 and 2007, 297, 174–180).	 

 	Fig. 18  Area resistance of membranes as a function of the GY. (Reproduced from J. Membrane Science, 2007, 297, 174–180).	 

 	Fig. 19  Structure of poly(arylene thioether ketone) membranes.	 

 	Fig. 20  The structure of SPEEK membranes. (Reproduced from J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 482–487).	 

 	Fig. 21  The structure of poly(phthalazinone ether ketone/sulfone).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
