The effects of the chemical composition on the structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties of all-inorganic halide perovskites   - Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QI00347J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QI00347J
(Research Article)
Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3803-3814The effects of the chemical composition on the structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties of all-inorganic halide perovskites†

        
          
            Pablo 
            Sánchez-Palencia
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Gregorio 
            García
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Perla 
            Wahnón
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Pablo 
            Palacios
          
        
      ac
aInstituto de Energía Solar, ETSI Telecomunicación, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, s/n, 28040, Madrid, Spain. E-mail: ggmoreno@etsit.upm.es
bDepartamento de Tecnología Fotónica y Bioingeniería, ETSI Telecomunicación, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Ciudad Universitaria, s/n, 28040 Madrid, Spain
cDepartamento de Física aplicada a las Ingenierías Aeronáutica y Naval. ETSI Aeronáutica y del Espacio, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Pz. Cardenal Cisneros, 3, 28040 Madrid, Spain
Received 
      15th March 2021
    , Accepted 26th June 2021First published on 28th June 2021AbstractOrganic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskites are widely used in optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells and light-emitting devices. Pursuing solutions to overcome the key problem of instability shown by most used MAPbI3 materials, all-inorganic perovskites like CsPbI3 are attracting considerable attention. Unfortunately, CsPbI3 still suffers from significant issues relating to chemical instability and toxicity due to the presence of Pb atoms; therefore, it is necessary to carry out a profound review of the properties of all-inorganic perovskites to overcome these problems. Experimental laboratories cannot afford, in terms of money and time, to synthesize and characterize large numbers of compounds to rigorously assess the outcomes. Therefore, a systematic density functional theory study of the family of all-inorganic perovskites with the general formula CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 has been performed, covering the entire chemical composition range and elucidating the connections between composition and the structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties, in addition to any effects on stability. Our results allow us to gain significant insight in the search for new all-inorganic perovskites with tailored structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties via fine-tuning the chemical composition.
Introduction
Perovskites have turned out to allow great advances in the photovoltaic field in recent years, showing a record power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 25.2% (29.1% when used in a tandem configuration with Si cells) compared with efficiencies lower than 10% barely 7–8 years ago.1–5 This vertiginous growth has arisen due to much work by research groups devoted to these materials, mainly hybrid organic–inorganic methylammonium lead iodide (MAPI), which has exhibited the most outstanding efficiencies, and, to a lesser extent, formamidinium lead iodide (FAPI). These studies have been specifically focused on all the properties related to solar efficiency, like band gap,6 absorption,7,8 and charge-carrier transport9,10 and recombination processes,11,12 among others. However, when analyzing this revolutionary family of materials, besides their PCEs, it is compulsory to look also at their stability, one of the biggest weaknesses of these emerging perovskites that has attracted a lot of attention in recent years.13–15 Generally, perovskites present instability under the influence of moisture, oxygen, UV light, and heat due to various mechanisms like polymorphic transitions, hydration, oxidation, and decomposition,16–19 achieving lifetimes of no more than 10000/1000 h during storage/under illumination during testing.20 To overcome the gap from laboratory development to reaching the commercial market, stability should be considered as a key criterion when selecting a material,19,21 while trying not to compromise the properties which lead to high efficiencies. Apart from the utilization of different materials for the different layers and interfaces and the development of diverse device engineering,15,22–25 the main method for solving this problem involves adjusting the chemical compositions of these materials, introducing new ions by means of partial substitution13,26,27 or total replacement,28,29 which allows the properties to be finetuned. For that reason, the effects of chemical composition modification on perovskite stability, assessed based on the structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties, need to be further studied.
The formula of a standard perovskite structure, ABX3, is at this point perfectly well known, where A is a univalent cation, B a divalent cation, and X a halogen. Despite efforts aimed at increasing the stabilities of MAPI and FAPI hybrid perovskites, those with the best efficiencies that have been studied for a longer time, the latest research is pointing towards the use of inorganic perovskites,30–32 trying to solve the stability problems caused by the rotation of the complex organic molecule located at the A position.33–35 Concretely, the all-inorganic CsPbI3 perovskite is gathering special attention because of its adequate bandgap and stability, although it is identically toxic due to the presence of lead. It is well known that lead s- and p-states play a major role in the high efficiencies already achieved, as they comprise the external levels of the VB and CB, respectively, dominating optical transitions between them.36 Additionally lead-free perovskites seem to exhibit lower stabilities than their lead-containing counterparts.20 These facts make it difficult to get rid of this toxic element, although this an established goal that has been thoroughly studied.37–41 Nevertheless, following this line of research, several compounds have been proposed with promising results, especially through the partial substitution of lead with tin.42,43 To stabilize the CsPbI3 photoactive perovskite black α-phase, avoiding its spontaneous deformation into the light-inactive yellow δ-phase, which occurs under ambient conditions because cesium cations are too small to hold PbI6 octahedra,44,45 different approaches have been used; among these, the partial replacement of iodine with bromine has been carried out,46–50 considering the idea that a smaller halogen atom will reduce the size of the octahedra. Besides, halogen substitutions change the bandgap but not the shape of the external bands as in the case of lead.51,52
This paper is focused on the effects of chemical composition modification on the structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical stabilities of all-inorganic cesium perovskites with the general formula CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3. The study of the whole chemical composition range would require a large quantity of experimental work, which would be time- and cost-consuming. Thus, an ab initio study based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations allows us to feasibly cover a wide range of chemical compositions, knowing in detail how composition changes will affect the different properties of the perovskites. Some of the compounds proposed herein (those with b = 0.4 and 0.3, and x = 0) have been previously studied as good candidates for use in solar cells.42,43 Firstly, stability has been assessed through a series of structural tolerance parameters, like the Goldschmidt factor,53 Sun's parameter,54 and the bonding strength.55 Also, thermodynamic stabilities have been evaluated by means of formation enthalpies according to standard procedures, taking into account two different pathways.56,57 Furthermore, several mechanical properties have been calculated based on the elastic constants of the different compounds obtained from ab initio calculations, trying to provide data that are harder to obtain experimentally, as measurements are sometimes complex and difficult to reproduce; this has sometimes led to these properties not having been precisely described. Young's, bulk, and shear moduli and Poisson's ratio data are presented to give an overall picture of the mechanical responses of these materials to different stresses; the responses are important for their integration into complex multilayer devices58,59 or their use for flexible and wearable applications,60,61 and they can also have a big impact on absorptivity, which relies on the crystallinity and stress state.28,29 All of these properties define a complete set that can suitably describe the different facets of the intrinsic stabilities of these halide perovskites, which, to our best knowledge, has not been given up to now, providing details about how to control these properties through composition engineering.
Methodology
Theoretical methods
As mentioned above, this paper is focused on analyzing the effects of chemical composition modifications on several structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical parameters, aimed at evaluating the adequacy integrating the studied perovskites into complex electronic devices. Thus, this section describes the different approaches applied herein to obtain these calculated properties.
To explain better the structural properties, a simple sketch of the perovskite structure is depicted in Fig. 1, paying special attention to the bond-generated octahedra (BX6 and XCs4B2, according to the common and previously proposed nomenclature), whose proportions and dimensions will be of particular importance for determining the structural stability of the crystals.
 Fig. 1  The structures of perovskite crystals with the different octahedra generated via atom bonding highlighted: (a) the BX6 octahedron and (b) the XCs4B2 octahedron. 
The Goldschmidt tolerance factor (t), used to assess structural stability, is easily determined from ionic radii (rCs, rB, and rX, where the sub-indices indicate the respective positions in the perovskite structure) according to the formula:62 t = ((rCs + rX))/√2(rB + rX).(1)When examining B = Pb/Sn and X = I/Br in cases involving partial compositions, the radii of the different ions were weighted according to the concentrations of the different elements occupying equivalent positions. This weighting is needed for many other calculated properties; the way that partial concentrations of elements in equivalent positions are defined from now on is through the use of x and b in the different formulas. Additionally, all the parameters relying on the ionic radii of the different atoms of the compounds have been calculated with the set of radii proposed by Shannon et al.63 Other sets of radii have been used to check the non-reliability of the results from the used set, and all the information on those sets is presented in the ESI.†
Sun et al.54 also proposed an alternative parameter or figure of merit (here denominated as Sun's parameter, ζ) to determine the stability of perovskites based on their structural configuration, improving a correlation factor based on the Goldschmidt parameter previously proposed by Li et al.;64 it additionally considers the octahedral factor μ and the atomic packing factor η according to the following formulas, where a is the lattice parameter of the cell and i is the total number of atoms in it: ζ = (μ + t)η(2) μ = rB/rX(2.1) (2.2)
The bonding strength (S), which is defined as an isotropic quantity that defines the resistance of a material to bond breaking, has been calculated based on the method first proposed by Šimůnek et al.,65 later modified by Boyko et al.,55 to study ternary compounds with spinel structures; afterwards, it was tailored by us.66 Šimůnek introduced this concept as an intrinsic parameter in proportion to the hardness of a material, a measurement hard to assess through theoretical calculations due to its complexity and quantity variations according to the experimental methods used for its obtention. This property has been calculated taking into account that in a CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskite, each halide X atom is in an octahedral environment (see Fig. 1b), forming four bonds with Cs atoms in the equatorial plane while two B atoms (Sn or Pb) are located along the longitudinal axis. This way, considering the bond lengths d(X–Cs) and d(X–B) and the average electron density (ei), the definition of the bonding strength (S) is as follows, with Zi and Ri being the appropriately weighted electronic valence charge and atomic radius of the corresponding Cs, B, or X atoms: (3)where: ecat = 0.67eCs + 0.33eB(3.1) eX = (1 − x)eI + xeBr(3.2) eB = (1 − b)ePb + beSn(3.3) (3.4) dX–B = (1 − b)(1 − x)dPb–I + b(1 − x)dSn–I + (1 − b) × dPb–Br + b × dSn-Br(3.5) dX–Cs = (1 − x)dCs–I + xdCs–Br.(3.6)
Thermodynamic stability has been assessed through two different pathways. In this approach, standard formation enthalpies (ΔHf) have been calculated starting from independent constituent elements in their ground states, but values were also obtained considering the standard route from known stable binary compounds, i.e., CsX and BX2 (named ΔHs from now on). Despite the different pathways, the standard procedure to obtain formation enthalpies considering the chemical potential μ° has been followed in all cases:54,57 (4.1) (4.2)
In general, a negative enthalpy determines the range of chemical potentials within which the studied compound is thermodynamically stable. The calculated ΔHf values provide an energy scale that measures the strength of chemical bonding in a compound relative to the strength of bonding in its constituents, while ΔHs can be related to possible pathways for the synthesis of the material.31,67,68
Regarding the mechanical properties, two kinds of VASP calculations have been carried out to obtain all the desired parameters. Firstly, to obtain the bulk modulus, energy/volume variations have been assessed starting from the optimized structures for each compound. In this manner, optimizations at fixed volume for a series of structures covering a range of lattice constants from 0.975 to 1.025 times the optimized value have been done. The resulting energy/volume curve has been fitted to the Birch–Murnaghan equation of state,69,70 presented below, from which the bulk modulus is deduced. E stands for energy, V for volume, and B for the bulk modulus, while B′ is its derivative with respect to pressure; the sub-index 0 represents the optimized/minimal energy structure: (5)
The rest of the parameters have been extracted from stress tensors also calculated with VASP according to the strain-stress methodology implemented in the program.71,72 In this way, Young's modulus (Y), shear modulus (G), and Poisson's ratio (ν) values are calculated on the basis of elastic constants (cij), according to Voigt–Reuss–Hill approximations.73 The bulk modulus (B) is also calculated based on the elastic constant to compare and check that the results are in concordance with those obtained from the fitting to the Birch–Murnaghan equation. The correlations between these parameters and the elastic constants are stated in the following formulas: B = (c11 + 2c12)/3(6) (7) (8) (9)
Computational details
The calculations proposed herein have been performed with the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). Structural optimizations have been performed using the PBEsol functional,74 specifically developed for solids and mechanical properties, by means of the conjugate gradient algorithm implemented in the program with forces and total energies converged to 0.01 eV Å−1 and 10−5 eV, respectively. The Brillouin zone has been sampled using an 8 × 8 × 8 k-point mesh for structural optimization and a 12 × 12 × 12 mesh for static calculations. Structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties were calculated using optimized geometries. Additionally, the SCAN functional75 has been used to obtain accurate final energies for all compounds for thermodynamic analysis. To obtain the elastic constants and mechanical properties, strain-stress methodology has been applied with finite distortions of the lattice, allowing maximum degrees of freedom during subsequent optimization. For this step, the plane-wave cutoffs were increased to 400 eV, way beyond the 30% increment recommended by the system to converge the stress tensor. Considering the more demanding situation, a 4 × 4 × 4 k-point mesh was used at this point, although denser grids were tested with no convergence differences.
CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites with partial concentrations of group-IV cations and halogens have been studied, with b = 0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 0.875, and 1.0 and x = 0.0, 0.167, 0.333, 0.5, 0.667, 0.833, and 1.0. For comparison purposes, only the cubic structure, that of the most useful phase for solar applications in the most commonly used CsPbI3 material,76 has been considered in this work, whether stable at room temperature or not. In the cases of the four ternary compounds, only CsSnBr3 presents a cubic phase that is stable at room temperature,77–80 although different solutions to this issue have been already proposed.80–84 All possible chemical configurations for each one of the studied complexes have been generated starting from the 2 × 2 × 2 supercell of CsPbI3 using the combinatorial methodology implemented in the SOD (Site Occupancy Disorder) program,85 focusing our interest on the structures of each composition with the highest space group symmetry, which are also those with the lowest energy.
Results
Contour maps have been chosen to present the variations in the values of the studied parameters with composition; in this way it is possible to distinguish between the different effects of halogen and cation substitution. For every contour map, a table with all the results from the studied compounds relating to the corresponding property is presented in the ESI.†
Structural parameters
The principal lattice parameter values for the fully optimized structures are presented in Fig. 2a. Considering distortion during the optimization of some of the structures from the initial cubic cell to a tetragonal lattice, the a/c ratio values are also display in Fig. 2b, and the cell volumes are shown in Fig. 2c. It must be noted that all the values relate to the 40-atom cells used to deal with the wide range of concentrations. The obtained values for the four ternary compounds agree with an average deviation of 0.725%, and in all cases the values deviate by less than 1.2% from experimental results,78,86,87 improving the calculated parameters from The Materials Project database,88 which show an average deviation of 1.782%; this supports the results presented here and the use of the PBEsol functional (the Materials Project results are calculated with the standard PBE functional).
 Fig. 2  (a) Lattice constant a [Å], (b) shape ratio a/c [dimensionless], and (c) volume [Å3] data for the unit cells of CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details relating to calculated numerical values as a function of chemical composition, see the ESI.† 
It can be seen that the cation concentration barely affects the parameters, especially the a/c parameter, which remains almost unaffected by this factor. For the lattice parameter a, the tendency when lead is totally replaced by tin is to show a small decrease, with total variations lower than 2% from one extreme to the other, while for the volume the tendency is also to decrease, by less than 5.5%.
On the other hand, changing the halogen concentration results in a variation in volume of around 20% from one extreme (only iodine) to the other (only bromine), with a very uniform decrease; the CsSnBr3 perovskite has the smallest value and CsPbI3 has the biggest value, as expected according to the sizes of the atoms. Nevertheless, the uniform decrease seen in the volume values is not as uniform when it comes to shape. As was previously mentioned, a perfect cubic structure is not retained except in the cases of pure iodine and bromine perovskites, and the partially substituted ones are slightly distorted into a tetragonal shape. For structures with high concentrations of iodine the crystals adopt a progressively shortened (a/c lower than 1) tetragonal form, with the minimum a/c value equal to 0.935 when x = 0.33, while at high concentrations of bromine the crystals become stretched tetragonal cells (a maximum a/c value of 1.065 at x = 0.66). Thus, a/c value decreases upon x increasement for lower (x = 0.00–0.33) and higher (x = 0.66–1.00) bromine concentrations. On the contrary, for intermediate x concentrations (x = 0.33–0.66), a/c value increases with x. The main lattice constant also shows a non-uniform decrease of nearly 6% as x changes from 0 to 1. The concentration ranges where the a/c parameter decreases also relate to slight changes in the lattice constant (x = 0–0.33 and x = 0.66–1), while for the range where the a/c ratio increases (x = 0.33–0.66), a rapid decrease occurs. Thus, it could be said that these variations balance out the non-uniform shape change trend, giving room for the resulting uniform volume decrease.
Besides basic distortions of the volume and shape of the structure, the relative atom positions, i.e., the distances between bonded atoms, are important in terms of the structural stability of the perovskite. The Goldschmidt tolerance factor has been extensively used to easily assess the stabilities of perovskites in similar terms, ensuring that the sizes of the different atoms are balanced so as not to distort the structure in excess, which could lead to bond breaking and different structures. The bonding strength also determines how easily the structure could collapse based on the distances between different atoms.
The Goldschmidt factor graph is presented in Fig. 3a. Values between 0.8 and 1 are supposed to be associated with perovskites that have a good chance of be formed, with all analyzed structures lying within these limits.62 This preliminary check is useful for gaining a perspective of the magnitude of the shape distortions observed above, showing that these are not large enough to cause structural instability. In this case the effect of b modification is greater than that of x modification; this is because the main use of this parameter is to evaluate the equilibrium in size between both types of cations, and therefore the radius of the halogen is less important. This fact is shown by the formula, where halogen atom radius is present in both terms, unlike the B atom radius. The highest value, which means the most stable compound in theory, belongs to CsSnBr3 (0.90), while the minimum value corresponds to CsPbI3 (0.85), although this is still far from the frontier of stability marked by a value of 0.8. From this point of CsPbI3, a uniform increase with x is observed, while the same trend occurs across the b range. As they depend exclusively on the radii of the different atoms and, consequently, on the chosen set of radius values, the Goldschmidt factor values for the four ternary compounds agree well with previous results taken from the literature when Shannon radii are also used,54,89 although precise correlation is not observed because of the different coordination environments considered. This decision is discussed in more detail in the ESI.†
 Fig. 3  (a) The Goldschmidt tolerance parameter [dimensionless] and improved (b) Sun's parameter [dimensionless] values for CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details on the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.† 
The Sun's parameter values, presented in Fig. 3b, should have better correlation with the thermodynamic stability of the perovskites, and this will be assessed in the following discussion. In this case it is observed that the most stable zone for Sun's parameter lies in the region of CsPbBr3 because of the octahedral factor influence. In this case, the influence of x on the parameter is greater than that of b, and the maximum value is obtained from the perovskite CsPbBr3.
Again, an increase as the x concentration changes from 0 to 1 occurs, but in this case the property value decreases as the b value increases, mainly relying upon the octahedral factor, which exhibits the same trend. Despite the opposing trends, both variations are essentially continuous within the studied range.
The bonding strength is defined as an isotropic quantity that defines the resistance of a material to bond breaking. The values of this parameter for the studied compounds are presented in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Bonding strength [dimensionless] values for CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details on the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.† 
As chemical intuition dictates, the presence of smaller atoms in the perovskite leads to greater bonding strength, taking into account that the valence charges of atoms in equivalent positions are the same. It is interesting to note that while the Goldschmidt factor is mostly influenced by b, bonding strength is more affected by x, which seems reasonable considering that the halogen atoms have greater presence and are part of every single bond. To the contrary, as previously mentioned, the Goldschmidt factor indicates how balanced the sizes of both cations are, being less affected by the halogens involved in the bonds. In this case the variation along the x concentration range involves an increase of around 13.1%, while the rise along the b concentration axis is approximately 4.7%; both trends are continuous. Small deviations from the linear trends, falling in all cases within a negligible ±0.5% range, are explained based on the uncertainty of the calculations, corresponding to insignificant displacements of the cell or the positions and, consequently, distances between atoms, or, directly, to the averages of these distances for all atoms in the cell, resulting in differences of a few hundredths of an Angstrom.
Thermodynamic parameters
The most common way to assess the stability of a certain compound is through studying its formation enthalpy. To do that rigorously, it is necessary to evaluate the possible synthesis and decomposition pathways of that compound, considering both the fundamental elements and competitor binary or ternary phases. These enthalpies can be calculated using formulas (4.1) and (4.2), which detail formation enthalpy from fundamental elements (Fig. 5a) and formation or synthesis enthalpy from binary phases (Fig. 5b), respectively. As was previously mentioned, the calculations used to obtain all these energies were carried out with the SCAN hybrid functional.
 Fig. 5  Formation enthalpies considering (a) constituent elements [eV per atom] and (b) binary compounds [meV per atom] for CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details on the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.† 
Herein, the studied perovskites fall way below the stability limits defined by their constituent elements, which means that their formation is plausible from a thermodynamic point of view. The very low values presented, in the range of 1–1.2 eV per atom, imply that the perovskite structure is strongly favored energetically. For the case of the enthalpies relating to the binary precursors route, negative values also indicate good stability, discarding in principle metastability with respect to competitor binary compounds, except for perovskites with a clear majority of Pb and I, which could present metastability with very small positive values of less than 10 meV per atom.
The formation enthalpy ΔHf evolves with a uniform decrease of 29% as x is increased from one extreme to the other, while the corresponding variation is observed when b is modified from 0 to 1, with a uniform rise of 5%. In contrast to that variation, the enthalpy from binary compounds ΔHs presents a not entirely uniform decrease as Br is introduced. That decrease is progressive, being more pronounced as x increases. At the same time, the effect of the introduction of Br is less significant as the b concentration increases, with a decrease of −60 meV per atom for pure Pb perovskites and −29 meV per atom for pure Sn perovskites. In a similar way, there is a decrease in ΔHs as b increases, although in this case it is uniform, with a more marked variation for pure I perovskites (−45 meV per atom) than for pure Br ones (−14 meV per atom), and with a progressive change for intermediate examples. In addition, there is a clear trend where highly mixed halogen compounds (x = 0.5) exhibit a small deviation to higher values of formation energy in the binary case, indicating that some instability originates from lattice distortions; on the contrary, this is not seen in the formation energy data based on constituent elements.
In summary, the higher bonding energies of lead binary compounds when compared to tin compounds, as crystalline lead is less energetic than tin, explain why CsSnBr3 and most closed perovskites are those with the lowest ΔHs values, i.e., the most stable from a binary compound perspective, while the area surrounding CsPbBr3 contains the perovskites with the lowest formation enthalpies from a constituent element perspective. The total energy values obtained directly from the calculations performed herein and the formation enthalpies based on constituent elements calculated using eqn (4.2) agree with reference values obtained from the Materials Project database,88 within error margins of 1 and 4%, respectively, despite different functionals being employed for the calculations, verifying the results presented here.
At this point is useful to point out the correlation between these two formation-enthalpy types and Sun's parameter and the bonding strength, respectively, as presented in Fig. 6. To measure how good these correlations are, two important statistical indexes are presented: the coefficient of determination (R2) and the mean absolute error (MAE). Both values are also presented in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Correlation between structural and thermodynamic parameters. (a) Formation enthalpy [eV per atom] vs. Sun's parameter [dimensionless] and (b) formation enthalpy from binary compounds [meV per atom] vs. the bonding strength [dimensionless] for all studied CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. 
For the prediction of the formation enthalpy from fundamental elements using Sun's parameter, the descriptor works extremely well, with R2 equal to 0.993 and a MAE of 6.8 meV per atom. Meanwhile, for the formation enthalpy from binary compounds, the R2 value of 0.896 is not that good, although it is high enough to perform perfectly well, but the MAE is even lower than the previous example, with a value of 4.5 meV per atom, which falls within the 5% threshold. As stated by Sun et al.,54 the correction to the Goldschmidt factor made via the inclusion of octahedral and atomic packing factors substantially improves the correlation with the formation enthalpy (given that no correlation could be appreciated using the Goldschmidt tolerance factor in this case), as it takes into account the main structural requirements of the perovskite in terms of the relative sizes of the constituent atoms that are not disrupted by excessively high interatomic forces. At the same time, it makes a lot of sense that the bonding strength, as a measure of the difficulty of breaking bonds, presents a well-adjusted relationship with the formation enthalpy from binary precursors, thinking of that as the usual decomposition pathway of a perovskite and considering that the breaking of bonds is what usually triggers the decomposition process. All these factors confirm the correct performance of these two structural parameters as predictors of perovskite thermodynamics, both being much easier to obtain than a complete thermodynamic study when numerous compounds are going to be studied or multiple calculations are required.
Mechanical parameters
Having good mechanical properties is always an excellent indicator of the suitability of a material for use in complex devices, where it is subject to different stresses. As previously stated, good mechanical stability is also needed by absorber materials to retain absorptivity values and not to present large losses of efficiency over time. Especially important in these cases is the bulk modulus, which determines the stiffness of the material toward compression forces, such as the ones seen in typical multilayer devices, like solar cells, during the manufacturing process and operation. The values of this property for the different studied compounds are presented in Fig. 7, calculated using the Birch–Murnaghan equation. The bulk modulus has also been calculated from the elastic constants of the materials (see the ESI†); both methods give similar results in terms of trends, although the values are slightly lower when calculated using the Birch–Murnaghan equation, with an average ratio of 1.12 between the values calculated with each method and a highest ratio of 1.22.
 Fig. 7  Bulk modulus [GPa] values for all CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites studied. For more details about the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.† 
From Fig. 7 is possible to see that the maximum value corresponds to the CsSnBr3 perovskite, as for the other parameters relating to stability, with a value of 22.38 GPa. The minimum value corresponds to CsPbI3 (17.46 GPa), which means that the bulk modulus grows with increases in x and b, with almost uniform growth rates of 23.5% and 4.0%, respectively. Once again, all the structures with a halogen composition (x) of 0.5, i.e., the same amounts of I and Br, present an anomalous decrease in the bulk modulus, which can probably be explained, as in the previous case, by the greater distortion of the crystal structure, which gives rise to a worse response to stress, as all those anomalies are related to some type of additional instability.
Some other mechanical properties, like the shear modulus, which determines the shear stiffness, and the Young's modulus, which measures the tensile stiffness, have been also been calculated by means of strain-stress methodology,71,72 and the results are presented in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  (a) Shear [GPa] and (b) Young's modulus [GPa] values for all CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites studied. For more details about the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.† 
Both parameters, the shear and Young's moduli, present similar trends when the chemical composition is changed. In general, upon x modification, uniform increases at average rates of 25.9% and 26.5%, respectively, from the pure-I to pure-Br extremes are shown, whereas b modification leads to much lesser changes. From b = 0 to b = 0.17, a rapid decrease is observed, but from that point up to b = 1, the trend changes and the value starts to rise quite uniformly until it reaches a value within a range of ±4% of the initial value for the pure-Pb perovskite with the same x concentration. The minimum values at b = 0.17 (except for x = 0.5, where it lies at b = 0.33) for the Shear/Young's moduli show relative values of around 96%/95% of the initial values at b = 0, with a minimum value of 94.6%/92.9% when x = 1/x = 0.
Poisson's ratio, which measures the deformation in a direction perpendicular to the load, has been also calculated. Poisson's ratio yields an almost constant value of around 0.29 for the entire composition range. For the sake of simplicity, a contour plot presenting Poisson's ratio values has been omitted (see the ESI† for more details).
All of the studied compounds meet the elastic stability criteria, defined according to the elastic constants for the most general case of symmetry, where: c11 > 0, c22 > 0, c33 > 0, c44 > 0, c55 > 0, c66 > 0, c11 + c22 − 2c12 > 0, c11 + c33 − 2c13 > 0, c22 + c33 − 2c23 > 0; and c11 + c22 + c33 + 2c12 + 2c13 + 2c23 > 0.29 Pugh's criterion90 is also met, locating all the compounds out of the brittle area and classifying them as ductile materials.91
To measure the accuracy of these properties values is delicate, because great differences far beyond the standard 5% error limit in comparison with previously reported values can be seen in the extensive literature in this area,38,92 especially those relying on different simulation programs. Moreover, the high instability of these compounds when they are manipulated makes it almost impossible to measure these properties experimentally. In spite of that, looking at other works, trends with regard to the four ternary compounds analyzed herein are correctly reproduced in this work, and the property values fall within a similar range to previously reported examples.38,92–98
Conclusions
A whole set of properties for the CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 family of all-inorganic perovskites is presented in this work. The main structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical parameters related to some extent to the intrinsic stabilities of these materials are properly described. It is expected that this set can help researchers, guiding their experimental efforts towards a specific compound depending on the precise properties desired. In this sense, the main parameters evaluated here show that CsSnBr3 is the most intrinsically stable perovskite within the studied range, as indicated by the Goldschmidt factor, the bonding strength, the formation enthalpy based on binary components, and the bulk modulus. Nevertheless, all the compounds studied herein fall within the intrinsic stability region delineated by those parameters.
Regarding all the described properties and the changes that they exhibit upon chemical composition modification, some trends and anomalies are remarkable enough to be compiled and highlighted below:
• Despite the cell volume presenting constant variations when the chemical composition is modified based on the atom radii, the lattice constant of the cell and, consequently, its shape do not present that same trend, losing the cubic structure when mixed halogens are introduced.
• Although most of the properties present a linear dependence on the chemical composition, the formation enthalpy based on binary precursors presents a rather exponential dependence because of the highest stability being shown by lead binary compounds.
• Paying attention to the percentage changes of the different properties, x seems to have considerably more influence than b, which seems logical when looking at the stoichiometry.
• For many properties, especially for those most directly related to stability, like Sun's parameter, the formation enthalpy ΔHs, and different mechanical parameters, an anomalous deviation from linear trends in the direction of additional instability is observed for most compounds when x = 0.5, indicating that the loss of cell symmetry could produce significant but not conclusive instability in these compounds.
Correlation between some structural and thermodynamic parameters is also presented. In one case, the linear dependence of Sun's parameter on the formation enthalpy of the set of compounds studied herein has been confirmed. In another case, new correlation, which has not been previously proposed, between the bonding strengths of the compounds and their formation enthalpies based on binary phases has been verified, with very high rates of correspondence.
Thus, this work offers fundamental insight in the search for new all-inorganic perovskites with tailored structural, thermodynamic, and mechanical properties and reduced toxicity, with a focus on suitable chemical compositions.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación through the project BESTMAT-QC (PID2019-107137RB-C22). The authors gratefully acknowledge the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (http://www.upm.es) for providing computing resources on Magerit Supercomputer. The statements made herein are solely the responsibility of the authors.
References
J. J. Yoo, S. Wieghold, M. C. Sponseller, M. R. Chua, S. N. Bertram, N. T. P. Hartono, J. S. Tresback, E. C. Hansen, J. P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, T. Buonassisi, S. S. Shin and M. G. Bawendi, An interface stabilized perovskite solar cell with high stabilized efficiency and low voltage loss, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2192 RSC .
P. Tockhorn, P. Wagner, L. Kegelmann, J. C. Stang, M. Mews, S. Albrecht and L. Korte, Three-Terminal Perovskite/Silicon Tandem Solar Cells with Top and Interdigitated Rear Contacts, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1381 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C. S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Il Seok, Efficient inorganic-organic hybrid heterojunction solar cells containing perovskite compound and polymeric hole conductors, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486 CrossRef CAS .

          NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/pdfs/best-research-cell-efficiencies.20200311.pdf, (accessed 21 March 2020).
J. P. Correa-Baena, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, T. J. Jacobsson, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, The rapid evolution of highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 710 RSC .
T. Wang, B. Daiber, J. M. Frost, S. A. Mann, E. C. Garnett, A. Walsh and B. Ehrler, Indirect to direct bandgap transition in methylammonium lead halide perovskite, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 509 RSC .
A. Jiménez-Solano, S. Carretero-Palacios and H. Míguez, Absorption enhancement in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells with embedded arrays of dielectric particles, Opt. Express, 2018, 26, A865 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Nelson and M. Di Vece, Using a neural network to improve the optical absorption in halide perovskite layers containing core-shells silver nanoparticles, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Filippetti, A. Mattoni, C. Caddeo, M. I. Saba and P. Delugas, Low electron-polar optical phonon scattering as a fundamental aspect of carrier mobility in methylammonium lead halide CH3NH3PbI3 perovskites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 15352 RSC .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Graẗzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-range balanced electron-and hole-transport lengths in organic-inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, W.-H. Fang, R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Symmetry Breaking at MAPbI3 Perovskite Grain Boundaries Suppresses Charge Recombination: Time-Domain ab Initio Analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Hybrid Perovskites for Photovoltaics: Charge-Carrier Recombination, Diffusion, and Radiative Efficiencies, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Siegler, D. W. Houck, S. H. Cho, D. J. Milliron and B. A. Korgel, Bismuth Enhances the Stability of CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 (MAPI) Perovskite under High Humidity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 963 CrossRef CAS .
G. Niu, W. Li, J. Li, X. Liang and L. Wang, Enhancement of thermal stability for perovskite solar cells through cesium doping, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17473 RSC .
T. T. Ava, A. Al Mamun, S. Marsillac and G. Namkoong, A review: Thermal stability of methylammonium lead halide based perovskite solar cells, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 188 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Ju, M. Chen, Y. Zhou, J. Dai, L. Ma, N. P. Padture and X. C. Zeng, Toward Eco-friendly and Stable Perovskite Materials for Photovoltaics, Joule, 2018, 2, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou and Y. Zhao, Chemical stability and instability of inorganic halide perovskites, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1495 RSC .
Q. Wali, F. J. Iftikhar, M. E. Khan, A. Ullah, Y. Iqbal and R. Jose, Advances in stability of perovskite solar cells, Org. Electron., 2020, 78, 105590 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, X. Tang, B. Huang, T. Hu, L. Tan, L. Chen and Y. Chen, Recent Progress on the Long-Term Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700387 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Urbina, The balance between efficiency, stability and environmental impacts in perovskite solar cells: a review, J. Phys. Energy, 2020, 2, 022001 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Hong, S. R. Svadlenak, K. A. Goulas and J. G. Labram, Thermal stability of mobility in methylammonium lead iodide, J. Phys. Mater., 2019, 3, 014003 CrossRef .
N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, A. D. Printz, A. Gold-Parker, Y. Ding, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, Engineering Stress in Perovskite Solar Cells to Improve Stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, A. Ho-Baillie and S. Huang, Review of Novel Passivation Techniques for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Wu, W. Chen, G. Chen, L. Liu, Z. He and R. Liu, The impact of hybrid compositional film/structure on organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 1 Search PubMed .
H. Dong, S. Pang, Y. Zhang, D. Chen, W. Zhu, H. Xi, J. Chang, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, Improving electron extraction ability and device stability of perovskite solar cells using a compatible PCBM/AZO electron transporting bilayer, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 720 CrossRef PubMed .
P. N. Rudd and J. Huang, Metal Ions in Halide Perovskite Materials and Devices, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 394 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. Il Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, Y. Fang, G. Kieslich, T. J. White and A. K. Cheetham, Mechanical properties of organic-inorganic halide perovskites, CH3NH3PbX3 (X=I, Br and Cl), by nanoindentation, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18450 RSC .
J. Feng, Mechanical properties of hybrid organic-inorganic CH3NH 3BX3 (B=Sn, Pb; X=Br, I) perovskites for solar cell absorbers, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081801 CrossRef .
T. Ma, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. Zhang and L. Yi, The development of all-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 464 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, H. Xu, W. E. I. Sha, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Yang and Q. Tang, Inorganic perovskite solar cells: An emerging member of the photovoltaic community, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21036 RSC .
Q. Tai, K. C. Tang and F. Yan, Recent progress of inorganic perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2375 RSC .
A. Mattoni, A. Filippetti, M. I. Saba and P. Delugas, Methylammonium Rotational Dynamics in Lead Halide Perovskite by Classical Molecular Dynamics: The Role of Temperature, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17421 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Carignano, A. Kachmar and J. Hutter, Thermal effects on CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite from Ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8991 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mladenović and N. Vukmirović, Effects of thermal disorder on the electronic structure of halide perovskites: Insights from MD simulations, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 25693 RSC .
A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, Hybrid perovskites for photovoltaics: Insights from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 1 CrossRef .
W. Ke and M. G. Kanatzidis, Prospects for low-toxicity lead-free perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Roknuzzaman, K. K. Ostrikov, H. Wang, A. Du and T. Tesfamichael, Towards lead-free perovskite photovoltaics and optoelectronics by ab-initio simulations, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, Toward Lead-Free Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1233 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gai, J. Wang, Y. Wang and J. Li, The low-dimensional three-dimensional tin halide perovskite: Film characterization and device performance, Energies, 2020, 13, 2 CrossRef CAS .
L. Serrano-Lujan, N. Espinosa, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, J. Abad, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Tin- and lead-based perovskite solar cells under scrutiny: An environmental perspective, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1 Search PubMed .
M. Hu, M. Chen, P. Guo, H. Zhou, J. Deng, Y. Yao, Y. Jiang, J. Gong, Z. Dai, Y. Zhou, F. Qian, X. Chong, J. Feng, R. D. Schaller, K. Zhu, N. P. Padture and Y. Zhou, Sub-1.4 eV bandgap inorganic perovskite solar cells with long-term stability, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, X. Zhang, W. Yang, G. E. Eperon and D. S. Ginger, Tin–Lead Alloying for Efficient and Stable All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 2782 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, L. Wan, X. Li, W. Zhang, S. Fu, Y. Wang, S. Li, H. Q. Wang, W. Song and J. Fang, Inverted All-Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells with Promoted Efficiency and Stability by Nickel Incorporation, Chem. Mater., 2019, 2 Search PubMed .
Z. Zeng, J. Zhang, X. Gan, H. Sun, M. Shang, D. Hou, C. Lu, R. Chen, Y. Zhu and L. Han, In Situ Grain Boundary Functionalization for Stable and Efficient Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1 CAS .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Bandgap-Tunable Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites with High Thermal Stability for Efficient Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1 Search PubMed .
S. Mariotti, O. S. Hutter, L. J. Phillips, P. J. Yates, B. Kundu and K. Durose, Stability and Performance of CsPbI2Br Thin Films and Solar Cell Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, F. Xu, Y. Li and Y. Zhao, A Facile Low Temperature Fabrication of High Performance CsPbI2Br All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and L. Shengzhong, All-inorganic cesium lead iodide perovskite solar cells with stabilized efficiency beyond 15%, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yin, H. Zhao, H. Jiang, S. Yuan, T. Niu, K. Zhao, Z. Liu and S. (Frank) Liu, Precursor Engineering for All-Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells with 14.78% Efficiency, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1 Search PubMed .
E. Mosconi, A. Amat, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, First-principles modeling of mixed halide organometal perovskites for photovoltaic applications, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13902 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, Y. Yan and S. H. Wei, Anomalous alloy properties in mixed halide perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Die Gesetze der Krystallochemie, Naturwissenschaften, 1926, 14, 477 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun and W. J. Yin, Thermodynamic Stability Trend of Cubic Perovskites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Boyko and A. Moewes, The hardness of group 14 spinel nitrides revisited, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2016, 124, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Deml, R. O'Hayre, C. Wolverton and V. Stevanović, Predicting density functional theory total energies and enthalpies of formation of metal-nonmetal compounds by linear regression, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 85142 CrossRef .
V. Stevanović, S. Lany, X. Zhang and A. Zunger, Correcting density functional theory for accurate predictions of compound enthalpies of formation: Fitted elemental-phase reference energies, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 115104 CrossRef .
D.-J. Xue, Y. Hou, S.-C. Liu, M. Wei, B. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Li, B. Sun, A. H. Proppe, Y. Dong, M. I. Saidaminov, S. O. Kelley, J.-S. Hu and E. H. Sargent, Regulating strain in perovskite thin films through charge-transport layers, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Ji, S. J. Sun, Y. Qin, K. Li and W. Li, Mechanical properties of hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 391, 15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, F. H. Isikgor, Z. Deng, F. Wei, G. Kieslich, P. D. Bristowe, J. Ouyang and A. K. Cheetham, Factors Influencing the Mechanical Properties of Formamidinium Lead Halides and Related Hybrid Perovskites, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Reyes-Martinez, A. L. Abdelhady, M. I. Saidaminov, D. Y. Chung, O. M. Bakr, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. O. Soboyejo and Y. L. Loo, Time-Dependent Mechanical Response of APbX3 (A=Cs, CH3NH3; X=I, Br) Single Crystals, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Travis, E. N. K. Glover, H. Bronstein, D. O. Scanlon and R. G. Palgrave, On the application of the tolerance factor to inorganic and hybrid halide perovskites: A revised system, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4548 RSC .
R. D. Shannon, Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Formability of ABX 3 (X=F, Cl, Br, I) halide perovskites, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Šimůnek and J. Vackář, Hardness of covalent and ionic crystals: First-principle calculations, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sánchez-Palencia, G. García, J. C. Conesa, P. Wahnón and P. Palacios, Spinel-Type nitride compounds with improved features as solar cell absorbers, Acta Mater., 2020, 197, 316 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Liu, R. Qin, H. Zhai, S. Chen and M. Yuan, All-inorganic perovskite solar cells based on cspbibr2 and metal oxide transport layers with improved stability, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gupta, A. Palakkandy, S. V. Syrotyuk, K. Kumar and S. Arora, A Novel Route for Fabrication of Stable CsPbI 3 Perovskite Thin Film by Thermal Evaporation, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 5091 CrossRef CAS .
F. Birch, Finite elastic strain of cubic crystals, Phys. Rev., 1947, 71, 809 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Murnaghan, The Compressibility of Media under Extreme Pressures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1944, 30, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Le Page and P. Saxe, Symmetry-general least-squares extraction of elastic data for strained materials from ab initio calculations of stress, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 104104 CrossRef .
M. De Jong, W. Chen, T. Angsten, A. Jain, R. Notestine, A. Gamst, M. Sluiter, C. K. Ande, S. Van Der Zwaag, J. J. Plata, C. Toher, S. Curtarolo, G. Ceder, K. A. Persson and M. Asta, Charting the complete elastic properties of inorganic crystalline compounds, Sci. Data, 2015, 2, 1 Search PubMed .
R. Hill, Related content The Elastic Behaviour of a Crystalline Aggregate, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, 1952, 65, 349 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou and K. Burke, Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, A. Ruzsinszky and J. Perdew, Strongly Constrained and Appropriately Normed Semilocal Density Functional, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 1 Search PubMed .
S. Pramchu, A. P. Jaroenjittichai and Y. Laosiritaworn, Effects of bromine substitution for iodine on structural stability and phase transition of CsPbI3, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 496, 1 CrossRef .
S. Dastidar, C. J. Hawley, A. D. Dillon, A. D. Gutierrez-Perez, J. E. Spanier and A. T. Fafarman, Quantitative Phase-Change Thermodynamics and Metastability of Perovskite-Phase Cesium Lead Iodide, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Chung, J. H. Song, J. Im, J. Androulakis, C. D. Malliakas, H. Li, A. J. Freeman, J. T. Kenney and M. G. Kanatzidis, CsSnI 3: Semiconductor or metal? High electrical conductivity and strong near-infrared photoluminescence from a single material. High hole mobility and phase-transitions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Whitcher, L. C. Gomes, D. Zhao, M. Bosman, X. Chi, Y. Wang, A. Carvalho, H. K. Hui, Q. Chang, M. B. H. Breese, A. H. Castro Neto, A. T. S. Wee, H. D. Sun, E. E. M. Chia and A. Rusydi, Dual phases of crystalline and electronic structures in the nanocrystalline perovskite CsPbBr3, NPG Asia Mater., 2019, 11, 70 CrossRef .
S. Gupta, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, CsSnBr3, A Lead-Free Halide Perovskite for Long-Term Solar Cell Application: Insights on SnF2 Addition, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1028 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, W. Zha, Y. Guo and R. Sa, Insight into the improved phase stability of CsPbI3 from First-Principles Calculations, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, A. K. Baranwal, M. A. Kamarudin, Y. Kamata, C. H. Ng, M. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, Structured crystallization for efficient all-inorganic perovskite solar cells with high phase stability, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 20390 RSC .
R. J. Sutton, M. R. Filip, A. A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, B. Wenger, F. Giustino and H. J. Snaith, Cubic or Orthorhombic? Revealing the Crystal Structure of Metastable Black-Phase CsPbI3 by Theory and Experiment, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1787 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sabba, H. K. Mulmudi, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Krishnamoorthy, T. Baikie, P. P. Boix, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Impact of anionic Br- substitution on open circuit voltage in lead free perovskite (CsSnI3-xBrx) solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1763 CrossRef CAS .
R. Grau-Crespo, S. Hamad, C. R. A. Catlow and N. H. De Leeuw, Symmetry-adapted configurational modelling of fractional site occupancy in solids, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2007, 19, 256201 CrossRef .
D. M. Trots and S. V. Myagkota, High-temperature structural evolution of caesium and rubidium triiodoplumbates, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2008, 69, 2520 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Fabini, G. Laurita, J. S. Bechtel, C. C. Stoumpos, H. A. Evans, A. G. Kontos, Y. S. Raptis, P. Falaras, A. Van Der Ven, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. Seshadri, Dynamic Stereochemical Activity of the Sn2+Lone Pair in Perovskite CsSnBr3, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
T. Oku, Crystal structures of perovskite halide compounds used for solar cells, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2020, 59, 264 CAS .
S. F. Pugh, XCII. Relations between the elastic moduli and the plastic properties of polycrystalline pure metals, London, Edinburgh Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1954, 45, 823 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Thompson and W. J. Clegg, Predicting whether a material is ductile or brittle, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2018, 22, 100 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lamichhane and N. M. Ravindra, Isosymmetric compression of cubic halide perovskites ABX3 (A=K, Rb, Cs; B=Ge, Sn, Pb and X=Cl,Br,I)-influence of cation–anion exchange: a first principle study, SN Appl. Sci., 2021, 3, 153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rakita, S. R. Cohen, N. K. Kedem, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Mechanical properties of APbX3 (A=Cs or CH3NH3; X=i or Br) perovskite single crystals, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 623 CrossRef CAS .
M. Afsari, A. Boochani and M. Hantezadeh, Electronic, optical and elastic properties of cubic perovskite CsPbI3: Using first principles study, Optik, 2016, 127, 11433 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Fadla, B. Bentria, T. Dahame and A. Benghia, First-principles investigation on the stability and material properties of all-inorganic cesium lead iodide perovskites CsPbI3 polymorphs, Physica B: Condens. Matter, 2020, 585, 412118 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Mahmood, M. Yaseen, M. Hassan, M. S. Rashid, I. Tlili and A. Laref, The first-principle study of mechanical, optoelectronic and thermoelectric properties of CsGeBr3 and CsSnBr3 perovskites, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 045901 CrossRef .
Q. Mahmood, M. Hassan, M. Rashid, B. U. Haq and A. Laref, The systematic study of mechanical, thermoelectric and optical properties of lead based halides by first principle approach, Physica B: Condens. Matter, 2019, 571, 87 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jing, R. Sa and G. Xu, Tuning electronic and optical properties of CsPbI3 by applying strain: A first-principles theoretical study, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2019, 732, 4 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qi00347jThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The structures of perovskite crystals with the different octahedra generated via atom bonding highlighted: (a) the BX6 octahedron and (b) the XCs4B2 octahedron.	 
t = ((rCs + rX))/√2(rB + rX).	(1)
ζ = (μ + t)η	(2)
μ = rB/rX	(2.1)
	(2.2)
	(3)
ecat = 0.67eCs + 0.33eB	(3.1)
eX = (1 − x)eI + xeBr	(3.2)
eB = (1 − b)ePb + beSn	(3.3)
	(3.4)
dX–B = (1 − b)(1 − x)dPb–I + b(1 − x)dSn–I + (1 − b) × dPb–Br + b × dSn-Br	(3.5)
dX–Cs = (1 − x)dCs–I + xdCs–Br.	(3.6)
	(4.1)
	(4.2)
	(5)
B = (c11 + 2c12)/3	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Lattice constant a [Å], (b) shape ratio a/c [dimensionless], and (c) volume [Å3] data for the unit cells of CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details relating to calculated numerical values as a function of chemical composition, see the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The Goldschmidt tolerance parameter [dimensionless] and improved (b) Sun's parameter [dimensionless] values for CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details on the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 4  Bonding strength [dimensionless] values for CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details on the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 5  Formation enthalpies considering (a) constituent elements [eV per atom] and (b) binary compounds [meV per atom] for CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites. For more details on the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 6  Correlation between structural and thermodynamic parameters. (a) Formation enthalpy [eV per atom] vs. Sun's parameter [dimensionless] and (b) formation enthalpy from binary compounds [meV per atom] vs. the bonding strength [dimensionless] for all studied CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 7  Bulk modulus [GPa] values for all CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites studied. For more details about the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Shear [GPa] and (b) Young's modulus [GPa] values for all CsPb1−bSnb(I1−xBrx)3 perovskites studied. For more details about the calculated numerical values as a function of the chemical composition, see the ESI.†	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qi00347j

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
