Dimension-tailored functional graphene structures for energy conversion and storage  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR00011G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR00011G
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3112-3126Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDimension-tailored functional graphene structures for energy conversion and storage

        
          
            Jing 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhipan 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Nan 
            Chen
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liangti 
            Qu
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Cluster Science (Ministry of Education), Beijing Key Laboratoy for Chemical Power Source and Green Catalysis, School of Chemistry, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: zhipan@bit.edu.cn; lqu@bit.edu.cn
Received 
      2nd January 2013
    , Accepted 8th February 2013First published on 14th February 2013AbstractFunctional graphene nanostructures of interesting physical and chemical properties have been attracting lots of research effort. In this feature article we focus on some of the recent work of dimension-tailed graphene contributed by us and others, and review the current trends in the tunable and controllable preparation of functionalized graphene architectures ranging from zero-dimensional quantum dots to three-dimensional networks. Additionally, recent progresses in applying these dimension-tailored graphene structures in energy conversion and storage are explicitly discussed, particularly in devices such as solar cells, actuators, fuel cells, supercapacitors, etc., presenting the great prospect of functional graphene structures in this dynamic research field.Zhipan ZhangZhipan Zhang received his doctorate degree from École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in 2008. After working at Dysol Ltd and a short stay in Monash University and the University of Calgary, he is now an Associate Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research focuses on energy-related applications of new materials, particularly in photovoltaics and solar fuels.Liangti QuLiangti Qu received a Ph.D. in Chemistry from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 2004. He is now a Professor of Chemistry at the Beijing Institute of Technology and leads the nanocarbon research group. His research interests in materials chemistry mainly focus on the synthesis, functionalization and application of nanomaterials with carbon–carbon conjugated structures, including carbon nanotubes, graphene and conducting polymers.
1 Introduction
Ever since its discovery in 2004, graphene has attracted tremendous research interest due to its unique physical and chemical properties.1 As a single layer of graphite, graphene features a perfect two-dimensional (2D) structure with large specific surface area, high intrinsic carrier mobility,2–4 strong mechanical strength,5 and superior flexibility.6 Unfortunately, the direct application of 2D pristine graphene sheets is hindered by having zero bandgap, easy aggregation and poor dispersion in common solvents, hence there has been ongoing research interest in converting graphene sheets into functionalized graphene structures of different dimensions.7,8 For example, one-dimensional (1D) graphene strips, also known as graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), produced by physical etching or chemical synthesis have shown intriguing properties of confined transport gaps associated with the geometry of the ribbons,9–14 qualifying them as emerging materials in electronics.15–17 Besides GNRs, functional graphene structures, such as zero-dimensional (0D) graphene quantum dots (GQDs), 1D graphene fibers, 2D graphene films and three-dimensional (3D) graphene frameworks, have been widely applied in biomedicine,18 catalysis,19 imaging,20 photonics,21 quantum computing,22 various sensors23–27 and even more.28 In this feature review, we focus our discussion on the tunable and controllable preparation of multi-dimensional functionalized graphene structures and their applications particularly in the field of energy conversion and storage, aiming to complement several recent timely reviews delivered on the topic.29–36
2 Building functional graphene architectures: from 0D quantum dots to 3D frameworks
Progress in synthetic strategies during the past few years has significantly changed the way graphene is produced. While the first graphene sample was a serendipitous discovery by the micromechanical cleaving of graphite,1,37 researchers have now developed various “bottom-up” and “top-down” approaches to prepare graphene with desired sizes and in large quantities,7,20 such as arc discharge,38,39 epitaxial growth,40,41 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),42,43 total organic synthesis,44–46 exfoliation of graphite,47,48 and so on.8,49 Moreover, graphene materials with a single-layer, bilayer or few-layer (layer number ≤ 10) structure can be selectively produced by judiciously choosing suitable techniques.50
In addition to all these efforts, building dimension-tailored graphene architectures is a further step in controllable graphene synthesis, as the physical and chemical characteristics of functional graphene structures are closely related to their dimensionality and therefore novel properties could potentially emerge from the dimensional confinement and/or benefit. For instance, graphene itself is a zero-bandgap material that is inappropriate for applications in semiconductor electronic devices such as high-frequency transistors and logic transistors.28 However, tailoring planar graphene material into 1D GNRs has opened up a bandgap of up to 0.36 eV,51 enabling the 1D graphene structures to exhibit characteristic electronic properties of charge confinement and quantum transport.52,53 Further reducing the dimensionality of graphene structures into 0D GQDs strongly builds up the electron interactions and the pronounced carrier–carrier Coulombic interactions are believed to contribute significantly to the observed room-temperature Coulomb blockade effect54 and the exceptionally long lifetime of hot carriers in GQDs.55 On the other hand, extending graphene structures into 3D porous frameworks usually provides architectures with high specific surface areas, strong mechanical strengths and fast electron transport kinetics, thus bolstering their performance in catalysis and electrochemical devices where bulky interfaces play an essential role in the process.7 Consequently, a close examination of graphene structures of all dimensions will help in understanding the physical and chemical properties associated with the structures and their applications, particularly in energy conversion and storage. As shown in Fig. 1, we will briefly summarize the preparation of different, multi-dimensional graphene structures ranging from 0D GQDs to 3D frameworks. In line with our past work, we will also elaborate the “bottom-up” strategy to construct higher dimensional graphene structures from 0D GQD building blocks, as this opens up opportunities to control the optical and electronic coupling between the separate GQD units and assess the full potential of the ensembles by virtue of their collective properties.
 Fig. 1  Some functional graphene structures from 0D GQDs to 3D frameworks. 
2.1 Graphene quantum dots (GQDs)
GQDs are defined as graphene dots smaller than 100 nm in size and less than 10 layers in thickness.56 They are generally dispersible in common solvents and capable of emitting deep UV,57 blue,58–65 green,66–68 yellow,69 red,55 white luminescence,70 with the quantum yield (QY) ranging from 2% to ∼29%.55,71 Under certain circumstances, the color of the photoluminescence could be tuned by changing the synthesis conditions of GQDs. As shown in Fig. 2, the photoluminescence color of the amino-functionalized GQDs (af-GQDs) changes from violet to green/yellow as the temperature of the amino-hydrothermal synthesis drops from 150 °C towards 70 °C, and this bathochromic shift is understood as a combined influence of the size effect and the quantity of functionalized amine groups on the GQDs prepared at different temperatures.71 The synthesis of GQDs has been systematically reviewed in a recent perspective article,56 where the strategies for synthesizing GQDs with tunable properties were classified into the cutting approach and the chemical synthesis approach. In addition, heteroatom-doped GQDs can be prepared by incorporating heteroatoms in the starting material, or the reacting media, to adjust their intrinsic properties such as electronic characteristics, surface and local chemical features. For example, N-doped GQDs can be synthesized by directly cutting N-doped graphene sheets.65 In another manner, our group has prepared N-doped GQDs by modifying the electrochemical approach reported previously68 and facilely replacing the PBS electrolyte to the N-containing tetrabutylammonium perchlorate (TBAP) in acetonitrile.60 Very recently, Li et al. applied the solution chemistry approach to introduce two nitrogen atoms onto the conjugated graphene cores and obtained N-doped colloidal GQDs with well-defined structures.72 It seems that the doping process has little influence on the size of GQDs,55,60,68,72 implying the incorporation of nitrogen atoms induces a structural change in GQDs, rather than that in the growing mechanism.
 Fig. 2  Emission images of aqueous dispersions of amino-functionalized GQDs (af-GQDs) hydrothermally prepared at different temperatures (upper) and af-GQD@polydimethylsiloxane hybrids (bottom) under irradiation of a 365 nm UV lamp (reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). 
2.2 1D graphene structures

2.2.1 Nanoscale 1D configuration. 
Narrow graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) are regarded as a quasi-one-dimensional system and utilized as an ideal platform for probing their unique electronic, magnetic and mechanical properties. Physically, GNRs were produced by the nanolithography technique, where a large graphene flake was first transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate, subsequently patterned by an electron-beam resist mask to define the constriction and eventually etched by reactive ion (oxygen plasma) to form desired geometries (Fig. 3a).9–13 Unfortunately, this lithographic patterning technique could only afford small quantities of GNRs with widths down to ∼10 nm, as is compromised by the resolution limitation of the state-of-the-art lithography,9,54 and with a very rough edge. To address these problems, the CVD technique was deployed to mass produce (grams per day) long, thin, and highly crystalline GNRs with widths of 20–300 nm.73 Meanwhile, Dai et al. derived sub-10 nm GNRs with smooth edges through a thermal exfoliation of commercial expandable graphite followed by a solution-phase sonication and functionalization with a noncovalent polymer (Fig. 3b and c).74 To address the problem of the low yield and the large variation in the width of GNR products, the same group further obtained sub-10 nm GNRs by the unzipping of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) via controlled etching of the exposed part of the nanotubes partly encapsulated in a polymer film before removing the polymer.75 Alternatively, as shown in Fig. 3d, Tour et al. produced several-micron long but much wider GNRs through lengthwise cutting and unraveling of MWCNTs by the action of acidic potassium permanganate.76 GNRs of >100 nm were found to remain intact after tip sonication (Fig. 3e), showing uniform widths and predominantly straight edges over their entire length. On the other hand, narrow GNRs of <100 nm were rarely observed in the product and probably oxidatively consumed during the MWCNT opening and subsequent exfoliation process. Hence, they improved this approach by introducing a second, weaker acid to increase the selectivity of the oxidative unzipping and protect the narrow ribbons <100 nm wide from excessive oxidation.77 More recently, the same group prepared large batches of highly conductive GNRs in 100% yield by longitudinal splitting of MWCNTs using potassium vapor and the high conductivity of the obtained GNRs implied a low density of oxidative defects on their surface.78 It is interesting to note that the approach of unzipping MWCNTs could also lead to the formation of heteroatom-doped GNRs. Terrones et al. synthesized N-doped GNRs with atomically smooth edges by an abrupt N2 gas expansion within the hollow core of N-doped MWCNTs following the exposure to a fast thermal shock.79 This synthesis involved a mild oxidation of MWCNTs by an acid treatment, which removed nanotubes caps and induced some structural defects within the outer layers of the tubes to facilitate the insertion of N2 molecules and the unzipping propagation, and was deemed suitable to exfoliate and unzip other intercalated layered materials.
 Fig. 3  (a) Atomic force microscope (AFM) image of GNRs covered by a protective etch mask. GNRs with widths ranging from 10–100 nm and lengths of 1–2 μm can be lithographically prepared in this setup (reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2007 by the American Physical Society). (b) (left) Photograph of a polymer solution with GNRs stably suspended in the solution. (right) Schematic drawing of a GNR with two units of a polymer chain adsorbed on top of the graphene via π-stacking. (c) An AFM image of selected GNRs with widths in a sub-10 nm region. All scale bars indicate 100 nm (reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2008 the American Association for the Advancement of Science). (d) Representation of the gradual unzipping of one wall of a carbon nanotube to form a nanoribbon. (e) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a folded, 4 μm long single-layer nanoribbon on a silicon surface (reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group). 
Nanotubes of graphene are also interesting materials. Technically, tubular graphene is generally classified as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and only includes single-walled or few-layered CNTs of large diameters. As shown in Fig. 4a, Wang et al. reported a CVD method to fabricate large-diameter graphene nanotubes with Ni nanowires as the template.80 By carefully tuning the growth duration, the thickness of the graphene nanotube can be controlled from 2 to ∼10 layers, with its diameter and length only dependent on the size of Ni nanowire catalysts (∼70 nm in diameter). When the Ni template was dissolved by a FeCl3 solution, the whole structure was inclined to collapse, as the few-layer graphene was not able to support the large tabular structure. In a different approach, we have prepared stable graphene nanotubes by the well-organized assembly of 0D functional GQDs in an anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) template (Fig. 4b).81 Specifically, aqueously dispersed GQDs were driven into the nanochannels of AAO membranes by an externally applied electric field and spontaneously deposited to form nanotubes arrays. Although directly derived from individual GQDs, the hierarchically porous 1D GQD nanotubes (GQD-NTs) remained as a self-standing array structure, even after the removal of the AAO template, showing the strong adhesion between neighboring GQDs and the excellent mechanical property of the GQD nanotubes. Compared to the initial GQDs, these GQD-NTs were found to feature much less O-related groups on the surface, causing the GQD-NTs to be insoluble in aqueous media.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the CVD growth of graphene with a Ni nanowire template and the subsequent chemical removal of the Ni nanowire to form a graphene tubular structure (reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (b) Scheme of the fabrication of GQD nanotubes and their application in surface-enhanced Raman scattering (reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 


2.2.2 Macroscopic 1D structure. 
Macroscopic 1D carbon fibers are of practical importance in constructing high-strength, low-weight structural materials in transportation vehicles, civil engineering and defence. Although past trials on fabricating CNT fibers by wet approaches82–85 and dry-state spinning of CNTs86–88 have been successful, the superb properties of the as-produced CNT fibers were usually accompanied by a high cost for producing the initial superaligned CNT arrays and extremely rigorous conditions such as high temperature and caustic media for CNT dispersion. Therefore, it would be desirable to have a simple and low-cost method to prepare continuous graphene 1D fibers. However, directly assembling 2D microscopic graphene sheets into 1D fibers proved to be extremely difficult, as the poor dispersibility and irregular size/shape of microscopic graphene sheets seriously obstructed the formation of high-quality graphene fibers and thus impair their macroscopic mechanical properties. Li et al. first reported that due to the low surface tension of ethanol, a flat CVD-grown graphene sheet on water surface lost its planar configuration and instantly scrolled up to form a fiber-like structure when it was placed on an ethanol surface.89 By taking the graphene film out of ethanol by tweezers, evaporating ethanol solvent and natural drying, a monolithic graphene fiber was obtained and its conductivity was measured to be 1000 S m−1. Later, Xu and Gao found that graphene oxide (GO) sheets could form a chiral liquid crystal (CLC) with laminar structures in their aqueous dispersions and applied a wet-spinning technique to fabricate meter-long GO fibers that were chemically reduced to graphene fibers in hydroiodic acid (Fig. 5a).90 The reduced graphene fiber possessed a good fracture strength of ∼140 MPa at an ultimate elongation of 5.8% and a high conductivity of ∼2.5 × 104 S m−1. Similarly, Cong et al. prepared neat graphene fibers by the wet spinning of GO fibers and subsequent chemical reduction.91 As depicted in Fig. 5b, the self-assembling process was facilitated by a positively charged hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) solution as the coagulation bath, where the negative charges of injected GO nanosheets were well compensated for by the adsorption of CTAB molecules, allowing the formed thin GO structure to curl toward its center and eventually form GO fibers after repetitive curling and folding. In this regard, we have developed a facile one-step dimensionally confined hydrothermal strategy to fabricate neat graphene fibers by injecting an aqueous GO suspension into a 400 μm wide glass pipeline and then baking it at 230 °C for 2 h after sealing up the two ends of the pipeline.92 Matching the geometry of the pipeline, the obtained graphene fibers were highly flexible and arbitrarily shapeable (Fig. 5c and d), with a tensile strength of up to180 MPa that could be further improved to 420 MPa after annealing at 800 °C for 2 h in vacuum. As a versatile platform, this graphene fiber could be further functionalized by in situ and post-synthesis incorporation of various materials with unique properties, such as magnetic Fe3O4 and photo-responsive TiO2 nanoparticles, into the fiber bodies to become stimulus-responsive and electronic-textiles.
 Fig. 5  (a) A four-meter-long GO fiber wound on a Teflon drum of 2 cm in diameter (reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group). (b) Schematic illustration of the assembly mechanism of the GO fiber in CTAB solution (reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). (c and d) The handmade planar and 3D geometric structures of highly flexible graphene fibers, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). 

2.3 Orderly structured 2D graphene films
Due to their planar 2D characteristics, graphene nanosheets would naturally pack to randomly structured 2D films through π–π stacking of their basal planes, but ordered 2D graphene films could be formed under certain circumstances. For example, the hydrophilic nature of functional groups (carboxyl, carboxylate, epoxy, etc.) can make the hydrophobic graphene microsheets more amphiphilic, making the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique an effective method to prepare long-range ordered graphene 2D structures. Li et al. first demonstrated that high-quality graphene sheets could be assembled in a layer-by-layer style by the LB technique and one, two and three layered graphene LB films were prepared through repetitively transferring graphene sheets LB film onto a substrate via dip-coating (Fig. 6a).93 Cote et al. found that GO single layers tended to float on water without forming overlapping multilayers due to the mutual edge-to-edge repulsion and double layers would irreversibly form when the surface pressure was high enough to overcome this repulsion and fold the monolayers during the LB assembling.94 Lately, Hamilton et al. reported the LB assemblies of colloidal GQDs, a new type of 2D disk-shaped nanostructures, on polar surfaces with controlled orientations.95 Typically, the 2D configuration can either align parallel to the surface (i.e., “face-on”) if the cofacial molecule–water interaction is stronger than the cofacial intermolecular attraction, or align out of plane from the surface (i.e., “edge-on”) if the cofacial molecule–water interaction is weaker. By modifying GQDs with a desirable carboxyl group, they successfully manipulated the orientation of GQDs either in- or out-of-plane with the substrate, which could have practical significance in determining their performance when applied in real molecular devices. Besides the LB technique, vacuum filtration has been proven to be another effective method to obtain extremely thin graphene films, as Eda et al. uniformly deposited one to five layers of graphene films from reduced GO on a variety of substrates.96 More importantly, this filtering method also appeared to be suitable for preparing ordered graphene films with a considerable thickness. Ruoff et al. filtered colloidal dispersions of GO sheets through a membrane and obtained free-standing graphene paper with thicknesses from 1 to 30 μm.97 As shown in Fig. 6b, well-packed individual graphene layers could be seen throughout the entire cross-section and such a macroscopically ordered structure led to very high values for the tensile modulus and fracture strength. In a similar way, Li et al. filtrated aqueous chemically converted GO colloids and obtained flexible graphene films with a conductivity of 7200 S m−1 and a shiny metallic luster (Fig. 6c).98 Very recently, we also successfully prepared a free-standing, mechanically flexible, but not stiff graphene film, of an appropriate thickness of 4–5 μm by direct filtration of an aqueous suspension of reduced GO colloids (Fig. 6d).99 As shown in Fig. 6e, the surface wettability of the graphene film could be further modified with hexane plasma (Hex-P) or O2 plasma (O2-P) to be hydrophobic or hydrophilic, verifying the great potential of vacuum filtration in fabricating high-quality graphene films in different scales and for different purposes.
 Fig. 6  (a) A photograph of a two-layer graphene LB film on quartz with part of it left clear. The scale bar is 10 mm (reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group). (b) An SEM side-view image of 10 μm thick GO paper. The scale bar is 2 μm (reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group). (c) A 10 μm thick chemically converted graphene film by vacuum filtration. The film showed a shiny metallic luster and a strip (top-right inset) from the film was bent to demonstrate its flexibility (reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group). (d) Cross-section SEM image of a graphene film showing the orderly layered structure of the film (scale bar: 1 μm). (e) Illustration of asymmetric plasma treatments of the graphene film with hexane and oxygen, and the corresponding surface wettabilities. Water contact angles for the Hex-P (left inset) and O2-P (right inset) treated surfaces were ∼90° and ∼15°, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 
2.4 3D graphene architectures
Building organized 3D graphene structures from graphene nanosheets has long been a hot topic, ever since the debut of graphene. The 3D porous graphene skeleton provides an ideal platform towards the maximization of accessible surface area for the development of high-performance catalysts, electromechanical and electrochemical devices. The syntheses of functional 3D macroscopic graphene architectures have been comprehensively examined in a few recent reviews,7,8 and generally, the most widely used approaches are template-directed deposition and the self-assembly of chemically modified graphenes and their derivatives in solution and/or at interfaces.8 To maximize the utilization of 3D graphene structures as a versatile platform, we have been working on the in situ functionalization of a hydrothermally produced 3D graphene framework (3DGF).100 For example, well-defined and interconnected 3DGF supported ternary heterogeneous Pd2/PtFe and Pt/PdCu networks (Fig. 7a and b) were synthesized through a dual solvothermal process to catalyze the electrooxidation of formic acid and ethanol, respectively.101,102 3DGF was adequately soaked with pyrrole (Py) monomer in the autoclave and directly used as the working electrode for electropolymerization of Py to form a deformation-tolerant 3D graphene–polypyrrole matrix.103,104 As shown in Fig. 7c, the matrix could sustain large-strain deformations (e.g., ε = 50%) under manual compression and recover most of the material volume without structural fatigue within seconds. Very recently, as shown in Fig. 7d and e, we reported a N-doped, fire-resistant, ultralight 3DGF of 2.1 ± 0.3 mg cm−3 by following similar procedures, but involving a separate high-temperature calcination.105 This 3DGF exhibited a very high capacity for the reversible adsorption of oils and organic solvents of up to 200–600 times the weight of the pristine graphene framework (Fig. 7f), setting a record among carbon-based adsorbent materials. Meanwhile, similar to the template-based synthesis of 1D graphene nanotubes from GQDs, we have also applied different templates to 3D honeycombs and microspheres from GQDs by using assemblies of SiO2 nanospheres and in a water/oil emulsion system.106,107 Additionally, hierarchical multichannel graphene microtubings (μGTs) with strength comparable to graphene fiber could be prepared by a dually geometric confinement approach with a Cu wire as the inner template and a glass pipeline as the outer one,108 further diversifying the types of applicable engineering materials that 3D graphene structures could promise.
 Fig. 7  Different functional materials derived from the versatile 3DGF platform. (a) A field emission SEM image of the Pt/PdCu on 3DGF displaying the porous nature of 3DGF. (b) Magnified image of (a), showing Pt/PdCu nanoboxes uniformly anchored on 3DGF (reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (c) The compression-recovery processes of deformation-tolerant 3D graphene–polypyrrole matrix (reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (d) A photograph of a piece of ultralight N-doped 3DGF (1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm in size) standing on a dandelion. (e) A photograph showing the non-flammable nature of the N-doped 3DGF in a burning flame. (f) N-doped 3DGF adsorbing gasoline dyed with Sudan III (reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). 
3 Application of tailored graphene structures in energy conversion and storage
3.1 Photovoltaics
In photovoltaic devices, research on graphene structures has been mainly focused on their applications as transparent conducting films and catalytic counter-electrodes (CE).34–36,109–111 Due to its high transparency and high in-plane conductivity,112 single or few-layer thin graphene films have been regarded as the ideal conductive substrates to replace the widely used transparent conducting oxide (TCO), especially the expensive indium-doped tin oxide (ITO). As shown in Fig. 8a, large-area conductive few-layer graphene films on various substrates were successfully prepared by vacuum filtering, and the optoelectronic properties could be tuned over several orders of magnitude.96 Films deposited by low-pressure CVD were more conductive and even deposited in an ultralarge scale (Fig. 8b),42,113 yet the cost of running such a system remained problematic. Some recent works emphasized the use of ambient pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) as an economically viable technique and obtained thin graphene films with a conductivity of a few hundred Ω □−1 and a high transmittance of >80% at 550 nm (Fig. 8c).114,115 To overcome the trade-off between high conductivity and high transparency, various doping species have been incorporated in the graphene films to increase the conductivity without significantly sacrificing the transparency,113,116–118 with FeCl3 being the most effective one. As shown in Fig. 8d, a sample of FeCl3 intercalated few-layer graphene (FeCl3-FLG) achieved a low sheet resistance of 8.8 Ω □−1 and a high transmittance of 84% at 550 nm.118 In addition, flexible conductive graphene films could also be prepared by the selective chemical exfoliation of graphite with a large lateral size,119 rod coating,120 and controlled assembling methods, such as layer-by-layer assembling121,122 and LB assembling,123 opening up great opportunities to apply these high-quality films in different types of photovoltaic device, particularly in flexible solar cell panels.
 Fig. 8  (a) A photograph of solution-processed GO thin films on the plastic substrate (reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group). (b) A transparent ultralarge-area graphene film transferred on a 35 inch PET sheet (reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group). (c) Transmittance of the graphene films, inset of the photograph shows transferred graphene/PET films on the university logo (reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Left, schematic crystal structure of a few-layer graphene intercalated with FeCl3. Right, comparison of square resistance versus transmittance at 550 nm for FeCl3-FLG samples to those of ITO, carbon-nanotube films and other doped graphene materials, with the grey area indicating the current limit of transparent conductors (reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). 
The application of graphene films as catalytic CEs in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) has only been reported during the past few years.124 Shi et al. evaluated the feasibility of using graphene modified fluorine-doped tin oxide (G-FTO) glass as the CE and found its performance was better than bare FTO glass, but inferior to Pt-coated FTO glass, possibly due to the low conductivity of the G-FTO (200–300 S m−1).125 Zhang et al. showed that the efficacy of graphene CE was greatly affected by an annealing process in air and the maximum DSC conversion efficiency of 6.8% was achieved with an optimized temperature of 400 °C.126 As the activity of the CE in the DSCs was most commonly reflected in its ability to catalyze the reduction reaction of I3− to I−, it is understandable that graphenes with oxygen-containing groups or nitrogen doping were better CEs in DSCs, as they usually were better catalysts in various redox reactions.19 Kavan et al. discovered that the electrocatalytic effect of graphene nanoplatelets on the I3−/I− redox reaction was proportional to the concentration of active sites (such as edge defects and oxidic groups).127 Very recently, Xue et al. demonstrated a CE based on 3D N-doped graphene foams (N-GFs) with a doping level as high as 7.6% (Fig. 9) and obtained a power conversion efficiency as high as 7.07% in a real DSC device, being one of the highest reported efficiency values in metal-free CEs of DSCs.128
 Fig. 9  Preparation route of the N-GF counter electrode from the GO suspension (reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). 
Besides these applications, graphene structures can be used as auxiliary electron transporting networks to facilitate the charge collection in the photovoltaic devices. Particularly in DSCs, GO was directly mixed with TiO2 nanoparticles and then deliberately reduced by UV radiation, chemical reagent or thermal annealing to form a graphene–TiO2 composite electrode.129–132 As expected, graphene was found to significantly improve the short-circuit current without sacrificing the open-circuit voltage of the device, leading to an increase in power conversion efficiency ranging from 7.5% to 59%.129,131 Additionally, functionalized graphene has potential in playing active roles in the charge generation process of photovoltaic devices. For instance, GQDs have been successfully applied as the sensitizer in the DSC133 or the electron acceptor in the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cell.68,134 As the LUMO level of the electrochemically synthesized GQDs is estimated to be in the range of 4.2 to 4.4 eV, it is well positioned between the LUMO of P3HT and the work function of the Al electrode in the BHJ solar cell, thus forming an electron transport cascade. In our device, the addition of GQDs to P3HT significantly improved the photovoltaic performance of the device, with a decent open-circuit voltage of 0.67 V and a photo-to-electric conversion efficiency of 1.28%.68 Later, Gupta et al. prepared aniline-functionalized GQDs (ANI-GQDs) and found that the device with 1 wt% ANI-GQD in P3HT had the highest conversion efficiency due to the formation of uniform and nanoscale phase separation dimensionally commensurate with the diffusion length of excitons (∼10 nm).134 Despite the moderate power conversion efficiencies of these devices, GQDs are in principle ideal candidate materials to rival the widely used C60/C70 as the electron acceptor in BHJ solar cells. Generally, effective exciton dissociation and fast carrier transport are key factors for efficient BHJ solar cells, as the large specific surface areas of GQDs can conveniently afford ample interface for exciton dissociation and the high electron mobility of GQDs is expected to increase the conductivity of the active layer and thus greatly facilitate the charge transport through the active layer. Therefore, breakthroughs in the power conversion efficiency of GQD-related photovoltaic devices could be envisaged in the near future.
3.2 Actuators
Actuators can transform shapes or dimensions in response to externally applied stimuli and the development of advanced actuator systems based on graphene structures has attracted considerable interest.135 Ruoff et al. first showed a macroscopic graphene-based actuator comprising of adjacent GO and MWCNT layers both of ∼10 μm in thickness. The device responded to variations of humidity and/or temperature, which was deemed to originate from the difference between the amount of interlamellar water in both layers under different relative humidities or temperatures.136 In electrochemical actuators, Liang et al. found that the addition of magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles in free-standing graphene-based paper significantly increased the actuation strain from about 0.064% to 0.1%, where Fe3O4 nanoparticles were used to prevent the graphene sheets from aggregating into stacks.137 We utilized an asymmetrically surface-modified graphene film to construct an electrochemical actuator and a rhythmic length change up to 0.2% was observed with O2-P treated film (Fig. 10a and b).99 Theoretical results indicated that electrochemical actuation strain in monolayer graphene was mainly electrostatic double layer (DL) induced strain (similar to 1%) rather than quantum-mechanical strain (similar to 0.2%),138 and a huge constant strain of 23.8% was predicted, although yet to be experimentally proven, as the result of a change in the atomic structure of GO configuration with hole injection.139 In line with other graphene–conducting polymer composite multilayer film actuators,140 we have rationally selected conducting polymers to form hybrid graphene electrochemical actuators and break the 1% benchmark in strain response. As shown in Fig. 10c, electropolymerizing Py soaked 3DGF yielded 3D graphene–polypyrrole (G–PPy) pillar that exhibited strong actuation responses and high actuation durability with heavy operating load.104 In response to the low potentials of ±0.8 V, the saturated strain of the 3D G–PPy pillar could reach a record of 2.5% (Fig. 10d), which was about 3 times that of unitary graphene film under an applied potential of ±1.2 V. Biener et al. prepared macroscopic 3D nanographene (3D-NG) by first transforming the highly cross-linked organic polymer into a porous carbon network and then etching away the more reactive amorphous carbon and partly the multilayer graphite components.141 Impressively, the length of a 3D-NG electrode could change periodically and reversibly up to 2.2% when the potential scanned between −1.0 V and + 1.0 V, probably because 3D-NG monoliths were wholly composed of surface atoms that were susceptible to interfacial charge accumulation or depletion induced by electrochemically driven ion adsorption. Lu et al. reported a type of actuator based on a parallel graphene nanosheets membrane with ionic liquid pre-expanding treatment and the actuator achieved variation as large as 98% in thickness under electrical stimulation, yet the unstable parallel structure and large volume deformation led to the breakdown of the electrode under high voltage, long actuation time or repetitive cycles.142 They later improved their system by introducing MWCNTs to effectively prevent reduced GO from restacking and the full carbon hybrid electrode hybrid maintained a large bending displacement with an excellent long-term actuation stability of up to a million cycles.143 Recently, Liang et al. designed an electromechanical bimorph actuator composed of polydiacetylene (PDA) crystal and flexible graphene paper (Fig. 10e) via a solution approach and the graphene–PDA bimorph actuator could generate large actuation motion and produce higher actuation stress than natural muscles, which was mainly attributed to the electric-induced deformation, as well as the secondary thermal-induced expansion of PDA.144 Interestingly, as PDA possessed interesting electrical and optical properties, this graphene–PDA actuator showed reversible electrochromatic phenomenon and reliable swing behavior with high frequencies when an alternating current was applied, demonstrating its potential contribution in promoting practical applications of graphene actuators.
 Fig. 10  (a) Curvature change of an asymmetrically modified graphene strip as a function of applied CV potential within ±1.2 V. Insets show the status of the graphene strip at −1.2, 0, and 1.2 V, respectively. (b) The length changes of the graphene strips treated with Hex-P and O2-P under applied square wave potential of ±1.2 V with a frequency of 0.05 Hz, where L and ΔL were defined as the length and length change of graphene actuator (reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) Photograph of the as-prepared 3D G–PPy pillar. (d) The strain responses of the 3D G–PPy actuator as a function of cyclic periods at an applied square wave potential of ±0.8 V (reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Schematic illustration of the bending actuation for the graphene–PDA actuator without and with an applied direct current (reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
3.3 Fuel cells
In fuel cells, graphene can play either a passive role as the support for catalysts, or an active role as the inherent catalyst. The high surface area, conductivity, and chemical stability qualified graphene as a versatile platform to anchor fuel cell catalysts.19,30,145,146 Ultimately, a further step from this would be developing functionalized graphenes with their inherent catalytic effects and thus making noble metal catalysts redundant. To date, N-doped graphene is the most promising candidate to fulfil this mission.147–149 Following the seminal work of Dai and co-workers on N-doped CNT arrays with high electrocatalytic activity for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR),150 we were among the first to synthesize N-doped graphene and demonstrate it as an efficient metal-free electrocatalyst for ORR in alkaline fuel cells (Fig. 11a).151–154 As plotted in Fig. 11b, the steady-state catalytic current at the N-graphene electrode was found to be about 3 times higher than that at the Pt/C electrode over a large potential range. The long-term stability, tolerance to crossover, and poison effect are also better than Pt/C for oxygen reduction in alkaline electrolyte. We further studied the N-doped GQD and ultralight 3DGF and found that they both possessed great ability to catalyze the ORR with excellent electrocatalytic selectivity against the electro-oxidation of the fuel molecule methanol.60,105 Recent trends in improving the performance and practical feasibility of this system included using low-cost nitrogen precursor, adding certain molecules as the electron acceptor or the second synergistic dopant, and the size-specific study of N-doping effects. Lin et al. selected urea as the low-cost but abundant N source and prepared N-doped graphene catalysts by pyrolyzing GO with urea.155 Parvez et al. used cyanamide as the nitrogen source and found that Fe nanoparticles could notably increase the electrocatalytic performance on ORR in an alkaline solution.156 Alternatively, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride), PDDA, was successfully used as an electron acceptor to promote intermolecular charge-transfer and induce net positive charge on carbon atoms in the nitrogen-free graphene plane to facilitate the ORR and thus notably improved the fuel selectivity, tolerance to CO poisoning and long-term stability of the PDDA-absorbed graphene electrode.157 With the introduction of boron as a second dopant by annealing GO in the presence of boric acid, the energy-gap, spin density, charge density and thus the catalytic performance of the resultant B and N co-doped graphene samples were demonstrated to be dependent on the doping-level of B and N and a modest N- and B-doping was found to yield the best catalyst.158 Similarly, as shown in Fig. 11c, sulfur could be employed as a second dopant to induce a large number of carbon atom active sites for better catalytic activities and theoretic calculations showed that synergistic performance enhancement came from the redistribution of spin and charge densities induced by the dual doping of S and N atoms.159,160 Additionally, Baek et al. developed a simple ball-milling process to exfoliate the pristine graphite directly into different edge-selectively functionalized graphene nanoplatelets in large scales and found that sulfur-containing graphene nanoplatelets showed relatively high electrocatalytic activity and good cycle stability for ORR even without S doping in the carbon framework,161 verifying the effectiveness of introducing S atom to increase ORR catalytic activity. Furthermore, Li et al. reported that the catalytic effect of N-doped graphene was also affected by the conjugation size of the π system (Fig. 11d), complementing the postulated correlation between the catalytic activity and the abundance of N with a specific bonding configuration.72
 Fig. 11  (a) A digital photo image of a transparent N-graphene film floating on water. (b) Rotating-ring disk electrode voltammograms for the ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the C-graphene electrode (red line), Pt/C electrode (green line), and N-graphene electrode (blue line). Electrode rotating rate: 1000 rpm. Scan rate: 0.01 V s−1 (reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) Fabrication of N and S dual-doped mesoporous graphene (N-S-G) nanosheets from GO (reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (d) Structures of N-doped GQDs 1, 2 and an undoped GQD 3 with different conjugation size (reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
3.4 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors (ECs), have attracted increasing attention owing to their high energy density, high rates of charge–discharge and their ability to complement secondary batteries in reducing the cycling duty and therefore extending the battery life.162 ECs can be divided into two types, i.e. the electric double layer capacitors (EDLCs) and the so-called pseudo-capacitors. In general, EDLCs are normally made with high surface area materials that work in a non-Faradic mode through the mere separation of electronic and ionic charges at the electrode/electrolyte interface, while the pseudo-capacitors are based on redox active electrode materials that operate through fast and reversible surface or near-surface Faradic reactions, thus rendering an increased energy density, but an inferior power density and cycle life compared to EDLCs. Graphene could help increase the capacitance of both EDLCs and pseudo-capacitors, and its function as a pure electrode or a component of graphene/polymer/metal oxide composite have been extensively reviewed by several researchers.31,33,163–165 We have selected 3D porous graphene structures to maximize the exposure of their surfaces to electrolyte and applied effective N-doping to further enhance the capacitance performance. As demonstrated in Fig. 12a, N-doped 3DGF presented a specific capacitance of 484 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, approaching the theoretical capacitance of 550 F g−1 for pure graphene EDLCs.105 The 3DGF electrode maintained high specific capacitances over a wide range of current densities and for a long-term charge–discharge period of 1000 repetitive cycles. Even at the high current density of 100 A g−1, its capacitance still remained at 415 F g−1, which could be ascribed to the highly exposed graphene sheets with minimum stack and the possible pseudocapacitance contribution of heteroatom doping. We further use PPy to increase the compressibility and springiness of 3DGF and with 3D PPy–graphene foam, we fabricated deformation-tolerant supercapacitors that showed no significant change with a 50% applied strain in 1000 measured cycles (Fig. 12b), indicating the excellent electrochemical stability of the compressible supercapacitor based on PPy–graphene foam electrodes.103 Feng and coworkers synthesized highly crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheets with a high pore volume of 3.42 cm3 g−1 and the structure was an ideal platform to build supercapacitors due to the presence of ultrahigh pore volume for electrolyte access, the nitrogen doping for cycling stability and the preservation of original 2D graphene nanostructure for good electrical conductivity.166 They also used 3D interconnected nitrogen and boron co-doped graphene frameworks to build simplified all-solid-state supercapacitors with a relatively high specific capacitance of ∼62 F g−1 and an improved energy density of ∼8.65 W h kg−1 compared to undoped or uni-doped samples.167 For high-frequency applications, Shi et al. designed a one-step electrochemical approach to preparing electrochemical reduced GO electrodes with 3D interpenetrating microstructures (Fig. 12c) and fabricated supercapacitors with superior rate-performance. At 120 Hz, the device exhibited a phase angle of −84° and a RC time constant of 1.35 ms, rivaling commercial aluminum electrolytic capacitors (AEC) for ac-line filtering.168 Additionally, as shown in Fig. 12d, supercapacitors with a specific capacitance of up to 500 F g−1 were achieved by loading amine-modified GO with polyaniline (PANi) and the contribution of PANi in capacitance was found to be dependent on the surface chemistry of GO.169 These results show that functionalized 3D graphene structures have unique advantages as a new type of electrode material or supporting material for high performance supercapacitors.
 Fig. 12  (a) The specific capacitances calculated from the discharge curves at a wide range of current densities, showing the excellent capacitive properties of N-doped 3DGF (reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (b) The specific capacitances at different compression states for 1000 cycles, verifying the robustness of the deformation-tolerant supercapacitor (reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (c) Photograph of an electrochemically reduced GO electrode (upper) and cross-sectional SEM image of the electrode (reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). (d) Specific capacitance of different surface-functionalized graphene after loading 10 wt% PANi as a function of the scan rate (from 2 to 100 mV s−1) in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, where the inset shows a cartoon depicting the PANi-functionalized amino-modified GO (reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
3.5 Other devices: batteries and more
Graphene has found applications in many other energy-related devices, particularly in secondary batteries due to the ongoing boom in research on powering electric vehicles and portable electronics. Structurally similar to graphite, graphene can work promisingly as the negative electrode material, or as the building block for the hybrid nanostructured electrode in lithium ion batteries (LIB).170–172 The recent renaissance of Li–O2 batteries has also been accelerated by incorporating graphene as an effective network to facilitate the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and ORR (Fig. 13a).173,174 Additionally, as shown in Fig. 13b, theoretical works have long predicted graphene structures as being good materials for hydrogen storage,175–177 although only moderate results have been experimentally observed so far,178,179 calling for more efforts to be devoted to this challenging, yet academically and industrially important research area.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic structure of the Li–O2 cell catalyzed by the MnCo2O4–graphene network hybrid, with the bottom showing MnCo2O4 nanoparticles covalently bonded to N-doped GO sheets through carbon–oxygen–metal and carbon–nitrogen–metal bonds (reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Snapshot from the grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations of pure (upper) and lithium-doped (bottom) pillared graphene structures for hydrogen storage at 77 K and 3 bar, with hydrogen molecules in green and lithium atoms in purple (reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society). 
4 Summary and prospect
The extraordinary physical and chemical properties of graphene based materials have attracted tremendous research interests during the past few years, quickly making graphene a star material in different scientific fields including biology, chemistry, material science, physics, etc. There have been considerable achievements in synthesizing functionalized graphene structures with desired shape, sizes and/or dimensions, greatly demonstrating their promise in various fields, especially in energy conversion and storage. In this featured review, we have briefly looked at different aspects of dimension-tailored functional graphene structure and paid special attention to some recent progress in applying these structures in solar cells, actuators, fuel cells, supercapacitors and so on, aiming to present a general picture of the field. To further promote the application of these useful and interesting graphene structures with different dimensions, three issues have to be addressed. First, better control in the morphology and dimension of the material is needed, since the ensemble composed of uniform individuals is most likely to show the collective properties that are sought after. Second, it is desirable to have hierarchical graphene structures that are ordered at different scales to fully exploit their potential. For example, current 3DGF usually features large pores with sizes up to a few hundred nanometers that are far too spacious for electrolyte filtration in supercapacitors. In this case, a better material would be a derivative of a new sub-structure (NSG) with micropores (a few nanometers in size) to form NSG@3DGF and therefore increase the surface area and the access to the electrolyte of graphene structure for an improved electric double-layer capacitance. Last, to match the demand of multifunctional devices such as flexible solar cells, wearable electronic fabrics and load-tolerant supercapacitors, research priority is advised to be directed to the development of versatile graphene structures of more than a single functionality. With these problems solved, the widespread application of the desired and precisely controllable functional graphene structures could be foreseen in energy conversion/storage and many other related fields.
Acknowledgements
We thank the financial support from the 973 program (2011CB013000) of China and NSFC (21004006, 21174019 and 51161120361), Fok Ying Tong Education Foundation (no. 131043), the research foundation for the doctoral program of higher education of China (20101101120036), the 111 Project 807012, and the Program for the New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-10-0047).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Elias, J. A. Jaszczak and A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 016602 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Booth, P. Blake, R. R. Nair, D. Jiang, E. W. Hill, U. Bangert, A. Bleloch, M. Gass, K. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson and A. K. Geim, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2442–2446 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5549–5563 RSC .
S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
M. Y. Han, B. Ozyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
K. Todd, H. Chou, S. Amasha and D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 416–421 CrossRef CAS .
C. Stampfer, J. Güttinger, S. Hellmüller, F. Molitor, K. Ensslin and T. Ihn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 056403 CrossRef CAS .
F. Molitor, A. Jacobsen, C. Stampfer, J. Güttinger, T. Ihn and K. Ensslin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 075426 CrossRef .
M. Wang, E. B. Song, S. Lee, J. Tang, M. Lang, C. Zeng, G. Xu, Y. Zhou and K. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8769–8773 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. James and J. M. Tour, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 1033–1050 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
N. O. Weiss, H. L. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5782–5825 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, L. M. Zhang, M. Liu and Z. J. Zhang, Theranostics, 2012, 2, 283–294 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Huang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3686–3699 RSC .
Q. L. Bao and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS .
P. Recher and B. Trauzettel, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 302001 CrossRef .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 26, 4637–4648 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Artiles, C. S. Rout and T. S. Fisher, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 1352–1360 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, S. X. Wu, X. Y. Qi, Q. Y. He, Q. C. Zhang, Q. Y. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Liu, X. C. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
Q. Y. He, S. X. Wu, Z. Y. Yin and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Q. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
Y. P. Zhai, Y. Q. Dou, D. Y. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 CAS .
L. M. Dai, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130–1166 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grande, V. T. Chundi, D. Wei, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhänen, Particuology, 2012, 10, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wan, Y. Huang and Y. S. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 598–607 CrossRef CAS .
B. Luo, S. M. Liu and L. J. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630–646 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, B. Liu, D. Tang, B. Yu, C. Jiang and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 411–417 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Subrahmanyam, L. S. Panchakarla, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4257–4259 CAS .
P. W. Sutter, J. I. Flege and E. A. Sutter, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shivaraman, R. A. Barton, X. Yu, J. Alden, L. Herman, M. V. S. Chandrashekhar, J. Park, P. L. McEuen, J. M. Parpia, H. G. Craighead and M. G. Spencer, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3100–3105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sakamoto, J. van Heijst, O. Lukin and A. D. Schlüter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1030–1069 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5944–5945 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. W. Cai, X. S. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, J. Y. Choi, T. Kim, S. H. Cho and H. J. Chung, Nature, 2011, 479, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. M. Dubois, Z. Zanolli, X. Declerck and J. C. Charlier, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2009, 72, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Rozhkov, G. Giavaras, Y. P. Bliokh, V. Freilikher and F. Nori, Phys. Rep., 2011, 503, 77–114 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Ponomarenko, F. Schedin, M. I. Katsnelson, R. Yang, E. W. Hill, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 356–358 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Mueller, X. Yan, J. A. McGuire and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2679–2682 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, N. Chen and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8869–8890 CAS .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Cao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, X. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. Zeng, J. Hao and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, J. Zhang, Z. Li and M. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 734–738 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, D. Wu, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15221–15223 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Q. Shi, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Yang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3686–3699 RSC .
D. I. Son, B. W. Kwon, D. H. Park, W. S. Seo, Y. Yi, B. Angadi, C. L. Lee and W. K. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 465–471 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuo, M. Shao and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Dong, G. L. Li, N. N. Zhou, R. X. Wang, Y. W. Chi and G. N. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 8378–8382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, W. B. Wu, W. C. Ren, H. M. Cheng, N. J. Tang, W. Zhong and Y. W. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 103107 CrossRef .
D. Pan, L. Guo, J. Zhang, C. Xi, Q. Xue, H. Huang, J. Li, Z. Zhang, W. Yu, Z. Chen, Z. Li and M. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3314–3318 RSC .
S. J. Zhu, J. H. Zhang, C. Y. Qiao, S. J. Tang, Y. F. Li, W. J. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. N. Gao, H. T. Wei, H. Zhang, H. C. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858–6860 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. E. Deng, Y. B. Hou and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tetsuka, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya, K. Okamoto, I. Tajima, R. Ohta and A. Okamoto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5333–5338 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. M. Dai and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932–18935 CrossRef CAS .
J. Campos-Delgado, J. M. Romo-Herrera, X. T. Jia, D. A. Cullen, H. Muramatsu, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, Z. F. Ren, D. J. Smith, Y. Okuno, T. Ohba, H. Kanoh, K. Kaneko, M. Endo, H. Terrones, M. S. Dresselhaus and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2773–2778 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. W. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. R. Wang, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877–880 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872–876 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Higginbotham, D. V. Kosynkin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2059–2069 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Kosynkin, W. Lu, A. Sinitskii, G. Pera, Z. Sun and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 968–974 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morelos-Gómez, S. M. Vega-Díaz, V. J. González, F. Tristán-López, R. Cruz-Silva, K. Fujisawa, H. Muramatsu, T. Hayashi, X. Mi, Y. F. Shi, H. Sakamoto, F. Khoerunnisa, K. Kaneko, B. G. Sumpter, Y. A. Kim, V. Meunier, M. Endo, E. Muñoz-Sandoval and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2261–2272 CrossRef .
R. Wang, Y. F. Hao, Z. Q. Wang, H. Gong and J. T. L. Thong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4844–4850 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Q. Fan, X. J. Xie, L. T. Qu and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2237–2244 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Dalton, S. Collins, E. Muñoz, J. M. Razal, V. H. Ebron, J. P. Ferraris, J. N. Coleman, B. G. Kim and R. H. Baughman, Nature, 2003, 423, 703 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Ericson, H. Fan, H. Peng, V. A. Davis, W. Zhou, J. Sulpizio, Y. Wang, R. Booker, J. Vavro, C. Guthy, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, M. J. Kim, S. Ramesh, R. K. Saini, C. Kittrell, G. Lavin, H. Schmidt, W. W. Adams, W. E. Billups, M. Pasquali, W. F. Hwang, R. H. Hauge, J. E. Fischer and R. E. Smalley, Science, 2004, 305, 1447–1450 CrossRef CAS .
B. Vigolo, A. Pénicaud, C. Coulon, C. Sauder, R. Pailler, C. Journet, P. Bernier and P. Poulin, Science, 2000, 290, 1331–1334 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Davis, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, M. J. Green, P. K. Rai, N. Behabtu, V. Prieto, R. D. Booker, J. Schmidt, E. Kesselman, W. Zhou, H. Fan, W. W. Adams, R. H. Hauge, J. E. Fischer, Y. Cohen, Y. Talmon, R. E. Smalley and M. Pasquali, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 830–834 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Jiang, Q. Q. Li and S. S. Fan, Nature, 2002, 419, 801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Li, I. A. Kinloch and A. H. Windle, Science, 2004, 304, 276–278 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2004, 306, 1358–1361 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, T. S. Zhao, K. L. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Q. Wei, F. Y. Kang, D. H. Wu and H. W. Zhu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12164–12171 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 571 CrossRef .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 613 CrossRef .
Z. L. Dong, C. C. Jiang, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, G. Y. Zhang, X. D. Bai, X. M. Sun, X. R. Wang, E. G. Wang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 538–542 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Hamilton, B. S. Li, X. Yan and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1524–1529 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Xie, L. T. Qu, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Zhu, H. Bai, G. Q. Shi and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6050–6054 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Hu, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Q. Shi, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11865–11867 RSC .
C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5493–5498 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Hu, H. H. Cheng, C. G. Hu, C. C. Jiang, L. Jiang, A. Y. Cao and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 591–595 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, C. G. Hu, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7563–7568 RSC .
Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, Y. Hu, H. H. Cheng, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 11533–11537 CrossRef .
Y. Q. Fan, H. H. Cheng, C. Zhou, X. J. Xie, Y. Liu, L. M. Dai, J. Zhang and L. T. Qu, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1776–1781 RSC .
Y. Ding, H. H. Cheng, C. Zhou, Y. Q. Fan, J. Zhu, H. B. Shao and L. T. Qu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 255605 CrossRef .
C. G. Hu, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. H. Wang, Z. L. Dong, C. C. Jiang, X. Q. Zhai, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5879–5884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Hu, H. Wang and B. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 782–796 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472–485 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wan, G. K. Long, L. Huang and Y. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5342–5358 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tian, A. Konar, X. Huili and D. Jena, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 092109 CrossRef .
S. Bae, H. K. Kim, Y. B. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bi, F. Q. Huang, J. Liang, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3202–3206 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, P. A. Hu, X. N. Wang, Z. L. Wang, D. Q. Liu, B. Yang and W. W. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18283–18290 RSC .
K. K. Kim, A. Reina, Y. Shi, H. Park, L. J. Li, Y. H. Lee and J. Kong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 285205 CrossRef .
A. Kasry, M. A. Kuroda, G. J. Martyna, G. S. Tulevski and A. A. Bol, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3839–3844 CrossRef CAS .
I. Khrapach, F. Withers, T. H. Bointon, D. K. Polyushkin, W. L. Barnes, S. Russo and M. F. Craciun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2844–2849 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zhao, S. F. Pei, W. C. Ren, L. B. Gao and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245–5252 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. H. Liang, Y. Fang, T. F. Qiu, J. Zhang and L. J. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2874–2878 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. W. Tong, X. F. Xu, B. Ozyilmaz and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1514–1518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Zhu and J. H. He, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3558–3566 RSC .
Q. B. Zheng, W. H. Ip, X. Y. Lin, N. Yousefi, K. K. Yeung, Z. G. Li and J. K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6039–6051 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang and Y. H. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8182–8188 CAS .
Y. Xu, H. Bai, G. W. Lu, C. Li and Q. G. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5856–5857 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhang, X. D. Li, H. B. Li, S. Chen, Z. Sun, X. J. Yin and S. M. Huang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5382–5388 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, J. Yum and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xue, J. Liu, H. Chen, R. G. Wang, D. Q. Li, J. Qu and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12124–12127 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kim, M. K. Parvez and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 483, 124–127 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, L. Gao and Y. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 083113 CrossRef .
H. Wang, S. L. Leonard and Y. H. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 10613–10620 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, X. Cui, B. Li and L. S. Li, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1869–1873 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, N. Chaudhary, R. Srivastava, G. D. Sharma, R. Bhardwaj and S. Chand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9960–9963 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. J. Liang and Y. S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3671–3679 RSC .
S. Park, J. An, J. W. Suk and R. S. Ruoff, Small, 2010, 6, 210–212 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liang, Y. Huang, J. Oh, M. Kozlov, D. Sui, S. L. Fang, R. H. Baughman, Y. F. Ma and Y. H. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3778–3784 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Roger and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 133, 10858–10863 CrossRef .
G. W. Roger and J. Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 133, 1250–1255 CrossRef .
A. R. Liu, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 6307–6312 CrossRef CAS .
J. Biener, S. Dasgupta, L. Shao, D. Wang, M. A. Worsley, A. Wittstock, J. R. I. Lee, M. M. Biener, C. A. Orme, S. O. Kucheyev, B. C. Wood, T. M. Willey, A. V. Hamza, J. Weissmüller, H. Hahn and T. F. Baumann, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5083–5087 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Lu, J. H. Liu, Y. Hu and W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3978–3980 RSC .
L. H. Lu, J. H. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. W. Zhang, H. Randriamahazaka and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4317–4321 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liang, L. Huang, N. Li, Y. Huang, Y. P. Wu, S. L. Fang, J. Oh, M. Kozlov, Y. F. Ma, F. F. Li, R. Baughman and Y. F. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4508–4519 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 123–124, 52–68 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089–1115 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wang, T. Maiyalagan and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 781–794 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wei and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3225–3241 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Liu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 RSC .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Dustock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, H. L. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. S. Li, G. C. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. H. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491–7495 RSC .
Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, Y. X. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Y. Yao and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740–4742 RSC .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Lin, G. Waller, Y. Liu, M. L. Liu and C. P. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 884–888 CrossRef CAS .
K. Parvez, S. B. Yang, Y. Hernandez, A. Winter, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9541–9550 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, D. S. Yu, L. M. Dai, D. W. Chang and J. B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6202–6209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, L. P. Zhang, Z. H. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yang, L. J. Zhi, K. Tang, X. L. Feng, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1386–1393 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Fan, J. Yan, L. J. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. L. Zhang, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. J. Liang and Y. S. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534–551 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, B. Luo, Y. Jia, X. Li, B. Wang, Q. Song, F. Kang and L. J. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6348–6355 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wen, X. C. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. M. Cui, G. H. Lu, X. L. Feng and J. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Sheng, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 CrossRef .
L. F. Lai, H. P. Yang, L. Wang, B. K. Teh, J. Q. Zhong, H. Chou, L. W. Chen, W. Chen, Z. X. Shen, R. S. Ruoff and J. Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5941–5951 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
J. B. Hou, Y. Y. Shao, M. W. Ellis, R. B. Moore and B. L. Yi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15384–15402 RSC .
L. M. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31–42 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Y. Liang, G. Y. Zheng, Y. G. Li, Y. Cui and H. J. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7931–7935 CAS .
S. Patchkovskii, J. S. Tse, S. N. Yurchenko, L. Zhechkov, T. Heine and G. Seifert, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10439–10444 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ataca, E. Akturk, S. Ciraci and H. Ustunel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 043123 CrossRef .
G. K. Dimitrakakis, E. Tylianakis and G. E. Froudakis, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3166–3170 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Parambhath, R. Nagar and S. Ramaprabhu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7826–7833 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Kim, W. G. Hong, H. Y. Yu, Y. K. Han, S. M. Lee, S. J. Chang, H. R. Moon, Y. Jun and H. J. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 1480–1484 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Zhipan Zhang	Zhipan Zhang received his doctorate degree from École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in 2008. After working at Dysol Ltd and a short stay in Monash University and the University of Calgary, he is now an Associate Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology. His research focuses on energy-related applications of new materials, particularly in photovoltaics and solar fuels.
Liangti Qu	Liangti Qu received a Ph.D. in Chemistry from Tsinghua University (Beijing, China) in 2004. He is now a Professor of Chemistry at the Beijing Institute of Technology and leads the nanocarbon research group. His research interests in materials chemistry mainly focus on the synthesis, functionalization and application of nanomaterials with carbon–carbon conjugated structures, including carbon nanotubes, graphene and conducting polymers.

 	Fig. 1  Some functional graphene structures from 0D GQDs to 3D frameworks.	 

 	Fig. 2  Emission images of aqueous dispersions of amino-functionalized GQDs (af-GQDs) hydrothermally prepared at different temperatures (upper) and af-GQD@polydimethylsiloxane hybrids (bottom) under irradiation of a 365 nm UV lamp (reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Atomic force microscope (AFM) image of GNRs covered by a protective etch mask. GNRs with widths ranging from 10–100 nm and lengths of 1–2 μm can be lithographically prepared in this setup (reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2007 by the American Physical Society). (b) (left) Photograph of a polymer solution with GNRs stably suspended in the solution. (right) Schematic drawing of a GNR with two units of a polymer chain adsorbed on top of the graphene via π-stacking. (c) An AFM image of selected GNRs with widths in a sub-10 nm region. All scale bars indicate 100 nm (reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2008 the American Association for the Advancement of Science). (d) Representation of the gradual unzipping of one wall of a carbon nanotube to form a nanoribbon. (e) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of a folded, 4 μm long single-layer nanoribbon on a silicon surface (reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the CVD growth of graphene with a Ni nanowire template and the subsequent chemical removal of the Ni nanowire to form a graphene tubular structure (reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (b) Scheme of the fabrication of GQD nanotubes and their application in surface-enhanced Raman scattering (reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A four-meter-long GO fiber wound on a Teflon drum of 2 cm in diameter (reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group). (b) Schematic illustration of the assembly mechanism of the GO fiber in CTAB solution (reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). (c and d) The handmade planar and 3D geometric structures of highly flexible graphene fibers, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) A photograph of a two-layer graphene LB film on quartz with part of it left clear. The scale bar is 10 mm (reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group). (b) An SEM side-view image of 10 μm thick GO paper. The scale bar is 2 μm (reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2007 Nature Publishing Group). (c) A 10 μm thick chemically converted graphene film by vacuum filtration. The film showed a shiny metallic luster and a strip (top-right inset) from the film was bent to demonstrate its flexibility (reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group). (d) Cross-section SEM image of a graphene film showing the orderly layered structure of the film (scale bar: 1 μm). (e) Illustration of asymmetric plasma treatments of the graphene film with hexane and oxygen, and the corresponding surface wettabilities. Water contact angles for the Hex-P (left inset) and O2-P (right inset) treated surfaces were ∼90° and ∼15°, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  Different functional materials derived from the versatile 3DGF platform. (a) A field emission SEM image of the Pt/PdCu on 3DGF displaying the porous nature of 3DGF. (b) Magnified image of (a), showing Pt/PdCu nanoboxes uniformly anchored on 3DGF (reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (c) The compression-recovery processes of deformation-tolerant 3D graphene–polypyrrole matrix (reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (d) A photograph of a piece of ultralight N-doped 3DGF (1.8 cm × 1.1 cm × 1.2 cm in size) standing on a dandelion. (e) A photograph showing the non-flammable nature of the N-doped 3DGF in a burning flame. (f) N-doped 3DGF adsorbing gasoline dyed with Sudan III (reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A photograph of solution-processed GO thin films on the plastic substrate (reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2008 Nature Publishing Group). (b) A transparent ultralarge-area graphene film transferred on a 35 inch PET sheet (reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2010 Nature Publishing Group). (c) Transmittance of the graphene films, inset of the photograph shows transferred graphene/PET films on the university logo (reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (d) Left, schematic crystal structure of a few-layer graphene intercalated with FeCl3. Right, comparison of square resistance versus transmittance at 550 nm for FeCl3-FLG samples to those of ITO, carbon-nanotube films and other doped graphene materials, with the grey area indicating the current limit of transparent conductors (reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 9  Preparation route of the N-GF counter electrode from the GO suspension (reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Curvature change of an asymmetrically modified graphene strip as a function of applied CV potential within ±1.2 V. Insets show the status of the graphene strip at −1.2, 0, and 1.2 V, respectively. (b) The length changes of the graphene strips treated with Hex-P and O2-P under applied square wave potential of ±1.2 V with a frequency of 0.05 Hz, where L and ΔL were defined as the length and length change of graphene actuator (reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) Photograph of the as-prepared 3D G–PPy pillar. (d) The strain responses of the 3D G–PPy actuator as a function of cyclic periods at an applied square wave potential of ±0.8 V (reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (e) Schematic illustration of the bending actuation for the graphene–PDA actuator without and with an applied direct current (reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A digital photo image of a transparent N-graphene film floating on water. (b) Rotating-ring disk electrode voltammograms for the ORR in air-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the C-graphene electrode (red line), Pt/C electrode (green line), and N-graphene electrode (blue line). Electrode rotating rate: 1000 rpm. Scan rate: 0.01 V s−1 (reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (c) Fabrication of N and S dual-doped mesoporous graphene (N-S-G) nanosheets from GO (reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (d) Structures of N-doped GQDs 1, 2 and an undoped GQD 3 with different conjugation size (reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The specific capacitances calculated from the discharge curves at a wide range of current densities, showing the excellent capacitive properties of N-doped 3DGF (reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH). (b) The specific capacitances at different compression states for 1000 cycles, verifying the robustness of the deformation-tolerant supercapacitor (reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). (c) Photograph of an electrochemically reduced GO electrode (upper) and cross-sectional SEM image of the electrode (reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group). (d) Specific capacitance of different surface-functionalized graphene after loading 10 wt% PANi as a function of the scan rate (from 2 to 100 mV s−1) in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, where the inset shows a cartoon depicting the PANi-functionalized amino-modified GO (reprinted with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic structure of the Li–O2 cell catalyzed by the MnCo2O4–graphene network hybrid, with the bottom showing MnCo2O4 nanoparticles covalently bonded to N-doped GO sheets through carbon–oxygen–metal and carbon–nitrogen–metal bonds (reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry). (b) Snapshot from the grand canonical Monte Carlo simulations of pure (upper) and lithium-doped (bottom) pillared graphene structures for hydrogen storage at 77 K and 3 bar, with hydrogen molecules in green and lithium atoms in purple (reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
