Stability progress of perovskite solar cells dependent on the crystalline structure: From 3D ABX 3 to 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite absorbers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA10444A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA10444A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5898-5933Stability progress of perovskite solar cells dependent on the crystalline structure: From 3D ABX3 to 2D Ruddlesden–Popper perovskite absorbers

        
          
            Farzaneh 
            Arabpour Roghabadi
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Maryam 
            Alidaei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seyede Maryam 
            Mousavi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tahereh 
            Ashjari
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ali Shokrolahzadeh 
            Tehrani
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vahid 
            Ahmadi
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Seyed Mojtaba 
            Sadrameli
          
        
      *b
aOptoelectronic and Nanophotonic Research Group, Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, P.O. Box: 14115-196, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: V_ahmadi@modares.ac.ir
bFaculty of Chemical Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: sadrameli@modares.ac.ir
Received 
      30th October 2018
    , Accepted 21st January 2019First published on 23rd January 2019AbstractAmong all types of photovoltaics, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have received extensive attention because of their potential for achieving cheap, lightweight, and fast fabricated devices. Although PSCs exhibit a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of up to 23%, they face issues regarding commercialization such as short lifetime. Remarkably, the most important key factors that regulate the durability of the devices are the type and crystalline structure of perovskite (PSK) materials. Though CH3NH3PbX3 is the first and also the widely utilized material as a light absorber in PSCs, it suffers from undesirable moisture stability, structural phase alteration, and photo and thermal instabilities. In this regard, the PSK crystal structure has been studied as a key factor to prolong the device lifetime. This review presents the progress of the changes in the PSK structure from 3 dimensional CH3NH3PbX3 to mixed cation or halide based PSKs and finally to Ruddlesden–Popper PSK two dimensional (2D) homologous structures regarding the lifetime improvement. To obtain insight on a realistic path towards durable and commercially viable PSCs, how the crystal formation energy, hydrophobicity, interface of the grains, and structural phase strength have been tuned to overcome the lack of the durability in PSK devices and the current status has been studied.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the demand for sustainable and clean energy resources has led to intense growth in the development of solar cells that directly convert sun light into electricity. Photovoltaics is one of the most promising technologies for harvesting the sun's energy as the largest noncarbon-based natural source. In order to meet the goal of commercialization, photovoltaic technology should be efficient, stable, and of low cost. Silicon photovoltaic cells as first generation solar cells are stable, with a long lifetime around 25 years and power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) as high as 20%, but their fabrication process is too complex and expensive. Photovoltaic uptake has been growing to introduce efficient alternatives to conventional solar cells such as crystalline silicon solar cells.1,2 The least costly and simplest fabrication method for solar cells is solution processing which provides roll-to-roll printing as a beneficial method for large scale production.3 One of the most promising technologies utilized for decreasing the manufacturing costs of solar cells is the perovskite solar cell (PSC)4,5 which has received extensive attention because of its potential for achieving cheap, lightweight, and fast fabricated solar cells. Although the PCE of PSCs reached up to 22%, their short lifetime and fast degradation still remain as the main challenges. Up to now, a lot of research has been undertaken to study and investigate the degradation of PSCs. Generally, the degradation of a complete device is related to structure, all the components of the device, fabrication, and operating atmospheric conditions. In this work, after a brief review of the history of PSCs, a general overview of the stability challenge in these devices is presented. Then, this study focuses on the progress of the changes in the PSK crystalline structure beginning from the 3D ABX3 based on CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) to the mixed halide and cation PSKs and finally to low dimensional PSKs to improve the device performance. In addition, because of the crucial role of the device interfaces in determining the stability, interfacial engineering related to the PSK layer is also focused on.
2 History of PSCs
Organic–inorganic hybrid PSKs (CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Br, I)) were first used as visible-light sensitizers for liquid-junction-sensitized solar cells in 2009.6 In these devices, the dye pigment in DSSCs was replaced by two organic–inorganic hybrid halide-based PSKs, CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3. Extremely unstable devices were achieved with PCEs around 3% which was much lower than the PCEs of the devices based on Ru-based molecular dyes.6–8 The PCE of the PSK-sensitized photocells reached 6.5% by optimizing the thickness of the photoanode and modifying their interfaces.9 The main problem in the liquid-junction-sensitized devices was their short lifetime (a few minutes), because the PSK was easily dissolved in liquid electrolyte. This problem encouraged the researchers to concentrate on solid-state hole transporting materials (HTMs). A device with 9.7% PCE was generated by utilizing 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-dimethoxyphenyl-amine-)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiroMeOTAD) as a solid-state HTM.10 At that time, a PSK structure based on CsSnI3 was also used as a solid state hole conductor in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).11 A PCE of higher than 10.9% was delivered for a solid-state sensitized solar cell based on a PSK absorber and alumina as a microstructured insulating scaffold in 2012.12 After achieving these advances, hybrid organic–inorganic PSKs were significantly studied by researchers. The PCE of PSCs showed a rapid ascending trend and reached up to 23% by introducing and optimizing two structures based on the mesoporous network and the planar heterojunction. Thus far, a PSC with a PCE of 23.3% has been reported as the record by the NREL. In contrast, the stability issue has still remained as a main challenge that has gained less attention (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Progress in PSC efficiencies and durability (NREL). 
The structures of PSCs can be divided into three categories: PSK sensitized mesoporous structure, planar heterojunction structure, and inverted structure. In all PSK structures, after absorption of the incident photons by CH3NH3PbX3, excitons with a low binding energy are generated which dissociated into the free charge carrier without needing acceptors. But, to achieve efficient absorption, charge transport, and charge collection, different structures of PSCs were presented.2 The basic architecture of mesoporous devices is similar to that of DSSCs with a solid HTM. In these devices, halide PSK fills a mesoporous network and forms a thin capping layer on the top. The filled network is sandwiched between two contacts with different work functions. In order to prevent direct contact between the anode and cathode, a thick compact TiO2 layer was deposited under the mesoporous layer.13 Two types of mesoporous networks have been used in mesoporous devices, namely active and passive. Active networks such as TiO2 nanoparticle networks act as both a scaffold for the PSK material and an electron transporting layer (ETL). By utilizing the TiO2 network, a large interface area between the absorber material and ETL is provided. Passive networks such as alumina mesoporous networks play only the supporter role.14 In the planar architecture, a PSK absorber layer is sandwiched between the ETL and hole transporting layer (HTL) without a mesoporous scaffold. Two heterojunctions are provided which are the junction between the absorber and HTL, and the one between the absorber and ETL. Different types of materials such as Cu2O15 are used as the HTL, and a compact layer such as a TiO2 layer is usually used as the ETL. In the inverted planar architecture, photogenerated electrons are collected in the cathode and photogenerated holes are collected in the anode.2
3 Stability of PSCs regarding PSK structure
Generally, issues of PSK device longevity can be addressed by two methods, the intrinsic and extrinsic methods. The extrinsic method includes using stable layers such as stable and hydrophobic inorganic and organic HTLs15 and ETLs,16 engineering interfacial contacts,17 device encapsulation,18 and defect passivation, leading to the lifetime enhancement of PSCs. For instance, TiO2 as the ETL can reduce the stability of PSCs under light irradiation. Thus, Shin and co-workers used lanthanum (La)-doped BaSnO3 (LBSO) PSK as an alternative ETL. They used the superoxide colloidal solution route to prepare an LBSO electrode and achieved a PCE as high as 21.2%. The long term photostability of both devices was monitored by storing them in a N2-filled container at a temperature of 25 °C under AM 1.5 G illumination provided by a xenon lamp. The TiO2 based PSC showed an abrupt decrease in PCE upon initial illumination but the LBSO-based PSC retained 93% of its initial PCE after 1000 h of full Sun illumination.19
The intrinsic method involves developing new PSK materials which are stable against moisture, heat, and light via composition engineering and modifying the original chemistry, and is explored in this review.
In general, issues related to the stability of the PSK crystals can be listed as follows (Fig. 2):
 Fig. 2  Issues related to the stability of the PSK layer in PSCs. 
• Thermal stability
• Moisture stability
• Stability of structural phase (structural phase transition)
• Photo-stability
Intrinsic modification of the PSK structure by composition engineering is one of the main strategies studied to overcome these challenges. Herein, the progress of the stability improvement of PSCs by composition engineering, structural modifications, and interfacial engineering of the PSK layer is summarized.
3.1 Stability of 3D ABX3 PSK based PSCs
As mentioned, the typical structure of 3D PSKs has an ABX3 formula that can adapt different crystal structures depending on the size and interaction of the A cation and the corner-sharing BX6 octahedra.20 In principle, in this structure, A+ ions are mainly responsible for maintaining the electroneutrality and cohesion of the lattices, though the electronic band structures of organic–inorganic PSKs are governed by the electronic orbitals of the X− and B+ ions.21 Therefore, the A+ cation plays a critical role in affecting the symmetry of the PSK lattice and the associated phase transition, which will also influence the resulting band structures and relevant optoelectronic properties.22 In organic–inorganic halide PSKs that are employed as absorbers in PSCs, the A+ cation is usually a monovalent cation (e.g. Cs+, CH3NH3+, and HC(NH2)2+), B represents a divalent metal (e.g. Pb2+ and Sn2+), and the X site is occupied by a halogen ion (I−, Cl−, or Br−). The PSK stability is strongly influenced by the Madelung electrostatic potential, and the electrostatic stabilization of organic–inorganic hybrid halide PSKs with a small lattice energy is remarkably lower than that of metal oxide PSKs.23

3.1.1 Stability progress of 3D-PSK based PSCs regarding A+ cations. 
As mentioned, the first PSCs used CH3NH3PbX3 (X = I, Br) PSKs as the absorber layer.6 Different stabilities and performances were achieved via introducing various types of cations such as organic, inorganic, and hybrid molecules to fill the A+ site of the PSK lattice. The trend of this progress is summarized below.
Methylammonium based 3D-PSKs-MAPbX3 – MAPbI3 are not only the first PSK materials that were used as a visible-light sensitizer for solar cells, but also the most widely used PSK in all configurations of PSCs.2,4,6 Although PCEs higher than 20% were achieved for MAPbI3 based devices,24 their quick degradation or unsatisfactory stability against moisture, heat, and light have been observed since the early studies and have still remained substantial challenges.23,25,26 Among all effective parameters on the stability of PSK layers, moisture is a key factor and was called the catalyzer of the degradation process. In the beginning, Frost et al.23 reported that water catalyzes the CH3NH3I (MAI) decomposition through reversible reactions (1) and (2) presented below:23 [(CH3NH3+)PbI3]n + H2O ↔ [(CH3NH3+)n−1(PbI3)n][H3O+] + CH3NH2(1) [(CH3NH3+)n−1(PbI3)n][H3O+] ↔ HI + PbI2 + [(CH3NH3+)PbI3]n−1 + H2O(2)
As shown, methylamine and hydroiodic acid are the byproducts of PSK decomposition, and both exist in the gas phase at room temperature because of their low boiling points (−6 °C and −34 °C for HI and methylamine, respectively). As a result, in an open system, they are continuously released and drive the decomposition reaction forward23 although some of the byproduct molecules can be trapped within the PSK structure and act as defects.27 Xu et al. argued that PSK crystal degradation results in a very unstable state and occurs during crystal formation or under radiation. Prolonged exposure to X-ray radiation populated antibonding C–N orbitals in CH3NH3+, leading to the elongation of bond length in CH3NH3+. As schematically presented in Fig. 3, in this unstable situation, CH3NH3+ may relax back to the initial structure, or may dissociate into a metastable arrangement of CH3I–PbI2 defects and trapped NH3.27 Therefore, a single water molecule is sufficient to degrade the PSK completely to PbI2 and a closed system results in partial decomposition of the PSK.23 In comparison, Niu et al.28 proposed that the released HI remains in the PSK film and after combination with O2 or under light illumination, produces I2 which is in the solid phase (reactions (3–6)). CH3NH3PbI3 (s) ↔ CH3NH3I (aq) + PbI2 (s)(3) CH3NH3I (aq) ↔ CH3NH2 (aq) + HI (aq)(4) 4HI (aq) + O2 ↔ 2I2 (s) + 2H2O(5) 2HI (aq) ↔ H2 (g) + I2(6)
 Fig. 3  Proposed mechanism for the formation of CH3I–PbI2 defect sites in MAPbI3 through dissociation during crystal formation or under light radiation. Reprinted with permission.27 
In contrast to the previous work of Niu et al.,28 Yang et al. reported that degradation of CH3NH3PbI3 starts by the formation of a hydrated intermediate containing isolated PbI6 octahedra ((CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O). They suggested that the initial step of the PSK disintegration process was not an acid–base reaction of the methylammonium cations, but rather the hydration of the PSK film leading to the formation of hydrate compositions (reaction (7)):29 4CH3NH3PbI3 + 2H2O ↔ (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2(7)
In another study, Conings et al. showed that during PSK decomposition, all Pb2+ was not converted to PbI2, while metallic Pb clusters were also formed and, similar to previous studies, water acted as a catalyst for the conversion of Pb2+ into metallic Pb (Pb0).30 The effect of environmental conditions on the stability of CH3NH3PbI3 PSK devices revealed not only that the PSK was decomposed because of the hydrophilicity of MAI, but also that MAI was disintegrated by reacting with oxygen and water. Further, as exhibited in Fig. 4a, even in the absence of oxygen and water, the PSK was decomposed at 85 °C but at a slower rate.30 Again, Han et al. confirmed that the humidity had a stronger impact on the device stability than temperature even above the phase transition temperature though higher temperatures accelerated the decomposition rate. Like in other research studies, they argued that the degradation was principally because of the decomposition of MAPbI3, as a result of reaction with H2O.25
 Fig. 4  (a) Photovoltaic characteristics of PSCs exposed to a temperature of 85 °C for 24 h under different atmospheric conditions.30 Reprinted with permission. (b) Schematic diagram of the degradation of MAPbI3 films in moisture along the in-plane direction. Reprinted with permission.35 
In the study performed by Leguy et al., more details about the reaction occuring between the PSK and water molecules and its dynamics were reported. They illustrated that hydrated crystal phases are formed when CH3NH3PbI3 is exposed to water vapor at room temperature through reaction (8) which is fully reversible. Actually, they argued that the formed monohydrate is an intermediate product that can be easily converted back to CH3NH3PbI3 after the material is dried. Further, the formation of the dihydrate is initiated by prolonging the exposure time to water vapor which leads to the formation of PbI2 and the release of two water molecules. They observed that when hydrate crystals were kept in air with a relative humidity (RH) of 35% at 21 °C, the reverse dehydration reaction occurred. Excess water can result in the dissolution of CH3NH3+ which leads to the irreversible degradation of the PSK through reaction (9). They proposed that the presence of condensed water determines the reaction to be reversible or irreversible degradation, because in the absence of the liquid water molecules, PbI2 did not appear.31 4CH3NH3PbI3 + 4H2O ↔ 4(CH3NH3PbI3·H2O) ↔ (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2 + 2H2O(8) (9)
As stated, oxygen and light are other key factors that strongly affect the degradation of PSCs. In this regard, the reaction of superoxide (O2−) with the methylammonium moiety was the initiator of degradation. According to the proposed mechanism by Aristidou et al., the free electron in the excited CH3NH3PbI3 (CH3NH3PbI*3) can transfer to molecular oxygen and form superoxide (reactions (10) and (11)). As a result, the generated superoxide attacks the PSK material and disintegrates it, leading to the formation of methylamine (MeNH2), lead iodide, iodine, and water molecules (reaction (12)).32 (10) (11) (12)
Domanski et al. kept the PSK device under white LED illumination and indicated that the presence of oxygen without illumination, in a dry atmosphere, is not harmful and cannot cause degradation of the device, whereas high levels of humidity by itself can cause very rapid degradation. In their study, the catalytic effect of illumination, in the presence of water and oxygen, on device degradation was observed.33In a study performed by Sun and co-workers, under illumination, irreversible degradation of PSK crystals occurred in the presence of oxygen even at levels as low as 1%, though the oxygen effect on degradation was not studied as much as the effect of water molecules. The oxygen induced degradation was attributed to more superoxide formation in the presence of more grain boundaries.34 This shows the importance of the fabrication of devices in a controlled atmosphere.
In addition to the elemental composition of the PSK layer, the stoichiometry of the precursors is among the main parameters that control the structural properties and the stability of the layer and device. The stoichiometric ratios of CH3NH3I:PbI2 between 3:1 and 1:1 in the precursor solution are usually employed which strongly affects the device properties. As reported, when a precursor solution containing excess cation halides (CH3NH3I) is utilized for PSK formation, in situ dissociation of cations (CH3NH3+) occurs. The excess iodide ions (I−) mostly participate in the formation of iodoplumbate complexes such as PbI3− and PbI42−. It was evidenced that the released energy from the crystal formation reaction can dissociate the free CH3NH3I molecules and iodoplumbate complexes into smaller molecules such as CH3I and NH3. By increasing the I− concentration in the precursor, more complexes are formed and subsequently more dissociations occur. As confirmed by XPS analysis (Fig. 5a), the produced components are mostly trapped in the PSK crystals and can act as defects which cause the stability loss. The proposed mechanism for the in situ dissociation of cations is presented in Fig. 5b.36
 Fig. 5  (a) The high-resolution XPS spectra of the C 1s region of films P1 (MAI:PbI2; 1:1 molar ratio) and P3 (MAI:PbI2; 3:1 molar ratio), (b) a proposed mechanism for the in situ dissociation of CH3NH3I and iodide complexes during the formation of CH3NH3PbI3. Reprinted with permission.36 
Particularly, using excess PbI2 has been considered as one of the preferred techniques to improve the PCE of CH3NH3PbI3 based devices37,38 though its undesired effect on the stability of the device has been reported. It is commonly believed that its desired effect is because defect passivation occurs at the PSK grain boundaries and surfaces.39,40 It was also argued that a small amount of excess PbI2 can improve the morphology by increasing the grain size as well as the uniformity of the PSK layer.41 Liu et al. showed that the device containing unreacted PbI2 degrades faster than the PbI2 free device under illumination even when stored in an inert atmosphere.40 According to the Gujar et al. study, although a very small amount of excess PbI2 can lead to PCE enhancement, it undesirably affects the stability of the device and accelerates the degradation of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer in a humid air atmosphere. They argued that in the presence of excess PbI2 in CH3NH3PbI3, the probability of the non-reversible reaction (13) occurring is enhanced. Additionally, a direct relation was observed between the amount of excess PbI2 and the rate of degradation.39 Likewise, Yerramili et al. confirmed the beneficial effects of adding excess amounts of Pb to the PSK film as a result of grain boundary passivation and altering the band structure at the interface of the PSK layer and the ETL. Further, their study stated that 5 mol% excess Pb was the optimal concentration with respect to PCE and stability of the PSC with an ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/Ag structure.42 (13)
The PSK microstructure has also been considered as one of the main key factors in the device degradation process. Interestingly, Wang et al. observed good stability of PSK single crystals that were stored in ambient air for more than two years. As a result, they concluded that CH3NH3PbI3 PSK materials might not be intrinsically unstable. They suggested that the moisture-induced degradation of 3D PSK films initiates from the grain boundaries. Therefore, the faster degradation and lower stability of the polycrystalline PSK material were attributed to the grain boundaries or grain size. They showed an increase in moisture stability by increasing the grain size and argued that water molecules permeate through or react with the grain boundaries quicker than with the top surface of the grains. In their study, the fastest degradation was observed in the films with the lowest average grain size of 297 nm in which almost 85% of their total surface was degraded after storage in a moist environment (RH around 85% adjusted by N2 gas) for 7 h. However, the PSK film with an average grain size of 678 nm showed only 10% degradation under similar conditions. Further, it was indicated that degradation of the grains was along the in-plane direction and amorphous grain boundaries include a higher content of water compared with the grain interior. In addition, in the solution processed CH3NH3PbI3 film, impurity segregation at grain boundaries is accompanied with the formation of an amorphous intergranular film that can be attributed to non-stoichiometric excess residuals in the grain boundaries (Fig. 4b).35 Sun et al. similarly argued that in the non-uniform PSK layer, the degradation initiates from the grain boundaries and disperses towards the bulk of the crystal grains. Thus, degradation was significantly reduced in films containing larger and more uniform grains compared to that in the films with smaller grains.34 Gomez et al. also confirmed that under light and voltage stress, the PSK layer degradation initiates from the PSK grain boundaries. They used photoconductive atomic force microscopy (pcAFM) to scan the PSK films under illumination and voltage stress. According to the photocurrent maps and topography images of the PSK film during light exposure shown in Fig. 6a and b, the photocurrent is distributed uniformly inside the PSK grains with discontinuities matching the grain boundaries. It is clearly shown that the degradation propagated from the grains' edge towards their bulk. Remarkably, the effect at the grain boundaries was significantly accelerated when the layers were kept under a combination of voltage and light stress which is more similar to the operation conditions of the device (Fig. 6c). Under these conditions, the effect at the grain boundaries in 2 h resembles that observed for the PSK layer kept for 24 h under illumination but without bias. Because the experiment was performed in dry air and no significant change was observed in the roughness of the PSK layer, Gomez et al. disproved that the diffusion of water from the boundaries into the bulk PSK grains was the reason for the propagation of the grain boundary effect. Additionally, the grain boundaries were defined to be responsible for the non-reversible power loss in the PSCs. Thus, grain boundaries act as the active sites for degradation that need to be passivated or minimized to have a stable device.43 In contrast to the aforementioned studies, according to investigation of local photoconductivity performed by Chu et al., the degradation of the PSK film did not initiate from grain boundaries but began with the disintegration of grains rather than nucleation and propagation from visible boundaries between neighbouring grains.44
 Fig. 6  (a) Topography (top), corresponding pcAFM current (bottom) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image (inset) of the PSK layer; the grain boundaries are marked by arrows; (b) pcAFM maps (top) and the corresponding topography images (bottom) of the PSK layer during light exposure for different times, and (c) pcAFM map of the PSK layer under the combination of voltage and light stress obtained by performing three passes with a −0.2 V biased tip and waiting one hour between each scan. Reprinted with permission.43 
It was evidenced that CH3NH3PbI3 is not intrinsically stable while heating to temperatures near the higher range of working temperatures under sunlight and shows crystal phase transition.30 Therefore, here a brief review of the crystal structure transition phenomenon in PSKs is reported. The crystal structure transition is one of the main factors that determine the stability of PSK materials and strongly depends on the nature of the materials.25 In principle, the Goldschmidt tolerance factor is used to estimate the PSK ABX3 structure and is as follows: (1)where rA, rB, and rX are the effective ionic radii of the cation in the cubo-octahedral A site, the cation in the octahedral B site, and the anion, respectively. The correlation between the tolerance factor and the PSK structure is illustrated in Fig. 7. A tolerance factor (t) value between 0.8 and 1.0 is favorable for a cubic hybrid halide PSK structure. These materials tend to form an orthorhombic structure when t < 0.8, and a hexagonal structure when t > 1. PSK materials usually have more than one structure depending on the preparation method and temperature.20,45
 Fig. 7  Correlation between tolerance factor (t) and PSK crystal structure. Reprinted with permission.20 
Generally, there are two phase transitions that occur in the PSK materials leading to three distinct structural modifications that are the high temperature α-phase, the intermediate temperature β-phase, and the low temperature γ-phase. The non-PSK yellow phase is also termed the δ-phase and occurs in δ-HC(NH2)2PbI3 (FAPbI3) representing a 1D array of octahedra. Fig. 8 shows the schematic of the phase transitions in the PSK materials.46 For instance, the α-phase was found for MASnI3 and FASnI3 at room temperature.46
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the phase transition occurring in the Pb and Sn organic–inorganic hybrid PSK materials. Reprinted with permission.46 
MAPbI3 adopts the β-phase at room temperature which is distorted and the α-phase is formed after phase transition which occurs at temperatures higher than 50 °C (Fig. 9). Thus, its reversible phase transition from the tetragonal to cubic phase occurs at 55 °C which is in the range of the operating temperature of solar cells. Further, the thermal and photo stability of PSCs can be significantly affected by this structural phase transition.30,46,47
 Fig. 9  Phase instability of CH3NH3PbI3. 
Some efforts have been taken to improve the long-term stability of MA based PSKs and subsequently the device lifetime. Choi et al. doped MAPbI3 with Cs+ to optimize the optical and electrical properties of the PSK. This doping improved the PCE from 5.51% for the MAPbI3 device to 7.68% for the Cs0.1MA0.9PbI3 device. However, their long-term stability tests indicated that under ambient conditions (temperature of 20 °C, 11% RH), both devices showed poor stability. This was attributed to the acidic nature of PEDOT:PSS and rapid oxidation of the Al electrode.26 Similar to the previous work, Niu et al. also used cesium doping in the MAPbI3 lattice to form CsxMA1−xPbI3 PSK for overcoming the stability challenge. A PCE as high as 18.1% was achieved for the CsxMA1−x PbI3 PSC with x = 0.09. Stability tests showed good thermal stability with x = 0.09 and 0.02 and on further increasing the amount of Cs, the stability and performance of the constructed solar cells rapidly decreased. In the case of high Cs content, the higher bandgap of Cs based PSK and segregation and phase change from black to yellow of CsPbI3, were known to be the reasons for PCE reduction and low stability in the CsxMA1−xPbI3 lattice. Stability investigations in different atmospheres comprising nitrogen and dry and humid air showed the critical effect of oxygen on the decomposition rate. Halide deficiencies caused due to the loss of halide in the form of MAI precursors through the annealing process led to the formation of unsaturated Pb atoms and thus created recombination states. By introducing Cs to the MAPbI3 films, due to the higher stability of Cs in comparison with MA, there would be less loss of halide which leads to less unsaturated Pb and better performance of the device. With x = 0.09, there was no additional trace of unsaturated lead. Final stability evaluation under air exposure to 85 °C showed that for x = 0 and x = 0.09 about 60% and 20% reduction of performance occurred after 60 min, respectively. The achieved improvement was attributed to the partial substitution of MA with Cs atoms which suppressed thermal loss and oxidation of MA through less MA occupation in the A site of the PSK crystal and compressed crystal structure.48
According to these results, it seems that overcoming the thermal and photo-stability challenges of CH3NH3PbI3 is slightly difficult. We summarize the issues related to the stability of the MA-based PSKs in Fig. 10. As stated, they are not thermo and photo-stable and suffer from halide segregation instabilities and strong moisture sensitivity, and are thus likely to be unsuitable for the large scale production of PSCs.
 Fig. 10  A summary of the stability issues for MA-based PSKs. 
3.1.1.1 Formamidinium based 3D-PSKs; FAPbX3. 
To overcome some of the challenges of MA based PSKs including thermal instability and photo-instability49 and also to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, formamidinium (FA)-based PSKs were introduced which have longer charge diffusion lengths and extended light harvesting capabilities than the MA ones.50 However, pure FAPbI3 lacks structural stability at room temperature and a general observation is that MA-based PSK materials are more stable than FA-based ones against humidity.46 The strong tendency of FA for dissociation to ammonia and sym-triazine can be one of the main reasons for its lower stability.51 FAPbI3 can crystallize into either a photoactive PSK α-phase (black trigonal PSK) or a photoinactive non-PSK hexagonal δ-phase (yellow hexagonal non-PSK) depending on the temperature of heat treatment.46 The α-phase of FAPbI3 is more thermally stable than MAPbI3 because of the relatively larger FA cation compared to the volatile MA cation. Though the α-FAPbI3 is metastable at temperatures lower than 160 °C it tends to convert to the thermodynamically more stable non-PSK δ-phase which is accelerated at high humidity.52
A FAPbI3 based device with 4.3% PCE was first fabricated by Koh et al. It was shown that the band gap of FAPbI3 is 1.42 eV which is closer to the optimum value and lower than the band gap of MAPbI3 (1.52 eV). Through the synthesis of FAPbI3, a black trigonal PSK polymorph and a yellow hexagonal non-PSK polymorph were formed. Their investigation revealed that the photoactive black phase is unstable in a humid atmosphere, even less stable than MA based PSKs.53 At the same time, Eperon et al. also introduced a FAPbI3 device with a PCE of 14.2%. In their work, although FAPbI3 was more thermally stable than MAPbI3, both PSKs showed degradation in ambient air at a RH approaching 100%. In the case of thermal stability, FAPbI3 was fully stable without discoloration at 150 °C in air, whereas the CH3NH3PbI3 PSK became discolored after 30 min.54 Lee et al. also used FAPbI3 instead of MAPbI3 and achieved a device with a PCE of 16.01% and superior photo-stability to the MAPbI3-based one. The higher photo-stability of FAPbI3 devices was demonstrated by their J–V curve dependency on illumination over 10 scans. They reported that FAPbI3 did not show structural phase transition in the temperature range of 25 to 150 °C.50
The high potential of FAPbI3 devices for achieving better performance than MAPbI3 devices and observation of no phase transition at the temperature range of 25 up to 150 °C50 have encouraged researchers to improve the structural stability of FAPbI3. One approach to solve the instability of black FAPbI3 against humidity is employing mixed cation or halide PSKs. In this regard, Binek et al. stabilized the α-phase of FAPbI3 by incorporating MA as a smaller cation with a high dipole moment without any lattice shrinkage and changes in the optical properties. Though in pure FAPbI3 a phase transition occurred at 130 °C, MA-stabilized samples did not show any phase transition in the temperature range of 25 to 250 °C. Incorporating MA resulted in stabilization of the α-phase FAPbI3 PSK due to the higher dipole moment of the MA cation that led to stronger interactions with the PbI6 octahedral cage. The photoexcited species lifetime increased in the samples containing 10 and 15% MAI. The most efficient device contained 15% MAI and exhibited a PCE of 8.7%. It was argued that the structure stability can be enhanced by increasing the number of hydrogen bonds between iodide ions and the hydrogen of the ammonium moiety in the cation because the MA molecules with higher dipole moment than FA tend to form stronger hydrogen bonds. The electron density in FA is distributed homogeneously over the nitrogen–carbon–nitrogen bond, while in the MA molecules, it is concentrated at the nitrogen atom. Another reason for achieving more stable FAPbI3 in the presence of MA is the increase of the Madelung energy caused by the stronger interaction between MA and lead iodide octahedra. Fig. 11 exhibits the interactions of the FA and MA cations with the inorganic ‘cage’.55
 Fig. 11  Schematic description of the dipole moments of (a) MA and (b) FA and (c) their effects on the inorganic cage. Reprinted with permission.55 
In another study, incorporation of MAPbBr3 into FAPbI3 was done to stabilize the photoactive phase of FAPbI3 and improve the PCE. As a result, a simultaneous introduction of both MA cations and Br anions in FAPbI3 led to a synergetic effect that stabilized the PSK phase. The PCE increased from 13.5% for FAPbI3 to 17.3% for (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15. It was reported that when co-substitution of MA with FA and Br with I occurred, strong diffraction peaks related to the photoactive PSK appeared; however, the PSK was formed at 100 °C while the phase transition of yellow non-PSK to black PSK was estimated to occur at 160 °C.45 To prevent the transformation of α-FAPbI3 to δ-FAPbI3, Chen et al. used a mixed cation PSK layer of MA and FA which was processed by a low pressure vapor assisted solution process. (FA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 containing 40% MA in the lattice showed long carrier lifetime and uniform morphology, leading to a device with 16.4% PCE. Further, the lifetime of the carrier improved by a factor of 3 times in the mixed PSK layer (FA)x(MA)1−xPbI3, which was higher than that of the FAPbI3 pure layer. The PCE value of the mixed cation device showed a 6.5% reduction after 288 h under a nitrogen atmosphere.56
Although FA based devices showed better stability than MA based ones, they were still degraded following operation under illumination and needed to be modified for further stability enhancement. FAPbI3 is more stable in the hexagonal δH-phase due to its large tolerance factor, while CsPbI3 is stabilized to a non-photoactive yellow phase with an orthorhombic structure at room temperature because of its small tolerance factor. Structural and thermodynamic arguments revealed that remarkable stabilization of FAPbI3 crystals over the non-PSK δ-phase can be achieved upon Cs/FA mixing. Although both the δ-phase of FAPbI3 and δ-phase of CsPbI3 consisted of 1D pillars, the FA pillars were made of face sharing PbI6 octahedra, aligned along the c direction and separated by domains containing only FA while the Cs pillars were surrounded by the cations and consisted of stacked and shifted edge sharing PbI6 octahedra. Another difference is the volume per stoichiometric unit which is 256 Å3 for Vδ-FAPbI3 and 222 Å3 for Vδ-CsPbI3. In contrast to the δ-phase, as shown in Fig. 12, the α and β phases of FAPbI3 are very similar to the CsPbI3 PSK phase. Remarkably, the volume per stoichiometric unit of the three crystals are very close (Vα-FAPbI3 ∼256 Å3 and Vβ-FAPbI3 ∼249 Å3vs. Vα-CsPbI3 ∼250 Å3). Accordingly, cation mixing in the δ-phase is energetically unfavorable and is difficultly compensated by the mixing entropy, while cation mixing is favorable for the α and β phases and the sum of the energy and mixing entropy contribution causes a reduction of the free energy, leading to a stabilization of the mixed 3D PSK over the δ phase. Fig. 12f presents the energy and mixing entropy contributions to the free energy, together with their sum, for CsxFA1−xPbI3. As observed, a mixed cation PSK with the maximum stability can be achieved at 40–60% Cs content though this might not be the best composition to maximize the PCE of the PSCs.57
 Fig. 12  The crystal phases of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 and dependency of the internal energy of mixed CsxFA1−xPbI3 on the phase type. (a and b) Exhibit the δ phase in FA and Cs PSK, respectively; (c and d) exhibit the α and β FAPbI3, respectively. (e) Represents the cubic phase of CsPbI3 PSK. (f) The internal energy, ΔE (dashed blue line), mixing entropy contribution, −TΔS (dotted red dashed line), and free energy, ΔF = ΔE − TΔS (black line) dependent on Cs content. Reprinted with permission.57 
Likewise, Li et al. alloyed large-tolerance-factor FAPbI3 and small-tolerance-factor CsPbI3 and tuned the effective tolerance factor of FA1−xCsxPbI3 resulting in the stability enhancement of the photoactive α-phase of the mixed solid-state PSK alloy. Alloying caused the reduction of the δ-to-α phase-transition temperature of FA1−xCsxPbI3 compared to that of pure FAPbI3. The transition for pure FAPbI3 occurred at 165 °C while for Cs15 and Cs30 alloys (with Cs ratio of 15 and 30 at%, respectively), it occurred at 125 °C and below 100 °C, respectively. The stabilized FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 solar cell retained its initial performance after 15 days of storage under ambient conditions with 15% RH. In contrast to the alloyed PSK device, the FAPbI3 device continuously degraded to about 50% of the initial PCE after 15 days. In addition to the stability improvement, the FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 device resulted in a PCE of 16.1% which is higher than the PCE of the FAPbI3 device (14.2%).20
As illustrated, the optoelectronic properties of PSK can be easily manipulated by mixing Cs and FA cations, due to the large radius variance between Cs+ and FA+.57,58 In another study, partial substitution of Cs+ for HC(NH2)2+ in FAPbI3 improved the photo- and moisture stability. In this study, the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 device retained around 35% of its initial performance after being illuminated continuously under ambient conditions for 30 min, while the FAPbI3 device retained around 20% of its initial PCE. This was attributed to the contraction of the cubo-octahedral volume and enhancement of (FA–I) interactions by partial incorporation of Cs ions in the FA-site. In addition to the stability improvement, reduction of the trap density in the presence of Cs+ enhanced the PCE from 14.9% to 16.5%.59
Yi et al. achieved a room temperature stable Cs0.2FA0.8PbI3 PSK by adding 20% CsPbI3 into FAPbI3, leading to the enhancement of the PCE from 10.4% to 15.69% and thermal stability. However, both the FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 PSK phases were unstable at room temperature. Although the phase transition of FAPbI3 was observed at 156 °C, no transition was observed for mixed PSK. Further, more enhancement in PCE was achieved by substituting 5% of the iodide in the mixed cation PSK with bromide. The device containing Cs0.2(FA)0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 PSK yielded a PCE of 17.35%. To investigate the thermal stability of the mixed PSKs, the films were heated at 150 °C under ambient conditions. Under these conditions, Cs0.2FA0.8PbI3 and Cs0.2FA0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 showed no discoloration while the color of MAPbI3 changed from dark-brown to yellow after 60 min. The Cs0.2FA0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 device retained its initial PCE within 1000 h of storage under ambient conditions in the dark, while the FAPbI3 device was completely degraded over 48 h maintenance under the same conditions. They argued that the stabilization of mixed cation PSK compared to that of the pure PSK is because of the entropic gains and the small internal energy input required for the formation of the solid solution while the δ-phase containing mixed cations needs a large amount of energy to be compensated by this configurational entropy increase.57 The structural phase transition and photoinduced instability of FAPb[I(1−x)Brx]3 PSK were also eliminated by partially substituting the formamidinium cations with Cs, leading to the formation of thermally stable and photo stable FA0.83Cs0.17Pb[I(1−x)Brx]3 PSK. It was reported that under thermal stress at 130 °C, the optical band gap and the crystal lattice of FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4) were stable. Also, no significant red shift in the photoluminescence (PL) emission was observed for the FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3 precursor after 1 h of identical light illumination which revealed that no photoinduced halide segregation took place.49
As stated, adding smaller cations such as MA can overcome the challenge of instability of the photoactive phase of FA PSK, leading to the formation of the structurally stable black phase FA PSK.45,55,56,60 MA can induce the crystallization of FA PSK; however it is not as efficient as Cs because of the small size difference between MA and FA.60 Cs can also effectively assist in the crystallization of FA due to the large size difference between Cs (ionic radius: 1.81°) and FA (ionic radius:2.79 Å).58–60 Saliba et al. used a mixture of three cations, MA, FA, and Cs, to achieve a high quality and stable PSK layer. The synthesized triple PSK was thermally more stable. The presence of smaller Cs in the FA/MA composition led to lowering of the effective Cs/MA/FA cation radius and shifted the tolerance factor towards a cubic lattice structure. This structure matches the photoactive black phase which is entropically stable at room temperature. The long-term device stability was determined by keeping the Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(100x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3(CsxM) PSK devices in a nitrogen atmosphere at room temperature under constant illumination and maximum power point (MPP) tracking. Remarkably, the Cs5M device showed no significant change after 250 h while the Cs0M device lost more than 60% of its initial performance. In addition to the stability improvement, the triple cation enhanced the PCE from 16.37% to 19.20%.60 In another study in which Cs+ was again incorporated into FAPbI3, by using a modified two-step processing approach based on CsI pre-intercalation in the inorganic framework, FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 was demonstrated to have substantially improved phase, humidity, and thermal stability compared with FAPbI3. It was indicated that the incorporation of Cs cations can improve the surface uniformity of the FAPbI3(Cl) film via retarding the nucleation in the CsI–PbI2 precursor solution. While the FAPbI3(Cl) device showed a PCE of 15.7%, the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3(Cl) device yielded a PCE of 18.6%. Storing the unsealed devices in an ambient atmosphere with R ≈ 70% revealed that the FAPbI3 based devices were completely degraded after 30 h, while the FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3-based devices showed a 45% efficiency drop, while a similar trend was observed for the degradation of both devices stored in glovebox. The FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3(Cl) film presented reduced trap density and improved carrier transport benefiting from Cs+ incorporation.58
Qiu et al. considered mixed cations to increase the phase stability of α-FAPbI3 and fabricated high-quality Cs/FA double cation PSK films by incorporating the efficient composition of CsI and FABr via a two-step interdiffusion method. They achieved more thermally stable and environmentally phase stable PSK films compared to the pure α-phase FAPbI3 with the addition of small amounts of CsI and FABr. The device with an absorber layer comprising 10 mol% CsI and 15 mol% FABr compared to the films prepared with other ratios showed the best PCE of 19.3%. The corresponding PSK film showed negligible degradation after annealing at 85 °C for 336 h.52
To stabilize the PSCs, in addition to the type of cations that are mixed together, the formation process also has a strong effect on the device performance and stability. In almost all mixed cation PSKs containing Cs+, a one step method was used to form the PSK film because the low solubility of Cs in alcohols and the limited diffusion depth of inorganic cations into PbI2 films lead to formation of low quality PSK films by the two step deposition method. In this regard, Zhao et al. introduced a PSK seeding growth (PSG) method that produced high quality Cs-containing FAPbI3 PSK films with controlled nucleation. Due to efficient incorporation of Cs into FAPbI3, a significant improvement in PCE, stability, and processing reproducibility was achieved. The PCE of the device increased from 19.4% to 21.7% by using the PSG method. Further, the device processed by the PSG method retained around 60% of its initial PCE after 140 h MPP operation (corresponding to a 280 h stability test).61
Likewise, to overcome the low solubility of cesium–halide salts in isopropyl alcohol in the two step deposition method, Zhao et al. proposed a PSK seeding growth method that led to large grain sizes, low trap density, and quasi-single crystallographic orientation in the PSK film. They achieved a stable PCE of 21.5% for planar Cs-containing FAPbI3-based PSCs. The decomposition of the PSK film was strikingly suppressed when Cs-containing PSK seeds were used. The devices based on Cs-containing PSK seeds exhibited a reduction in PCE from 20.7 to 13.8% after 200 h while the PCE of the control device decreased from 18.7 to 10.9% after 300 s under operational conditions.62
In addition to Cs and Ma, Saliba et al. reported that Rb can also stabilize the black phase of FA PSK, despite the pure RbPbI3 compound not being suitable as a PSK. Employing mixed cation RbCsMAFA PSK (with 5% Rb) resulted in a stabilized power output of 21.6% with high reproducibility and lack of a yellow phase in the RbCsMAFA films. The mixed cation device retained 95% of its initial performance during the combined heat–light stress tests in which the devices were continuously illuminated with full solar intensity for 500 h at 85 °C and under MPP tracking in a nitrogen atmosphere.63 Again, to increase the PCE and thermal and moisture stabilities of (FAPbI3)0.9(FAPbBr3)0.1 based PSCs, Liu et al. introduced MA, Cs or Rb cations into PSK. They showed that the PSK film containing 10% Cs cations had perfect morphology and the fewest defect states which led to an excellent PCE of 19.94%. Also the device based on this active layer showed a low PCE hysteresis (95%) which is lower than that of the reported FA-based devices. The thermal stability measurement of the devices at 85 °C and a RH of 20% in the dark revealed that within 260 h of storage, the PCE of the Cs10-FA based device only decreased by 20% while the MA15-FA, Rb5-FA and FA based devices retained about 45%, 18%, and 10% of the their initial PCEs. In the case of moisture stability, after 1440 h of storage of the unencapsulated devices under 45 ± 5% RH at room temperature, the PCE of FA, MA15-FA, and Rb5-FA devices decreased by about 87%, 79% and 49%, respectively, while it only reduced by 12% for the Cs10-FA device.64
To summarise this section, FA-based PSKs can deliver the best balance between thermal stability, structural stability, and high PCE. The α-phase of FAPbI3 has more thermal stability than MAPbI3 because of the relatively larger FA cations compared to the volatile MA cations though the α-FAPbI3 is metastable at temperatures lower than160 °C and tends to convert to the thermodynamically more stable non-PSK δ-phase which is is accelerated at high humidity. This undesired stability has been overcome by adding smaller cations such as MA and more effectively Cs. In fact, this section demonstrates the crucial importance of the presence of Cs cations for the prolonging of the lifetime of the mixed cation-halide PSKs.
3.1.1.2 Cs based 3D-PSKs; CsPbX3. 
Inorganic cations are introduced as stable alternatives for organic ones in PSK materials to tune both the performance and durability of the devices. Cs+ is a widely used inorganic cation in both pure cation and mixed cation PSK materials. Pure inorganic cesium lead trihalide PSKs exhibit excellent thermal stability and higher thermal-decomposition temperature range than the organic ones. They demonstrate that more stable devices can be fabricated through employing Cs+ cations, though their tolerance factor is too low for sustaining a cubic crystal structure and photoactive CsPbI3 is usually achievable at a temperature higher than 300 °C (Fig. 13).63,65–67 CsPbI3 shows structural stability at 300 °C, whereas CH3NH3PbI3 organic PSK degrades when kept at 85 °C for a long period of time.67 In another experiment in which organic cations were compared with inorganic ones, MAPbI3 rapidly decomposed to PbI2 after 10 min at 180 °C, while CsPbBrI2 showed superior stability even at higher temperatures.68 The main difference between CsBX3 inorganic PSKs and the organic ones is that the formation of an ideal cubic structure is possible in the Cs-based PSK because Cs+, a single atom, can occupy the 1b Wyckoff position in the center of the cube of the PSK structure in a primitive unit cell, while this is not possible for organic cations and they tend to be disordered in the cage.46 It was found that CsPbBr3 and CsPbCl3 are tetragonally or monoclinically distorted at room temperature and showed phase transition to a pure cubic PSK structure at 130 °C and 47 °C, respectively.66
 Fig. 13  (a) Diagrammatic structure of CsPbI3 phases at RT and T > 300 °C. (b) Absorbance spectra of black PSK and yellow non-PSK phases of CsPbI3 thin films. (c) X-ray diffraction spectra (XRD) of cubic CsPbI3 thin films in the black phase. Reprinted with permission.67 
As mentioned, CsPbI3 shows a non-PSK yellow phase at room temperature that requires a higher temperature to form the black PSK phase. Namely, the ambient instability of these materials is a problem which causes the degradation of the structure and transition of it to the yellow non-PSK phase. For the first time, Eperon et al. fabricated a CsPbI3 based device and stabilized the black phase of CsPbI3 at room temperature by careful processing control and developing a low phase transition route in an inert atmosphere and at low temperatures. They found that by adding a small amount of hydroiodic acid to the PSK precursor solution and subsequently enhancing the solubility of the precursors, the yellow phase can be converted to the black phase at only 100 °C. The device fabricated with the stabilized CsPbI3 in its stable black phase with a bandgap of 1.73 eV reached a stabilized PCE of 1.7% and a measured current–voltage curve efficiency up to 2.9% for a planar heterojunction architecture.67 This group continued their research by employing a mixed halide PSK based on CsPbI3 and CsPbBr3 and stabilized the PSK device. Although in their previous research67 a uniform layer of CsPbI3 PSK was formed using the one step solution processing route by adding HI, they realized that HI cannot be efficient for the solubility of mixed halide. To indicate the thermal and structural stability of the CsPbI2Br thin film in comparison to that of the organic compound MAPbI2Br, both layers were placed in an air atmosphere at 85 °C and a RH of 25%. The results showed that after 270 min of heating on a hotplate at 85 °C the absorbance of the inorganic layer was constant while a reduction in the organic thin film absorbance and transition to the yellow phase were observed. These results indicated that the phase and compositional stabilities of the CsPbI2Br thin film are in contrast to those of MAPbI2Br. Further, the CsPbI2Br cells with 5.6% stabilized power output and J–V scan PCEs up to 9.8% were fabricated.69
CsPbBr3, an orthorhombic PSK at RT with a bandgap of 2.25 eV, is not a suitable absorber for solar light harvesting and the highest reported PCE for a CsPbBr3 device is around 5.95%,70 while, as previously mentioned, CsPbI3 in the cubic PSK phase has a more suitable band gap of 1.73 eV though it is only stable at temperatures above 300 °C.57,66–68 On the other hand, the higher bandgap of bromide based PSKs can be beneficial to obtain high open circuit voltages. Kulbak et al.71 considered these properties and synthesized a mixed PSK employing Br as the halide and Cs as an inorganic cation which resulted in thermal and compositional stability of the PSK structure. In order to compare the two organic MAPbBr3 and inorganic CsPbBr3 materials and their device performances, a two step solution method was applied to form the PSK layer. These results indicated that a device with higher thermal stability was obtained in the case of using Cs as the cation and bromide as the halide site of the PSK layer. This was because of the higher decomposition temperatures of CsBr and its lower hydrophilicity in comparison to that of organic CH3NH3Br (MABr) which revealed its effect in the first stage of the layer decomposition which is the loss of MABr. This means that by replacing Cs cations, the temperature of the first stage of decomposition would be much higher than that for MAPbBr3. To study the aging of the devices, they were stored in air atmosphere with RH = 15–20% and characterized in ambient air under a RH of 60–70% every couple of days for 2 weeks. The PCE of the device after 15 days remained in average of 5.5% for the inorganic PSK device while this value faced a significant decrease for the organic structure and reached less than 1% after the aforementioned time.71


3.1.2 Stability progress of 3D-PSK based PSCs regarding the metal site. 
There have been growing efforts to substitute toxic lead based PSKs with environment-friendly compounds. The most straightforward alternative for Pb in PSK materials is another metal from the 14th group of the periodic table, such as Sn or Ge, as these divalent cations possess similar electron configurations. Although it is expected that the stability of the divalent oxidation state decreases because of the decreasing inert electron pair effect upon proceeding up the elements of the 14th group (Pb2+→Sn2+→Ge2+).72 However, germanium is a semi-metal element with a strong lone pair effect that makes the Ge atom crystallization more difficult compared with Pb.72 A Sn based PSK was introduced as a proper alternative to the lead based one because of its lower toxicity and near-ideal choice of bandgap though the Sn-based devices suffer from extremely poor stability when exposed to oxygen due to the instantaneous oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+ and uncontrollable crystal growth.73,74 An early investigation on the stability of the Sn- and Pb-based PSK materials indicated that the Pb-containing phases are more stable than the Sn-containing phases. These behaviors were detected by recording the XRD spectra of the samples with time. In this study, the Pb-based PSK was stable in air for months; however its surface was affected by moisture and lost its crystalline luster after a couple of weeks. In comparison with Pb-based phases, the Sn-based materials were more sensitive to air and moisture.46 Thermal analysis revealed similar trends for Sn and Pb based PSKs. Thermogravimetric analysis that was conducted under a nitrogen flow to avoid oxidation showed that their decomposition started before melting at temperatures >300 °C. The mass loss corresponding to the loss of the organic cation and all of the iodide content was observed, finally leaving a metallic residue. As confirmed, the decomposition is usually started by a mass loss corresponding to organic cations such as “CH3NH3I” or “HC(NH2)2I”, possibly in the form of amine and HI molecules, followed by a second step in mass loss corresponding to the loss of HI molecules.46 The decomposition temperature of CH3NH3I under inert gas was estimated to be roughly 280 °C, while the decomposition of partly oxidized CH3NH3SnI3 started at ∼150 °C.46 For the first time, CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx PSKs were used as lead-free light harvesters in PSCs. By chemical alloying of iodide with bromide, the band structure of the PSKs was energetically tuned, leading to a PCE of 5.8%. To realize the stability behavior of the Sn based device, the devices were stored in a nitrogen glovebox after sealing with Surlyn films. Under these conditions, the device retained almost 80% of the initial PCE after 12 h. The PCE loss was attributed to the p-type doping which occurred via Sn2+ oxidation induced during the fabrication process.74
In an effort to substitute the toxic Pb metal with other elements, bismuth was used by another group instead of lead. Bismuth not only is a non-toxic element compared to the toxic lead element, but also facilitates the fabrication of more stable devices compared to the lead element. MA3Bi2I9 and MA3Bi2I9Clx PSK thin films exhibited very similar XRD patterns. The crystal structure and space group of MA3Bi2I9 were hexagonal and P63/mm (194), respectively, similar to those of Cs3Bi2I9. Bismuth-based PSKs showed lower light absorption compared to MAPbI3 for a similar sample thickness. The optical bandgaps of MA3Bi2I9, Cs3Bi2I9, and MA3Bi2I9Clx samples were estimated to be around 2.1, 2.2, and 2.4 eV, respectively. The PSCs based on Cs3Bi2I9, MA3Bi2I9, and MA3Bi2I9Clx active layers resulted in PCEs of 1.09%, 0.12%, and 0.003%, respectively. For investigation into the stability of these PSK layers, light absorption spectra were recorded after a month of storage in the dark with a humidity lower than 10% which indicated that the PSKs were rather stable. The PCE of the devices showed an increase during the first few days and then a stable value was observed.75 Jain et al., to achieve performance improvement of MA3Bi2I9-based solar cells used the VASP technique in which the BiI3 layer was exposed to MAI vapor for 25 min. The champion cell with this process had a PCE of 3.17%. This device showed high stability as its PCE decreased only 1% after 60 days.76 In another study, Zhang et al. synthesized highly crystalline, stable, and novel Cs2NaBiI6 (CNBI) lead-free double PSK via a facile one-step hydrothermal process with a bandgap of 1.66 eV. They stored the PSK films in a colorless transparent vessel in ambient air for 5 months. The similar XRD patterns of fresh and aged PSK layers showed that the aged samples were not degraded after 5 months of storage at a RH of 70%. The CNBI double PSC exhibited a PCE of 0.42%.77
Electron beam irradiation can significantly degrade the performances of hybrid and inorganic Pb and Ge based PSC devices.72,78 According to the HRTEM images of CsGeI3 presented in Fig. 14, under continuous electron beam irradiation, the morphology and structures are changed in situ. Upon electron beam irradiation of CsGeI3 nanocubes, electron stimulated oxidation of I− anions into I0 atoms occurs, leading to desorption of I atoms. Further, conversion of Ge2+ ions into Ge0 atoms can also occur on CsGeI3 nanocubes. These changes were confirmed by the appearance of a low-contrast portion in the center of this CsGeI3 nanocube (Fig. 14a–f). In fact, lattice fluctuation occurs due to the continuous loss of I− and Ge2+ species. Subsequently, a CsI spot starts to develop and evolves into single-crystalline CsI. Finally, CsI crystals decomposed into small fragments which is schematically described in Fig. 14f.72 Further investigation into the stability of CsGeI3 nanocubes under ambient conditions revealed that the single crystalline CsGeI3 PSK nanocubes were stable for a few hours and then some parts gradually changed into CsI crystals, followed by the complete transformation into CsI NCs after one day. It was argued that the fast degradation of CsGeI3 NCs in air was due to the presence of water molecules that dissociated CsGeI3 nanocubes and the invasion of oxygen molecules to Ge2+ cations.72
 Fig. 14  (a–f) HRTEM images of one CsGeI3 nanocube under electron beam irradiation (300 kV) with increasing electron dose (the scale bars represent 20 nm). The crystal lattice faces of CsGeI3 (100), CsGeI3 (111), CsGeI3 (200) and CsI (110) are marked by the green, orange, blue and yellow colors, respectively. (g–i) SAED patterns captured under continuous electron beam irradiation. (j) Schematic illustration of the electron beam irradiation induced transformations in colloidal CsGeI3 nanocubes. Reprinted with permission.72 
Ca+ is another metal cation that was considered for Pb replacement in PSCs. Lau et al. improved the quality of the layer by partial substitution of Ca+ in the lead part of the PSK layer of CsPbI3. Partial replacement of lead with Ca+ cations which caused the formation of a Ca rich oxide layer created the passivation effect, thereby increasing the carrier lifetime. Addition of this compound in the precursor solution caused improvements in layer properties like bandgap enlargement, smoother and uniform films and larger grains. In this work, the optimized value of calcium content was set at 5%; calcium amounts less than 2% were insufficient to cause the mentioned features and for larger amounts, the excessive oxide layer hindered the transport of carriers between PSK and the HTM layer. Modification of the morphological properties of the PSK lattice led to better contact between the hole transport layer and the PSK absorber layer. The encapsulated MaPb1−xCaxI3 based device with x = 5% showed a stabilized PCE of 13.3% for over 2 months. The PCE remained at 85% of the initial value for a period of over two months in the dark and at a RH of 60–70% at room temperature while the PCE of the device with the CsPbI3 PSK layer dropped 20% more than that of the device with Ca.79


3.1.3 Stability progress of 3D-PSK based PSCs regarding the halide site. 
In the early stages of work on the stability of PSK devices Lee et al. found that iodide–chloride mixed-halide PSKs such as CH3NH3PbI3−xClx are remarkably stable when they are processed in air compared to CH3NH3PbI3. In this experiment, the change in absorbance of the PSK films kept under full sun illumination for 1000 h was negligible.12 It was evidenced that partial substitution of the relatively smaller Br for the bulky I anion in the PSK structure can stabilize the structure and lead to a greater resistance towards high humidity.45,57,80,81 In fact, halide PSKs show strong ionic characteristics, so Coulomb interactions are certainly important because they cause the reduction of the formation energy and favor certain ordered structures. In a simple I–Pb–I trimer (Fig. 15b), Pb has Coulomb attractions with two I ions and the two I ions have Coulomb repulsion between them. When an I ion is replaced by a Cl ion, there is electron transfer between I and Cl because of the different electronegativities. As a result, the charge of Cl will be (1 + δ)− and the charge of I will be (1 − δ)− and the total Coulomb energy is lowered by δ2/(2r)2. In general, in 3D alloys such as CsPbI3−xClx, maximum Coulomb energy gain can be achieved when the elements are arranged in a way that I has a maximum number of Cl as its nearest neighbors but a minimum number of I in the anion sublattice. However, contribution from the lattice type cannot be neglected in achieving the most stable composition and structure. As schematically described in Fig. 15, the alloy system achieves the largest coulomb energy gain at x = 1/3 and 2/3 and the lowest formation energy is observed at x = 1/3 which can be the minimum energy position if the Coulomb energy gain is more than the strain energy. For instance, by introducing Cl and Br into the CsPbI3 PSK and optimizing the composition, the optical properties and the lifetime were improved when x = 1/3 in CsPbI3−xClx, CsPbI3−xBrx, and CsPbBr3−xClx structures. Further, significant increase in stability, PCE, and carrier diffusion length was achieved by introducing Cl into the MAPbI3 lattice. However, in the case of the addition of chloride to the MAPbI3 (Cl–I) lattice, it is difficult to form the layer in contrast to forming mixed halides such as (Br–I) and (Cl–Br) which form easily at moderate temperatures.80 Remarkably, the predicted results were consistent with the experimental reports.81
 Fig. 15  (a) Modeled formation energy of the CsPb(X1−xYx)3 (X, Y = I, Br, Cl) alloy, (b) model system for the I–Pb–Cl trimer to describe how charge transfer can achieve Coulomb energy gain due to halogen mixing in PSK. Reprinted with permission.80 
In this regard, it was evidenced that bromide doping of CH3NH3PbI3 PSK led to a more stable PSK layer because of the lattice constant reduction and the phase transition from tetragonal to cubic.81 Further, chemical alloying of iodide with bromide in CH3NH3SnI3−xBrx PSKs was also employed to prolong the device lifetime.74 In the experimental study performed by Misra et al.,82 the durability of two MAPbX3 (X = I and Br) PSKs was investigated by simultaneously exposing them to concentrated sunlight of 100 suns at elevated temperature (45–55 °C). Remarkably, by changing the halide part of the PSK structure from iodide to bromide, more stability was achieved through higher bond strength with a divalent metal and crystallinity form. In contrast to MAPbI3, MAPbBr3 indicated no photobleaching and degradation after 60 min of exposure to 60 suns and in a temperature range of 45–55 °C. Unusually, MAPbI3 showed no degradation after being exposed to the same sunlight concentration at 25 °C. Accordingly, PSK was mainly decomposed due to thermal stress.82 Tripathi et al. compared the photovoltaic properties and stability of MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx prepared by using the low temperature solution method. They showed that introducing a small amount of MACl into the MAI solution led to a smoother PSK film with greater reproducibility and photostability. EDX measurements showed that small amounts of chlorine (in the range of 2% to 4%) remained in PSK film. The champion device based on the MAPbI3−xClx absorber resulted in a PCE of 11.82% while it was 9.83% for the MAPbI3 based one. The MAPbI3−xClx device didn't show any photo-instability over 2 h of operation under 1 sun illumination, while the performance of the MAPbI3 one gradually decreased under the same conditions. To investigate the moisture stability of the devices, they were encapsulated with cavity glass and UV-curable resin. After two months of storage under ambient atmosphere, the encapsulated MAPbI3−xClx device retained 90% of its initial PCE.83
Eperon et al. took advantage of using mixed halides and fabricated mixed halide PSK based on CsPbI3 and CsPbBr3 to stabilize the PSK device.69 Among the Cs based PSKs, CsPbBr3 shows an electron mobility and a lifetime as high as 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2 μs, respectively. To improve the optical properties and stabilize CsPbBr3 based PSCs, Ng et al., added a small amount of PbI2 into the precursor and synthesized mixed halide CsPbBr3−xIx PSK. While a PCE of 2.97% was achieved for pure CsPbBr3, a PCE of 3.98% was obtained for CsPbBr2.9I0.1. Although the PCE of the encapsulated pure device decreased to 0.66% after 6 days of storage in a glovebox and characterization under ambient conditions, the PCE of the CsPbBr2.9I0.1 device just decreased from 3.98% to 3.53%.84
In another investigation, Aldibaja et al. demonstrated that lead precursors can affect the film morphology, PCE, and stability of the devices. They investigated the stability of PSK films prepared from PbCl2 and Pb(OAc)2 precursors under three storage conditions. First, the devices were kept under ambient lab illumination and showed a continuous reduction in their PCE independent of the precursor. After 15 days of storage, the PCE decreased to 20% of the initial PCE. However, reduction of the PCE in PbCl2 based PSCs was slightly lower than that in the devices prepared from the Pb(OAc)2 precursor. Second, the stability behavior was studied in the dark in ambient air and the cell made from the PbCl2 precursor showed good stability after 32 days while the cell made from the Pb(OAc)2 precursor retained 40% of its initial PCE. The last condition was under a N2 atmosphere without illumination where the stability increased even further and the PbCl2 and Pb(OAc)2 based devices retained around 97% and 84% of their initial PCEs after two months, respectively.85
Further, substitution of Pb(SCN)2 for PbI2 precursors resulted in high quality PSK films with a CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x mixed halide structure which showed great stabilities for over 500 h under a RH exceeding 70%. It was considered that the achieved stability improvement was due to the compact and great morphology of the resultant films. A two step sequential deposition method was applied to the construction of the CH3NH3PbI3−x(SCN)x PSK layer with an initial efficiency of about 15% while conventional CH3NH3PbI3 had value of 8.7%. The former PSK lattice retained 86.7% of the initial PCE for the aforementioned time while this amount was 60% for the latter one.86
Despite the desired effect of the mixed halide on the stability of the devices, photo-induced halide segregation has been a challenge and its contribution to the performance loss cannot be neglected. Hoke et al. reported that in the MAPbI(3−x)Brx PSK, photo-induced halide segregation occurred which caused the halide segregation into iodide-rich minority and bromide-enriched majority domains. This instability can limit the achievement of expected results from the mixed halide PSKs such as obtaining high voltages.87 This photo-induced instability of MAPb(I0.8Br0.2)3 PSK was also confirmed by observing a red shift in the PL after 1 hour of illumination in the McMeekin et al. study.49 Beat et al. reported that CsPb(BrxI1−x)3 films containing low Br concentrations maintain uniform halide composition under illumination. By substituting the CsPbI3 lattice with 33% Br, a CsPbBrI2 based device with a stabilized PCE of 6.5% and improved thermal stability was achieved.68 The level of intrinsic iodide ion vacancies in the PSK materials is a key factor influencing the conduction of iodide ions, although te contribution from this factor varies depending upon the fabrication conditions and sample thermal history.88 The kinetics of light-induced halide ion migration and segregation was demonstrated by Yoon et al. using steady-state and temporally resolved absorption (TDA) spectroscopy measurements. Reaction (14) represents the halide segregation caused by the formation of I-rich and Br-rich regions within the PSK film. nMAPbBrxI3−x + hν → (n − 2m)MAPbBrxI3−x + mMAPbBrx−yI3−x+y + mMAPbBrx+yI3−x−y(14)
The proposed model that describes halide ion migration in halide-deficient PSKs, leading to iodide- and bromide-rich domains, is schematically illustrated in Fig. 16. Ion migration is a multistep process that occurs between adjacent vacancies to ultimately induce local phase segregation. As evidenced, by employing excess halide ions within the PSK films, light induced halide ion segregation effects can be minimized due to the faster recovery kinetics. However, in the halide concentration-dependent photosegregation phenomenon, two key factors are responsible for the selective migration of I− and Br−; they are vacancy-influenced halide ion migration and the difference between the affinity of Pb2+ toward Br− and I−. Actually, the effect of these two factors is dependent on the Pb:halide ratio in the PSK films.89
 Fig. 16  Schematic of the presence of halide vacancies in the Pb–I plane of mixed halide PSK films that leads to halide segregation.89 

3.2 Stability progress of 3D PSK based devices regarding the interfaces related to the PSK layer
As illustrated in the previous sections, PSCs comprise different layers and interfaces such as PSK/HTL, PSK/ETL, and ETL and HTL/contacts. In reality, the performance and stability of these devices are strongly dependent on the properties of all of these components and interfaces. One of the most efficient and important strategies studied to improve the PCE and prolong the device lifetime is interfacial engineering. In fact, the interfacial layers can efficiently prevent undesirable chemical reactions between the adjacent layers while they retain the possibility of charge transport at the interfaces.
PSK materials are mostly processed by low temperature solution-based methods2 that lead to the formation of polycrystalline grains with high surface areas and unavoidable defects and atomic coordination deficiencies. As specified, the boundaries of these grains are considered as the active sites for initiating the degradation process.35 Thus, in addition to the interfaces related to the junctions including PSK/HTM, PSK/ETM, and transporting layers/contacts, the interfaces of the grains should be considered as one of the main key parameters for achieving a stable device. Accordingly, the studies related to interfacial engineering in the PSCs can be divided into several categories such as the interface modification of PSK and transporting layers, transporting layers and contacts, and PSK grains. For instance, Arora et al. added a conductive reduced graphene oxide spacer layer between a CuSCN HTL and Au which resulted in a PCE of 20.4% as well as negligible hysteresis. Moreover, the engineered PSC retained more than 95% of its initial PCE after aging at MPP for 1000 h (under full solar intensity at 60 °C).90 Likewise, a thin layer of tantalum doped tungsten oxide (Ta-WOx) was inserted between a poly[5,5′-bis(2-butyloctyl)-(2,2′-bithiophene)-4,4′-dicarboxylate-alt-5,5′-2,2′-bithiophene] (PDCBT) HTL and Au contact that led to the achievement of a PCE of 21.2% for a planar PSC. Remarkably, the PDCBT/Ta-WOx based device retained almost 95% of its PCE after 1000 h of exposure to one sun illumination in a home-built chamber filled with N2.91
According to the main scope of this review, the studies that relate to the interfaces are mainly concentrated on the PSK grains although all the junctions are determinant in the device stability. In this regard, Li et al. engineered the interfaces of the PSK grains by a crosslinking method using alkylphosphonic acid ω-ammonium cations. It was evidenced that the phosphonic acid groups can form hydrogen bonds with the halide anions of the PSK and crosslink the neighboring PSK grains (Fig. 17a). The chemical modification of the surface of PSK grains using butylphosphonic acid 4-ammonium chloride (4-ABPACl) facilitated the growth of PSK crystals in the TiO2 mesoporous network and formed a smooth capping layer, leading to an enhancement of the PCE from 8.8% to 16.7%. In addition to the enhancement of the PCE, the stability of the PSCs was significantly improved after crosslinking of the grains. Over the first week of storage in the dark and at a RH of 55%, the device modified by 4-ABPA retained more than 90% of its initial PCE, while the pristine device lost more than 80% of its initial PCE (Fig. 17b). Also, the encapsulated modified and unmodified devices were illuminated continuously under 10 mW cm−2 ultraviolet-filtered simulated sun light at 45 °C for one week. Under these conditions, the device prepared using the crosslinked PSK lost only 10% of its fresh performance after one week, whereas the unmodified one lost 30% of its initial PCE. To evaluate the thermal stability of the crosslinked PSC, the sealed device was exposed to a high temperature of 85 °C for 350 h in the dark. As exhibited in Fig. 17c, Jsc remained stable after suffering an initial increase, while other characteristics decreased slightly, leading to a 20% reduction in PCE. In fact, the surface-anchored 4-ABPA groups protected the PSK grains from moisture and retarded the process of degradation.92
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of two neighbouring PSK grains crosslinked by 4-ABPACl; (b) PCE of unsealed PSCs as a function of storage time in ambient air at a RH of 55% in the dark. PCE was measured under 10% full sun intensity. (c) evolution of normalized photovoltaic characteristics of the encapsulated PCS with a 4-ABPA-anchored PSK film measured under 10% full sun intensity during ageing at 85 °C in the dark. Reprinted with permission.92 
Both conjugated and insulating polymers such as polyethyleneimine (PEI) have been extensively utilized as the interfacial modifiers in PSCs. The improvement of the PCE and stability of PSCs was reported by inserting PEI between s-VOx and the PSK layer and also in the interface of [6,6]-phenyl C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) and the LiF/Al contact layer in the device with an FTO/s-VOx/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/PC61BM/LiF/Al structure.93 In another study, a series of insulating polymers such as polystyrene (PS), teflon, and polyvinylidene-trifluoroethylene copolymer (PVDF-TrFE) were considered as tunneling layers between PSK and the ETL of a PSC which led to PCE enrichment by suppressing carrier recombination. Furthermore, they may serve as water-resistant layers to protect the PSK film from attacks by water molecules. In this regard, the PSC modified by a fluoro-silane layer showed negligible color change after it was immersed in water for 3 min, whereas the control device degraded completely after it was dipped in water for less than 5 s.94 Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is another polymer that was used to stabilize the PSCs in humid environments due to its strong hygroscopicity. Interestingly, the PCE of the PSC without PEG decreased from 12 to 0.5% after being exposed to a humid environment (RH: 70%) under dark conditions for 50 h, whereas the PSC modified by PEG (40 mg ml−1) retained 65% of its original PCE (15.4%) after 300 h of aging under the same conditions. Besides, in the case of photostability, under continuous light illumination at a RH of 70%, the pristine device lost its performance after 10 h, while the PEG modified one retained 83% of its initial PCE during the same aging period. This strongly indicates the protection of the PSK grains from decomposition by moisture attack.95 Likewise, poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PVP) with coordinating groups was employed to passivate the defects available at the interface of PSK grains and improve the performance. In this work, the control PSC with a planar structure showed a stabilized PCE of 17.5% under ambient conditions (20° to 25 °C; RH of 25 to 40%), continuous AM 1.5 G, one sun illumination and a constant bias voltage of 0.88 V that dropped to 16.2% after 30 min. However, the PVP-passivated one exhibited a stabilized PCE of 19.1% under 0.94 V that presented a small drop in its PCE (18.9 mW cm−2) after 30 min under the same conditions. Furthermore, according to the stability test of the encapsulated devices stored in a glovebox and measured under ambient conditions (20° to 25 °C; RH of 25 to 40%) for 2500 h, the device without the PVP surface passivation degraded to 59% of the initial PCE while the PVP passivated one retained more than 85% of the original PCE. The achieved improvement was attributed to the interfacial engineering of the grains by crosslinking, preventing the access of water molecule to the PSK, and also reduction of the mobility of the PSK component.96
Passivation of the surface defects of the PSK grains was also performed by the N and S atoms of [N-9′′-heptadecanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) as an electron donor polymer. The lone electron pairs of the S and N atoms of PCDTBT molecules were successfully delocalized via interactions with under-coordinated Pb ions and passivated positive ion trap states in the PSK layer. Because of the interaction of CHNH3PbIxCl3−x and PCDTBT (doping concentration of 0.3 mg ml−1), around 20% growth of PCE was achieved. To demonstrate the stability changes due to the PSK doping, the fabricated devices were kept at a temperature of 28 °C and a RH of 30%. This test revealed that the PCE of the devices based on a CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x:PCDTBT active layer decreased only by 19% after 192 h of storage while this change was 30% for the control device.97 In another study, polyvinylammonium carbochain was utilized to prepare the boundary-suppressed PSK layer. As a result of this modification, the PCE of the device increased from 12.7% to 16.3% by adding 4% PVAm.HI. The polyvinylammonium in PVAm.HI acted as nucleation sites and templates for PSK crystal growth of CH3NH3PbI3 and formed a uniform layer that prevented the diffusion of water molecules into the inner space. Simultaneously, the formation of hydrogen bonding through the NH3+ of polyvinylammonium prohibited the escape of hydrolysis products, MAI or HI, and delayed the degradation of the device. Further, the interfaces of the PSK layer with HTL and ETL were improved which prolonged the device lifetime. Consequently, in the presence of PVAm.HI, the unencapsulated PSC followed an “outside-in” corrosion mechanism and retained 92% and 80% of its original performance upon 50 days and 100 days exposure in an ambient environment with a RH of 30%, respectively, while the control device lost more than 65% of its initial PCE after being exposed under the same conditions for 5 days.98 In the work in which polystyrene (PS) was used to engineer the interfaces in the PSK layer, not only was the PCE enhanced, but significant improvement in the stability of both the PSK material and PSC was also observed. It was proved that PS covered the film surface and was pushed to the grain boundaries during crystal formation and capped the grains which efficiently blocked the mass release from the grains and inhibited organic component evaporation and water corrosion. As a result of this modification, the PCE of the planar device increased from 19.2% to 20.2% with a steady-state efficiency of 19.3%. Remarkably, the PS-capped PSC showed only 10% reduction in its performance after being exposed to ambient conditions (25 °C and RH of 30%) for 30 days compared to the 22% loss of the control device. The better moisture stability in the presence of PS was attributed to the infiltration of hydrophobic PS chains into the PSK grain boundaries.99 Recently, Jiang et al. used a series of polymers including different p-type (J50, J51, J61, and J71) and n-type (N2200) semiconductors and a typical insulator polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) to passivate the grain boundaries of the PSK layer and engineered their interfaces. Among these polymers, J71 formed a pinhole-free CH3NH3PbI3 film with passivated grains that led to PCE enhancement from 17.43% to 19.19% and better stability in the ambient environment (in air at a RH of 40% at 25 °C). Moreover, the J71-modified PSC exhibited less than 10% loss in its performance after 14 days while the reference cell lost more than 20% of its PCE under the same storage conditions. Interestingly, all the aforementioned polymers showed desired effects on the performance of PSCs though they were not as efficient as S71.100
Recently, Kim et al. demonstrated that adding a thin layer of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) as a functional hygroscopic polymer on top of the PSK layer can prolong the device lifetime during operation and in a humid atmosphere. It was evidenced that undercoordinated defect sites of the surface of the PSK grains were passivated due to the chemical interaction of PEO chains and Pb ions, leading to an enhancement of the PCE from 15.29 to 16.46% and significant improvement of the device stability. In this regard, when PSCs were exposed to humid air (RH = 88%), the reference device lost more than 90% of its performance after 120 h while the PEO-capped one retained 80% of its initial PCE over 120 h. As a result of the stability test performed at MPP and a RH of 50% under one-sun illumination, 50% of the initial PCE of the reference MAPbI3 device was lost within 12 h while the device with PEO retained 80% of the initial PCE over 18 h. Similar to that of the MAPbI3 device, the stability of a FACs device was also enhanced in the presence of PEO although the improvement was more significant. In this case, negligible degradation was observed over 14 h continuous illumination at MPP while the PCE of the bare FACs device showed a 25% decrease. In addition to PEO, polystyrene and poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) were also employed as the interfacial layer though they were not as efficient as PEO.101 In another study, the interface of CsPbI2Br and P3HT was modified by Zeng et al. to minimize the energy losses of a CsPbI2Br solar cell. In this regard, PSCs retained around 90% of their initial PCE after 960 h of storage in a dry glovebox due to the passivation of the surface defects of CsPbI2Br, reducing the energy disorder of P3HT, and enhancing the contact area between P3HT and PSK.102
In addition to the aforementioned polymers, organic small molecules have been also utilized as interface modifiers in PSCs. The stabilities of PSCs based on CH3NH3PbI3 and (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 were improved using 1-methyl-3-(1H,1H,2H,2H-nonafluorohexyl)-imidazolium iodide (FIm) as a dopant. In this work, the CH3NH3PbI3 based device was stable for a period of 90 days of storage in a glovebox under Ar. Moreover, the (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 based one retained its initial PCE (15.4%) after 40 days of storage under ambient conditions (RH of 57–60%).103 Terephthalic acid (TPA) is another molecule that is used to form a high-quality MAPbI3 film with laterally grown and interconnected grains. TPA modified PSCs (18.51%) with a higher PCE compared to the PCE of the pristine device (15.53%) exhibited robust moisture resistance and thermal stability. After storage of the unsealed devices in air with a RH of 30% for 35 days, the pristine PSC only retained 18% of the original PCE, whereas the TPA modified one retained 51% of its original PCE value. The compensative effects of the sheet-shaped PSK covered onto the grain boundaries and the robust crystallization of the PSK film caused by TPA were defined as the reasons for the moisture resistance enhancement. Furthermore, the strong interaction between the carboxyl group in TPA and the PSK grains and the incredible crystal morphology led to the significant improvement of the thermal stability of PSCs. As a result, 20% and 80% reduction in PCE was observed for the TPA modified device and unmodified one, respectively, after heating for 10 h at 100 °C.104 In another study, Hou et al. used dopamine for interfacial engineering of PSCs with a planar structure of ITO/SnO2/CH3NH3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. A dopamine (DA) self-assembled monolayer (SAM) was coated on SnO2 (as the ETL). Because of this treatment, the device PCE was significantly improved from 14.05 to 16.87%. This interfacial layer tuned the surface electronic states and the interfacial optoelectronic properties due to the hydrogen-bonding interactions between the NH3+ groups of DA and the halide anions of the PSK. The DA-modified device retained above 80% of its initial performance, while the PCE of the pristine device dropped below 50% after being exposed to air for 12 days.105 Likewise, the interface of the PSK and ETL layers was engineered by inserting Cl atoms. A 600 nm-thick FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 PSK layer was deposited on the chlorine-capped TiO2 colloidal nanocrystal films synthesized at a temperature lower than 150 °C. It was evidenced that the interfacial Cl atoms on the TiO2 film quenched the deep trap states present at the PSK interface and thus reduced interface recombination at the TiO2/PSK contact by strong electronic coupling and chemical binding of the TiO2 and PSK. As a result, hysteresis-free planar PSCs with PCEs of 20.1% and 19.5% for the devices with areas of 0.049 cm2 and 1.1 cm2 were fabricated, respectively. The long-term stability of the devices was examined under dark as well as under operating conditions. The devices based on TiO2–Cl presented enhanced stability compared to those based on pristine TiO2 under continuous operation at MPP and dark conditions. MAFA-based devices on TiO2–Cl and TiO2 retained 95% and 38% of their initial PCEs after storage in the dark over 60 days, respectively. In addition to MAFA based devices, efficient CsMAFA devices on TiO2–Cl with PCEs higher than 21% were also fabricated that exhibited longer lifetimes by retaining 96% of their initial PCE after 90 days of storage under dark conditions. Further, the CsMAFA PSC including TiO2–Cl (with a 420 nm cutoff UV filter) showed a 10% loss in its initial PCE after continuous operation for 500 h under one-sun illumination, as directly determined from the MPP tracking.106 In another effort to make progress in the application of PSCs, Han et al. made improvements in the PCE and stability of the devices by placing a layer of CsI between the absorber MAPbI3 layer and the mp-TiO2 ETL layer. The CsI layer passivated the trap states caused by the mesoporous structure of the ETL layer and improved the surface morphology of mp-TiO2. The addition of this layer in the structure gave the device advantages such as promotion of charge separation, superior collection, and better transport of the charges. A PCE of 17.1% for the device with the CsI layer compared to 14.38% for pristine MAPbI3, without CsI, indicated the positive role of this layer in the efficiency improvement. Stability tests revealed that within 60 days of the experiment at room temperature and in a dark atmosphere, the devices with and without the CsI interface layer retained 66% and 30% of their initial PCEs, respectively. These results indicated the superior stability of the device with the CsI interface layer.107
He et al. achieved a high efficiency planar PSC by the corporation of HPbI3 into PSK precursor solution which led to modulation of the crystallization process and grain boundary passivation of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx thin films. The average PCE of the control solar cells was 17.42% whereas it was 14.09% for the device without additive and the best control device presented a PCE of 18.59%. The fabrication of PSK films was carried out by a one-step solution process which led to the formation of less PSK seeds for the HPbI3–CH3NH3PbI3−xClx thin film compared to the HPbI3 free film because, the presence of the HPbI3 additive increased the solubility of lead polyhalide colloids in the precursor solution. The decrease of nucleation centers resulted in larger PSK grain sizes (in microscale) in the annealed PSK films. In addition to the residual PbI2, the HPbI3 additive passivated the recombination sites in the grain boundaries. These two improvements of the PSK layer by the incorporation of HPbI3 led to the enhancement of the PCE and stability of the devices. The unencapsulated controlled PSK devices degraded fast and only 60.4% of the initial PCE was retained after 42 days of storage in air at room temperature whereas the HPbI3-PSK devices retained almost 87.8% of the initial PCE.108 Li et al. passivated the defects of CsPbBr3 grains by adding CsPb2Br5 at the interfaces which reduced the carrier recombination in the active layer. As a result of this self-passivation, a PCE as high as 8.36% was achieved when excess PbBr2 was used to form the derivative phase. Besides, the derivative-phase inorganic PSC after being exposed to humidity of 45% exhibited only a 10% drop over 1000 h.109
Chen et al. increased the PCE and stability of FA0.88Cs0.12PbI3-based PSCs by spin coating the FAPF6 solution on the PSK film. The PCE of the devices increased from 17.8% to 19.3% due to FAPF6 treatment of the PSK film. In this technique, using the molecular ion PF6 led to interface engineering via an ion exchange reaction. The introduction of an interlayer containing PF6− ions between the PSK and HTM caused the enhancement of the carrier lifetime and the reduction of the defect density. The operational stability test of the PSCs was performed under AM 1.5G one sun illumination and at a RH of 50–70%. The post-treated PSK-based device retained over 80% of its initial PCE after 528 h, while the device without post-treatment only retained 50% of its initial PCE. For examination of the moisture stability of the PSK films, the PSK/FTO films were exposed to a high relative humidity of 85–90% at about 25 °C in the dark. The absorbance spectra of the PSK films showed that the films without FAPF6 treatment were completely degraded after 8 h of exposure but the treated PSK films still showed absorbance to some extent at the same exposure time. This moisture improvement was due to the presence of the FA0.88Cs0.12PbI3−x(PF6)x interlayer which preferentially grew along the grain boundaries which passivated the defects. Further, the photostability testing of unencapsulated devices under one sun illumination was carried out at room temperature in a N2-filled glovebox. The FAPF6-treated device retained 92% of its initial PCE after 360 h illumination, while the control device retained 75% of its initial PCE. The reduction of trap-assisted nonradiative recombination was proposed as the main reason for the improvement of the light stability.110 Wang, et al. proved that the intensity of the defects on the surface of a MAPB (I0.95 BR0.5) PSC was more than that on its glass side. Therefore, surface modification was performed through spin coating of an FAI solution on the PSK layer. The results were evidence of the FA+ cations and I− anions penetrating into the vacancies of the PSK layer, which were the defect sites, and passivating the layer. It was concluded that FA cations, which penetrated into the MA vacancies, were causes of the larger grains and better crystallinity of the final PSK layers. Stability tests under conditions of holding on a hot plate at 100 °C in 50% RH, revealed that the sample with 0.5mg ml−1 FAI post treatment maintained its dark black color and its absorbance after 900 min compared to the control one.111
Fullerene derivatives such as PCBM are favored organic molecules that were used as efficient interface modifiers.112 Highly efficient PSCs with high thermal stability and photostability were fabricated by passivating the PSK grain boundaries using α-bis-PCBM. In this regard, the device with a PCE of 20.8% retained more than 90% of its performance after 44 days of storage in ambient air with a RH of 40% at 65 °C and 96% after 600 h under continuous full-sun illumination and MPP tracking, respectively. In contrast, the control device lost around 50% of its original PCE under the first set of conditions and was completely degraded after being exposed to continuous illumination for 250 h.112 Similarly, Park et al. introduced PCBM molecules as additives in different amounts into precursor solutions to improve the thermal stability of the CH3NH3PbI3−xClx PSKs. The added molecules which accumulated at the grain boundaries chemically interacted with the halogen atoms in the PSK and bound them to their original state in the PSK. Subsequently, they caused the passivation of the defects by preventing halogen atoms from exiting the crystal lattice and migrating from grain boundaries. Moreover, it was concluded that the larger PSK grains with a small grain interface area exhibited higher thermal stabilities. This illustrated the critical role of the grain size and boundary through the decomposition process which can be slowed down by adding additive molecules such as PCBM.113 C60 is another member of the fullerene family that was employed to improve both the performance and stability of PSCs. As a result of adding C60 into the PSK layer, the surface of the PSK grains was passivated and the migration of I and Pb elements was prevented, and the best PCE of 19.8% was obtained. Interestingly, the encapsulated PSCs retained 70% of its initial value after 1000 h of continuous full sun illumination while the reference device lost more than 80% of its original PCE. It should be noted that in this work, PCBM was not as efficient as C60 in defect passivation.114
The introduction of graphdiyne (GDY) hydrophobic molecules into the FA0.85MA0.15 Pb(I0.85Br0.15) PSK layer of a planar PSC affected the stability of the device as well as its performance. According to the XRD patterns and absorbance spectra of the samples, the addition of GDY had no effect on the band structure and crystallinity of the PSK layer. Interaction of GDY with the PSK causes the formation of a PSK/GDY bulk heterojunction and gave the layer advantages of better charge extraction and higher carrier mobility. These are speculated to be the reasons for the better performance of the device which is demonstrated in the recorded PCEs of 20.54% and 19.6% for 0.2GDY/PSK and pristine PSK, respectively. As evidenced, amounts less than 0.5mg ml−1 of GDY can passivate the defects and yield a better interface area between the PSK and ETL layer while amounts exceeding 0.5mg ml−1 can act as recombination centers which lead to undesirable PCEs. Samples comprising GDY showed better stability toward induced moisture. This result emphasizes the role of the presence of a hydrophobic compound in the grain boundaries which in addition to passivating the defects and forming a bulk heterojunction, prevents water molecules from entering the lattice and causing the decomposition of the device. Devices were kept in the dark and without encapsulation for 140 days. The results indicated that the device with 0.2GDY/PSK retained 95% of its initial PCE while the PCE of the control sample fell from 19.6% to 16.6%.115
Actually, in almost all studies performed to improve the stability by interfacial engineering, the device lifetime was prolonged independent of the configuration and the strategy employed for engineering.

Table 1 reviews the studies done to improve the stability of PSCs regarding the 3D PSK structures. The modifications followed and the achievements related to the durability of the devices are also summarized. As reviewed, there is no standard protocol for testing the stability of PSCs. Generally, temperature, humidity, atmosphere, and light intensity are the main key factors that were considered in the stability investigation. For instance, in some studies, the MPP condition was employed while in others the devices were kept in the dark. This makes it very difficult to compare the stability behavior of the PSCs reported in different papers. Thus, the conditions of the stability test for each study are mentioned in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the stability improvement of the 3D-based PSK devices




Structure
Modification
Test conditions
Achievement
Ref.




ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al
Doping of 3D MAPbI3 by Cs+
Ambient conditions, RT: 20 °C, RH: 11%
Both MAPbI3 and Cs0.1MA0.9PbI3 devices lost their performance after 45 h

26



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Using FAPbI3 as a 3D PSK absorber
Ambient humid atmosphere
FAPbI3 black phase was even less stable than MA based PSKs

53



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Using FAPbI3 as a 3D PSK absorber
10 scans under one sun illumination; devices were kept in air for 8 days before measurement
FAPbI3 showed superior photostability than the MAPbI3 device

50



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsSnI3/m-MTDATA or Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Replacing Pb with Sn and addition of SnF2 in the PSK layer
Storing the device in a glovebox for more than 250 h
Inconsiderable change in device performance

116



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/FAPbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag
Substitution of Cs+ for FA in FAPbI3 and formation of FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3
Under continuous white light illumination (100 mW cm−2), ambient conditions; RH = 40%
The FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 device retained 35% of its initial PCE after 30 min, while the FAPbI3 device retained 20% of its initial PCE

59



CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 films
Comparison of photo- and thermal-stability of CH3NH3PbI3 with that of CH3NH3PbBr3
Exposure to 100 suns for 60 min, T range = 25 to 55 °C
MAPbBr3 was photo- and thermally stable for 60 min while some of the CH3NH3PbI3 crystals were decomposed

82



FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Tuning the tolerance factor by alloying FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 and formation of solid-state FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 alloys
Storing under 15% RH
FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 was completely stable for 15 days; FAPbI3 lost 50% of its PCE during this time

20



FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Interface engineering by crosslinking of CH3NH3PbI3 grains using 4-ABPACl
(1) Ambient conditions in the dark, RH = 55%; I–V curves were recorded at 10% illumination intensity
(1) Over one week, the device modified by 4-ABPA retained more than 90% of its PCE, while the pristine device lost more than 80% of its initial PCE

92



(2) Encapsulated devices illuminated under 10 mW cm−2 UV-filtered simulated sun light at 45 °C
(2) The device based on the crosslinked PSK lost only 10% of its PCE after one week, whereas the control one lost 30% of its PCE


FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/PTAA/Au
Utilization of Cs as the cation and Br as the halide part of the 3D PSK
Stored in air with RH = 15–20% and characterized in air with RH = 60–70%, every couple of days for 2 weeks
CsPbBr3 kept its initial PCE after 15 days, while MAPbI3 lost more than 80% of its PCE during this storage time

71



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/FAPbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Replacing FAPbI3 with triple cations, Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(1−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 PSK
Under a N2 atmosphere, RT, constant illumination, max power point
The Cs5M device was stable for 250 h. The Cs0M device lost its PCE after 100 h

60



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
Construction of mixed halide perovskite, CsPbI2Br
RH of 20–25%, T = 85 °C for 270 min
The absorbance of the CsPbI2Br layer was constant while a reduction in the MAPbI2Br thin film absorbance and transition to yellow phase was observed

69



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Replacing FAPbI3 with mixed cations and halide Cs0.2FA0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 PSK
Ambient conditions in the dark
The Cs0.2FA0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 device was stable for 1000 h while FAPbI3 lost its performance after 48 h

57



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Incorporation of Rb in the cation site of mixed cation PSK, MAFACsRbPbI3
Storing at 85 °C for 500 h in a N2 atmosphere under full illumination
The MAFACsRbPbI3 device retained 95% of its initial performance

63



FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Protecting CH3NH3PbI3 grains with PEG chains
(1) Humid environment (RH: 70%) in the dark
(1) The PCE of the pristine PSC decreased from 12 to 0.5% after 50 h, whereas the PSC modified by PEG retained 65% of its PCE after 300 h

95



(2) Under continuous light illumination at a RH of 70%
(2) The pristine device lost its PCE after 10 h, while the PEG modified one retained 83% of its PCE during the same aging period


FTO/bl-TiO2/C60/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Mixed cation PSK layer of MA and FA ((FA)x(MA)1−xPbI3) used to prevent the transformation of α-FAPbI3 to δ-FAPbI3
Storing in a N2 glovebox
The device with (FA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 (MA = 40%) PSK showed a 6.5% reduction in PCE after 288 h

56



FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Introducing Cs to the CH3NH3PbI3 lattice and fabricating CsxMA1−x PbI3
60 min exposure to air at 85 °C
The Cs0.09MA0.91PbI3 device retained 80% of its PCE, while the MAPbI3 device retained around 30% of its initial PCE

48



FTO/nr-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Modification of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer by PVAm HI
Ambient environment with a RH of 30%
The modified device retained 92% and 80% of its PCE after 50 days and 100 days, respectively, while the control device lost more than 65% of its PCE after 5 days

98



FTO/SnO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Grain boundary passivation of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer by PVP
(1) Ambient conditions (20° to 25 °C; RH of 25 to 40%) under 1-sun and a constant bias
(1) The stabilized PCE of the control PSC decreased from 17.5% under 0.88 V to 16.2% after 30 min, whereas the stabilized PCE of the PVP-passivated one under 0.94 V decreased from 19.1% to 18.9 mW cm−2) after 30 min

96



(2) Encapsulated devices were stored in a glovebox and measured under ambient condition (20° to 25 °C; RH of 25 to 40%) for 2500 h
(2) The device without PVP degraded to 59% of its initial PCE while the PVP passivated one retained more than 85% of the original PCE


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al
Passivation of the surface defects of the CHNH3PbIxCl3−x grains by PCDTBT

T = 28 °C at a RH of 30%
The PCE of the devices based on the CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x:PCDTBT active layer decreased only by 19% after 192 h of storage while this change was 30% for the control devices

97



FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/P3HT/Au
Ca substitution in the lead part of the CsPbI3 layer (CsPb1−xCaxI3)
RT, RH = 60–70%, in the dark
The PCE of the encapsulated CsPb1−xCaxI3 device remained at 85% of the initial value for two months, while the PCE of the encapsulated CsPbI3 device dropped 20% more than that of the device with Ca

79



FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro OMeTAD/Au
Interface modification of FA0.75MA0.25Pb(I11/12,Br1/12)3 grains by polystyrene
Ambient conditions, T = 25 °C and RH = 30%
The PS-capped PSC showed only 10% reduction in its PCE after 30 days compared to 22% loss for the control cell

99



FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
CH3NH3PbI3 layer modification by interface engineering and grain boundary passivation using J71 as a p-type polymer
Ambient environment (in air at a RH of 40% at 25 °C)
The J71-modified PSC exhibited less than 10% loss in its PCE after 14 days while the reference cell lost more than 20% of its PCE

100



FTO/bl-TiO2/C60/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Grain boundary passivation of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer by PEO
(1) RH = 88%
The reference device lost more than 90% of its PCE after 120 h while the PEO-capped one retained 80% of its initial PCE over 120 h

101



(2) MPP and a RH of 50% under one-sun illumination
(2) 50% of the PCE of the reference MAPbI3 device was lost within 12 h while the device with PEO retained 80% of the PCE over 18 h


FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Interface engineering of the grains of the MAPbI3 layer using TPA
(1) RH of 30%
(1) The pristine PSC retained 18% of the original PCE, whereas the TPA modified one retained 51% of its original PCE

104



(2) Heating at 100 °C
(2) 20% and 80% reduction in PCE was observed for the TPA modified device and unmodified one, respectively, after 10 h


FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Passivating of the [(FAI)0.81(PbI2)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbBr2)0.15] grain boundaries using α-bis-PCBM
(1) Ambient air with a RH of 40% at 65 °C
(1) The device with PCBM retained more than 90% of its PCE after 44 days of storage while the control device lost around 50% of its PCE

112



(2) Continuous full-sun illumination and MPP tracking
(2) The PCBM modified device retained 96% of its PCE after 600 h and the control device was completely degraded after 250 h




4 Stability progress of PSCs regarding 2D Ruddlesden–Popper PSKs
As reviewed in the previous sections, three-dimensional (3D) PSK materials, especially organic cation based ones, suffer from intrinsic instability and are prone to degradation during exposure to heat, oxygen, moisture, and light. One important strategy that has been studied significantly regarding the stability of the PSK materials is employing 2D PSKs. In fact, 2D PSKs have been introduced as credible photostable and moisture-resistant light absorber candidates. As mentioned, the low formation energy of 3D PSKs accounts for their low stability relative to their precursor phases.
2D multilayered halide PSKs generally have a structural formula of (R)2(CH3NH3)n−1MnX3n+1, where R is a primary aliphatic or aromatic alkylammonium cation, M is a divalent metal such as Pb, and X is a halide anion such as I and Cl. When n = ∞, it corresponds to the cubic PSK compound CH3NH3PbI3 and n = 2, 3, … corresponds to bilayer and trilayer compounds.117 In comparison to the 3D PSKs, 2D PSKs show more flexible structures, with more relaxed limitations in the size of the organic cations. Further, 2D PSKs with remarkable variations of electrical and photophysical properties can be produced.118 Reducing the dimensionality of the inorganic components from the 3D structure to the 2D structure causes enhancement of the exciton binding energy and bandgap enlargement.119 As presented in Fig. 18a, the stability study of dimensionally-tuned PSKs using density functional theory (DFT) simulations revealed that the conventional 3D PSK is marginally stable and the formation energy increases by the reduction of n values. The intercalation of appropriate organic molecules such as phenylethylammonium between the vPSK layers introduces considerable van der Waals interactions that cause the increase of the formation energy.120
 Fig. 18  Energetics of formation of dimensionality tuned PSKs and their stability. (a) Unit cell structure of (C8H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 PSKs with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞). (b) The PCEs of the devices involving dimensionally tuned PSKs. Reprinted with permission.120 
2D PSKs are synthesized by inserting bulky alkylammonium cations such as 2-phenylethylammonium in between the anionic layers.117 In this structure, the adjacent layers are held together by weak van der Waals forces guaranteeing the stability of the structure, and also the hydrophobic nature of the spacing cations prevents the diffusion of water molecules into the PSK lattice.121 The importance of the stability issue in PSCs encouraged researchers to focus more on low dimensional PSKs as more moisture, photo, and temperature resistant materials. Research related to 2D PSK based PSCs can be divided into two categorizes, (a) pure 2D PSK and mixed 2D/3D PSKs as absorber layers and (b) 2D PSKs as a capping layer, that are reviewed in the following sections.
4.1 2D PSKs as the absorber layer
Interestingly, layered PSKs were introduced into PSCs to benefit their higher and tunable stability and tunable properties. For the first time, Smith et al.119 used two-dimensional hybrid PSKs as an absorber in PSK devices. They synthesized the n = 3 (n = number of Pb–I sheets in each inorganic layer) member of the series (PEA)2(MA)n−1[PbnI3n+1] by combining (PEA: C6H5(CH2)2NH3+)I, (MA)I, and PbI2. PEA is a large organic cation that possesses a large ionic radius which is incompatible with a 3D PSK structure and yields the formation of a two-dimensional layered structure. In their study, 2D PSKs were more resistant to moisture compared to MAPbI3, and provided the possibility of fabrication of devices under humid conditions. Upon humidity exposure (RH: 52%), 3D MA based PSKs started to decompose after just 4–5 days while 2D PSK films showed no significant changes over a period of 46 days. The fabricated device containing the mentioned 2D structure displayed a low PCE around 4.73% because of the inhibition of out-of-plane charge transport by the organic cations.122 Actually, PEA acts like an insulating spacing layer between the conducting inorganic slabs.119
Obtaining superior prolonged stability of PSCs by employing 2D PSKs instead of 3D ones encouraged researchers to continue their studies; however, hereafter a mixture of 2D/3D PSKs was studied to overcome the challenge of the low PCE achieved in the first report. The Yao group118 deposited a mixture of 2D/3D PSK via a two-step method that formed compact PSK films by spin-coating a mixture of PbI2 and polyethylenimine hydriodide (PEI HI), followed by coating of a CH3NH3I layer. Among the devices containing different amounts of 2D PSK (PEI)2PbI4 incorporated into MAPbI3 – that is, (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x with the mole ratio x ranging between 0 and 4% – the highest PCE of over 15% was achieved at x = 2% with higher reproducibility and moisture stability than MAPbI3 ones. In contrast to the MAPbI3 device which lost its performance completely after 120 h of exposure to ambient conditions with a RH of 50%, the PCEs of the (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x (x = 2%) and (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x (x = 4%) devices dropped by 16% and 8% on the 14th day, respectively. Similar to other studies, decreasing the possibility of the direct contact of PSK with water molecules led to enhanced stability.123
The moisture-resistant property of the 2D PSKs can be strongly attributed to the hydrophobicity of the cations used for the layered structure formation. n-Butylamine (BA) is another small molecule that has been used to form layered PSKs. Cao et al.124 fabricated 2D (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, and 4) PSK thin films from a stoichiometric reaction between PbI2, MAI, and BA that combines the structural features of the simple 2D (n = 1) and the 3D (n = ∞) PSKs. In fact, they used CH3(CH2)3NH3+ instead of PEA employed in the previous work.119 A comparison of the stability behavior of MAPbI3 and (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 showed that MAPbI3 gradually disintegrated to yellow PbI2 after a short time in a humid atmosphere, while (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 remained unchanged after 2 months of exposure under 40% humidity conditions. But the PCE achieved for the device involving 2D (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1PSKs was lower than 5% due to the low absorption coefficient and poor carrier transport.124 Quan et al. tuned the dimensionality of PSK by adding the phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) organic molecule that yielded compounds with different layer (n) values in the series PEA2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1. In both experimental and numerical investigations, the highest stability was achieved for the device with n = 6 while it showed the lowest performance due to its lower mobility (Fig. 18b). Moisture and thermal stabilities of the low dimensional devices were improved significantly compared to those of the 3D ones. In this regard, the PCE of the 3D device in humid air (55% RH) decreased from 16.47% to 4.2% in 3 days, while the PCEs of n = 60 and n = 40 devices decreased from 17.21% and 17.10% to 12.8% and 13.14% after 14 days, respectively.120
Regarding the effect of the type and size of cation molecules used for the synthesis of layered PSKs, Safdari et al. fabricated PSCs containing just pure 2D PSKs based on diammonium cations with different organic chain lengths. The 2D PSKs resulting from the reaction between PbI2 and the di-cations of 1,4-diaminobutane, 1,6-diaminohexane, and 1,8-diaminooctane were [NH3(CH2)4NH3]PbI4 (BdAPbI4), [NH3(CH2)6NH3]PbI4 (HdAPbI4), and [NH3(CH2)8NH3]PbI4 (OdAPbI4). It was concluded that the bulkier cation is the less suitable 2D PSK for PSCs, while an impressive thermal stability was observed for BdAPbI4 and HdAPbI4 up to 200 °C without any phase transition. However, a low PCE of 1.082% was achieved for the BdAPbI4 based device; it was comparable with the PCE of 2.1% for MAPbI3 fabricated under 55.6% humidity conditions.126 One important challenge in this structure is the insulating nature of organic spacer cations that hinders charge transport. By introducing a bulkier cation into the MAPbI3 materials which decreased the material dimensionality and enhanced the distance between Pb–I structural units, the electrical conductivity was reduced.126,127 The conductivity of 3D MAPbI3 was reported to be around 1.1 × 10−4 S cm−1, while a conductivity of 1.3 × 10−6 S cm−1 was reported for the 1D (CH3CH2NH3)PbI3.126 To overcome the inefficient charge transport in 2D structures, Tsai et al. focused on the quality enhancement of the orientation toward single-crystalline. Uniform Ruddlesden–Popper phases—layered two-dimensional PSK films with crystalline planes aligned along the out-of-plane orientation, which facilitates efficient charge transport along the PSK planes—were formed by a hot casting process. The aforementioned process resulted in the fabrication of a device with 12.52% PCE. Compared to the 3D PSK device, (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 showed remarkably higher photo- and moisture stability both under encapsulated and unencapsulated conditions. Unencapsulated 2D PSK devices retained 80% of their initial PCE after 200 h and slowly degraded to about 70% of the initial PCE over 2050 h under one-sun illumination. In contrast, the 3D PSK device retained just 40% of its initial PCE within the first 24 h, followed by slow degradation to <10% of its initial PCE over 2250 h. The stability behavior of the encapsulated devices was also tested under one sun illumination and at a RH of 65% for over 2250 h. As shown in Fig. 19, the encapsulated 3D PSK device lost more than 50% of its original performance during the first 10 h and then saturated at 10% of its original PCE value over 800 h, while the 2D encapsulated PSK showed no degradation over 2250 h of storage under light illumination which revealed its superior photostability. The improved moisture stability of the aforementioned 2D PSK was attributed to the hydrophobic nature of the n-butylammonium (BA) spacer cation.125 Further, Chen et al. employed short branched chain butylamine (iso-BA) spacer cations instead of using the linear n-BA+ to form an alternative 2D PSK. 2D PSK films were deposited via both room temperature (RT) and hot casting processes. Compared to the (n-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 analogue featuring linear-chain spacers, the RT processed (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 exhibited significantly increased crystallinity and improved out-of-plane orientation, along with dramatically enhanced charge mobility and charge extraction. Further, the best ambient stability was achieved from the hot cast 2D PSK by retaining its initial absorption after storage in an environmental chamber at 20 °C with a RH of 60% for 840 h. The device containing hot cast (iso-BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 showed the highest PCE which was 10.63%; however the stability of the complete device was not reported in this work.121 In another study in which the BA molecule was used to form a layered structure, addition of 5% Cs to the 2D (BA)2Cs3x(MA)3−3xPb4I13 lattice not only improved the PCE of the PSC from 12.3% to 13.7%, but also resulted in the achievement of excellent improvement in the moisture and thermal stability of the device. The Cs5-2D device retained 89% of the initial PCE after 1400 h under ambient conditions with 30% RH while the Cs0-2D device retained 74% of its initial PCE under the same conditions (Fig. 20). Cs+ doped (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 2D devices correlate well with their more stable phase structures and more hydrophobic surfaces.128 Zhang et al. used a crystallographic orientation strategy to improve the stability and PCE of 2D PSCs based on (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1. By adding a small amount of NH4SCN (BAI:MAI:PbI2:NH4SCN = 2:2:3:1) in the PSK precursor solution, vertically oriented growth of the (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10-based PSK was achieved which resulted in highly efficient devices with average PCEs of 6.82% and 8.79% for n = 3 and 4, respectively. NH4SCN efficiently reduced the grain boundaries in the direction perpendicular to the substrate. The PCE of the thermally annealed (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10-based PSC remained stable over 600 s scan under 1 sun illumination. Further, the layered device kept in a purified N2 glovebox showed good stability with almost unchanged PCE after 25 days.129
 Fig. 19  Photostability behavior of a planar solar cell with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al under constant AM 1.5G illumination for 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and 3D MAPbI3 PSCs (a) without and (c) with encapsulation. Moisture stability of the device under a RH of 65% (b) without and (d) with encapsulation. Reprinted with permission.125 
 Fig. 20  Stability measurements for Cs+ doped (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 2D PSCs. (a) Long-term stability of both unencapsulated Cs0-2D and Cs5-2D solar cells under ambient conditions with a RH of 30%. (b) Humidity tolerance measurements for both solar cells at RHs of 30%, 65%, and 85%. (c) Thermal stability of unencapsulated Cs0-2D and Cs5-2D PSCs at 80 °C under an inert atmosphere. Reprinted with permission.128 
Polymer cations have also been introduced as alternatives for small-molecule cations to form 2D PSKs. Polymer cations can improve the film quality as well as prevent moisture diffusion into the layer. Further, charge transport within the device can be improved compared to that of 2D PSKs employing small-molecule bulky ammonium because of the induced tight stacking of the separated inorganic unit layers. In this regard, Yao et al. used polyethylenimine (PEI) cations to form a 2D (PEI)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 3, 5, 7) PSK. They argued that hydrophobic polymeric-ammonium can offer stronger steric hindrance, providing PSK crystals with improved moisture stability, and also more compact PSK films can be formed that prevent the diffusion of water molecules into the device. The device based on (PEI)2(MA)6Pb7I22 resulted in a maximum PCE of 10.08% which is much better than the photovoltaic parameters achieved for the (BA)2(MA)6Pb7I22 PSK device. Actually, fabricating the hybrid structure using polymeric-ammonium cations to covalently link adjacent PSK layers provided better charge transport properties. Another important result was that the performance loss observed for the large area 2D device was significantly lower than that of the large area 3D PSK device. Although the 3D MAPbI3 started to decompose immediately after exposure to a 50% humid atmosphere, no obvious changes were observed for (PEI)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 even after one month. Moreover, the devices containing both the (PEI)2(MA)6Pb7I22 and (PEI)2(MA)4Pb5I16 large cells retained approximately their original PCE values after 500 h of light soaking.130
Gan et al., introduced homogeneous and pin hole free 2D perovskite films with a (PEA)2(MA)m−1PbmI3m+1 formula, constructed with the one step spin coating method under ambient conditions. Owing to the nature of the low dimensional PSC these series of layers (m = 1, 2, 3) exhibited high stability in air with 60% moisture content for a period of over 60 days of experimentation and remained unchanged. In order to optimize and improve the device performance with the (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 light absorber, TiO2 nanorods were used which led to achieving better contact, coverage, and film features. The champion device with m = 3 and 600 nm TiO2 nanorods showed a PCE of 3.72% and retained more than 70% of its initial PCE after 60 days of storage in the dark at 60% humidity.131 Recently, one-year stable PSK devices were fabricated by engineering an ultra-stable 2D/3D (HOOC(CH2)4NH3)2PbI4/CH3NH3PbI3 PSK junction using the protonated salt of aminovaleric acid iodide (HOOC(CH2)4NH3I, AVAI) as the organic precursor mixed with PbI2. The fabricated devices containing 2D/3D PSK with an organic HTM and Au electrode yielded a PCE of 14.6%, and with a fully printable HTM-free configuration employing a carbon electrode, a PCE of 11.2% was achieved for a 100 cm2 module. The 2D/3D device with a Spiro HTM/Au contact retained up to 60% of the original PCE after 300 h continuous illumination under an argon atmosphere while the 3D CH3NH3PbI3 device retained around 40% of its initial PCE. Remarkably, the HTM free 2D/3D module with the carbon contact under 1 sun illumination at a stabilized temperature of 55 °C is fully stable for >10000 h.132 Iagher and Etgar studied different organic molecule spacers including PEA, cyclohexylammonium iodide (CHMA), and benzylammonium iodide in 2D/3D PSKs. Also Cs was introduced into this structure to make a PSK with two cations. Their investigations showed that introducing Cs cations can lead to a PCE increase but the stability of both encapsulated 3D (MAPbI3) and 2D/3D PSCs containing 10% Cs was less than the stability of the ones without Cs cations under one sun illumination and a RH of 30–50% at a temperature of 50–60 °C. For instance, after storing the benzylammonium iodide based 2D/3D device for 200 h under the mentioned conditions, around 55% of the initial PCE was retained, while in the BA/Cs based 2D/3D device, the performance was completely lost. Remarkably, there were no significant differences between the stability behavior of 3D and 2D/3D based devices. This poor stability was attributed to the different ionic radii of Cs and MA in the absorber layer prepared from the mixture of two cations, which caused strains in the PSK structure. The strain and distortion increase could accelerate the degradation of PSK.133
Similar to MAPbI3 PSKs, PEA+ was also incorporated into FAPBI3 PSKs to form FAxPEA1−xPbI3 with enhanced phase and ambient stability combined with higher PCE. The achieved stability was attributed to the formation of a self-assembled organic shell around grain boundaries that raised the phase transition energy and phase stability as well as prevented moisture from interacting with PSK. The presence of the PEA+ interlayer can lead to blockage of transport pathways and increase the energy barrier of transition from the black photoactive phase to the yellow phase, consequently making black phase PEA-FAPbI3 a kinetically stable substance. It was argued that in addition to the improved stability, PEA+ also passivated the surface defects, leading to a 17.71% PCE device with an inverted planar structure. The unencapsulated device containing layered FAxPEA1−xPbI3 (N = 40) retained more than 90% of its original PCE after being stored in air for 16 days under RH = 40%, while the pure FAPbI3 based device lost its PCE completely after 16 days.22 However in previous studies, in spite of the improvements achieved in moisture stability, relatively low performances with severe hysteresis were obtained. Wang et al. showed that by engineering heterostructures between 2D and 3D PSK phases, both the performance and stability of solar cells can be achieved. They argued that coating 3D PSK grains with either stable layered PSK crystallites, or simply a shell of butylammonium, would enhance the moisture stability due to interfacial grain boundary passivation. n-Butylammonium cations were incorporated into a mixed-cation lead mixed-halide FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IyBr1−y)3 3D PSK, leading to the formation of 2D PSK platelets interspersed between highly orientated 3D PSK grains. As a result, a 2D–3D heterostructured PSK device with a stabilized PCE of 19.5% was fabricated which retained 80% of its post burn-in PCE after 1000 h in air and close to the 4000 h with encapsulation under one-sun illumination.134
Due to the poor stability of Sn based 3D PSK devices which are even less stable than Pb based devices, the formation of 2D Sn PSKs was also studied. Similar to Pb PSKs, it was shown that 2D Sn PSKs provide much better stability than 3D films.135 For the first time, Liao et al. reported that although 2D PSKs face the charge transport problem because of the quantum well structures, orientated PSK films that are vertically grown can overcome this problem. In this regard, highly orientated (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1 PSKs were formed using an appropriate ratio of PEA, leading to the achievement of a 5.94% PCE device with greatly enhanced air stability. The 2D device retained its original PCE for over 100 h without encapsulation, while the 3D one lost its performance completely after 70 h.73 The Ruddlesden–Popper (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1SnnI3n+1 PSK is another 2D structure that was introduced as an appropriate light absorber for solar cells. PCEs of 1.94% and 2.53% were achieved for the n = 3 and n = 4 members, respectively, with promising device stability. The stability test showed that the MASnI3 device lost its initial performance after just 3 min of exposure to air while the Sn4I13 devices gradually degraded over ∼30 min. It was argued that the 2D organic–inorganic PSK films were protected by the hydrophobic long butylammonium chains. The encapsulated 2D Sn iodide PSK device exhibited better stability and retained more than 90% of its initial efficiency after 30 days.136 Usually, the decomposition enthalpy (ΔHdec) is used to determine the stability of materials and a negative value of ΔHdec corresponds to thermodynamically stable conditions. The DFT study performed in the case of low dimensional Sn based PSKs showed how the PSK dimension changes the air stability. In this study, two decomposition pathways were considered for (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1: the first includes only Sn2+ compounds,73 (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1 → 2PEAI + (n − 1)FAI + nSnI2 and the other involves only Sn4+ compounds to take into account the oxidation process (reaction (15));73 (15)
The calculated ΔHdec as function of n is presented in Fig. 21 and takes into consideration the (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1 PSK with two different orientations of FA, i.e., along the (001) and (111) directions of the 3D quasi-cubic lattice. It clearly shows that (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1 structures are stable with respect to the first decomposition pathway while they are unstable with respect to the second decomposition pathway, which is confirmed by the experimental reports137 regarding the oxidation of Sn based materials in air. Further, as seen, the ΔHdec decreases along with the decrease of n which shows the suppression of instability against the oxidation disproportionation process.73
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic structure of 3D FASnI3 and (PEA)2SnI4, and mixed FA-PEA tin PSKs. (b) Decomposition enthalpy (ΔHdec) as a function of n calculated by DFT for (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1; different orientations of FA molecules along the (001) and (111) directions were considered. Reprinted with permission.73 
Recently, Lee et al. incorporated 2D (PEA2PbI4) PSK into the precursor solution of FAPbI3 and fabricated a PSC with a stabilized PCE of 20.64%. 2D PSK amended the crystallinity of the PSK layer by suppressing the non-PSK hexagonal phase, and also enlarged the charge carrier lifetime from 78.5 to 148.7 ns, which indicated a decrease in the defect density. This study showed that the grain boundaries within the film, which are the ingression pathways for moisture, might be passivated by adding 2D PSK. To investigate the ambient stability of PSCs, unencapsulated devices were stored in a desiccator (RH < 30%) under dark conditions. The results showed that the control device degraded by 29% within 1392 h whereas the target device lost 2% of its initial PCE during this time. The operational stability of the unencapsulated devices was also examined by MPP tracking under one sun illumination, a RH of 50%, and T = 40 °C. Under these conditions, the unencapsulated control device rapidly lost 68% of its PCE over 450 min, whereas the target device retained 80% of its PCE during this period of time. In the case of encapsulated devices, the control and 2D–3D devices retained 52.3% and 72.3% of their initial PCEs, respectively, after being exposed to continuous light (0.9 sun; 90 ± 5 mW cm−2, RH of 50%, and T = 40 °C) under open circuit conditions for 500 h.138
4.2 2D PSKs as the capping layer
The importance of the stability issue in PSCs encouraged researchers to focus more on low dimensional PSKs as more moisture resistant materials, though low PCEs were achieved in the early studies. The low PCE achieved in the primary study guided researchers to use 2D PSK materials at the interface of the PSK layer and HTMs. It should be noted that 2D PSKs have not only been used as absorber layers with higher stability than 3D ones, but they have also been used as capping layers or interfacial layers to protect the PSK absorber from moisture, leading to enhanced stability. It was argued that the 2D interfacial layer can act as a protective layer on the PSK layer by shielding it from atmospheric moisture and also improving charge injection through energy level matching. In this regard, for the first time, branched polyethylenimine hydriodide (PEI HI) was employed to in situ form layered PSK (PEI)2[PbI4] as a protective layer for the PSK film. The incorporation of a great moisture-resistant 2D PSK at the interface of HTM and MAPbI3xClx and MAPbI3 PSKs yielded PCEs of 14.79 and 13.09%, respectively, with long lifetime. In this study, both of these devices showed no significant changes after 10 days under illumination at 50% humidity, although the MAPbI3 based PSC was more stable.118 Using this strategy, both reasonable PCE and lifetime were obtained.
Hybrid PSK based on CA2PbI4/MAPbIxCl3−x is another mixed 2D/3D structure that was used to enhance the stability and performance of PSCs. 2D PSK (CA2PbI4) was synthesized in situ by a reaction of CAI (cyclopropylammonium iodide) with excess PbI2 on the top surface of 3D PSK. In contrast to the 3D PSK which showed rapid degradation over 8 days of storage under a RH of 63%, the mixed PSK exhibited no change in its absorbance for up to 40 days. The stability tests revealed that the device containing more hydrophobic 2D/3D PSK was appropriately stable and retained a majority of its initial PCE after 110 h of storage under ambient conditions with 63% RH. In contrast, 3D PSK devices degraded completely after only 50 h. The best PCE obtained for the mixed 2D/3D devices was 13.86% while the pure 3D device showed a PCE of 13.12%.139 Hu et al. reported employing a MAPbI3/layered PSK heterojunction in the device that combined the efficient light absorption of MAPbI3 and moisture resistance properties of layered PSK. Self-organized layered PSK incorporating methylammonium and long-chain phenylethylammonium (PEA+ = C6H5C2H4NH3+) or n-butylammonium (BA+ = C4H9NH3+) on top of MAPbI3 improved the PCE due to reduced recombination losses, as well as improved moisture stability in the devices. A device stability test was performed at 75% RH in air at room temperature for 19 days. Under these conditions, the PCE of MAPbI3 based devices decreased from 10% to 7%, while the PCE of the heterojunction devices decreased from 12.5% to 11.5%.140 In another study, an ultrathin 2D PSK (5-AVA)2PbI4 (5-AVA = 5-ammoniumvaleric acid) passivation layer was incorporated at the interface between (FAPbI3)0.88(CsPbBr3)0.12 and the hole transporting CuSCN, yielding a 16.75% PCE device with enhanced photo and moisture stability (Fig. 22).141
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic architecture of PSC, (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the complete device, (c) the energy-level diagram of the device composition, and (d) crystal structure of 2D (5-AVA)2PbI4 PSK. Reprinted with permission.141 
A PSC based on a 2D/3D PSK light absorber with higher thermal and moisture stabilities and a high PCE of 18.0% was fabricated using an in situ growth route. Remarkably, the mixed 2D/3D devices retained 72% of their initial PCE compared to their 3D counterpart, MAPbI3, which retained only 40% of its initial efficiency (17.3%) after 20 days under a RH of 40%. In this in situ growth route, by utilizing a flash-annealing process (placed 3 mm above the hotplate at 300 °C for a short time, less than 10 s) on the 3D PSK surface, MAI released Pb–I cages at the surface. Subsequently, AVAI was cast on top of the annealed layers, leading to the formation of a 2D PSK structure. During the high temperature flash-annealing method, a small amount of MAI molecules was replaced by AVAI molecules leading to the formation of better interactions between 2D and 3D phases. In the case of thermal stability, the mixed 2D/3D device showed a PCE of 17.4% after heating at 100 °C for 1 h, while the 3D one resulted in a PCE of 14.9% under the same conditions which was attributed to the nonuniform 3D PSK layer. Further, AVA-MAPbI3 with 5s flash annealing time exhibited better moisture stability than 3D MAPbI3 at a RH of 93% whereas the 3D one disintegrated after 2 s while the 2D/3D PSK film still remained black.142
Recently, Cho et al. synthesized a thin 2D perovskite capping layer in the form of PEA2PbI4 on top of the 3D PSK layer by spin coating the phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) IPA solution on a pristine Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39 (CFMPIB) film. The results of the long-term stability test of the devices containing 2D perovskite films which were kept under illumination showed that the device based on L-CFM/P (layered PSK with CFMPIB and quasi-PEA2PbI4) was more stable than the one with pristine CFMPIB. The L-CFM/P based device showed significant stability even at a temperature of 50 °C in air. The stability of L-CFM/P devices was significantly improved even at 50 °C temperature in air. It retained 90% of the initial PCE after 800 h under inert gas conditions and 85% in a humid environment with encapsulation while the pristine 3D PSK based device showed a faster decrease of PCE.143 Zhu et al. improved the humidity and thermal stability of the PSC by modifying the grain boundary of the FA0.95Cs0.05PbI3 layer. By gradually growing in situ two-dimensional nanoplates between the grain boundaries of PSK films using phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI), a device with a PCE as high as 20.34% was achieved. Remarkably, the PSK with 0.1 mol L−1 PEAI did not show any phase transition, indicating the enhanced thermal stability of the FA0.95Cs0.05PbI3 film.144
2D PSK was not only used as an active layer, but was also employed as a HTL. A low cost and durable device with high PCE and robust stability was reported in which 2D PSK was used as the HTL instead of expensive and unstable organic HTLs. It was argued that holes generated in the 3D MAPbI3 can efficiently be extracted into the p-type 2D BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 HTL with the help of the built-in field in the 3D–2D junction. The 3D–2D PSC exhibited a champion PCE of 13.15% which increased to 16.13% after thermal aging. Interestingly, the 3D–2D PSC retained 71% and 74% of its initial PCE over 50 days under 65% humidity and over 30 days at 85 °C without encapsulation, respectively. The mixed-halide, mixed cation Cs0.17FA0.83PbI2.4Br0.6-based 3D–2D PSC presented desirable illumination stability under MPP conditions which was even higher than that of the MAPbI3 based 3D–2D device. It tolerated around 96 h of one-sun illumination with no obvious PCE decay.145
A brief summary of the efforts taken to improve the durability of the PSCs regarding low dimensional PSKs is presented in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the stability progress of the PSCs employing low dimensional PSKs




Device structure
Strategy
Test conditions
Achievement
Ref.




ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/LiF/Ag
Combining 2D PSK with CH3NH3PbI3 and forming (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x
Ambient conditions
The MAPbI3 device lost its performance completely after 120 h

123



RH: 50%
The PCEs of devices with (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x, x = 2% and 4% dropped by 16% and 8% over 14 days, respectively


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Ag
Using mixed 2D/3D PSK hybrids (CA2PbI4/MAPbIxCl3−x)
Ambient conditions, at RT
2D/3D PSK retained the majority of its initial PCE after 110 h of storage

139



RH: 63 ± 5%
3D PSK devices degraded completely after 50 h


FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Employing reduced-dimensionality (quasi-2D) PEA2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 PSK films
(1) Stored in nitrogen
(1) Quasi-2D PSK with n < 40 retained its initial performance after 1440 h while the 3D PSK lost its PCE completely

120



(2) Humid air, RH: 55%
(2) 3D device almost fully degraded after 7 days, while n = 40 showed 30% reduction after 14 days


FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Employing MAPbI3/layered heterojunction as active layer ((PEA)2(MA)4(Pb5I16)
In air, at RT
The PCE of MAPbI3 devices decreased from 10% to 7%, while the heterojunction devices showed no significant change in their performance after 19 days

140



RH: 75%


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al
Using 2D(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 PSK instead of 3D MAPbI3
Under one sun illumination
The 2D PSK device retained 80% of its PCE after 200 h and slowly degraded to about 70% of its initial PCE over 2050 h

125



The 3D device retained 40% of the PCE within the first 24 h, followed by slow degradation to <10% of its initial PCE over 2250 h


The encapsulated 3D PSK device lost more than 50% of its original performance after 10 h, while the 2D encapsulated PSK showed no degradation over 2250 h of storage under light illumination


ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Lif/Ag
Using polyethylenimine (PEI) cations to form 2D (PEI)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1
Under one sun illumination
The devices containing both the (PEI)2(MA)6Pb7I22 and (PEI)2(MA)4Pb5I16 large cells retained approximately their original PCE value after 500 h of light soaking, while the MAPbI3 lost its PCE

130



FTO/bl-TiO2/mp TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au
Using mixed 2D/3D (HOOC(CH2)4NH3)2PbI4/CH3NH3PbI3 PSK
(1) Continuous illumination under an Ar atmosphere
(1) The 2D/3D device with the Spiro HTM/Au contact retained up to 60% of the original PCE after 300 h under condition 1 while the 3D CH3NH3PbI3 device retained 40% of its initial PCE

132



FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/ZrO2/C
(2) Module stability test under one sun at T = 55 °C and under short circuit conditions; a UV filter up to 390 nm is on top of all the samples. ISO standards conditions
(2) Module with a carbon contact was stable for >400 days


FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Formation of a 2D–3D heterostructure by employing n-butylammonium cations in FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IyBr1−y)3 3D PSK and formation of BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3
Under xenon-lamp simulated full-spectrum AM1.5, 76 mW cm−2 in air
The reference cell retained 80% of its “post burn-in” PCE after 700 h

134



RH: 45%
The 2D–3D cell retained 80% of its “post burn-in” PCE after 1000 h in air, and close to 4000 h when encapsulated


ITO/NiOx/PSK/PCBM/C60/Ag
Formation of quasi 3D FAxPEA1−xPbI3 PSK structures
Under ambient conditions
The device containing layered FAxPEA1−xPbI3 (N = 40) retained more than 90% of its PCE after 16 days, while the FAPbI3 device lost its PCE completely in the same period of time

22



RH: 40%


ITO/NiOx/PSK/PCBM/Al
Formation of highly oriented growth 2D (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1
Stored in a glove box (N2)
The 2D device retained its PCE for over 100 h without encapsulation, while the 3D one lost its performance completely after 70 h

73



FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/PTAA/Au
Using 2D (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1SnnI3n+1 PSKs to enhance the moisture stability
Exposed to air
The 3D MASnI3 device lost its initial PCE after 3 min while the Sn4I13 devices gradually degraded over ∼30 min

136



The encapsulated 2D Sn iodide PSK device retained more than 90% of its PCE after 30 days and 40% after 120 days while the PCE of the encapsulated MASnI3 dropped to zero after 30 days


FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
Hot casting of a PEAI/IPA solution on top of Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39 PSK to enhance the moisture stability
(1) Inert gas conditions
(1) The device containing the 2D PSK capping layer retained 90% of its initial PCE after 800 h

143



(2) Humid environment (0.85 RH)
(2) It retained 85% of its initial PCE after 800 h




5 Summary and future outlook
The research on PSCs is undergoing rapid development; however, the majority of attempts are focused on achieving highly efficient devices. Although their PCE reached up to 23.3%, the short lifetime and fast degradation have still remained as the main challenges that have gained less attention. Thus far, lifetimes from a few minutes to several months were achieved in PSCs. As stated, issues of PSK device longevity can be addressed by two methods, the intrinsic and extrinsic methods. Particularly, the intrinsic method involves the development of new PSK materials stable against moisture, heat, and light via composition engineering and modifying the original chemistry. In fact, in this tremendous playground, a lot of effective parameters are present. Among all the effective parameters, PSK materials must display long-term stability under ambient conditions and at the upper end of the operational temperature range. The long term durability of organic–inorganic PSK necessitates a stable crystalline structure against environmental stresses. This review summarized the progress of the changes in the PSK crystalline structure beginning from the 3D ABX3 structures based on MAPbX3 to the mixed halide and cation PSKs and finally to the low dimensional PSKs to prolong the device performance. In addition to the stability issues related to MAPbX3 as the first 3D structure used in PSCs, the degradation mechanisms were also illustrated. Then, other 3D PSKs engineered by the cooperation of organic and inorganic cations, various metals and halides were reviewed regarding the stability challenges. In general, 3D PSKs suffer from intrinsic instability over heat, light, and moisture which hindered their widespread commercialization. The origins of these instabilities are mainly attributed to the high hydrophilicity of organic cations in the PSK structure and the weak interaction between organic cations and the surrounding halide anions. In brief, MA-based PSKs are not thermo- and photo-stable absorbers and suffer from halide segregation instabilities. Although FA-based PSKs showed higher thermal stability, they suffer from high moisture sensitivity. In the case of CsPbI3, the perovskite phase can be formed though this photo-active phase is only stable at temperatures above 300 °C. It seems that FA-based PSKs mixed with other smaller cations can deliver the best balance between thermal stability and structural stability. Moreover, although some stability challenges were overcome by employing a mixture of halides, more study is needed to understand the exact mechanisms of the desired effects. Thus, cooperation of these PSKs to obtain durable mixed PSK structures still has enormous potential to prolong the lifetime of PSCs. In the case of metal sites, many efforts have been taken to substitute the toxic lead with Sn, though more significant stability challenges have emerged. As illustrated, the grain boundaries in the PSK films were defined as the most active sites in the degradation process and have been commonly passivated using organic small molecules and polymer chains. On the other hand, 2D and 2D/3D Ruddlesden–Popper PSK materials have provided desired stability for PSCs. Though intrinsic approaches such as lowering the dimensionality have significantly improved the thermal and moisture stability of PSCs, the devices based on the above new hydrophobic PSKs showed much lower PCE in comparison with 3D PSKs based devices. Thus far, very promising features were delivered by mixing 3D/2D structures, where a mixture of two structures was employed as the active layer or layered PSKs as capping layers. Remarkably, the 2D PSK family has enormous potential for achieving durable PSCs and still awaits further investigation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from INSF and the Research Department of Tarbiat Modares University (Research group of phase change materials, Grant No. IG-39710 and research group of nano plasma photonics, IG-39704).
References
B. Wang, X. Xiao and T. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 12287–12297 RSC .
F. Arabpour Roghabadi, N. Ahmadi, V. Ahmadi, A. Di Carlo, K. Oniy Aghmiuni, A. Shokrolahzadeh Tehrani, F. S. Ghoreishi, M. Payandeh and N. Mansour Rezaei Fumani, Sol. Energy, 2018, 173, 407–424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Galagan, E. W. C. Coenen, W. J. H. Verhees and R. Andriessen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5700–5705 RSC .
F. Arabpour Roghabadi, V. Ahmadi and K. Oniy Aghmiuni, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 112677–112685 RSC .
B. Abdollahi Nejand, V. Ahmadi and H. R. Shahverdi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21807–21818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung and N.-G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Petrović, V. Chellappan and S. Ramakrishna, Sol. Energy, 2015, 122, 678–699 CrossRef .
J.-H. Im, C.-R. Lee, J.-W. Lee, S.-W. Park and N.-G. Park, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4088–4093 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Chung, B. Lee, J. He, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 485, 486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Nejand, V. Ahmadi, S. Gharibzadeh and H. R. Shahverdi, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Yang, Y. Ding, J. Xu, X. Liu, B. Zhang, J. Yao, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1232–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, C. Cheng, H. Wei, H. Liu, X. Li, W. Li and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 42105–42112 RSC .
F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, E. Lamanna, S. Cacovich, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, C. Ducati and A. Di Carlo, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 162–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 284–292 CrossRef .
Y. Wan-Jian, S. Tingting and Y. Yanfa, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Nan, Z. Zonglong, C. Chu-Chen, L. Hongbin, P. Bo, P. Alessio, L. Xiaosong, W. Liduo and J. A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, T. Li, Y. Shao, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3650–3656 RSC .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 RSC .
H. Choi, J. Jeong, H.-B. Kim, S. Kim, B. Walker, G.-H. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2014, 7, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, L. Liu, L. Yang, P. Shen, B. Sun and J. A. McLeod, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4720–4725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 RSC .
J. Yang, B. D. Siempelkamp, D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1955–1963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
A. M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8326–8330 CrossRef .
K. Domanski, E. A. Alharbi, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and W. Tress, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, P. Fassl, D. Becker-Koch, A. Bausch, B. Rivkin, S. Bai, P. E. Hopkinson, H. J. Snaith and Y. Vaynzof, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700977 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Bai, Q. Dong and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 516–522 RSC .
F. Arabpour
Roghabadi, V. Ahmadi and K. Oniy Aghmiuni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13532–13538 CrossRef .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, M. J. Katz, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 091101 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Gujar, T. Unger, A. Schönleber, M. Fried, F. Panzer, S. van Smaalen, A. Köhler and M. Thelakkat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 605–614 RSC .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
J. Xiong, B. Yang, R. Wu, C. Cao, Y. Huang, C. Liu, Z. Hu, H. Huang, Y. Gao and J. Yang, Org. Electron., 2015, 24, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Yerramilli, Y. Chen, D. Sanni, J. Asare, N. D. Theodore and T. L. Alford, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomez, S. Sanchez, M. Campoy-Quiles and A. Abate, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chu, M. Yang, P. Schulz, D. Wu, X. Ma, E. Seifert, L. Sun, X. Li, K. Zhu and K. Lai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2230 CrossRef PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628–5641 RSC .
G. Niu, W. Li, J. Li, X. Liang and L. Wang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 17473–17479 RSC .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Lee, D. J. Seol, A. N. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4991–4998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Schaefer, I. Hechenbleikner, G. A. Peters and V. P. Wystrach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1959, 81, 1466–1470 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qiu, A. Ray, M. Jaysankar, T. Merckx, J. P. Bastos, D. Cheyns, R. Gehlhaar, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700920 CrossRef .
T. M. Koh, K. Fu, Y. Fang, S. Chen, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar, P. P. Boix and T. Baikie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16458–16462 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Xu, L. Xiao, B. Zhang, S. Dai and J. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2449–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662 RSC .
Z. Ning, S. Yiheng, Z. Yu, X. Ziqi, Z. Guanhaojie, L. Liang, C. Qi and Z. Huanping, Small, 2017, 13, 1700484 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Lee, D. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, S. W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
Y. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, J. Kim, O. Voznyy, X. Gong, L. N. Quan, C. S. Tan, J. Hofkens, D. Yu, Q. Zhao and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1607 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Tan, H. Yuan, Z. Yang, J. Z. Fan, J. Kim, O. Voznyy, X. Gong, L. N. Quan and C. S. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1607 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Zhu, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Pan, L. e. Mo and S. Dai, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2436–2443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Filip, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith and F. Giustino, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. MØLler, Nature, 1958, 182, 1436 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paterno, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695 RSC .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad and D. T. Moore, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kulbak, S. Gupta, N. Kedem, I. Levine, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 167–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiaotong, S. Weidong, L. Qian, Z. Xixia, H. Dongsheng and Q. Zewei, Chem.–Asian J., 2018, 13, 1654–1659 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liao, H. Liu, W. Zhou, D. Yang, Y. Shang, Z. Shi, B. Li, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, L. N. Quan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, B. R. Sutherland, Q. Mi, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6693–6699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 489 CrossRef CAS .
B.-W. Park, B. Philippe, X. Zhang, H. Rensmo, G. Boschloo and E. M. J. Johansson, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6806–6813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Jain, D. Phuyal, M. L. Davies, M. Li, B. Philippe, C. De Castro, Z. Qiu, J. Kim, T. Watson and W. C. Tsoi, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 614–624 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, L. Gao, S. Teo, Z. Guo, Z. Xu, S. Zhao and T. Ma, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2419–2428 RSC .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. J. Lau, X. Deng, J. Zheng, J. Kim, Z. Zhang, M. Zhang, J. Bing, B. Wilkinson, L. Hu, R. Patterson, S. Huang and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5580–5586 RSC .
W.-J. Yin, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3625–3631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Misra, S. Aharon, B. Li, D. Mogilyansky, I. Visoly-Fisher, L. Etgar and E. A. Katz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 326–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tripathi, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, T. Masuda, L. Han and K. Miyano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12081–12088 RSC .
C. H. Ng, T. S. Ripolles, K. Hamada, S. H. Teo, H. N. Lim, J. Bisquert and S. Hayase, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2482 CrossRef PubMed .
F. K. Aldibaja, L. Badia, E. Mas-Marzá, R. S. Sánchez, E. M. Barea and I. Mora-Sero, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9194–9200 RSC .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. W. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yoon, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1507–1514 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arora, M. I. Dar, A. Hinderhofer, N. Pellet, F. Schreiber, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2017, 358, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, X. Du, S. Scheiner, D. P. McMeekin, Z. Wang, N. Li, M. S. Killian, H. Chen, M. Richter, I. Levchuk, N. Schrenker, E. Spiecker, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, A. Hirsch, P. Schmuki, H.-P. Steinrück, R. H. Fink, M. Halik, H. J. Snaith and C. J. Brabec, Science, 2017, 358, 1192–1197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, M. Ibrahim Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, C. Liang, Y. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Song and G. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32574–32580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Q. Dong, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6734–6739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Yan, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zuo, H. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-C. Zhang, M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-R. Jiang, H.-R. Liu, Y.-G. Yang, X.-Y. Gao and H. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2572–2579 RSC .
H. Li, C. Liang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Tong, W. Zuo, S. Xu, G. Shao and S. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6064–6071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Shi, L. Zhu, Y. Luo, D. Li, H. Wu and Q. Meng, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 383–392 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, X. Zhang, J. Lei, H. Bin, Z.-G. Zhang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701757 CrossRef .
M. Kim, S. G. Motti, R. Sorrentino and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2609–2619 RSC .
Q. Zeng, X. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Lu, Z. Chen, X. Yong, S. A. T. Redfern, H. Wei, H. Wang, H. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Zhang, J. S. Tse and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705393 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Salado, F. J. Ramos, V. M. Manzanares, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. J. Dyson and S. Ahmad, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2708–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang, L. Pan, Z. Sun and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35200–35208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hou, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, Y. Chen and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30607–30613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, J. Luo, B. Zhao, Z. Wan, R. Wang and C. Jia, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 236, 122–130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, W. Wang and L. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38985–38993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, G. Tong, T. Chen, H. Zhu, G. Li, Y. Chang, L. Wang and Y. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14255–14261 RSC .
J. Chen, S.-G. Kim and N.-G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801948 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, B. Li, J. Yuan, F. Huang, G. Cao and J. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37005–37013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Luo, N. Pellet, C. Yi, X. Li, X. Zhao, T. J. S. Dennis, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, D. Bi and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606806 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Park, H. Ko, D. H. Sin, K. C. Song and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703546 CrossRef .
C. Ji, C. Liang, H. Zhang, M. Sun, F. Sun, Q. Song, X. Zhang, D. Li, F. You and Z. He, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. Liu, J. Shi, H. Zhang, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, Y. Li and Q. Meng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802012 CrossRef .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh and M. Asta, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Calabrese, N. L. Jones, R. L. Harlow, N. Herron, D. L. Thorn and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2328–2330 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, X. Wang, Y.-x. Xu and F. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Sun, J. Peng, W. Zhang, X. Su, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and Z. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700162 CrossRef .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .
K. Yao, X. Wang, F. Li and L. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15430–15433 RSC .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safdari, P. H. Svensson, M. T. Hoang, I. Oh, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15638–15646 RSC .
M. Safdari, A. Fischer, B. Xu, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9201–9207 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. Zhu, D. Yang, J. Li, Y. Liu, D.-M. Smilgies and R. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
X. Zhang, G. Wu, S. Yang, W. Fu, Z. Zhang, C. Chen, W. Liu, J. Yan, W. Yang and H. Chen, Small, 2017, 13, 1700611 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yao, X. Wang, Y.-x. Xu, F. Li and L. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3131–3138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gan, O. Wang, K. Liu, X. Du, L. Guo and H. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Iagher and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 366–372 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, C. A. Feild, W. T. A. Harrison and A. M. Guloy, Nature, 1994, 369, 467 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, T. Yokoyama, J. L. Logsdon, T.-B. Song, O. K. Farha, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 982–990 CrossRef .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, S. J. Turner, M. T. Z. Tan, M. A. Worsley and A. Zettl, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 522 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, Z. Dai, T.-H. Han, C. Choi, S.-Y. Chang, S.-J. Lee, N. De Marco, H. Zhao, P. Sun, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3021 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ma, C. Leng, Y. Ji, X. Wei, K. Sun, L. Tang, J. Yang, W. Luo, C. Li, Y. Deng, S. Feng, J. Shen, S. Lu, C. Du and H. Shi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18309–18314 RSC .
Y. Hu, J. Schlipf, M. Wussler, M. L. Petrus, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, P. Müller-Buschbaum and P. Docampo, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5999–6007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiangzhao, S. Ja-Young and P. Nam-Gyu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702714 CrossRef .
T. Ye, A. Bruno, G. Han, T. M. Koh, J. Li, N. F. Jamaludin, C. Soci, S. G. Mhaisalkar and W. L. Leong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801654 CrossRef .
K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, E. Oveisi, J. Ryu, O. Almora, M. Tschumi, P. A. Schouwink, G. Seo, S. Heo, J. Park, J. Jang, S. Paek, G. Garcia-Belmonte and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952–959 RSC .
X. Zhu, S. Zuo, Z. Yang, J. Feng, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Priya, S. F. Liu and D. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39802–39808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, M. Long, M. Qin, X. Lu, S. Chen, F. Xie, L. Gong, J. Chen, M. Chu, Q. Miao, Z. Chen, W. Xu, P. Liu, W. Xie and J.-b. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2706–2721 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Progress in PSC efficiencies and durability (NREL).	 

 	Fig. 2  Issues related to the stability of the PSK layer in PSCs.	 
[(CH3NH3+)PbI3]n + H2O ↔ [(CH3NH3+)n−1(PbI3)n][H3O+] + CH3NH2	(1)
[(CH3NH3+)n−1(PbI3)n][H3O+] ↔ HI + PbI2 + [(CH3NH3+)PbI3]n−1 + H2O	(2)
CH3NH3PbI3 (s) ↔ CH3NH3I (aq) + PbI2 (s)	(3)
CH3NH3I (aq) ↔ CH3NH2 (aq) + HI (aq)	(4)
4HI (aq) + O2 ↔ 2I2 (s) + 2H2O	(5)
2HI (aq) ↔ H2 (g) + I2	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Proposed mechanism for the formation of CH3I–PbI2 defect sites in MAPbI3 through dissociation during crystal formation or under light radiation. Reprinted with permission.27	 
4CH3NH3PbI3 + 2H2O ↔ (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2	(7)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photovoltaic characteristics of PSCs exposed to a temperature of 85 °C for 24 h under different atmospheric conditions.30 Reprinted with permission. (b) Schematic diagram of the degradation of MAPbI3 films in moisture along the in-plane direction. Reprinted with permission.35	 
4CH3NH3PbI3 + 4H2O ↔ 4(CH3NH3PbI3·H2O) ↔ (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O + 3PbI2 + 2H2O	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The high-resolution XPS spectra of the C 1s region of films P1 (MAI:PbI2; 1:1 molar ratio) and P3 (MAI:PbI2; 3:1 molar ratio), (b) a proposed mechanism for the in situ dissociation of CH3NH3I and iodide complexes during the formation of CH3NH3PbI3. Reprinted with permission.36	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Topography (top), corresponding pcAFM current (bottom) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) image (inset) of the PSK layer; the grain boundaries are marked by arrows; (b) pcAFM maps (top) and the corresponding topography images (bottom) of the PSK layer during light exposure for different times, and (c) pcAFM map of the PSK layer under the combination of voltage and light stress obtained by performing three passes with a −0.2 V biased tip and waiting one hour between each scan. Reprinted with permission.43	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 7  Correlation between tolerance factor (t) and PSK crystal structure. Reprinted with permission.20	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the phase transition occurring in the Pb and Sn organic–inorganic hybrid PSK materials. Reprinted with permission.46	 

 	Fig. 9  Phase instability of CH3NH3PbI3.	 

 	Fig. 10  A summary of the stability issues for MA-based PSKs.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic description of the dipole moments of (a) MA and (b) FA and (c) their effects on the inorganic cage. Reprinted with permission.55	 

 	Fig. 12  The crystal phases of FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 and dependency of the internal energy of mixed CsxFA1−xPbI3 on the phase type. (a and b) Exhibit the δ phase in FA and Cs PSK, respectively; (c and d) exhibit the α and β FAPbI3, respectively. (e) Represents the cubic phase of CsPbI3 PSK. (f) The internal energy, ΔE (dashed blue line), mixing entropy contribution, −TΔS (dotted red dashed line), and free energy, ΔF = ΔE − TΔS (black line) dependent on Cs content. Reprinted with permission.57	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Diagrammatic structure of CsPbI3 phases at RT and T > 300 °C. (b) Absorbance spectra of black PSK and yellow non-PSK phases of CsPbI3 thin films. (c) X-ray diffraction spectra (XRD) of cubic CsPbI3 thin films in the black phase. Reprinted with permission.67	 

 	Fig. 14  (a–f) HRTEM images of one CsGeI3 nanocube under electron beam irradiation (300 kV) with increasing electron dose (the scale bars represent 20 nm). The crystal lattice faces of CsGeI3 (100), CsGeI3 (111), CsGeI3 (200) and CsI (110) are marked by the green, orange, blue and yellow colors, respectively. (g–i) SAED patterns captured under continuous electron beam irradiation. (j) Schematic illustration of the electron beam irradiation induced transformations in colloidal CsGeI3 nanocubes. Reprinted with permission.72	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Modeled formation energy of the CsPb(X1−xYx)3 (X, Y = I, Br, Cl) alloy, (b) model system for the I–Pb–Cl trimer to describe how charge transfer can achieve Coulomb energy gain due to halogen mixing in PSK. Reprinted with permission.80	 
nMAPbBrxI3−x + hν → (n − 2m)MAPbBrxI3−x + mMAPbBrx−yI3−x+y + mMAPbBrx+yI3−x−y	(14)

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of the presence of halide vacancies in the Pb–I plane of mixed halide PSK films that leads to halide segregation.89	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of two neighbouring PSK grains crosslinked by 4-ABPACl; (b) PCE of unsealed PSCs as a function of storage time in ambient air at a RH of 55% in the dark. PCE was measured under 10% full sun intensity. (c) evolution of normalized photovoltaic characteristics of the encapsulated PCS with a 4-ABPA-anchored PSK film measured under 10% full sun intensity during ageing at 85 °C in the dark. Reprinted with permission.92	 

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al	Doping of 3D MAPbI3 by Cs+	Ambient conditions, RT: 20 °C, RH: 11%	Both MAPbI3 and Cs0.1MA0.9PbI3 devices lost their performance after 45 h	
26

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Using FAPbI3 as a 3D PSK absorber	Ambient humid atmosphere	FAPbI3 black phase was even less stable than MA based PSKs	
53

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Using FAPbI3 as a 3D PSK absorber	10 scans under one sun illumination; devices were kept in air for 8 days before measurement	FAPbI3 showed superior photostability than the MAPbI3 device	
50

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/CsSnI3/m-MTDATA or Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Replacing Pb with Sn and addition of SnF2 in the PSK layer	Storing the device in a glovebox for more than 250 h	Inconsiderable change in device performance	
116

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/FAPbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Ag	Substitution of Cs+ for FA in FAPbI3 and formation of FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3	Under continuous white light illumination (100 mW cm−2), ambient conditions; RH = 40%	The FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 device retained 35% of its initial PCE after 30 min, while the FAPbI3 device retained 20% of its initial PCE	
59

CH3NH3PbI3 and CH3NH3PbBr3 films	Comparison of photo- and thermal-stability of CH3NH3PbI3 with that of CH3NH3PbBr3	Exposure to 100 suns for 60 min, T range = 25 to 55 °C	MAPbBr3 was photo- and thermally stable for 60 min while some of the CH3NH3PbI3 crystals were decomposed	
82

FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Tuning the tolerance factor by alloying FAPbI3 and CsPbI3 and formation of solid-state FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 alloys	Storing under 15% RH	FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 was completely stable for 15 days; FAPbI3 lost 50% of its PCE during this time	
20

FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Interface engineering by crosslinking of CH3NH3PbI3 grains using 4-ABPACl	(1) Ambient conditions in the dark, RH = 55%; I–V curves were recorded at 10% illumination intensity	(1) Over one week, the device modified by 4-ABPA retained more than 90% of its PCE, while the pristine device lost more than 80% of its initial PCE	
92

(2) Encapsulated devices illuminated under 10 mW cm−2 UV-filtered simulated sun light at 45 °C	(2) The device based on the crosslinked PSK lost only 10% of its PCE after one week, whereas the control one lost 30% of its PCE
FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/PTAA/Au	Utilization of Cs as the cation and Br as the halide part of the 3D PSK	Stored in air with RH = 15–20% and characterized in air with RH = 60–70%, every couple of days for 2 weeks	CsPbBr3 kept its initial PCE after 15 days, while MAPbI3 lost more than 80% of its PCE during this storage time	
71

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/FAPbI3/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Replacing FAPbI3 with triple cations, Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(1−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 PSK	Under a N2 atmosphere, RT, constant illumination, max power point	The Cs5M device was stable for 250 h. The Cs0M device lost its PCE after 100 h	
60

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	Construction of mixed halide perovskite, CsPbI2Br	RH of 20–25%, T = 85 °C for 270 min	The absorbance of the CsPbI2Br layer was constant while a reduction in the MAPbI2Br thin film absorbance and transition to yellow phase was observed	
69

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Replacing FAPbI3 with mixed cations and halide Cs0.2FA0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 PSK	Ambient conditions in the dark	The Cs0.2FA0.8PbI2.84Br0.16 device was stable for 1000 h while FAPbI3 lost its performance after 48 h	
57

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Incorporation of Rb in the cation site of mixed cation PSK, MAFACsRbPbI3	Storing at 85 °C for 500 h in a N2 atmosphere under full illumination	The MAFACsRbPbI3 device retained 95% of its initial performance	
63

FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Protecting CH3NH3PbI3 grains with PEG chains	(1) Humid environment (RH: 70%) in the dark	(1) The PCE of the pristine PSC decreased from 12 to 0.5% after 50 h, whereas the PSC modified by PEG retained 65% of its PCE after 300 h	
95

(2) Under continuous light illumination at a RH of 70%	(2) The pristine device lost its PCE after 10 h, while the PEG modified one retained 83% of its PCE during the same aging period
FTO/bl-TiO2/C60/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Mixed cation PSK layer of MA and FA ((FA)x(MA)1−xPbI3) used to prevent the transformation of α-FAPbI3 to δ-FAPbI3	Storing in a N2 glovebox	The device with (FA)x(MA)1−xPbI3 (MA = 40%) PSK showed a 6.5% reduction in PCE after 288 h	
56

FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Introducing Cs to the CH3NH3PbI3 lattice and fabricating CsxMA1−x PbI3	60 min exposure to air at 85 °C	The Cs0.09MA0.91PbI3 device retained 80% of its PCE, while the MAPbI3 device retained around 30% of its initial PCE	
48

FTO/nr-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Modification of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer by PVAm HI	Ambient environment with a RH of 30%	The modified device retained 92% and 80% of its PCE after 50 days and 100 days, respectively, while the control device lost more than 65% of its PCE after 5 days	
98

FTO/SnO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Grain boundary passivation of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer by PVP	(1) Ambient conditions (20° to 25 °C; RH of 25 to 40%) under 1-sun and a constant bias	(1) The stabilized PCE of the control PSC decreased from 17.5% under 0.88 V to 16.2% after 30 min, whereas the stabilized PCE of the PVP-passivated one under 0.94 V decreased from 19.1% to 18.9 mW cm−2) after 30 min	
96

(2) Encapsulated devices were stored in a glovebox and measured under ambient condition (20° to 25 °C; RH of 25 to 40%) for 2500 h	(2) The device without PVP degraded to 59% of its initial PCE while the PVP passivated one retained more than 85% of the original PCE
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al	Passivation of the surface defects of the CHNH3PbIxCl3−x grains by PCDTBT	
T = 28 °C at a RH of 30%	The PCE of the devices based on the CH3NH3PbIxCl3−x:PCDTBT active layer decreased only by 19% after 192 h of storage while this change was 30% for the control devices	
97

FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/P3HT/Au	Ca substitution in the lead part of the CsPbI3 layer (CsPb1−xCaxI3)	RT, RH = 60–70%, in the dark	The PCE of the encapsulated CsPb1−xCaxI3 device remained at 85% of the initial value for two months, while the PCE of the encapsulated CsPbI3 device dropped 20% more than that of the device with Ca	
79

FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro OMeTAD/Au	Interface modification of FA0.75MA0.25Pb(I11/12,Br1/12)3 grains by polystyrene	Ambient conditions, T = 25 °C and RH = 30%	The PS-capped PSC showed only 10% reduction in its PCE after 30 days compared to 22% loss for the control cell	
99

FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	CH3NH3PbI3 layer modification by interface engineering and grain boundary passivation using J71 as a p-type polymer	Ambient environment (in air at a RH of 40% at 25 °C)	The J71-modified PSC exhibited less than 10% loss in its PCE after 14 days while the reference cell lost more than 20% of its PCE	
100

FTO/bl-TiO2/C60/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Grain boundary passivation of the CH3NH3PbI3 layer by PEO	(1) RH = 88%	The reference device lost more than 90% of its PCE after 120 h while the PEO-capped one retained 80% of its initial PCE over 120 h	
101

(2) MPP and a RH of 50% under one-sun illumination	(2) 50% of the PCE of the reference MAPbI3 device was lost within 12 h while the device with PEO retained 80% of the PCE over 18 h
FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Interface engineering of the grains of the MAPbI3 layer using TPA	(1) RH of 30%	(1) The pristine PSC retained 18% of the original PCE, whereas the TPA modified one retained 51% of its original PCE	
104

(2) Heating at 100 °C	(2) 20% and 80% reduction in PCE was observed for the TPA modified device and unmodified one, respectively, after 10 h
FTO/bl-TiO2/m-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Passivating of the [(FAI)0.81(PbI2)0.85(MABr)0.15(PbBr2)0.15] grain boundaries using α-bis-PCBM	(1) Ambient air with a RH of 40% at 65 °C	(1) The device with PCBM retained more than 90% of its PCE after 44 days of storage while the control device lost around 50% of its PCE	
112

(2) Continuous full-sun illumination and MPP tracking	(2) The PCBM modified device retained 96% of its PCE after 600 h and the control device was completely degraded after 250 h

 	Fig. 18  Energetics of formation of dimensionality tuned PSKs and their stability. (a) Unit cell structure of (C8H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 PSKs with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞). (b) The PCEs of the devices involving dimensionally tuned PSKs. Reprinted with permission.120	 

 	Fig. 19  Photostability behavior of a planar solar cell with ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al under constant AM 1.5G illumination for 2D (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 and 3D MAPbI3 PSCs (a) without and (c) with encapsulation. Moisture stability of the device under a RH of 65% (b) without and (d) with encapsulation. Reprinted with permission.125	 

 	Fig. 20  Stability measurements for Cs+ doped (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 2D PSCs. (a) Long-term stability of both unencapsulated Cs0-2D and Cs5-2D solar cells under ambient conditions with a RH of 30%. (b) Humidity tolerance measurements for both solar cells at RHs of 30%, 65%, and 85%. (c) Thermal stability of unencapsulated Cs0-2D and Cs5-2D PSCs at 80 °C under an inert atmosphere. Reprinted with permission.128	 
	(15)

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic structure of 3D FASnI3 and (PEA)2SnI4, and mixed FA-PEA tin PSKs. (b) Decomposition enthalpy (ΔHdec) as a function of n calculated by DFT for (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1; different orientations of FA molecules along the (001) and (111) directions were considered. Reprinted with permission.73	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic architecture of PSC, (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the complete device, (c) the energy-level diagram of the device composition, and (d) crystal structure of 2D (5-AVA)2PbI4 PSK. Reprinted with permission.141	 

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/LiF/Ag	Combining 2D PSK with CH3NH3PbI3 and forming (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x	Ambient conditions	The MAPbI3 device lost its performance completely after 120 h	
123

RH: 50%	The PCEs of devices with (MAPbI3)1−x[(PEI)2PbI4]x, x = 2% and 4% dropped by 16% and 8% over 14 days, respectively
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Ag	Using mixed 2D/3D PSK hybrids (CA2PbI4/MAPbIxCl3−x)	Ambient conditions, at RT	2D/3D PSK retained the majority of its initial PCE after 110 h of storage	
139

RH: 63 ± 5%	3D PSK devices degraded completely after 50 h
FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Employing reduced-dimensionality (quasi-2D) PEA2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 PSK films	(1) Stored in nitrogen	(1) Quasi-2D PSK with n < 40 retained its initial performance after 1440 h while the 3D PSK lost its PCE completely	
120

(2) Humid air, RH: 55%	(2) 3D device almost fully degraded after 7 days, while n = 40 showed 30% reduction after 14 days
FTO/bl-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Employing MAPbI3/layered heterojunction as active layer ((PEA)2(MA)4(Pb5I16)	In air, at RT	The PCE of MAPbI3 devices decreased from 10% to 7%, while the heterojunction devices showed no significant change in their performance after 19 days	
140

RH: 75%
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Al	Using 2D(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 PSK instead of 3D MAPbI3	Under one sun illumination	The 2D PSK device retained 80% of its PCE after 200 h and slowly degraded to about 70% of its initial PCE over 2050 h	
125

The 3D device retained 40% of the PCE within the first 24 h, followed by slow degradation to <10% of its initial PCE over 2250 h
The encapsulated 3D PSK device lost more than 50% of its original performance after 10 h, while the 2D encapsulated PSK showed no degradation over 2250 h of storage under light illumination
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PSK/PCBM/Lif/Ag	Using polyethylenimine (PEI) cations to form 2D (PEI)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1	Under one sun illumination	The devices containing both the (PEI)2(MA)6Pb7I22 and (PEI)2(MA)4Pb5I16 large cells retained approximately their original PCE value after 500 h of light soaking, while the MAPbI3 lost its PCE	
130

FTO/bl-TiO2/mp TiO2/PSK/Spiro-MeOTAD/Au	Using mixed 2D/3D (HOOC(CH2)4NH3)2PbI4/CH3NH3PbI3 PSK	(1) Continuous illumination under an Ar atmosphere	(1) The 2D/3D device with the Spiro HTM/Au contact retained up to 60% of the original PCE after 300 h under condition 1 while the 3D CH3NH3PbI3 device retained 40% of its initial PCE	
132

FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/ZrO2/C	(2) Module stability test under one sun at T = 55 °C and under short circuit conditions; a UV filter up to 390 nm is on top of all the samples. ISO standards conditions	(2) Module with a carbon contact was stable for >400 days
FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Formation of a 2D–3D heterostructure by employing n-butylammonium cations in FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(IyBr1−y)3 3D PSK and formation of BA0.09(FA0.83Cs0.17)0.91Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3	Under xenon-lamp simulated full-spectrum AM1.5, 76 mW cm−2 in air	The reference cell retained 80% of its “post burn-in” PCE after 700 h	
134

RH: 45%	The 2D–3D cell retained 80% of its “post burn-in” PCE after 1000 h in air, and close to 4000 h when encapsulated
ITO/NiOx/PSK/PCBM/C60/Ag	Formation of quasi 3D FAxPEA1−xPbI3 PSK structures	Under ambient conditions	The device containing layered FAxPEA1−xPbI3 (N = 40) retained more than 90% of its PCE after 16 days, while the FAPbI3 device lost its PCE completely in the same period of time	
22

RH: 40%
ITO/NiOx/PSK/PCBM/Al	Formation of highly oriented growth 2D (PEA)2(FA)n−1SnnI3n+1	Stored in a glove box (N2)	The 2D device retained its PCE for over 100 h without encapsulation, while the 3D one lost its performance completely after 70 h	
73

FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/PTAA/Au	Using 2D (CH3(CH2)3NH3)2(CH3NH3)n−1SnnI3n+1 PSKs to enhance the moisture stability	Exposed to air	The 3D MASnI3 device lost its initial PCE after 3 min while the Sn4I13 devices gradually degraded over ∼30 min	
136

The encapsulated 2D Sn iodide PSK device retained more than 90% of its PCE after 30 days and 40% after 120 days while the PCE of the encapsulated MASnI3 dropped to zero after 30 days
FTO/bl-TiO2/mp-TiO2/PSK/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	Hot casting of a PEAI/IPA solution on top of Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39 PSK to enhance the moisture stability	(1) Inert gas conditions	(1) The device containing the 2D PSK capping layer retained 90% of its initial PCE after 800 h	
143

(2) Humid environment (0.85 RH)	(2) It retained 85% of its initial PCE after 800 h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
