A semiconductor/mixed ion and electron conductor heterojunction for elevated-temperature water splitting   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP52536H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP52536H
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15459-15469Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA semiconductor/mixed ion and electron conductor heterojunction for elevated-temperature water splitting†

        
          
            Xiaofei 
            Ye
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            John 
            Melas-Kyriazi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuoluo A. 
            Feng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nicholas A. 
            Melosh
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            William C. 
            Chueh
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. E-mail: wchueh@stanford.edu
bDepartment of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Received 
      18th June 2013
    , Accepted 11th July 2013First published on 11th July 2013AbstractPhotoelectrochemical cells (PECs) have been studied extensively for dissociating water into hydrogen and oxygen. Key bottlenecks for achieving high solar-to-hydrogen efficiency in PECs include increasing solar spectrum utilization, surmounting overpotential losses, and aligning the absorber/electrochemical redox levels. We propose a new class of solid-state PECs based on mixed ionic and electronic conducting (MIEC) oxides that operates at temperatures significantly above ambient and utilizes both the light and thermal energy available from concentrated sunlight to dissociate water vapor. Unlike thermochemical and hybrid photo-thermochemical water-splitting routes, the elevated-temperature PEC is a single-step approach operating isothermally. At the heart of the solid-state PEC is a semiconductor light absorber coated with a thin MIEC layer for improved catalytic activity, electrochemical stability, and ionic conduction. The MIEC, placed between the gas phase and the semiconductor light absorber, provides a facile path for minority carriers to reach the water vapor as well as a path for the ionic carriers to reach the solid electrolyte. Elevated temperature operation allows reasonable band misalignments at the interfaces to be overcome, reduces the required overpotential, and facilitates rapid product diffusion away from the surface. In this work, we simulate the behavior of an oxygen-ion-conducting photocathode in 1-D. Using the detailed-balance approach, in conjunction with recombination and electrochemical reaction rates, the practical efficiency is calculated as a function of temperature, solar flux, and select material properties. For a non-degenerate light absorber with a 2.0 eV band-gap and an uphill band offset of 0.3 eV, an efficiency of 17% and 11% is predicted at 723 and 873 K, respectively.
1. Introduction
One of the most critical bottlenecks for increasing solar energy utilization is overcoming the inherent intermittency of solar radiation.1 Converting solar energy into high density chemical energy such as hydrogen is an effective way to address this challenge.2 In particular, dissociating water with sunlight-driven photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) has received enormous attention.2–4 The key challenge for PECs is identifying a combination of materials that absorb the visible solar spectrum, minimize overpotential losses, achieve proper energetic alignment between the light absorber and the electrochemical redox levels, and exhibit excellent stability. Thus far no one material system has proven ideal for these stringent requirements, though recent progress has been made on systems such as Si,5–8 Fe2O3,9–12 Cu2O,13,14etc. One solution is a heterojunction PEC which couples an efficient solar absorber in the 1–1.6 eV band-gap range with an efficient and robust catalytic layer, typically an oxide with a much larger band-gap.7,13–21 Researchers have previously explored Si–TiO2,7,16 Si–Fe2O3,15 WO3–Fe2O3,17 WO3–BiVO4,18–20 and Cu2O–TiO2.13,14,21 However, these heterojunctions have had limited success at room temperature. While heterojunctions improve harvesting of the solar spectrum, even a small uphill barrier at the interface can severely impede electron transfer and substantially increase the rate of carrier recombination. Moreover, the considerable overpotential required to drive the reaction at a rate matching the solar flux leads to significant losses. Even a state-of-the-art oxygen-evolution catalyst such as RuO2 requires a 200 mV overpotential at a 10 mA cm−2 current density.22
An alternate approach to fully harvest the solar spectrum is to forgo semiconductor photo-excitation, and instead convert concentrated solar energy into heat. In thermochemical decomposition of steam, thermal energy rather than electrical energy assists chemical reactions involving energetic barriers.23–25 Remarkable reaction kinetics has been reported as a result of the high operating temperature, typically from 1300 to 1600 °C.23 However, operating at this temperature range requires specialized solar reactors lined with refractory material and precision solar concentrators (typically at concentration exceeding 1000 suns,26,27 where 1 sun is 1 kW m−2), dramatically increasing the cost. Other approaches aim to separate the thermal and electrical reactions into multiple devices. For example, Licht and coworkers proposed to utilize electricity from multi-junction solar cells and heat from unabsorbed concentrated sunlight to drive a high-temperature electrolyzer.28–31 Another approach combining a photochemical reactor with thermochemical cycles was also proposed by T-Raissi et al.32 However, the system complexity of the multi-devices and multi-step fuel production cycles may ultimately limit their scalability.
In this work, we present a new class of solid-state PECs based on a heterojunction between a semiconductor light absorber and a mixed ionic and electronic conducting (MIEC) oxide. This integrated photo-thermochemical device captures both thermal and photon energy from concentrated sunlight at temperatures between 673 and 973 K, which could improve carrier transport and electro-catalysis. Unlike thermochemical and hybrid cycles, the elevated-temperature PEC is a single-step approach operating isothermally, thereby substantially reducing the system complexity.
There have been several attempts to optimize the operating temperature of PECs. Most studies found that the peak efficiency is obtained at 60 to 80 °C.33,34 Beyond this temperature range, the liquid and polymer solid electrolytes are not stable, and rising dark current with temperature causes the efficiency to approach zero rapidly.35 Unfortunately, these limitations restrict the PEC temperature to near ambient. Thus, the significant benefit of faster kinetics and lower water dissociation free energy cannot be fully realized. In this work, by replacing a liquid or polymeric solid electrolyte in conventional PECs with a solid ionic conductor, we are able to extend the operating temperature to a much higher range. Many MIECs, e.g. proton- and oxygen-ion-conducting oxides such as doped BaZrO3,36–39 CeO2,40–44 and various perovskite oxides, have been studied extensively and proven to exhibit excellent conductivity, electro-catalytic activity and thermal stability.
By using a temperature-dependent model, we show that the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of the proposed light absorber/MIEC heterojunction plateaus at temperatures far above ambient. Our result contrasts sharply with the conventional view that efficiencies of photovoltaic-based processes decrease with temperature.35 Our simulation reveals that the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency reaches a maximum of 17% at 723 K for a light absorber with a band-gap of 2.0 eV. These practical efficiencies, calculated using material properties for non-precious electro-catalysts and a single-junction light absorber, demonstrate the advantage of combining thermal and photon energy for the dissociation of water to hydrogen.
2. Light absorber/MIEC heterojunction
In the light absorber/MIEC heterojunction, the MIEC can be implemented as a thin film which is placed between the light absorber and the gas environment (Fig. 1a). The wide band-gap MIEC, which allows most of the solar spectrum to pass through, facilitates (1) selective minority carrier emission from the light absorber to the gas phase molecules, (2) ionic transport to the counter electrode, and (3) passivation of the light absorber against corrosion.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the proposed elevated-temperature photocathode-based, oxygen-ion-conducting PEC. (b) Schematic energy band diagram. CB and VB are the conduction and the valence band, respectively. 
To better illustrate the physics of a light absorber/MIEC heterojunction PEC, we follow the migration of ionic and electronic carriers during water splitting in a photocathode-based, oxygen-ion-conducting PEC (Fig. 1). The thin MIEC layer is assumed to have a band-gap greater than 3.5 eV such that 97% of the light passes through. Incident photons with energy greater than the absorber band-gap excite valence electrons into the conduction band (step 1 in Fig. 1). Excited electrons with energy exceeding that of the absorber band-gap rapidly thermalize and heat up the absorber. This contrasts sharply with the “hot electron” phenomenon in which non-equilibrium electrons must be harvested in <10−12 s.45–47 Even if there is a moderate electron barrier at the light absorber/MIEC interface, fully thermalized, excited electrons in the absorber can thermionically emit into MIEC layer, while holes are reflected at the hole barrier and migrate to the anode (step 2). Four such electrons then migrate across the MIEC layer and react with adsorbed water molecules (or intermediate species) producing two hydrogen molecules and two oxygen ions at the MIEC/gas interface (step 3). Hydrogen gas, rather than being potentially trapped as gas bubbles in liquid-based PECs, diffuses away from the surface rapidly, thereby preventing unwanted back reaction (step 4). Simultaneously, two oxygen ions diffuse down the MIEC and the membrane (step 5) and react with four holes at the anode/gas interface to generate an oxygen gas molecule (step 6), thereby completing the circuit. An analogous schematic can also be drawn for PECs based on a photoanode and on a proton-conducting MIEC. Compared to the conventional solar-cell-powered electrolyzer approach,48,49 the light absorber/MIEC heterojunction combines carrier excitation, separation and emission to gas-phase reactants into a single heterojunction device.
Based on the stability of oxygen in the ionized state in the MIEC, we expect that oxygen ions should migrate from the MIEC/gas interface without recombining with electrons in the MIEC. Nevertheless, it is important to note that even if oxygen ions recombined with electrons in the MIEC, the performance of the PEC remains unchanged. The recombination of oxygen vacancies with electrons, unlike the recombination of holes with electrons, is an electrochemical reaction. Therefore, the resulting neutral oxygen vacancy is an energized species which then reacts with steam to produce hydrogen.
An enormous range of high temperature materials has been investigated for solid-oxide fuel cells and electrolyzers (typically working at temperatures >700 °C).50 These materials are excellent candidates for the electrode, MIEC and solid electrolyte for our PEC. For the MIEC, in particular, many ceria-based and ferrite-based materials exhibit sufficiently large band gaps (>3 eV) and high electro-catalytic activity. This motivated our selection of ceria as the MIEC in our efficiency simulations. For the anode, transition-metal-based perovskite oxides such as lanthanum strontium cobaltites and ferrites are well-established electrodes for high temperature fuel cells and electrolyzers. Finally, doped ceria and zirconia are commonly used as electrolytes for oxygen-ion conduction. The above materials have excellent thermal and chemical compatibility with each other and are promising candidates for our PEC. Although less explored, several light absorber materials have been investigated for their high temperature stability. For example, with band-gaps ranging from 2.0–3.2 eV, Fe2O3,51 SrTiO3,52 and TiO253 exhibit excellent stability at elevated temperatures.
The temperature dependence of the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency is non-trivial. While an increase in the thermal voltage (kBT/q) improves the carrier emission rate across heterojunctions and the electrochemical reaction rate, it also increases the intrinsic carrier concentration which lowers the quasi-Fermi-level splitting in the light absorber. From these competing contributions, we expect qualitatively that the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency plateaus at a certain temperature. Below such a temperature, improvement in carrier emission and reaction rates with temperature dominates; above which, rising intrinsic carrier concentration dominates. Next, we develop an analytical model based on the detailed-balance approach to examine the temperature-dependent solar-to-hydrogen efficiency.
3. Temperature-dependent photoelectrode model
Our analytical model describes a one-dimensional oxygen-ion-conducting photocathode which emphasizes the coupling of carrier transport across the light absorber/MIEC heterojunction and chemical reactions at the MIEC/gas interface. A schematic depicting the physical system being modeled is shown in Fig. 1b. The photocathode consists of a heterojunction formed between a p-type semiconductor light absorber and an n-type MIEC, the latter also in contact with the gas phase. To highlight interfacial effects and to satisfy the one-dimensional approximation (because ions and electrons flow orthogonally) in this geometry, we assume that ionic and electronic transport are fast relative to interfacial carrier transport and chemical reactions (see ESI† for justification). For simplicity, we take all other components of the PEC, namely the membrane and the anode, to be reversible (i.e., exhibiting negligible voltage losses). Finally, we assume that all incident photons with energy greater than the band-gap are absorbed. As such, the positive dependence of the optical absorption coefficient on temperature (especially for indirect band-gap semiconductors) is ignored when calculating the short-circuit current. Concentrated AM1.5G sunlight was used in our calculation.
3.1 Current density at the absorber/MIEC interface
The current density at the absorber/MIEC interface is derived using a detailed-balance method.54 For the loss mechanisms, we considered radiative and surface recombinations in the light absorber, the rate of the latter scales linearly with the excess carrier concentration. We adopt this phenomenological description rather than the more physical Shockley–Read–Hall mechanism55–58 to minimize the number of unknown parameters in the simulation. Because technologically-relevant photoelectrodes are likely nanostructured, we expect surface recombination to dominate over bulk recombination mechanisms such as Auger recombination, which is not explicitly considered here (see ESI† for discussions). Because the band-gap of the MIEC is assumed to be significantly greater than that of the light absorber, photo-generated and thermal-generated carriers within the MIEC are also taken to be negligible. Moreover, the recombination of non-equilibrium electrons in the MIEC layer is also neglected due to its wide band-gap and the very low hole concentration. Coupling these recombination mechanisms with carrier generation via light absorption, we obtain the following flux conservation equation: (1)where Γsun is the photon flux with photon energy above band-gap Eg, nabs and ndarkabs are the electron concentrations in the light absorber with and without illumination, respectively, ni is the intrinsic electron concentration in the light absorber, Na is the dopant concentration in the light absorber, ΓBB is the blackbody radiation of the device at equilibrium, Ssur is the surface recombination velocity, and q is the electric charge. The hole concentration in the light absorber is taken to be fixed by excess acceptor doping. In eqn (1), the second term in the right hand side represents radiative recombination under illumination and the third term represents surface recombination. The final term, J/q, corresponds to the net electron mass flux across the interface, which can be expressed as a sum of the forward and reverse flux: J/q = nabsSforward − nMIECSreverse(2)where Sforward and Sreverse represent the carrier velocity for forward and reverse emission, respectively, and nMIEC is the carrier concentration in the MIEC. Here, emission in the forward direction is defined as from the light absorber to the MIEC. Under open-circuit conditions, Sforward and Sreverse are related to each other by nabs and nMIEC values at J = 0. Eqn (2) describes the situation that once the photo-excited electrons emit across the heterojunction into the MIEC, they could also jump back into the light absorber. Based on the thermionic emission formalism, the forward and reverse carrier emission velocities are thermally activated, such that Sforward = S0exp(−ΔEC/kBT), in which ΔEC is the conduction band offset between the absorber and the MIEC.59 By recognizing that ndarkabs = ni2(T)/Na and combining eqn (1) and (2), we obtain the current density at the absorber/MIEC interface, (3)where the total recombination velocity is defined as the sum of the surface recombination and the blackbody radiative recombination velocities: (4)Eqn (3) provides a simple analytical expression for understanding the carrier generation and recombination processes at the light absorber/MIEC interface. The first combined term in eqn (3) accounts for the flux of photo-generated electrons (Γsun) and thermal-generated electrons at the surface , which emits in the forward direction with probability . Electrons not emitted across the heterojunction recombine with holes in the light absorber. On the other hand, electrons could also emit from the MIEC to the light absorber (i.e., in the reverse direction), which is described by the second term of eqn (3). Of the electrons that emit in the reverse direction at the rate of nMIECSreverse, a fraction of them recombine with holes in the light absorber, and the remaining undergo further emission into the MIEC.
For computational convenience, we have chosen not to include space-charge effects. We assumed that the charge separation is achieved solely through the asymmetric heterojunction. Including the space-charge model will only further improve the charge separation and lead to even higher solar-to-fuel efficiency, and is the subject of a forthcoming paper.
3.2 Current density at the MIEC/gas interface
Once the excited electrons in the light absorber emit into the MIEC, they migrate to the MIEC/gas interface and react with the water vapor molecules (Fig. 1b). As we have assumed the MIEC layer is sufficiently thin and the electrons mobile, the rate of electron emission into water molecules is controlled by the electrochemical reaction rate at the MIEC/gas interface. The overall reaction is given as: H2O(g) + 2e− + VO2+ → H2(g) + OO(5)where VO2+ is the oxygen vacancy in MIEC. Not knowing the detailed reaction mechanism, we assume that the reaction kinetics can be described by the above global reaction.60 The reaction rate is expressed as a function of gas pressures and the electron and oxygen vacancy concentration in the MIEC: (6)where kf and kr are the forward and reverse rate constants, respectively, ñs and V,s are surface electrons and vacancies occupation fractions,  and  are the partial pressures immediately above the surface, and P0 is the standard pressure. Here, the electron concentration (i.e., the chemical potential) is used instead of the Fermi level (sum of chemical and electrostatic potentials). We are not explicitly considering electrostatic potential drops at the interface61 because, under the global reaction approximation, oxygen vacancies and electrons are transported as a neutral complex across the interface. Under the typical situation of high extrinsic doping (with an aliovalent dopant), V,s is approximately constant under conditions applicable to water splitting.43 In other words, we are taking electron transfer across the MIEC/gas interface as rate limiting. By absorbing V,s into the rate constant, we obtain the approximated reaction rate in eqn (6). Furthermore, the boundary condition can be simplified by recognizing that kf′ and kr are related through equilibrium partial pressure and electron concentration, (7)where ñeqs is the electron occupation fraction when the MIEC is in equilibrium with the supplied gas environment,  and  are the water and hydrogen partial pressures in the inlet gas, respectively (in practice, the latter is negligible). Finally, we note that high oxygen vacancy concentration in most MIECs gives a Debye screening length that is typically less than one nanometer.62 For simplicity, carrier transport in the space-charge layer is ignored.
It has been shown in the solid-oxide fuel cell that there is a stagnation layer at the electrode surface.63,64 The gas composition outside this layer depends on the gas flow rate in the system. At steady state, the electronic current at the MIEC/gas interface matches the hydrogen diffusion rate in the gas phase. (8)where DH2 is the mass diffusivity of hydrogen, taken to be independent of hydrogen partial pressure, and l is the thickness of the stagnation layer. The hydrogen partial pressure outside the stagnation layer at steady state  is determined by the hydrogen flux JH2 (with , where  is the steam flow rate at the inlet). The ratio  is then the water-to-hydrogen conversion rate in the system. An analogous equation can be written for the gas phase diffusion of H2O(g). Combining eqn (6)–(8), we obtain the current density at the MIEC/gas interface. (9)Here the non-dimensionalized parameter  is the measure of competition between gas convection and diffusion, ranging from 0 to 1, for the ith gas species (H2 or H2O in our case). The effective mass diffusivity, αiDi, reflects the coupling between the gas convection rate and the diffusion rate through the steady state partial pressure. If the gas flow rate is fast as compared to gas diffusion such that the partial pressure is not perturbed by hydrogen production or water consumption, then α → 1 and the effective mass diffusivity is simply Di. On the other hand, when the gas flow rate approaches zero, α → 0 and the gas diffusion is impeded due to a decrease in the pressure gradient near the MIEC surface. Eqn (9) reveals that the efficacy of reactant and product mass transport plays a crucial role in determining the current density.
3.3 Overall current density and efficiency of the solid-state PEC
Under the assumption of fast electron transport and no recombination in the MIEC, eqn (3) and (9) can be combined directly to give the hydrogen flux of the PEC. The device efficiency is then given by: (10)where F is the Faraday constant, ΔG0,298Krxn is the standard Gibbs free energy of the water splitting reaction at 298 K (237 kJ mol−1), and Psun is the power of the incident solar irradiation.
3.4 Energy balance
The availability of thermal energy resulting from below- and above-bang-gap light absorption sets the temperature of our elevated-temperature PEC. The maximum attainable temperature is determined by considering the total energy balance between concentrated sunlight input, electrical work, and heat flow. In the absence of external energy sinks, the total energy balance is expressed as: (11)The first term gives the blackbody radiation (for both equilibrium and excess carriers), where PBB is defined in the ESI.† The second term gives the electrical work done by the light absorber. Finally, the third term sums the net thermal energy consumed by heating H2O and by the water-splitting reaction (see ESI† for a detailed explanation). Here,  is the enthalpy required to heat/boil water from 298 K to T, and TΔSrxn is the reaction entropy for water dissociation at given temperature and partial pressures. Heat recovery, which is not considered in this work, further increases the maximum attainable temperature.
3.5 Simulation parameters
To simulate the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, we take a non-degenerate semiconducting light absorber and a polaron-type, oxygen-ion-conducting MIEC (in which both electron and ion mobilities are thermally-activated). For simplicity, we use the effective density of states of Si. While the effective density of states varies between materials, the effect on the carrier concentration is relatively small compared to the effect of the band-gap, especially at elevated temperatures (see ESI†). For the MIEC, we used thermodynamic and transport properties of 15% Sm-doped CeO2−δ (ceria),43 a common material used in solid-oxide fuel cells and electrolyzers.
To identify material parameters that maximize the efficiency, we varied the band-gap of the light absorber (Eg) and the conduction band offset between the light absorber and the MIEC (ΔEC). Turning to interfacial properties, the thermionic emission pre-factor (S0) which combines the electron thermal velocity and the reflection coefficient, is selected to be 1 × 107 cm s−1.59 Finally in the gas phase, the stagnation gas layer thickness is selected to be 0.5 mm, consistent with values reported for solid-oxide fuel cell anodes.63,64Table 1 summarizes the default parameter values used in the simulation. Unless otherwise noted, these values were used in the subsequent simulations.
Table 1 Default simulation parameters




Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit





a The energy penalty of boiling water is included in the efficiency calculation.





Solar concentration


200
suns


Band-gap

E
g

2.0
eV


Dopant concentration

N
a

1019
cm−3


Thermionic emission pre-factor

S
0

107
cm s−1


Surface recombination velocity

S
sur

104
cm s−1


Conduction band offset
ΔEC
0.3
eV


Stagnation gas layer thickness

l

0.5
mm


Molar flux of supplied steam



1.5
mol s−1 m−2


Supplied steam partial pressure at cathodea



1
atm


Oxygen impurity partial pressure in the steam



10−4
atm


Oxygen partial pressure at anode



0.21
atm




4. Results and discussion
4.1 Temperature-dependent solar-to-hydrogen efficiency
The efficiency of the semiconductor/MIEC heterojunction photocathode was calculated as a function of temperature. The solar-to-hydrogen efficiency shows a broad maximum at ∼750 K (Fig. 2a) using material parameters and operating conditions listed in Table 1. The efficiency, accounting for overpotentials and the energy penalty for boiling water and heating up steam, reaches a respectable value of 17% (which, as shown later, can be increased further by optimizing the material properties). The H2O-to-H2 conversion rate is 9.4%. No heat recovery was assumed. Next, we explain the trend of the efficiency curve by calculating the voltage drops within the heterojunction.
 Fig. 2  (a) Device efficiency, conversion rate and H2 flux density as a function of temperature using parameters in Table 1. (b) Voltage drop within the photocathode under operation. Inset: schematic energy diagram. (c) Thermal and electrical contributions to the energy converted into hydrogen. Calculations were performed across a wide range of temperature to reveal important trends. At temperatures below 700 K, the fast-ionic- and fast-electronic-transport assumptions in the MIEC may not be realistic (see ESI†). 
The inset in Fig. 2b shows the schematic, non-equilibrium potential distribution in the PEC photocathode. On shining light, the photovoltage Δμabs/q (splitting of electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels) is established in the light absorber. The voltage decreases across the absorber/MIEC interface in order to drive electrons across the conduction band offset at the heterojunction. The difference between Δμabs and ΔμMIEC (where ΔμMIEC is the MIEC quasi-Fermi-level splitting), is the overpotential for thermionic emission. As we have assumed the electron transport in the MIEC to be fast, ΔμMIEC is also the electron chemical potential available for dissociating water at the MIEC/gas interface. Based on the surface hydrogen and water vapor partial pressures at steady state, a dynamic redox potential Erxn (accounting for reactant and product pressures at non-standard states) can be calculated. The difference between ΔμMIEC/q and Erxn is the reaction overpotential. We note that calculations were performed across a wide range of temperature to reveal important trends. At temperatures below 700 K, the fast-ionic- and fast-electronic-transport assumptions in the MIEC may not be realistic (see ESI†).
The quasi-Fermi-level splitting in the light absorber and the MIEC, as well as the dynamic redox potential, are shown in Fig. 2b. At temperatures below 700 K, the photovoltage is well in excess of the standard redox potential E0rxn (∼1.1 V), also shown in Fig. 2b. In this temperature regime, the overpotential at the light absorber/MIEC heterojunction (shown in hashed blue in Fig. 2b) dominates. As the temperature increases, the heterojunction overpotential decreases from ∼0.5 V at 400 K to ∼0.1 V at 700 K, while the current density increases by more than 5 times. This highlights the importance of thermal energy for accelerating carrier emission across heterojunctions. As the temperature is increased significantly above 700 K, the light absorber photovoltage falls below the standard redox potential for water splitting. While some hydrogen is still being produced, the flux is suppressed due to an insufficient driving force. This is due to rising intrinsic carrier concentration with temperature, leading to decreased photovoltage in the light absorber. As we will show later, the efficiency at higher temperatures can be improved by increasing the dopant concentration. It is also worthwhile to note that the reaction overpotential (shown in hashed green in Fig. 2b) is always below 0.1 V. Summarizing, at lower temperatures, the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency rises rapidly with temperature due to thermally-assisted carrier emission across the MIEC/light absorber interface; at higher temperatures, the efficiency decreases with temperature due to rising intrinsic carrier concentration and diminishing photovoltage.
So far, we have shown that the heterojunction PEC converts the absorbed photons into electrical energy to dissociate water, while thermal energy assists electrons to surmount energetic barriers. However, beyond improving kinetics, thermal energy also contributes to the total energy stored in hydrogen (TΔSrxn, where ΔSrxn is the entropy of the water-splitting reaction). This is evident in the negative temperature dependence of the standard redox potential for water dissociation (i.e., the electrical requirement), also shown in Fig. 2b. The standard redox potential decreases from 1.23 V at room temperature to 1.06 V at 750 K. Moreover, thermal energy is also utilized to heat and boil liquid water to steam. Fig. 2c shows the thermal and electrical contributions to the total free energy stored in H2. At 750 K, ∼35% of the energy required for dissociating water is supplied thermally. At room temperature, the thermal contribution value drops to 17%. These results confirm the significant thermodynamic benefit of dissociating water at elevated temperature, as excess thermal energy from concentrated sunlight, along with photon energy, is transferred efficiently to chemical bonds.
In our simulation we also take into account the maximum attainable PEC temperature based on the total energy balance (eqn (11)), assuming no heat recovery. That is, heat released from cooling steam, H2, and O2 to room temperature is discarded. The maximum attainable temperature depends on the solar concentration and is plotted in Fig. 3. At a solar concentration of 200 suns, there is sufficient thermal energy to operate the PEC at 900 K. In practice, significant heat recovery can be achieved using a heat exchanger, for example, a counterflow design where the heat released from cooling product gases provides the energy to heat up the reactants. This can further increase the attainable temperature.
 Fig. 3  Attainable maximum operating temperature as a function of the solar concentration. The open circle indicates the concentration used in our simulation. 
4.2 Effect of gas-phase mass transport
So far we have assessed the electrical and thermal contributions to the photocathode performance. Another critical aspect is the gas-phase transport, in particular, the rate at which hydrogen is removed from the MIEC/gas interface. In our simulation, the externally tunable parameter is the water flow rate at the inlet, which, as shown in eqn (9), sets the effective diffusivity of the gas species. Intuitively, a low gas flow rate will lead to accumulation of H2 at the MIEC/gas interface and promote the undesired back reaction, thereby limiting PEC efficiency. On the other hand, at a high water vapor flow rate, most of the thermal energy goes towards heating up water (in the limit of zero heat recovery) and the H2O-to-H2 conversion rate is negligible.

Fig. 4a shows the PEC efficiency as a function of temperature for various flow rates. Efficiency trends identically with temperature regardless of the flow rate. However, the maximum efficiency first increases at low flow rates, then plateaus, and finally falls. The maximum efficiency drops sharply at high flow rates because the temperature required for attaining the optimal efficiency can no longer be reached at the given solar flux. The efficiency trend with the flow rate is directly evident in Fig. 4b, where the maximum efficiency and the H2O-to-H2 conversion rate are shown as a function of flow rate. At low flow rates (regime 1), gas-phase mass diffusion limits the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, which increases rapidly with the flow rate as the back reaction is suppressed. The gain in efficiency comes at the cost of a relatively small decrease in the conversion rate. In regime 2, the efficiency plateaus as the back reaction is almost entirely suppressed, while the conversion rate continues to drop. Finally, in regime 3, the maximum efficiency drops rapidly with the flow rate, as the heating requirement for excess steam in the inlet exceeds the solar energy input. The optimal flow rate lies around the boundary of regimes 1 and 2. For example, a 16% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and a 54% H2O-to-H2 conversion rate are predicted at a flow rate of 0.25 mol s−1 m−2. Our calculations confirm that high efficiency and a reasonable conversion rate can be achieved simultaneously.
 Fig. 4  (a) Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency as a function of temperature at different gas flow rates. The blue curve does not extend beyond ∼550 K because there is insufficient thermal energy to reach those temperatures. (b) The maximum efficiency and the corresponding conversion rate as a function of gas flow rate. 
4.3 Effect of material properties on efficiency
Having examined the behavior of the MIEC-based heterojunction PEC as a function of temperature and gas flow rate, we now turn to several key bulk and interfacial material properties. In particular, we have calculated the temperature-dependent solar-to-hydrogen efficiency as a function of (1) the band offset between the light absorber and the MIEC, (2) the doping level in the absorber, and (3) the exchange current density of the MIEC/gas interface (Fig. 5). The last quantity is a direct measure of the electro-catalytic activity. The band-gap was held constant at 2.0 eV, with material parameters varied one at a time. Fig. 5a shows the efficiency as a function of temperature for band offsets ranging from 0 to 0.4 eV. At larger conduction band offsets, the efficiency exhibits a clear plateau in the temperature range simulated. As already discussed in Section 4.1, below the peak-efficiency temperature, thermionic emission across the interface limits the efficiency, whereas above the peak, rising intrinsic carrier concentration lowers the light absorber photovoltage significantly below the reversible water splitting potential. Notably, the efficiency at lower temperatures rises dramatically with decreasing band offset (Fig. 5a). At the same time, the maximum efficiency increases from 12% to 18% as the band offset is decreased from 0.4 to 0.2 eV, concurrent with a decrease in the peak-efficiency temperature from 800 to 650 K. This result suggests that while smaller band offset is always desired, thermal enhancement of the emission rate across the heterojunction increases the efficiency tremendously with temperature. On the other hand, the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency at the higher temperature (>800 K) is largely independent of the band offset.
 Fig. 5  Device efficiency as a function of temperature for various (a) band offsets, (b) dopant concentrations, and (c) exchange current densities. 
For the same, higher temperature range, however, the efficiency depends very strongly on the dopant concentration (Fig. 5b). This is a direct confirmation that lower photovoltage due to the increased intrinsic carrier concentration dominates the loss mechanism. By increasing the light absorber doping level (while keeping a constant band-gap), the absorber becomes less intrinsic. This allows the PEC to run at higher temperature without losing photovoltage. The peak-efficiency temperature increases with the doping level (Fig. 5b), from 650 K (Na = 1018 cm−3) to 850 K (Na = 1020 cm−3). We note that for band conductors like Si, carrier mobility and lifetime decrease with the doping level. In addition, recombination mechanisms, such as Auger recombination, may become significant. Nevertheless, our preliminary analysis confirms that Auger recombination is less important than surface recombination in thin-film and nanostructured devices (see ESI† for details).
Finally, turning to the MIEC/gas exchange current density, it has a negligible effect on the efficiency at most temperatures (Fig. 5c). This confirms our earlier calculation that the surface reaction at the MIEC/gas interface does not limit the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency. As already mentioned, this result contrasts sharply with conventional room-temperature PEC where the overpotential due to slow electro-catalysis largely determines the efficiency.2,3
4.4 Effect of band-gap with other material properties
Another crucial material parameter is the light absorber band-gap. Because the effect of band-gap on the light absorber/MIEC heterojunction is strongly coupled with the doping level and the conduction band offset, we carried out a parametric efficiency analysis on these three material properties. The colormap plots in Fig. 6 show the temperature-dependent device efficiency and H2O-to-H2 conversion rate (see scale bar). The white area in the plot indicates an unreachable temperature region due to the total energy balance constraint set by eqn (11).
 Fig. 6  Parametric analysis of the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and H2O-to-H2 conversion rate as a function of temperature and band-gap for various band offsets and doping levels. Solar concentration is 200 suns. 
With the band-gap less than 1.4 eV, the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency is almost zero at room temperature due to the large overpotential; the efficiency remains essentially at zero even at higher temperatures, due to the large dark current. At very large band-gaps (>∼2.5 eV), the efficiency is also negligible due to the low flux of above-band-gap photons. For the intermediate band-gaps between 1.7 and 2.2 eV, with Na = 1019 cm−3 and ΔEC = 0.3 eV, our model predict solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies between 13.5% (at 550 K and 830 K) and 17.7% (at 640 K), with H2O-to-H2 conversion between 7.7 and 10%. Conditions giving solar-to-hydrogen efficiency greater than 10% are enclosed by the dashed line in Fig. 6.
With smaller band-gap light absorbers, the peak efficiency shifts towards lower temperature. This finding is consistent with the fact that high intrinsic carrier concentration is the dominant photovoltage loss mechanism in narrow band-gap light absorbers. Likewise, the efficiency of photoelectrodes with a smaller band-gap light absorber is more sensitive to the doping level, also evident in Fig. 6. For absorbers with larger band-gaps, in contrast, the efficiency remains nearly constant with doping. Finally, the efficiency is sensitive to the band offset only at lower temperatures. This result is consistent with our expectation that at higher temperatures, thermal energy provides sufficient energy to overcome an uphill band offset at the heterojunction. For example, even for a 0.4 eV uphill band offset, a 16% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency is achieved at a band-gap of 1.9 eV and a doping level of 1020 cm−3.
Overall, we find that the optimal heterojunction should exhibit the following properties: the light absorber should have a band-gap at around 2 eV with moderate doping, and there should be an asymmetric band offset between the light absorber and the MIEC material with the minority carrier band offset less than 0.4 eV.
5. Conclusions
Heterojunction photoelectrodes consisting of a semiconductor light absorber and a mixed ionic and electronic conductor provide an elegant path towards more efficient hydrogen production at elevated temperatures. By operating at several hundreds of degree Celsius with concentrated sunlight, this new class of PEC recovers thermal energy intrinsically that would otherwise be lost, and utilizes it to enhance the rate of electron transfer at the heterojunction and electro-catalysis at the MIEC/gas interface. Our detailed-balance simulation confirms that the optimal temperature for intermediate band-gap light absorbers is significantly above ambient. The key towards maximizing the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of our photoelectrode is selecting an intermediate band-gap absorber (between 1.7 and 2.2 eV) such that the intrinsic carrier concentration is minimized at elevated temperature, and achieving a reasonable band alignment between the light absorber and the MIEC (less than a 0.4 eV uphill barrier). Experimental demonstration of this new type of PEC is underway.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Moore Foundation and the Precourt Institute for Energy. X.Y. was supported by the Stanford Graduate Fellowship. J.M.-K. was supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1147470 and Z.A.F. was supported by the Moore Foundation.
References

          N. S. Lewis, G. Crabtree, A. J. Nozik, M. R. Wasielewski and P. Alivisatos, Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, M. Rekas and C. C. Sorrell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 991–1022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duehnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Strandwitz, D. B. Turner-Evans, A. C. Tamboli, C. T. Chen, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1109–1116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410–415 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Bjorketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Norskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2012, 12, 158–164 CrossRef .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Li, F. K. Meng, S. Suri, W. Q. Ding, F. Q. Huang and N. Q. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8213–8215 RSC .
F. K. Meng, J. T. Li, S. K. Cushing, J. Bright, M. J. Zhi, J. D. Rowley, Z. L. Hong, A. Manivannan, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 746–751 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Mayer, C. Du and D. W. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12406–12409 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Kohl, S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 225–229 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chatchai, Y. Murakami, S. Y. Kishioka, A. Y. Nosaka and Y. Nosaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1147–1152 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hong, S. Lee, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1781–1787 CAS .
J. Z. Su, L. J. Guo, N. Z. Bao and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1928–1933 CrossRef CAS .
W. Siripala, A. Ivanovskaya, T. F. Jaramillo, S. H. Baeck and E. W. McFarland, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lodi, E. Sivieri, A. Debattisti and S. Trasatti, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1978, 8, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S. M. Haile and A. Steinfeld, Science, 2010, 330, 1797–1801 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodama and N. Gokon, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4048–4077 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 603–615 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Pavlovic, I. S. Radonjic, D. D. Milosavljevic and L. S. Pantic, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3891–3902 CrossRef .

          R. Pitz-Paal, Solar Energy Conversion and Photoenergy Systems, EOLSS Publishers, Oxford, UK,  2007 Search PubMed .
S. Licht, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2005, 30, 459–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5592–5612 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, O. Chitayat, H. Bergmann, A. Dick, H. Ayub and S. Ghosh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 10867–10882 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16283–16292 CAS .
A. T-Raissi, N. Muradov, C. Huang and O. Adebiyi, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2007, 129, 184–189 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, M. D. Karkhanavala and P. N. Moorthy, J. Appl. Phys., 1979, 50, 4228–4230 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rajeshwar, P. Singh and R. Thapar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1750–1754 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wysocki and P. Rappaport, J. Appl. Phys., 1960, 31, 571–578 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Bohn and T. Schober, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2000, 83, 768–772 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pergolesi, E. Fabbri, A. D'Epifanio, E. Di Bartolomeo, A. Tebano, S. Sanna, S. Licoccia, G. Balestrino and E. Traversa, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 846–852 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. M. Snijkers, A. Buekenhoudt, J. Cooymans and J. J. Luyten, Scr. Mater., 2004, 50, 655–659 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Tao and J. T. S. Irvine, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 3493–3503 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chueh and S. M. Haile, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2010, 368, 3269–3294 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tuller and A. S. Nowick, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 122, 255–259 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Tuller and A. S. Nowick, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1977, 38, 859–867 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lai and S. M. Haile, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 88, 2979–2997 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mogensen, N. M. Sammes and G. A. Tompsett, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 129, 63–94 CrossRef CAS .
G. Conibeer, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wuerfel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 46, 43–52 CrossRef CAS .
M. Neges, K. Schwarzburg and F. Willig, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2107–2128 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3248–3252 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Jacobson, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 660–674 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Morin, Phys. Rev., 1954, 93, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohta, T. Nomura, H. Ohta and K. Koumoto, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 97, 034106 CrossRef .
P. Periyat, S. C. Pillai, D. E. McCormack, J. Colreavy and S. J. Hinder, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7644–7652 CAS .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Eades and R. M. Swanson, J. Appl. Phys., 1985, 58, 4267–4276 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Fitzgerald and A. S. Grove, Surf. Sci., 1968, 9, 347–369 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and W. T. Read, Phys. Rev., 1952, 87, 835–842 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Stevenson and R. J. Keyes, Physica, 1954, 20, 1041–1046 CrossRef CAS .
K. Horio and H. Yanai, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1990, 37, 1093–1098 CrossRef .
F. Ciucci, W. C. Chueh, D. G. Goodwin and S. M. Haile, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2121–2135 RSC .
J. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 2027–2037 RSC .
G. Xin, W. Sigle and J. Maier, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 86, 77–87 CrossRef .
S. Primdahl and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2827–2833 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Bessler, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 997–1011 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp52536hThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the proposed elevated-temperature photocathode-based, oxygen-ion-conducting PEC. (b) Schematic energy band diagram. CB and VB are the conduction and the valence band, respectively.	 
	(1)
J/q = nabsSforward − nMIECSreverse	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
H2O(g) + 2e− + VO2+ → H2(g) + OO	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)


Solar concentration	
	200	suns
Band-gap	
E
g
	2.0	eV
Dopant concentration	
N
a
	1019	cm−3
Thermionic emission pre-factor	
S
0
	107	cm s−1
Surface recombination velocity	
S
sur
	104	cm s−1
Conduction band offset	ΔEC	0.3	eV
Stagnation gas layer thickness	
l
	0.5	mm
Molar flux of supplied steam	

	1.5	mol s−1 m−2
Supplied steam partial pressure at cathodea	

	1	atm
Oxygen impurity partial pressure in the steam	

	10−4	atm
Oxygen partial pressure at anode	

	0.21	atm

 	Fig. 2  (a) Device efficiency, conversion rate and H2 flux density as a function of temperature using parameters in Table 1. (b) Voltage drop within the photocathode under operation. Inset: schematic energy diagram. (c) Thermal and electrical contributions to the energy converted into hydrogen. Calculations were performed across a wide range of temperature to reveal important trends. At temperatures below 700 K, the fast-ionic- and fast-electronic-transport assumptions in the MIEC may not be realistic (see ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 3  Attainable maximum operating temperature as a function of the solar concentration. The open circle indicates the concentration used in our simulation.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Solar-to-hydrogen efficiency as a function of temperature at different gas flow rates. The blue curve does not extend beyond ∼550 K because there is insufficient thermal energy to reach those temperatures. (b) The maximum efficiency and the corresponding conversion rate as a function of gas flow rate.	 

 	Fig. 5  Device efficiency as a function of temperature for various (a) band offsets, (b) dopant concentrations, and (c) exchange current densities.	 

 	Fig. 6  Parametric analysis of the solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and H2O-to-H2 conversion rate as a function of temperature and band-gap for various band offsets and doping levels. Solar concentration is 200 suns.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3cp52536h

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
