A rational design of functional porous frameworks for electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction reaction  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00843B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00843B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 1382-1427A rational design of functional porous frameworks for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction

        
          
            Changli 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zunhang 
            Lv
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wenxiu 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Feng
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bo 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory of Cluster Science Ministry of Education, Beijing Key Laboratory of Photoelectronic/Electrophotonic Conversion Materials, Advanced Technology Research Institute (Jinan), Advanced Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Science, School of Materials Science and Engineering, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering Beijing Institute of Technology No. 5, South Street, Zhongguancun, Haidian District, Beijing 100081, China. E-mail: yangwx19@bit.edu.cn; bowang@bit.edu.cn
Received 
      8th December 2022
    First published on 1st February 2023AbstractThe electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (ECO2RR) is considered one of the approaches with the most potential to achieve lower carbon emissions in the future, but a huge gap still exists between the current ECO2RR technology and industrial applications. Therefore, the design and preparation of catalysts with satisfactory activity, selectivity and stability for the ECO2RR have attracted extensive attention. As a classic type of functional porous framework, crystalline porous materials (e.g., metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs)) and derived porous materials (e.g., MOF/COF composites and pyrolysates) have been regarded as superior catalysts for the ECO2RR due to their advantages such as designable porosity, modifiable skeleton, flexible active site structure, regulable charge transfer pathway and controllable morphology. Meanwhile, with the rapid development of nano-characterization and theoretical calculation technologies, the structure–activity relationships of functional porous frameworks have been comprehensively considered, i.e., metallic element type, local coordination environment, and microstructure, corresponding to selectivity, activity and mass transfer efficiency for the ECO2RR, respectively. In this review, the rational design strategy for functional porous frameworks is briefly but precisely generalized based on three key factors including metallic element type, local coordination environment, and microstructure. Then, details about the structure–activity relationships for functional porous frameworks are illustrated in the order of MOFs, COFs, composites and pyrolysates to analyze the effect of the above-mentioned three factors on their ECO2RR performance. Finally, the challenges and perspectives of functional porous frameworks for the further development of the ECO2RR are reasonably proposed, aiming to offer insights for future studies in this intriguing and significant research field.
Changli Wang
Changli Wang received his BS degree from Yangzhou University in 2021. Currently, he is pursuing his MS degree under the supervision of Profs. Wenxiu Yang and Bo Wang at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests include the design and synthesis of functional porous frameworks for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction.
Zunhang Lv
Zunhang Lv received his BS degree from Qufu Normal University in 2014 and MS degree in 2018 from Qingdao University of Science and Technology. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Profs. Wenxiu Yang and Bo Wang at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.
Wenxiu Yang
Wenxiu Yang received her BS degree from Lanzhou University in 2012 and PhD in Analytical Chemistry in 2017 from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. After a Postdoctoral Fellowship at Peking University, she is now an Associate Professor at the Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research mainly focuses on the synthesis and surface/interface modification of functional nanomaterials and their applications in electrocatalysis (e.g., ORR, HER, OER, and CO2RR) and energy storage (e.g., PEMFC, zinc–air batteries, and PEMEC).
Xiao Feng
Xiao Feng received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry in 2008 and PhD in Materials Science in 2013 from the Beijing Institute of Technology. He carried out a joint PhD research program supported by CSC at the Institute for Molecular Science, Japan (2009–2012). Currently, he is a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology. His current research interest mainly focuses on porous organic polymers (i.e., covalent organic frameworks) and their applications in membrane separation (i.e., gas separation and desalination).
Bo Wang
Bo Wang obtained his BS and MS degrees from Peking University in 2004 and the University of Michigan in 2006, respectively, and his PhD from the University of California Los Angeles in 2008. He has been a Professor in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology since 2011. His research interests are the design and synthesis of novel functional porous frameworks, energy storage, advanced battery materials, gas purification, toxicant capture, and sensing.
1. Introduction
The ongoing use of fossil fuels together with the excess carbon dioxide (CO2) emission has resulted in an environmental crisis, including acidification of the ocean, extreme weather, greenhouse effect, and extinction of species.1,2 Thus, with the aim to achieve a sustainable ecology, growing attention has focused on exploring new technologies for the capture and conversion of CO2 into value-added products for industrial applications, such as C1 products (e.g., carbon monoxide (CO), formic acid (HCOOH), methane (CH4), and methyl alcohol (CH3OH)), C2 products (e.g., ethylene (C2H4), ethane (C2H6), ethyl alcohol (CH3CH2OH), and acetic acid (CH3COOH)), C3 and C3+ products.3 To date, various approaches have been proposed to convert CO2 to value-added products, such as chemical transformation, photocatalytic reduction, electrocatalytic reduction, and biological conversion.4,5 Among them, the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (ECO2RR) is considered one of the most promising conversion pathways owing to its advantages, as follows: (a) mild ECO2RR conversion conditions; (b) tunable catalytic process through controllable electrochemical parameters; (c) abundant renewable power (e.g., solar, wind, water, and biomass energy) as energy sources during the ECO2RR; and (d) compactness and modularity for industrial applications.6–8 However, a series of challenges still remain in the ECO2RR including large overpotential, poor selectivity, and low current density, which can be ascribed to the sluggish reaction dynamics, the complicated reaction mechanisms, and various reaction pathways of ECO2RR.9 Also, the ECO2RR is always accompanied with the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) owing to their similar potential window, which greatly restrict its catalytic efficiency and application potentiality.10 Hence, it is very important to rationally design ECO2RR electrocatalysts with robust selectivity, activity, and stability to overcome the above-mentioned limitations.11
Earlier studies on the ECO2RR mainly focused on homogeneous catalysts. However, this type of catalyst suffers from degradation induced by water or protons, and thus organic media are strictly required to achieve satisfactory ECO2RR activity and suppress the HER.12 Subsequently, heterogenous catalysts have been proposed with both enhanced catalytic efficiency and stability in aqueous media.13 Furthermore, research on the structure–activity relationships of heterogeneous catalysts has also advanced to promote the understanding of the ECO2RR catalytic mechanism, thus giving scientific guidance for future work. The exploration of heterogeneous catalysts started with metallic monocrystalline and polycrystalline materials, such as Au, Ag, Pd, and Cu, due to their efficient activity and clear structure–activity relationships.14,15 Over the last decade, as an emerging type of functional porous framework, crystalline porous materials (e.g., metal organic frameworks (MOFs) and covalent organic frameworks (COFs)) and derived porous materials (e.g., MOF/COF composites and pyrolysates) have received widespread attention as superior ECO2RR electrocatalysts due to their many advantages, such as designable porosity, modifiable skeleton, flexible active site structure, regulable charge transfer (electron, hole, and ion) pathway and controllable microstructure.16,17 Commonly, three strategies have been proposed to prompt the catalytic performance of functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR, including the rational design of pristine MOFs/COFs with novel planar/spatial coordination configuration, the combination of MOFs/COFs and conductive materials to enhance their conductivity and stability, and the pyrolysis of MOFs/COFs to obtain catalysts with tunable local coordination environment and enhanced electron/mass transfer ability.
In recent years, with the rapid development of nano-characterization and theoretical calculation technologies, the significant structure–activity relationships for functional porous frameworks have been comprehensively considered during the ECO2RR, i.e., metallic element type, local coordination environment, and microstructure, corresponding to the selectivity, activity and mass transfer efficiency for the ECO2RR, respectively.18–20 In the case of the type of metallic element, the catalytic selectivity tends to be determined by the intrinsic activity of each metal for the ECO2RR.21,22 According to the difference in catalytic selectivity in functional porous frameworks, metals can be roughly divided into three types, i.e., metals with various catalytic selectivity (e.g., Cu, Co, Ni, Fe, and Zn), metals with CO selectivity (including Sc, Mn, Y, and Re), and metals with HCOOH selectivity (such as In, Sn, and Bi).23–30 Among them, the Cu element has been demonstrated to exhibit the greatest potential for the ECO2RR, which is capable of generating a series of hydrocarbons, e.g., HCOOH, CH4, CH3OH, C2H4, and CH3CH2OH.31 In the case of the local coordination environment, the coordination number, edge effect, vacancy defect, axial coordination, local strain, functional group effect, and coordination atom species are commonly considered to discuss the structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR.32,33 Regarding the microstructure, pore engineering, tailor-made pore interfaces, and 1D/2D/3D morphologies have been the focus to optimize the mass transfer efficiency, active site exposure, and three-phase interface density in catalysts during the electrochemical process.34,35
To date, the reviews on the catalysts for the ECO2RR mainly focused on metallic monocrystalline or polycrystalline materials, while a comprehensive illustration of functional porous frameworks is lacking. Furthermore, few reviews systematically summarized the structure–activity relationships for MOFs, COFs, composites and pyrolysates for the ECO2RR. Therefore, it is necessary to logically illustrate functional porous frameworks with various active sites to realize the analysis of structure–activity relationships of these catalysts for the ECO2RR. In this review, the rational design strategy of functional porous frameworks is briefly but precisely generalized based on three key factors including metallic element type, local coordination environment, and microstructure. Then, details about the structure–activity relationships for functional porous frameworks are illustrated in the order of MOFs, COFs, composites and pyrolysates to analyze the effect of the above-mentioned three factors on their ECO2RR performance (Fig. 1). Finally, the challenges and perspectives of functional porous frameworks for the further development of the ECO2RR are reasonably proposed, aiming to offer insights for future work in this intriguing and significant research field.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the classification and design of functional porous frameworks with well-defined active sites for the ECO2RR. 
2. Design strategies of functional porous frameworks
From the perspective of electrocatalytic reaction, the fundamental discussion of catalysts for the ECO2RR is focused on catalytic selectivity, activity and mass transfer efficiency.36 Due to the innate advantages of functional porous frameworks, e.g., controllable metallic center, tunable coordination configuration, uniform dispersion of active sites, ultrahigh surface area, and permanent porosity, they endow catalysts with abundant designable strategies to realize improved ECO2RR performances.37 Therefore, a series of rational design strategies has been proposed in the last decade, aiming to comprehensively optimize the catalytic selectivity, activity and mass transfer efficiency of functional porous frameworks, which can be mainly divided into three aspects, including metallic element type, local coordination environment, and microstructure. Besides, owing to the unique characteristics of either crystalline or derived porous materials, the tunable structure–activity relationships have greatly broadened the ideas for the design of ECO2RR catalysts.
Based on the rapid development of crystalline porous materials, a variety of MOFs/COFs with novel metal nodes, linking units and site configurations has been found to exhibit superior ECO2RR activity.38 Compared with inorganic materials with a specific surface orientation, crystalline porous materials not only offer well-defined active sites for the following investigation of structure–activity relationships, but also ensure the full utilization of atomically dispersed active sites through abundant pore structures to a large extent.39 Therefore, it is attractive and feasible to realize the simultaneous regulation of the type of metallic element, local coordination environment, and microstructure in MOFs/COFs. To date, Cu, Co, Ni, Fe, and Zn serve as the primary objects for the preparation of MOFs/COFs directly used for the ECO2RR (Fig. 2). For instance, Co–N, Ni–N, Fe–N, Sc–N, Mn–N, Y–N, and Re–N linking units display specific CO electivity, while In–N, Sn–N, and Bi–N linking units exhibit HCOOH selectivity together with suppressed HER.40–42 Also, Cu–O, Cu–N, and Zn–N linking units have been generally certified to possess catalytic activity beyond CO.43–45 This controllable structure–activity relationship can be attributed to the rational selection of the metallic center and local coordination, both of which ultimately determine the preferred reaction pathways during the ECO2RR. Besides, owing to the pre-set topological structure in crystalline porous materials, it becomes easy to implement adjustable 1D/2D/3D morphologies with tailor-made pore interfaces, ensuring the full contact between the atomically dispersed active sites and electrolyte, thus boosting the electrochemical process at the three-phase interface during the ECO2RR.46 However, the poor thermal/electrochemical stability and insufficient conductivity of pristine crystalline porous materials limit their practical application to some extent.
 Fig. 2  Systematic list of catalytic selectivity of each metallic element involved in the study of functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR. 
Derived porous materials produced by the composition and pyrolysis strategies not only can maintain the advantages of pristine crystalline porous materials but also achieve enhanced conductivity and electrochemical stability for the ECO2RR.47 Therefore, the rational selection and utilization of the metallic element, local coordination environment, and microstructure is in general accordance with that of crystalline porous materials.48 However, the type of metallic element for crystalline porous materials as ECO2RR catalysts is limited to the already-known metals with intrinsic activity, while the selection of metallic element for derived porous materials can be extended to a wider range, including several metals with extrinsic activity (Fig. 2).49 Meanwhile, the utilization of the pores and cavity microstructures in derived porous materials is not only for the optimization of mass transfer, but also regarded as the edge carriers to carry key species, which can promote the catalytic process or suppress the competitive reaction (such as HER).50
2.1. Metallic element type
The selection of the type of metallic element serves as the key factor determining the catalytic selectivity for the ECO2RR, which can be ascribed to the different binding energies of adsorption intermediates for the first proton–electron transfer, including *H, *OCHO, and *COOH.51 It is commonly accepted that ΔG(*H), ΔG(*OCHO) and ΔG(*COOH) are used as key descriptors for H2, HCOOH, and CO production, respectively.52 Regarding the preparation of functional porous frameworks for application in the ECO2RR, the selected element type includes Cu, Co, Ni, Fe, and Zn elements with various catalytic selectivity, Sc, Mn, Y, and Re elements with CO selectivity, and In, Sn, and Bi elements with HCOOH selectivity.23–30 Especially, owing to the proper connection between ΔG(*CO) and ΔG(*H), Cu has been demonstrated to be the most promising element with superior proton–electron transfer and C–C coupling ability, thus generating a series of C1, C2 and C2+ products during the ECO2RR, including major products (e.g., HCOOH, CH4, CH3OH, C2H4, and CH3CH2OH) and minor products (e.g., CH3COOH and CH3COCH3), as shown in Table 1, entries 4–9.53,54 Based on this, the deeper probing of C2+ hydrocarbon production on Cu-based functional porous frameworks seems a tempting but challenging goal in future research.
Table 1 Half reactions of the ECO2RR and possible reaction pathways under the conditions of pH = 7, 25 °C, and 1 atm.71 One step, namely, one “→”, stands for one-time proton–electron transfer




Entry
Half reaction of ECO2RR
Possible reaction pathways

E

θ
/V (vs. SHE)




1
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
CO2 → *COOH → CO
−0.53


2
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
CO2 → *OCHO → HCOOH
−0.61


3
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → HCHO
−0.48


4
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CH2O → CH3*O → CH3OH
−0.38


5
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CH2O → CH3*O → → → CH4
−0.24


6
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4+ 4H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CO*CO → *CO*COH → *CCO → *CHCO → *CHCH*O → CH2CH*O → C2H4
−0.34


7
2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e−→ CH3CH2OH + 3H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CO*CO → *CO*COH → *CCO → *CHCO → *CHCH*O → CH2CH*O → CH3CH*O → CH3CH2*O → CH3CH2OH
−0.33


8
2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CO*CO → *CO*COH → *CCO → *CHCO → *CHCH*O → CH2CH*O → CH3CH*O → CH3CH2*O → → → C2H6
−0.27


9
2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH + 2H2O
CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CHOH → *CH2OH → *CH3 → CH3CO*O → CH3COOH
—


10
2H+ + 2e− → H2
—
−0.42




In the case of the Co, Ni and Fe elements, a huge transformation in catalytic selectivity occurs from nanoparticles (NPs) to atomic distribution.55 To date, it has been proven that atomically dispersed Co, Ni and Fe active sites existing in either crystalline or derived porous materials display high CO selectivity during the ECO2RR.56,57 DFT calculations revealed that the first proton-coupled electron transfer step to generate the *COOH intermediate is deemed as the rate-limiting step for the ECO2RR to produce CO.58 The adsorption of *COOH intermediates on Co, Ni and Fe centers tends to be thermodynamically favorable compared with that of *H intermediates.59 Also, the binding energy of the *CO intermediates on the Co, Ni and Fe sites is relatively weak compared with Cu sites, which is the key factor determining the simultaneous suppressed HER and high CO selectivity.26 Considering practical feasibility and economic benefit, the study of atomically dispersed Co-, Ni- and Fe-based functional porous frameworks is focused on the improvement of their activity and stability at an industrial-level current density. Also, the explanation for Sc, Mn, Y, and Re with specific ECO2RR selectivity for CO on atomically dispersed M–Nx active sites is in accordance with Co, Ni and Fe.60–62
In addition, one type of metallic element also exists in functional porous frameworks that display single selectivity for HCOOH production, namely, main group elements containing In, Sn, and Bi.40–42 The reaction pathway from CO2 to HCOOH includes a two-step proton–electron transfer, as shown in Table 1, entry 2. Different from transition metals with various linking units to construct a series of MOFs and COFs with diverse topology structures, the frequently used strategies are the direct utilization of In-, Sn-, and Bi-based MOFs as well as their derived N-doped carbon layer for the ECO2RR.63–65 During this pathway, it is generally accepted that the *OCHO intermediate is more energy efficient than the *COOH intermediate, which is the reaction pathway to CO production.66,67 Therefore, In, Sn, and Bi exhibit a dominant HCOOH pathway instead of the CO pathway during the first step of CO2 activation.41,68 A reasonable explanation is that strong hybridization exists between the 4d orbital of the In, Sn, and Bi atoms and the 2p orbital of the O in the *OCHO intermediates, leading to an enhanced binding effect in the *OCHO intermediate and favourable HCOOH production.69,70
Actually, the above discussion concerning the relationships between metallic element and catalytic selectivity is confined to monometallic active sites, which cannot describe all the circumstances occurring on functional porous frameworks. The bimetallic synergistic effect on the optimization of the structure–activity relationships in functional porous frameworks is also an important design strategy, enabling a decreased activation barrier and smoother reaction pathway during the ECO2RR.72,73 As is known, the rational design and synthesis of bimetal catalysts are necessary for the implementation of synergistic catalysis, thus effectively regulating the adsorption/desorption of key intermediates during the ECO2RR.74 In this case, two possibilities exist, as follows: (a) two metallic elements with different intrinsic activities may exhibit competing catalytic selectivity.75 Specifically, the prepared bimetal-based functional porous frameworks from the selection of Co, Ni, Fe, and Zn exhibit effective regulation between the ECO2RR and HER, achieving CO selectivity.76 Also, the construction of Cu–M (M = Co, Ni, Fe, and Zn) bimetal-based functional porous frameworks can maintain their pristine catalytic potential for the ECO2RR towards hydrocarbons.77 (b) The synergistic effect between the active metal A and non-active metal B prompts the efficient ECO2RR on bimetal-based functional porous frameworks. For example, the modification of Mg2+ species on the surface Cu active sites can lead to the stabilization of the Cu+ species and enhanced CO2 activation to form CO intermediates, thus facilitating the following C–C coupling to C2+ products.78 In this condition, the participation of metal B can regulate the electron configurations and d-band centers of metal A and stabilize the active species during the electrochemical process.
2.2. Local coordination environment
The local coordination environment, serving as the pivotal factor to estimate the structure–activity relationships on metallic active sites with different coordination configuration, is capable of regulating catalytic selectivity between the ECO2RR and competing HER.79 The experimental and theoretical research on functional porous frameworks resulted in the fundamental comprehension of structure–activity relationships, which can guide the rational design of active sites with enhanced intrinsic activity for the ECO2RR.80 Generally, it has been demonstrated that the elaborate design and preparation of functional porous frameworks can produce the expected site configuration for the ECO2RR, which is one of the effective strategies that decides the catalytic selectivity for the ECO2RR.81 As the typical example, bulk Fe, Co, and Ni catalysts exhibit distinct HER preference both in experiments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. However, the atomic Fe, Co, and Ni centers display significantly enhanced CO selectivity and suppressed HER.82 This huge shift in catalytic selectivity can be attributed to the effective regulation of the local coordination environment, which boosts the oriented electron transfer from the coordination atoms to the metallic centers and the corresponding high catalytic selectivity to CO production. In addition, three similar works employed Cu-doped ZIF-8 as a precursor to obtain Cu single-atom catalysts (SACs) for the ECO2RR.54,83,84 However, they displayed very different catalytic selectivity, including CH3CH2OH, CH3OCH3, and CH3OH production, which is also sensitively determined by the local coordination environment. Furthermore, the current discussion on the catalytic selectivity of Cu–N–C SACs is still obscure owing to the uncertainty of the local coordination configuration and other influence factors, which serve as key descriptors to determine the preference of key adsorption intermediates and the following reaction pathways. Based on this, an increasing number of in situ characterization technologies has been devoted to ECO2RR research, aiming to reasonably speculate the obtained active sites, such as coordination number, coordination atom species, and active site configuration.
Regarding the coordination number, a change in this number has a great impact on the ECO2RR performance because of the alteration of the pristine symmetric active sites, which favour the dispersion of electrons and hinder the oriented electron transfer from the linking atoms to metallic centers.85 For example, compared with the intact M–N4 site on N-doped graphene, the asymmetric M–Nx site should be triggered by regulating the coordination number or interaction between the M–Nx site and carbon layer, which can enable improved electron-oriented transfer from the asymmetric M–Nx sites to adsorption intermediates.86 To achieve this goal, pyrolysis is one of the effective strategies to destroy the intact pristine M–N4 site, and thereafter convert it to an M–Nx site with unsaturated or oversaturated coordination, ultimately realizing improved catalytic selectivity. Furthermore, modification to create abundant carbon defects around the asymmetric M–Nx sites is also an efficient approach to ensure efficient contact between the M–Nx active sites and CO2 molecule, thus enhancing the ability for CO2 activation.87 The same circumstance occurs on Sc, Mn, Y, and Re with specific ECO2RR selectivity for CO on atomically dispersed M–Nx active sites.60–62
In the case of the coordination atom species (e.g., C, N, O, and halogen atoms), the majority of research focused on the construction of M–N and M–O linking units due to their efficient ECO2RR activity. Lin et al. applied C atoms as coordination sites and discovered that the HER preference increased on this type of active site, and thus are unfavorable for ECO2RR activity.88 Regarding F, Cl, Br, and I coordination atoms, there are three possible rational design strategies, as follows: (a) formation of carbon defects during the pyrolytic process, offering unsaturated coordination sites, which are beneficial for the anchoring of post-modified halogen atoms. The obtained M–X (X represents halogen atoms) bonds can efficiently suppress the HER. (b) The formation of C–X bonds adjacent to the M–Nx active sites due to the addition of halogen-containing linkers in MOF/COF precursors.89 Also, this method is suitable for realizing the synergistic effect of adjacent functional groups. (c) Axial coordination engineering by introducing M–X bonds in the axial direction of metallic active sites.90 This unique spatial coordination configuration endows metallic centers with a denser distribution of charges, enabling the oriented electron transfer in the opposite M–X direction. Therefore, coordination atom species are considered to play a significant role in studying the structure–activity relationships during the ECO2RR.
Besides the metallic active sites for the ECO2RR, non-metallic materials such as carbon nanomaterials have also been proven to possess intrinsic ECO2RR activity. For example, Zn is a typical element to realize non-metallic active sites derived from Zn-based functional porous frameworks.91 ZIFs, as a subclass of MOFs, have been extensively explored to obtain a series of novel Zn–N coordinated spatial configurations. Different from Cu-, Co-, Ni-, and Fe-based MOFs with metallic centers as active sites, it has been demonstrated that in Zn-based ZIFs, the sp2 C species in the imidazolate linkers tend to possess ECO2RR activity instead of the Zn centers.92 Meanwhile, due to the relatively lower evaporating temperature of Zn0, Zn-based MOFs/COFs have been demonstrated to be excellent precursors to prepare metal-free porous carbon, which exhibit abundant pore structures, abundant heteroatom species, and higher carbon defect density compared with conventional carbon maertials.93 Besides, Zn-based MOFs/COFs can also be employed as carriers to incorporate other metallic sites to enhance the synergistic effect during the ECO2RR.94
2.3. Microstructure
With the rapid development of nano-characterization technologies, the probing of the influence of microstructure on mass transfer and high-current stability have aroused intense interest for the enhanced application potential of functional porous frameworks. Noteworthily, both the crystalline and derived types of frameworks possess the superiority of high porosity, flexible pore channels and adjustable morphology with well-defined active site configuration.95 Besides, the pore channels with an optimized pore size, pore distribution, and pore shape are significant to ensure the sufficient exposure of active sites and efficient mass transfer, thus boosting the rate of the ECO2RR.96 Therefore, considering the contact between the active sites and CO2 molecule, the microstructure plays a pivotal role in regulating the mass transfer, electron transfer, electrolyte penetration, and long-term stability. The pore size in catalysts can be divided into three ranges, namely, microporous (<2 nm), mesoporous (2–50 nm) and macroporous (>50 nm), in accordance with the definition of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Considering the practical application field, functional porous frameworks with a pore distribution of 1.5–10 nm will be a suitable range to control the mass transfer effect in catalysts for the ECO2RR.97 Specifically, a too small aperture not only demands a relatively higher pressure to reach the same electrolyte penetration but also hinders the diffusion of CO2 in the pore channels. Alternatively, a too large aperture unavoidably requires the precise selection of monomers that tend to possess biphenyl or multi-phenyl structures, which are expensive. In summary, in the design and selection of functional porous frameworks, the mass transfer and synthesis cost should be rationally considered.
In fact, the strategy of regulating the microstructure considers other factors besides the morphology and pore channels of the catalysts.71 Here, when the as-prepared catalysts are applied in a flow cell or membrane electrode assembly (MEA), the gas transfer, ionic transfer, and three-phase interfaces should be considered to optimize the ECO2RR system, which are highly dependent on the microstructure of the catalyst and the interaction between the gas diffusion layer and catalyst layer. Recently, the precise regulation of the microstructure in functional porous frameworks has been achieved.98 In the case of pristine MOFs/COFs, surfactant-assisted morphology regulation, ligand-oriented pore-size regulation, and post-treatment-assisted hierarchical pore regulation are common design strategies to guarantee the full exposure of the active sites during the electrochemical process. In regard to MOF/COF composites, their pore channels can provide a superior platform to incorporate sub-nano metal NPs and effectively avoid the aggregation of the metal, thus improving the atomic utilization of the active metal and the long-term stability. In the case of MOF/COF pyrolysates, direct pyrolysis not only can maintain the pore structure of the pristine frameworks, but also create hierarchical pore channels owing to the collapse and corresponding reconstruction process. Hence, pyrolysis is a complicated and flexible strategy for achieving a controllable pore size, including muti-segment temperature programming, relatively low-temperature activation, and Joule heat flash.99
Promisingly, the efforts devoted to functional porous frameworks in the last decade have significantly promoted the understanding of both the reaction mechanism and structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR.100 Also, the advances in the structural design of crystalline and derived porous materials can be beneficial to effectively regulate the electrochemical properties of active sites from the perspective of metallic element type, local coordination environment and microstructure, further optimizing the ECO2RR performance. In the following sections, the design and preparation of functional porous frameworks in terms of local coordination environment and microstructure will be discussed in detail in the order of the metallic element type. Here, we comprehensively consider the coordination number, edge effect, vacancy defect, axial coordination, local strain, functional group effect, coordination atom species, interfaces, pore structure, and morphologies determine how the local coordination environment and microstructure influence the structure–activity relationships of functional porous frameworks with targeted active sites for the ECO2RR.
3. Cu-based functional porous frameworks
Generally, Cu is recognized as the most potential metal to realize the deeper reduction of CO2 to a series of hydrocarbon products owing to its moderate binding energies for the *H, *COOH, and *CO adsorption intermediates.101 Especially, a suitable ΔG(*CO) not only ensures the effective coverage of CO on the Cu active sites, but also avoid the CO poisoning effect. DFT calculations revealed that the Cu active sites can efficiently enable proton–electron transfer to form *CO intermediates, and thereafter C–C coupling, thus generating C1, C2 and C2+ products.102 To date, the complicated and uncertain reaction process together with the poor selectivity of single products on Cu-based catalysts has been the main topic of research on the ECO2RR.103,104 Therefore, the design of Cu-based functional porous frameworks with a well-defined site configuration results in a superior platform for investigating their structure–activity relationships, revealing their corresponding catalytic mechanism.
In the case of crystalline porous materials, the mature design strategy mainly includes the Cu–O4 configuration in Cu-based 2D MOFs and the Cu–N4 configuration in Cu-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs. Here, the local coordination environment becomes the major discussion for the regulation of ECO2RR, including the coordination number, synergistic effect of adjacent active sites, axial coordination, functional group effect, and coordination atom species. To date, the influence of a change in the coordination number on the ECO2RR performance is still under debate. Noteworthily, Cu–O linking units with an unsaturated and oversaturated coordination number have both been demonstrated to possess an enhanced catalytic performance to produce hydrocarbons. Besides, owing to the pre-set topological structure in pristine Cu-based MOFs/COFs, it becomes feasible to implement adjustable 1D/2D/3D morphologies with tailor-made pore interfaces, ensuring the full contact between the active sites and electrolytes during the ECO2RR.
Regarding derived porous materials, their design strategy can be roughly divided into MOF/COF composites and pyrolysates, considering the coordination environment and microstructure. In the case of MOF/COF composites, owing to the complicated catalytic mechanism during the electrochemical process, the aggregation of metal atoms tends to form polycrystalline NPs and generate other types of active sites, leading to a decrease in the catalytic selectivity for a single product.105 Hence, the introduction of conductive materials enables the uniform distribution of metallic atoms, preventing their rapid aggregation into large-sized Cu NPs especially at a high current density. Conductive materials including graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), polymers, and metal powders are selected as efficient supports to enhance the surface/interface charge transfer during the ECO2RR.106,107 Especially, a modified gas diffusion electrode (GDE) was prepared via the in situ growth of Cu-based MOFs/COFs on self-supporting electrodes (e.g., carbon cloth (CC), carbon paper (CP), and Cu foam), which could efficiently expose the Cu–N/O active sites and improve the charge transfer efficiency during the electrocatalytic process.108,109 In addition, Cu-based MOF/COF pyrolysates have also been demonstrated as efficient ECO2RR catalysts, which can be prepared under different calcination atmospheres (e.g., air, O2, N2, H2, NH3, and their mixtures).110 Herein, the enhanced ECO2RR activity and stability of the MOF/COF pyrolysates can be attributed to two reasons, as follows: (a) the high-temperature pyrolysis procedure endows catalysts with a higher degree of graphitization, thus improving their conductivity and catalytic stability to the maximum extent111 and (b) carbon layers play an important role in uniformly distributing and anchoring Cu single atoms (SAs) or NPs, avoiding their aggregation and ensuring the sufficient contact between active sites and electrolytes.112–114 Especially, Cu SACs as the typical type of atom-level dispersing active site have been extensively studied both experimentally and theoretically owing to the simplified graphene monolayer model, which is beneficial to deeply understand the catalytic mechanism and the corresponding structure–activity relationships of various active sites in Cu SACs during the ECO2RR.115
3.1. Cu-based crystalline porous materials

3.1.1. Cu-based MOFs. 
In 2012, Yamada et al. utilized a Cu-based MOF for the ECO2RR to produce HCOOH for the first time.116 The as-prepared Cu-based MOF with ruby acid as the linker (denoted as CR-MOF) exhibited an HCOOH selectivity of over 98% among the ECO2RR products. In the same year, the ECO2RR towards oxalic acid on a Cu-based MOF film was studied by Kulandainathan in CO2-saturated tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate solution.117 Afterwards, a series of Cu-based MOFs with Cu–N/O planar or spatial configurations was used as ECO2RR catalysts. Regarding the structure–activity relationships of Cu-based MOFs for the ECO2RR, extensive research has been carried out, which mainly focused on the bottom-up strategy at the atomic/molecular level, including the design of intact Cu–O4 or Cu–N4 sites,118 introduction of a second metal,119 design of dual-linker MOFs with mixed linking types,120 synergistic effect of dual-sites,44 regulation of the coordination number,121,122 and construction of heteroatom-containing functional groups or novel heterocyclic structures.43,123,124
The rational design of novel Cu-based 2D MOFs with an extended heterocyclic conjugated structure is a potential strategy to improve the in-plane charge transfer during the electrochemical process. Based on this, the experimental exploration assisted by theoretical prediction becomes a direct and efficient way to obtain a series of Cu–O4 or Cu–N4 units, constructing highly symmetric 2D MOFs. For example, our group successfully synthesized the highly symmetric hexaazatrinaphthylene (HATNA) as a linker to construct a novel 2D conjugated Cu MOF (denoted as HATNA-Cu-MOF), as shown in Fig. 3a.125 Considering the charge-oriented transfer between HATNA and the Cu catecholate node, the HATNA-Cu-MOF effectively mediated the adsorption/desorption energy of the key intermediate and achieved a faradaic efficiency (FE) for CH4 of 78% with a current density of 8.2 mA cm−2 and durability over 12 h for the ECO2RR (Fig. 3b). In addition, a C3-symmetric 2,3,7,8,12,13-hexahydroxytricyclo-quinazoline (HHTQ) was selected by Chen and coworkers to form Cu–O4 units and the corresponding hexagonal networks (Fig. 3c).43 When applied in the ECO2RR, Cu3(HHTQ)2 showcased an FE for CH3OH of 53.6% at −0.4 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode, RHE) (Fig. 3d). It was revealed through X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra that the oxidation state of Cu2+ in Cu3(HHTQ)2 was well maintained during the electrocatalytic process without detectable signals of Cu0 or Cu+, demonstrating the stability of the well-defined CuO4 catalytic sites during the ECO2RR process. The above-mentioned two works mainly focused on the design of 2D MOFs at the atomic/molecular level and used bulk MOFs direct as catalysts for the ECO2RR, ignoring the influence of their microstructure on their catalytic activity. The conversion of a bulk 2D copper-tetrahydroxyquinone MOF into nano-flakes (abbreviated as Cu-THQ NFs) was realized by Majidi et al. via a facile liquid-phase exfoliation strategy (Fig. 3e).124 It is worth noting that Cu-THQ NFs possessed an onset potential of −0.126 V (vs. RHE) with a current density of 173 mA cm−2, which is the lowest onset potential reported to date for the ECO2RR to CO together with the potential for a large current density (Fig. 3f). Interestingly, though the same Cu–O4 configuration in the above-mentioned works, three Cu-based 2D MOFs exhibited totally different ECO2RR selectivity, including CH4, CH3OH, and CO production, which can be ascribed to the difference in the adsorption energy of the key intermediates on the Cu centers, therefore undergoing a different reaction pathway.
 Fig. 3  (a) Presentation of the structure of HATNA-Cu-MOF. (b) Comparison of the FE of CH4 among HATNA-Cu-MOF, HATNA-6OH and the model compound. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (c) Schematic of the structure of M3(HHTQ)2 (M = Cu, Ni). (d) Selectivity for each product (CH3OH and H2) for Cu3(HHTQ)2 at different potentials. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (e) Illustration of the structure of Cu-THQ. (f) Differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS) for CO and H2 production at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 for Cu-THQ NFs (inset exhibits the FE of CO and H2 in the range of −0.126 to −0.43 V (vs. RHE)). Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. 
Even though Cu-based catalysts have been verified to possess great potential for the production of hydrocarbons compared with other metallic elements, the high energy barrier of *CO hydrogenation and C–C coupling leads to the production of C1 with restricted C2 production. Based on this, several optimization strategies have been proposed for the rational design of novel active sites with short-range synergistic effect44 or coordination number regulation121,122 in Cu-based MOFs. Considering the short-range synergistic effect, the well-defined Cu–N/O single active sites are not satisfactory to realize the potential of the ECO2RR to form C2 products. Accordingly, the design of adjacent sites with a synergistic effect is a plausible atomic/molecular-level strategy to achieve C2 production using Cu-based MOFs. For example, a typical MOF was prepared by Chen et al. consisting of (2,3,9,10,16,17,23,24-octahydroxyphthalo-cyaninato) copper(II) linkers and square-planar CuO4 nodes (denoted as PcCu–Cu–O) for the ECO2RR to produce C2H4 (Fig. 4a).44 The as-prepared PcCu–Cu–O displayed an FE for C2H4 of 50% with a current density of 7.3 mA cm−2 at −1.2 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KHCO3, which is superior to Cu phthalocyanine (Fig. 4b). It was revealed via in situ infrared spectroscopy that the CO produced on the CuO4 site could further migrate and dimerize on the CuPc site. Therefore, the synergistic effect between the CuPc site and CuO4 site resulted in a lower energy barrier of C–C coupling (Fig. 4c and d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Brief synthetic process of PcCu–Cu–O. (b) FEs of C2H4, CH4, CO, and H2 for PcCu–Cu–O. (c and d) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of PcCu–Cu–O during the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (e) Schematic illustration of the loss of crystallinity in the (111) plane of HKUST-1. (f) FEs of 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1 at 1 M KOH. (g) EPR verification of the distortion of symmetric Cu dimer toward an asymmetric structure in 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1. (h) FT-EXAFS spectra of 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1 at −1.38 V (vs. RHE) in 1 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (i) Schematic of Cu-DBC. (j) Cu 3d orbital splitting in CuO4 and CuO5 sites, respectively. (k) FE comparison of Cu-DBC, Cu-THQ, and Cu-HHTP. (l) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of Cu-DBC at −1.4 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022. 
Concerning the structure–activity relationships between the coordination configuration and catalytic selectivity, the regulation of the coordination number (CN) of Cu-based MOFs is one of the efficient strategies to design Cu–N/O sites with novel coordination configuration of Cu centers for the ECO2RR. Different from the common CuO4 or CuN4 (CN = 4) planar coordination configuration in Cu-based 2D MOFs or Cu2O10 (CN = 6, involving the O5Cu–CuO5 SBU) spatial coordination configuration in Cu-based 3D MOFs (e.g., Cu-BDC and HKUST-1), CN regulation involves both a decrease and increase in the CN of the common coordination configuration, both of which can effectively adjust the local charge density of the well-define Cu–N/O active sites, thus optimizing the catalytic selectivity of Cu-based MOFs for the ECO2RR. Based on HKUST-1 with 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC) as the linker, Sargent et al. proposed an active site with unsaturated coordination by distorting a symmetric paddle-wheel Cu dimer to an asymmetric motif through heat treatment (Fig. 4e).121 The 250 °C 3 h calcinated HKUST-1 exhibited a C2H4 FE of 45% with the current density of 262 mA cm−2 at −1.07 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 4f). Notably, the heat treatment of HKUST-1 resulted in the loss of the (1 1 1) plane, which was attributed to the structural distortion in the paddle-wheel Cu dimer. Firstly, the 250 °C 3 h calcinated HKUST-1 exhibited an obviously increased electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signal intensity in comparison to the untreated HKUST-1 (Fig. 4g), indicating the conversion from antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic states with an increase in unpaired electrons. Secondly, it was elaborated via in situ Fourier transform extended X-ray absorption fine structure (FT-EXAFS) results that the CN of the Cu–Cu dimer was directly determined by the degree of distortion of the Cu–Cu dimer in HKUST-1 (Fig. 4h). Thereinto, the 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1 formed an average CN of 9.5 ± 0.9 in the Cu–Cu dimer, resulting in the effective regulation of the Cu dimer as the active site for the ECO2RR. To increase the Cu CN in Cu-based MOFs, a novel MOF was prepared by Chen et al. using dibenzo-[g,p]chrysene-2,3,6,7,10,11,14,15-octaol (H8DBC) as the linker to form a CuO5 SBU (Fig. 4i).122 In comparison to the square-planar CuO4 site (e.g., Cu-HHTQ and Cu-THQ, as mentioned above), the square-pyramidal CuO5 site in Cu-DBC led to the promotion of the energy levels of d orbitals (dz2, dxz/dyz), not only ensuring stronger CO adsorption on the CuO5 site for the following hydrogenation process, but also increasing the Lewis basicity of the Cu center for CO2 capture and electron injection (Fig. 4j). Consequently, different from the catalytic selectivity of either Cu-HHTQ or Cu-THQ, Cu-DBC possessed an FE CH4 of 56% with a current density of 11.4 mA cm−2 at −1.4 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 4k). The attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra demonstrated the presence of *CHO, *CH2O, and *CH3O and absence of *CO, indicating a typical eight-electron transfer process for the ECO2RR to produce CH4, as shown in Fig. 4l.


3.1.2. Cu-based COFs. 
COFs tend to be prepared via the crosslinking of aromatic molecules with reversible covalent bonds, possessing advantages of tunable composition, extended π-conjugation structure, and sufficient porosity.126,127 It is worth noting that this type of catalyst can bridge the gap between homogeneous and heterogeneous electrocatalysts owing to its characteristics of small-molecule catalytic activity and conductivity and mass transfer efficiency of the π-conjugation structure and porosity, respectively.128–130 Especially, metal-porphyrin/phthalocyanine, serving as one type of well-defined M–N4 site, have been extensively probed to construct COFs with high catalytic activity for the ECO2RR (e.g., Cu-, Co-, Ni-, and Fe-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs).17 The optimization strategies of metal-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs mainly focus on the charge-oriented transfer in the COF skeleton and the pore engineering of its microstructure. According to the pre-designed topology in COFs, the pore structure formed by the polymerization of a series of different nodes and linkers has been extensively explored in recent years.131 Herein, the pore engineering for the ECO2RR starts with two considerations, namely, the oriented creation of tailor-made pore interfaces53 and the novel hole channel distinguished by shape and size.132,133 Currently, the rational design of functional groups in COFs can provide a chemical basis for the functionalization of their pore interfaces, thus triggering the further regulation of a series of interactions, such as coordination, hydrogen bond, dipole–dipole/quadrupole interactions, electrostatic interaction, acid-based interaction, and electronic interaction.
Generally, it is accepted that Co-, Ni-, and Fe-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs display specific selectivity in the ECO2RR towards CO. On the contrary, owing to the complexity of the intrinsic activity of the Cu element, Cu-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs also display potential catalytic selectivity for hydrocarbon production. Besides, due to the as-mentioned synthetic flexibility of COFs at the atomic/molecular level, Cu can further endow porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs with great possibility for deeper ECO2RR to unusual hydrocarbons. To date, CH3COOH is usually seen as a by-product of the ECO2RR owing to the unsatisfactory selectivity compared with the preferred C2 products such as C2H4 and CH3CH2OH. Actually, the ECO2RR to C2H4 or CH3CH2OH takes a favorable and similar path, whereas the ECO2RR to CH3COOH undergoes a completely different path.53 Therefore, research on the ECO2RR to C2 products other than C2H4 and CH3CH2OH seems unconventional and challenging. Noteworthily, Liao et al. synthesized a novel 2D Cu-based phthalocyanine COF (PcCu-TFPN) as a catalyst for the ECO2RR with a CH3COOH FE of 90.3% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) and current density of 12.5 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KHCO3 solution (Fig. 5a).53 It was demonstrated from an experimental and theoretical perspective that PcCu-TFPN not only overcame the easy desorption of *CO intermediates and aggregation of Cu sites into clusters, but also boosted the bonding of nucleophilic (H3)–C in the *CH3 intermediate to the Lewis acid, thus facilitating the coupling of a *CH3 with a CO2 during the electrocatalytic process (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the structure of PcCu-TFPN. (b) Free energy diagrams of *CH3 and *OOCCH3 for Cu-porphyrin and PcCu-TFPN, respectively (insets exhibit the electron densities of *CH3 intermediates). Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. (c) Schematic representation of anthraquinone COF-based nanofibers and hollow tubes for ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (d) Schematic representation of porphyrin COF-based nanostructures (Ani stands for aniline and TEPA is tetraethylenepentamine). Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. 
Concerning the novel 1D/2D/3D hole channel created by pore engineering, a series of works was reported by Lan's group on improving the selectivity of Cu-based COFs for hydrocarbon production. As shown in Fig. 5c, two types of anthraquinone-based COFs with adjustable one-dimensional (1D) superstructures were successfully obtained, which were denoted as AAn-COF nanofibers (NF) and OH-AAn-COF hollow tubes (HT).132 Through a further reflux post-modification method, Cu2+ was uniformly dispersed on the as-prepared COFs. When applied for the ECO2RR, AAn-COF-Cu (NF) and OH-AAn-COF-Cu (HT) exhibited a CH4 FE of 77% (−128.1 mA cm−2, −0.9 V (vs. RHE)) and 61% (−99.5 mA cm−2, −1.0 V (vs. RHE)) respectively. In addition to the exploration of 1D structures, catalysts with tunable multi-dimensional microstructures have been further considered. Based on this, the self-assembling strategy was utilized to synthesize multi-dimensional COF-366-Cu nanostructures (including hollow sphere, nanosheets and nanofibers, as shown in Fig. 5d). Intriguingly, the microstructure-optimized COF-366-Cu exhibited a higher CH4 FE (hollow sphere, 68.2%; nanosheet, 64.2%; and nanofiber, 71.0% at −0.9 V (vs. RHE)) than the pristine COF-366-Cu (43.0%, −0.9 V (vs. RHE)).133 The possible improved catalytic performance was attributed to the structure–activity relationships between the microstructure of the COFs and the corresponding accessibility of CO2 molecules to the Cu active sites. However, the understanding of the relationships between the morphology of Cu-based COFs and their selectivity in the ECO2RR for hydrocarbon production remains vague and limited. Therefore, further research related to the morphology regulation should center on theoretical simulation to analyze the CO2 adsorption/activation and mass transfer of morphology-regulated Cu-based COFs.

3.2. Cu-based derived porous materials

3.2.1. Cu-based MOF/COF composites. 
To compensate for the deficiency of pristine MOFs/COFs, the composition strategy is a direct and effective method, which can be achieved by mixing with a conducting support,134in situ MOF synthesis on self-supporting electrode,135 electrochemical reduction of MOFs/COFs,136–138etc. Peng's group proposed the use of a Cu-based MOF-support mixture, where Ketjenblack (KB) was used as the conductive support. The multi-crystalline Cu NPs derived from the reconstruction of the MOF could be effectively distributed in KB through current shock pretreatment, similar to the prevention of dendrite growth via the introduction of conductive scaffolds in metal-ion batteries (Fig. 6a and b).134 Notably, the addition of KB to the Cu-based 2D MOF resulted in a C2H4 FE of over 60% with a potential in the range of −1.2 to −1.7 V (vs. RHE) for the ECO2RR. It was revealed through in situ XAS and ex situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Fig. 6c and d, respectively) that the introduction of KB ensured the quick evolution of tiny Cu NPs from the MOF, and thereafter their stabilization. Concerning the electrochemical reduction of MOFs/COFs, Cao and coworkers proposed that the design of catalysts with a single type of active site may play a significant role in promoting the catalytic selectivity for a single product during the ECO2RR.136 Consequently, they successfully obtained the electrochemical in situ-reduced Cu2O with a specific (1 1 1) plane and average size of 3.5 nm on Cu-HHTP. When applied as a catalyst for the ECO2RR, the as-prepared Cu2O@CuHHTP composite achieved a CH4 FE of 73% with a partial current density of 10.8 mA cm−2 at −1.4 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 6e). The in situ ATR-FTIR spectra and DFT calculations revealed that several pivotal intermediates (e.g., *CH2O and *OCH3 during the formation of CH4) could be effectively realized and stabilized via the (1 1 1) plane in Cu2O as well as the synergistic effect between Cu2O and Cu-HHTP, as shown in Fig. 6f and g, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Illustration of the regulation of the selectivity for the ECO2RR in the presence (a) and absence (b) of carbon supports. (c) In situ Cu K-edge XAS of KB@Cu3(HITP)2 at −1.25 V (vs. RHE). (d) Ex situ XRD patterns of KB@Cu3(HITP)2 at −1.25 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (e) Illustration of the solvothermal synthesis of Cu-HHTP and preparation of Cu2O@Cu-HHTP via electrochemical treatment of Cu-HHTP at the applied potential of −1.2 V (vs. RHE) for 30 min. (f) Proposed mechanism of Cu2O@Cu-HHTP for the formation of CH4. (g) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra on Cu2O@Cu-HHTP at −1.4 V (vs. RHE) in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KCl/0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. 


3.2.2. Cu-based MOF/COF pyrolysates. 
The ECO2RR tends to put forward high demands for the stability of catalysts under the harsh electrochemical condition. In this case, although the composition strategy is effective to some extent, it remains limited to further produce catalysts with both satisfactory conductivity and stability. Noteworthily, the pyrolysis of MOFs/COFs not only can maintain the porosity of crystalline porous materials, but also endow the pyrolysates a series of new properties, such as excellent thermal/chemical stability and improved conductivity. According to the type of Cu active sites, these catalysts include two common types of MOF-/COF-derived pyrolysates, namely, Cu SACs and Cu compounds.139,140 Thereinto, Cu SACs can be further divided into Cu-doped ZIF-8-derived SACs54,83,84 and Cu-based MOF-derived SACs.112,141 It is worth noting that SACs serve as one type of emerging extraordinary materials for electrocatalysis in recent years. SACs, possessing the advantages of tunable local coordination environment, unique electronic structure, quantum size effect, and metal-support strong interaction, have displayed great potential for the ECO2RR.
In 2019, a ZIF-8-derived Cu–N–C catalysts were prepared by Fontecave et al. through facile pyrolysis with Cu–N4 sites uniformly dispersed in N-doped carbon layers.83 The as-prepared Cu–N–C achieved a CH3CH2OH FE of 55% for the ECO2RR and C2 FE (CH3CH2OH and C2H4) of 80% for the electrocatalytic CO reduction reaction (ECORR) at −1.2 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M CsHCO3 (Fig. 7a and b, respectively). Different from the common understanding of the ECO2RR tendency of isolated Cu active sites to C1 products, Fontecave et al. successfully achieved C–C coupling and subsequent C2 production on Cu–N4 sites. It was illustrated by the in situ XAS results that the isolated Cu sites were reversibly converted into Cu NPs during the electrochemical process, which played a key role in the formation of C2 products instead of C1 products (Fig. 7c). In addition to the common C2 products (e.g., CH3CH2OH and C2H4), CH3COCH3 is another possible product during the ECO2RR. For example, Cu SA encapsulated on N-doped porous carbon (denoted as Cu-SA/NPC) was designed by Chen et al. for the ECO2RR with a CH3COCH3 FE of 36.7% and production rate of 336.1 μg h−1 (Fig. 7d).54 It was revealed by DFT calculations that the local coordination environment of the Cu centers with four pyrrole-N atoms was responsible for CO2 activation and C–C coupling (Fig. 7e). Besides the direct utilization of powder for ECO2RR research, electrostatic spinning technology is one of the effective methods to achieve the preparation of Cu SA-decorated carbon nanofibers on a large scale, which can be directly used as a GDE for the ECO2RR. For instance, He and coworkers realized the synthesis of Cu SAs on through-hole carbon nanofibers (CuSAs/TCNFs) at a large-scale size.84 The as-prepared CuSA/TCNF membrane possessed high mechanical properties, which could be directly utilized as a cathode for the ECO2RR, resulting in a CH3OH FE of 44% with a partial current density of 93 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7f). It was displayed by DFT calculations that the Cu SAs possess a relatively higher binding energy for the *CO intermediate, tending to the further reduction to hydrocarbons such as CH3OH instead of the release from active sites as CO product (Fig. 7g).
 Fig. 7  (a) FEs under “flow” conditions after 1 h of CPE at a CO2 rate of 2.5 mL min−1 in 0.1 M CsHCO3. (b) FEs at −1.2 V (vs. RHE) and a CO2 rate of 2.5 mL min−1 in 0.1 M aqueous solution with different cations (right: FEs of ECORR products under the same reaction conditions). (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of Cu0.5NC with no applied potential (blue line), Cu0.5NC with applied potential of −1.2 V (vs. RHE) (red line), Cu0.5NC after electrolysis with no applied potential (green line) and Cu0.5NC after electrolysis with subsequent exposure to air for 10 h (orange line). Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. (d) FEs on Cu-SA/NPC. (e) Free energy diagrams of Cu-pyrrolic-N4 and Cu-pyridinic-N4 sites in Cu-SA/NPC for the ECO2RR to CH3COCH3. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (f) Schematic of the preparation of CuSAs/TCNFs with several key parameters, reflecting the catalytic capacity for the ECO2RR. (g) Free energy diagrams for *CO to CH3OH on Cu–N4 sites (Cu: orange, C: gray, N: dark blue, O: red, and H: light blue). Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
Compared to the mature method to prepare Cu SACs utilizing Cu-doped ZIF-8 precursors, the direct use of Cu-based MOFs as precursors for further treatment is another plausible strategy to prepare Cu SACs or compounds for the ECO2RR. For example, Zheng and coworkers conducted calcination, and following O2-saturated HCl treatment to successfully convert a Cu-based MOF to Cu–N–C-T (T represents the pyrolysis temperature) SACs with different types of Cu–Nx configurations (Fig. 8a), which was demonstrated by XRD, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and XANES results.112 It was proposed that the pyrolysis temperature played a key role in tuning the Cu doping concentration and Cu–Nx configurations. Consequently, Cu–N–C-800 with a Cu concentration of 4.9%mol exhibited catalytic selectivity for C2H4, while Cu–N–C-900 with a Cu concentration of 2.4%mol displayed priority for CH4, which was attributed to the regulation of the distance between neighboring Cu–Nx sites. Similarly, it was demonstrated via DFT calculations that C2H4 production demands the binding of two *CO intermediates on two adjacent Cu–N2 sites, while either isolated Cu–N4 or isolated Cu–N2 sites result in the formation of CH4. Hence, the tuning of the coordination type and local environment of the Cu active sites is one of the direct approaches to realize the regulation of the product categories for the ECO2RR. Similar to the use of Cu-based MOFs as precursors, the one-step calcination method to directly obtain Cu compounds supported on carbon layers instead of Cu SACs is also feasible for the ECO2RR. The preparation of a CuxOyCz nanostructure was reported by Schuhmann and coworkers using HKUST-1 as a porous self-sacrificial template.141 Intriguingly, a mixture of the as-prepared CuxOyCz and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) on gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) was found to suppress the HER effectively. Consequently, 25 to 50 wt% PTFE GDEs showed a C2+ FE of 54% with a current density of 80 mA cm−2. Also, the local OH− ion activity of PTFE-modified GDEs was analyzed via the close position of the Pt-nanoelectrode. It was proposed that an increase in the current density resulted in locally generated OH− ions, thus promoting the OH−/H2O activity ratio independent of the PTFE amount.
 Fig. 8  (a) Synthetic process of Cu–N–C-T (T represents the pyrolysis temperature). Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (b) Electron density difference plots for Cu, Cu@C and Cu2O@C with two adsorbed *CO and *CHO. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. 
Based on the research on the structure–activity relationship between MOF/COF-derived Cu compounds and catalytic selectivity for the ECO2RR, an increasing number of works have been reported to reveal a tendency to C2 production. Especially, MOF-derived CuOx could be reasonably obtained with Cu oxide NPs at a controllable size supporting on carbon layers. Currently, there has been scarce research on MOF-derived CuOx that mainly focuses on the strong interaction of CuOx NPs and the carbon layer, which may play a key role in the stabilization of the active sites and interface charge transfer during the ECO2RR. Taking the typical 3D Cu-based MOFs (e.g., Cu-BDC and HKUST-1) as an example, a carbon-coated CuOx (CuOx@C) catalyst was prepared by Wang et al. through the one-pot pyrolysis of HKUST-1, exhibiting a CH3CH2OH FE of 46% with a partial current density of 166 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V (vs. RHE).139 On the one hand, it was indicated through in situ Raman spectra that the carbon layer could effectively stabilize the Cu+ species and promote C–C coupling during the electrocatalytic process. On the other hand, the DFT results demonstrated that the carbon layer can tune the *CHCH*O intermediate, undergoing a key hydrogenation pathway towards CH3CH2OH production (Fig. 8b). In addition to the benzene ring-containing or imidazole-containing linkers, amino acids serving as a series of classic N/O/S-containing small molecules can also be utilized as linkers to construct various Cu-amino acid MOFs for the effective introduction of heteroatom species and regulation of their microstructure. For instance, Xia et al. used Cu-aspartic acid MOF nanofibers as precursors to synthesize MOF-derived polycrystalline CuO nanowires through a controllable annealing treatment.140 The as-prepared porous CuO nanowires exhibited a C2 FE of 70% at −1.3 V (vs. RHE).
Noteworthily, the above-mentioned works concerning functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR seem to be confined to C1 and C2 products. This is because the deeper reduction of CO2 to C3 or C3+ products needs to avoid the desorption of the *C2 intermediates and ensure the synergistic effect of the adjacent site, which is an unprecedented challenge in the design of catalysts. Alternatively, the ECORR exhibits better deeper reduction ability toward C3 or C3+ fuels compared with the ECO2RR. Besides, for the industry-level applications of the ECO2RR, the design of catalytic systems besides catalysts (e.g., GDE and industry-level devices) is also necessary to bridge the gap between well-designed test systems in the lab and large-scale energy conversion in industry. Therefore, a system consisting of two tandem electrolyzers was constructed by Tang et al. to achieve the conversion of CO2 to CO and CO to n-propanol (CH3CH2CH2OH) (Fig. 9).142 Beyond the reported tandem electrodes and one-pot tandem catalysts, precise voltage control of tandem electrolyzers enables the optimized conversion of both the ECO2RR to CO and ECORR towards n-propanol. Specifically, the tandem electrolyzers achieved an n-propanol FE of 15.9% together with the corresponding half-cell power conversion efficiency (CPE) of 19.3%. Hence, tandem catalysis possesses great potential for further facilitating the catalytic depth and industrial application, giving insight into Cu-based functional porous frameworks for further exploration in the field of ECO2RR.
 Fig. 9  Schematic of two-step ECO2RR to n-propanol. The first step of the tandem catalytic system consists of (A) flow cell, (B) peristaltic pump, (C) anolyte (0.5 M KHCO3) and (D) catholyte (0.5 M KHCO3), and 3D Ni-SAG is used in a flow cell to reduce CO2 to CO. As-generated CO is purified in (E) 5 M NaOH and sent to the second step of the system, which consists of (F) flow cell, (G) peristaltic pump, (H) catholyte (1 M KOH), and (I) anolyte (1 M KOH), and multi-hollow Cu2O is used in a flow cell to reduce CO to n-propanol. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. 
With the development of Cu-based functional porous frameworks, an increasing number of unique linking types and active site configurations has been designed and obtained, which are suitable equally for the ECO2RR, such as Cu-based MOFs formed by Cu3 clusters and imide linkers (Li et al.143 and Lan et al.144), bicentric Cu-porphyrin structure (Peng et al.145), metal-porphyrin linked mercurated graphynes (Wong et al.146), and Cu–P3 sites with novel coordinated heteroatom species and a high single-atom density of 11.3 wt% (Wang et al.147), which provide abundant Cu-based catalysts with reference significance on adjustable active sites for an improved ECO2RR performance.

4. Co-based functional porous frameworks
Research on Co-based functional porous frameworks tends to focus on atomically dispersing the Co–N4 planar configuration in either porphyrin/phthalocyanine MOFs/COFs or derived SACs.58 The Co center in the Co–N4 site displays specific catalytic selectivity for CO production owing to its unique electron configurations and d-band centers.148 Hence, the improvement in FE and partial current density for CO is an ongoing topic for Co-based functional porous frameworks.
In the case of pristine Co-based MOFs/COFs, the recent emergence of conductive frameworks offers the possibility to overcome the limitation of current density with an enhancement in oriented through-bond and through-space charge transfer via the utilization of redox-active building blocks, the construction of d–π or π–π conjugated structures, and the formation of π-stacking. Regarding Co-based MOF/COF-derived SACs, asymmetrical Co–Nx sites with a tunable local coordination environment and high-graphitization carbon layers ensure catalytic selectivity and improved current density simultaneously. Besides atomically dispersed Co active sites, Co NPs are limited by their low ECO2RR selectivity and dominant HER activity.151 Especially, the pyrolysis strategy tends to produce MOF/COF-derived Co NPs with face centered cubic (fcc) stacking, which display specific selectivity to the adverse HER. Therefore, alternative methods are needed to obtain Co NPs with unconventional stacking structures or other types of Co compounds. Noteworthily, Co NPs with hexagonal close packed (hcp) stacking have been demonstrated to possess C–C coupling to ethanal (CH3CHO) production ability.25 CoO NPs with an electron-enriched ternary heterostructure could undergo a six-electron pathway to produce CH4.24 Also, a Co transition metal hydroxide (TMH) was found to effectively suppress the HER and boost the catalytic selectivity for HCOOH.23 The research on Co-based catalysts for the ECO2RR greatly widens the design of Co-based functional porous frameworks to probe the corresponding structure–activity relationships.
4.1. Co-based crystalline porous materials

4.1.1. Co-based MOFs. 
Based on the well-defined Co–N4 active sites, porphyrin/phthalocyanine-derived linkers have been extensively studied and utilized to construct a variety of Co-porphyrin/phthalocyanine MOFs/COFs for heterogeneous catalysis. In 2015, Yang and coworkers studied a Co-porphyrin MOF (denoted as Al2(OH)2TCPP-Co) by linking alumina rods.152 When applied in the ECO2RR, the as-prepared Al2(OH)2TCPP-Co exhibited a CO FE of 76% with a TON of 1400 at −0.7 V (vs. RHE). The following works aimed to further promote the CO FE with an improved or even industrial-level current density from the perspective of catalyst design and device upgrade. During the optimization of Co-porphyrin/phthalocyanine MOFs, the introduction of second metallic atoms to form M–N/O linking units can regulate the local charge distribution in Co–N4 sites and promote electron-oriented transfer under applied potential, thus lowering the energy barrier of key adsorption intermediates.
A series of structural analogues of 2D MOFs (denoted as MPC–Cu–X (M = Co, Ni; X = NH, O)) was prepared by Mirica and coworkers with metal phthalocyanine and Cu nodes as constructing units for the ECO2RR to CO (Fig. 10a).149 The catalytic selectivity among the series of 2D MOF analogues tended to be determined by the type of metal in the MPc units and the heteroatomic identity of the Cu nodes, which was demonstrated by parallel experiments with metal-free phthalocyanine MOF analogues. Thereinto, CoPC–Cu–O exhibited a CO FE of 85% with a current density of −17.3 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of −0.63 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 10b). It was revealed by DFT calculations that CoPC–Cu–O exhibited a lower *COOH formation energy and more positive electrostatic potential on MPc units compared with NiPC–Cu–NH (Fig. 10c–f). In addition, Lan and coworkers designed novel polyoxometalate metal-porphyrin organic frameworks (PMOFs) by applying reductive polyoxometalate (POM) ε-PMo8VMo4VIO40Zn4 (denoted as Zn-ε-Keggin) clusters and metal-porphyrins as linking units.150 It was noted that the formation of charge transportation channels between the reductive POM units and metal-porphyrin units in the electric field created effective electron-oriented transfer during the ECO2RR (Fig. 10g). Especially, Co-PMOF exhibited a CO FE of 99% with a turnover frequency (TOF) of 1656 h−1 at −1.0 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 10h and i).
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthetic process for MPC–Cu–X (M = Co, Ni; X = NH, O) with MPc units connected by Cu bis(diimine) or Cu bis(dioxolene) linkages. (b) FEs of CoPC–Cu–O at different potentials (dark green for CO and light blue for H2). (c) Reasonable reaction mechanism for the ECO2RR towards CO on MPc sites in MPC–Cu–XH. Free energy diagram for the ECO2RR towards CO on CoPC–Cu–NH (red), CoPC–Cu–O (green), NiPC–Cu–NH (orange), and NiPC–Cu–O (blue) at 0 V by the pathway of (d) route I and (e) route II. (f) Electrostatic potential diagrams of MPC–Cu–XH with an isovalue of 0.5 eV. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (g) Schematic of Co-PMOF for the ECO2RR. (h) FE CO of Co-PMOF at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) in 0.5 M KHCO3. (i) CO partial current density and TOFs of Co-PMOF at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) in 0.5 M KHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018. 


4.1.2. Co-based COFs. 
Earlier studies on the ECO2RR centered on homogeneous catalysts, such as Co-porphyrin and Co-phthalocyanine. However, this type of catalyst suffers from degradation induced by water or protons, and thus organic media are required to achieve satisfactory ECO2RR activity and suppress the HER.12 In 2015, a Co-porphyrin molecular catalyst was first incorporated into a COF by Chang et al. using a Co-porphyrin linked by organic conjugated imine bonds, which modulated the electronic properties of the Co active center inside the lattice.13 The as-prepared COF-366-Co exhibited a CO FE of 90% with a TOF of 9400 h−1 at an overpotential of −0.55 V (vs. RHE), which is superior to the conventional Co-porphyrin molecular catalyst. Then, a series of works related to the rational design of Co-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs was reported, including the introduction of heteroatom species (e.g., sulfur153,154), functional groups (e.g., N-containing156 and O-containing groups157) and non-planar 3D heterocyclic structure,155 thus effectively modulating the local charge distribution of the Co–N4 sites in Co-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs and boosting the catalytic performance for CO production.
Owing to the advantage of COFs, either the introduction of heteroatom species or the construction of extended planar conjugated structure becomes facile in Co-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs. Recently, a series of studies was carried out by Cao et al. concerning the rational design of Co-porphyrin COFs for the ECO2RR. It was proposed that sulfur(S)-containing linkers could possibly promote electron-transfer capability in the layers of COFs, compensating for their limited conductivity to some extent.153 As shown in Fig. 11a, tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) was used as a linker to form a 2D Co-porphyrin COF (denoted as TTF-Por(Co)-COF) to facilitate charge transfer between TTF and Co-porphyrin. In comparison to COF-366-Co without TTF, TTF-Por(Co)-COF exhibited a CO FE of 95% at −0.7 V (vs. RHE). It was revealed by DFT calculations that *CO2 to *COOH on TTF-Por(Co)-COF demanded a lower activation energy barrier with respect to that of COF-366-Co. Moreover, this electron-transfer heterojunction can be universal for Co-porphyrin COFs structured by other S-containing linkers. Another Co-porphyrin COF (denoted as TT-Por(Co)-COF) was prepared using thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2,5-dicarbaldehyde (TT) and 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)-porphinatocobalt (Co-TAPP) as building units (Fig. 11b).154 The as-prepared TT-Por(Co)-COF similarly exhibited a CO FE of 91.4% at −0.6 V (vs. RHE). Besides the sensible design of COFs in layers at the atomic/molecular level, interlayer regulation is also one of the adjustable aspects because the active sites are usually hidden in the layers of 2D COFs and fail to be accessible to the electrolyte and CO2.155 Thus, to promote the accessibility of the active sites during the ECO2RR, porous 3D Co-porphyrin COFs (3D-Por(Co/H)-COFs) were further designed through the solvothermal Schiff-base condensation reaction of tetra(4-formylphenyl) methane (TFPM) and a mixture of Co-TAPP (Fig. 11c). The as-prepared 3D-Por(Co/H)-COF exhibited a CO FE of 92.4% at −0.6 V (vs. RHE).
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthetic illustration of 2D TTF-Por(Co)-COF with views along the c axis (upper right) and side views (lower right). Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (b) Presentation of the synthetic process of 2D TT-Por(Co)-COF, featuring tetragonal pores with a diameter of 2.0 nm. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Synthetic process of 3D-Por(Co/H)-COF and the simulated network. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2022. 
In addition to Co-porphyrin COFs, Co phthalocyanine COFs are similar COFs with well-defined Co–N4 active sites. Based on the 18 π-electron conjugated system of the Co-phthalocyanine units, the extended planar structure further provides Co-based COFs with enhanced charge-oriented transfer. Besides, adjustable charge-transfer channels can be easily realized owing to the diversity of bonding formation and heterocyclic structures. Typically, Jiang et al. used an N-containing heterocyclic structure to design a stable and conductive Co-phthalocyanine COF, which was topologically connected by a phenazine linkage to form a 2D tetragonal framework (CoPc-PDQ-COF), as shown in Fig. 12a.156 Also, the 2D structure ensured conjugation either in the x or y direction and enhanced the charge transfer along the z direction (Fig. 12b). The as-obtained CoPc-PDQ-COF exhibited a CO FE of 96% and long-term TOF of 11412 h−1 (Fig. 12c). Furthermore, the reasonable choice of N-containing functional groups is similar obtain Co phthalocyanine COFs with a larger conjugated structure for optimized electron-transfer channels.
 Fig. 12  (a) Synthesis of CoPc-PDQ-COF with phenazine linkage by condensing [NH2]8CoPc with PDQ. (b) π structure of CoPc-PDQ-COF with π conjugation along the x and y axis and π conduction along the z axis, which facilitate electron transport to the Co phthalocyanine units. (c) FEs of CoPc-PDQ-COF (red curve), monomeric [NH2]8CoPc (blue curve), commercial CoPc (green curve), and carbon fiber (black curve) with error bars signifying the standard deviation of three independent samples. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of COP-SA and COP-BDA. (e) Structures of three models: CoPc-(NH2)4, COPc-SA4 and CoPc-BDA4 (light blue atom is Co, grey is C, blue is N, white is H, and red is O). Binding strength of (f) *COOH and (g) *CO to CoPc-(NH2)4, CoPc-SA4 and CoPc-BDA4. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. 
Considering O-containing functional groups with a unique π-conjugated structure, the preparation of a novel Co tetraamino phthalocyanine-squaraine covalent organic polymer (COP-SA) was reported by Ye et al. for the ECO2RR to CO, reaching a CO FE of 96.5% with a current density of 9.74 mA cm−2 at −0.65 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 12d).157 On the one hand, the unique zwitterionic structure of the squaraine units is beneficial for the formation of ultrathin layers, resulting in more exposed active sites. On the other hand, the ultrathin skeleton plausibly provided Co–N4 active sites with a uniform distribution and prevented agglomeration during the ECO2RR. It was consistently suggested by DFT calculations that squaraine units could effectively facilitate the COOH adsorption, and the following CO desorption (Fig. 12e–g).

4.2. Co-based-derived porous materials

4.2.1. Co-based MOF/COF composites. 
Considering the specific CO selectivity of the Co–N4 sites in Co-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs, the improvement in current density and catalytic stability is the key factor determining the upper limit of their application prospect. In this case, the composition strategy compensates for their unsatisfactory current density and promotes the competitiveness of pristine Co-based MOFs/COFs. The simplest method is directly mixing pristine Co-based MOFs/COFs with conductive materials. However, although this facile process can elevate the current density in the short term, the long-term catalytic stability cannot be guaranteed owing to the uneven distribution of Co atoms and the complexity of metallic and non-metallic active sites. Accordingly, the current research mainly focuses on the covalent bonding between pristine Co-based MOFs/COFs and conductive species. Besides, the extension of the types of conductive species boosts the development of Co-based MOF/COF composites with enhanced charge-transfer channels. The corresponding electron-transfer channels are formed in the following ways, i.e., channel limitation of metallocenes, conductive polymers, and POMs, and covalent grafting of conductive carbon materials in the skeleton of pristine MOFs/COFs.
A series of works has been reported by Lan et al. for the optimization of Co-based catalysts for the ECO2RR, including the introduction of metallocene and conductive polymers in Co-based MOFs to make up for the electron-donating capability and electron conductivity of pristine MOFs/COFs during the ECO2RR.158 In the case of the former, metallocene (CoCp2) was successfully embedded in a Co-based MOF (MOF-545-Co) via chemical vapor deposition (Fig. 13a). The as-prepared CoCp2@MOF-545-Co composites exhibited a CO FE of 97% at −0.7 V (vs. RHE). Intriguingly, the introduction of metallocene not only boosted the electron donation but also resulted in the formation of abundant electron transfer channels during the ECO2RR, which was proven by the lower adsorption energy of CO2 through DFT calculations. Regarding the latter, it was proposed that the insertion of electron-conductive polymer molecules (e.g., polypyrrole (PPy)) in the channel of MOFs through the in situ polymerization reaction is an alternative approach to increase the electron-transfer ability (Fig. 13b).159 Likewise, using MOF-545-Co as the study object, the as-prepared PPy@MOF-545-Co composites exhibited a CO FE of 98% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE), which is superior to that of the bare MOF-545-Co. The incorporation of PPy, similar to metallocene, served as electric cables in the channel of the MOF to enhance the electron transfer during the ECO2RR.
 Fig. 13  (a) Comparison of MCp2@MOF and MOF for the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) Presentation of the introduction of PPy in the channel of MOF-545-Co for the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (c) Brief presentation of the synthetic process and proposed electron-transfer mechanism on H-POM@PCN-222(Co) for the ECO2RR (blue box: Zr-based second building unit, yellow square: TCPP linker, and yellow ball: Co center). Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (d) Synthetic process of COF-366-(OMe)2-Co@CNTs. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. 
POMs, a family of unique M–O clusters, can also serve as one type of supplementary materials to obtain MOF/COF composites owing to the richness in electron aggregates, achieving fast and reversible multiple electron-transfer pathways. Also, it is commonly accepted that the incorporation of POMs in the MOF channels can narrow the electron transport distance, thus improving the interface contact between the electrolyte and active sites. For instance, a series of POM@MOF composites (denoted as POM@PCN-222(Co)) with the combination of POMs and Co-porphyrin units was obtained by Ma et al. via the post-modification method (Fig. 13c).160 It was demonstrated by DFT calculations that the electron-oriented transfer not only accelerated the multi-electron transfer pathways, but also enriched the local charge density of the Co-porphyrin unit, which played a significant role in reducing the energy barrier of the key adsorption intermediates during the ECO2RR. In addition to the introduction of the above-mentioned three types of materials in MOFs/COFs, the most common and cost-low method for preparing Co-based MOF/COF composites is the incorporation of conductive supports, which is similar to Cu-based composites, as illustrated before. For example, a series of Co-based MOF composites (COF-366-(OMe)2-Co@CNTs) was fabricated by Zhu et al. via the polymerization of COFs with Co-porphyrin units uniformly dispersed on amino-functionalized CNTs, as exhibited in Fig. 13d.161 It was found that the reasonable combination of COF nanolayers and the conductive CNTs resulted in an improved current density and a CO FE of over 90% from −0.58 to 0.88 V (vs. RHE) compared with pristine Co-based COF. This is based on the fact that the catalytic performances of Co-based MOF/COF composites can be effectively optimized by the regulation of the charge-oriented transfer, which tends to focus on the rational selection of incorporated materials and the design of functional group decoration (e.g., hydroxyl group, methoxy group, and fluoride group). However, the underlying mechanism regarding the effect of the local charge environment regulation of active sites via the incorporated functional groups remains obscure, which should be further considered and provides more substantial aids for follow-up research on the structure–activity relationships between the local environment regulation and ECO2RR performance.


4.2.2. Co-based MOF/COF pyrolysates. 
To maintain both the advantages of pristine Co-based MOFs/COFs and carbon supports, high-temperature pyrolysis treatment is regarded as the typical method to prepare Co SAs or NPs loaded on porous carbon layers. Regarding the synthesis of Co SACs, there are two universal strategies, namely, the pre-introduction and post-modification of Co atoms in MOFs/COFs. Moreover, the tunable Co–Nx active sites formed in Co SACs can be influenced by their local coordination environment and the microstructure. Different from Ni- or Fe-based SACs, which possess relatively high theoretical activity for CO production, the effect of the local coordination environment on Co–Nx sites for the ECO2RR is still obscure and needs to be explored. It has been reported that the intact Co–N4 sites on N-doped graphene display high HER activity together with relatively low selectivity for the ECO2RR. Therefore, regulating the pyrolysis conditions may be an effective means to provide active sites with more feasible types of local coordination environments, including coordination number, coordination atom species, and coordination spatial configuration, thus further triggering the catalytic potential of Co–Nx sites during the ECO2RR.
Based on the local coordination environment, Li et al. conducted a series of studies on Co SACs with adjustable coordination numbers and found that an unconventional coordination environment (e.g., Co–Nx, x < 4162 or > 4163) can possibly break the uniform charge distribution and form electron-oriented transfer in the asymmetric Co active sites, therefore promoting the activation of CO2. In the former work, they employed ZIF-8-derived Co SACs as targets to form Co–N2 active sites with unsaturated coordination (Fig. 14a).162 Firstly, the regulation of the coordination number of N atoms surrounding the Co centers was determined by the temperature-dependent volatile C–N fragments (Fig. 14b). Secondly, the higher pyrolysis temperature tended to form Co centers with a greater reduction degree (proved by XANES results in Fig. 14c), which was possibly derived from the electron donation from native carbon layers. Therefore, the as-prepared Co–N2 sites exhibited a CO FE of 94% with a current density of 18.1 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 520 mV (vs. RHE), which is superior to the intact Co–N4 sites. The latter work used an N-enriched carbon matrix post-modified Co SA to construct Co–N5 with active sites with oversaturated coordination (Fig. 14d).163 As shown in Fig. 14e, the uniformly dispersed Co–N5 sites on hollow N-doped porous carbon spheres (Co–N5/HNPCs) displayed a CO FE of 99.2% and 99.4% at −0.73 and −0.79 V (vs. RHE), respectively, together with electrocatalytic stability for 10 h. It was revealed that both unsaturated and oversaturated coordination in the asymmetric Co–Nx sites could realize the remarkable regulation of the local coordination environment, thus playing a significant role in the enhanced catalytic activity for the ECO2RR.
 Fig. 14  (a) Formation of Co–N4 and Co–N2 sites. (b) FT-EXAFS and (c) XANES spectra of Co–N2, Co–N3, and Co–N4, and Co NPs. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2018. (d) Synthetic process of Co–N5/HNPCSs. (e) FE CO and H2 of Co–N5/HNPCSs and CoPc. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (f) Illustration of the synthesis of CoSA/HCNFs composites. (g) FE CO of CoSA/HCNFs, CoSA/CNFs, and HCNFs with potential from −0.2 to −1.0 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (h) Schematic illustration of MOF-based porous Co-TMH transformation process under lower diffusion condition. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022. 
In addition to regulating the coordination number of the Co SA sites, changing the coordination atom species is another parallel approach to achieve the modulation of local charge distribution in the active sites. Herein, Lin et al. compared the Co–N4 and Co–N4−xCx sites for the ECO2RR, demonstrating the adverse impact of the C coordination to the Co center on the catalytic activity.88 In their work, the catalyst was prepared by employing the typical pyrolysis temperature regulation of Co-doped ZIF-8 precursors to obtain Co SAs supported on carbon layers with an adjustable local coordination environment. Consequently, the Co–N4 sites exhibited a CO FE of 82% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE), whereas that of Co–N4−xCx was only 47%. Based on the existing research progress, other possible coordinating atoms should also be considered (e.g., O, S, and P atoms) to estimate the positive and negative influence of several coordination atom species on the ECO2RR performance, giving insights for subsequent work.
Considering microstructure, although SACs exhibit great potential for the ECO2RR, they possess abundant single atomic sites embedded inside the bulk with low accessibility. Also, most MOF/COF-derived SACs are powder-based materials, resulting in a relatively low current density. Herein, the electrospinning method was used by He and coworkers to construct a self-supporting, cross-linked and high-yield electrode (denoted as CoSA/HCNFs) with the improved utilization of Co SAs (Fig. 14f).164 It is worth noting that the 3D porous net-like CoSA/HCNF nanofibers greatly enhanced the electrochemical active surface areas, which created abundant reactant transportation for the full contact between Co SAs and electrolyte during the ECO2RR. Specifically, the CoSA/HCNF nanofibers exhibited a CO FE of 91% together with a current density of 67 mA cm−2 in an H-type cell and a CO FE of 92% with a current density of 211 mA cm−2 in a flow cell, respectively (Fig. 14g). Here, the electrospinning method is capable of greatly compensating for the distance between laboratory and industry. In addition to SACs, Co compounds derived from ZIF-67 were also studied as catalysts for the ECO2RR. For instance, Liao and coworkers used in situ liquid-phase TEM to observe the transformation from ZIF-67 to porous and layered cobalt transition metal hydroxide (Co-TMH) (Fig. 14h).23 Initially, the voids in the MOFs migrated and merged to form nanosized bubbles owing to their structural collapse. Under the condition of slow diffusion, the limited supply of reaction reagent triggered the slow formation of metastable nanosized bubbles in ZIF-67, further resulting in the generation of nanocages inside ZIF-67. Later, abundant Co-TMH nanocages with porous microstructure were hereafter obtained. Under the condition of faster diffusion, the drastic generation of nanosized bubbles and their quick aggregation led to the growth of Co-TMH nanosheets. In their work, the regulation of diffusion rate plays a key role in the generation of catalysts with totally different microstructures. After electrochemical reduction treatment, the as-prepared Co-TMH nanocages exhibited an HCOOH FE of over 90% at a potential in the range of −0.7 V to −1.0 V (vs. RHE).

5. Ni-based functional porous frameworks
Ni-based functional porous frameworks, similar to their Co-based counterparts, have been designed based on atomically dispersed Ni–Nx sites to obtain either porphyrin/phthalocyanine MOFs/COFs or derived SACs for the ECO2RR to produce CO. Different from Co-based catalysts, Ni NPs display dominant HER selectivity together with poor ECO2RR activity, which have not been reported to undergo an ECO2RR pathway to date. Hence, the exploration of catalytic selectivity in Ni-based functional porous frameworks is centered on the optimization of the local coordination environment in atomically dispersing Ni active sites. Noteworthily, a 2D Ni-based MOF with novel Ni–N2O2 planar configuration displayed unusual ECO2RR selectivity for CH3OH with a CH3OH FE of 27% at −0.9 V (vs. RHE).26 Actually, the design of Ni-based functional porous frameworks is focused on improving the CO FE and partial current density owing to their natural advantage of diverse electron configurations and d-band centers, possessing suitable ability of CO desorption.16 In the case of pristine MOFs/COFs, the introduction of heteroatom species and the construction of heterocyclic conjugated structures are common methods to create abundant electron-oriented transfer to Ni–N4 redox-active units during the ECO2RR. In the case of MOF/COF derived SACs, owing to the various possibilities of the pyrolysis strategy, abundant defects and asymmetrical/unsaturated Ni–Nx coordinated configurations can be generated during the pyrolytic process. Besides, several works have been reported on Ni SACs that are capable of achieving ultra-high CO selectivity with a broad potential window and an industrial-level current density with the optimization of both catalyst design and device upgrade.86,87 To deeply exploit the potentiality of Ni-based functional porous frameworks, a series of technology combination strategies was proposed, including the photo-coupled ECO2RR167 and tandem catalysis of the ECO2RR and ECORR.142
5.1. Ni-based crystalline porous materials

5.1.1. Ni-based MOFs. 
Considering the similar coordination condition of Co and Ni in porphyrin/phthalocyanine MOFs/COFs, the design and synthesis of novel Ni-based MOFs also demands the rational selection of monomer molecules. For example, a series of works concerning Ni-phthalocyanine MOFs was conducted by Cao's group in the field of ECO2RR. Through the choice of -OH and –NH2 coordinating to the Ni center, two types of Ni phthalocyanine MOFs (NiPc–NiO4165 and NiPc–Ni(NH)4166) were successfully obtained with a similar 2D skeleton structure except for the Ni–O4 and Ni–N4 linking units (Fig. 15a and d), respectively. When applied in the ECO2RR, both NiPc–NiO4 and NiPc–Ni(NH)4 exhibited a CO FE of over 90% at a potential in the range of −0.7 to −1.0 V (vs. RHE), displaying similar CO selectivity. Specifically, the catalytic activity of NiPc–NiO4 for the ECO2RR could be further explained in terms of adsorption capacity, charge distribution, and reducibility to rationally estimate the potential catalytic function of NiPc and NiO4. Firstly, a more robust van der Waals interaction existed between CO2 and NiPc than that of the NiO4 node, ensuring the easier combination of CO2 and NiPc. Secondly, it was indicated from the Mulliken population analysis that NiPc exhibited a more electron-rich environment compared with NiO4, regardless if the Ni atoms were or were not adsorbed by CO2, as shown in Fig. 15b. Thirdly, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of NiPc–NiO4 shifted from −4.22 eV to −4.62 eV when the CO2 moved from the NiPC to NiO4 node (Fig. 15c), indicating the excellent reducibility of NiPc. Therefore, the well-defined NiPc units have been comprehensively demonstrated as the intrinsic active sites considering their strong adsorption capacity for CO2, electron-rich environment and excellent reducibility during the ECO2RR.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthetic process of NiPc–NiO4 with the corresponding structure in the AA-stacking mode. (b) Mulliken charge of different Ni atoms in NiPc–NiO4. (c) Energy level of HOMO and LUMO of different Ni atoms in NiPc–NiO4 with the introduction of CO2. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (d) Synthetic scheme of 2D conductive NiPc–Ni(NH)4. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (e) Illustration of PCN-601 with redox active sites. (f) Presentation of Ni8 cluster and Ni-porphyrin as oxidative and reductive sites, respectively, in PCN-601. (g) Performance illustration of PCN-601 in hybrid electrolytic cell. (h) FE HCOOH and FE CO of MOR‖CO2RR. (i) FE CO of MOR‖CO2RR, OER‖CO2RR and MOR‖CO2RR with light at different potentials using PCN-601 as both the anode and cathode. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. (j) Schematic of the liquid exfoliation process of bulk Ni(Im)2 to 2D nanosheets. (k) FE CO of bulk Ni(Im)2, 2D Ni(Im)2-140 nm, 2D Ni(Im)2-65 nm, 2D Ni(Im)2-15 nm and 2D Ni(Im)2-5 nm at different potentials. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. 
To date, the majority of works focused on the half reaction of the cathode ECO2RR, neglecting the anode reaction. In fact, the synergistic research of anodic oxidation and cathodic reduction can be possibly a more efficient electrochemical system with large-scale potential. Accordingly, the hybrid system of methanol oxidation and ECO2RR has been considered as a practical strategy to facilitate both the total value of redox products and energy conversion efficiency. Typically, PCN-601 with redox active sites was obtained by Lan et al. for hybrid ECO2RR (Fig. 15e).167 Specifically, PCN-601 could achieve both anodic methanol oxidation with an HCOOH FE of over 90% and cathodic ECO2RR with a CO FE of over 90% (Fig. 15f and i), respectively. Also, the catalytic performance could be further improved with light irradiation (Fig. 15g). It was revealed through DFT calculations that the electron transfer from Ni8 clusters to Ni-porphyrins under an electric field resulted in the improved oxidizability of the Ni8 clusters and enhanced reducibility of Ni-porphyrins, thus facilitating the whole catalytic performance (Fig. 15h). It is worth noting that Lan’ work as an example of a well-defined model system gives new insight to establish efficient redox electrocatalysts for hybrid ECO2RR.
In addition to a series of Ni-based MOFs constructed by Ni–O linkages, an Ni(Im)2 ZIF nanosheet with imidazole as linkers was also studied by Gu et al. as a catalyst in the field of ECO2RR.168 It was found that the exfoliation of the bulk Ni(Im)2 ZIF into nanosheets with a thickness of 5 nm could effectively promote its catalytic performance with a CO FE of 79% at −0.9 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 15j). Also, an increase in the thickness of the Ni(Im)2 ZIF resulted in a successive reduction in the CO FE until reaching the minimum of 34% in the bulk ZIF (Fig. 15k). Therefore, not only the local coordination environment on the Ni active sites, but also the microstructure play an important role in influencing the structure–activity relationships. In this condition, the improvement of the superficial active site density can be achieved with a decrease in the Ni(Im)2 thickness, given that the bulk Ni(Im)2 failed to achieve satisfactory mass transport, barely relying on self-owned microporous holes. Besides, the charge transfer in the MOF channels tends to be affected by the diffusion rate of the counter ions to balance the charge of redox hopping. Therefore, the limitation of ion transfer can also have an adverse influence on the ECO2RR performance.


5.1.2. Ni-based COFs. 
Different from the M–O or M–N linking units in Ni-based MOFs, second linkers that bond with porphyrin/phthalocyanine-derived linkers via covalent bonds have been considered in the rational design of Ni-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs. Therefore, the reasonable choice of the second linkers is a one of the direct strategies to introduce heteroatom species (e.g., halogen, sulfur),169 functional groups (e.g., low carbon alkyl group, and cyano group),170 and extended planar conjugated heterocyclic structure,171–173 thus realizing effective modulation of the structure–activity relationships of Ni-based COFs for ECO2RR performance.
Consequently, Lan's group conducted a series of works on the design of novel Ni-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs considering the above-mentioned pivotal factors. Here, heteroatom species were employed to construct a metal-porphyrin-tetrathiafulvalene COF (M-TTCOFs, M = Co, Ni) (Fig. 16a).169 S-containing tetrathiafulvalene, working as both an electron donator and carrier, could form an electron-oriented transfer pathway in the metal-porphyrin (Fig. 16b). Moreover, the exfoliation method, as mentioned above, could further create abundant active sites with promoted exposure and accessibility. Especially, the M-TTCOF nanosheets with a thickness of 5 nm after exfoliation exhibited a CO FE of over 90% in the potential range of −0.6 to −0.8 V (vs. RHE) and maximum CO FE of 99.7% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE).
 Fig. 16  (a) Synthetic process of M-TTCOFs via the condensation of 4-formyl-TTF and M-TAPP (M = Co, Ni). (b) Illustration of the ECO2RR mechanism on M-TTCOF. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (c) Schematic of MPc-TFPN COF through the condensation of MPc-8OH and TFPN. (d) Photo-current response curve of NiPc-TFPN COF at different potentials. (e) CO partial current density and TOF at different potentials under the condition of dark and light. (f) Comparison of the relative adsorption energy for the first step of the ECO2RR (* + CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → *CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−) on the metal site and nitrogen site in the MPc-TFPN COF (M = Co, Ni, Zn). (g) Presentation of the excited states of NiPc-TFPN COF. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. 
Furthermore, the tactic of introducing a particular extended heterocyclic conjugated structure was employed to obtain a series of dioxin-linked metal phthalocyanine COFs (MPc-TFPN COF, M = Ni, Co, Zn) for the ECO2RR (Fig. 16c).170 Owing to the light irradiation of the adjustable electronic properties in the photosensitive aromatic macrocycle, the ECO2RR performance could be further improved for the metal-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs. It was found that when coupled with light, the CO FE of the as-prepared NiPc-TFPN reached up to nearly 100% with an enhanced current density and TOF at −0.9 V (vs. RHE), as exhibited in Fig. 16d and e. Based on the calculated electronic properties of the S1 and T1 excited states of these metal phthalocyanine COFs, it was revealed that light irradiation not only induces improved electron-oriented transfer from the linker to the M–N4 units but also let the COFs exist in the T1 excited state, which possesses a lower free energy barrier from CO2 to *COOH compared to that in the ground state. This is the inherent reason why the NiPc-TFPN COF exhibited better ECO2RR activity under light irradiation (Fig. 16f and g). Thus, this work can play an excellent guiding role in the following research on photo-coupled ECO2RR.
In regard to the type of bonding ways in metal-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs, as mentioned before, Cao's group designed several types of chemical bonds to construct 2D Ni-based COFs for the ECO2RR, including the self-polymerization of cyanides to triazine171 (Fig. 17a) and the condensation between the carbonyl group and the amino group to pyrazine172 (Fig. 17b). Both MOFs exhibited a CO FE of over 90% in the potential range of −0.6 to −1.1 V (vs. RHE). However, owing to the well-defined Ni–N4 sites in the Ni-porphyrin/phthalocyanine COFs, modulating the local coordination environment of the Ni center is challenging, and thus rarely reported thus far. In 2018, Nakanishi and coworkers attempted to regulate the coordination number of the metal sites to improve the ECO2RR performance.173 Consequently, covalent triazine frameworks modified with various coordination-unsaturated metal atoms (denoted as M-CTF, M = Co, Ni or Cu) were correspondingly obtained (Fig. 17c and d), respectively. When applied in the ECO2RR, Ni-CTF exhibited a CO FE of over 90% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE), which is much higher than that of Co-, Cu-, and pure TTF (Fig. 17e). Here, the Ni sites with a lower coordination number possessed a suitable adsorption energy for CO2 and the desorption of CO, possibly because of the optimized d orbitals with relatively low steric hindrance. Additionally, the Ni sites in CTF with a low coordination number could realize enhanced bonding with CO2 compared with the intact Ni–N4 sites, thus reducing the free energy barrier for the first reaction step of the ECO2RR to CO (Fig. 17f and g). Therefore, other triazine frameworks can also serve as superior supports for atomically anchoring metallic ions to construct M–N/O active sites with a coordination-unsaturated configuration for the ECO2RR.
 Fig. 17  (a) Synthetic process of MSAs/PTF (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu). Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the Chinese Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (b) Synthetic process of 2D conductive NiPC–COF. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Structure of Ni sites in Ni-CTF. (d) FT-EXAFS spectra at Ni K-edge of Ni-CTF (red), Ni-TPP (black), Ni foil (gray) and NiO (dark yellow). (e) FE CO of Co-CTF (red), Ni-CTF (green), Cu-CTF (blue) and CTF (black) in KHCO3 electrolyte at pH = 6.8. Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR towards CO on Co (red), Ni (green) and Cu (blue)-modified (f) CTF and (g) TPP at 0 V (pale lines) and −0.87 V (dark lines). Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. 

5.2. Ni-based derived porous materials
MOF/COF-derived Ni SACs, serving as a type of noble-metal-free catalyst, constructed individual Ni atoms coordinated with N atoms embedded on carbon supports.174 Currently, considering several advantages of MOFs/COFs, Ni-based MOF-derived SACs have been extensively studied and prepared using novel synthetic methods and coordination regulation strategies, thus being developed as the largest quantity of SACs among the catalysts for the ECO2RR. Also, the local coordination environment, which is not only suitable for Ni-based MOFs/COFs, plays an important role in regulating the electronic structure of active sites in Ni SACs, ultimately resulting in the optimized adsorption/desorption of key intermediates during the ECO2RR.86 Specifically, the modulation strategies for Ni SACs commonly include the coordination numbers, coordination atom species and oxidation state of the Ni center because Ni tends to possess a variable oxidation state during chemical/electrochemical synthesis or even the electrocatalytic process, which may play a crucial role in the ECO2RR activity. In 2018, Liu et al. conducted a detailed work on Ni(I) SACs for the ECO2RR to CO in terms of their oxidation state.175 It was revealed by in situ XAS and XPS results that the monovalent Ni(I) centers with d9 electronic configuration were the intrinsic active sites during the ECO2RR. The as-prepared Ni(I) SACs exhibited a CO FE of 97% with a specific current of 350 A gcatalyst−1 and a TOF of 14800 h−1 at an overpotential of 0.61 V (vs. RHE).
Owing to the various possibilities of the pyrolysis strategy, the abundant defects and asymmetrical/unsaturated coordinated structure formed during the pyrolysis process endow SACs with great potential for electrochemical catalysis. For instance, ZIF-8, typically serving as one type of superb precursor with the advantages of N-rich system and high specific surface area, can be beneficial to vaporize the Zn0 in ZIF-8 and anchor the targeted metal ions via the thermal stabilization of the corresponding Ni–Nx active sites, including intact Ni–N4 sites,176–180 asymmetrical Ni–NxC4−x sites,181–185 Ni–N4 sites accompanied by Ni NPs,186 and Ni–N4 sites decorated with functional groups in the second/third shell.187

5.2.1. Ni-doped ZIF-8-derived SACs. 
Concerning Ni-doped ZIF-8-derived SACs, two main aspects are considered to assess the structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR, namely, coordination configuration and size effect. In the case of the former, Li et al.181 and Jiang et al.182 both employed the Ni2+ post-decoration strategy to prepare ZIF-8 derived SACs with an Ni–N3C1 configuration, as proven by the corresponding EXAFS fitting results (Fig. 18a and b), respectively. The as-prepared Ni–N3C1 sites possessed a satisfactory CO FE over a wide potential range during the ECO2RR. In addition to the first-shell regulation of Ni–Nx active sites, a generalized amination strategy was reported by Liu et al. to prepare Ni–N4 sites decorated with NH2 groups in the third shell (denoted as Ni–N4/C–NH2) (Fig. 18c).187 The aminated Ni SACs achieved a CO FE of 90% with a partial current density of 450 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of −0.89 V (vs. RHE) in a flow-type cell (Fig. 18d and e). It was demonstrated by both experimental results and DFT calculations that the improved catalytic performance can be ascribed to the enhanced adsorption energies of the key *CO2 and *COOH intermediates by regulating the electronic structure through NH2 groups in the third shell. Thus, both the coordination atom species and local functional groups may result in optimized ECO2RR activity to produce CO in Ni SACs. In the latter case, it was reasonably proposed by Gu and coworkers that the size effect of Ni active sites may have an important effect on the ECO2RR, namely, Ni NPs with a larger size favor the HER instead of the ECO2RR. Based on this, Ni-based catalysts ranging in size from SAs to over 100 nm with active sites uniformly distributed on ZIF-8-derived N-doped carbon supports were prepared (Fig. 18f).177 Specifically, the Ni SAs possessed a CO FE of 97% at −0.8 V (vs. RHE), while Ni NPs with a size of 4.1 nm exhibited a slightly lower FE CO of 93%. However, the Ni NPs with a further increase in size to 37.2 nm showed a high H2 FE of over 70% to compete with the ECO2RR, demonstrating the size-dependent catalytic activity on Ni-based catalysts both experimentally and theoretically (Fig. 18g and h).
 Fig. 18  (a) Synthetic process of Ni SAs/N–C. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (b) Fabrication of Ni SACs with a low coordination number. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (c) Presentation of the synthetic process for Ni–N4/C–NH2. (d) Schematic of a flow-cell electrolyzer for the ECO2RR. (e) CO FE and partial current density of Ni–N4/C–NH2 in flow-cell electrolyzer. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. (f) Theoretical models for the adsorption of *COOH on Ni NPs with different sizes, including Ni(1 1 1) (37.2 Ni NPs), Ni(2 1 1) (14.3 Ni NPs), and Ni10 clusters (4.1 Ni NPs) (C: black, O: red, H: white, Ni: blue). (g) Gibbs free energies of *COOH adsorption. (h) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR towards CO. Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. 


5.2.2. Ni-doped MOF-derived SACs. 
In regard to Ni-doped MOF-derived SACs, a series of works was conducted by Jiang and coworkers to prepare Ni–NxC4−x active sites. For example, a host–guest cooperative protection strategy was proposed to obtain Ni SACs by introducing PPy in a bimetallic MOF (Fig. 19a).188 It is worth noting that not only the introduction of Mg2+ in MOF-74 ensured the isolated distribution of Ni atoms, but also PPy served as an N source to form Ni–NxC4−x active sites. When applied in the ECO2RR, Ni–N2–C with the lowest N coordination number achieved a CO FE of 98% and TOF of 1622 h−1, which are superior to that of Ni–N3–C and Ni–N4–C. It was revealed by DFT calculations that the low N coordination number in the Ni–N2–C sites is beneficial for the formation of the *COOH key intermediate during the ECO2RR pathway to CO. Moreover, a general synthetic process to obtain metal SAs supported on N-doped carbon (denoted as M–N–C; M = Fe, Co, Ni and Cu) was adopted to find a general synthetic protocol for discerning the difference in activity of various metal SAs (Fig. 19b).189 The as-prepared M–N–C, possessing identical parameters in local coordination environment and carbon support, enable the difference in the intrinsic activity of various metal SAs to be identified. It was found that Ni–N–C exhibited a CO FE of 96.8%, surpassing Fe-, Co- and Cu-based M–N–C. Similarly, a family of porous metal-porphyrin triazine-based frameworks was developed by Hou and coworkers (denoted as MPTFs-x, M= Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu, x = temperature), as shown in Fig. 19c.190 Noteworthily, NiPTFs-600 displayed a CO FE of over 90% in the potential range of −0.55 V to −0.95 V (vs. RHE), which can be attributed to the high content of N species of up to 8.43 at% together with abundant Ni–Nx active sites.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the host–guest cooperative protection strategy to obtain NiSA–Nx–C. Reproduced from ref. 188 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. (b) Universal preparation process of MTV-MOF-derived M–N–C (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu). Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Presentation of the synthetic process of MPTFs-600. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (d) Scheme of the synthetic process of C-TpDt-Ni (C: grey, N: blue, O: red, and Ni: green). (e) Experimentally derived CO TOF in the potential range of −0.4 to −0.85 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. 


5.2.3. Ni-doped COF-derived SACs. 
In addition to MOF-derived catalysts, COF-derived Ni SACs have also been considered for the ECO2RR. Specifically, Strasser and coworkers synthesized a series of COF-derived Ni–N–C catalysts (denoted as C-TpDt-Ni) with a temperature-dependent Ni–Nx content (Fig. 19d).191 In their work, several general metrics were investigated for reasonably assessing the catalytic activity of the as-prepared Ni–Nx SACs, which are worth considering as catalytic paradigms, e.g., active site density (SD) and intrinsic TOF. Specifically, by considering both the specific surface area and percentage of metal atoms on the surface of catalysts, the definition of the active site density not only can help understand the plausible active site density of M–Nx with the units of “cm2 mg−1”, but also be beneficial for assessing the intrinsic TOF with the units of “μmol m−2 s−1” (Fig. 19e). Furthermore, it was reasonably proposed that in the high current density region, the TOF values tended to saturate owing to the decreasing local CO2 concentration together with the increasing local OH− concentration. Thus, to solve this unavoidable problem, the utilization of either a rotating electrode or more acidic medium was capable of neutralizing the superficial pH, and thereafter maintained the CO2 transfer. Therefore, the regulation of the inner-particle pore size and inter-particle pore size tends to be an ongoing topic in the research of structure–activity relationships between microstructure and ECO2RR performance. The modified microstructure assisted with the optimization of the reaction condition will be beneficial to accelerate OH− removal and entry of CO2, realizing improved intrinsic activity for the ECO2RR. Thus, the deeper probing of general metrics and the optimization of the test conditions can be significant factors to further assess the catalytic performance of catalysts comprehensively.

6. Fe-based functional porous frameworks
Fe-based functional porous frameworks have been extensively studied for various electrocatalytic processes.192 Especially, Fe SACs with tunable Fe–N–C active sites have been commonly recognized as the most promising noble metal-free oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) catalysts, which greatly advanced the research progress of Fe-based catalysts. Based on this, a series of regulating approaches concerning the local coordination environment and microstructure for the ORR is equally suitable for the ECO2RR. Specifically, the consideration of the local coordination environment includes the coordination number, edge effect, vacancy defect, axial coordination, local strain, functional group effect, and coordination atom species of Fe–Nx active sites. Also, the design of microstructure tends to proceed from pore engineering to assess several kinetic factors during electrochemical surface/interface reactions (e.g., mass transfer). The reported Fe SACs with atomically dispersed Fe–Nx active sites on carbon layers mainly display specific CO selectivity with a CO FE of up to 90%, similar to their Co and Ni counterparts. Besides, Fe-based catalysts have been accepted to show potential to realize C–C coupling, generating C2 products. For instance, an N-doped γ-Fe2O3 core-shell architecture was reported to possess a C2H6 FE of 42% with a current density of 32 mA cm−2.27 A FeP nanoarray exhibited a CH3CH2OH FE of 14.1% and current density of 2 mA cm−2.28 A Fe2P2S6 nanosheet was also reported with a CH3CH2OH FE of 23.1% and current density of 0.5 mA cm−2.29 Here, Fe-based functional porous frameworks are highly attractive but their application is still challenging.
6.1. Fe-based crystalline porous materials
To date, compared with Cu/Co/Ni-based MOFs/COFs, there are fewer studies focused on Fe-based MOFs/COFs for the ECO2RR. The existing studies mainly focused on the design and synthesis of Fe-porphyrin MOFs/COFs with well-defined Fe–N4 sites for the ECO2RR to CO. In 2015, Hupp et al. successfully assembled an Fe-porphyrin MOF (Fe-MOF-525) on an F-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate via electrophoresis.195 When applied to the ECO2RR, the as-prepared Fe-MOF-525 produced 14.9 and 15.3 μmol cm−2 H2 and CO, respectively, at an overpotential of 650 mV (vs. RHE). Noteworthily, CV curves in N2 and CO2-saturated electrolyte indicated that the electrocatalytic activity of Fe-MOF-525 is attributed to the presence of the Fe(I/0) redox couple on the Fe–N4 sites in the Fe-porphyrin units. Similarly, taking Fe-porphyrin MOFs/COFs as the study object, Li and coworkers prepared a 3D PCN-222(Fe) MOF, which possessed the same building blocks as MOF-525 but different spatial structures, leading to a star-shaped network of Zr6 clusters connected by square-planar Fe-TCPP fragments.196 The as-prepared PCN-222(Fe) possessed a CO FE of 91% at an overpotential of 494 mV (vs. RHE). In comparison to MOF-525, the lower overpotential on PCN-222(Fe) can be attributed to the better mass transfer through 3D porous channels, thus ensuring the higher accessibility of protons during the ECO2RR. Unfortunately, both the Fe-based MOF-525 and PCN-222 failed to maintain satisfactory long-term stability, which remains to be further optimized for the improved ECO2RR performance using Fe-based MOFs/COFs.
6.2. Fe-based-derived porous materials

6.2.1. Fe-based MOF-derived SACs. 
Fe-based MOF-derived SACs have been widely accepted as a vital class of catalysts for the ECO2RR owing to the consensus proven by a series of remarkable works that the atomically dispersed Fe–Nx moieties on carbon layers endow Fe active sites with intrinsic catalytic selectivity for CO production. In 2017, it was demonstrated by Fontecave et al. that the introduction of Fe NPs in Fe–N–C catalysts notably promoted the HER with a decrease in the CO/H2 ratio.197 Therefore, the complete elimination of Fe NPs in Fe–N–C SACs via post-treatment plays an important role in predicting the ECO2RR performance. Besides, Fe–N4 sites possessed a lower onset potential for CO production compared with Ni–N4 sites owing to the stronger adsorption of the *COOH intermediate on Fe–N4 sites during CO2 activation.193 However, the strong *CO binding energy on the Fe–N4 sites may hinder the release of CO at a high overpotential, ultimately limiting the CO selectivity and yield under the condition of a large current density. Therefore, the Fe–N4 site tends to reach the maximum FE with an overpotential of less than 0.6 V.194 As is commonly known, the regulation of the local coordination environment and microstructure in Fe SACs plays a pivotal role in optimizing the electronic structure of the Fe–Nx sites for an improved ECO2RR performance.
Concerning the up-to-date works in regulating the local coordination environment in MOF/COF-derived Fe SACs, the feasibly optimized site configuration includes edge-hosted Fe–N2+2,193,194 Fe–N3V (V: vacancy),198 Fe–N4O (O: axial coordinated O),199 Fe–N4 with adjustable Fe–N bond lengths,200 and Fe–N4 with adjacent functional groups,89 which probed the impact of edge effect, vacancy defect, axial coordination, local strain, and functional group effect on the ECO2RR performance, respectively. For instance, Li et al.193 and Shao et al.194 successively proposed Fe-doped ZIF-8-derived Fe SACs with edge-hosted Fe–N2+2 sites. Different from the conventional intact Fe–N4 sites that were embedded in the inner graphitic layer, the edge-hosted Fe–N2+2 sites were formed via the connection of the Fe center and two N atoms at the edges of each graphitic layer. Owing to the unique edge coordination effect, the edge-hosted Fe–N2+2 sites resulted in the distortion of the local carbon layer and the corresponding out-of-plane position of Fe centers, while Fe–N4 maintained the in-plane structure. Mössbauer spectroscopy was utilized by Li et al. to verify the coexistence of both edge-hosted Fe–N2+2 sites and intact Fe–N4 sites in Fe SACs (Fig. 20a). In situ infrared absorption spectroscopy was adopted by Shao et al. to deeper confirm that the Fe centers in the intact Fe–N4 sites tended to be poisoned owing to the strong adsorption of CO and were not considered as the real active sites for CO production (Fig. 20c and d). It was revealed through DFT calculation results in both works that the specific selectivity for CO and high reaction rate may be derived from the edge-hosted Fe–N2+2 sites, which can balance the binding energy of adsorbed *COOH and *CO species compared with the intact Fe–N4 sites (Fig. 20b).
 Fig. 20  (a) Typical Mössbauer spectrum of Fe–N–C with the presence of two different local coordination environments. (b) Initial and final state for the COOH dissociation reaction on Fe–N4 and Fe–N2+2 sites (C: gray, N: blue, Fe: yellow, O: red, H: white). Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (c) Presentation of Fe–N2+2 active sites for the ECO2RR towards CO. (d) Evolution of integrated *CO band intensity during switching of the CO/Ar atmosphere and potential. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
In regard to the research on vacancy defects in Fe SACs, a gas diffusion strategy with one-step thermal activation was adopted by Hou and coworkers to obtain N-doped porous carbon polyhedrons with trace isolated Fe–Nx sites (Fig. 21a).198 It was demonstrated via XANES and EXAFS results that the coordination number of the as-prepared SACs was 3, namely, an FeN3V (V: vacancy) planar coordination structure. For comparison, DFT calculations were conducted to parallelly assess the optimized Fe–N4, Fe–N3, and Fe–N3V models (Fig. 21b). On the one hand, the energy barrier of CO2 to *COOH is relatively high (0.47 eV) to make a downhill step of *COOH to *CO on the Fe–N3V sites. On the other hand, the contrast Fe–N3 model with the Fe center located out of plane led to the distortion of the graphitic layer, which resulted in an extremely high energy barrier of 1.48 eV for the *CO to CO step. Overall, Fe–N3V with balanced energy barriers for CO2-to-*COOH (0.47 eV), *COOH-to-*CO (0.15 eV), and *CO-to-CO (0.14 eV) became the most favorable model for the ECO2RR among the models (Fig. 21c). In regard to the design of axial coordination, Arbiol et al. used an O- and N-rich MOF (IRMOF-3) as the precursor to construct a mixed coordination environment with Fe–O and Fe–N bonds, ultimately leading to uniformly dispersed axial O-coordinated Fe–N4 sites (denoted as Fe–N4O) (Fig. 21d).199 It was uncovered via DFT calculations that the axial O-coordination can effectively regulate the local charge distribution in the Fe–N4O sites, thus boosting smoother CO desorption and increasing the energy for the HER (Fig. 21e–g). Besides, compared with the intact Fe–N4 sites, the d-band center of the Fe 3d orbitals in Fe–N4O shifted to a more negative value with the introduction of an axial O atom, leading to easier CO release, and subsequently improved catalytic selectivity towards CO (Fig. 21h). Noteworthily, the as-mentioned axial O-coordination regulation may be one of the effective strategies to mitigate the intrinsically strong adsorption of CO on Fe centers during the ECO2RR based on the reportedly experimental and theoretical results.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for the gas diffusion strategy to prepare Fe–Nx in a carbon layer. (b) Top view of the optimized atomic structures for Fe–N4, Fe–N3, and Fe–N3V sites embedded on graphitic layer (Fe: yellow, N: blue, and C: gray). (c) Free energy diagrams of the ECO2RR to CO on Fe–N4, Fe–N3, and Fe–N3V models. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Fe–N4O catalyst. Top view and side view of the optimized (e) Fe–N4 and (f) Fe–N4O adsorption configuration (Fe: purple, O: red, N: blue, and C: gray). (g) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR towards CO at −0.48 V (vs. RHE). (h) Projected electron density of states (PDOS) of Fe d orbitals over Fe–N4O and Fe–N4 surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. 
In the case of the local strain effect in the Fe–N4 sites on the structure–activity relationships, it was proposed by Wu et al. that the improvement in intrinsic activity in the Fe centers was associated with the optimal local strain on the Fe–N bond.200 Based on this, they established a nonplanar structure of Fe–N4 sites with different degrees of compressive strain (i.e., shorter Fe–N bonds) in a graphitic layer for the ECO2RR. Compared with the unstrained Fe–N4 sites, more electrons will be transferred from the C atoms in *COOH to the Fe centers with a 2%-shortened Fe–N bond (Fig. 22a). The free energy change for *COOH adsorption occurs after a decrease in the Fe–N4 sites with strained or shortened Fe–N bonds (Fig. 22b and c). Besides, it was revealed that the onset potential for the HER is more negative than that for the ECO2RR on these strained Fe–N4 sites, as shown in Fig. 22d. Concerning the functional group effect in the Fe–N4 sites on the structure–activity relationships, Hu et al. reported that the construction of F-doped Fe–N–C SACs with the electron-withdrawing character of F element could effectively stabilize the Fe3+ centers in the Fe–N4 sites.89 It was found that F doping endowed the edge-hosted F3-FeN4-zigzag and F3-FeN4-armchair with a relatively lower ΔG(*CO) and higher ΔG(*H) compared with the undoped FeN4-zigzag and FeN4-armchair (Fig. 22f–h). Also, the corresponding theoretical results were illustrated from a thermodynamic viewpoint, where the introduction of defects and electron-withdrawing F element not only decreased the ΔG(*CO) to improve the ECO2RR to CO but also increased the ΔG(*H) to suppress the HER.
 Fig. 22  (a) Atomic and electronic structures of *COOH intermediate adsorbate on Fe–N4 sites (C: gray, N: blue, Fe: yellow, O: red, and H: white). The charge accumulation and depletion are shown by the yellow and cyan clouds with an isosurface of 0.01 e Å−3, respectively. (b) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CO on Fe–N4 sites with various local strain. (c) Free energy diagrams for the HER on Fe–N4 sites with various local strain. (d) Difference between the limiting potentials of the HER and ECO2RR on Fe–N4 sites with various local strain. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (e) Presentation of the preparation of FeSAs/CNF-900. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (f) List of seven possible optimized Fe–N4 models. (g) ΔG(*CO) and (h) ΔG(*H) of seven possible optimized Fe–N4 models. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature, Copyright 2022. (i) Synthetic procedure for xFe2O3–N@CN. (j) FE for C2H6 on 0.3Fe2O3–N@CN at different potentials. (k) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to C2H6 on 0.3Fe2O3–N@CN (red line) and pristine Fe2O3 (blue line) (Fe: purple, N: blue, O: red, and H: white). Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022. 
In addition, the design of the microstructure in catalysts is a key factor that influences the extrinsic activity of Fe-based derived porous materials for the ECO2RR. In this discussion, the design of microstructure tends to proceed via pore engineering to assess the mass transfer efficiency in catalysts during electrochemical surface/interface reactions. A typical work was conducted by Zhu and coworkers to prepare a mesoporous carbon framework with hierarchical pore size distribution and uniformly dispersed Fe–Nx sites (Fig. 22e).201 It is worth noting that the creation of abundant mesopores in the as-prepared carbon framework not only ensured the accessibility of the inner Fe–Nx sites, but also promoted the mass and charge transfer. Hence, the as-prepared Fe SACs with unique nanosized structure displayed catalytic activity for both the ORR and ECO2RR.


6.2.2. Fe-based MOF-derived compounds. 
Besides, the regulation of the microstructure in Fe-based catalysts is equally applied to MOF/COF-derived Fe compounds. To date, there have been few reports related to MOF-derived FeOx as catalysts for the ECO2RR. A noteworthy work was reported by Han and coworkers to demonstrate that Fe-based catalysts also possess ECO2RR selectivity towards C2H6 with satisfactory catalytic efficiency (Fig. 22i).27 Specifically, a two-step synthetic method was adopted to obtain N-doped γ-Fe2O3 (xFe2O3–N@CN) with a surfactant as the regulating agent to optimize the electrochemical surface/interface reactions. The as-prepared xFe2O3–N@CN exhibited a C2H6 FE of 42% with a current density of 32 mA cm−2 at −2.0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) (Fig. 22j). Both the experimental and theoretical results indicated that the FeO1.5−nNn active sites with abundant oxygen vacancies were available to stabilize the *COOH intermediates (Fig. 22k). Also, the exposure of two adjacent surfaces of Fe atoms could trigger a lower energy barrier for C–C coupling on the FeO1.5−nNn sites, thus boosting the C2H6 production. To date, although various configurations of Fe centers have been identified and considered as active sites for the ECO2RR, more systematic research in regard to the effect of the synthetic conditions on the local coordination environment, microstructure, and corresponding structure–activity relationship in Fe-based functional porous frameworks is still urgently needed for comprehensive discussion. Also, considering the lack of deeper study on the effect of several kinetic factors on electrochemical surface/interface reactions, further works need to be conducted considering pore structure optimization, in-depth physical characterization, and theoretical dynamic simulation.

7. Zn-based functional porous frameworks
In regard to crystalline porous materials, Zn-based ZIFs as a subclass of MOFs have been extensively explored to obtain a series of novel Zn–N coordinated spatial configurations.92 Different from Cu-, Co-, Ni-, and Fe-based MOFs with metallic centers as active sites, it has been demonstrated for Zn-based ZIFs that the sp2 C species in the imidazolate linkers possess ECO2RR activity instead of the Zn centers.202 This is a platform for deeply probing the structure–activity relationships between non-metallic active sites and ECO2RR performance. In the case of derived porous materials, the Zn element tends to be used as an superexcellent self-sacrificing metal for atomically dispersing a second metal to obtain the corresponding second metallic SACs owing to the relatively low boiling point of Zn0. Also, the classification of Zn-based derived porous materials can be roughly conducted based on the difference in their pyrolysis temperature, i.e., Zn SACs with a pyrolysis temperature lower than the boiling point of Zn045 and metal-free catalysts with a pyrolysis temperature higher than the boiling point of Zn0.203 Different from several conventional carbon materials, the as-mentioned pyrolytic processes endow Zn-based MOF-derived metal-free catalysts with the advantage of abundant pore structures, introduction of heteroatom species, high carbon defect density, and interaction of defects, thus creating abundant non-metallic active sites for the ECO2RR.91,93 Based on the latest experimental and theoretical results, it was found that the catalytic selectivity of Zn-based functional porous frameworks is determined by the identification of their intrinsic active species. For instance, Zn–O coordinated configurations in Zn-based MOFs display either CH4204 or CO205 selectivity, while the sp2 C species in Zn-based ZIFs exhibit CO selectivity.206 Also, the Zn–N4 planar sites in Zn SACs show CH4 selectivity, while non-metallic species in metal-free catalysts possess specific CO selectivity.45
7.1. Zn-based crystalline porous materials
In 2016, a Zn-BTC MOF was deposited by Han et al. on CP to assess the effect of MOF morphology on the catalytic performance with the combination of an ionic liquid (IL) electrolyte.204 The morphology of the as-prepared Zn-BTC MOF was determined by the regulation of the concentration of Zn ions during the synthetic process. Intriguingly, it was found that the flake-shaped Zn-BTC exhibited the largest electrochemically active surface area, and accordingly the highest catalytic activity for the ECO2RR. Especially, F-containing imidazolyl ILs could further improve the ECO2RR performance of Zn-BTC owing to the stronger interaction between F− and CO2, displaying a CH4 FE of over 80% with a current density of 3 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 0.25 V (vs. RHE). In 2017, the MOF-74 family (including Co, Ni, and Zn) was applied by Jang et al. to investigate the ECO2RR.205 It was found in their work that Co- or Ni-MOF-74 possessed specific H2 selectivity, while Zn-MOF-74 was capable of generating a mixture of CO and H2.
As a subclass of MOFs, ZIFs are constructed by metallic nodes and N-containing imidazolate linkers.92 It has been extensively studied and proven that N species play a key role in the local electronic regulation for the ECO2RR, including pyridinic N, pyrrolic N and graphitic N. Therefore, a series of works in regard to Zn-based ZIFs has been conducted for the ECO2RR. In 2017, ZIF-8 was used by Kang et al. to study the ECO2RR for the first time.208 In their work, ZIF-8 synthesized with ZnSO4 as the metal salt delivered a CO FE of 65% at −1.8 V (vs. saturated calomel electrode, SCE). Subsequently, a series of ZIFs with the same sodalite topology but different organic linkers was assessed by Bao and coworkers as catalysts for the ECO2RR, including ZIF-8, ZIF-108, ZIF-7 and SIM-1 (Fig. 23a).202 It was found that ZIF-8 exhibited the highest CO FE of 81.0% at −1.1 V (vs. RHE) among the four ZIFs. It was further proposed that the main catalytic sites were possibly ascribed to the imidazolate linkers coordinating with Zn centers in ZIF-8 (Fig. 23b). According to the DFT calculation results, ZIF-8 possesses both an appropriate formation energy for *COOH and the highest formation energy for *H, indicating that it the most favorable catalyst among the four ZIFs (Fig. 23c and d).
 Fig. 23  (a) Optimized adsorption configuration of *COOH on different imidazolate linkers in four ZIFs. (b) Reaction processes on imidazolate linkers within ZIF-8 (C: grey, O: red, H: white, and N: blue). Calculated free energy diagrams with solvent effect corrections for (c) ECO2RR and (d) HER. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018. (e) EPR spectra of pristine ZIF-8, ZIF-A-LD, and ZIF-LE. (f) Free energy diagrams for ECO2RR to CO on the sp2 C atom sites in imidazole linker of pristine ZIF-8 (upper) and ZIF-A-LD (below), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2018. (g) Presentation of the structure of ZIF-8 and CALF20, including the chemical structure of polyhedron Zn nodes. (h) Simplified model of CALF20 and ZIF-8 labeled with different possible active sites. (i) Free energy diagram for the ECO2RR to CO on CALF20 at 0 V (vs. RHE). (j) Calculated overpotential on the most active site in CALF20 and ZIF-8 for the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 
Based on this, the regulation of the Zn–N spatial coordination configuration in Zn-based ZIFs may be one of the effective strategies to further enhance the ECO2RR performance. Here, the introduction of a second linker is a common approach to retain the crystal structure of the original ZIFs, and thus beneficial for analyzing the optimized Zn–N coordination configuration.206,209 For example, a strong electron-donating molecule (1,10-phenanthroline) was introduced by Wang and coworkers in ZIF-8, while maintaining the pristine spatial configuration of ZIF-8.206 The experimental (Fig. 23e) and theoretical (Fig. 23f) results revealed that the electron-donating characteristic of 1,10-phenanthroline can trigger the adjacent active sites of the sp2 C atoms in the imidazolate linker to accept more electrons, thus facilitating the formation of *COOH during the ECO2RR to CO. Furthermore, the adoption of new types of Zn-based ZIFs for the ECO2RR is beneficial for probing the structure–activity relationships on the novel spatial coordination configurations.207,210 Kibria et al. utilized a Zn-based ZIF with an azole linker of 1,2,4-triazole (denoted as CALF20) for the ECO2RR (Fig. 23g).207 The as-prepared CALF20 showed a CO FE of ∼94% with a CO partial current density of −32.8 mA cm−2 at −0.97 V (vs. RHE). It was suggested that the triazole linker in CALF20 could effectively enhance the charge transfer (Fig. 23h), thus inducing more electrons in the adjacent active sites at the azole linker and facilitating the formation of *COOH compared with the diazole linker in ZIF-8 (Fig. 23i). Therefore, the calculated overpotential for the ECO2RR on the most active site in CALF20 was lower than that in ZIF-8 (Fig. 23j), consistent with the experimental results.
7.2. Zn-based derived porous materials

7.2.1. Zn-based MOF-derived SACs. 
Due to the relatively lower boiling point of the Zn element, it tends to be used as a superexcellent self-sacrificing metal for atomically dispersing a second metal instead of obtaining Zn SACs. Therefore, few studies have been reported concerning Zn-based MOF/COF-derived SACs. A typical work was performed by Xin et al. through a mixture-drying-pyrolysis three-step method to achieve a uniform dispersion of Zn SAs on porous N-doped carbon (denoted as SA-Zn/MNC).45 Noteworthily, the as-prepared SA-Zn/MNC displayed a CH4 FE of 85% with a CH4 partial current density of −31.8 mA cm−2 and long-term stability of 35 h at −1.8 V (vs. SCE), comparable with the state-of-the-art Cu-based catalysts for the ECO2RR to CH4 (Fig. 24a and b). This stable and efficient performance could be ascribed to the electric conductance of the carbon layer for rapid charge transfer, microporosity for favoring active-site exposure and stability, and the presence of Zn SAs for specific selectivity to CH4. According to previous studies, the Co-, Ni-, and Fe–N4 sites in SACs tend to bond the C atom of CO2, resulting in the protonation of the O atoms to form *COOH, and subsequently CO production with a low energy barrier.211 In their work, it was revealed via DFT calculations that for the Zn–N4 sites, the O atom rather than the C atom in *OCHO prefers to form a chemical bond with Zn during the ECO2RR, thus blocking the generation of CO and helping to produce CH4, theoretically revealing the unusual electrocatalytic mechanism from CO2 to CH4 in Zn-based catalysts (Fig. 24c and d).
 Fig. 24  (a) FE CH4 of MNC, Zn powder, and SA-Zn/MNC at different potentials. (b) ECO2RR stability test of SA-Zn/MNC at −1.8 V (vs. SCE). (c) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CH4 on Zn–N4-graphene. (d) Most stable structure of each step for the ECO2RR to CH4 on Zn–N4-graphene (Zn: grey, O: red, C: brown, and H: pink). Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (e) Free energy diagrams for graphene, graphitic-N-doped, pyridinic-N-doped, pyrrolic-N-doped, oxidized-N-doped C29H14 cluster. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. (f) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CO on N-doped graphene and N, S co-doped graphene. (g) Synthesis of NSHCF. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2018. (h) Presentation of the fabrication of K-defect-C-1100 via K+-assisted strategy. (i) C K-edge XAFS spectra of K-defect-C-900, K-defect-C-1000 and K-defect-C-1100. (j) Calculated positron lifetimes of defect-free region and different vacancy-type defects with plane symmetries of vacant sites for graphite (insets: schematic of density distribution of positrons at V10 and V12). (k) HAADF-STEM image of K-defect-C-1100 after fast Fourier transformation filtering. (l) Free energy changes of *COOH formation on different vacancy-type defects (inset: electron density difference analysis of CO2 adsorbed on V12 with yellow and cyan standing for the charge accumulation and depletion, respectively). Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. 


7.2.2. Zn-based MOF-derived metal-free catalysts. 
Compared to the synthesis of Zn SACs with a pyrolysis temperature below the boiling point of Zn0 (e.g., Xin et al.45), the pyrolysis of Zn-based MOFs/COFs over the boiling point of Zn0 tends to produce another typical category of catalysts, namely, metal-free porous (N-doped or not) carbon materials. Different from several conventional carbon materials, Zn-based MOF/COF-derived metal-free carbon materials with the advantage of abundant pore structure, introduction of heteroatom species, high carbon defect density, and interaction of defects endow Zn-based catalysts with adjustable structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR.91,93,203,212,213 Huang et al. reported the preparation of N-doped porous carbon (denoted as NPC) with Zn-MOF-74 as the precursor for the ECO2RR.203 The as-obtained NPC possessed abundant active N atoms, with tunable N species with the regulation of the pyrolytic temperature and time, such as pyridinic N and graphitic N atoms. Thereinto, the optimal NPC exhibited a CO FE of 98.4% at −0.55 V (vs. RHE). DFT calculations demonstrated that pyridinic N and graphitic N atoms may be the intrinsic active sites for the ECO2RR owing to the synergistic effect of the high content of N species and the accessibility in the porous microstructure (Fig. 24e). Furthermore, it was proposed by Lin et al. that the introduction of other heteroatoms in addition to N atoms within metal-free catalysts should also be considered in the field of ECO2RR. Therefore, the large-scale production of N and S co-doped, hierarchically porous carbon nanofiber (NSHCF) membranes with an area of 400 cm2 was successfully obtained through the electrospinning method (Fig. 24g).91 The as-prepared NSHCF membranes could be directly utilized as self-supporting cathodes for the ECO2RR, exhibiting a CO FE of 94% with a current density of −50 mA cm−2 at −0.7 V (vs. RHE). It was revealed via the combination of experimental and theoretical results that the catalytic selectivity for CO can be ascribed to the co-doped pyridinic N and carbon-bonded S atoms, effectively lowering the energy for *COOH formation (Fig. 24f). Also, the well-designed hierarchically porous structures of NSHCF membranes could provide abundant N and S species with higher accessibility, resulting in an improved current density during the ECO2RR. Therefore, the synergistic regulation of the pore engineering and the heteroatom species will be significant to assess the catalytic potential of metal-free carbon materials for the ECO2RR.
Thus far, the majority of research concerning metal-free catalysts for the ECO2RR mainly focused on heteroatoms as active sites, neglecting the intrinsic carbon defect sites in the catalysts. In fact, the introduction of carbon defects is similar to the heteroatom regulation strategy, which can break the symmetry in the molecular plane and trigger charge redistribution, stimulating their potential to activate CO2 during the catalytic process. However, the preparation of intrinsic carbon defects tends to be associated with heteroatom-doping effects, and thus the exploration of their unique structure–activity relationships during the catalytic process remains a challenge. In this case, a K+-assisted synthetic approach was proposed by Jiang et al. to obtain a porous carbon (denoted as K-defect-C) with rich intrinsic carbon defects and complete removal of heteroatom species through the pyrolytic process of a K+-confined MOF (Fig. 24h).93 The positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS), XAFS and high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) jointly demonstrated the existence of rich 12-vacancy-type carbon defects (i.e., V12) in the as-prepared K-defect-C (Fig. 24i-k). When applied in the ECO2RR, the K-defect-C reached a CO FE of 99% at −0.45 V (vs. RHE), which is superior to MOF-derived carbon without K+ etching. It was further revealed by DFT calculations that the V12 carbon defects in K-defect-C were beneficial for CO2 adsorption and activation, thus accelerating the formation of *COOH during the ECO2RR, as exhibited in Fig. 24l. Based on this, more research concerning the structure–activity relationships between intrinsic carbon defects and the corresponding ECO2RR activity should be carried out with carbon defect density, and interaction of defects considered.

8. Bimetal-based functional porous frameworks
The above-mentioned illustration mainly focused on the study of monometal-based functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR with the regulation of the local coordination environment and microstructure. In fact, the bimetallic synergistic effect on the optimization of structure–activity relationships in catalysts is also a non-negligible factor. As is known, the rational design and synthesis of bimetal catalysts are the best strategies for the implementation of synergistic catalysis, thus effectively regulating the adsorption/desorption of key intermediates during the ECO2RR. Theoretically, Fe–Fe-,64 Fe–Cu-,74 and Co–Ni-based72 bimetal sites have been predicted to have potential for the ECO2RR towards CO, HCOOH, CH4, and CH3CH2OH. Experimentally, Fe–Ni,76 Fe–Cu,77 Ni–Zn,73 and Fe–Zn75 were demonstrated as efficient catalysts for the ECO2RR to CO. Based on the existing research findings, it was found that the bimetallic configuration could lead to a unique synergistic interaction with tunable electronic and geometric effects on bimetallic active sites, resulting in a decrease in the activation barrier and a smoother reaction pathway during the ECO2RR. To date, studies can be approximately divided to two sections, including pristine bimetal-based MOFs/COFs and the corresponding derived bimetallic SACs, both of which start from the observation of well-defined bimetallic active sites to probe the plausible structure–activity relationships during the ECO2RR.
8.1. Bimetal-based crystalline porous materials
In 2019, a new anionic 3D metal-catecholate framework was proposed by Yaghi and coworkers, denoted as MOF-1992.214 The CoPc catechol linker (CoPc-2,3,9,10,16,17,23,24-octaol), which was previously confirmed to possess catalytic activity for the ECO2RR, was connected to Fe3 subunits to obtain an open 3D MOF structure with a rod-shaped morphology (Fig. 25a). As is known, metal catecholate MOFs display a facile property of rapid electron transfer because of the enhanced overlapping of metal ions and catechol. The synergistic combination of electron transfer and accessible bimetallic active sites in MOF-1992 led to a CO FE of 80% with a current density of 16.5 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 0.52 V. For further probing the potential synergistic effect between the first metal phthalocyanine units and the second M–N/O linking units during the ECO2RR, Feng et al. reported the preparation of a layer-stacked, bimetallic 2D MOF with Cu phthalocyanine (Cu–N4) units and zinc-bis(dihydroxy) units (Zn–O4) as building units (denoted as PcCu–O8–Zn).215 The as-prepared PcCu–O8–Zn exhibited a CO FE of 88% with a TOF of 0.39 s−1 and durability of over 10 h at −0.7 V (vs. RHE) (Fig. 25b). Intriguingly, the molar H2/CO ratio could be effectively tuned from 1:7 to 4:1 by the regulation of metallic element type and applied potential. Also, the control experiments with the combination of in situ spectroelectrochemistry and DFT calculations jointly unveiled a synergistic catalytic mechanism that Zn–O4 units acted as the intrinsic active sites for the ECO2RR, while the Cu–N4 units possess specific selectivity for the protonation of adsorbed CO2 (Fig. 25c and d).
 Fig. 25  (a) Single-crystal structure of MOF-1992 based on Fe3 subunits and Co phthalocyanine catechol linkers (C: black, O: red, N: green, Co: orange, and Fe: blue polyhedral). Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (b) Structure of PcCu–O8–Zn (the dashed rectangular indicates the unit cell). (c) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR (solid lines) and HER (dashed lines) on M–O4 sites in PcCu–O8–Zn at 0.55 V. (d) Presentation of the synthetic process of PcCu–O8–Zn. Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of C–ZnxNiyZIF-8. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (f) Presentation of the preparation of C-AFC©ZIF-8. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. (g) FE CO of CuFe/N–C, Fe/N–C, Cu/N–C, N–C at different potentials. (h) Free energy diagrams of CuFe/N–C, Fe/N–C, Cu/N–C for the ECO2RR to CO. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (i) FE CO of Ni/Fe–N–C, Ni–N–C, Fe–N–C at different potentials. (j) Free energy diagrams of Ni/Fe–N–C, Ni–N–C, Fe–N–C for the ECO2RR to CO. (k) Proposed catalytic mechanism on FeNi–N6 bimetallic site from *COOH to *CO. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. 
The above-mentioned works centered on the design of bimetallic sites in MOFs/COFs at the atomic/molecular level. Actually, a mixture of two MOFs with definite catalytic activity for the ECO2RR should also be considered. A typical example was conducted by Irabiena and coworkers on the use of Cu-BTC and Bi-BTC MOF (i.e., HKUST-1/CAU-17) blends supported on porous CP, exhibiting catalytic selectivity for liquid products, including HCOOH, CH3OH, and CH3CH2OH.216 Also, it was suggested that the combination of Cu- and Bi-based MOFs accompanied with an equilibrium of bimetallic active centers and reaction intermediates can facilitate the formation of several liquid products. Based on this, the following works about the mixture strategy for bimetal-based catalysts should be extended for optimizing the ECO2RR performance and the industrial potential on a large scale.
8.2. Bimetal-based derived porous materials
The research on bimetal-based derived porous materials for the ECO2RR are mainly focused on MOF/COF-derived SACs. However, although monometallic Co–Nx, Ni–Nx, and Fe–Nx sites have been reported to display a relatively high current density for CO production, they suffer from sluggish kinetics in the first proton-coupled electron transfer (i.e., CO2 + H+ + e− = *COOH).217 Also, despite the relatively low onset potential for the ECO2RR to CO, Co–Nx and Fe–Nx sites possess strong binding of CO, and therefore limit the in-time CO release on Co or Fe centers, which is adverse to CO production.218 Thus, to address this issue, building accessible active sites with synergistic effects between bimetallic sites is plausible to improve the ECO2RR activity.87 Thus far, the bimetallic sites supported on a carbon layer in SACs can be clearly observed and studied via a series of advanced characterization methods and theoretical demonstration, as illustrated in this review, thus comprehensively understanding the structure–activity relationships in bimetallic SACs. Here, bimetallic SACs, according to the coordination configuration of their active sites, are mainly divided into two types. The first is isolated dispersed M1–Nx sites and M2–Nx sites (M1: first metallic element and M2: second metallic element).73,75 The second is M1M2–Ny with two adjacent metallic centers.76,77
In the former case, Bao's group used ZIF-8 as a self-sacrificing precursor to successively obtain Ni–Zn SACs (Fig. 25e) and Fe–Zn SACs (Fig. 25f) with isolated dispersed M–Nx sites.73,75 It was proposed that the rational selection of pyrolytic temperature can lead to a Zn residual as a fraction of Zn–Nx active sites in ZIF-8. Therefore, this pyrolytic process is an efficient method to obtain M1–Zn bimetallic sites (M1 = Ni, Fe). Specifically, both Ni–Zn SACs and Fe–Zn SACs exhibited a CO FE of over 90% at the optimal potential. However, both works only focused on the atomically dispersed M1–Nx active sites and overlooked the possible synergistic effect of Zn–Nx sites on either the promotion of ECO2RR or the inhibition of the HER. For the comprehensive consideration concerning the effect of Zn–Nx sites on the ECO2RR performance, both the contrast experiments and DFT calculations should be supplemented to assess the catalytic performance of Zn-only SACs for the ECO2RR, ultimately identifying the intrinsic active sites and foreseeing the possible structure–activity relationships in bimetallic catalysts. In the latter case, Chen et al.77 and Zhao et al.76 synthesized N3–Fe–Cu–N3 and N3–Fe–Ni–N3 bimetallic sites, respectively, for the ECO2RR to CO. It is worth noting that both works used two types of M–N–C monometallic SACs for comparison experimentally and theoretically (Fig. 25g–j). Specifically, N3–Fe–Ni–N3 displayed a CO FE of 98% with a current density of 7.4 mA cm−2 at −0.7 V (vs. RHE), which is superior to that of Ni–N–C and Fe–N–C, respectively (Fig. 25i). The corresponding DFT calculations revealed that the Fe–Ni centers were first passivated by strongly bonded *CO, providing additional active sites for the second CO2 activation on either the Fe or Ni site (Fig. 25k). Then, the reduction of CO2 occurred on the Fe sites, leading to a lower reaction barrier for the ECO2RR than either Fe or Ni monometallic centers (Fig. 25j). Therefore, a similar contrast demonstration will be suitable for other types of adjacent bimetallic sites for research on the structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR.
Actually, the possible configurations of the adjacent bimetallic sites in SACs that have been explored already are more than what is listed here because of the deeper study of the structure–activity relationship on other electrocatalytic process, e.g., ORR.90,221,222 Here, we do not further expand on the discussion of bimetallic SACs in other applications. In addition to SACs, bimetallic compounds (including bimetallic NPs and their oxides) are another classic type of bimetallic catalysts. For example, Wu et al.219 and Zhang et al.220 used H3BTC as a linker to obtain Cu/Bi- and Cu/In-MOF bimetallic precursors (Fig. 26a and f), respectively. Through the pyrolytic process, bimetallic MOFs could be converted to Cu–Bi or Cu–In NPs supported on carbon layers, respectively. Also, both works performed contrast experiments to assess the ECO2RR performance on bimetallic catalysts compared with monometallic ones (Fig. 26b). Besides, several in situ technologies together with theoretical approaches are effective means to deeply reveal the electrochemical mechanism of bimetallic catalysts. Specifically, Wu et al. used in situ FT-IR to demonstrate that Cu–Bi bimetallic sites in Cu–Bi catalysts boosted the formation of *OCHO, thus undergoing the *OCHO pathway to produce HCOOH (Fig. 26e). It was further revealed via DFT calculations that the free energy of the *OCHO pathway was lower than that of the *COOH pathway, similarly indicating the preferable reaction step to HCOOH (Fig. 26c and d), consistent with the in situ FT-IR results. Another interesting discussion is the difference in the metallic atomic ratio of M1/M2 on the surface and bulk in bimetallic catalysts to study the surface/interface electrochemical dynamics during the ECO2RR. XPS technology with Ar ion etching and ICP-OES were adopted by Zhang et al. to jointly analyze the metallic atomic ratio of M1/M2 from the surface to subsurface and further to the bulk in bimetallic catalysts (Fig. 26g). Accordingly, the Cu/In atomic ratio changed from 3.78 to 6.24 and further to 11.07, which can possibly be a pivotal factor that regulated the formation energy of several key intermediates during the ECO2RR.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of the synthetic process of Cu–Bi bimetallic catalysts. (b) FE HCOOH of different catalysts at different potentials. (c) Free energy diagrams of different pathways of ECO2RR to HCOOH on CuBi75 (2 1 1) plane. (d) Proposed mechanism of the ECO2RR to HCOOH on the CuBi75 catalyst. (e) In situ FT-IR spectra of 1000–2000 cm−1 on CuBi75 catalyst in the potential range of 0 to −1.2 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (f) Illustration of the synthetic procedure for Cu–In bimetallic catalysts. (g) Atomic ratio of Cu and In on the surface and subsurface of Cu90In10/C. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. 
Undeniably, bimetal-based functional porous frameworks have displayed a series of unique advantages compared to their monometal counterparts. However, the current studies are far from enabling the understanding of several key factors that influence the positive or negative feedback to the structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR. Therefore, it is essential to investigate the spectroscopic signal-property relationships in more detail via advanced spectro-microscopic synchrotron technology, particularly in situ conditions aided with the corresponding DFT calculations. Actually, it is of particular significance because any minor change in spectroscopic signals can lead to enormous variation in either optical or electronic characteristics in catalysts, ultimately influencing their electrocatalytic performance in turn.
9. Other metal-based functional porous frameworks
To date, the research on the rational design of functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR mainly focused on the first-transition periodic metals (as mentioned above, e.g., Cu, Co, Ni, Fe, and Zn). With the exploration of other metallic elements, an increasing number of metals with intrinsic or extrinsic catalytic activity for the ECO2RR have been found in recent years. On one hand, it has been revealed with the assistance of theoretical prediction that Cr, Mn, Ru, Rh, Ir, Os, Pt, and Au elements possess catalytic activity for the ECO2RR.224,225 On the other hand, abundant experimental results have extended the type of metallic elements applied for the ECO2RR, including transition periodic (e.g., Sc,60 Mn,61 Y,60 Zr,50,223,226 and Re62) and main group (e.g., Al,49,227 In,40,63,66,67,69,70 Sn,41,64 and Bi41,42,65,68,228–231) metals, as shown in Fig. 2. Consequently, Zr and Al elements have been identified as metals with extrinsic catalytic activity for the ECO2RR. Namely, either Zr-only or Al-only catalysts in the absence of other metals have not been found to exhibit dominant ECO2RR activity to date. However, the adjustable synergistic interaction linked to different metallic components in catalysts offers a wide platform to enhance the fundamental understanding of Zr- or Al-based MOF/COF composites as catalysts for the ECO2RR. Therefore, the study of Zr or Al for the ECO2RR is focused on the assisted effect on the intrinsic active metals. In addition, considering the difference in catalytic selectivity, other metals with intrinsic activity can be roughly divided into two sorts, including Sc, Mn, Y, and Re elements with CO selectivity and In, Sn, and Bi element with HCOOH selectivity.
9.1. Transition metals

9.1.1. Sc, Mn, Y, and Re with CO selectivity. 
In the range of transition metals, Sc and Y rare earth elements were used by Shui et al. to obtain MOF-derived SACs supported on carbon layers (denoted as Sc1/NC and Y1/NC, respectively).60 Compared with the typical M–N4 coordination configuration in Cu, Co, Ni, Fe, or Zn SACs, as mentioned above, Sc and Y atoms with a relatively larger atomic radius were inclined to be anchored on the large-sized carbon defects via six coordination bonds of N and C atoms (Fig. 28a–c). Intriguingly, although Sc- or Y-based materials are commonly inert to various electrocatalytic processes, the as-prepared Sc1/NC and Y1/NC SACs exhibited both ECO2RR and NRR activity, possibly owing to the adjustable local electronic structure in the Sc or Y centers by coordination of the N and C atoms, respectively. In the case of the Re element, Sun et al. reported the preparation of an MOF with 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid as the linker and Zn as the metallic node.62 Consequently, the bipyridyl unit created an appropriate condition for the following Re single atom anchored to obtain an Re-based highly oriented surface-grafted MOF (denoted as Re-SURMOF), as shown in Fig. 27b. Via the theoretical results of charge mobility in the (0 0 1) and (0 1 0) direction, it was found that charge migration was inclined to follow the (0 0 1) direction (i.e., perpendicular to the substrate), demonstrating highly oriented growth along the (0 0 1) direction, assisted by the XRD results (Fig. 27a). In the case of the Mn element, a similar anchoring strategy was adopted by Lloret-Fillol et al. to construct an Mn-based COF with atomically anchored Mn centers, which was denoted as COFbpyMn (Fig. 27d).61 Intriguingly, the as-prepared COFbpyMn imposed mechanical constraints on the Mn centers, offering a strategy to avoid the formation of detrimental Mn0–Mn0 dimer, which may be the key reason for the improved ECO2RR performance (Fig. 27e).
 Fig. 27  (a) Experimental (red) and simulated (black) XRD results of Re-SURMOF grown on FTO substrate. (b) Presentation of the simulated structure of Re-SURMOF. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. (c) Evolution of Zr-fcu-MOF-BDC with a variation in organic linkers and the element in metallic nodes. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (d) Synthetic procedure of COFbpy and COFbpyMn. (e) DFT energies for the endergonic dimerization mechanism process in COFbpyMn. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (f) Zr6 clusters and diagram of the catalytic reaction. Zr6 clusters are occupied by a linker (e.g., TCPP, BA, FA and AA), and the rest are uncoordinated Zr sites. CO2 is converted to CO by TCPP-Co, and H2O is converted to H2 by uncoordinated Zr sites. (g) Diagram of the dependence of catalytic performance on uncoordinated Zr sites. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. (h) Schematic of the preparation of Ag@Al-PMOF composite. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. 


9.1.2. Zr and Al with CO selectivity. 
It is worth noting that Zr and Al element tends to exhibit no intrinsic catalytic activity for the ECO2RR in Zr-only or Al-only catalysts. However, the adjustable synergistic interaction linked to different metallic components in catalysts offers a wide platform to enhance the fundamental understanding of Zr- or Al-based MOF/COF composites as catalysts for the ECO2RR. Therefore, the study of Zr or Al for ECO2RR centered on its assisted effect on the intrinsic active metals (e.g., Au,227 Ag,49,50 Co,223 and Cu226), which has been demonstrated experimentally. For example, the effect of pore size and Lewis acidity on the synergistic interaction between a Zr-based MOF and Ag NPs was studied by Sargent et al. via the evolution of Zr-fcu-MOF-BDC with a variation in organic linkers and the element in metallic nodes (i.e., Zr and Y element) for supporting Ag NPs (Fig. 27c).50 It was found that with a reduction in the channel size, the physical adsorption of CO2 in catalysts was elevated possibly because of the improved local CO2 concentration near the Ag NPs, enhancing the binding of *CO in the top or bridge modes, thus enhancing the ECO2RR, while suppressing the HER. Similarly, a Zr-based MOF Co-porphyrin (PCN-223-Co) was utilized by Gu et al. to probe the influence of uncoordinated Zr sites on catalytic activity for the ECO2RR (Fig. 27f).223 Thereinto, PCN-223-AA with the lowest number of uncoordinated Zr sites displayed the highest FE CO of 90.7%, demonstrating a negative correlation between the uncoordinated Zr sites and the catalytic performance (Fig. 27g).
In the case of the Al element, Buonsanti et al. synthesized a composite with Ag nanocrystals (NCs) intimately contacting an Al-based MOF ([Al2(OH)2-(TCPP)], TCPP = tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin), abbreviated as Ag@Al-PMOF (Fig. 27h).49 Intriguingly, it was found that the synergistic interaction between the Ag NCs and Al-PMOF led to electron-oriented transfer, which may be a key factor in the promoted ECO2RR performance compared with Ag NCs without Al-PMOF. Based on the above research, it is reasonably proposed that the appropriate design of composites will result in the unexpected synergistic interaction of metallic NPs and Zr- or Al-based MOFs with tunable pore size and surface/interface environment. To enhance the catalytic potential of metallic NPs to the maximum extent, the introduction of a redox-active metal ion or metal-porphyrin/phthalocyanine units in porous MOFs/COFs can boost the electron-oriented transfer, playing a key role both in the improved conductivity and redox hopping for the ECO2RR.

9.2. Main group metals

9.2.1. In with HCOOH selectivity. 
In the series of p block metals in the fifth/sixth period, several metallic elements with a relatively larger atomic radius compared to that in the first transition period, including In, Sn, and Bi, have attracted extensive attention due to their specific catalytic selectivity for HCOOH production. To date, research on the In element for the ECO2RR can be similarly divided into In-MOFs40,63,66 and MOF-derived In SACs.67,69,70 In the case of the former, Schröder et al. reported the preparation of an MOF-based electrode via the in situ electrochemical synthesis of MFM-300(In) on In foil to ensure the intimate contact between the as-prepared In-MOF NPs and the electrode surface (denoted as MFM-300(In)-e/In).40 Notably, MFM-300(In)-e/In showed an HCOOH FE of 99.1% with a current density of 46.1 mA cm−2 at −2.15 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). In the latter case, Li's group67 and Yin's group69 successively synthesized In SAs supported on N-doped carbon (denoted as In-SAs/NC) via the pyrolysis of In-doped ZIF-8 precursors. In comparison to In-free N-doped carbon in Li's work (Fig. 28d and e) and In NPs with (1 0 1), (1 1 0), and (1 1 2) planes in Yin's work (Fig. 28g), In-SAs/NC exhibited higher catalytic activity for the ECO2RR both experimentally and theoretically. Besides, it was found in both works that in the reaction pathway to HCOOH and CO, the according formation energy of *OCHO was lower than that of *COOH, demonstrating the pivotal HCOOH pathway during CO2 activation instead of the CO pathway (Fig. 28f and g), which is the reason why the In-based catalysts displayed specific selectivity for the ECO2RR to HCOOH. In addition to the above-mentioned intact In–N4 sites, Daasbjerg further adopted the regulation of local coordination environment on the active site configuration to obtain In–N3V (V: vacancy) sites.70 In terms of the electron state tailoring in the active sites, it was unveiled via DFT calculations that structural change from In–N4 to In–N3V let the In orbital (s and pz) energies closer to the Fermi energy (Ef), thus lowering the formation energy of *OCHO, indicating the feasibility of configuration optimization of In active sites to achieve improved ECO2RR activity, as displayed in Fig. 28h and i.
 Fig. 28  (a) Optimized structures of substrates type A (left) and type B (right). (b) Calculated active site structures of a Y single atom and corresponding adsorption energies. (c) FT-EXAFS fitting in R-space of Y1/NC using model (9) Y-B-N3 (C: gray, N: pink, and Y: red). Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (d) FEs and TOFs of In-SAs/NC, In-NPs/NC, NC for the ECO2RR towards HCOOH at various potentials. (e) Difference in the limiting potentials between the ECO2RR and HER on In-SAs/NC, In-NPs/NC, and NC. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (f) Stable adsorption configurations of *OCHO and *COOH on the In–N–C surface (C: gray, N: blue, O: red, H: white, and In: wine). (g) Calculated free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to HCOOH on In–N–C, In (1 0 1), In (1 1 0), and In (1 1 2) plane. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (h) PDOS of In s and p orbitals in In–N4 and In–N3–V models. (i) Abbreviated PDOS illustration of the differential In orbital energy and In–*COOH bond formation on In–N4 and In–N3–V models. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022. 


9.2.2. Sn with HCOOH selectivity. 
Regarding the Sn element, an ion exchange strategy was used by Sun et al. to obtain an Sn-doped ZIF-8 catalyst (denoted as xSZ, x represents the Sn2+ doping mass content) (Fig. 29a).41 According to the XPS results, the Sn 3d spectra were deconvoluted into three peaks as Sn0 (484.3 eV and 493.2 eV), Sn2+ (486.4 eV and 495.1 eV), and Sn4+ (487.8 eV and 496.4 eV), respectively (Fig. 29b). Consequently, the Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2 splitting peaks of the xSZ catalysts were mainly ascribed to Sn2+ with an atomic percentage of over 80%, indicating the equivalent substitution of Zn2+ with Sn2+ in the nodes of pristine ZIF-8. Also, 0.6SZ exhibited the lowest Sn0/Sntotal and Sn2+/Sntotal ratios and the highest Sn4+/Sntotal of 11.3% compared to the other xSZ catalysts, which may be an interesting topic in subsequent studies concerning structure–activity relationships between the mismatching degree in MOFs and the corresponding ECO2RR performance. Additionally, it was theoretically predicted by Gu et al. for the first time that the Sn (1 0 1) plane exhibited more advantages for the ECO2RR compared with the Sn (2 0 0) plane (Fig. 29c–e).64 Based on this, an Sn-MOF precursor was pyrolyzed, and then selectively etched to successfully obtain Sn (1 0 1)/SnO2/C-T (T stands for the pyrolysis temperature) composites with a variation in the pyrolysis condition and acid strength (Fig. 29f). Specifically, the as-prepared Sn (1 0 1)/SnO2/C-500 composites achieved the optimal HCOOH FE of 93.3% with catalytic stability of 20 h.
 Fig. 29  (a) Presentation of the synthesis of Sn-doped ZIF-8 catalysts. (b) High-resolution Sn 3d XPS spectra of xSZ catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Calculated free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CO and HCOOH. Optimized geometric structure of (d) Sn (1 0 1) and (e) Sn (2 0 0) planes. (f) Schematic of the synthetic process of Sn (1 0 1)/SnO2/C-500 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. 


9.2.3. Bi with HCOOH selectivity. 
In the case of the Bi element, a series of related works can be divided into three main types, i.e., Bi-based MOFs,41,42,65 MOF-derived Bi SACs,68 and MOF/COF-derived Bi compounds.228–231 Concerning Bi-based MOFs, Sun et al.42 and Zhang et al.65 successively adopted a typical Bi-MOF (i.e., CAU-17), achieving an HCOOH FE of over 85% at a potential from −0.8 to −1.1 V (vs. RHE) for the ECO2RR. It was revealed via in situ XAS that Bi-MOF was capable of maintaining Bi3+ during and after the ECO2RR, indicating the stability of the framework during the electrochemical process (Fig. 30b and c). Also, DFT calculations further demonstrated that the crystallographic channels of the Bi sites in CAU-17 could promote the formation of *OCHO, thus resulting in specific selectivity for HCOOH production. In regard to MOF-derived Bi SACs, the isolated Bi–N4 sites supported on porous carbon layers (denoted as Bi–N4 SACs) were obtained by Li et al. via the pyrolytic process of a mixture of Bi-MOF and dicyandiamide (DCD).68 With the help of in situ environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) technology, as shown in Fig. 30a, it was clearly observed that Bi-MOF was first converted to Bi NPs, and then redistributed to the isolated Bi–N4 active sites under an NH3 atmosphere, which were released from the thermal decomposition of DCD. When applied in the ECO2RR, the as-prepared Bi–N4 SACs exhibited a CO FE of 97% with a TOF of 5535 h−1 at an overpotential of 0.39 V (vs. RHE). Compared with the two contrast samples including BiC4 and Bi (1 0 0), the Bi–N4 site possessed dominant catalytic activity with the lowest energy for *COOH formation.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the evolution from Bi-MOF to Bi SAs with corresponding TEM images representatively during the pyrolytic process. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (b) XANES and (c) FT-EXAFS spectra as a function of electrochemical bias and with electroreduction time under in situ ECO2RR conditions over Bi-MOF, Bi metal, and Bi2O3. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (d) XPS of O 1s region of BiOx@C and BiOx/C. (e) EPR spectra of BiOx@C and BiOx/C. Reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (f) In situ FT-IR spectra of BiInO-0.67@C at 1200–2200 cm−1 from open-circuit voltage to −1.2 V (vs. RHE). (g) In situ FT-IR spectra of BiInO-0.67@C at 1200–2200 cm−1 from 0 to 3600 s at −0.9 V (vs. RHE). (h) Proposed mechanism for the ECO2RR to HCOOH on BiInO-0.67@C (pathway (1) represents the *OCHO formation and pathway (2) represents the *COOH formation). Reproduced from ref. 230 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022. 
In the case of MOF-derived Bi compounds, both the pyrolysis229–231 and electrochemical transformation strategies228 are facile methods to prepare either Bi or BiOx NPs with controllable size uniformly supported on N-doped (or not) porous carbon layers owing to the high Bi atomic loadings in Bi-based MOF precursors. For example, an MOF-derived BiOx@C nanomaterial was used by Guo and coworkers as a catalyst for the ECO2RR.229 It was found through the combination of XPS and EPR spectra that the oxygen vacancies in BiOx@C may play a key role in CO2 adsorption and activation, thus improving the catalytic activity for HCOOH production, as shown in Fig. 30d and e. Based on this, Geng et al.230 and Zhou et al.231 further introduced a second metallic element to construct Bi–In bimetallic oxides. Especially, in situ FTIR was used by Geng et al. to probe the possible catalytic mechanism, where *OCHO species (the intensity of the peak at 1593 cm−1) were generated in the first step of CO2 activation, and then dominated the formation of HCCOH instead of the *COOH pathway (Fig. 30f–h). In addition to the pyrolytic process, Bi nanosheet arrays distributed on carbon cloth (denoted as Bi/CC-17) were prepared by Sun et al. via the in situ electrochemical transformation strategy with Bi-MOFs as precursors attached to CC.228 It is worth noting that this electroreduction could effectively achieve intimate contact between the Bi nanosheets and the conductive CC substrates, thus exhibiting an HCOOH FE of 98% with a current density of 45 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V (vs. RHE).

10. Conclusions and perspectives
The ECO2RR is considered one of the most promising approaches to realize the goal of lower carbon emissions, but still faces a series of bottlenecks in its industrial application. Herein, we reviewed the up-to-date progress in functional porous frameworks as catalysts for the ECO2RR, including crystalline porous materials (i.e., MOFs and COFs) and derived porous materials (i.e., MOF/COF composites and pyrolysates). As is known, there are three advantages of functional porous frameworks as catalysts for the ECO2RR, as follows: (a) pristine MOFs/COFs with pre-set metal elements and adjustable skeleton structure not only serve as superior electron transfer agents during the catalytic process, but also improve the atom utilization owing to the atom-level dispersion of the metallic centers. Also, the well-defined and tunable active sites provide abundant possibilities for the rational regulation of local coordination environment in pristine MOFs/COFs; (b) the composition strategy can effectively enhance the chemical interactions (e.g., coordination force and π–π interaction) and charge transfer ability, compensating for the deficiency of pristine MOFs/COFs. The typical composition strategies include mixture with guest species (such as metals, metal oxides, and conductive supports), in situ synthesis of MOFs/COFs on self-supporting electrode, and electrochemical reduction of MOFs/COFs, aiming to achieve an enhanced ECO2RR performance. (c) The pyrolysis strategy can effectively facilitate the conductivity and stability owing to the graphitization of materials via high-temperature calcination. Also, the derived carbon layer plays an important role in anchoring and uniformly distributing metal SAs, clusters, and NPs, thus avoiding the excessive aggregation of the metal atoms and increasing the atomic utilization.
Assisted with the rapid development of nano-characterization and theoretical calculation technologies, structure–activity relationships have been comprehensively considered to deeper understand the catalytic mechanisms of functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR. In this review, the structure–activity relationships were mainly divided into three categories to rational discuss the design strategies of catalysts, i.e., metallic element type, local coordination environment, and microstructure, which corresponding to the selectivity, activity and mass transfer efficiency for the ECO2RR, respectively. For metallic element types, the ECO2RR selectivity is strictly determined by the intrinsic activity of each metal, which is directly determined by the difference in electron configurations and d-band centers. A series of binding energies of adsorption intermediates has been utilized as key descriptors to compare the ECO2RR activity and competing HER, which have been demonstrated to be experimentally and theoretically effective. In the case of the local coordination environment, the comprehensive consideration includes the coordination number, edge effect, vacancy defect, axial coordination, local strain, functional group effect, and coordination atom species to discuss the structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR. As elaborated in detail, these significant factors have a direct and effective influence on the regulation of the ECO2RR and HER reaction pathways, thus achieving the optimized catalytic selectivity. In regard to microstructure, the consideration covers pore engineering and tailor-made pore interfaces to optimize the mass transfer efficiency and ensure the full contact between active sites and electrolytes to the maximum extent during the electrochemical process. In short, the rational selection of metallic elements, well-defined active sites with tunable local coordination environment, and controllable microstructure are essential for the design of functional porous frameworks. Meanwhile, comprehensive consideration of the structure–activity relationships is important to promote the selectivity, activity and stability for the ECO2RR by the optimization of the intrinsic/extrinsic activity and the mass/electron transfer of active sites in either crystalline or derived porous materials.
Despite the promising prospect for the ECO2RR with the rapid development of functional porous frameworks, a series of unavoidable issues still exist, which need to be recognized and solved, as follows:
1) The creation of novel active site structure in MOFs/COFs, which can be achieved in two ways. Firstly, the breakthrough of the bottleneck of existing understanding on the structure–activity relationship for the ECO2RR seems a key factor that may help researchers find more catalytic possibilities and reaction mechanisms. Therefore, a series of practically innovative design ideas should be proposed to overcome the above-mentioned limitation. For example, the asymmetric site configuration and the mixed coordination effect of heteroatoms is an attractive design strategy in condition of either crystalline or derived porous materials, boosting the preferred ECO2RR performance. Secondly, the learning and utilization of new-type chemically robust metal-oxygen clusters as SBU in MOFs or stable covalent bonding ways in COFs can be an effective method to improve the catalytic stability during the ECO2RR. As is known, the lack of chemical and electrochemical stability for crystalline porous materials is one of the most severe challenges, limiting their practical applications. Therefore, the more stable bonding ways will gain the popularity for future research.
2) The normalization and rationalization of the research on the structure–activity relationships for the ECO2RR. Noteworthily, owing to the rapid development of computational chemistry, theoretical electrochemistry greatly helps in understanding the physical property and the possible catalytic reaction mechanism based on the reasonable active site model. However, the significant difference between the theoretical model and the actual catalyst sample may cause a misunderstanding and the corresponding false conclusion for the structure–activity relationships. Hence, it is highly necessary for researchers to undertake deeper experimental characterization instead of constructing theoretical models subjectively without scientific experimental verification. For instance, more and more in situ spectroscopy technologies and related spectral calculations have been employed to study the oriented electron transfer and the evolution of active sites, uncovering the possible catalytic mechanism behind the ECO2RR.
3) The urgent need for reducing the synthetic cost. The high synthetic cost of MOF/COF-based catalysts can be reflected in two aspects, as follows: (a) the high cost of monomers used for the construction of either MOFs or COFs becomes the biggest obstacle in their practical application. Therefore, an optimized and low-cost monomer-synthesis industrial chain is urgently needed in the future and (b) the synthesis of derived porous materials not only calls for a high energy consumption process, but also faces the issue of low yield. This strongly suggests that future works should consider the catalytic performance and catalyst yield simultaneously because the normalized and comprehensive assessment can more objectively reflect the large-scale application potential of catalysts.
4) The exploration of deep CO2 reduction products. At present, most of the products of reported functional porous frameworks as catalysts for the ECO2RR are confined to C1 and C2 products. Actually, the deeper reduction of CO2 towards C3 or C3+ products needs to avoid the desorption of the *C2 intermediate and ensure the synergistic effect of the adjacent site simultaneously, facing the unprecedented challenge for the appropriate design of catalysts. Alternatively, tandem catalysis can maximize the catalytic capacity of each loop and tends be available to achieve C3 or C3+ fuels, which is surprising for industrial applications. For example, the ECORR possesses much better catalytic capacity towards C3 or C3+ products in comparison to the ECO2RR. The corresponding tandem catalysis consisting of ECO2RR to CO and ECORR to C3 or C3+ products is a noteworthy topic for further study. Hence, tandem catalysis possesses extensive potential for further facilitating the catalytic depth and the industrial application of the ECO2RR, giving direction to obtain insight into functional porous frameworks for their further exploration in the field of ECO2RR.
Overall, although a series of challenges still needs to be addressed together with the in-depth understanding of this emerging research direction, it is firmly believed that crystalline and derived porous materials, as two typical types of functional porous frameworks, have a promising future for application in the ECO2RR due to their unique advantages.
Author contributions
C.-L. W. conducted the literature search, writing, and creation of figures and tables. Z.-H. L., W.-X. Y., X. F. and B. W. supervised and revised the manuscript. All authors were involved in the discussion and critical revision and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2020YFB1506300); National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants no. 21625102, 21971017, 21922502, 22075018, 51991344, 52025025, 52072400); Beijing Institute of Technology Research Fund Program; Analysis and Testing Center of Beijing Institute of Technology.
References
W. Lai, Y. Qiao, J. Zhang, Z. Lin and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3603–3629 RSC .
X. She, Y. Wang, H. Xu, S. C. E. Tsang and S. P. Lau, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202211396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, T. Qiu, S. Gao, R. Zhong and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2003410 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, L. Zheng, D. Jiang, W. Xia, X. Xu, Y. Yamauchi, J. Ge and J. Tang, Small, 2021, 17, 2006590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Hao, L. W. Chen, J. Li, Y. Guo, X. Su, M. Shu, Q. Zhang, W. Y. Gao, S. Li, Z. L. Yu, L. Gu, X. Feng, A. X. Yin, R. Si, Y. W. Zhang, B. Wang and C. H. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, P. Hou, X. Wang and P. Kang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 231–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. W. Lees, B. A. W. Mowbray, F. G. L. Parlane and C. P. Berlinguette, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 7, 55–64 CrossRef .
X. Li and Q.-L. Zhu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100033 CrossRef .
A. Wagner, C. D. Sahm and E. Reisner, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 775–786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Yang, C. Peng, C. Priest, Y. Mei and G. Wu, Small, 2021, 17, 2005148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, Y. S. Wei, C. C. Hou, C. Li and Q. Xu, Small, 2021, 17, 2004809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Dubois and D. L. Dubois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, X. He, W. Wang, S. Xie, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12897–12914 RSC .
Z. Zhang, L. Bian, H. Tian, Y. Liu, Y. Bando, Y. Yamauchi and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2022, 18, 2107450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Freund, S. Canossa, S. M. Cohen, W. Yan, H. Deng, V. Guillerm, M. Eddaoudi, D. G. Madden, D. Fairen-Jimenez, H. Lyu, L. K. Macreadie, Z. Ji, Y. Zhang, B. Wang, F. Haase, C. Woll, O. Zaremba, J. Andreo, S. Wuttke and C. S. Diercks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 23946–23974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, H. Y. Wang, H. Zheng, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2540–2581 RSC .
Q. Guan, L. L. Zhou and Y.
B. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 6307–6416 RSC .
Y. Liang, E. Li, K. Wang, Z.-J. Guan, H.-H. He, L. Zhang, H.-C. Zhou, F. Huang and Y. Fang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 8378–8405 RSC .
C. H. Sharp, B. C. Bukowski, H. Li, E. M. Johnson, S. Ilic, A. J. Morris, D. Gersappe, R. Q. Snurr and J. R. Morris, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 11530–11558 RSC .
H. Xia, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Guo, S. Guo and Q. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 43 CrossRef PubMed .
N.-C. Denise and V. Ana Sofia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 5899–5917 RSC .
L. Xiao, G. Wang, X. Huang, S. Zhou, R. Zhou, Y. Jiang, S. Liu, G. Li, H. Zheng, S.-G. Sun and H.-G. Liao, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121164 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Xu, T. Chen, D. Wei, X. Guo, L. Peng, N. Xue, Y. Zhu, M. Ding and W. Ding, J. Catal., 2021, 393, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, Z. Yin, J. Jin, M. Sun, B. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Ma, M. Muzzio, M. Shen, C. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Peng, P. Xi, C. H. Yan and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 15335–15343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, J. Wang, P. Tang, W. Tang, L. Liu, M. Shakouri, X. Wang, J. Llorca, S. Zhao, M. Heggen, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, A. Cabot, H. B. Wu and J. Arbiol, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 314, 121451 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, P. Zhang, X. Kang, L. Zheng, G. Mo, R. Wu, J. Tai and B. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 14769–14777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, L. Li, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, S. Mou, T. Wu, Q. Liu, B. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 758–762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, L. Chang, Y. Zhang, S. Mou, T. Wang, Y. Luo, Z. Wang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 9721–9725 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, T. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Li, P. Wei, D. Gao, B. Nan, R. Si, G. Wang and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22408–22413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Ding, P. Cai, L. Yi, Y. Li, C. Tu, Y. Hou, Z. Wen and L. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4993–5061 RSC .
T. Kitao, Y. Zhang, S. Kitagawa, B. Wang and T. Uemura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3108–3133 RSC .
Y. Zhou, R. Abazari, J. Chen, M. Tahir, A. Kumar, R. R. Ikreedeegh, E. Rani, H. Singh and A. M. Kirillov, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 451, 214264 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, X. Li, H. Shang, F. Qin and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23382–23418 RSC .
Y. Han, S. Zhu, S. Xu, X. Niu, Z. Xu, R. Zhao and Q. Wang, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 3174–3180 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bao, Y. Zou, C. Zhang, C. Yu and C. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202209433 CAS .
S. Li, Y. Liu, L. Dai, S. Li, B. Wang, J. Xie and P. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 48, 439–446 CrossRef .
T. He, C. Yang, Y. Chen, N. Huang, S. Duan, Z. Zhang, W. Hu and D. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2205186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sun, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1273–1299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, B. Wang, K. Hu, K. Lyu, X. Han, B. F. Spencer, M. D. Frogley, F. Tuna, E. J. L. McInnes, R. A. W. Dryfe, B. Han, S. Yang and M. Schroder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17384–17392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Geng, W. Chen, G. Li, X. Dong, Y. Song, W. Wei and Y. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 4035–4040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, G. H. Gu, C. Choi, P. Kolla, S. Hong, T. S. Wu, Y. L. Soo, J. Masa, S. Mukerjee, Y. S. Jung, J. S. Qiu and Z. Y. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, D. Yang, Y. Zhou, G. Zhang, G. Xing, Y. Liu, Y. Ma, O. Terasaki, S. Yang and L. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14473–14479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Qiu, H. L. Zhu, J. R. Huang, P. Q. Liao and X. M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7242–7246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, S. Song, M. Liu, S. Yao, Z. Liang, H. Cheng, Z. Ren, W. Liu, R. Lin, G. Qi, X. Liu, Q. Wu, J. Luo and H. L. Xin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12563–12567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198–210 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, T. Yue, K. Qi, Y. Qiu, B. Y. Xia and X. Guo, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2189–2201 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, L. Zhou, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, G. Shi, S. Zhao, H. Gu, J. Wu, X. Gao, Y. Li, K. Liu, S. Dai and L. Zhang, Chem, 2022, 8, 1–14 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Guntern, J. R. Pankhurst, J. Vavra, M. Mensi, V. Mantella, P. Schouwink and R. Buonsanti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12632–12639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam, O. Shekhah, G. Lee, A. Mallick, H. Jiang, F. Li, B. Chen, J. Wicks, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21513–21521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bagger, W. Ju, A. S. Varela, P. Strasser and J. Rossmeisl, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2017, 18, 3266–3273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, H. Liang, Z. Yi, R. Guo, C. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Sun and X. Liu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 441, 213983 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Qiu, J. R. Huang, C. Yu, Z. H. Zhao, H. L. Zhu, Z. Ke, P. Q. Liao and X. M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202206470 CAS .
K. Zhao, X. Nie, H. Wang, S. Chen, X. Quan, H. Yu, W. Choi, G. Zhang, B. Kim and J. G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Wang, Y. Ma, J. Zhou, Y. Wang, P. Lu, J. Yin, R. Ye, Z. Zhu and Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102151 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, J. Yu, Z. Xie, S. W. Yu, L. Zhang, T. Akauola, J. G. Chen, W. Huang, L. Qi and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 20931–20938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. Choi, M. Xu, X. Hao, H. Zhang, Z. Jiang, M. Zuo, J. Kim, W. Zhou, X. Meng, Q. Yu, Z. Sun, S. Wei, J. Ye, G. G. Wallace, D. L. Officer and Y. Yamauchi, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 929–937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Li, Q. Tan, L. Lu, Z. Wang and G. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18137–18157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, X. Fu, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Ruan, Y.-J. Zeng and H. Huang, Nano Today, 2021, 36, 101028 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, X. Kong, L. Zheng, X. Guo, X. Liu and J. Shui, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1093–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Dubed Bandomo, S. S. Mondal, F. Franco, A. Bucci, V. Martin-Diaconescu, M. A. Ortuño, P. H. van Langevelde, A. Shafir, N. López and J. Lloret-Fillol, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7210–7222 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, J. X. Liu, Y. Gao, C. H. Gong, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, C. Woll and L. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15320–15326 RSC .
J. Zhai, Q. Kang, Q. Liu, D. Lai, Q. Lu and F. Gao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 608, 1942–1950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Wu, X. R. Zhu, T. Liang, X. D. Zhang, S. Z. Hou, M. Xu, Y. F. Li and Z. Y. Gu, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 9653–9659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Zhou, Q. Li, J. Yi, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9776–9787 RSC .
L. F. Liu, J. L. Zhang, X. Y. Cheng, M. Z. Xu, X. C. Kang, Q. Wan, B. X. Han, N. N. Wu, L. R. Zheng and C. Y. Ma, Nano Res., 2023, 16, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shang, T. Wang, J. Pei, Z. Jiang, D. Zhou, Y. Wang, H. Li, J. Dong, Z. Zhuang, W. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22465–22469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Yu, J. Liu, W. Chen, A. Li, H. Rong, R. Lin, S. Ji, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, C. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16569–16573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lu, X. Tan, H. Zhao, Q. Xiang, K. Liu, X. Zhao, X. Yin, X. Li, X. Hai, S. Xi, A. T. S. Wee, S. J. Pennycook, X. Yu, M. Yuan, J. Wu, G. Zhang, S. C. Smith and Z. Yin, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5671–5678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Li, X. Y. Lu, S. Q. Zhao, M. Ceccato, X. M. Hu, A. Roldan, M. Liu and K. Daasbjerg, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 7386–7395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
Q. Huang, H. Liu, W. An, Y. Wang, Y. Feng and Y. Men, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19113–19121 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, H. Li, Y. Ye, H. Wu, F. Cai, R. Si, J. Xiao, S. Miao, S. Xie, F. Yang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1204–1210 RSC .
S. Chen, H. Yuan, S. I. Morozov, L. Ge, L. Li, L. Xu and W. A. Goddard III, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2541–2549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Ye, F. Cai, H. B. Li, H. H. Wu, G. X. Wang, Y. S. Li, S. Miao, S. H. Xie, R. Si, J. Wang and X. H. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, X. Tan, W. Yang, C. Jia, S. Xu, K. Wang, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6972–6976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Xie, T. Liu, Y. Wu and B. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2020, 269, 115029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xie, Y. Shen, W. Ma, D. Wei, B. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, S. Xie, C. Wang and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202213423 CAS .
D. Grammatico, A. J. Bagnall, L. Riccardi, M. Fontecave, B. L. Su and L. Billon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202206399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Nam, P. De Luna, A. Rosas-Hernandez, A. Thevenon, F. Li, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 266–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, T. Liu, G. Wang and X. Bao, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 713–727 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Nguyen, J. Guo, A. Sachindran, F. Li, A. Seifitokaldani and D. Cao-Thang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12474–12494 RSC .
D. Karapinar, N. T. Huan, N. Ranjbar Sahraie, J. Li, D. Wakerley, N. Touati, S. Zanna, D. Taverna, L. H. Galvao Tizei, A. Zitolo, F. Jaouen, V. Mougel and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15098–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Lin, Q. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jouny, J.-J. Lv, T. Cheng, B. H. Ko, J.-J. Zhu, W. A. Goddard, III and F. Jiao, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 846–851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Huang, X. F. Qiu, Z. H. Zhao, H. L. Zhu, Y. C. Liu, W. Shi, P. Q. Liao and X. M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202210985 CAS .
J. D. Yi, X. Gao, H. Zhou, W. Chen and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202212329 CAS .
Z. Geng, Y. Cao, W. Chen, X. Kong, Y. Liu, T. Yao and Y. Lin, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, G. Li, Y. Zeng, L. Yan, X. Wang, L. Yang, Q. Wu and Z. Hu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 7896–7902 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Liu, Z. Lv, R. Liu, L. Li, J. Wang, W. Yang, X. Jiang, X. Feng and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202117617 CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, Q. Lin, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, C. He and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15476–15480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. Gao and J. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2022 DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.2c00315 .
L. L. Ling, L. Jiao, X. Liu, Y. Dong, W. Yang, H. Zhang, B. Ye, J. Chen and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2205933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, T. Sharifi, Y. Gao, T. Zhang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804257 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, J. Yu, M. Sun, B. Chen, X. Zhou, C. Ye, Z. Guan, W. Guo, G. Wang, S. Lu, D. Xia, Y. Wang, Z. He, L. Zheng, Q. Yun, L. Wang, J. Zhou, P. Lu, J. Yin, Y. Zhao, Z. Luo, L. Zhai, L. Liao, Z. Zhu, R. Ye, Y. Chen, Y. Lu, S. Xi, B. Huang, C.-S. Lee and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2110607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Overa, B. H. Ko, Y. Zhao and F. Jiao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 638–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, X. Yang, T. O'Carroll, H. Li, K.-J. Chen and G. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200586 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y.-K. Tzeng, Y. Ji, Y. Li, J. Li, X. Zheng, A. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Gong, L. Cai, Y. Li, X. Zhang, W. Chen, B. Liu, H. Lu, N. A. Melosh, Z.-X. Shen, K. Chan, T. Tan, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 131–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Zhu, Z.-L. Liang, S.-L. Hou, Y. Xie, Y. Ma, Y. Zhang and B. Zhao, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiao and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 7975–8000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lai, Z. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, Y. Qiao and H. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111193 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Liang, T. Beweries, R. Francke and M. Beller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200723 CAS .
Q. Fan, X. Zhang, X. Ge, L. Bai, D. He, Y. Qu, C. Kong, J. Bi, D. Ding, Y. Cao, X. Duan, J. Wang, J. Yang and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sultan, H. Lee, S. Park, M. M. Kim, A. Yoon, H. Choi, T.-H. Kong, Y.-J. Koe, H.-S. Oh, Z. Lee, H. Kim, W. Kim and Y. Kwon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2397–2409 RSC .
Y. Yang, J. Fu, Y. Zhang, A. A. Ensafi and J.-S. Hu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 22397–22420 CrossRef CAS .
A. Friedman and L. Elbaz, J. Catal., 2021, 395, 23–35 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Chen, Y. C. Hao, Y. Guo, Q. Zhang, J. Li, W. Y. Gao, L. Ren, X. Su, L. Hu, N. Zhang, S. Li, X. Feng, L. Gu, Y. W. Zhang, A. X. Yin and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 5727–5736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Abdelkader-Fernández, D. M. Fernandes and C. Freire, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 42, 101350 CrossRef .
W. Zheng and L. Y. S. Lee, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2838–2843 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, L. Xu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2067–2080 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan, J. Xu, Z. Wei, J. Ma, S. Guo, S. Wang, H. Liu and S. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701784 CrossRef PubMed .
A. X. Guan, Z. Chen, Y. L. Quan, C. Peng, Z. Q. Wang, S. K. Sham, C. Yang, Y. L. Ji, L. P. Qian, X. Xu and G. F. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1044–1053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Dong, J. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Wang, X. Gao, Y. Han, P. Qi and B. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1318–1325 RSC .
S. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, S. Hong, Y. Dong, J. Wang, X. Gao, P. Qi, Y. Han and B. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1046–1054 RSC .
B. Cao, F.-Z. Li and J. Gu, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 9735–9752 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hinogami, S. Yotsuhashi, M. Deguchi, Y. Zenitani, H. Hashiba and Y. Yamada, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, H17–H19 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kumar, S. S. Kumar and M. A. Kulandainathan, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 70–73 CrossRef .
J. X. Wu, S. Z. Hou, X. D. Zhang, M. Xu, H. F. Yang, P. S. Cao and Z. Y. Gu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2199–2205 RSC .
M. Perfecto-Irigaray, J. Albo, G. Beobide, O. Castillo, A. Irabien and S. Perez-Yanez, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 21092–21099 RSC .
F. Yang, A. Chen, P. L. Deng, Y. Zhou, Z. Shahid, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7975–7981 RSC .
D. H. Nam, O. S. Bushuyev, J. Li, P. De Luna, A. Seifitokaldani, C. T. Dinh, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, Y. Wang, Z. Liang, A. H. Proppe, C. S. Tan, P. Todorovic, O. Shekhah, C. M. Gabardo, J. W. Jo, J. Choi, M. J. Choi, S. W. Baek, J. Kim, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11378–11386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Liu, H.-L. Zhu, Z.-H. Zhao, N.-Y. Huang, P.-Q. Liao and X.-M. Chen, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 2749–2755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Albo, D. Vallejo, G. Beobide, O. Castillo, P. Castano and A. Irabien, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1100–1109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Majidi, A. Ahmadiparidari, N. Shan, S. N. Misal, K. Kumar, Z. Huang, S. Rastegar, Z. Hemmat, X. Zou, P. Zapol, J. Cabana, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Li, L. Dai, J. Li, J. Lv, Z. Zhu, A. Yin, P. Li and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 16409–16415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Jing, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3565–3604 RSC .
X. Gao, Y. Dong, S. Li, J. Zhou, L. Wang and B. Wang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 3, 81–126 CrossRef .
X. H. Han, K. Gong, X. Huang, J. W. Yang, X. Feng, J. Xie and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202202912 CAS .
Z. Mu, Y. Zhu, B. Li, A. Dong, B. Wang and X. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 5145–5154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, P. Shao, L. Hu, C. Sun, J. Li, X. Feng and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 7897–7902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, T. He, Y. Gong and D. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1672–1685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. R. Wang, H. M. Ding, M. Lu, G. K. Gao, L. Z. Dong, Q. Li, Y. F. Chen, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 1659–1668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Yang, Y.-R. Wang, G.-K. Gao, M. Liu, C. Miao, L.-Y. Li, W. Cheng, Z.-Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, Z. Xin, S.-L. Li, D.-S. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 1439–1444 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Chen, L. Xiong, K. Feng, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Yuan, B. Yang, Z. Deng, Y. Liu, M. H. Rummeli, J. Zhong, Y. Jiao and Y. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, D. Yang, H. Liu, X. Sun, C. Chen, J. Bi, J. Liu, H. Wu and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8896–8901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Yi, R. Xie, Z. L. Xie, G. L. Chai, T. F. Liu, R. P. Chen, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23641–23648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Kung, C. O. Audu, A. W. Peters, H. Noh, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2394–2401 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, C. Yu, C. Zhao, H. Huang, X. Yao, X. Han, W. Guo, S. Cui, H. Huang and J. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9904–9910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zang, T. Liu, P. Wei, H. Li, Q. Wang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202209629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, P. Deng, Q. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Yan, L. Zhou, K. Qi, H. Liu, H. S. Park and B. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12418–12423 RSC .
N. Sikdar, J. R. C. Junqueira, S. Dieckhofer, T. Quast, M. Braun, Y. Song, H. B. Aiyappa, S. Seisel, J. Weidner, D. Ohl, C. Andronescu and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 23427–23434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, Y. Song, Q. Zheng, C. Long, T. Fan, Z. Yang, X. Huang, Q. Li, Y. Sun, L. Zuo, S. Lei and Z. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2202054 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Wei, P. Y. You, H. Duan, M. Xie, R. Q. Xia, X. Chen, X. Zhao, G. H. Ning, A. I. Cooper and D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 17487–17495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-Z. Dong, Y.-F. Lu, R. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, J. Liu, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 10185–10193 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, L. Chen, S. Xue, H. Sun, K. Feng, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Xiao, Y. Qin, J. Zhong, Z. Deng, Y. Jiao and Y. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fang, L. Xu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhu and W. Y. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 15143–15154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, J. Wan, H. Zhang, J. Li, W. Chen, Y. Li, Z. Guo and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 5496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhai, W. Yan, L. Dong, S. Deng, D. P. Wilkinson, X. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 20320–20344 RSC .
Z. Meng, J. Luo, W. Li and K. A. Mirica, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21656–21669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Wang, Q. Huang, C. T. He, Y. Chen, J. Liu, F. C. Shen and Y. Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4466 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guan, J. Lai and G. Xu, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 2764–2777 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kornienko, Y. Zhao, C. S. Kley, C. Zhu, D. Kim, S. Lin, C. J. Chang, O. M. Yaghi and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14129–14135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu, R.-K. Xie, M.-J. Mao, G.-L. Chai, J.-D. Yi, S.-S. Zhao, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1005–1012 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, M. J. Mao, Q. J. Wu, J. Liang, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Small, 2021, 17, 2004933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Chi, Q. Chen, S.-S. Zhao, D.-H. Si, Q.-J. Wu, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4653–4659 RSC .
N. Huang, K. H. Lee, Y. Yue, X. Xu, S. Irle, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16587–16593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, J.-J. Zhang, Z. Zhu, X. Chen, L. Huang, J. Su, Z. Xu, T. H. Ly, C.-S. Lee, B. I. Yakobson, B. Z. Tang and R. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119750 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xin, Y.-R. Wang, Y. Chen, W.-L. Li, L.-Z. Dong and Y.-Q. Lan, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xin, J. Liu, X. Wang, K. Shen, Z. Yuan, Y. Chen and Y. Q. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 54959–54966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Sun, Y. R. Wang, W. W. He, R. L. Zhong, Q. Z. Liu, S. Xu, J. M. Xu, X. L. Han, X. Ge, S. L. Li, Y. Q. Lan, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. Nafady and S. Ma, Small, 2021, 17, 2100762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Zhang, W. Wei, D. D. Ma, X. T. Wu and Q. L. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 37986–37992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Q. Lin, Y. Wu, G. Li, Q. Hu, X. Chai, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104454 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Yi, D. H. Si, R. Xie, Q. Yin, M. D. Zhang, Q. Wu, G. L. Chai, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 17108–17114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-D. Zhang, D.-H. Si, J.-D. Yi, Q. Yin, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 1332–1339 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sun, L. Z. Dong, J. R. Li, J. W. Shi, J. Liu, Y. R. Wang, Q. Huang and Y. Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202207282 CAS .
J. X. Wu, W. W. Yuan, M. Xu and Z. Y. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11634–11637 RSC .
H. J. Zhu, M. Lu, Y. R. Wang, S. J. Yao, M. Zhang, Y. H. Kan, J. Liu, Y. Chen, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, M. Zhang, C. G. Liu, J. Liu, L. J. Shang, M. Wang, J. N. Chang, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4864–4871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, Y.-B. Huang, Y.-L. Liang, G.-L. Chai, J.-D. Yi, T. Zhang, K.-T. Zang, J. Luo, R. Xu, H. Lin, S.-Y. Zhang, H.-M. Wang and R. Cao, CCS Chem., 2019, 1, 384–395 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Zhang, D. H. Si, J. D. Yi, S. S. Zhao, Y. B. Huang and R. Cao, Small, 2020, 16, 2005254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Su, K. Iwase, T. Harada, K. Kamiya and S. Nakanishi, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3941–3947 RSC .
J. H. Kim, Y. J. Sa, T. Lim, J. Woo and S. H. Joo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2022, 55, 2672–2684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Q. Lin, C. Zhang, X. Yu, Z. Cheng, G. Li, Q. Hu, X. Ren, Q. Zhang, J. Liu and C. He, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, D. He, X. Yan, S. Dai, S. Younan, Z. Ke, X. Pan, X. Xiao, H. Wu and J. Gu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18572–18577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma, D. Wu, X. Han, H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Gao, F. Xu and K. Jiang, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 32, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Lu, Y. J. Yang, J. N. Yao, M. Wang, S. Dipazir, M. L. Yuan, J. X. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. J. Xie and G. J. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Y.-L. Liang, P.-C. Shi, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 271, 118929 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, C. Xie and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7607–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, H. Yu, Y. Su, J. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Zeng, S. Deng and J. Wang, Nano Res., 2023, 16, 146–154 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-X. Li, D.-H. Si, W. Lin, Y.-B. Wang, H.-J. Zhu, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2022, 65, 1584–1593 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Ye, G. L. Fan, J. J. Xu, L. Yang and F. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135583 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Wen, F. Mao, Y. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, H. Q. Fu, L. R. Zheng, P. F. Liu and H. G. Yang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1086–1093 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Zhang, W. Liu, M. Jiao, K. Mou, X. Zhang and L. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2349–2356 RSC .
Y. N. Gong, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, C. Y. Pan, L. Zheng, X. Cai, B. Liu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2705–2709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, W. Yang, G. Wan, R. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Zhou, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20589–20595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, W. Zheng, J. Zhu, Z. Li, B. Yang, Z. Wen, J. Lu, L. Lei, S. Wang and Y. Hou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118908 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, W. Ju, S. Vijay, J. Timoshenko, K. Mou, D. A. Cullen, J. Yang, X. Wang, P. Pachfule, S. Bruckner, H. S. Jeon, F. T. Haase, S. C. Tsang, C. Rettenmaier, K. Chan, B. R. Cuenya, A. Thomas and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202114707 CAS .
A. A. Gewirth, J. A. Varnell and A. M. DiAscro, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2313–2339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. Pan, H. G. Zhang, K. X. Liu, D. Cullen, K. More, M. Y. Wang, Z. X. Feng, G. F. Wang, G. Wu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3116–3122 CrossRef CAS .
X. P. Qin, S. Q. Zhu, F. Xiao, L. L. Zhang and M. H. Shao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1778–1783 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hod, M. D. Sampson, P. Deria, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6302–6309 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Dong, S. L. Qian, F. Y. Bu, Y. C. Wu, L. G. Feng, Y. L. Teng, W. L. Liu and Z. W. Li, ACS Appl. Energ. Mater., 2018, 1, 4662–4669 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Huan, N. Ranjbar, G. Rousse, M. Sougrati, A. Zitolo, V. Mougel, F. Jaouen and M. Fontecave, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 1520–1525 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, X. Sang, W. Zheng, B. Yang, S. Yao, C. Lei, Z. Li, Q. He, J. Lu, L. Lei, L. Dai and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, X. Han, H. Liu, M. Biset-Peiró, J. Li, X. Zhang, P. Tang, B. Yang, L. Zheng, J. R. Morante and J. Arbiol, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2111446 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mohd Adli, W. Shan, S. Hwang, W. Samarakoon, S. Karakalos, Y. Li, D. A. Cullen, D. Su, Z. Feng, G. Wang and G. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, D.-D. Ma, B. Chen, K. Zhang, R. Zou, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118720 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, H. Li, J. Xiao, D. Gao, R. Si, F. Yang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Y. Ying, D. Sun, Z. Zhang, L. Fei, Z. Wen, J. Qiao and H. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 3244–3251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kang, Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 266–273 RSC .
I. Choi, Y. E. Jung, S. J. Yoo, J. Y. Kim, H.-J. Kim, C. Y. Lee and J. H. Jang, J. Electrochem. Sci. Technol., 2017, 8, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dou, J. Song, S. Xi, Y. Du, J. Wang, Z. F. Huang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4041–4045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Al-Attas, N. N. Marei, X. Yong, N. G. Yasri, V. Thangadurai, G. Shimizu, S. Siahrostami and M. G. Kibria, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7350–7357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, P. Hou, Z. Wang and P. Kang, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2017, 18, 3142–3147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, H. Yang, X. Zhou, K. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Zhou, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24867–24873 RSC .
X. Jiang, H. Wu, S. Chang, R. Si, S. Miao, W. Huang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19371–19377 RSC .
Z. Song, L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis, X. Fu, J. L. Luo and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001561 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, X. Sun, S. Ould-Chikh, D. Osadchii, F. Bai, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14751–14758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Li, M. Chen, J. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 3, 257–263 CrossRef .
R. Matheu, E. Gutierrez-Puebla, M. A. Monge, C. S. Diercks, J. Kang, M. S. Prevot, X. Pei, N. Hanikel, B. Zhang, P. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17081–17085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, M. Ghorbani-Asl, K. H. Ly, J. Zhang, J. Ge, M. Wang, Z. Liao, D. Makarov, E. Zschech, E. Brunner, I. M. Weidinger, J. Zhang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, S. Kaskel, R. Dong and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Albo, M. Perfecto-Irigaray, G. Beobide and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, H. Cao, Z. Zhang and Y.-G. Wang, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 11380–11390 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Lin, W. Hua, X. Xie, Q. Mu, K. Feng, J. Zhong, F. Lyu, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, Nano Res., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s12274-022-4728-1 .
Z. Yang, H. Wang, X. Fei, W. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Wang, X. Tan, Q. Zhao, H. Wang, J. Zhu, L. Zhou, H. Ning and M. Wu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120571 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, J. Tian, M. Wang, X. Jin, M. Shen and L. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 6096–6102 RSC .
L. Hu, C. Dai, L. Chen, Y. Zhu, Y. Hao, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Feng, S. Yuan, L. Wang and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 27324–27329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, W. Li, L. Wang and B. Wang, EnergyChem, 2021, 3, 100056 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Zhang, L. R. Huang, J. X. Wu and Z. Y. Gu, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 5191–5194 RSC .
Y. Xiao, D. Chen and R. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 378, 138028 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Y. Wang, L. Yan, J. Zhao and Z. Su, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467–468, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Kang, J. H. Won, H. Choi, W. Sim, M. K. Kim, S. Sultan, Y. Kwon and H. M. Jeong, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 66, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
P. De Luna, W. Liang, A. Mallick, O. Shekhah, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, A. H. Proppe, P. Todorovic, S. O. Kelley, E. H. Sargent and M. Eddaoudi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31225–31232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, S. Cao, Y. Wu, P. Zhai, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, Z. Fan, C. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Hou and L. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 880–886 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhao, Q.-S. Chen, D.-H. Zhuo, J. Lu, Z.-N. Xu, C.-M. Wang, J.-X. Tang, S.-G. Sun and G.-C. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 367, 137478 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Yang, H. Zang, F. Chen, C. Wang, N. Yu and B. Geng, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 12003–12011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guan, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, T. N. V. Karsili, M. Fan, Y. Liu, B. Marchetti and X. D. Zhou, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 612, 235–245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Changli Wang
	Changli Wang received his BS degree from Yangzhou University in 2021. Currently, he is pursuing his MS degree under the supervision of Profs. Wenxiu Yang and Bo Wang at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests include the design and synthesis of functional porous frameworks for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction.

Zunhang Lv
	Zunhang Lv received his BS degree from Qufu Normal University in 2014 and MS degree in 2018 from Qingdao University of Science and Technology. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Profs. Wenxiu Yang and Bo Wang at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials for electrocatalysis.

Wenxiu Yang
	Wenxiu Yang received her BS degree from Lanzhou University in 2012 and PhD in Analytical Chemistry in 2017 from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. After a Postdoctoral Fellowship at Peking University, she is now an Associate Professor at the Beijing Institute of Technology. Her research mainly focuses on the synthesis and surface/interface modification of functional nanomaterials and their applications in electrocatalysis (e.g., ORR, HER, OER, and CO2RR) and energy storage (e.g., PEMFC, zinc–air batteries, and PEMEC).

Xiao Feng
	Xiao Feng received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry in 2008 and PhD in Materials Science in 2013 from the Beijing Institute of Technology. He carried out a joint PhD research program supported by CSC at the Institute for Molecular Science, Japan (2009–2012). Currently, he is a Professor at Beijing Institute of Technology. His current research interest mainly focuses on porous organic polymers (i.e., covalent organic frameworks) and their applications in membrane separation (i.e., gas separation and desalination).

Bo Wang
	Bo Wang obtained his BS and MS degrees from Peking University in 2004 and the University of Michigan in 2006, respectively, and his PhD from the University of California Los Angeles in 2008. He has been a Professor in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology since 2011. His research interests are the design and synthesis of novel functional porous frameworks, energy storage, advanced battery materials, gas purification, toxicant capture, and sensing.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the classification and design of functional porous frameworks with well-defined active sites for the ECO2RR.	 

 	Fig. 2  Systematic list of catalytic selectivity of each metallic element involved in the study of functional porous frameworks for the ECO2RR.	 

1	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	CO2 → *COOH → CO	−0.53
2	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	CO2 → *OCHO → HCOOH	−0.61
3	CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → HCHO	−0.48
4	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CH2O → CH3*O → CH3OH	−0.38
5	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CH2O → CH3*O → → → CH4	−0.24
6	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e− → C2H4+ 4H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CO*CO → *CO*COH → *CCO → *CHCO → *CHCH*O → CH2CH*O → C2H4	−0.34
7	2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e−→ CH3CH2OH + 3H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CO*CO → *CO*COH → *CCO → *CHCO → *CHCH*O → CH2CH*O → CH3CH*O → CH3CH2*O → CH3CH2OH	−0.33
8	2CO2 + 14H+ + 14e− → C2H6 + 4H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CO*CO → *CO*COH → *CCO → *CHCO → *CHCH*O → CH2CH*O → CH3CH*O → CH3CH2*O → → → C2H6	−0.27
9	2CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH3COOH + 2H2O	CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CHOH → *CH2OH → *CH3 → CH3CO*O → CH3COOH	—
10	2H+ + 2e− → H2	—	−0.42

 	Fig. 3  (a) Presentation of the structure of HATNA-Cu-MOF. (b) Comparison of the FE of CH4 among HATNA-Cu-MOF, HATNA-6OH and the model compound. Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (c) Schematic of the structure of M3(HHTQ)2 (M = Cu, Ni). (d) Selectivity for each product (CH3OH and H2) for Cu3(HHTQ)2 at different potentials. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (e) Illustration of the structure of Cu-THQ. (f) Differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS) for CO and H2 production at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 for Cu-THQ NFs (inset exhibits the FE of CO and H2 in the range of −0.126 to −0.43 V (vs. RHE)). Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Brief synthetic process of PcCu–Cu–O. (b) FEs of C2H4, CH4, CO, and H2 for PcCu–Cu–O. (c and d) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of PcCu–Cu–O during the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (e) Schematic illustration of the loss of crystallinity in the (111) plane of HKUST-1. (f) FEs of 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1 at 1 M KOH. (g) EPR verification of the distortion of symmetric Cu dimer toward an asymmetric structure in 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1. (h) FT-EXAFS spectra of 250 °C 3 h calcined HKUST-1 at −1.38 V (vs. RHE) in 1 M KOH. Reproduced from ref. 121 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (i) Schematic of Cu-DBC. (j) Cu 3d orbital splitting in CuO4 and CuO5 sites, respectively. (k) FE comparison of Cu-DBC, Cu-THQ, and Cu-HHTP. (l) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra of Cu-DBC at −1.4 V (vs. RHE) in 0.1 M KHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 122 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of the structure of PcCu-TFPN. (b) Free energy diagrams of *CH3 and *OOCCH3 for Cu-porphyrin and PcCu-TFPN, respectively (insets exhibit the electron densities of *CH3 intermediates). Reproduced from ref. 53 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. (c) Schematic representation of anthraquinone COF-based nanofibers and hollow tubes for ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (d) Schematic representation of porphyrin COF-based nanostructures (Ani stands for aniline and TEPA is tetraethylenepentamine). Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of the regulation of the selectivity for the ECO2RR in the presence (a) and absence (b) of carbon supports. (c) In situ Cu K-edge XAS of KB@Cu3(HITP)2 at −1.25 V (vs. RHE). (d) Ex situ XRD patterns of KB@Cu3(HITP)2 at −1.25 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (e) Illustration of the solvothermal synthesis of Cu-HHTP and preparation of Cu2O@Cu-HHTP via electrochemical treatment of Cu-HHTP at the applied potential of −1.2 V (vs. RHE) for 30 min. (f) Proposed mechanism of Cu2O@Cu-HHTP for the formation of CH4. (g) In situ ATR-FTIR spectra on Cu2O@Cu-HHTP at −1.4 V (vs. RHE) in CO2-saturated 0.1 M KCl/0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) FEs under “flow” conditions after 1 h of CPE at a CO2 rate of 2.5 mL min−1 in 0.1 M CsHCO3. (b) FEs at −1.2 V (vs. RHE) and a CO2 rate of 2.5 mL min−1 in 0.1 M aqueous solution with different cations (right: FEs of ECORR products under the same reaction conditions). (c) FT-EXAFS spectra of Cu0.5NC with no applied potential (blue line), Cu0.5NC with applied potential of −1.2 V (vs. RHE) (red line), Cu0.5NC after electrolysis with no applied potential (green line) and Cu0.5NC after electrolysis with subsequent exposure to air for 10 h (orange line). Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. (d) FEs on Cu-SA/NPC. (e) Free energy diagrams of Cu-pyrrolic-N4 and Cu-pyridinic-N4 sites in Cu-SA/NPC for the ECO2RR to CH3COCH3. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (f) Schematic of the preparation of CuSAs/TCNFs with several key parameters, reflecting the catalytic capacity for the ECO2RR. (g) Free energy diagrams for *CO to CH3OH on Cu–N4 sites (Cu: orange, C: gray, N: dark blue, O: red, and H: light blue). Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Synthetic process of Cu–N–C-T (T represents the pyrolysis temperature). Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (b) Electron density difference plots for Cu, Cu@C and Cu2O@C with two adsorbed *CO and *CHO. Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic of two-step ECO2RR to n-propanol. The first step of the tandem catalytic system consists of (A) flow cell, (B) peristaltic pump, (C) anolyte (0.5 M KHCO3) and (D) catholyte (0.5 M KHCO3), and 3D Ni-SAG is used in a flow cell to reduce CO2 to CO. As-generated CO is purified in (E) 5 M NaOH and sent to the second step of the system, which consists of (F) flow cell, (G) peristaltic pump, (H) catholyte (1 M KOH), and (I) anolyte (1 M KOH), and multi-hollow Cu2O is used in a flow cell to reduce CO to n-propanol. Reproduced from ref. 142 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthetic process for MPC–Cu–X (M = Co, Ni; X = NH, O) with MPc units connected by Cu bis(diimine) or Cu bis(dioxolene) linkages. (b) FEs of CoPC–Cu–O at different potentials (dark green for CO and light blue for H2). (c) Reasonable reaction mechanism for the ECO2RR towards CO on MPc sites in MPC–Cu–XH. Free energy diagram for the ECO2RR towards CO on CoPC–Cu–NH (red), CoPC–Cu–O (green), NiPC–Cu–NH (orange), and NiPC–Cu–O (blue) at 0 V by the pathway of (d) route I and (e) route II. (f) Electrostatic potential diagrams of MPC–Cu–XH with an isovalue of 0.5 eV. Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (g) Schematic of Co-PMOF for the ECO2RR. (h) FE CO of Co-PMOF at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) in 0.5 M KHCO3. (i) CO partial current density and TOFs of Co-PMOF at −0.8 V (vs. RHE) in 0.5 M KHCO3. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthetic illustration of 2D TTF-Por(Co)-COF with views along the c axis (upper right) and side views (lower right). Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (b) Presentation of the synthetic process of 2D TT-Por(Co)-COF, featuring tetragonal pores with a diameter of 2.0 nm. Reproduced from ref. 154 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Synthetic process of 3D-Por(Co/H)-COF and the simulated network. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Synthesis of CoPc-PDQ-COF with phenazine linkage by condensing [NH2]8CoPc with PDQ. (b) π structure of CoPc-PDQ-COF with π conjugation along the x and y axis and π conduction along the z axis, which facilitate electron transport to the Co phthalocyanine units. (c) FEs of CoPc-PDQ-COF (red curve), monomeric [NH2]8CoPc (blue curve), commercial CoPc (green curve), and carbon fiber (black curve) with error bars signifying the standard deviation of three independent samples. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of COP-SA and COP-BDA. (e) Structures of three models: CoPc-(NH2)4, COPc-SA4 and CoPc-BDA4 (light blue atom is Co, grey is C, blue is N, white is H, and red is O). Binding strength of (f) *COOH and (g) *CO to CoPc-(NH2)4, CoPc-SA4 and CoPc-BDA4. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Comparison of MCp2@MOF and MOF for the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2019. (b) Presentation of the introduction of PPy in the channel of MOF-545-Co for the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (c) Brief presentation of the synthetic process and proposed electron-transfer mechanism on H-POM@PCN-222(Co) for the ECO2RR (blue box: Zr-based second building unit, yellow square: TCPP linker, and yellow ball: Co center). Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (d) Synthetic process of COF-366-(OMe)2-Co@CNTs. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Formation of Co–N4 and Co–N2 sites. (b) FT-EXAFS and (c) XANES spectra of Co–N2, Co–N3, and Co–N4, and Co NPs. Reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2018. (d) Synthetic process of Co–N5/HNPCSs. (e) FE CO and H2 of Co–N5/HNPCSs and CoPc. Reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (f) Illustration of the synthesis of CoSA/HCNFs composites. (g) FE CO of CoSA/HCNFs, CoSA/CNFs, and HCNFs with potential from −0.2 to −1.0 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (h) Schematic illustration of MOF-based porous Co-TMH transformation process under lower diffusion condition. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the synthetic process of NiPc–NiO4 with the corresponding structure in the AA-stacking mode. (b) Mulliken charge of different Ni atoms in NiPc–NiO4. (c) Energy level of HOMO and LUMO of different Ni atoms in NiPc–NiO4 with the introduction of CO2. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (d) Synthetic scheme of 2D conductive NiPc–Ni(NH)4. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission from Science China Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature, Copyright 2021. (e) Illustration of PCN-601 with redox active sites. (f) Presentation of Ni8 cluster and Ni-porphyrin as oxidative and reductive sites, respectively, in PCN-601. (g) Performance illustration of PCN-601 in hybrid electrolytic cell. (h) FE HCOOH and FE CO of MOR‖CO2RR. (i) FE CO of MOR‖CO2RR, OER‖CO2RR and MOR‖CO2RR with light at different potentials using PCN-601 as both the anode and cathode. Reproduced from ref. 167 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022. (j) Schematic of the liquid exfoliation process of bulk Ni(Im)2 to 2D nanosheets. (k) FE CO of bulk Ni(Im)2, 2D Ni(Im)2-140 nm, 2D Ni(Im)2-65 nm, 2D Ni(Im)2-15 nm and 2D Ni(Im)2-5 nm at different potentials. Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Synthetic process of M-TTCOFs via the condensation of 4-formyl-TTF and M-TAPP (M = Co, Ni). (b) Illustration of the ECO2RR mechanism on M-TTCOF. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (c) Schematic of MPc-TFPN COF through the condensation of MPc-8OH and TFPN. (d) Photo-current response curve of NiPc-TFPN COF at different potentials. (e) CO partial current density and TOF at different potentials under the condition of dark and light. (f) Comparison of the relative adsorption energy for the first step of the ECO2RR (* + CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → *CO2 + 2H+ + 2e−) on the metal site and nitrogen site in the MPc-TFPN COF (M = Co, Ni, Zn). (g) Presentation of the excited states of NiPc-TFPN COF. Reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Synthetic process of MSAs/PTF (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu). Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from the Chinese Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (b) Synthetic process of 2D conductive NiPC–COF. Reproduced from ref. 172 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Structure of Ni sites in Ni-CTF. (d) FT-EXAFS spectra at Ni K-edge of Ni-CTF (red), Ni-TPP (black), Ni foil (gray) and NiO (dark yellow). (e) FE CO of Co-CTF (red), Ni-CTF (green), Cu-CTF (blue) and CTF (black) in KHCO3 electrolyte at pH = 6.8. Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR towards CO on Co (red), Ni (green) and Cu (blue)-modified (f) CTF and (g) TPP at 0 V (pale lines) and −0.87 V (dark lines). Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Synthetic process of Ni SAs/N–C. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. (b) Fabrication of Ni SACs with a low coordination number. Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2021. (c) Presentation of the synthetic process for Ni–N4/C–NH2. (d) Schematic of a flow-cell electrolyzer for the ECO2RR. (e) CO FE and partial current density of Ni–N4/C–NH2 in flow-cell electrolyzer. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. (f) Theoretical models for the adsorption of *COOH on Ni NPs with different sizes, including Ni(1 1 1) (37.2 Ni NPs), Ni(2 1 1) (14.3 Ni NPs), and Ni10 clusters (4.1 Ni NPs) (C: black, O: red, H: white, Ni: blue). (g) Gibbs free energies of *COOH adsorption. (h) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR towards CO. Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic of the host–guest cooperative protection strategy to obtain NiSA–Nx–C. Reproduced from ref. 188 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. (b) Universal preparation process of MTV-MOF-derived M–N–C (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Cu). Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Presentation of the synthetic process of MPTFs-600. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (d) Scheme of the synthetic process of C-TpDt-Ni (C: grey, N: blue, O: red, and Ni: green). (e) Experimentally derived CO TOF in the potential range of −0.4 to −0.85 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Typical Mössbauer spectrum of Fe–N–C with the presence of two different local coordination environments. (b) Initial and final state for the COOH dissociation reaction on Fe–N4 and Fe–N2+2 sites (C: gray, N: blue, Fe: yellow, O: red, H: white). Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2018. (c) Presentation of Fe–N2+2 active sites for the ECO2RR towards CO. (d) Evolution of integrated *CO band intensity during switching of the CO/Ar atmosphere and potential. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process for the gas diffusion strategy to prepare Fe–Nx in a carbon layer. (b) Top view of the optimized atomic structures for Fe–N4, Fe–N3, and Fe–N3V sites embedded on graphitic layer (Fe: yellow, N: blue, and C: gray). (c) Free energy diagrams of the ECO2RR to CO on Fe–N4, Fe–N3, and Fe–N3V models. Reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of Fe–N4O catalyst. Top view and side view of the optimized (e) Fe–N4 and (f) Fe–N4O adsorption configuration (Fe: purple, O: red, N: blue, and C: gray). (g) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR towards CO at −0.48 V (vs. RHE). (h) Projected electron density of states (PDOS) of Fe d orbitals over Fe–N4O and Fe–N4 surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Atomic and electronic structures of *COOH intermediate adsorbate on Fe–N4 sites (C: gray, N: blue, Fe: yellow, O: red, and H: white). The charge accumulation and depletion are shown by the yellow and cyan clouds with an isosurface of 0.01 e Å−3, respectively. (b) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CO on Fe–N4 sites with various local strain. (c) Free energy diagrams for the HER on Fe–N4 sites with various local strain. (d) Difference between the limiting potentials of the HER and ECO2RR on Fe–N4 sites with various local strain. Reproduced from ref. 200 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (e) Presentation of the preparation of FeSAs/CNF-900. Reproduced from ref. 201 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (f) List of seven possible optimized Fe–N4 models. (g) ΔG(*CO) and (h) ΔG(*H) of seven possible optimized Fe–N4 models. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature, Copyright 2022. (i) Synthetic procedure for xFe2O3–N@CN. (j) FE for C2H6 on 0.3Fe2O3–N@CN at different potentials. (k) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to C2H6 on 0.3Fe2O3–N@CN (red line) and pristine Fe2O3 (blue line) (Fe: purple, N: blue, O: red, and H: white). Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Optimized adsorption configuration of *COOH on different imidazolate linkers in four ZIFs. (b) Reaction processes on imidazolate linkers within ZIF-8 (C: grey, O: red, H: white, and N: blue). Calculated free energy diagrams with solvent effect corrections for (c) ECO2RR and (d) HER. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2018. (e) EPR spectra of pristine ZIF-8, ZIF-A-LD, and ZIF-LE. (f) Free energy diagrams for ECO2RR to CO on the sp2 C atom sites in imidazole linker of pristine ZIF-8 (upper) and ZIF-A-LD (below), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 206 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2018. (g) Presentation of the structure of ZIF-8 and CALF20, including the chemical structure of polyhedron Zn nodes. (h) Simplified model of CALF20 and ZIF-8 labeled with different possible active sites. (i) Free energy diagram for the ECO2RR to CO on CALF20 at 0 V (vs. RHE). (j) Calculated overpotential on the most active site in CALF20 and ZIF-8 for the ECO2RR. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) FE CH4 of MNC, Zn powder, and SA-Zn/MNC at different potentials. (b) ECO2RR stability test of SA-Zn/MNC at −1.8 V (vs. SCE). (c) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CH4 on Zn–N4-graphene. (d) Most stable structure of each step for the ECO2RR to CH4 on Zn–N4-graphene (Zn: grey, O: red, C: brown, and H: pink). Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (e) Free energy diagrams for graphene, graphitic-N-doped, pyridinic-N-doped, pyrrolic-N-doped, oxidized-N-doped C29H14 cluster. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019. (f) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CO on N-doped graphene and N, S co-doped graphene. (g) Synthesis of NSHCF. Reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2018. (h) Presentation of the fabrication of K-defect-C-1100 via K+-assisted strategy. (i) C K-edge XAFS spectra of K-defect-C-900, K-defect-C-1000 and K-defect-C-1100. (j) Calculated positron lifetimes of defect-free region and different vacancy-type defects with plane symmetries of vacant sites for graphite (insets: schematic of density distribution of positrons at V10 and V12). (k) HAADF-STEM image of K-defect-C-1100 after fast Fourier transformation filtering. (l) Free energy changes of *COOH formation on different vacancy-type defects (inset: electron density difference analysis of CO2 adsorbed on V12 with yellow and cyan standing for the charge accumulation and depletion, respectively). Reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Single-crystal structure of MOF-1992 based on Fe3 subunits and Co phthalocyanine catechol linkers (C: black, O: red, N: green, Co: orange, and Fe: blue polyhedral). Reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (b) Structure of PcCu–O8–Zn (the dashed rectangular indicates the unit cell). (c) Free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR (solid lines) and HER (dashed lines) on M–O4 sites in PcCu–O8–Zn at 0.55 V. (d) Presentation of the synthetic process of PcCu–O8–Zn. Reproduced from ref. 215 with permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of C–ZnxNiyZIF-8. Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (f) Presentation of the preparation of C-AFC©ZIF-8. Reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. (g) FE CO of CuFe/N–C, Fe/N–C, Cu/N–C, N–C at different potentials. (h) Free energy diagrams of CuFe/N–C, Fe/N–C, Cu/N–C for the ECO2RR to CO. Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (i) FE CO of Ni/Fe–N–C, Ni–N–C, Fe–N–C at different potentials. (j) Free energy diagrams of Ni/Fe–N–C, Ni–N–C, Fe–N–C for the ECO2RR to CO. (k) Proposed catalytic mechanism on FeNi–N6 bimetallic site from *COOH to *CO. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic of the synthetic process of Cu–Bi bimetallic catalysts. (b) FE HCOOH of different catalysts at different potentials. (c) Free energy diagrams of different pathways of ECO2RR to HCOOH on CuBi75 (2 1 1) plane. (d) Proposed mechanism of the ECO2RR to HCOOH on the CuBi75 catalyst. (e) In situ FT-IR spectra of 1000–2000 cm−1 on CuBi75 catalyst in the potential range of 0 to −1.2 V (vs. RHE). Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2021. (f) Illustration of the synthetic procedure for Cu–In bimetallic catalysts. (g) Atomic ratio of Cu and In on the surface and subsurface of Cu90In10/C. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Experimental (red) and simulated (black) XRD results of Re-SURMOF grown on FTO substrate. (b) Presentation of the simulated structure of Re-SURMOF. Reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2016. (c) Evolution of Zr-fcu-MOF-BDC with a variation in organic linkers and the element in metallic nodes. Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (d) Synthetic procedure of COFbpy and COFbpyMn. (e) DFT energies for the endergonic dimerization mechanism process in COFbpyMn. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (f) Zr6 clusters and diagram of the catalytic reaction. Zr6 clusters are occupied by a linker (e.g., TCPP, BA, FA and AA), and the rest are uncoordinated Zr sites. CO2 is converted to CO by TCPP-Co, and H2O is converted to H2 by uncoordinated Zr sites. (g) Diagram of the dependence of catalytic performance on uncoordinated Zr sites. Reproduced from ref. 223 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2021. (h) Schematic of the preparation of Ag@Al-PMOF composite. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Optimized structures of substrates type A (left) and type B (right). (b) Calculated active site structures of a Y single atom and corresponding adsorption energies. (c) FT-EXAFS fitting in R-space of Y1/NC using model (9) Y-B-N3 (C: gray, N: pink, and Y: red). Reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. (d) FEs and TOFs of In-SAs/NC, In-NPs/NC, NC for the ECO2RR towards HCOOH at various potentials. (e) Difference in the limiting potentials between the ECO2RR and HER on In-SAs/NC, In-NPs/NC, and NC. Reproduced from ref. 67 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (f) Stable adsorption configurations of *OCHO and *COOH on the In–N–C surface (C: gray, N: blue, O: red, H: white, and In: wine). (g) Calculated free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to HCOOH on In–N–C, In (1 0 1), In (1 1 0), and In (1 1 2) plane. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021. (h) PDOS of In s and p orbitals in In–N4 and In–N3–V models. (i) Abbreviated PDOS illustration of the differential In orbital energy and In–*COOH bond formation on In–N4 and In–N3–V models. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Presentation of the synthesis of Sn-doped ZIF-8 catalysts. (b) High-resolution Sn 3d XPS spectra of xSZ catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Copyright 2020. (c) Calculated free energy diagrams for the ECO2RR to CO and HCOOH. Optimized geometric structure of (d) Sn (1 0 1) and (e) Sn (2 0 0) planes. (f) Schematic of the synthetic process of Sn (1 0 1)/SnO2/C-500 catalysts. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic of the evolution from Bi-MOF to Bi SAs with corresponding TEM images representatively during the pyrolytic process. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (b) XANES and (c) FT-EXAFS spectra as a function of electrochemical bias and with electroreduction time under in situ ECO2RR conditions over Bi-MOF, Bi metal, and Bi2O3. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (d) XPS of O 1s region of BiOx@C and BiOx/C. (e) EPR spectra of BiOx@C and BiOx/C. Reproduced from ref. 229 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2020. (f) In situ FT-IR spectra of BiInO-0.67@C at 1200–2200 cm−1 from open-circuit voltage to −1.2 V (vs. RHE). (g) In situ FT-IR spectra of BiInO-0.67@C at 1200–2200 cm−1 from 0 to 3600 s at −0.9 V (vs. RHE). (h) Proposed mechanism for the ECO2RR to HCOOH on BiInO-0.67@C (pathway (1) represents the *OCHO formation and pathway (2) represents the *COOH formation). Reproduced from ref. 230 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2022.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
