Catalytically solid-phase self-organization of nanoporous SnS with optical depolarizability  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5NR07172K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5NR07172K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4579-4587Catalytically solid-phase self-organization of nanoporous SnS with optical depolarizability

        
          
            Chih-Hsien 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Chieh 
            Chi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chung-Lun 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Jung 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ling-Hsuan 
            Tsai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jung-Hung 
            Chang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mu Ku 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Min-Hsiung 
            Shih
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Chao-Kuei 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Chih-I. 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Din Ping 
            Tsai
          
        
      ce and 

        
          
            Gong-Ru 
            Lin
          
        
      *a
aGraduate Institute of Photonics and Optoelectronics, and Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, 1, Roosevelt Road Sec. 4, Taipei 106, Taiwan, Republic of China. E-mail: grlin@ntu.edu.tw
bDepartment of Photonics and Department of Physics, National Sun Yat-sen University, No. 70, Lien-Hai Rd., Kaohsiung 804, Taiwan
cDepartment of Physics, National Taiwan University, 1, Roosevelt Road Sec. 4, Taipei 106, Taiwan, Republic of China
dDepartment of Photonics and Institute of Electro-Optical Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta Hsueh Road, Hsinchu 30010, Taiwan
eResearch Center for Applied Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan
Received 
      15th October 2015
    , Accepted 20th January 2016First published on 21st January 2016AbstractThe catalytic solid-phase synthesis of self-organized nanoporous tin sulfide (SnS) with enhanced absorption, manipulative transmittance and depolarization features is demonstrated. Using an ultralow radio-frequency (RF) sputtering power, the variation of the orientation angle between the anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) membrane and the axis of the sputtered ion beam detunes the catalytically synthesized SnS from nanorod to nanoporous morphology, along the sidewall of the AAO membrane. The ultraslow catalytic sputtering synthesis on the AAO at the RF plasma power of 20 W and the orientation angle of 0° regulates the porosity and integrality of nanoporous SnS, with average pore diameter of 80–150 nm. When transferring from planar to nanoporous structure, the phase composition changes from SnS to SnS2–Sn2S3, and the optical bandgap shrinks from 1.43 to 1.16 eV, due to the preferred crystalline orientation, which also contributes to an ultralow reflectance of <1% at 200–500 nm when both the transmittance and the surface scattering remain at their maxima. The absorption coefficient is enhanced by nearly one order of magnitude with its minimum of >5 × 104 cm−1 at the wavelength between 200 and 700 nm, due to the red-shifting of the absorption spectrum to at least 100 nm. The catalytically self-organized nanoporous SnS causes strong haze and beam divergence of 20°–30° by depolarized nonlinear scattering at the surface, which favors the solar energy conversion with reduced surface reflection and enhanced photon scattering under preserved transmittance.
Introduction
Tin sulfide (SnS) is one of the semiconductor compounds of group IV–VI that has received considerable interest for solar-energy conversion applications in recent years. In previous studies, variable poly-crystalline SnS structures with mixed SnS, SnS2 and Sn2S3 phases have been demonstrated.1,2 SnS with specific orthorhombic and CdI2-like crystallinity consists of many featured characteristics, including its tunable bandgap energy, varied from 1.296 (direct bandgap) or 1.095 (indirect bandgap) to 2.18 eV.3,4 The lattice constant of the stoichiometric SnS is very close to that of Si (5.431 Å), which is potentially available to serve as an interfacial buffer for the hybrid SnS/Si heterostructure. The SnS also exhibits a comparable absorbance to Si, thus making it an alternative candidate to form hybrids with Si for applications in near-infrared photodetectors or heterojunction solar cells.5,6 Recently, the nano-scale synthesis of SnS has emerged to meet the demands of rapid developments in nanophotonics. Many methods have been proposed for the chemical synthesis of the SnS nanostructure, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),7 electrochemical bath deposition,8 thermal evaporation and spray pyrolitic processes.9 Deng et al. reported that the synthesized quasi-one-dimensional, ribbon-like SnS nanostructure exhibits unusual electronic and thermal properties.10 However, most methods for nano-scale SnS fabrication rely on the chemical solution process, and the obtained nanostructures are usually irregularly distributed nanowires and nanotubes.11 Chemical vapor epitaxy and radio-frequency (RF) sputtering deposition have not been utilized to successfully synthesize SnS nanostructures. This is mainly attributed to the lack of an appropriate catalyst or template for the solid-phase synthesis under strictly confined methods and conditions. Not long ago, the anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) based porous membrane was introduced as a well-known catalyst for growing semiconductor nanowires (or nanorods),12,13 which is promising for enhancing the functional performances of versatile photonic devices. However, only the aqueous solution deposition of the SnS2 nanowires, and the solvent-relief growth of the SnS2 nanotubes on nanochannels of the AAO membranes were demonstrated.4,14,15 More recently, versatile nano-scale SnS structures have also emerged.4,16–21 Cho et al. utilized the self-catalytic solution–liquid–liquid–solid method to synthesize SnS nanorods.16 Similar structures were proposed by Cai and co-workers, with the use of the alternative solid–liquid–gas–solid approach, which were applied to fabricating Li-ion batteries.17 In addition to the solvothermal process demonstrated by Tripathi et al. to grow SnS nanorods,18 Liu et al. also synthesized 30 nm large SnS nanowires by employing the method using cationic surfactant, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide.19 Recently, Yue and co-workers employed chemical vapor deposition to grow SnS nanowires for solar cell applications without20 or with21 Au catalyst. However, only a few reports have emphasized using the AAO membrane to synthesize similar SnS nano-structures;4 the solid-state synthesis of SnS and SnS2 nanoporous structures grown on the AAO membrane have not been successfully demonstrated, to date. The obstacle to this is mainly attributed to the specific and complicated deposition mechanism of the solid-phase synthesis, compared to the electrochemical deposition process.
In this study, the solid-phase synthesis of catalytically assembled nanoporous SnS film, self-organized on the nanoporous AAO membrane is demonstrated using ultralow-speed RF sputtering with nearly threshold plasma power at room temperature. By changing the orientation of the angle between the AAO membrane and the axis of the sputtered ion beam, versatile SnS nanorod and nanoporous structures can be synthesized along the sidewall of the nanoporous AAO membrane. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was performed to show the formation of the non-stoichiometric SnS, with its multi-phase SnxSy compositions being transformed by changing the templates and oriented angles. The surface roughness, ultralow reflectance, high absorption coefficient, manipulative transmittance, reflection divergence and haze of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film are analyzed. The depolarization of the scattered reflection from the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film under TE- or TM-mode incidence is also analyzed.
Experimental section
Both the planar and the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS samples were fabricated by placing Si and AAO host membranes into the RF sputtering chamber concurrently. The commercially available nanoporous AAO membrane with a thickness of 60 μm and an average pore diameter of 250 nm was used as the template in this study to fabricate the SnS materials.
The 4 inch large SnS target, with a Sn/S composition ratio of 1:1, was located at the top of the chamber as the sputtering target, and the distance between the AAO membrane and the sputtering beam was set to 10 cm. During the sputtering growth, the chamber pressure was reduced to 10−6 torr, and the ion-beam was started with a flowing argon fluence of 120 sccm for deposition at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the orientation angle was set between the ion-beam and the surface normal of the AAO membrane from 0° to 90°, at an increase of 45°, and the threshold deposition rate was approached by reducing the RF power from 100 to 20 W, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The deposition rate decreased from 0.55 to 0.08 nm s−1 (see Fig. 1(b)) when the RF plasma power decreased from 100 to 20 W. To obtain the nanoporous SnS film, the AAO was removed by the H3PO4 solvent (30% DI water + 70% H3PO4) at a temperature of 60 °C for 1 hour.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the SnS material deposited on the nanoporous AAO membrane by changing its orientation angle (θ) from 0 to 90°. (b) The deposition rate of SnS clusters on the AAO membrane sputtered using varying RF plasma powers. 
Subsequently, the self-organized catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS structure along the sidewall of the nanoporous AAO catalyst membrane was electrochemically exfoliated from the AAO after synthesis. This was performed by using a H3PO4 solution (30% DI water + 70% H3PO4) at a solution temperature of 60 °C over 1 hour, to etch out the AAO membrane. The AAO membrane was gradually removed, leaving the SnS nanohoneycomb thin film floating on the surface of the H3PO4 aqueous solution. The catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS structure was then transferred to a quartz substrate and dried in forming gas at room temperature. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was performed to monitor the surface morphology of the planar and nanoporous SnS films. XPS, with a Mg Kα-line based X-ray source at a beam energy of 1253.6 eV under a vacuum pressure of 5 × 10−10 torr, was employed to analyze the composition ratio and the structural phase of the planar and the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film. The Raman scattering spectra of the planar and nanoporous SnS films were measured by pumping with a 532 nm Nd:YAG laser.
The optical absorption coefficient ranging from 300 to 1600 nm was determined by resolving the optical transmittance and reflectance spectra, which were measured using a Xenon light source (Oriel, 68147 + 68830) and a monochromator (CVI, DK2400). The optical bandgap was obtained by fitting the absorption spectrum with Tauc's equation under direct band gap conditions. To investigate the effect of nonlinear scattering on the surface of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS, the reflected beam divergence and depolarization from the surfaces of planar and nanoporous SnS samples were analyzed, as shown in Fig. 2. The incidence of both TE (transverse electric)- and TM (transverse magnetic)-modes were employed, using a linear polarizer to purify the degree of polarization of the incident laser beam with an optical power of 10 mW. At an incident angle of 20°, the reflected power was spatially resolved by a power meter (Newport, model 818-UV) located in a circular orbit with respect to the sample at the center point.
 Fig. 2  Experimental setup for analyzing the reflected beam divergence and the scattering depolarization of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film under TE- and TM-mode incidences. 
Results and discussion
The different morphologies of the nanoporous SnS films grown on the AAO membrane with changing orientation angles are shown in Fig. 3(a), as characterized by the top-view SEM images. With increasing RF power, the SEM images of the nanoporous SnS film sputtered at various orientation angles show the different nano-scale morphologies, in which the regulated porosity strictly depends on the optimization of the RF power and orientation angle. In Fig. 3(a), with an orientation angle of 90°, the zoom-in SEM image of the SnS surface shows the randomized nanorod morphology with an average nanorod length of 1 μm, when sputtered on the AAO template at the threshold plasma power.
 Fig. 3  (a)–(c) The top-view SEM images of the SnS nanostructures grown on the AAO membrane, oriented at different angles. 
From Fig. 3(b) it can be observed that tilting the orientation angle of the AAO membrane from 90° to 45° produces a mixed nanorod/nanoporous structure with a better regularity and a longer rod length of 2 μm. By further changing the orientation angle to 0° (while the surface normal of the AAO membrane is collimated with the axis of the sputtered ion-beam), the three-dimensional coral-like SnS scheme with an catalytically synthesized nanoporous structure deposited along the sidewall of the AAO membrane is observed by the top-view SEM image, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Unfortunately, the coral-like three-dimensional nanostructure is formed with broken sidewalls when synthesized at a larger deposition rate. With decreasing the orientation angle of the AAO membrane, the deposition area between the sputtering direction and the normal of the AAO template is effectively enlarged, which supports the regulated stacking of more SnS clusters on the AAO membrane along their direction. Under higher RF plasma power, the SnS clusters tend to be rapidly deposited without the preferred selective orientation, and randomly grow on the sidewall of the AAO, leaving a large amount of hollow holes within the sidewalls of the deposited SnS nanostructure. Therefore, the orientation angle of the AAO membrane and the deposition rate are crucial parameters to precisely control and optimize the catalytically synthesized nanostructure.

Fig. 4 shows the TEM images of the synthesized nanoporous SnS on the AAO membrane when deposited at different orientation angles, including the top view (first row), the cross sectional view (second row), and the selected area diffraction pattern (SAD) (third row). The top-view TEM in the first row of Fig. 4 shows that the SnS films grown on the AAO membrane exhibit orientation angle dependent morphologies. The SnS film can be catalytically synthesized along the AAO sidewall when the orientation angle of deposition is set at 0°, producing regulated honeycomb-like nano-grains in the whole layer, as shown in Fig. 4(a). In contrast, both the SnS grown at orientation angles of 45° (see Fig. 4(b)) and 90° (see Fig. 4(c)) present the randomly self-assembled SnS nanowires on the AAO membrane. The cross-sectional-view TEM images in Fig. 4(d)–(f) reveal the sidewall structure of the SnS catalytically synthesized on the AAO membrane with different orientation angles. All SnS honeycomb or nanowire samples on the AAO membrane are easily broken because of their steep and fragile structures. For more detail, the SAD patterns of different SnS samples were analyzed to declare their crystalline orientations. At least two SAD diffraction rings were observed, which corroborate that the SnS films have nano-cluster structures and small crystalline grains when deposited at the orientation angle of 0°, as shown in Fig. 4(g). The d-spacings of 0.333 and 0.218 nm are attributed to the (111)-oriented Sn2S3 with d = 0.335 nm, and the (102)-oriented SnS2 with d = 0.215 nm, respectively. However, the SAD analysis also proves that the structural phases of the SnS grown at orientation angles of 45° and 90° are amorphous, as shown in Fig. 4(h) and (i).
 Fig. 4  1st row: the top-view TEM images of the SnS grown on the AAO membrane at orientation angles of (a) 0°, (b) 45°, and (c) 90°. 2nd row: the cross-sectional TEM images of the SnS grown on the AAO membrane at the orientation angles of (d) 0°, (e) 45°, and (f) 90°. 3rd row: the SAD patterns of the SnS grown on the AAO membrane at the orientation angles of (g) 0°, (h) 45°, and (i) 90°. 
In previous studies, the SnS nanostructures were mostly synthesized via electrochemical reaction procedures. The reactant atoms or ions would inevitably diffuse into the nanopores of the AAO membrane, and the structures were synthesized and spatially confined within the nanopores of the AAO membrane; with the appropriate growth conditions, the chemically reactive atoms or ions could still form SnS nanotubes or nanorods.4,14,15 In contrast, we demonstrate for the first time, the synthesis of the nanoporous SnS structure by solid-phase RF sputtering at an ultralow deposition rate. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the sizes of the sputtered SnS clusters are larger than the atoms or ions reacting during the electrochemical deposition process, which facilitates the SnS deposition along the AAO sidewall and prevents the diffusion of SnS precursors into the nanopores of the AAO membrane. As a result, the sputtered SnS clusters gradually duplicate the AAO membrane during the deposition, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b). Eventually, the growth of the nanorods is inhibited by the solid-phase RF sputtering synthesis. The catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film also prefers to form on the top surface of the AAO membrane. At the very beginning, the SEM image reveals that the sputtered SnS clusters (red color) can only be deposited along the sidewall of the AAO membrane (gray color), as shown in Fig. 5(b). To understand the formation mechanism of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film at extremely low deposition rate, the top-view SEM image of the nanoporous SnS film deposited along the sidewall of the AAO membrane for 5 and 25 min are shown in Fig. 5(c) and (d), respectively. When increasing the deposition time to 25 min, the regular nanoporous SnS film is formed with average pore diameter of 150 nm and spacing of 100 nm by setting the orientation angle at 0°, and the pore diameter of the nanoporous SnS film is exactly the same as that of the AAO membrane.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic of the SnS clusters deposited on the AAO membrane, and (b) the zoom-in SEM image of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film on the AAO membrane. The top-view SEM image of the nanoporous SnS film grown on the AAO membrane after (c) 5 min and (d) 25 min deposition. 
After the self-assembly at the threshold sputtering rate, the nanoporous SnS sample changes its phase among the various poly-typed SnS, Sn2S3 and SnS2, similar to those synthesized using chemical synthesis in previous studies.1,2 With the spatially confined solid-state synthesis along the sidewall of the AAO membrane, the phase transformation of the nanoporous SnS film was characterized using Raman scattering spectroscopy. In addition, it was compared with that of a planar SnS film, as shown in Fig. 6. The co-existence of the SnS and Sn2S3 phases in the planar SnS sample results in the corresponding Raman scattering signals at 229 cm−1 and 308 cm−1,22,23 respectively. The peak intensities of the SnS and Sn2S3 phases are almost the same, indicating their equivalent composition ratios in the planar SnS film. The Raman scattering signal of the SnS phase at 229 cm−1 is attributed to the Ag mode. In contrast, the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film reveals the Sn2S3 and SnS2 related Raman scattering peaks at 234 cm−1 and 312 cm−1, respectively, with their corresponding intensity ratio of 3:2.24,25 The relatively broadened peak at 234 cm−1 can further be decomposed into two components, which are located at 234 cm−1 and 251 cm−1. Both components are related to the vibrational modes of the Sn2S3 and SnS2 phases. These results indicate the significant phase transformation from SnS/Sn2S3 to Sn2S3/SnS2, when the film structure transforms from a planar film to the catalytically synthesized nanoporous film. Such a phase transformation is accompanied by the diminishing of the phase mixture phenomenon, which results in the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film containing more single phase Sn2S3. These results confirm that the growth of the SnS materials has crystalline orientation and phase dependency. Typically, the melting point of SnS is at 880 °C, which could be reduced to 600 °C by increasing the Sn/S composition from 1 to 0.5. In our catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS with slightly complex SnS compositions, the structural phase has sufficient thermal stability to environmental temperature variation.
 Fig. 6  The Raman scattering spectra of planar SnS and nanoporous SnS films (in comparison with those of glass substrate and AAO membrane). 
As supporting evidence, the bonding components in planar and nanoporous SnS films were also characterized via the decomposition of the Sn 3d5/2 orbital electron related XPS signal, as shown in Fig. 7. The Sn 3d5/2 orbital electron related XPS peak can be fitted by three types of Sn–S bonding components, contributed by SnS, Sn2S3 and SnS2 phase structures at the binding energies of 486 eV, 486.6 eV, and 487.3 eV, respectively.26 In comparison to the planar SnS film, the nanoporous SnS film shows slightly enhanced Sn–S bonding components from the SnS2 phase, whereas the peak intensity of the Sn–S bond contributed by the SnS phase is somewhat attenuated. In a previous report, such a co-existing SnxSy bi-phase mixture was also observed from the samples prepared by chemical synthesis at reaction temperatures as high as 800 °C. During the solid-phase sputtering at the threshold deposition rate, the SnS2 nanoclusters are slowly ablated from the target to accumulate on the sidewall of the AAO membrane without significantly changing its structural phase.
 Fig. 7  The XPS signal spectra of planar SnS and nanoporous SnS films with decomposed SnS, Sn2S3 and SnS2 peaks. 
Subsequently, the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film with brown color was lifted off by etching the AAO membrane in H3PO4 solution at 60 °C for 1 hour,27 as shown in Fig. 8(a). The thickness of the SnS sample was fixed at 110 nm. In Fig. 8(b), the optical transmittance of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film rapidly decays at wavelengths shorter than 710 nm, as compared to that of the planar SnS film. The reflectance of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film was also reduced to 5% or less at the wavelengths ranging from 200 to 1000 nm. The extremely low reflectance (R < 1%) of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film was observed in the UV and blue regions, due to its highly roughened morphology. In particular, the surface of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film significantly enhances the photon scattering effect, to promote its application in future solar cells, which provides an improved haze effect at the surface without sacrificing its transmittance. The short current density of  can be enhanced by concurrently decreasing the surface reflection. In this case, there is no conflict on increasing the absorption and maintaining the transmittance using such an catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film. The film behaves like a structure combining the conventional multi-layer dielectric coating with the optoelectronic conversion layer, which concurrently increases the solar power conversion efficiency and improves the surface haze as well as the film transparency.28
 Fig. 8  (a) The schematic for transferring the planar and nanoporous SnS films to glass substrate. (b) The optical transmittance and reflectance spectra of planar and nanoporous SnS samples at wavelengths ranging from 200 to 1600 nm. 

Fig. 9 shows the AFM images of the synthesized planar and nanoporous SnS surfaces, analyzing their surface roughness. The planar SnS surface, as shown in Fig. 9(a), exhibits a little roughness, with average deviation of 2.18 nm. In contrast, the nanoporous SnS surface exhibits relatively larger surface roughness, with average deviation of up to 22 nm, as shown in Fig. 9(b). In general, the absorption of the sample can be enhanced if the surface reflectance can be minimized. The surface reflectance correlated with surface roughness can be described as follows:29,30 (1)where the n(λ) and n0 denote the refractive index of the SnS film and air, respectively, and N denotes the number of the sliced layer in the nanostructure with graded refractive indices.
 Fig. 9  The AFM images (upper) and 1-D cross-section scan (lower) of the (a) planar and (b) nano-porous SnS samples. 
When N → ∞, the optical thickness y and the parameters |C| can be approximated as follows: (2)where , D denotes the total thickness of the SnS film, which also involves the surface roughness. With these approximations, the reflectance can be simplified as follows: (3)
Comparing the planar and nano-porous SnS films, the nano-porous SnS film can increase its surface roughness to decrease its reflectance according to eqn (3), which effectively enlarges the trapping of photons as well as the optical absorption in such a nano-roughened film. Recently, various groups employed versatile surface nano-structures to decrease reflectance and enhance the absorbance of materials.31–34 For example, Gonzalez-Valls and co-workers utilized vertically aligned nanostructures on ZnO surface to increase the photon trapping probability for solar cell applications.32 Using hydrothermal synthesis, Chao et al. further applied the ZnO nanorods to form the anti-reflection coating layer.33 With the use of aqueous HF/AgNO3 based etching solution, Si nanowire and Si nanorod covered surfaces have also shown great potential to serve as anti-reflective surfaces for enhancing the optical absorption.31,34

Fig. 10(a) depicts the absorption spectrum to show that the absorption coefficient of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film can be increased by one order of magnitude higher than that of the planar SnS film at UV-to-visible wavelengths. It also reveals a red-shifted phenomenon assisting the absorption in the near-infrared region. At 200–600 nm, the absorption coefficient of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film is above 1 × 105 cm−1. Fig. 10(b) shows the plot of (αhv)1/2 against photon energy for the planar and the nanoporous SnS samples, with the corresponding interpolation lines fitted by Tauc's formula.28 The fitted optical bandgap energy shrinks from 1.43 to 1.16 eV when the SnS transforms from the planar to the catalytically synthesized nanoporous structure. The main reason for the shifted optical bandgap is attributed to the enhanced photon scattering by the phase transformation of the nanoporous SnS film. In principle, the optical bandgap of SnS could be changed by varying the composition.35 When synthesizing the SnxSy films by decomposing SnCl4 and H2S, the variable optical bandgap was also observed by detuning the fluence ratio of [SnCl4]/[SnCl4] + [H2S].36 If dual phases simultaneously exist, the absorption and optical bandgap are dominated by the phase with lower optical bandgap.37 Due to the strong optical scattering induced by the highly roughened catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS surface, both the beam divergence and the nonlinear depolarization effects can be observed from the reflection of a parallel incident and linearly polarized laser. In previous studies, the simulations on haze and nonlinear scattering divergence of reflectance on the surface roughened Si nanostructure have been well established.31,37,38
 Fig. 10  (a) The absorption spectra of planar and nanoporous SnS samples measured at different wavelengths; (b) the (αhv)1/2 plot as a function of the photon energy for the planar and nanoporous SnS samples. 
To analyze the surface roughness of the planar and catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS films, the divergent angles of the scattered reflectance from different samples were analyzed under the orthogonally polarized TE-mode and TM-mode incidences by adjusting a linear polarizer. Fig. 11(a) schematically illustrates the linear-polarized laser beam illuminated on the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS surface at a small incident angle of 20°.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic for measuring the reflected beam divergence of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS sample under TE- and TM-mode incidences. (b) The profile of angular dependent laser intensity profile after nonlinearly surface scattering. (c) The three-dimensional schematic of the scattered power distribution for the planar and catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS samples under TE- and TM-mode incidences. 
In Fig. 11(b), the one-dimensional divergent angle of 5° is resolved from the reflected intensity profile of the planar SnS film under TE- and TM-mode incidences. However, the central part of the reflection-beam profile significantly broadens to show that the divergent angle is enlarged from 5° (planar SnS film) to 20° and 30° (catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film) for TE- and TM-mode incidences, respectively. The contours of the angular dependent power distribution of the reflected beam at different polarizations from different surfaces are shown in Fig. 11(c). For the planar SnS film, the three-dimensional power distribution contours are slightly different between TE- and TM-mode incidences. The TM-mode incidence induces a reflected beam divergence larger than the TE-mode incidence. Theoretically, the magnitude of polarized scattering reflection distribution is related to the effective dielectric permittivity along different orientations of planar and catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS films, which is proportional to the quantity of bound electrons (N) interacting with the incoming polarized electrical field (TE- and TM-modes).39 The electrical permittivity is defined as follows: (4)where ε0 and εr are the permittivities of free space and SnS material, respectively, P is the polarization and E is the incident filed, N denotes the SnS atoms per unit volume and m is the electron's mass, and the summation denotes that there are fj electrons with frequency ωj and damping γj in each atom.
In the case of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film, the TE-mode and TM-mode polarized illuminations experience different portions of the honeycomb structure, such that different interactions between the orthogonally polarized light components and the vertical/horizontal portions of the SnS honeycomb occur before reflection. This eventually induces different divergent angles on the reflection distribution of scattered light. The TM-mode incidence aligns with the vertical direction of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film, which interacts with a larger amount of bound electrons in the SnS. In contrast, the TE-mode incidence is parallel to the surface of the nanoporous SnS film, which only interacts with a small amount of bound electrons because the horizontal portion of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film is the mixed structure of air and SnS. As a result, the orthogonally polarized TE- and TM-mode incidences could induce multiple scattering phenomena in the inhomogeneous and nanoroughened SnS honeycomb.
Conclusion
The catalytic solid-phase synthesis of self-organized, nanoporous SnS film along the sidewall of the AAO membrane has been successfully demonstrated. Different morphologies such as the nanorod and the nanoporous SnS structures standing along the sidewall of the AAO membrane can be synthesized, being controlled by changing the orientation angle of the AAO template from 90° to 0° with respect to the axis of the sputtered ion beam. The morphological variation strongly correlates with the depositable areas on the AAO membrane controlled by tuning the orientation angle. Enlarging the RF plasma power to 100 W forms only disordered SnS nanorods on the AAO membrane, whereas reducing the RF plasma to 20 W and aligning the orientation angle at 0°, regulates the uniform synthesis of self-organized nanoporous SnS film with pore diameter of 80–150 nm. The nanoporous SnS film can be more easily prepared using the catalytic solid-phase sputtering technique, than the electrochemical synthesis, which is accompanied by a compositional change to multi-crystalline phases when transforming from planar to nanoporous SnS. The Raman scattering analysis confirms that the planar SnS film composed of the SnS–Sn2S3 phases is transformed into the SnS2–Sn2S3 phases in the nanoporous SnS film. This is attributed to the preferred crystalline orientation of the sputtered SnS clusters when being deposited along the sidewall of the AAO membrane. The catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film exhibits an ultralow reflectance of below 1% at wavelengths ranging from 200 to 500 nm, while both the transmittance and the surface scattering of the incident photons remain at their maxima. The absorption coefficient of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film can be red-shifted to at least 100 nm, which enables its solar energy conversion efficiency at visible and near-infrared wavelength regions. Enhancement of the absorption coefficient by nearly one order of magnitude is observed at the wavelengths between 200 and 700 nm, with its minimum value above 5 × 104 cm−1. The fitted optical bandgap is red-shifted from 1.43 to 1.16 eV when transferring from planar to nanoporous SnS structure. Lastly, the polarization dependent nonlinear scattering and haze of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film are characterized, which indicate that the reflected beam exhibits a polarization dependent divergent angle of up to 20°–30°. This is correlated with the effective dielectric permittivity varied at different orientations of the nanoporous structure. These results elucidate that the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS is an ideal structure for utilization as the active layer for photovoltaic solar cells with reduced surface reflection, enhanced photon scattering and manipulated transmittance.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, R.O.C., for financially supporting this study under grants MOST 103-2221-E002-042-MY3 and MOST-104-2221-E-002-117-MY3.
Notes and references
T. Jiang and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 1099 RSC .
L. A. Burton and A. Walsh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24262 CAS .
P. Wu, N. Du, H. Zhang, J. Liu, L. Chang, L. Wang, D. Yang and L.-Z. Jiang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4002 RSC .
G. H. Yue, L. S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Z. Chen and D. L. Peng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Ramakrishna Reddy, N. Koteswara Reddy and R. W. Miles, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3041 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, H. Shen, W. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H235 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khadraoui, N. Benramdane, C. Mathieu, A. Bouzidi, R. Miloua, Z. Kebbab and K. Sahraoui, Solid State Commun., 2010, 150, 297 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Wang, B. Y. Kumar Reddy and H. Gong, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, H157 CrossRef .
N. Koteswara Reddy and K. T. Ramakrishna Reddy, Thin Solid Films, 1998, 325, 4 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, D. Cao, J. He, S. Lin, S. M. Lindsay and Y. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Lin, Y.-C. Chen, C.-J. Chen and P.-F. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chang, Y.-H. Pai, J.-H. He and G.-R. Lin, Acta Mater., 2010, 58, 1270 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Pai and G.-R. Lin, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hai, K. Tang, C. Wang, C. An, Q. Yang, G. Shen and Y. Qian, J. Cryst. Growth, 2001, 225, 92 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, G.-Z. Shen, K.-B. Tang, Y.-K. Liu and Y.-T. Qian, Appl. Phys. A, 2003, 77, 747 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Cho and Y.-M. Sung, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3690 RSC .
J. Cai, Z. Li and P. K. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4093 CAS .
A. M. Tripathi and S. Mitra, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 10358 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Hou and G. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 379, 67 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yue, Y. D. Lin, X. Wen, L. S. Wang, Y. Z. Chen and D. L. Peng, Appl. Phys. A, 2012, 106, 87 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Yue, Y. D. Lin, X. Wen, L. S. Wang and D. L. Peng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16437 RSC .
S. Sohila, M. Rajalakshmi, C. Ghosh, A. K. Arora and C. Muthamizhchelvan, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 5843 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Chandrasekhar and D. G. Mead, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1979, 19, 932 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, Y. H. Chung, S. H. Kang and Y. E. Sung, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 3606 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Louise, P. P. Ivan, M.
E. H. Amanda and J. H. C. Robin, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 1792 CrossRef .
M. Cruz, J. Morales, J. P. Espinos and J. Sanz, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 175, 359 CrossRef CAS .
G.-R. Lin, Y.-C. Chang, E.-S. Liu, H.-C. Kuo and H.-S. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 181923 CrossRef .
C.-T. Lee, L.-H. Tsai, Y.-H. Lin and G.-R. Lin, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, Q1 CrossRef .
G.-R. Lin, F.-S. Meng, Y.-H. Pai, Y.-C. Chang and S.-H. Hsu, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 20824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Layered Media, ed. P. Yeh, Wiley, Singapore,  1988 Search PubMed .
G.-R. Lin, Y.-H. Lin and F.-S. Meng, IEEE Photonics J., 2012, 4, 163 CrossRef .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19 CAS .
Y.-C. Chao, C.-Y. Chen, C.-A. Lin and J.-H. He, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3436 CAS .
C. Lin and M. L. Povinelli, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 19371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cheng, Y. He, G. Chen, E.-C. Cho and G. Conibeer, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2008, 202, 6070 CrossRef CAS .
H. Noguchi, A. Setiyadi, H. Tanamura, T. Nagatomo and O. Omoto, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 35, 325 CrossRef CAS .
G.-R. Lin, F.-S. Meng and Y.-H. Lin, Prog. Electromagn. Res., 2011, 117, 67 CrossRef .
A. Sanchez-Juarez and A. Ortíz, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2002, 17, 931 CrossRef CAS .
F.-S. Meng, Y.-H. Lin and G.-R. Lin, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 083523 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the SnS material deposited on the nanoporous AAO membrane by changing its orientation angle (θ) from 0 to 90°. (b) The deposition rate of SnS clusters on the AAO membrane sputtered using varying RF plasma powers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Experimental setup for analyzing the reflected beam divergence and the scattering depolarization of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film under TE- and TM-mode incidences.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a)–(c) The top-view SEM images of the SnS nanostructures grown on the AAO membrane, oriented at different angles.	 

 	Fig. 4  1st row: the top-view TEM images of the SnS grown on the AAO membrane at orientation angles of (a) 0°, (b) 45°, and (c) 90°. 2nd row: the cross-sectional TEM images of the SnS grown on the AAO membrane at the orientation angles of (d) 0°, (e) 45°, and (f) 90°. 3rd row: the SAD patterns of the SnS grown on the AAO membrane at the orientation angles of (g) 0°, (h) 45°, and (i) 90°.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic of the SnS clusters deposited on the AAO membrane, and (b) the zoom-in SEM image of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS film on the AAO membrane. The top-view SEM image of the nanoporous SnS film grown on the AAO membrane after (c) 5 min and (d) 25 min deposition.	 

 	Fig. 6  The Raman scattering spectra of planar SnS and nanoporous SnS films (in comparison with those of glass substrate and AAO membrane).	 

 	Fig. 7  The XPS signal spectra of planar SnS and nanoporous SnS films with decomposed SnS, Sn2S3 and SnS2 peaks.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The schematic for transferring the planar and nanoporous SnS films to glass substrate. (b) The optical transmittance and reflectance spectra of planar and nanoporous SnS samples at wavelengths ranging from 200 to 1600 nm.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 9  The AFM images (upper) and 1-D cross-section scan (lower) of the (a) planar and (b) nano-porous SnS samples.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 10  (a) The absorption spectra of planar and nanoporous SnS samples measured at different wavelengths; (b) the (αhv)1/2 plot as a function of the photon energy for the planar and nanoporous SnS samples.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic for measuring the reflected beam divergence of the catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS sample under TE- and TM-mode incidences. (b) The profile of angular dependent laser intensity profile after nonlinearly surface scattering. (c) The three-dimensional schematic of the scattered power distribution for the planar and catalytically synthesized nanoporous SnS samples under TE- and TM-mode incidences.	 
	(4)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
