High-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells with molecular copper phenanthroline as solid hole conductor   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE01204J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE01204J
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2634-2637High-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells with molecular copper phenanthroline as solid hole conductor†

        
          
            Marina 
            Freitag‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Quentin 
            Daniel‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Meysam 
            Pazoki
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kári 
            Sveinbjörnsson
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jinbao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Licheng 
            Sun
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt§
a and 

        
          
            Gerrit 
            Boschloo
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry-Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 523, SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden. E-mail: gerrit.boschloo@kemi.uu.se
bDepartment of Chemistry, School of Chemical Science and Engineering, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Teknikringen 30, 10044 Stockholm, Sweden
cState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, DUT-KTH Joint Education and Research Center on Molecular Devices, Dalian University of Technology (DUT), 116024 Dalian, China
Received 
      17th April 2015
    , Accepted 3rd June 2015First published on 3rd June 2015AbstractCopper phenanthroline complexes in the solid phase can act as efficient molecular hole transporting material (HTM) for hybrid solar cells. We prepared solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells with the organic dye LEG4 and bis(2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline)copper(I/II) (Cu(dmp)2) and achieved power conversion efficiencies of more than 8% under 1000 W m−2 AM1.5G illumination, with open-circuit potentials of more than 1.0 V. The successful application of a copper-complex based HTM paves the way for low-cost and efficient hybrid solar cells, as well as for other opto-electronic devices.

Broader context
Very large-scale application of photovoltaics is a viable way to meet with future energy demands. This requires low-cost solar cell technologies that do not employ rare or toxic elements. The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) has the potential to be one of these technologies, but stability and efficiencies still need improvement. In DSC molecular dyes are responsible for solar light absorption and charge separation takes place in electron transfer processes that are reminiscent to natural photosynthesis. In conventional DSCs a redox mediator in a liquid electrolyte is used to transfer positive charge to the counter electrode. The liquid electrolyte leads to challenges in hermetic encapsulation and long-term stability of the device. In solid-state DSC the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a solid hole molecular conductor, which gives it the advantage of easier encapsulation and interconnection. Thus far, however, solar cell efficiencies of solid-state DSC are significantly lower than those of liquid electrolyte-DSCs.

Harnessing the enormous potential of energy available in sunlight represents a major challenge for scientists and society.1 There is a rapid progress in the field of photovoltaics, opening up vast opportunities among renewable energy sources.2,3 Research on dye-sensitized liquid-junction solar cells has been very active during the past two decades.4–6 Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) offer the opportunity to make efficient solar cells in every color imaginable, and with possibilities for transparency. A clear disadvantage is the liquid electrolyte, which is difficult to encapsulate for long-term stability in solar modules. Therefore solid-state dye-sensitized cells (ssDSCs) have been developed, where the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a molecular hole transport material (HTM)7,8 or an inorganic p-type semiconductor.9,10 Spiro-OMeTAD is the most popular hole transporting material (HTM) for ssDSCs, and 7.2% power conversion efficiency (PCE) has been reported by Burschka et al. in 201111 and 7.7% (PCE) by Xu et al. in 2015.12 Other HTMs based on organic small molecules or conducting polymers are less efficient to date. Inorganic wide-bandgap p-type semiconductors such as CuSCN and CuI show higher conductivity than their organic counterparts, but yielded thus far lower PCE in ssDSC devices. More recently, the dark-colored Sn4+ compound Cs2SnI6 was successfully used as a hole conductor in ssDSC, reaching PCE-values of up to 7.8%.13 Interestingly, the open-circuit potentials for ssDSC that use inorganic p-type semiconductors are thus far significantly lower (∼0.6 V) than that obtained with spiro-OMeTAD (∼0.9 V).
Significant drawbacks of ssDSC with spiro-OMeTAD as HTM are the limited optimum thickness of the mesoporous TiO2 film that can be used, due to limitations in pore filling by the HTM and the fast recombination between electrons in TiO2 and holes in the HTM.14 Moreover, the electronic properties of spiro-OMeTAD such as work function and hole mobility may be a limiting factor for further development. Finally, the very high price of high purity spiro-OMeTAD is a problem for potential commercialization.
Here we will show that low-cost copper-based molecular complexes are hole conductors that outperform inorganic p-type semiconductors as well as small molecular hole conductors such as spiro-OMeTAD in ssDSCs. Fukuzumi and coworkers were the first to use copper complexes as redox mediators in dye-sensitized solar cells,15 and attained a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 2.2% using bis (2,9-dimethyl-1,10-phenanthroline) copper(I/II) (CuI/II(dmp)2, Fig. 1a) under reduced solar light irradiation (20 mW cm−2). More recently, Peng Wang and coworkers reached 7.0% efficiency using the same complex under full sunlight in combination with an organic sensitizer.16 Cu(dmp)2 has a distorted tetragonal geometry, in which the structural change in confirmation between the copper(I) and copper(II) complex is minimized. It has a high self-exchange rate for electron transfer,15 which makes it suited for use as a hole transport material in the solid-state.
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of copper 2,2′-dimethyl phenanthroline (Cu(I/II)(dmp)2) (the counter ion is TFSI) and LEG4 dye. (b) Device structure of the ssDSC. (c) UV-Vis spectrum of Cu(I)(dmp)2 HTM film. (d) Cross section by SEM of a representative working electrode with copper based HTM after removal of the PEDOT-coated FTO counter electrode. (e) J–V curves of ssDSCs and DSCs employing Cu(dmp)2 HTM or redox mediator. (f) IPCE spectra of ssDSCs and DSCs employing Cu(dmp)2 HTM or redox mediator. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells using the CuI/II(dmp)2 as redox couple were prepared in a sandwich structure similar to conventional liquid junction based devices (Fig. 1b). A mesoporous TiO2 film (6 μm transparent + 3 μm light scattering layer) on conducting glass was sensitized using the organic dye LEG4 (Fig. 1a).17 This electrode was sandwiched to a PEDOT-coated (∼200 nm) conducting glass counter electrode20 using a thermoplastic frame. A volatile electrolyte, containing 0.20 M CuI(dmp)2TFSI (TFSI: bis (tri fluoromethane)sulfonamide), 0.05 M CuII(dmp)2TFSI/Cl, 0.1 M LiTFSI, and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile, was introduced into the cell through a predrilled hole in the counter electrode, which was sealed for liquid-electrolyte DSC, or kept open to allow for slow evaporation of the solvent to obtain a solid-state DSC (Fig. 1b). Evaporation of the redox electrolyte in a DSC normally means the death of the solar cell; here, however, we found that a large fraction of dried-out cells were still performing well. We therefore refer to them as “Zombie Cells”. The solid copper based HTM has a bright red color, and its UV-vis spectrum is similar to that of the complex in solution, see Fig. 1c. The absorption onset is at about 600 nm and the decadic absorption coefficient is about 2 × 104 cm−1 in the maximum at 470 nm. In solution, the extinction coefficients of Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 are very low in the visible region (e.g., 40 and 114 M−1 cm−1 at 540 nm for Cu(I) and Cu(II), respectively), much less than that of the dye LEG4 (49000 M−1 cm−1 at 540 nm).

Fig. 1(d) shows the cross section scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the LEG4/TiO2/Cu(dmp)2 electrode on conducting glass substrate. The dried electrolyte forms a disordered layer on top of the electrode. The cross section image clearly shows a thick capping layer of the copper based HTM of about 2 μm on top of the sensitized mesoporous TiO2 layer. Although not visible from SEM, it may be expected that the pores in the mesoporous TiO2 are to a large extent filled by the copper-based HTM. XRD analysis of opened cells indicates that the HTM layer is partially crystalline (see Fig. S1 in ESI†). The broad background peaks suggest that a significant part is in an amorphous state.
The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of DSCs with liquid electrolyte and ssDSCs with the solid-state HTM based on Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 were tested under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination, using a black metal mask with 0.25 cm2 aperture area. For comparison optimized ssDSCs using spiro-OMeTAD as HTM were measured. A PCE as high as 8.2% was found for the ssDSC with copper 2,2-dimethylphenanthroline as HTM. The detailed photovoltaic parameters of champion cells, the open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF), short circuit current density (JSC) and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are given in Table 1 as well as in Fig. 1(e). Details for a series of devices, showing similar trends, are given in ESI.† Very high VOC values, exceeding 1.0 V, are obtained both for devices with liquid electrolyte and HTM based on Cu(I/II)(dmp)2. Remarkably, an improved solar cell performance is found when going from the liquid electrolyte to the solid HTM. The JSC improved from 9.4 mA cm−2 for the cell with liquid electrolyte to 13.8 mA cm−2 for the cell with the solid-state HTM. In comparison to the spiro-OMeTAD, both VOC and JSC are higher for the Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 HTM, leading to a higher PCE. It should be noted that the mesoporous film thickness is limited to 2 μm for the optimized spiro-OMeTAD cell, while it was 9 μm for the cell with Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 HTM. The higher JSC is therefore not surprising. The higher VOC is attributed to the more positive redox potential of Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 as compared to spiro-OMeTAD0/+ by about 200 mV (see ESI,† S4).
Table 1 Photovoltaic characteristics by J–V measurements of LEG4-sensitized ssDSCs and DSCs using Cu(dmp)2-based HTM or redox mediator




HTM or Electrolyte

V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)





a TiO2 film thickness 2 μm.





Cu(dmp)2 HTM
1010
13.8
0.59
8.2


Cu(dmp)2 EL
1035
9.4
0.62
6.0


Spiro-OMeTAD HTMa
895
9.4
0.67
5.6




The overstanding HTM capping layer for ssDSC that use spiro-OMeTAD is about 100–200 nm, while in copper complex based ssDSC the distance between top of the TiO2 electrode and the PEDOT on the counter electrode is about 10 μm. It is therefore evident that the hole conductivity of the copper complex based HTM must be better than that of spiro-OMeTAD. Additional hole mobility measurements were performed (see Fig. S5 and Table S1 in ESI†), which indicate that the hole mobility in a solid film of Cu(I)(dmp)2 TFSI/Cl (∼10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1) is one order of magnitude higher than that of doped spiro-OMeTAD.
IPCE spectra for the LEG4 based ssDSCs with the copper based HTMs, recorded using low intensity monochromatic light, reached a maximum of about 74%, see Fig. 1f. On average, ssDSCs with solid Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 HTM were outperforming DSCs with Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 in liquid electrolyte by about 10%. The solar cell statistics for 20 DSC and 20 ssDSC devices are shown in ESI† (Fig. S4, ESI†).
Charge transfer processes in these solar cells were studied using photoinduced absorption spectroscopy (PIA) measurements, see Fig. 2(a). In the absence of HTM or redox mediator, the LEG4/TiO2 sample shows a ground-state bleach at 510 nm, and absorption peaks of oxidized LEG4 dye at 650 nm and 780 nm. In the presence of Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 in the electrolyte, these features disappear and a broad absorption caused by electrons in TiO2 is observed, as well as a Stark-bleach at wavelengths below 670 nm. The latter is caused by the electric field imposed on the dye molecules, originating from injected electrons in TiO2 particles and their positive counter charge in the electrolyte.18,19 This demonstrates an efficient and complete reduction of the oxidized dye by the redox mediator. In the case of the Cu HTM, some features of the oxidized LEG4 are still visible, indicating that not all oxidized dye molecules are rapidly regenerated by the HTM. Presumably, this is due to dye molecules that are not in direct contact with the HTM. These dye molecules have a long-live oxidized state, giving a strong PIA signal (the PIA signal is proportional to the concentration of oxidized dye molecules as well as their lifetime).
 Fig. 2  (a) PIA spectra of ssDSCs and DSCs with LEG4 employing Cu(dmp)2-based HTM or redox mediator. (b) Electron transport time as function of short-circuit current density of solar cells with Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 TFSI/Cl as HTM or as redox mediator. (c) Electron lifetime as a function of open circuit voltage. 
Small-intensity light modulations superimposed on larger light bias were used to measure photovoltage and current transients, from which the electron lifetimes (τe) at open circuit voltage and the electron transport times (τtr) at short-circuit conditions were derived. Fig. 2(b) shows that the electron transport is about two times faster for the solid state cell. Faster electron transport in the mesoporous TiO2 in ssDSC was also found for other HTMs such as spiro-OMeTAD. We attribute this effect to the difference in interactions of electrons in TiO2 and their counter charges, present in the solid HTM or liquid electrolyte.
The electron lifetime in the ssDSCs with the copper complex based HTM is comparable or slightly higher than that of cells employing the liquid electrolyte (Fig. 2c). For optimized spiro-OMeTAD cells, similar electron lifetimes are found (∼1 ms at 1 sun intensity, see ESI†), but at a lower VOC value (∼0.9 V) and for much thinner mesoporous TiO2 film thickness (∼2 μm). Due to faster electron and longer or similar electron lifetimes, charge collection efficiencies in the ssDSCs based on Cu(dmp)2 HTM are expected to be higher than that of the respective liquid electrolyte DSCs, which may explain the higher photocurrent found in solid-state cells.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated the application of a new type of HTM, based on earth abundant Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 complexes that have a distorted tetragonal geometry. These molecular copper complexes have a straightforward synthetic route from a low cost starting material and can be solution processed. The new transition metal complex based HTM leads to an impressive power conversion efficiency of 8.2% for a solid-state dye-sensitized solar cell. In comparison, ssDSC using spiro-OMeTAD as HTM gave only 5.6% power conversion efficiency under the same experimental conditions. The solar cell performance is better for the solid HTM than for the liquid-electrolyte based DSC with devices having identical configuration. SEM and other measurements indicate that the crystallization and the drying process of the HTM is essential for the good performance of the devices. Our results demonstrate a new class of HTMs that is not only promising for ssDSCs, but also of interest to perovskite solar cells and other areas of organic electronics.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Swedish Energy Agency, the Swedish Research Council (VR), Merck KGaA (Germany), and the STandUP for energy program for financial support. J.Z. gratefully acknowledges the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for a PhD study fellowship. We thank Michael Wang for technical support and motivation.
Notes and references
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 12 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, A. Banerjee and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70 Search PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissortel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, U. B. Cappel, E. L. Unger, M. Karlsson, K. M. Karlsson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 779 RSC .
G. R. A. Kumara, A. Konno, K. Shiratsuchi, J. Tsukahara and K. Tennakone, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 954 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. O'Regan and F. J. Lenzmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4342 CrossRef .
J. Burschka, A. Dualeh, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, N.-L. Cevey-Ha, C. Yi, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, E. Gabrielsson, M. Safdari, M. Cheng, Y. Hua, H. Tian, J. M. Gardner, L. Kloo and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402340 Search PubMed .
B. Lee, C. C. Stoumpos, N. Zhou, F. Hao, C. Malliakas, C.-Y. Yeh, T. J. Marks, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. P. H. Chang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-K. Ding, N. Tétreault, J. Brillet, B. E. Hardin, E. H. Smith, S. J. Rosenthal, F. Sauvage, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hattori, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Q. Yu, N. Cai, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4376 RSC .
E. Gabrielsson, H. Ellis, S. Feldt, H. Tian, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. B. Cappel, S. M. Feldt, J. Schoneboom, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2015.01.068 .
H. Ellis, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, C. Perruchot, M. Jouini, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee01204j‡ These authors contributed equally.§ Current address: Laboratory for Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
Very large-scale application of photovoltaics is a viable way to meet with future energy demands. This requires low-cost solar cell technologies that do not employ rare or toxic elements. The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSC) has the potential to be one of these technologies, but stability and efficiencies still need improvement. In DSC molecular dyes are responsible for solar light absorption and charge separation takes place in electron transfer processes that are reminiscent to natural photosynthesis. In conventional DSCs a redox mediator in a liquid electrolyte is used to transfer positive charge to the counter electrode. The liquid electrolyte leads to challenges in hermetic encapsulation and long-term stability of the device. In solid-state DSC the liquid electrolyte is replaced by a solid hole molecular conductor, which gives it the advantage of easier encapsulation and interconnection. Thus far, however, solar cell efficiencies of solid-state DSC are significantly lower than those of liquid electrolyte-DSCs.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical structures of copper 2,2′-dimethyl phenanthroline (Cu(I/II)(dmp)2) (the counter ion is TFSI) and LEG4 dye. (b) Device structure of the ssDSC. (c) UV-Vis spectrum of Cu(I)(dmp)2 HTM film. (d) Cross section by SEM of a representative working electrode with copper based HTM after removal of the PEDOT-coated FTO counter electrode. (e) J–V curves of ssDSCs and DSCs employing Cu(dmp)2 HTM or redox mediator. (f) IPCE spectra of ssDSCs and DSCs employing Cu(dmp)2 HTM or redox mediator.	 


Cu(dmp)2 HTM	1010	13.8	0.59	8.2
Cu(dmp)2 EL	1035	9.4	0.62	6.0
Spiro-OMeTAD HTMa	895	9.4	0.67	5.6

 	Fig. 2  (a) PIA spectra of ssDSCs and DSCs with LEG4 employing Cu(dmp)2-based HTM or redox mediator. (b) Electron transport time as function of short-circuit current density of solar cells with Cu(I/II)(dmp)2 TFSI/Cl as HTM or as redox mediator. (c) Electron lifetime as a function of open circuit voltage.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee01204j
‡ These authors contributed equally.
§ Current address: Laboratory for Photomolecular Science, Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
