Dion–Jacobson halide perovskites for photovoltaic and photodetection applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC01061A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC01061A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6378-6394Dion–Jacobson halide perovskites for photovoltaic and photodetection applications

        
          
            Huiying 
            Fu
          
        
      
Department of Materials Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. E-mail: hyfu@fudan.edu.cn
Received 
      7th March 2021
    , Accepted 16th April 2021First published on 20th April 2021AbstractHybrid halide perovskites have progressed as eminent semiconducting materials pioneering in the domain of low-cost thin film photovoltaics. Nevertheless, the intrinsic instability of the dominant three-dimensional (3D) perovskites impedes their potential applications in industrial-scale production and commercialization. Two-dimensional (2D) perovskite structures have surfaced as an achievable resolution to this contention. In 2D perovskites, large organic cations have been introduced as spacing cations to isolate the inorganic metal halide octahedra layers and correspondingly promote the formation of quantum well superlattices. The photophysical properties of 2D perovskites can be widely tailored through the manipulation of composition, structure, and dimensionality, which provides a compelling field for researchers working in the fields of both chemistry and physics to unveil 2D perovskite materials for high-performance devices. The advancement of low-dimensional Dion–Jacobson (DJ) phase perovskites has lately attracted considerable attention in view of their appealing stability against harsh environmental conditions as well as their competitive performance in optoelectronic applications. Although the initial reports on photovoltaic solar cells (PSCs) based on DJ perovskites have exhibited comparatively poor performance, recent investigations have revealed that they have the capability to realize a high power conversion efficiency above 20%. In this review, we discuss the structural and optoelectronic characteristics of DJ perovskites, followed by a comprehensive investigation on the recent development in DJ PSCs and photodetectors. The conceivable approaches that can be deployed to expedite the advancement of DJ-based optoelectronic applications are also discussed.
1 Introduction
Substantial attention has been concentrated on organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites in view of their compelling and potentially advantageous electrical, optical, and magnetic properties that stem from these materials. In particular, the research on the production of two-dimensional (2D) layered hybrid perovskites through the incorporation of bulky alkyl or aromatic ammonium cations into their inorganic frameworks has revolutionized the field of optoelectronics.1–4 Such layered structures not only give the 2D perovskites superior stability, in contrast to their three-dimensional (3D) counterparts, but also exhibit immense possibilities for optoelectronic applications.5–10 For instance, solar cells with a high power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 22.9% have been conceived by exploiting octylammonium iodide (OAI) treated 2D/3D perovskites.11 Different from small cations (such as methylammonium (MA+), formamidinium (FA+), cesium (Cs+)) in 3D perovskites, the large bulky organic cations in 2D perovskites present a steric barrier for surface moisture adsorption, which provides an effective route to suppress moisture invasion to the 2D crystal lattice. Thereupon, it is anticipated that replacement of the small hygroscopic organic cations with large hydrophobic organic cations will promote a prolonged lifetime of the perovskites (both materials and devices) under atmospheric conditions. Thus far, 2D perovskites based on various organic ammonium salts have been successively explored, such as the (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (BA: n-butylammonium) Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) 2D perovskite,12 (PEA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (PEA: 2-phenylethylammonium) layered perovskite,5 and (PDMA)FA2Pb3I10 (PDMA: 1,4-phenylenedimethanammonium) Dion–Jacobson (DJ) 2D perovskites.13 Nevertheless, the 2D perovskites are normally not excellent candidates as light-absorbers for photovoltaic applications in view of their broad optical bandgap and limited charge-carrier transportation in the out-of-plane direction within the 2D structure. Accordingly, it is still necessary to explore the incorporation of novel potential ammonium salts into 2D perovskites to accomplish high-performance and long-term stable optoelectronic devices.
At present, research on the RP phase perovskites is relatively mature, and much effort has so far been devoted to 2D RP perovskite solar cells by advancing the crystal orientation and optoelectronic properties to boost the device efficiency, where some of these systems have shown a performance commensurate with that of their 3D counterparts.14–17 The schematic illustration of the evolution from 2D perovskite to 3D perovskite with key components is shown in Fig. 1. 2D RP perovskites have a general formula of (RNH3)2An−1MnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3,…), where RH3 represents a large aliphatic or conjugated aromatic alkylammonium spacer cation. It is verifiable that the molecular configuration and the characters of the spacer cations as well as the n values of the inorganic sheets are decisive for the efficiency and stability of 2D perovskite solar cells (PSCs). Researchers have studied the functioning mechanisms of 2D RP perovskites; they have also produced a range of RP perovskites by manipulating the cation type and investigated the influence of the cation on the behavior of PSC. Different from the 2D RP perovskites in which monovalent organic ammonium is deployed as the spacing cation, the 2D DJ perovskites with the common chemical formula of (NH3RNH3)An−1MnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3,…) have a relatively shorter distance between the neighboring inorganic slabs, owing to the formation of a monolayer of divalent cations between layers of corner-sharing lead halide octahedra ([PbI6]4+), of both the (001) and (110) orientations. The decreased interlayer distance and the resulting weakened quantum confinement effect as well as the narrowed bandgap will be favorable for charge separation and/or transport as well as light harvesting.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the evolution from 2D perovskite to 3D perovskite with key components. Reprinted with permission.2 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
As newly reported halide perovskites, the DJ phases have been developed with several known examples. Since the initial demonstration of 2D RP PSCs (with PEA+ as the spacer cation where a PCE of 4.73% was achieved) by Smith et al. in 2014,5 there have been several investigations with the intention of developing new 2D perovskites as well as tuning their film morphology, improving their crystallinity, and regulating their phase orientation through a variety of approaches, such as solvent engineering, the addition of additives, and tailoring of organic spacing cations.12,18–20 2D RP perovskites contain pairs of interdigitated organic spacers between adjacent inorganic sheets, where a van der Waals gap emerges in the bulky spacers’ bilayer construction. By contrast, there are no weak van der Waals interactions in 2D DJ perovskites due to the diammonium groups of the organic spacing layer connecting the adjacent inorganic sheets with a short interlayer distance by strong hydrogen-bonding interactions, thereby excluding the drawbacks of RP perovskites. The structural comparison between the n = 3 crystal structures of RP phases and DJ phases is shown in Fig. 2. The strong interactions between organic spacers and inorganic sheets show the potential for constructing a more rigid structure of DJ perovskites, and hence improved structural stability can be anticipated. These advantages of 2D DJ perovskites over RP perovskites makes them a promising candidate for developing 2D PSCs with high efficiency and long-term stability.
 Fig. 2  The structural comparison between n = 3 crystal structures of RP phases and DJ phases. Reprinted with permission.2 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
In this review, we discuss the progress of 2D DJ perovskites for a variety of optoelectronic applications. First, we examine the assortment of the dication spacers for the formation of 2D DJ perovskites and discuss the optoelectronic properties of 2D DJ perovskites, including their band structure, charge transport, and optical properties. We also summarize the recent achievements of deploying 2D DJ perovskites in photovoltaic devices and photodetectors. In the last section, we access the challenges and outlooks for further expanding 2D DJ perovskites to an extensive range of applications.
2 Dications for the assembly of 2D DJ perovskites
The 2D DJ perovskites possess great scope for the manipulation if their properties by adjusting the functional organic cations or increasing the perovskite layer thickness. A majority of the organic moieties incorporated in the formation of metal hybrid perovskites have been nonfunctional moieties such as alkyl chains that merely play a bifunctional role by assisting in improving the processability of the hybrids. Incorporation of functionalized organic groups within the perovskites may give the materials new and unusual properties. Examples of this can be seen in many publications.21,22
Investigations on 2D DJ perovskites have been mostly focused on using alkylammonium dications as the spacing cations, although there has also been a general trend in this field of perovskites that consists of incorporating π-conjugated systems as spacer cations.23–26 With the relatively high rigidity of the dication monolayer structures, compared with the flexible bilayer of monocations in RP perovskites, the more distorted lead halide octahedra of DJ perovskites are formed. This uncommon structural motif of intensified octahedral distortion induces the broad-band emission of perovskites, which has been observed in their photoluminescence (PL) spectra, in both the (001) and (110) orientations.27,28 However, the rigidity and size of the dications that can be incorporated within 2D perovskites are limited.25,29 Phenylene-p-diamine and a family of similar rigid conjugated aromatic diamines have been demonstrated to be capable of forming a one-dimensional network of lead iodide octahedra.30 Taking this into consideration, some conjugated systems appear to have an over-intensified rigidity, which is too extreme for the lead halide assembly to construct a 2D structure. Research reported by He et al. and Mao et al. has revealed the utilization of asymmetrically methylated N,N-dimethylethylenediamine leads to the formation of 2D perovskites, while another report presented the formation of 1D perovskites based on N,N′-dimethylethylenediamine, which has a similar diamine structure with symmetric methylation.29,31,32 The balance maintained by these materials to form 2D or 1D assemblies can be ascribed to the varied distance between the ammonium moiety and the halide plane. The alternating methyl units in the asymmetric N,N-dimethylethylenediamine could induce the distortions involved for the stabilization of the 2D perovskite structure, which is consistent with the demonstrated assumption that the closer distance of the ammonium groups to the halide plane would cause larger distortions in the Pb–X–Pb layer.33,34
3 Optoelectronic properties of 2D DJ perovskites
In the 2D halide perovskites, the organic interlayers function as insulating barriers confining the charge carriers in two dimensions, while they also perform as dielectric moderators that regulate the electrostatic forces exerted on the electron–hole pairs generated from photoexcitation. The introduction of organic spacers promotes the perovskite to form a natural multiple quantum well structure, in which the inorganic layer acts as a “well” and the organic insulating layer acts as a “barrier”. The crystal structure of layered perovskite-type quantum well materials with incorporated naphthalene together with the energy diagram of the materials are illustrated in Fig. 3.35 The quantum well width is determined by the value of n, while the quantum well barrier thickness depends on the length of the organic spacer cation and the arising spatial stereoscopic effect. On account of the large organic/inorganic dielectric contrast, the metal halide perovskite materials engender high electron/hole binding energies.
 Fig. 3  Schematics of the crystal structure of naphthalene-incorporated layered perovskite-type quantum well materials. It merges the Wannier and Frenkel pictures which are suited for the excitons in the inorganic and organic parts (a). Energy diagram and energy transfer dynamics of (CjH2jNH3PbBr4) (b). Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2008 American Physical Society. 
The strong chemical bonding between organic spacing cations and inorganic frameworks has been demonstrated to enhance the structural stability of 2D DJ perovskites.36 Additionally, the reduced distance between inorganic sheets in the DJ perovskites from the monolayer spacer cations can be commensurate with or even two times smaller than the van der Waals radius of halide atoms. This establishes a much more energetic electronic coupling between neighboring inorganic layers, which has been reflected by more efficient charge-carrier transport and larger carrier mobilities/lifetimes compared with the predominant 2D RP perovskites.37
More complicated 2D DJ perovskites with functional organic cations have been reported with interesting optoelectronic properties. It has been reported conjugated oligomers could absorb a complementary proportion of the solar spectrum to that of the inorganic composition while π-conjugated organic cations could enhance charge carrier transport in the 2D RP perovskite light absorbent.23,35,38,39 A quaterthiophene derivative, 5,5′′′-bis(aminoethyl)-2,2′:5′,2′:5′′,2′′′- quaterthiophene (AEQT), has been introduced into the 2D perovskite structure and demonstrated a strongly influence on the optical properties of the resulting perovskite.23 The quenched PL from AEQT was observed for AEQTPbX4 when the excitonic transition of the inorganic layer presented a high energy of 3.7 eV (X = Cl), which is larger than the singlet and triplet transition energies of the organic AEQT, while the offset between the energy levels of the AEQT layer and the inorganic sheets led to energy transfer and/or charge separation, denoting the formation of an inverted Type I heterojunction of AEQTPbCl4 in which the organic framework had a narrower bandgap than that of the inorganic framework, as shown in Fig. 4a. Changing from Cl to Br to I increased the energy of the valence band, and AEQTPbI4 feasibly formed a Type II heterojunction (Fig. 4b). However, to what extent the π-conjugated organic spacer cations contribute to the optical absorption and emission of 2D perovskites is still under debate.33,39 Earlier investigation also demonstrated that the alignment of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy levels of the organic and inorganic layers affected the charge-carrier transfer between them in the metal hybrid perovskites to some extent.40 Recent theoretical work has revealed that the orbitals of the organic spacer cations, especially the aromatic ones, may participate in the energy band structure of the hybrids.26
 Fig. 4  Energy diagram for (a) AEQTPbCl4 with a Type I heterojunction and (b) AEQTPbI4 with a Type II heterojunction. Reprinted with permission.23 Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society. 
A typical example of how the selection of organic spacer cations affects the optoelectronic properties of 2D DJ perovskites was reported by Mao et al.41 By employing time-resolved PL spectroscopy, the considerable difference of PL lifetimes in layered DJ (3AMP)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 and (4AMP)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4) was observed (Fig. 5), in which 3AMP was 3-(aminoethyl)piperidinium and 4AMP was 4-(aminoethyl)piperidinium. The dependence of the electron–hole recombination time scales on the aromatic diammonium cations was investigated, with longer excited-state lifetimes being found for 3AMP (∼280 ps) over the 4AMP case (sub-100 ps) regardless of the value of n at room temperature, which corresponds to better charge transport properties and much higher power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) for the 3AMP-based PSCs than the 4AMP-based device. It was mentioned that the long-lived excited state lifetime in the 3AMP-based perovskite was unintelligible because the 3AMP-based perovskite possesses a much smaller bandgap than the 4AMP-based perovskite.
 Fig. 5  Time-resolved PL decay for (3AMP)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 and (4AMP)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4). The 3AMP series showed generally longer lifetimes than the 4AMP series. Reprinted with permission.41 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Hitherto, aliphatic diammonium cations with varied lengths of alkyl chains have been widely investigated in 2D DJ perovskites and have shown exceptional optoelectronic properties. Notwithstanding, it is prevalent that the aliphatic diammoniums are electrically insulating in view of their low dielectric constants. By contrast, the aromatic spacers exhibit a larger dielectric constant compared with aliphatic spacers of a similar size, which could decrease the dielectric mismatch between the organic layer and the adjacent corner-sharing [PbI6]4− slabs and diminish the corresponding dielectric confinement in the quantum well.1,42 Kanatzidis and coworkers reported that the aromatic dication spacers based on pyridinium exhibited a smaller exciton binding energy compared with the aliphatic families on account of the increased dielectric constant, resulting in improved performance of the photovoltaic devices.43
4 Layered DJ perovskites in photovoltaic applications
By circumspectly regulating the stoichiometry of the initial precursors, layered DJ perovskites can be prepared with fixed value n, which is characterized as the number of 2D perovskite slabs (defined as the [PbI6]4− octahedral sheets sandwiched between bilayers of spacer cations). As a critical factor in regulating the optoelectrical properties of low-dimensional perovskites, the value of n influences the bandgap and the absorption in conjunction with the conductivity/mobility and the stability of the perovskites. In most reported PSCs, the value of n is above 3 for devices with an efficiency higher than 10%. It is challenging to achieve phase-pure perovskites with high n values, due to the smaller variations of thermodynamic stability in the higher-n schemes. It is worth mentioning that n = 1 represents the pure 2D structure, while 1 < n ≤ 5 is often recognized as a quasi-2D construction. Based on the phase purity, layered perovskites for applications in photovoltaics are normally divided into three divisions: (i) phase-pure layered perovskites, (ii) mixed 2D/3D perovskites, and (iii) 2D perovskite passivation layers for 3D perovskites. Up to now, spacer cations such as alkyl chain diamines, piperidinium derivatives and their counterparts, benzene dimethanammonium, and thiophene-based dications, have been most employed for DJ perovskites.
4.1 Alkyl chain diamines
To achieve high-performance 2D DJ PSCs, the rational design of bulky dication spacer compounds and device engineering are in high demand to achieve high-quality perovskite films along with crystal preferred vertical orientation. So far, aliphatic diammonium cations with different lengths of alkyl chains have been employed in 2D DJ PSCs and have shown significant photovoltaic performance. Selection of the aliphatic spacer cation with a suitable length is one of the rational approaches to manipulate the optical and electronic properties of DJ perovskites. Increasing the cation length leads to variations in the electron and hole confinement potentials in view of the structural distortion, which directly regulates the bandgaps of the related perovskites and influences the charge-transport properties. It was reported that DJ perovskites with organic ammonium spacers with different chain lengths showed different quantum well barrier thicknesses thereby different control of the orientation and quantum well distribution.44 DJ perovskites based on organic spacer cations with a short length, such as 1,3-propanediamine (PDA) and 1,4-butanediamine (BDA), possessed applicable quantum well barrier thicknesses, which exhibited exceptional orientation and more orderly quantum well distribution, granting access to a smooth bandgap transition that led to a lower defect density, longer carrier diffusion length, and higher charge mobility. By contrast, DJ perovskites based on organic spacer cations with a long length, such as 1,5-pentamethylenediamine (PeDA) and 1,6-hexamethylenediamine (HDA), showed thicker barriers, resulting in inferior orientation and multiple phases of the DJ perovskite.
Thus far, BDA has been widely investigated as the spacer cation for 2D DJ perovskites. In 2016, Zhao et al. demonstrated the initial undertaking of using BDA in the formation 2D/3D DJ perovskites.45 A moderate PCE of 9.75% was achieved for the BDA-based 2D/3D DJ PSCs. Later on, Safdari et al. reported the incorporation of BDA in 2D DJ perovskites.46 The BDA-based 2D perovskites were investigated as light absorbing materials in solar cells and a champion PCE of 1.08% was reported. Later, a study investigated by the same group revealed that using BDA as the dication or anion source mixed with lead iodide (PbI2) through different synthetic routes led to the production of 2D (BDA)PbI4 and 1D (BDA)Pb2I6.47 Crystal structures of 1D (BDA)Pb2I6 and 2D (BDA)PbI4 are shown in Fig. 6. Solar cells were fabricated based on these two materials and used as light absorbents in solar cells, with a similar PCE of 1.1% being obtained for both materials. Recently, Niu et al. demonstrated that BDA-based low-dimensional DJ PSCs could exhibit a competitive PCE and a stability comparable to those of established monoamine-based RP PSCs.48 The single-layer BDA enabled the low-dimensional perovskite films to present a high charge-carrier mobility, a low trap-states density, and a near single-crystalline phase crystal. The best-performing PSCs based on BDA showed a PCE of 17.91% with negligible hysteresis, and the PSCs also exhibited a promising stability with 84% of their initial PCE being maintained after examination under ambient conditions and with no encapsulation being applied for the devices. Another recent report by Zhao et al. demonstrated a postdeposition strategy of solvent vapor annealing (SVA) for BDA-based perovskites, with preferential vertical orientation and enhanced grain growth achieved to reduce both bulk and surface defects.49 An NREL-certified efficiency of 18.00 ± 0.30% was obtained for a PSC containing SVA-treated (BDA)(Cs0.1FA0.9)4Pb5I16. Meanwhile, excellent humidity, thermal, and operational stabilities were also realized for PSCs comprising SVA-treated BDA-based 2D perovskites.
 Fig. 6  Crystal structures of (A) solvated (BDA)Pb2I6 and (B) (BDA)PbI4 along three axes. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2017 Royal Society Chemistry. 
An approach of introducing short chain diamines to reduce the distance between the inorganic layers in 2D perovskites, thereby enhancing the charge transport between the inorganic layers, was reported by Ma et al.50 The studied diamine was PDA, showing a decreased interlayer distance of around 2 Å, which can give the adjacent layers of perovskite strong interactions, and thus improved stability was achieved. It was revealed that quantum confinement was no longer the dominating factor in the PDA-based DJ perovskites, which led to a considerable improvement of charge transport. The enhanced electric properties of the PDA-based DJ perovskites yielded a PCE of 13.0% for the resulting device. Moreover, improved environmental stability of the PDA-based perovskites was also achieved. PDA-based DJ PSCs with encapsulation could maintain over 90% of their initial efficiency upon storage for over 1000 h, and unencapsulated PSCs could retain their initial efficiency at a temperature of 70 °C for over 100 h. Another report based on PDA-based 2D perovskites, reported by Ahmad et al., showed a similar PCE value of 13.3% for the related devices but with exceptional device stability.51 Devices without encapsulation maintained over 95% efficiency upon exposure to various hash conditions including the ambient atmosphere (40–70% relative humidity [RH]) for 4000 h, damp heat (85 °C and 85% RH) for 168 h, and continuous light illumination for 3000 h. There is an example of incorporating the short chain ethane-1,2-diammonium (EDA2+) into mixed-organic-cation perovskites to achieve high-efficiency solar cells with excellent stability.52 The valence band edge (EVB/eV) of the mixed-cation perovskite films is manipulated by the incorporation of EDA2+ into the 3D MAPbI3 structure, with EVB altering successively from −5.39 eV for pristine MAPbI3 to more positive values for mixed-cation perovskites, e.g., −5.28 eV for the perovskite containing 6.4 mol% EDA2+. It was postulated that the possible cause for the observed modifications in band alignment might be a decrease in the dimensionality of the mixed-cation perovskite films, viz. the development of 2D structure. However, the XRD data did not support this hypothesis (the exclusion of the formation of 2D structures is illustrated in Fig. 7). An alternative reason for the reshaped electronic structure might be the distortion of the [PbI6]4− octahedra and the correspondingly rearranged crystal structure of the perovskite in view of the steric and coulombic interactions with EDA2+. The low concentration of EDA2+ modified the electronic configuration of MAPbI3 only slightly. However, it is a critical parameter for maintaining a high photovoltaic performance, and a PCE as high as 17.9% ± 0.4% was obtained for MAPbI3-based PSCs with 0.8 mol% EDA2+ incorporated into the perovskites.
 Fig. 7  Possible structural changes in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite upon modification with diammonium cations. Reprinted with permission.52 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
On the other hand, relatively long chain alkyl diammoniums have also been demonstrated as spacer cations to prepare 2D DJ perovskites.44–46,53 In the report by Lv et al., HDA was introduced to produce a 2D DJ perovskite capping layer in a 2D/3D perovskite stacking structure.53 The HDA-based 2D DJ perovskite with n = 1 showed a UV stability that was more remarkable than that for a 3D counterpart and a 2D RP perovskite in a 2D/3D perovskite configuration. In addition to the significant UV stability, the HDA-based 2D DJ perovskite can also function as an interfacial layer that passivates the surface defects located on the 3D perovskite, resulting in a significantly enhanced PL lifetime and the interfacial charge recombination being greatly suppressed. As a consequence, the PCE was enhanced from 19.22% for the 3D perovskite to 20.31% for the 2D/3D perovskite, while the moisture and the thermal stabilities were also simultaneously enhanced.
In a recent report, Zhao et al. demonstrated the introduction of an asymmetric alkyl diammonium, 3-(dimethylammonium)-1-propylammonium (DMAPA+), as a spacer cation to boost the efficiency and stability in 2D DJ PSCs.54 Due to the small adjacent interlayer distance of the inorganic sheets, PSCs based on 2D (DMAPA)PbI4 achieved a PCE of 3.85%, which was the champion PCE for PSCs based on n = 1 2D DJ perovskites. The methodical investigation of the crystallization kinetics of DJ perovskites with higher n values (n = 3, 4, 5) revealed that the formation and decomposition of the intermediate phase of the perovskite played a dominating role in the oriented growth of high-quality perovskite films. The rapid formation and decomposition of the intermediate phase facilitated the formation of a (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4) film with a vertical crystal domain distribution, a hierarchical phase distribution, and a low trap-state density. Correspondingly, high PCEs up to 15.16% were achieved, which was also a record value for 2D DJ PSCs with n ≤ 4. Additionally, DMAPA-based 2D DJ PSCs showed promising stability, with over 90% of their initial PCE being maintained with no encapsulation after storage at 85 °C in the ambient atmosphere for more than 1000 h.
4.2 Piperidinium derivatives and analogues
Mao et al. pioneered in the investigation of 2D DJ perovskites based on piperidinium derivatives functioning as the spacer cations.41 The studied piperidinium derivatives were 3AMP (3-(aminomethyl)piperidinium) and 4AMP (4-(aminomethyl)piperidinium). Due to the varied position of the functional moiety in the spacer cations of 3AMP and 4AMP, the as-prepared DJ perovskites exhibited different optical properties, with the 3AMP families showing smaller bandgaps than those of the 4AMP families. 3AMP-based perovskites also showed an enhanced charge-transport performance compared with the 4AMP-based perovskites. Correspondingly, the 3AMP families showed a more advanced PV performance (about 7% champion efficiency for n = 4) than the 4AMP families (about 5% champion efficiency for n = 4).
Later, Ke et al. introduced the mixed A-site cations of MA+ and FA+ into the perovskite slabs through compositional engineering, which was demonstrated as an effective strategy to promote the efficiency and stability of DJ PSCs based on 3AMP.43 It was reported that the structure of (3AMP)(MA0.75FA0.25)3Pb4I13 featured, on average, larger Pb–I–Pb angles than that of (3AMP)(MA)3Pb4I13, which led to broadened electronic bands and narrowed bandgaps. It is noteworthy that DJ perovskites with various FA fractions showed a preferred orientation in the (011) planes, which could facilitate the vertical growth of perovskites on the substrate. Therefore, minimized electrical losses and improved charge-carrier transport can be anticipated. 3AMP-based DJ mixed-cation PSC with a planar p–i–n device structure exhibited a champion PCE of 12.04%, with promising air and light stability. A recent report on mixing both the spacer cations (3AMP and 4AMP) and the perovskite A cations (MA and FA) in (3AMP)a(4AMP)1−a(FA)b(MA)1−bPb2Br7 revealed that this dual alloying greatly influenced the distortion of the inorganic framework.55 The Pb–Br–Pb angles could be affected by both a and b variables, and with the decrease of values of a and b, the angle became smaller (Fig. 8). The tuning of the bandgap obeys the rule that the larger the Pb–Br–Pb angle, the smaller the bandgap.56 This compositional engineering of organic cations (both A-site and spacer) provides a competent approach for manipulating the optical and electronic properties of DJ perovskites, and is thereby a compelling design implement for device engineering.
 Fig. 8  Top-down view of the crystal structure of the nine members of the extended solid solution (3AMP)a(4AMP)1−a(FA)b(MA)1−bPb2Br7 (a and b = 1, 0.5, or 0). Average Pb–Br–Pb angles in the organic framework of each composition are labelled. Atom symbol: orange (Br), blue (Pb), and organic cations are omitted here for clarity. Reprinted with permission.55 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
The strategy of additive-assisted deposition of 2D perovskites has been widely employed to produce high-quality 2D RP perovskite films.17,57 In a recent report by Wu et al., additive-assisted fabrication of 2D DJ perovskite films was also employed.58 With an appropriate amount of methylammonium thiocyanate (MASCN) added, the deposited (3AMP)(MA0.75FA0.25)3Pb4I13 film exhibited ordered crystallinity, preferred phase orientation, and decreased defect states. The device with the optimized inverted planar structure presented a maximum PCE of 16.25%. Meanwhile, the unencapsulated device maintained about 80% of its initial efficiency after 35 days of exposure to ambient conditions (RH = 45 ± 5%). The comparison study of stability measurement for the 2D and 3D PSCs at room temperature with humidity values of 25 ± 5% and 45 ± 5% is shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Stability measurement for the 2D and 3D PSCs at room temperature with the humidity of (a) 25 ± 5% and (b) 45 ± 5%. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
A number of 2D DJ perovskites with the incorporation of the analogues of piperidinium, pyridinium, as the spacer cations was reported by Li et al.1 The influence of diverse dications, such as the conformation and the existence of conjugated groups, on the properties of the inorganic layers in DJ perovskites by fabricating the 3AMPY- (3-(aminomethyl)pyridinium) and 3AMP-based films/devices (n = 4) through the same film deposition approach was investigated. The comparison between 3AMPY and 3AMP showed that the aromatic spacer of 3AMPY, which possessed increased molecular rigidity, reduced the interlayer spacing of the inorganic sheets, and decreased the dielectric mismatch between the inorganic layer and the organic spacer, showing the secondary but influential efficacy of the organic cations on the structure and the optoelectronic properties of the perovskite materials. It was revealed that the (3AMPY)(MA)3Pb4I13 film showed high crystallinity and better layer orientation, corresponding to enhanced charge transport and improved charge collection. Furthermore, the (3AMPY)(MA)3Pb4I13 film had the largest average PL lifetime compared with the (4AMPY)(MA)3Pb4I13 (4AMPY: 4-(aminomethyl)pyridinium)) film and the (3AMP)(MA)3Pb4I13 film, indicating the much lowered carrier recombination of the (3AMPY)(MA)3Pb4I13 film. Solar cells based on n = 4 perovskites as the light absorber of both pyridinium and piperidinium types presented excellent performances, with a champion PCE of 9.20% for (3AMPY)(MA)3Pb4I13-based devices, which was higher than both the (4AMPY)(MA)3Pb4I13- and (3AMP)(MA)3Pb4I13-based devices.
4.3 Benzene dimethanammonium
Grätzel and colleagues pioneered the investigation of 1,4-phenylenedimethanammonium (PDMA) as the spacing cation in 2D DJ perovskite with FA as the A-site cation.14 Promising efficiencies above 7% were obtained for (PDMA)(FA)2Pb3I10-based devices in a mesoporous device architecture. Moreover, it is notable that the devices showed high stability when exposed to a humid ambient atmosphere. Later, Cohen et al. promoted the efficiency of 2D DJ PSCs based on PDMA functioning as the spacer cation to a higher value of 15.6% through tailoring the value of n to 10 and mixing the A-site cations and halides.59 A beneficial adjustment of the electronic properties between the 2D perovskites and the selective contacts contributed to the low recombination rate, charge extraction, and the voltage decay. Further, a systematic study on 2D DJ perovskites based on PDMA was conducted to reveal the internal crystal structure and how the structure impacted the photophysical properties of the materials.60 It was shown that the 2D perovskites transformed continuously from the confinement structure of n = 1 to the nonconfinement mixture with n = 1 or 2, and typically became nonconfinement ones (n ≥ 3) (Fig. 10), which was attributed to the compression of the PDMA spacer by the octahedral sheets. Importantly, the charge carrier lifetime could be increased through the reduction of the internal trap density of nonconfinement 2D perovskites by adjusting the molar ratio of PDMA:MA in the mixture of precursors. The diminished quantum confinement boosted the interlayer charge transport, thereby promoting the PCE of PDMA-based DJ PSCs to a maximum value of about 11%. The J–V curves of the champion device (PDMA-6) under 100 mW cm−2 are shown in Fig. 11. Furthermore, the tighter interlayer packing of perovskites was also beneficial for enhancing the ambient stability of the related devices.
 Fig. 10  XRD patterns of (a) PMA (phenylmethylammonium) and PDMA based pure 2D perovskites, (b) PDMA based perovskite thin films with various n values. Inset showing an enlarged XRD pattern of n = 2 from 3° to 12°. (c) Optical absorption and (d) steady-state PL spectra of PDMA based perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and (b) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 of PDMA-6 based solar cell. (c) The corresponding stabilized photocurrent density over 1000 s under a bias of 0.7 V. (d) EQE profile of PDMA-6 based devices. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
4.4 Thiophene-based dications
As an essential building block and one of the most important conjugated moieties in organic semiconducting materials, the thiophene unit has been widely explored in 2D RP DSCs and distinctive photovoltaic performances have been achieved.17,61,62 The first example of a 2D DJ perovskite bearing a thiophene derivative as the organic spacer was demonstrated by Lu et al.63 The high-quality 2D DJ perovskite film based on (ThDMA)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 5) (ThDMA: 2,5-thiophenedimethylammonium) was deposited by a DMSO-assisted film-fabrication approach. The strong coordination of DMSO played a critical role in inducing the crystal growth and orientation of the 2D DJ perovskite phases, which facilitates enlarging of the grain size, a decrease of the trap-state density, and more efficient charge-carrier transportation compared with the 2D DJ perovskite film prepared without DMSO (Fig. 12). A maximum PCE of 15.75% was obtained for the optimized solar cell. Excellent device stability was also observed for 2D DJ PSCs based on ThDMA, with 95% of the initial PCE sustained for the unencapsulated devices after storage in nitrogen for 1655 h.
 Fig. 12  SEM top-view of the 2D DJ perovskite films based on ThDMA. Control sample: DJ perovskite film prepared with DMF as the solvent. Target sample: DJ perovskite film prepared with the optimized DMF/DMSO ratio (9:1, v/v). Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
4.5 Lead-free DJ perovskites
The potential toxic impact of Pb on the environment and public health is one of the hurdles that hinder the development of Pb-based perovskites. One research domain in the halide perovskite area is evaluating Pb substitutes to establish lead-free halide perovskites. Among lead-free perovskites, tin (Sn)-based perovskites possess competitive optoelectronic properties, such as optimal optical bandgaps and high charge-carrier mobilities.64,65 The antecedent example of DJ Sn-based halide perovskites for photovoltaic applications was demonstrated by Chen et al.66 The (4AMP)(FA)3Sn4I13 perovskite showed impressive absorption features, with the absorption edge at 860 nm. An impressive carrier lifetime as large as 18.57 ns was observed for (4AMP)(FA)3Sn4I13, which was considerably longer than the values reported for RP Sn-based perovskites. An intermediate PCE of 4.22% was achieved for PSCs based on (4AMP)(FA)3Sn4I13 without hole-transporting in a mesoscopic structure. Most recently, the same group reported that the incorporation of an optimized amount of 4AMP into FASnI3 thin films promoted the performance of the resulting devices to a higher level.67 It was revealed that with an optimized amount of 4AMP in the thin films the predisposition toward the formation of low-dimensional perovskite phases had diminished. The authors proposed that using the optimum amount of 4AMP (15 mol%) led to an insufficient concentration of 4AMP for forming considerable amounts of unsuitable and unrestrained low-dimensional DJ phases. However, the employed 4AMP provided enough affinity to cover the grain surfaces and grain boundaries of FASnI3, resulting in near fully covered functionalization, as shown in Fig. 13. The obtained thin films showed improved stability against oxygen and moisture as well as decreased nonradiative recombination of photocarriers, indicating the suppressed generation of Sn-defects. A champion PCE of 10.9% was reported for the PSC based on augmented 4AMP-functionalization applied for FASnI3 perovskite thin films. Meanwhile, the PSC showed excellent operational stability with 77% of the initial PCE being maintained after 500 h exposure to continuous 1 sun illumination.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the optimum 4AMP functionalization of grain surfaces (external) and grain boundaries (internal) in FASnI3 perovskite polycrystalline thin film (4AMP-15), together with occasional low-dimensional DJ nanoplatelet second phase. Not to scale. Reprinted with permission.67 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
In addition to 4AMP, alkyl chain dications BEA (BDA) and HDA have also been introduced into the perovskite structure for the formation of 2D lead-free DJ perovskites.68,69 The anti-solvent method was employed for fabrication of the (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 thin film, and the obtained perovskite showed a compact morphology and stable structure that suppressed the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+, and which showed the tendency to promote a charge-carrier transport of (BEA)FA2Sb3I10 comparable to that of 3D FASnI3.68 PSCs based on (BEA)FA2Sb3I10 as the light absorber exhibited a champion PCE of 6.43% with negligible hysteresis (Fig. 14c). Significant stability of the devices was observed, with above 90% of their initial PCE being sustained after 1000 h without encapsulation under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 14e). A comparison of device stabilities revealed the exceptional long-term stability of 2D (BEA)FA2Sb3I10 PSCs compared with 3D FASnI3 (Fig. 14e and f). Recently, Ma et al. reported the introduction of HDA into FASnI3 to form 2D lead-free DJ perovskites.69 The competitive device performance achieved was ascribed to the high-quality perovskite films with improved uniformity and coverage, large crystallinity domain, and eliminated pinholes along with increased radiative recombination and a lengthened carrier lifetime. A champion PCE of 7.6% was achieved for PSCs based on HAD-treated FASnI3 films and an excellent long-term stability of 80% of the initial efficiency was maintained after 550 h in a glovebox under a nitrogen environment for an unencapsulated device.
 Fig. 14  (a) Device structure of (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 and FASnI3 perovskite solar cells. (b) Current–density–voltage characteristics under one-sun simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination of the champion-efficiency (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 and FASnI3 devices. (c) J–V curves of the (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 device measured under opposite scan direction. (d) Histogram of PCEs on 30 measured devices based on (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 and FASnI3 perovskite, fitted with Gaussian distribution. (e) Stability of devices stored in a glovebox without encapsulation. (f) Stability of devices under ambient atmosphere without encapsulation. Reprinted with permission.68 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
The photovoltaic parameters and stability performance for both the lead and lead-free PSCs are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 The bandgaps, photovoltaic parameters and device stability performance for both lead and lead-free DJ perovskites




Dication-metal
Number of inorganic slabs

E
g (eV)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF
PCE (%)
Stability
Ref.




BDA-Pb
—
—
1.10 ± 0.01
12.10 ± 2.38
0.72 ± 0.04
9.75 ± 2.22
—

45





1
2.37
0.870
2.894
0.430
1.082
—

46



1
2.37
0.925
2.73
0.45
1.1
—

47



—
—
1.09
22.25
0.7365
17.91
Retaining 84% of original PCE after 1182 h in ambient air without encapsulation

48



5
—
1.1386 ± 0.0049
21.22 ± 0.21
0.7451 ± 0.008
18.00 ± 0.30
Retaining almost 100% of original PCE after 800 h under 80% humidity without encapsulation

49



PDA-Pb
4
1.63
0.97
18.0
74.3
13.0
Maintaining of initial efficiency at 70 °C for over 100 h without encapsulation

50



4
1.63
0.98
19.5
0.69
13.3
Retaining more than 95% of initial PCE upon exposure to ambient air, damp heat, and continuous light illumination

51



EDA-Pb
—
—
1.05 ± 0.02
22.6 ± 0.3
0.76 ± 0.01
17.9 ± 0.4
Retaining 75% of initial performance after 72 h of continuous operation at 50% relative humidity and 50 °C under 1 sun illumination

52



HDA-Pb
—
—
1.10
22.80
0.81
20.31
Maintaining 80% of initial PCE after 60 days of 55–75% relative humidity and 25–40 °C.

53



DMAPA-Pb
1
2.2
0.95
8.59
0.46
3.85
—

54



4
—
1.05
21.78
0.64
15.16
Maintaining over 90% of initial PCE after storage at 85 °C in ambient atmosphere for more than 1000 h


3AMP-Pb
4
1.87
1.06
10.17
0.676
7.32
—

41



Mixture (3AMP and 4AMP)-Pb
4
1.48
1.09
13.69
0.8104
12.04
Retaining a slightly higher PCE than the initial PCE after 2760 h storage in the glovebox in the dark

43



3AMP-Pb
4
—
1.19
17.91
0.76
16.25
Unsealed device maintained around 80% of initial PCE after 35 days of exposure to air

58



3AMPY-Pb
4
1.87
1.08
14.34
0.5958
9.20
—

1



PDMA-Pb
3
1.59
0.844
11.49
0.72
7.0
Maintaining 85% of initial PCE after 60 days at ambient air with relative humidity of 30–50%

13



10
—
1.02
21.5
0.71
15.6
The efficiency dropped to 80% of initial PCE after 84 h in the dark in ambient air with 20–50% humidity

59



6
—
1.08
20.90
0.48
10.86
—

60



ThDMA-Pb
5
1.58
1.07
19.55
75.46
15.75
95% of initial PCE sustained for the unencapsulated device after storage in N2 for 1655 h

63



4AMP-Sn
4
1.47
0.64
14.90
0.443
4.22
9% decay of initial PCE observed after device exposure to 1 sun illumination in N2 at 45 °C for 100 h

66



—
—
0.69
21.15
0.74
10.86
77% retention of initial PCE after 500 h under continuous 1 sun illumination

67



BDA-Sn
3
1.47
0.62
18.85
0.55
6.43
Above 90% of initial PCE sustained after 1000 h without encapsulation under N2 atmosphere

68



HDA
—
—
0.514
21.46
68.87
7.6
Retaining 80% of initial efficiency after over 550 h in a glovebox with a N2 environment

69





5 2D DJ perovskites in photodetection applications
Generally, both the 2D halide perovskites of RP phases and DJ phases are applicable as the active materials employed in photodetection applications on account of their distinct optical bandgaps, small exciton binding energy, high carrier mobility, and large absorption coefficient.70–74 For instance, photodetectors with a tunable photoresponse and short response time (milliseconds) have been reported based on (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3) perovskites.75 Another important feature is the flexibility of the 2D layered structures, which has been demonstrated to give the resulting photodetectors new functionalities. A self-powered photodetector was reported by Liu et al. by using ferroelectric (EA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10 (EA: ethylammonium).76 It was revealed that the strong internal inversion symmetry breaking in (EA)2(MA)2Pb3Br10 led to a high built-in electric field inside the ferroelectric devices, and thereby electrically tunable self-powered photoactive performance was enabled.
Compared with RP phases, demonstrations of DJ-type perovskites for photodetection applications remain limited. The typical shortening of the interlayer distance of DJ phase perovskites could remarkably improve the out-of-plane electron transport, which may be constructive for photodetection technologies. Fu et al. reported the incorporation of 2mept (2-methyl-1,5-diaminopentane) as the spacer cation for the formation of 2D DJ (2meptH2)(MA)Pb2I7 perovskites.77 (2meptH2)(MA)Pb2I7 showed an impressive photoresponse with a remarkably high photoresponsivity (13 A W−1 under a bias of 10 V) and a considerable switching ratio (>103), which indicates that (2meptH2)(MA)Pb2I7 can function as a promising candidate for high-efficiency photodetection applications. DJ perovskites based on EDA as the spacer cation were also investigated in photodetection applications.78 When (EDA)(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskites were employed in photodetectors, a champion photoresponsivity of 125 mA W−1 under 532 nm irradiation was obtained. A feature worth noting of the EDA-based DJ perovskites films is their great mechanical flexibility, due to which the photocurrent was observed to increase after bending the perovskite films to the radius of 2 mm and 10000 bending cycles on account of the unique binding nature of the perovskites (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  (a) Dependence of the normalized photocurrent of the bending curvature of flexible devices. (b) Dependence of the normalized photocurrent of the bending cycles of all flexible devices. The inset shows the optical image of the measurement setup under the bending test. (c) Optical image of the typical RPP film using organic bilayer as the spacer cation under mechanical bending. Schematic of the perovskite crystal structure is illustrated on the film with the potential failure plane depicted along the organic bilayer sandwiched between the two metal halide octahedral layers. (d) Optical image of the EDA4 sample (DJP) using a single EDA layer as the spacer cation under mechanical bending. Schematic of the perovskite crystal structure is also illustrated on the film, where the more intact structure would make the film have better flexibility as compared to the on depicted in panel (c). Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
One of the research themes in the advancement of photodetection based on perovskites is preparing heterostructures based on single-crystalline 2D/3D perovskite, which show macroscopic dimensions, distinct interfaces, and a highly crystalline phase.79,80 Most recently, Zhang et al. took the initial step in producing centimeter-sized single-crystalline 2D/3D perovskite heterostructure (4-AMP)(MA)2Pb3Br10/MAPbBr3 that presented a well-defined interface and highly crystalline characteristics, which facilitated the formation of a built-in electric field, with noticeable current rectification and a distinct photovoltaic response in the heterostructure being observed (Fig. 16).81 Incorporation of these high-quality heterostructure crystals into self-powered photodetectors presented a sterling performance, including a large on/off switching ratio (∼105), high detectivity (∼1012), and a fast response time (600/600 μs), indicating the likely possibility of introducing the 2D/3D perovskite heterostructure into practical photodetection applications.
 Fig. 16  (a) Pictures of the as-grown heterostructure from the top and front. (b) Surface morphology of the heterostructure by SEM. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
The structural anisotropy of 2D materials promoted application of the materials in polarization-sensitive photodetection.82–87 The class of 2D layered hybrid perovskite ferroelectrics have also been examined for research into polarization-sensitive photodetection.88 More recently, a novel member of 2D DJ perovskite family, namely (HDA)CsPb2Br7, was developed to study its potential optical absorption anisotropy and polarized-light detection.89 The anisotropy characteristics of (HDA)CsPb2Br7 were demonstrated by its crystal structure, electric conductivity, and optical absorption properties. (HDA)CsPb2Br7 possesses a natural anisotropy of optical absorption, with the absorption coefficient along the b-axis being significantly smaller than that of the a- and c-axes (Fig. 17a). Photodetectors based on the (HDA)CsPb2Br7 crystal showed excellent detecting behavior towards polarized light, including high detectivity up to 1.5 × 109 Jones, a large dichroism ratio (Icph/Ibph ≈ 1.6) and a fast response rate of 200 μs. This research identifies an imperative supplement for the conventional 2D polarization-sensitive materials, as well as drawing attention to a unique research aspect of 2D DJ perovskites for polarized-light detection techniques.
 Fig. 17  (a) Anisotropy of absorbance properties for (HDA)CsPb2Br7 along different crystallographic axes of (HDA)CsPb2Br7. (b) Polarization dependence of the angle-resolved photocurrent under incident light. At the 0° polarization angle, electric field induced by polarized-light is parallel to the direction of its b-axis. Reprinted with permission.89 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
6 Conclusion and future perspectives
Since the pioneering demonstration of the 2D DJ perovskite absorber in solar cells in 2018, the champion efficiency of 2D DJ PSCs has been promoted to over 20% so far, which is comparable to that of 2D RP PSCs. This identifies the significant promise of incorporating 2D or 2D/3D DJ perovskites into photovoltaic applications. Additionally, 2D DJ perovskites also show tremendous potential in photodetection applications. These remarkable accomplishments stem from the progression in the synthetic-chemistry approaches of 2D DJ perovskites and the construction approaches of related solar cells, along with advancements in the scientific understanding of the fundamental properties of the materials. To further propel the performance of 2D DJ perovskites in optoelectronic applications, more endeavors are required to concentrate on fine-tuning of the optoelectronic properties of DJ perovskites by materials design, which can be achieved by the appropriate selection of organic spacer cations, the selection of metal cations, A-site cations, and halides, and alteration of the perovskite sheet thickness. On the other hand, the systematic and decisive theories for the construction of 2D perovskites with well-controlled structures have not been well established yet. The crystal growth control of DJ perovskites through a benign and facile process to attain the preferred orientation of crystals is also of predominant significance since the charge-transport properties of DJ perovskites are highly associated with the orientation of the inorganic sheets within the perovskite films. The demonstrated successful synthetic strategies of inducing the orientation of 2D lattice as well as regulating the packing of crystals in DJ perovskites include A-site cation alloying, the use of additives, and implementing specific solvents in the precursor solution. It is also essential to further understand the fundamental physical and chemical properties of 2D DJ perovskites. Up to now, the understanding of the features of the excitonic properties of charge carriers and conversion of excitons to free charge carriers in 2D DJ perovskites is extremely limited. A systematic theoretical study on the improved long-term stability of PSCs based on 2D DJ perovskites is urgently required as well. Other than PSCs and photodetectors, there are numerous other potential optoelectronic applications such as light-emitting diodes, transistors, and lasers yet to be developed with the incorporation of 2D DJ perovskites. Based on the charge-transport features along both the out-of-plane and in-plane directions for 2D perovskites being very different, methodical investigation in such area is needed for advancing research into various optoelectronic applications based on 2D DJ perovskites.
The unique combination of divalent ammonium cations with perovskite slabs through chemical bonding in DJ perovskites produces DJ perovskites with competitive advantages such as excellent stability and electrical properties. Given the wide varieties of spacer cations with different sizes and functional groups, establishing 2D DJ perovskites with high performance deserves further investigation and presents wide scope for chemical engineering. However, the achievability of integrating diamine spacer cations in DJ perovskites for optoelectronic applications is limited, and only four categories of spacer cations have been reported. On the synthetic-chemistry front, the fluorination of aromatic spacer cations to boost charge transport in 2D RP perovskites appears to be reassuring, and detailed examination has revealed the improved photovoltaic performance of solar cells based on organic cations upon fluorination.90–94 It is expected that advancement in the synthetic chemistry of fluorinating organic dication spacers for 2D DJ perovskites will provide a leap forward for research into low-dimensional perovskites. Integrating dication spacers with a π-conjugated functional moiety into DJ perovskites has been demonstrated as an efficacious approach to produce DJ perovskites with exceptional electrical and optical properties. Since the quantum-well barrier thickness plays an imperative role in charge transport in the DJ perovskite layer, the introduction of novel short-length dications with an aromatic unit for DJ perovskites presents the possibility that the resulting DJ perovskites will exhibit a small exciton binding energy because the high dielectric constant of the aromatic cation will lead to a small dielectric confinement effect. This is expected to improve the performance of the related photovoltaic devices because of the improved charge separation and transport. The compositional engineering of mixed A-site cations (even triple cations) in the perovskite sheet, which has been successfully developed for 3D and 2D RP perovskites with a highly improved photovoltaic performance,95–98 has also been deployed in 2D DJ perovskites with improved efficiency and stability achieved for DJ PSCs. The synthetic strategy of mixed bulky dications in 2D DJ perovskites has also been reported. Combined with A-site cation alloying, the structural features and optoelectronic properties of the resulting perovskites were fine-tuned, indicating that dual alloying provides a powerful synthetic method for property optimization and promoting the performance of the devices. It is noteworthy that the combination of as-discussed synthetic approaches toward effective property manipulation of the 2D DJ perovskites is anticipated to improve the optoelectronic properties and the performance of the corresponding optoelectronic applications.
The main reason for the inferior performance of 2D DJ perovskites, compared with 3D perovskites, is the hindered charge transport between the perovskite slabs by the insulating spacer cation components. Phase engineering of constructing a 2D/3D perovskite hybrid structure has emerged as a solution to this challenge, which combines the advantages of both components and shows potential in fabricating 2D/3D solar cells based on DJ perovskites with both improved stability and efficiency. However, reports on 2D/3D DJ perovskites are limited. Including 2D/3D RP perovskites in solar cells has given high stability and excellent efficiency, indicating that more efforts towards the optimization of DJ perovskites through preparing the 2D/3D structure will pave the way for achieving considerable advancement in device applications.
Extensive discussions have been carried out to suggest the prominence of the spacer cations and metal halide sheets on the electronic structures of 2D RP perovskites. Lessons learned from research on RP perovskites are that the configuration of the spacer cations regulates the electronic structure of the layered perovskites through the strain on the inorganic structure, which is determined by how the cation fits in the interstitial space between the inorganic octahedra, and the dielectric constant of the spacer cations regulates the dielectric confinement therefore tuning the electronic bandgap and exciton binding energy of 2D perovskites, as mentioned above in the discussion on DJ perovskites. The halide anions and metal substitution in the inorganic sheets can regulate the electronic structures of 2D perovskites as well. Thus far, such research on DJ perovskites is still in its infancy. It has been demonstrated for RP perovskites and 3D perovskites that replacing iodide with bromide or chloride leads to an increase in the bandgap, as it may do in 2D DJ perovskites. Mixed halide systems have been developed to further modify the optoelectronic properties of RP perovskites,99 which presents the possibility of fine-tuning the optoelectronic properties of DJ perovskites through mixed halides. Metal substitutions have also been employed to further manipulate the properties of 2D perovskites. Pb possesses a smaller Pauling electronegativity than Sn, so the Pb electronic states exhibit a higher band structure.100 Sn-Based 2D perovskites have been revealed to have smaller bandgaps than those of Pb-based 2D perovskites, which contain the same organic cation.101
The use of organometal halide perovskites in optoelectronic applications have been under intense study relatively recently. 2D (quasi-2D or 2D/3D) RP and DJ perovskites have also been universally used as light-active materials for photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and photodetection. It has been discussed in detail that future research into 2D DJ perovskites includes both the intensification of material design and device fabrication for photovoltaic devices and photodetectors and a thorough fundamental understanding of the physical and photophysical characteristics of DJ perovskites, which conceivably paves the way for other applications in the field of optoelectronics.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares no competing financial interests.
References
X. T. Li, W. J. Ke, B. Traoré, P. J. Guo, I. Hadar, M. Kepenekian, J. Even, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, R. D. Schaller and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12880–12890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1171–1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. P. Lu, J. H. Tong, J. J. Berry, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1154–1186 RSC .
J. Wang, J. C. Dong, F. F. Lu, C. L. Sun, Q. C. Zhang and N. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23563–23576 RSC .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, M. Saski, P. Yadav, D. Q. Bi, N. Pellet, J. Lewinski, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3345–3351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Veldhuis, P. P. Boix, N. Yantara, M. J. Li, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Adv. Mater., 2018, 28, 6804–6834 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chen and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605448 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Raghavan, T.-P. Chen, S.-S. Li, W.-L. Chen, C.-Y. Lo, Y.-M. Liao, G. Haider, C.-C. Lin, C.-C. Chen, R. Sankar, Y.-M. Chang, F.-C. Chou and C.-W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3221–3228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, S.-U. Lee, D. Y. Lee, M. J. Paik, H. Na, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902740 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. V. Millic, A. Umadisingu, J.-Y. Seo, J.-H. Im, H.-S. Kim, Y. H. Liu, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 150–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhou, Y. S. Shen, L. Li, S. Q. Tan, N. Liu, G. H. J. Zheng, Q. Chen and H. P. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 459–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. D. Ren, B. Liu, R. Munir, X. J. Zhu, D. Yang, J. B. Li, Y. C. Liu, D.-M. Smilgies, R. P. Li, Z. Yang, T. Q. Niu, X. L. Wang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Z. F. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2095–2102 RSC .
A. H. Proppe, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. R. Tan, O. Voznyy, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2890–2896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Lai, B. Kan, T. T. Liu, N. Zheng, Z. Q. Xie, T. Zhou, X. J. Wan, X. D. Zhang, Y. S. Liu and Y. S. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11639–11646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, Y. H. Lee, T. Lyu, J. H. Yoo, T. Park and J. H. Oh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18173–18182 RSC .
X. Q. Zhang, G. Wu, W. F. Fu, M. C. Qin, W. T. Yang, J. L. Yan, Z. Q. Zhang, X. H. Lu and H. Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702498 CrossRef .
H. Y. Zheng, G. Z. Liu, L. Z. Zhu, J. J. Ye, X. H. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat, X. Pan and S. Y. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800051 CrossRef .
J. L. Hua, Z. Li, J. W. Y. Lam, H. P. Xu, J. Z. Sun, Y. P. Dong, Y. Q. Dong, A. J. Qin, W. Z. Yuan, H. Z. Chen, M. Wang and B. Z. Tang, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8127–8130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Li, C. K. Lin, G. L. Zheng, Z. Y. Cheng, H. You, W. D. Wang and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3463–3469 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, K. Chondroudis and C. R. Kagan, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 6246–6256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Zhu, N. Mercier, P. Frère, P. Blanchard, J. Roncali, M. Allain, C. Pasquier and A. Riou, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 5330–5339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dobrzycki and K. Woźniak, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 577–589 RSC .
M. P. Hautzinger, J. Dai, Y. J. Ji, Y. P. Fu, J. Chen, I. A. Guzei, J. C. Wright, Y. Y. Li and S. Jin, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 14991–14998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Dohner, E. T. Hoke and H. I. Karunadasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1718–1721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yangui, D. Garrot, J. S. Lauret, A. Lusson, G. Bouchez, E. Deleporte, S. Pillet, E. E. Bendeif, M. Castro, S. Triki, Y. Abid and K. Boukheddaden, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23638–23647 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. He, M. Worku, L. J. Xu, C. K. Zhou, H. R. Lin, A. J. Robb, H. Hanson, Y. Xin and B. W. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1159–1168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-E. Wang, M.-S. Wang, X.-M. Jiang, Z.-F. Liu, R.-G. Lin, L.-Z. Cai, G.-C. Guo and J.-S. Huang, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 1957–1961 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Mao, Y. L. Wu, C. C. Stoumpos, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5210–5215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, C. K. Zhou, Y. Tian, Y. Shu, J. Messier, J. C. Wang, L. J. van de Burgt, K. Kountouriotis, Y. Xin, E. Holt, K. Schanze, R. Clark, T. Siegrist and B. W. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14051 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Z. Du, Q. Tu, X. Zhang, Q. W. Han, J. Liu, S. Zauscher and D. B. Mitzi, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 9291–9302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ema, M. Inomata, Y. Kato, H. Kunugita and M. Era, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 257401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Li, J. Hoffman, W. J. Ke, M. Chen, H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, A. D. Mohite, M. Kepenekian, C. Katan, J. Evan, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12226–12238 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Straus and C. R. Kagan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1434–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Passarelli, D. J. Fairfield, N. A. Sather, M. P. Hendricks, H. Sai, C. L. Stern and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7313–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Leveillee, C. Katan, L. J. Zhou, A. D. Mohite, J. Even, S. Tretiak, A. Schleife and A. J. Neukirch, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 105406 CrossRef CAS .
M. Braun, W. Tuffentsammer, H. Wachtel and H. C. Wolf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 307, 373–378 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Mao, W. J. Ke, L. Pedesseau, Y. L. Wu, C. Katan, J. Even, M. R. Wasielewski, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3775–3783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hong, T. Ishihara and A. V. Nurmikko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 6961–6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Ke, L. L. Mao, C. C. Stoumpos, J. Hoffman, I. Spanopoulos, A. D. Mohite and M. C. Kanatzidis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803384 CrossRef .
Y. T. Zheng, T. T. Niu, J. Qiu, L. F. Chao, B. X. Li, Y. G. Yang, Q. Li, C. Q. Lin, X. Y. Gao, C. F. Zhang, Y. D. Xia, Y. H. Chen and W. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900090 CrossRef .
T. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
M. Safdari, P. H. Svensson, M. T. Hoang, I. Oh, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15638–15646 RSC .
M. Safdari, D. Phuyal, B. Philippe, P. H. Svensson, S. M. Butorin, K. O. Kvashnina, H. Rensmo, L. Kloo and J. M. Gardner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11730–11738 RSC .
T. T. Niu, H. Ren, B. Wu, Y. D. Xia, X. J. Xie, Y. G. Yang, X. Y. Gao, Y. H. Chen and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2349–2356 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Zhao, T. R. Liu, A. B. Kaplan, C. Yao and Y.-L. Loo, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8880–8889 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Ma, D. Shen, T.-W. Ng, M.-F. Lo and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800710 CrossRef .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. W. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. C. Wang, X. L. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Lu, L. C. Jiang, W. Li, F. Li, N. K. Pai, A. D. Scully, C.-M. Tsai, U. Bach, A. N. Simonov, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700444 CrossRef .
Y. P. Lv, H. R. Ma, Y. F. Yin, Q. S. Dong, W. D. Zhao, S. Y. Jin and Y. T. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10283–10290 RSC .
W. D. Zhao, Q. S. Dong, J. W. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Chen, C. Y. Zhao, M. Y. Hu, S. Y. Jin, N. P. Padture and Y. T. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9919–9926 RSC .
L. L. Mao, P. J. Guo, M. Kepenekian, I. Spanopoulos, Y. H. He, C. Katan, J. Even, R. D. Schaller, R. Seshadri, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8342–8351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Li, N. Liu, K. Meng, Z. Liu, Y. D. Hu, Q. F. Xu, X. Wang, S. D. Li, L. Cheng and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5237–5245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Wu, X. M. Lian, S. X. Tian, Y. Z. Zhang, M. C. Qin, Y. Y. Zhang, F. Y. Wang, X. H. Lu, G. Wu and H. Z. Chen, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000087 CrossRef CAS .
B.-E. Cohen, Y. M. Li, Q. B. Meng and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2588–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yu, Y. J. Yan, M. Abdellah, T. Pullerits, K. B. Zheng and Z. Q. Liang, Small, 2019, 15, 1905081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Yan, S. Yu, A. Honarfar, T. Pullerits, K. B. Zheng and Z. Q. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900548 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qin, H. J. Zhong, J. J. Intemann, S. F. Leng, M. H. Cui, C. C. Qin, M. Xiong, F. Liu, A. K.-Y. Jen and K. Yao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904050 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lu, G. W. Lv, Z. Y. Xu, Y. X. Dong, X. F. Ji and Y. S. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11114–11122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. W.-G. Diau, E. Jokar and M. Rameez, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1930–1937 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Zhao, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Tabachnyk, H. Glass, V. S. Kamboj, W. Y. Nie, A. J. Pearson, Y. Puttisong, K. C. Godel, H. E. Beere, D. A. Ritchie, A. D. Mohite, S. E. Dutton, R. H. Friend and A. Sadhanala, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604744 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, M. Y. Hu, Z. H. Dai, Y. Hu, Y. G. Rong, H. W. Han, X. C. Zeng, Y. Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 276–277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Q. S. Dong, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. H. Liu, Z. H. Dai, A. D. Carl, B. Bahrami, A. H. Chowdhury, R. L. Grimm, Y. T. Shi, Q. Q. Qiao, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2223–2230 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Li, X. L. Liu, Y. Q. Zhang, C. Liang, G. S. Chen, F. Y. Li, M. Su, G. C. Xing, X. T. Tao and Y. L. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6909–6914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, J. W. Chen, M. H. Wang, X. Xu, J. Qian, Y. Lu, W. Z. Zhang, P. F. Xia, M. C. Qin, M. J. Zhu, L. Q. Zhang, S. F. Chen, X. H. Lu and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 16289–16299 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Li, T. Y. Luo, S. F. Zhang, Z. J. Sun, X. He, W. F. Zhang and H. X. Chang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2021, 4, 46–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Li, J. Wang, J. Q. Ma, H. Z. Shen, L. Li, X. F. Duan and D. H. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 806 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. He, Y. G. Wang, K. Li, X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. J. Yang, Q. Liao, T. Y. Zhai, J. N. Yao and H. B. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15905–15912 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Y. Wu, X. T. Liu, S. G. Han, Y. B. Li, T. Yang, Y. Ma, M. C. Hong, J. H. Luo and Z. H. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1901049 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, I. Abdelwahab, K. Leng, K. P. Loh and W. Ji, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Zhou, Y. L. Chu and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25660–25665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Liu, S. S. Wang, P. Q. Long, L. N. Li, Y. Peng, Z. Y. Xu, S. G. Han, Z. H. Sun, M. C. Hong and J. H. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14504–14508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Fu, J. R. Yuan, S. C. Wu, Y. P. Yao, X. Y. Zhang and X.-M. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1394–1399 RSC .
Z. X. Lai, R. T. Dong, Q. Zhu, Y. Meng, F. Wang, F. Z. Li, X. M. Bu, X. L. Kang, H. Zhang, Q. Quan, W. Wang, F. Wang, S. P. Yip and J. C. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 39567–39577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Loi, J. P. Cao, X. Y. Guo, C.-K. Liu, N. X. Wang, J. J. Song, G. Q. Tang, Y. Zhu and F. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hwang and J.-S. Lee, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801356 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhang, C. M. Ji, X. T. Liu, S. S. Wang, L. N. Li, Y. Peng, Y. P. Yao, M. C. Hong and J. H. Luo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2000311 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Long, A. Y. Gao, P. Wang, H. Xia, C. Ott, C. Pan, Y. J. Fu, E. F. Liu, X. S. Chen, W. Lu, T. Nilges, J. B. Xu, X. M. Wang, W. D. Hu and F. Miao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700589 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno and F. Koppens, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 182–194 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Yuan, X. G. Liu, F. Afshinmanesh, W. Li, G. Xu, J. Sun, B. Lian, A. G. Curto, G. J. Ye, Y. Hikita, Z. X. Shen, S.-C. Zhang, X. H. Chen, M. Brongersma, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 707–713 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Liu, S. J. Zheng, X. X. He, A. Chaturvedi, J. F. He, W. L. Chow, T. R. Mion, X. L. Wang, J. D. Zhou, Q. D. Fu, H. J. Fan, B. K. Tay, L. Song, R.-H. He, C. Kloc, P. M. Ajayan and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1169–1177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Yang, S.-C. Liu, Y. Wang, M. S. Long, C.-M. Dai, S. Y. Chen, B. Zhang, Z. Sun, Z. Y. Sun, C. G. Hu, S. S. Zhang, L. M. Tong, G. M. Zhang, D.-J. Xue and J.-S. Hu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801311 CrossRef .
L. Li, P. L. Gong, D. P. Sheng, S. Wang, W. K. Wang, X. D. Zhu, X. Q. Shi, F. K. Wang, W. Han, S. J. Yang, K. L. Liu, H. Q. Li and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804541 CrossRef PubMed .
L. N. Li, X. T. Liu, Y. B. Li, Z. Y. Xu, Z. Y. Wu, S. G. Han, K. W. Tao, M. C. Hong, J. H. Luo and Z. H. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, Y. B. Li, S. G. Han, Z. Y. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Y. Zhang, X. T. Liu, B. Teng, J. H. Luo and Z. H. Sun, Small, 2020, 16, 1907020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, D. H. Kim, H. P. Lu, J.-S. Park, B. W. Larson, J. Hu, L. G. Gao, C. X. Xiao, O. G. Reid, X. H. Chen, Q. Zhao, P. F. Ndione, J. J. Berry, W. You, A. Walsh, M. C. Beard and K. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5972–5979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Cho, Y. Zhang, S. Orlandi, M. Cavazzini, I. Zimmermann, A. Lesch, N. Tabet, G. Pozzi, G. Grancini and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5467–5474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-T. Sha, Y.-A. Xiong, Q. Pan, X.-G. Chen, X.-J. Song, J. Tao, S.-R. Miao, Z.-Y. Jing, Z.-J. Feng, Y.-M. You and R.-G. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901843 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Ye, J. H. Tong, J. Hu, C. X. Xiao, H. P. Hu, S. P. Dunfield, D. H. Kim, X. H. Chen, B. W. Larson, J. Hao, K. Wang, Q. Zhao, Z. Chen, H. M. Hu, W. You, J. J. Berry, F. Zhang and K. Zhu, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000082 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, I. W. H. Oswald, H. M. Hu, S. J. Stuard, M. M. Nahid, L. Yan, Z. Chen, H. Ade, J. R. Neilson and W. You, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gratia, G. Grancini, J.-N. Audinot, X. Jeanbourquin, E. Mosconi, I. Zimmermann, D. Dowsett, Y. H. Lee, M. Grätzel, F. De Angelis, K. Sivula, T. Wirtz and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15821–15824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. K. Ono, E. J. Juarez-Perez and Y. B. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30197–30246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. Gao, F. Zhang, X. H. Chen, C. X. Xiao, B. W. Larson, S. P. Dunfield, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11737–11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lanty, K. Jemli, Y. Wei, J. Leymarie, J. Even, J.-S. Lauret and E. Deleporte, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3958–3963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Mao, H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, L. Ma, J. Im, C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, F. Hao, M. R. Wasielewski, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7781–7792 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Papavassiliou, I. B. Koutselas, A. Terzis and M.-H. Whangbo, Solid State Commun., 1994, 91, 695–698 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the evolution from 2D perovskite to 3D perovskite with key components. Reprinted with permission.2 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The structural comparison between n = 3 crystal structures of RP phases and DJ phases. Reprinted with permission.2 Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematics of the crystal structure of naphthalene-incorporated layered perovskite-type quantum well materials. It merges the Wannier and Frenkel pictures which are suited for the excitons in the inorganic and organic parts (a). Energy diagram and energy transfer dynamics of (CjH2jNH3PbBr4) (b). Reprinted with permission.35 Copyright 2008 American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy diagram for (a) AEQTPbCl4 with a Type I heterojunction and (b) AEQTPbI4 with a Type II heterojunction. Reprinted with permission.23 Copyright 1999 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Time-resolved PL decay for (3AMP)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 and (4AMP)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4). The 3AMP series showed generally longer lifetimes than the 4AMP series. Reprinted with permission.41 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Crystal structures of (A) solvated (BDA)Pb2I6 and (B) (BDA)PbI4 along three axes. Reprinted with permission.47 Copyright 2017 Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Possible structural changes in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite upon modification with diammonium cations. Reprinted with permission.52 Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  Top-down view of the crystal structure of the nine members of the extended solid solution (3AMP)a(4AMP)1−a(FA)b(MA)1−bPb2Br7 (a and b = 1, 0.5, or 0). Average Pb–Br–Pb angles in the organic framework of each composition are labelled. Atom symbol: orange (Br), blue (Pb), and organic cations are omitted here for clarity. Reprinted with permission.55 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Stability measurement for the 2D and 3D PSCs at room temperature with the humidity of (a) 25 ± 5% and (b) 45 ± 5%. Reprinted with permission.58 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  XRD patterns of (a) PMA (phenylmethylammonium) and PDMA based pure 2D perovskites, (b) PDMA based perovskite thin films with various n values. Inset showing an enlarged XRD pattern of n = 2 from 3° to 12°. (c) Optical absorption and (d) steady-state PL spectra of PDMA based perovskite thin films. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image and (b) J–V curves under 100 mW cm−2 of PDMA-6 based solar cell. (c) The corresponding stabilized photocurrent density over 1000 s under a bias of 0.7 V. (d) EQE profile of PDMA-6 based devices. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM top-view of the 2D DJ perovskite films based on ThDMA. Control sample: DJ perovskite film prepared with DMF as the solvent. Target sample: DJ perovskite film prepared with the optimized DMF/DMSO ratio (9:1, v/v). Reprinted with permission.63 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the optimum 4AMP functionalization of grain surfaces (external) and grain boundaries (internal) in FASnI3 perovskite polycrystalline thin film (4AMP-15), together with occasional low-dimensional DJ nanoplatelet second phase. Not to scale. Reprinted with permission.67 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Device structure of (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 and FASnI3 perovskite solar cells. (b) Current–density–voltage characteristics under one-sun simulated AM 1.5 solar illumination of the champion-efficiency (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 and FASnI3 devices. (c) J–V curves of the (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 device measured under opposite scan direction. (d) Histogram of PCEs on 30 measured devices based on (BEA)FA2Sn3I10 and FASnI3 perovskite, fitted with Gaussian distribution. (e) Stability of devices stored in a glovebox without encapsulation. (f) Stability of devices under ambient atmosphere without encapsulation. Reprinted with permission.68 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

BDA-Pb	—	—	1.10 ± 0.01	12.10 ± 2.38	0.72 ± 0.04	9.75 ± 2.22	—	
45


	1	2.37	0.870	2.894	0.430	1.082	—	
46

1	2.37	0.925	2.73	0.45	1.1	—	
47

—	—	1.09	22.25	0.7365	17.91	Retaining 84% of original PCE after 1182 h in ambient air without encapsulation	
48

5	—	1.1386 ± 0.0049	21.22 ± 0.21	0.7451 ± 0.008	18.00 ± 0.30	Retaining almost 100% of original PCE after 800 h under 80% humidity without encapsulation	
49

PDA-Pb	4	1.63	0.97	18.0	74.3	13.0	Maintaining of initial efficiency at 70 °C for over 100 h without encapsulation	
50

4	1.63	0.98	19.5	0.69	13.3	Retaining more than 95% of initial PCE upon exposure to ambient air, damp heat, and continuous light illumination	
51

EDA-Pb	—	—	1.05 ± 0.02	22.6 ± 0.3	0.76 ± 0.01	17.9 ± 0.4	Retaining 75% of initial performance after 72 h of continuous operation at 50% relative humidity and 50 °C under 1 sun illumination	
52

HDA-Pb	—	—	1.10	22.80	0.81	20.31	Maintaining 80% of initial PCE after 60 days of 55–75% relative humidity and 25–40 °C.	
53

DMAPA-Pb	1	2.2	0.95	8.59	0.46	3.85	—	
54

4	—	1.05	21.78	0.64	15.16	Maintaining over 90% of initial PCE after storage at 85 °C in ambient atmosphere for more than 1000 h
3AMP-Pb	4	1.87	1.06	10.17	0.676	7.32	—	
41

Mixture (3AMP and 4AMP)-Pb	4	1.48	1.09	13.69	0.8104	12.04	Retaining a slightly higher PCE than the initial PCE after 2760 h storage in the glovebox in the dark	
43

3AMP-Pb	4	—	1.19	17.91	0.76	16.25	Unsealed device maintained around 80% of initial PCE after 35 days of exposure to air	
58

3AMPY-Pb	4	1.87	1.08	14.34	0.5958	9.20	—	
1

PDMA-Pb	3	1.59	0.844	11.49	0.72	7.0	Maintaining 85% of initial PCE after 60 days at ambient air with relative humidity of 30–50%	
13

10	—	1.02	21.5	0.71	15.6	The efficiency dropped to 80% of initial PCE after 84 h in the dark in ambient air with 20–50% humidity	
59

6	—	1.08	20.90	0.48	10.86	—	
60

ThDMA-Pb	5	1.58	1.07	19.55	75.46	15.75	95% of initial PCE sustained for the unencapsulated device after storage in N2 for 1655 h	
63

4AMP-Sn	4	1.47	0.64	14.90	0.443	4.22	9% decay of initial PCE observed after device exposure to 1 sun illumination in N2 at 45 °C for 100 h	
66

—	—	0.69	21.15	0.74	10.86	77% retention of initial PCE after 500 h under continuous 1 sun illumination	
67

BDA-Sn	3	1.47	0.62	18.85	0.55	6.43	Above 90% of initial PCE sustained after 1000 h without encapsulation under N2 atmosphere	
68

HDA	—	—	0.514	21.46	68.87	7.6	Retaining 80% of initial efficiency after over 550 h in a glovebox with a N2 environment	
69


 	Fig. 15  (a) Dependence of the normalized photocurrent of the bending curvature of flexible devices. (b) Dependence of the normalized photocurrent of the bending cycles of all flexible devices. The inset shows the optical image of the measurement setup under the bending test. (c) Optical image of the typical RPP film using organic bilayer as the spacer cation under mechanical bending. Schematic of the perovskite crystal structure is illustrated on the film with the potential failure plane depicted along the organic bilayer sandwiched between the two metal halide octahedral layers. (d) Optical image of the EDA4 sample (DJP) using a single EDA layer as the spacer cation under mechanical bending. Schematic of the perovskite crystal structure is also illustrated on the film, where the more intact structure would make the film have better flexibility as compared to the on depicted in panel (c). Reprinted with permission.78 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Pictures of the as-grown heterostructure from the top and front. (b) Surface morphology of the heterostructure by SEM. Reprinted with permission.81 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Anisotropy of absorbance properties for (HDA)CsPb2Br7 along different crystallographic axes of (HDA)CsPb2Br7. (b) Polarization dependence of the angle-resolved photocurrent under incident light. At the 0° polarization angle, electric field induced by polarized-light is parallel to the direction of its b-axis. Reprinted with permission.89 Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
