MXenes as an emerging class of two-dimensional materials for advanced energy storage devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA10083A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA10083A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4558-4584MXenes as an emerging class of two-dimensional materials for advanced energy storage devices

        
          
            Tahir 
            Rasheed
          
          
        
      
Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: tahir.rasheed@kfupm.edu.sa; tahir.rasheed@hotmail.com
Received 
      24th November 2021
    , Accepted 28th January 2022First published on 28th January 2022AbstractA class of two-dimensional (2D) transition metal nitrides and carbides (MXenes) has emerged as a promising paradigm. Their unique architecture such as controllable interfacial chemistry, high electronic conductivity, tunable layered structures, etc., has drawn a great amount of attention. This makes the MXene family a promising class of materials in a variety of applications, including energy storage, electrocatalysis, medicine, water purification etc. However, the practical applicability of MXenes in energy storage systems is relentlessly limited by the issues of poor material utilization efficiency, slow reaction kinetics and limited active sites. Herein, the most recent achievements in rational microstructural design and synthesis for improving the energy storage performance of MXene-based materials have comprehensively been summarized. The present review describes the synthesis and characteristics of MXenes followed by their structural features and applications in energy storage devices. Then the focus turned towards the state-of-the-art progress of MXene-based materials for metal–sulfur batteries, alkali metal-ion batteries, and zinc ion batteries (ZIBs). Finally, the opportunities and critical challenges for future 2D MXene-based nanoarchitecture research are discussed, with the aim of providing a comprehensive reference for the engineering of MXene-based electrodes for electrochemical energy storage.Tahir RasheedDr Tahir Rasheed is currently working as a researcher at the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia. He completed his PhD degree and postdoctoral research in Polymer Chemistry at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests focus on multiple disciplines including controllable synthesis, characterization and self-assembly of polymeric materials, polymer-based composites, nanomaterials & nanocomposites, and hybrid nanocomposites, with special emphasis on their potential applications in the field of sensing and biosensing, electrocatalysis, degradation and quantification of various emerging pollutants and energy storage devices.
1. Introduction
In recent decades, prodigious advancement in societal awareness and the growth of the electronics market have resulted in increased pollution and climatic change globally. These have all been challenged with ambitious goals from both the private and public sectors; in order for people to remain safe and businesses to remain competitive, high-performance, low-carbon technologies must be developed and adopted within the next few decades.1–5 The issue of energy storage is at the heart of both the renewable energy and electronics markets. The design, capacity, size, and power of portable electronic devices are constrained, while the outputs of solar and wind energies are limited by changing weather conditions. As a result, new energy storage systems for both large-scale grid storage and advanced portable energy devices must be developed.6–11 The performance of these gadgets, as we all know, is highly dependent on the qualities of novel materials. Therefore, the development of various types of materials for use in electrochemical energy storage systems is critical.
Transition metal nitride and carbide complexes “known as MXenes” have been reported as a novel class of two-dimensional (2D) materials since 2011.12 Due to their unique layered architecture, excellent electrical conductivity, large specific surface area, high mechanical properties and superior chemical stability, they have demonstrated some competitiveness in energy storage domains.13–15 MXenes are a new class of materials that have received a lot of attention due to their resemblance to graphene. First, both MXenes and graphene may be produced from their conventional material via a “top down” exfoliation technique (a MAX material or graphite). This exfoliation approach allows for the manufacture of ultrathin 2D nanomaterials on a massive scale, with thicknesses as low as a single atom or a few atomic layers, resulting in a variety of unique chemical and physical properties. Second, ideal MXene and graphene materials have a large specific surface area and are highly conductive, which makes them an excellent candidate for a variety of energy conversion and storage applications. Thirdly, similar modification approaches exist for the modification of both MXenes and graphene to alter the surface characteristics, shape and crystalline structure for specific purposes. Furthermore, the curvature and porosity of MXenes and graphene may usually be tweaked to provide more precise pore volumes and surface area. Furthermore, to improve performance, the microstructure of MXene and graphene materials can be modified using heteroatom (metal or nonmetal) doping and surface changes. Additionally, the distinctive tunable structural features of MXenes result in the formation of different morphologies, such as hierarchical structures, MXene based quantum dots, nanotubes and accordion like architectures. Scheme 1 illustrates the different morphologies of MXene based structures. These similarities open up new possibilities to develop MXene/MXene based composite materials for energy conversion and storage applications.16–19 These days, smart electricity grids, next-generation devices and electric vehicles (EVs) demand exceptional longstanding properties, high power and high energy to ensure reliable energy supply. Therefore, the development of extensive high-performance energy storage systems is crucial in this regard in order to integrate renewable energy resources into high-power energy applications.20,21 Many renewable energy storage systems, such as lithium-ion batteries, potassium ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, zinc ion batteries, and lithium–sulfur batteries, have been developed so far.22 However, there are a number of issues in the complete development of these storage systems. Because of the inherent drawbacks of MXenes, such as low capacitance, low capacity, and inferior retention owing to the undesirable complex surface functional groups and unreactive microstructure, ideal 2D MXene sheets cannot achieve practical applications in the above-mentioned energy storage systems. To increase the performance of energy storage systems and overcome the constraints of developing high-performance energy storage technologies, nanoengineering approaches on innovative MXene materials such as surface modification, morphology control, and composite synthesis are urgently needed.
 Scheme 1  Illustration of different morphological structures of MXenes. 
Herein, we have attempted to document the recent progress in research related to the development of 2D MXenes and their composites exhibiting increased performance for various energy storage devices, such as lithium-ion batteries, potassium ion batteries, sodium-ion batteries, zinc ion batteries, and lithium–sulfur batteries. We address synthesis, chemical and physical characterization, and electrochemical properties in order to optimize their functionalization. Finally, we discuss the critical problems and prospects for 2D MXene material research and development for energy storage applications.
2. Preparation and properties of MXenes
To date, the majority of MXenes have been made by selectively removing particular atomic layers from their precursors, such as their analogues or MAX phases. With nearly 70 representatives, MAX phases are a huge family of stacked nitrides and carbides. Unlike the preparation of graphene and MoS2 materials, etching is required for MXenes due to the strong metallic connections between the A and M elements in the MAX phase, which make mechanical exfoliation problematic. The A layer can facilely be etched because of the chemical stability of M–X compared with M–A bonds.23 Generally, MXenes show a hexagonal close packing architecture. Different types of atomic ordering are followed in M2X, M3X2 and M4X3 and are ABABAB and ABCABC, respectively. As with the parent MAX phases, the MXene sheets are generally oriented laterally.24 The majority of MXenes have good mechanical properties among 2D materials, making them interesting for nano-devices with mechanical needs or as potential composite reinforcement.
By using molecular simulation dynamics, Borysiuk and coworkers demonstrated that titanium carbide is stronger and stiffer than the corresponding MoS2, but weaker than graphene.25 The manufacture of 2D MXene nanosheets involves etching A atoms and delamination of a multilayer to a few layers, if not a single layer. The delamination and etching processes can be carried out simultaneously or separately, as demonstrated in Fig. 1a.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of MXenes by wet-etching methods. (b) Schematic describing the synthesis and dispersion of Ti3C2Tx in an organic solvent X. Reproduced with permission,26 copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Fluoride-free anodic etching of bulk Ti3AlC2 in a binary aqueous electrolyte. (i) Schematic of the etching and delamination process. (ii) The configuration of an electrochemical cell. (iii) Optical image of the as-received bulk Ti3AlC2. (iv) The aqueous dispersion of delaminated Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission,27 copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (d) Schematic demonstration of the basic etching routes, illustrating reactions between Ti3AlC2 and aqueous NaOH solution under different conditions. Reproduced with permission,28 copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 
The most common method for preparing MXenes is wet etching with HF-forming, aqueous HF or HF-containing solutions. This exfoliation method causes the A-containing layers to be selectively removed and replaced with –F, –O, and –OH functional groups, resulting in extraordinary hydrophilicity of the materials. There are a variety of methods for making MXenes, and one synthesis strategy may be appropriate for one type of precursor but not for another. Even for a specific type of MXene, multiple distinct synthesis processes have been documented, each of which affects the final chemical/physical characteristics and thus the performance of MXenes in their applications.26 The etching conditions differ from one type of precursor to another, and are mostly determined by the material's atomic bond. In comparison to Ti-containing MXenes, Zr-, Cr-, V-, Mo-, Ta- and Nb-containing MXenes require severe etching conditions. For example, Ti2CTx can be prepared through etching with 10 wt% HF for 10 h, while V2CTx require 50 wt% HF for 90 hours. Single-layer MXene nanosheets were generated in 2013 by intercalating large organic molecules and delaminating the accordion-like sheets from each other, despite the fact that HF has been widely employed for the manufacture of MXenes since its introduction in 2011. This opens a new direction for the exploration of single layer two dimensional MXenes.29 A number of organic compounds, such as isopropyl amine, dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH) and chloroform, have been described for this purpose.26 Organic molecules were encapsulated into multi-layered MXenes before delaminating in water and creating a colloidal solution via mechanical shaking or sonication (Fig. 1b).27 Further MXenes were produced by using the HF-etching technique in which (LiF + HCl) or HF-(NH4HF2) were used as etching agents. This technique reduces the risk of dealing HF directly. Furthermore, cations (such as Li+ and NH4+) and water molecules can also intercalate into the multilayer structure of MXenes. As a result, the resultant MXenes have a greater interlayer spacing than HF-etched MXenes, weakening layer interaction and contributing to material delamination upon sonication. Therefore, this approach streamlines the previously noted tedious multistep synthetic processes by allowing MXenes to be prepared in just one step.28 Because fluoride-containing acidic solutions are corrosive and dangerous, numerous different safe and cost-effective etching methods have been researched extensively. Yang and coworkers developed a fluoride-free electrochemical method for Ti3C2 delamination in a binary aqueous electrolyte, reaching high Ti3C2Tx nanosheet manufacturing yields (Fig. 1c).30 In this method, chloride ions are employed to etch Al atoms in an anodic etching process, and then ammonium hydroxide is intercalated to exfoliate the etched anode's edges on the surfaces. Exfoliated Ti3C2Tx (T = O, OH) flakes lack fluorine terminations due to the absence of F.30 Furthermore, a less expensive alternative to acid etching is to dissolve the A layer in MAX with a higher concentration and temperature than the basic solution of NaOH (Fig. 1d). This technique has the advantage of being a fluorine free approach to synthesise multilayer Ti3C2Tx (T = OH or O) with a yield of 92%.31 MXenes can also be synthesized using other techniques such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), salt templated, spray-lyophilization32 and molten salt techniques.33 For example, the spray-lyophilization technique was used to prepare stacking-resistant Ti3C2Tx with 3D structures by Fang and coworkers for potassium-ion hybrid capacitors.32 The exploration of these tactics aids in the study of MXenes, particularly MoN and Mo2C 2D structured materials generated using bottom-up synthetic routes, which include numerous flaws and so assist the analysis of their intrinsic properties. Existing methods, however, have yet to be widely used for energy storage due to their complexity. To scale up the creation of MXenes, more research into bottom-up synthesis pathways is needed. Many wet etching processes and associated exfoliation techniques can be used to make MXenes.34–37 Depending on the nature of the M and X elements, and the functional groups on the surface, the electrical characteristics of MXenes range from semiconducting to metallic. Khazaei and coworkers investigated the electronic characteristics of M2X complexes chemically functionalized with O, OH, and F groups, respectively, using first-principles simulations.38 Furthermore, HF2C Ti2C, Sc2C, and Zr2C are likely to become semiconductors after surface functionalization, according to their calculations. The electrical structures of thicker MXene sheets with a larger number of transition metals, such as Ta3C2, Ti3C2, Nb4C3, Ti4C3, V3C2 and Ti4N3 with a larger number of transition metals, remain metallic after any type of functionalization, according to the data. When used as electrode materials, these MXenes with excellent optical conductivities can accelerate electronic and ionic transport, encouraging their use in electrochemical energy storage. For example, for delaminated and mildly etched vacuum filtered films, the conductivity of Ti3C2Tx can reach 4600 S cm−1, which is greater than that of solution-processed graphene.39 Ti3C2Tx’s strong electronic conductivity, combined with its simple synthetic procedure, has boosted related research, making it the most investigated material in the family of MXenes. Another important aspect of MXenes that must be considered in their applications is their stability. The delaminated MXene sheets are known to distribute effectively in water, generating a colloidal solution. Single MXene sheets, on the other hand, are not permanently stable in an oxygen-rich environment. Zhang and coworkers discovered that the degradation begins at the margins of Ti3C2Tx flakes, and that the colloidal solution in open containers eventually oxidizes to TiO2. The solution, on the other hand, might be well maintained when kept at 5 °C in a hermetic Ar-filled bottle since dissolved oxygen was removed.40 Furthermore, radiation exposure can cause MXene compounds to oxidize. As a result, MXene solutions should be stored in an inert dark environment and an inert atmosphere should be continuously bubbled during the processing of material. Aside from the intrinsic compositions that mostly dictate the properties of distinct MXenes, it is worth noting that the synthetic conditions, notably the surface terminations, have a substantial impact on the properties of as-prepared MXenes.41 The flaw proportion in the manufactured single-layer MXene Ti3C2Tx can be changed by adjusting the HF concentration, according to Sang and coworkers.42 Decreased HF concentrations, faster etching times, and sonication-free delamination would result in MXenes with fewer flaws and bigger lateral sizes, resulting in greater electronic conductivity. It has been shown that MXene imperfections generally react with activated cations, resulting in a reduction in initial coulombic efficiency.43 As a result, when making MXenes for batteries, mild etching conditions are suggested. However, because synthesis circumstances such as a short etching period and low HF concentration may limit the product yield, it is necessary to establish an optimal environment to balance these opposites. MXenes' adaptable features enable them to be tuned for a variety of applications, including gas and biosensors, energy storage, photo- and electro-catalysis, composite reinforcement, lubrication, water purification, and electromagnetic interference shielding. MXenes have unusual thermoelectric, electrical, plasmonic, and optical properties, allowing them to be used in a variety of applications.44 Overall, many of the documented MXenes have an excellent combination of mechanical properties, electronic conductivity, and hydrophilicity, which makes them interesting for electrochemical energy storage.45
3. MXene-based 2D materials for energy storage applications
The extensive utilization of fossil fuels has resulted in the emission of greenhouse gases which has changed the climate globally, in the last few decades.46 As a result, many countries have committed to developing cleaner and sustainable energy resources in order to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels. Most of the renewable energy sources, such as tidal, wind, and solar energy, are, nevertheless, intermittent, generating power based on natural conditions.47,48 Consequently, energy storage systems are required to store the harvested energy obtained from natural sources and convert it to electricity for users on demand. Presently, rechargeable lithium ion batteries (LIBs) and supercapacitors are preliminarily being applied as energy storage systems in different electric vehicles to decrease the emission of greenhouse gases. Furthermore, to provide consistent energy supply, the next-generation smart electrical grids require high power, high energy, and remarkable long-term features. In this context, high-performance MXene-based materials for energy storage systems are essential for integrating renewable energy resources into practical applications. Herein, we have tried to summarize the recent developments in the engineering and utilization of 2D MXenes and their composites for the enhanced performance of different energy storage systems, such as lithium, potassium, sodium, lithium–sulfur–zinc ion batteries and supercapacitors.
3.1. Lithium-ion batteries
Owing to the enhanced energy densities and non-memory effect, LIBs have attracted extensive attention and have widely been employed in portable electronics and electric vehicles in the last few decades.9,10,49,50 The performance of LIBs greatly depends on the electrode material, which is a key component of the system. An emerging class of 2D materials, such as MXenes and their composites, have shown greater potential for the development of next-generation LIBs. This extensive utilization of MXenes as electrode materials originates from the fact that they have a wide structural and chemical range, greater theoretical capacity and higher electrical conductivity.51,52 The layered structure of MXenes facilitates the accommodation of lithium ions (Li+) by establishing Mn+1XnTxLiy, such as Ti3C2O2Li2.53,54 Furthermore, because of low conductivity of 2D structure of MXenes, an extra layer of Li+ can be produced reversibly, offering a two-fold increase in electrode capacity (Fig. 2a).53,55
 Fig. 2  3D MXene architectures for LIBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the Ti3C2Tx lithiation process. The valence electron localization functions are shown with and without the additional lithium layer. Reproduced with permission,56 copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) SEM image of the 3D porous Ti3C2Tx MXene foam. (c) Rate performance of the stacked MXene film and the 3D porous MXene foam. (d) Long-term cycle stability of the 3D porous Ti3C2Tx MXene electrode. Reproduced with permission,57 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Charge–discharge profiles of 3D FeS2@MXene for lithium ion storage; inset shows the SEM image of 3D FeS2@MXene. (f) Long-term galvanostatic cycling performance of the 3D FeS2@MXene nanohybrid, pure FeS2, and Ti3C2Tx MXenes for Li-ion storage at a current density of 10 A g−1, respectively. Reproduced with permission,58 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
A number of factors affect the performance of MXenes towards lithium storage, such as transition metal species, surface functional groups and formula weights. Among the various functionalities, oxygen provides the maximum capacity, while fluorine and hydroxyl groups result in lower capacity accompanied by lithium ion deterioration.59 The gravimetric capacities of lower formula weight MXene (M2X = Sc2C, Ti2C, V2C Nb2C, etc.) based electrodes are higher as compared to their corresponding higher formula weight counterparts (M3X2 and M4X3).29,60 However, some exceptions are there; for example niobium (Nb) is heavier than titanium (Ti), but at the same cycling rate, electrodes made of Nb based MXenes (Nb2CTx) have high gravimetric capacities compared with that of Ti (Ti2CTx). The capacity values are in the order of 180 mA h g−1 and 110 mA h g−1 for Nb2CTxversus Ti2CTx at 1C respectively.61 Aside from inherent material qualities, the electrode architecture is a major predictor of the electrochemical performance of MXene based materials.62 Furthermore, 3D porous electrode designs, in comparison to 2D stacked structures, can effectively enable ion transportation and increase MXene nanosheet use, leading to an improvement in lithium storage performance. For example, the lower surface area (1.9 m2 g−1) of a layered Ti3C2Tx MXene film leads to a capacity of 35.4 mA h g−1. On the other hand, a 3D MXene (Ti3C2Tx) foam with an open architecture and larger surface area (39.9 m2 g−1) demonstrates a significant capacity value of 455.5 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1, respectively (Fig. 2b). Additionally, enhanced rate performance and excellent cycling stability were presented by the electrodes in the range of 101 mA h g−1 at 18 A g−1 and 220 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 3500 cycles, respectively (Fig. 2c and d).57 These higher capacity values and cycling stability demonstrate the excellent advantages of 3D porous electrodes for the storage of lithium. In another approach, a hybrid composite based on reduced graphene oxide and MXenes was documented. This reported electrode material has a porous 3D architecture of Ti3C2Tx/rGO, with a smaller number of layered nanosheets of MXenes. This hybrid composite inherited graphene's advantages in the development of a porous structure and MXene's high electrical conductivity, resulting in decreased MXene nanosheet layering and improved electrolyte ion penetration efficiency in electrodes. At a current density of 0.05 A g−1, the as-prepared electrodes reveal a specific capacity of 335.5 mA h g−1, excellent rate performance and a good retention of capacitance (30%) at 4 A g−1. Furthermore, no fading in capacity was observed after 1000 cycles.63 Furthermore, a number of transition metal sulfides or oxides were incorporated to improve the Li-ion storing capabilities of 3D MXenes. The high porosity and high conductivity of the 3D MXene frameworks and the high specific capacity of redox materials were integrated in the resulting 3D MXene-based nanocomposites, which significantly improved the electrochemical performance. For example, high capacity values are presented by the nanohybrids based on the 3D architecture of Ti3C2Tx and FeS2. In this framework, the FeS2 nanodots (≈10 nm) were homogenously dispersed on the 3D surface of MXenes. The nanohybrids demonstrate a specific capacity of 1728 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 601 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 for Li-ion storage, respectively (Fig. 2e). In comparison to pristine FeS2 and Ti3C2Tx MXenes, the capacity of 3D nanohybrid composites was very high. The specific capacity values of the pristine electrodes and hybrid electrode were as follows: 128 mA h g−1, 161 mA h g−1 (100 cycles) and 762 mA h g−1 (1000 cycles), respectively at 10 A g−1 (Fig. 2f). This enhanced performance was attributed to the high electrical conductivity and greater surface area of the distinctive 3D FeS2@Ti3C2Tx heterostructure.58 Likewise, the great chemical stability, low cost, high theoretical capacity value (782 mA h g−1), facile fabrication and nontoxicity make SnO2 another attractive material for the fabrication of electrodes.64 Benefiting from the extraordinary features of SnO2, a three-dimensional aerogel-based network composed of a protective carbon layer and Ti3C2Tx conductive material was applied for electrode fabrication. The prepared 3D composite (SnO2@C/Ti3C2Tx) reveals a greater initial capacity of 1314 mA h g−1 as well as a reversible specific capacity of 520 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1. Additionally, it had a reversible specific capacity of 205.6 mA h g−1, a discharge capacity of 169 mA h g−1, and a coulombic efficiency of 99.5 percent after 1000 cycles, even at 10 A g−1.65 In another approach, a 3D framework (CoO/Co2Mo3O8@Ti3C2Tx) was synthesized by the electrostatic assembly of a positively charged double layered hydroxide and negatively charged MXenes. The as-prepared 3D network had a high reversible capacity of 947.4 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, a noteworthy rate behavior of 435.8 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1, and good stability after 1200 cycles (545 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1).66
3.2. Sodium storage of MXenes and their composites
Lithium and sodium belong to the alkali metal group of the periodic table and have similarities in chemical and physical characters. A number of oxides containing lithium with electrochemical activity have been replaced by sodium and exhibit similar activities. Through learning from the documented literature about LIB materials, the investigation on sodium ion battery (SIB) materials has emerged and shown tremendous technological advancement in recent years. On the other hand, the differences between lithium and sodium cannot be overlooked. The major difference between the two is the radius and electrode potential. The ionic radius of lithium ions (0.76 Å) is smaller than that of the sodium ion (1.02 Å). Also, the electrode potential of lithium ions (E°(Li/Li+) = −3.05 V) is smaller than that of sodium ions (E°(Na/Na+) = −2.71 V). These parameters lead to the conclusion that the mass energy density of SIBs is lower than that of LIBs. The material type and properties are regarded as the key component of SIBs. Therefore, the development of high-stability materials, such as electrolytes, anode materials and cathode materials, is essential for the fabrication of long-life batteries. Some pragmatic developments in SIBs can only be achieved by creating electrode materials with stable intercalation/deintercalation capabilities. However, the current state of SIB material research is greatly centered on a new class of materials known as two dimensional (2D) layered materials. A 2D layered material has a large surface area and open 2D ion transportation channels, which can provide a large number of active sites for sodium-ion storage. MXenes have emerged as a new type of 2D materials and have been extensively exploited in recent years. Their smaller ion diffusion barrier, high electrical conductivity and unique architecture make them an ideal candidate for electrochemical energy storage devices. The inevitable layering phenomena and poor theoretical specific capacity, however, limit MXenes' electrochemical performance. Further investigations are being conducted to increase the electrochemical performance of MXenes by combining them with a number of other materials to achieve the desired results effectively. In combination with other materials, the stacking of MXenes can afford more channels for the transportation of ions, while the added materials can grow or adhere between the layers of MXenes resulting in a greater interlayer spacing. Furthermore, the composites of MXenes with sulfides and oxides have a greater value of theoretical capacity and are cost effective, which makes them an ideal candidate for anodes in SIBs. On the other hand, poor cycling performance, low conductivity and serious expansion of volume are the key problems to be addressed. They can easily be overcome by combining MXenes with other materials having high conductivity. As a result, when combined with layered materials (2D-MXene composites), they can demonstrate stable intercalation/deintercalation as well as cycling stability, which is a research bottleneck. The use of MXenes in SIBs will then be examined from the perspective of pure MXenes as well as their composite oxide, sulfide, and carbon components. Utilizing DFT calculations, Jung and coworkers67 demonstrated sodium storage in the 2D architecture of MXenes as anode materials for SIBs. The group found that the interaction between sodium ions and MXenes is weak. Though several factors may influence the energy barrier of ion migration in MXenes, the reduced diffusion activation energy of SIBs implies that MXenes are a possible high-power electrode material. In an approach Xiong and coworkers documented the electrochemical behavior of Ti3C2Tx.68 The material reveals an initial value of discharge capacity of around 270 mA h g−1 with good stability and cycling performance after several cycles. The specific capacity was about 100 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Similarly, MXene based nano-tablets were prepared by Zhang Xiaogang and coworkers.69 They used dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as an embedding agent. The as-prepared nano-tablets reveal excellent rate and cycling performance as well as a higher specific capacity value. The reversible specific capacity is 267 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1. With a current density of 1 A g−1, a reversible capacity of 76 mA h g−1 may be maintained after 1500 cycles. In another report, Zhao and coworkers found that the introduction of common acids such as HCl into the suspension of Ti3C2Tx can cause the wrinkling of MXene sheets.70 As a result, they described a new method for fabricating 3D porous Ti3C2Tx using alkali-induced wrinkling of Ti3C2Tx nanoflakes (Fig. 3a–c).
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for M′–c-Ti3C2Tx (M+ = Li+, Na+, K+, TBA+) by flocculation using MOH. (b) Zeta potential of Ti3C2Tx and Na–c-Ti3C2Tx 3D frameworks at pH ≈ 7. (c) Photographs of Ti3C2Tx MXene colloidal suspensions (left) and Na–c-Ti3C2Tx after flocculation (middle and right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
They use different types of bases, including KOH, NaOH, TBAOH, LiOH, etc., with a concentration of 0.5 to 24 mol. The electrochemical performance of NaOH was better than those of all other bases. Furthermore, after 500 cycles, the specific capacity of Na–c-Ti3CTx is 130 mA h g−1, and after 1000 cycles, 54 mA h g−1 can be maintained at a current density of 1.5 A g−1, indicating an outstanding capacity retention rate. On the other hand, the capacity of Li–c-Ti3C2Tx was about 160 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 after 300 cycles. This newly developed method has extensive applications in the fields of biomedicine, catalysis and the environment. There are a number of methods by which the electrochemical performance of MXenes can be increased. To expand the interlayer spacing of MXenes, Fan and coworkers employed DMSO and alcohol. The group reported the preparation of few layer MXenes by using ultrasonic stripping and agitation of Ti3C2Tx with an enhanced surface area.71 Zhao and coworkers72 created a three-dimensional and hollow sphere structure out of a 2D MXene sheet. The as-prepared 3D MXenes exhibit high conductivity as a result of good interaction between the metal and sphere. Furthermore, Islam and coworkers73 used the DFT approach to study the electrochemical characteristics of a large variety of new 2D transition metal carbides, offering a useful theoretical direction for investigating various high capacity M2C based MXenes.

3.2.1. Sodium storage of MXene/sulfide composites. 
CoS has a relatively high theoretical capacity, a low cost, and a weak Co–S link. This makes CoS a prominent anode material for SIBs. Correspondingly, the serious volume expansion and poor conductivity of CoS result in poor rate and cycling performance. Therefore, a decrease in size and mixing it with other conductive materials make it suitable to present better performance. By combining the advantages of MXenes and CoS, Zhang and coworkers prepared a composite material based on MXene/CoS (Ti3C2/CoS).74 The preparation of MXenes was carried out using MAX, HCl and LiF. As shown in Fig. 4a and b the sources of cobalt and sulfur are Co(NO3)2·6H2O and thioacetamide. MXene layers can greatly enhance the electrical conductivity of the composite material by providing a stable conductive network, and their porous 2D assembly can reveal more active sites for a faster electrochemical reaction.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the CoS/MXene composite. (c) Rate performance of CoS/MXene and charge–discharge curves at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
After 1700 cycles, the reversible capacity of the CoS/MXene composite is about 267 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1. The capacity fading in each cycle was equal to 0.00072%. TEM reveals good structural stability of the CoS/MXene composite after 1000 cycles. On the other hand, the capacity of pristine MXene and CoS after 700 and 1000 cycles was about 55 mA h g−1 and 162 mA h g−1. respectively. Further at high current density, the capacity of the composite was 80 mA h g−1. After further reducing the current density to 0.1 A g−1, the capacity of the composite was about 505 mA h g−1 (Fig. 4c). Another sulphide based material SnS2 has a typical CdI2 stacked structure, in which S atoms are close packed in a two-layer structure and Sn atoms are sandwiched between the layers giving an octahedron structure. These layers are held together by weak van der Waals interactions. The large interlayer spacing between the layers of SnS2 favors the transmission of lithium and sodium ions.75,76 It is an effective technique to develop a hetero-structure based on MXenes with high metal conductivity and SnS2 with high capacity using the synergy of MXenes and SnS2. By using vacuum filtration, Wu and coworkers developed self-assembled nanostructure based nanochips by the combination of MXenes and SnS2 (ref. 77) (Fig. 5a). Nano-tablets of SnS2 were hydrothermally prepared with the help of thioacetamide and SnCl4·5H2O as precursors. Meanwhile the MXenes are prepared through HF etching of MAX (Ti3AlC2), followed by ultrasonic stripping. A SnS2@MXene based composite was fabricated by dispersing SnS2 into the MXene colloidal solution. After 200 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1, the capacity was about 322 mA h g−1 (Fig. 5b), which is superior to other proportions of composite materials and pristine MXenes, which indicates outstanding cycling stability and rate performance. The combination of Sn atoms with six S atoms produces SnS, which has a great theoretical capacity but is limited in use due to excessive volume expansion and low conductivity.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the MX/SnS2 composite by vacuum-assisted filtration. (b) Cycling and rate performance of SnS2@MXene composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Zhang and coworkers prepared a composite material comprising an MXene and SnS through a hydrothermal approach.78 The introduction of SnS increases the interlayer spacing and results in enhanced reversible capacity and conductivity of the composite material. At 160 °C, an ethanolic solution of SnCl4·5H2O and Ti3C2Tx (50 mg) was hydrothermally reacted for the production of the composite material. Electrochemical experiments demonstrate that at various current densities the composite has good rate performance, excellent cycling stability and a discharge capacity of about 255.9 mA h g−1 even when the current density is increased to 1000 mA g−1. Furthermore, the specific capacity is 320 mA h g−1 and the Coulomb efficiency is 98 percent at a current density of 500 mA g−1. The group also investigated the electrochemical performance of pristine Ti3C2Tx and SnS and found that SnS shows relatively better capacity at the start of the experiment, but the capacity decreased rapidly upon long cycling. In a nutshell, the MXene@SnS composite exhibits outstanding electrochemical characteristics and has promising application possibilities due to the synergistic impact of SnS with high theoretical capacity and Ti3C2Tx with superior conductivity. Another promising 2D layered material MoS2 has been extensively studied for the purpose. For sodium ion storage, the potential window for MoS2 is in the range of 0.01–3.0 V. The mechanism involved in the storage of Na+ is an embedded conversion mechanism. In this mechanism, MoS2 is converted into Na2S and metallic Mo, respectively, which results in the enhancement of specific capacity. On the other hand, during the charging and discharging process, MoS2 undergoes large volume expansion and lower conductivity. A pristine MoS2 electrode exhibits quick capacity attenuation and rate performance.79 A 2D composite material was prepared by Huang and coworkers80 with the help of a hydrothermal technique. The group introduce a MoS2 nanosheet into the interlayer of a Ti3C2Tx MXene to create the composite. The prepared composite material shows a high capacity of 250.9 mA h g−1 for about 1000 cycles at 100 mA g−1. The retention in capacity was about 88%. Further at a higher current density (1000 mA g−1), the capacity was around 160 mA h g−1. Wu and coworkers81 also investigated MoS2/Ti3C2–MXene@C and discovered that it performs well electrochemically. At different current densities such as 0.2 A g−1 and 10 A g−1, the initial capacities are in the range of 1200 mA h g−1 and 700 mA h g−1, respectively. After 3000 cycles, the retention in capacity was 95% at a current density of 20 A g−1. In another approach, Bao Shujuan's group82 investigated the MoS2/Ti3C2Tx composite's use in SIBs and LIBs. The composite offers a high specific capacity as well as excellent cycling performance.


3.2.2. Sodium storage of MXene/oxide composites. 
On the basis of relatively good theoretical capacity values, oxide-based materials have also been used in energy storage device applications. For example, the theoretical capacity of Sb2O3 is 1103 mA h g−1, but it hasn't been extensively exploited in the field. This may be because of the poor reversibility of the first cycle of Sb2O3. The nanorods of Sb2O3 were prepared by Wang and coworkers using the Kirkendall effect, in which the single step oxidation of Sb was carried out to obtain the required material. Furthermore, the coating of the material was carried out with TiO2 to obtain the final nanocomposite as Sb2O3@TiO2.83 The expansion of the volume of Sb2O3 while charging and discharging may be efficiently reduced by the hollow structure and TiO2 surface coating, which improves the material's ion conduction rate. The specific discharge capacity of the Sb2O3@TiO2 composite was 593 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 current density when it was used as the anode material of LIBs. Benefiting from oxide-based composites, Guo and coworkers have developed an MXene (Ti3C2Tx) and Sb2O3 based composite through the solution phase approach. The as-prepared material has a high sodium ion diffusion rate as well as electronic conduction.84 The presence of Sb2O3 nanoparticles is responsible for the structural stability of the composite by preventing the staking of MXene layers during the self-assembly process, which in turns inhibits the volume expansion. When employed as the negative electrode in SIBs, the capacity of Sb2O3/Ti3C2Tx reached 472 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1 current density. A specific capacity of 295 mA h g−1 was achieved with excellent rate performance at 2 A g−1. The electrochemical performance of the modified Sb2O3 anode is much better than that of the original Sb2O3 anode. Huang and coworkers prepared a nontoxic Na0.23TiO2/Ti3C2 composite.85 The 3D Na0.23TiO2/Ti3C2 composite was prepared through the growth of interlinked amorphous Na0.23TiO2 nanoribbons on layered Ti3C2 nanowafers, displaying a sandwich construction. This structure is favorable to delivering integrated electrode material advantages. Ti3C2 nanosheets can help in increasing the flow of electrons and present better conductivity of the composite materials from the electrode to the nanobelt. The transportation of electrons and the conduction of the composite material through the electrolyte originate from the sandwich structure of the system. Because of the reduced size of Na0.23TiO2, the diffusion channel of Na+ is shortened, allowing for high cycle stability and magnification. A capacity retention of 100% was achieved after 400 cycles at a current density of 2 A g−1 and discharge capacity of about 56 mA h g−1. Furthermore, CoNiO2 is a common transition metal oxide that has been investigated extensively in LIBs as a negative electrode. It has a relatively good theoretical capacity value but has not been used extensively in SIBs.86 This encouraged Xu and coworkers to develop a MXene and CoNiO2 based composite through a hydrothermal reaction followed by the calcination of the material (Fig. 6a).87 The SEM and TEM pictographs of the composite have been portrayed in Fig. 6b–g. The application of the composite as an electrode material in SIBs demonstrates a capacity of 223 mA h g−1 after 140 cycles. At a higher current density of 100 mA g−1, the value of discharge capacity is also about 223 mA h g−1. Furthermore, the coulombic efficiency was around 98.7%. The complete electrochemical performance of the composite material has been portrayed in Fig. 6h.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the CoNiO2/Ti3C2Tx composite; (b–d) FESEM (e–g) TEM images of Ti3C2Tx; (h) electrochemical performance of the CoNiO2/Ti3C2Tx composite including CV curves at 0.1 mV s−1; charge–discharge profiles at 100 mA g−1; rate performance; charge–discharge curves at different current densities; cycling performance and charge-transfer mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 copyright 2018. 


3.2.3. Sodium storage of MXene/carbon composites. 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have low resistance, larger surface area, one-dimensional architecture, ultra-high mechanical strength and high current density.88,89 Taking advantage of this, Ren and coworkers developed a 2D porous structure of MXenes (Ti3C2Tx) at room temperature and introduced CNTs to fabricate flexible films.90 In another approach, porous Ti3C2/CNT composite based thin film electrodes for SIBs were also described by Xie and coworkers.91 The findings suggest that carbon nanotubes can perform well electrochemically. The stacking in the MXene architecture can be hindered by the use of CNTs as nano-level electrostatic bonding barriers. The as-prepared composite displays good cycling stability and rate performance by showing a capacity value of about 421 mA h cm−3 and 89 mA h cm−3 respectively at 20 mA g−1 and 5000 mA g−1current densities.


3.2.4. Sodium storage of other MXene composites. 
Polymer-based composites of MXenes can also be a better choice for application as one of the components of energy storage devices. By using an in situ polymerization technique, Ren and coworkers developed a PANI/Ti3C2 based composite material.92 The composite reveals an increased (1.26 times) value of specific capacitance in the order of 164 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1 compared with pristine Ti3C2 (131 F g−1). It also has good cycling stability, with 96% of its initial capacitance retained after 3000 cycles. In another study, nanodots of MXenes were synthesized by Zhang and coworkers through ball milling of Ti3C2Tx (micro-sized) with red phosphorus.93 The composite shows good capacity (≈600 mA h g−1) at 260 mA g−1 and good cycle stability for 150 cycles. Furthermore, electrostatic adsorption was employed by Zhao and coworkers to develop the stacked and self-assembled layers of Ti3C2/PDDA–BP heterojunctions.94 The prevailing pseudo-capacitance performance was observed because of the presence of all active sites on the surface, and this originates from the fact that both the components are in direct contact with each other. The parallel 2D interlayer gap acts as a route for ion diffusion and charge transfer, speeding up the electrochemical kinetics. According to DFT calculations, the robust interaction between Ti3C2 and BP reduces the binding energy between BP and Na. More pertinently, BP NPs in the Ti3C2/PDDA–BP heterostructures can be transformed into monodisperse nanoparticles of BP, which are dispersed between Ti3C2 nanosheets via chemical interactions, to prevent BP aggregation and shield volume expansion, as well as serving as a stronger synergistic adsorption site to speed up sodium intercalation. After 500 cycles, the Ti3C2/BP based composite material exhibits an excellent reversible capacity of around 1112 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1. Furthermore, excellent rate performance and cycling stability were shown by the material at a higher current density (2.0 A g−1) and also the capacity still remained at 464 mA h g−1 at this current. The most striking feature was that at 1.0 A g−1 the reversible capacity remains at around ∼658 mA h g−1 with a decay rate of 0.05% after 2000 cycles. This demonstrates the excellent cycling stability of the material. Additionally, the electrochemical performance of Ti3C2/PDDA–BP was better than that of the BP–Ti3C2 material.

3.3. Potassium storage of MXenes and their composites
Potassium ion batteries (PIBs) are another emerging class of electrochemical energy storage systems95,96 with a promising future in long-life and low-cost energy storage. Although these diverse advantages suggest that PIBs have a bright future in large-scale energy storage systems, the larger relative atomic mass of potassium theoretically restricts the PIBs' energy density. At the same time, the higher radius of K+ slows down the intercalation kinetic mechanism and the larger operational pressure causes repetitive intercalation of the electrode material, resulting in undesirable PIB electrochemical rate and cycling performance. As a result, developing electrode materials that are amenable to removal and reversible insertion of K+, as well as matching of the electrolyte with them, is key to improving the electrochemical performance of PIBs. However, the current state of PIB material research is that researchers are mostly working on new types of layered materials. The 2D layered material has a large specific surface area and an open 2D ion conduction pathway, providing a significant number of active sites for the storage of potassium ions.97,98 In this regard, MXenes are attracting a huge amount of interest as potential electrode materials for PIBs. MXene based nanoribbons (a-Ti3C2) were synthesized by Dong and coworkers.103 They prepared the ribbons by continuous agitating of the MXene (Ti3C2) in an aqueous solution of KOH. The better electrochemical performance was revealed by the material because of the unique porous 3D network, larger surface area, smaller ionic diffusion route and enhanced interlayer spacing. At 200 mA g−1 the capacity was 78 mA h g−1. Because of its operability and simplicity, this approach of creating a-Ti3C2 is regarded as a new strategy for the manufacture of a wide variety of alkaline MXene materials. Another class of 2D materials such as potassium titanate (KTO) and sodium titanate (NTO) have widely been exploited as potential electrode materials for PIBs and SIBs.94,99–102 These materials have greater chemical stability, environmental friendliness and appropriate interlayer spacing, which makes them ideal candidates for the purpose. On the other hand, slow volume expansion as well as ion diffusion limit their applications. Nanoribbons of KTO and NTO were prepared by Dong and coworkers with the help of Ti3C2 as the precursor. They carried out the simultaneous conversion and oxidation of K/Na. The MXenes were prepared through etching of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase with the help of a 40% solution of hydrofluoric acid (HF), followed by a hydrothermal treatment in KOH or NaOH solution by the introduction of hydrogen peroxide, which results in the generation of M-KTO or M-NTO nanoribbons (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration diagram of the formation of M-KTO or M-NTO nanobelts and their atomic structures. (b) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of M-NTO cycled at different current densities from 50 to 2000 mA g−1. (c) Rate performance of M-NTO at different current densities. (d) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of M-NTO for SIBs at 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
On treatment with H2O2 and KOH, M-KTO was obtained as a yellow colored product with an open pore architecture. The reversibility of M-KTO was evaluated by using the CV curves of the 2nd and 3rd cycles, which indicate the charge/discharge curves by coinciding 2nd and 3rd cycles. The galvanostatic charge discharge curves and cycling performance have been illustrated in Fig. 7b and c. The stability of the formed material is also shown in Fig. 7d. Utilizing the idea, Dong and coworkers prepared a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and MXene based 2D nanoflake precursor. This precursor was further developed into a self-standing membrane electrode having a sandwich morphology, such as graphene layer/ultrathin NTO or KTO nanoflakes.103 The cycling stability and rate performance of the flexible KTO/rGO and NTO/rGO membrane electrodes were good. The remarkable electrochemical performance is due to the distinctive sandwich architecture, which reduces the ion diffusion pathway, improves electrical conductivity, and provides a strong bond between the stacked nano-chips. The greater value of initial discharge capacity was around 1094 mA h g−1 when KTO/rGO-10% was used as an anode material for PIBs. Furthermore, at 2 A g−1 a capacity of 75 mA h g−1 was shown after 700 cycles. Furthermore, Huang and coworkers80 documented carbon-coated MXenes/MoSe2 for potassium ion storage in 2019. They emphasize the importance of the composites and heterostructure of MXenes. To construct a 3D hierarchical heterojunction, 2D ultrathin MoSe2 nanostructures were decorated at the interface of MXene sheets with surface terminating oxygen atoms with self-linkages (Fig. 8a).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the MoSe2@MXene/C composite, (b) rate capabilities of MoSe2@MXene/C at different current densities and (c) comparison of the rate performance of MoSe2/MXene@C, MoSe2/MXene, MoSe2, and MXene at various current densities. (d) Long-term cycling discharge capacities and coulombic efficiencies of MoSe2/MXene@C at the current densities of 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
By expanding interlayer gaps, these ultra-thin nano-sheets operate as a volume strain barrier. In addition, the carbon plating on MoSe2/MXene reinforces the architecture and improves MXene conductivity. The structural durability was provided by the strong chemical interactions between the 2D sheets of MoSe2 and MXene layers. The structural features guarantee excellent ionic insertion and extraction with excellent electrochemical performance. After 100 cycles at a current density of 200 mA g−1, the reversible capacity was around 355 mA h g−1. Furthermore, Fig. 8b–d portray excellent rate capability and cycling stability. The MXene heterojunction hybrid composite, in other words, has a wide interlayer spacing and can endure volume change when big size K+ is introduced and extracted, resulting in superior electrochemical performance. MXene-based composite materials will continue to be the focus of development and research in the future, depending on existing material costs, research results, and other variables.
3.4. MXene-based composites for lithium–sulfur batteries
Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries (LSBs) have recently received a lot of attention due to their impressive energy density and theoretical specific capacity when compared to lithium-ion batteries.104–108 Though the average voltage peaks of Li–S batteries are towards lower value of potential (2.2 V vs. Li+/Li) when compared with other materials used as cathode. An excellent energy density and theoretical capacity of 2567 W h kg−1 and 1672 mA h g−1 respectively are shown by the sulfur electrodes due to the formation of Li2S. These values are 5–10 times greater than that of the traditional electrode used in LIBs.109 The abundance of sulfur, low cost, extended cycle life, and wide working temperature range are only a few of the benefits of lithium–sulfur batteries. Despite the fact that lithium–sulfur batteries have been studied intensively for decades, their practical implementation has been hampered by a number of disadvantages, which may include poor cyclability caused by the “shuttle effect” and low conductivity. The general way to address the above-mentioned difficulties is trapping sulfur species in a conductive carbon matrix. As a result, the conductivity of carbon/sulfur cathodes may be effectively increased, while polysulfide solubility in organic electrolytes can be reduced. The anchoring impact of lithium based polysulfides on different 2D materials was explored using computational methods.110 The findings show that MXene materials have excellent adsorption properties with Li2Sx species, and that the binding strength is determined by the charge transfer number from clusters of S atoms. Hydroxyl terminated and bare MXenes can be employed for the entrapment of polysulfides (Li2S4, Li2S6, and Li2S8). Alternative sulfides (Li2S and Li2S2), on the other hand, can be restricted by the bare and –O group MXenes, leading to a higher usage of sulfur active materials. These findings can be used to develop different S/MXene composites for lithium–sulfur batteries. Because of the strong interaction between functional groups and polysulfide species on MXenes, Ti2CTx and Ti3C2Tx have been widely used as conductive sulfur hosts for lithium–sulfur batteries, resulting in significantly improved cyclability and stability.111 Owing to their high self-functionalized surfaces and underlying metallic conductivity, Liang and coworkers produced 2D conductive MXene phases as suitable sulfur battery hosts.112 Excellent cycling stability was demonstrated by the S/Ti2C composites. This composite material contains 70% sulphur. This long-term cycling stability originates from the stronger interaction between Ti atoms and polysulfide species, which was confirmed by an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study. At C/5 the as-prepared cathode exhibits a good capacity of around 1200 mA h g−1. A capacity retention of 80% was achieved after 400 cycles at a current rate of C/2. MXenes not only serve as a conductive matrix for accommodating volume changes, but they also capture polysulfide molecules, reducing polysulfide solubility in organic electrolytes. Benefiting from this, Liang and coworkers presented a material composed of CNTs interwoven between MXene layers for the electrode application in Li–S batteries. This conductive network has the ability to adsorb polysulfides because of the porosity created as a result of the interwoven structure. Such a hierarchical MXene/CNT architecture allows for a greater sulfur host loading (5.5 mg cm−2) and outstanding performance in Li–S batteries.113 MXenes can also be employed as additives in membranes and cathodes114,115 to prolong the cycling performance of Li–S batteries. A number of investigations have been documented stating the enhanced adsorption of polysulfides by MXene based materials for Li–S batteries. Bao and coworkers carried out the thermal annealing of positively charged melamine and negatively charged metallic Ti3C2Tx flakes for the fabrication of disrupted nanosheets of N–Ti3C2Tx.116 These disrupted N-doped sheets can adsorb polysulfides through physical and chemical interactions and can be employed as electrode materials for Li–S batteries. This doping methodology guarantees a desirable porosity with a higher pore volume, which enables a greater loading of sulphur up to 5.1 mg cm−2. As a result, the disrupted N-doped MXene/sulfur nanosheets have good electrochemical properties, including a great cycling performance and excellent reversible capacity. Other nitrides or N-doped materials for high-performance Li–S batteries can be prepared using this doping synthesis technique.117,118 MXenes can be coupled with graphene or CNTs to generate a hierarchical networking having a greater pore volume, which facilitates a greater amount of sulfur loading.119 In an approach, Dong and coworkers developed integrated and flexible cathodes based upon MXenes.120Fig. 9 portrays a flexible and integrated Li–S battery and its electrochemical performance, which was prepared by the assembly of 3D alkalized host Ti3C2 MXene/S, named (a-Ti3C2–S) and a separator based on polypropylene (PP)/Ti3C2 MXene.120
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the flexible and integrated a-Ti3C2–S/d-Ti3C2/PP electrode for Li–S batteries. (b) Schematic of the preparation of d-Ti3C2 nanosheets and the a-Ti3C2–S hybrid. (c) Electrochemical performance of the a-Ti3C2–S/d-Ti3C2/PP electrode tested. Reproduced with permission,120 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
As a result, the integrated electrode exhibits excellent rate capacity, high reversible capacity and low overpotential. More crucially, the utilization of an Al foil current collector is not required for this free-standing all-MXene-based cathode, which bodes well for next-generation/advanced flexible energy storage systems. Due to the multiple alternatives of MXenes for high power/energy Li–S batteries, this design of an all-MXene-based separator and cathode is highly adaptable to build several all-nanosheet-like cathodes. MXenes have the inborn ability of polarization than traditional conductive hosts such as carbon for fabrication of sulfur-based cathodes, allowing the MXene matrix to efficiently seduce polysulfides throughout Li–S battery cycling. MXenes can be functionalized to increase their adsorption capacity to lithium polysulfides, removing the shuttling effect in Li–S batteries. Furthermore, developing hierarchical MXenes with a 3D porous structure will increase the mass loading of sulfur in the cathode, resulting in a significant increase in integrated capacity. MXenes can limit the formation of lithium dendrites, enhancing the characteristics of lithium metal anodes for Li–S batteries, in addition to separators and cathodes.121
3.5. Zinc ion batteries
MXenes with a 2D layered architecture belong to the family of metal nitrides and carbides.122 Among the family of MXenes, Ti3C2Tx has exhibited high packing density (∼4 g cm−3), rich functionalities and excellent conductivity (∼6000–8000 S cm−1), making it a promising candidate for conductive substrates in a number of energy storage systems.26,123,124 The traditionally used conductive substrates such as CNTs and graphene cannot activate the host material completely, which limits the rate performance of the material.125 Luo and coworkers documented a composite material based on accordion type Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and MnOx, and the group named it MnOx@Ti3C2Tx (Fig. 10a). The current is uniformly split into each successive particle of MnOx@Ti3C2Tx as per the principle of parallel circuits, considerably increasing the electrode's maximal current limit (Fig. 10b), thus confirming that at a high current density the active material can be fully activated. However, the initial capacity was maintained at 50% by MnOx@Ti3C2Tx by increasing the current from 0.1 to 10 A g−1 (Fig. 8c), accompanied by power and energy densities in the range of 25 W L−1and 80 W h L−1 respectively.126 In another study, Shi and coworkers developed a ZnMn2O4@Ti3C2Tx based composite material through a hydrothermal methodology. The group investigated the electrochemical performance of the material and found that the dissolution of ZnMn2O4 was inhibited by the Ti3C2Tx matrix. This inhibition effectively improves the cycling performance with a retention of capacity of ∼92.4% at 1 A g−1 after 5000 cycles of the cathode material.127 Furthermore, V2CTx has good electrochemical stability, conductivity, a higher specific surface area, etc., and is appropriate for enhancing the performance of aqueous ZIBs. During the etching of the MAX phase, Venkatkarthick and coworkers developed a strategy to develop V2Ox on the surface of V2CTx. Because V2CTx has a larger surface area, additional pseudo-capacitive interactions are triggered, resulting in improved rate performance. At 0.05 and 2 A g−1, the composite cathode material reveals capacities of 304 and 84 mA h g−1 respectively.128 Similarly, Narayanasamy and coworkers developed a V2O5@V2C based cathode material for aqueous ZIBs. Benefiting from the improved permeability and lower interfacial resistance for the electrolyte of the V2O5@V2C nanohybrid, the as-prepared aqueous ZIBs displayed a retention of capacity of 87% for 2000 long cycles at 4 A g−1. At higher densities 0.5 and 4 A g−1, the cathode showed higher values of capacity such as 0.5 and 4 A g−1 respectively.129 The MXene-based composite may be manufactured into a binder-free electrode with exceptional mechanical properties thanks to its ultra-thin two-dimensional layered structure. MXene-based self-supporting electrodes have a high volumetric energy density (80 W h L−1) and hence have a wide range of applications in tiny and lightweight equipment.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of MnOx@Ti3C2Tx. (b) Schematic illustration of the parallel circuitry at the nanoscale based on MnOx@Ti3C2Tx. (c) Rate performance of MnOx@Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission126 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
3.6. MXene and MXene based materials for supercapacitors
The high power density of supercapacitors compared with conventional batteries has attracted a great amount of attention.9,130 As a result, supercapacitors are thought to be an ideal choice for next-generation high-power devices. Supercapacitors are classified into two types on the basis of storage mechanisms. The first is the electrical double layer capacitor (EDLC), which stores charges in a Helmholtz double layer at the electrode material surfaces. The supercapacitor in an ideal EDLC has a traditional rectangular cyclic voltammogram with no redox reaction, resulting in excellent power performance.131–133 As the storage of charges occurs at the surface of electrodes, it limits the specific energy density of the supercapacitor.134 Furthermore, the capacity of an EDCL is directly related to the surface area of the electrode. Therefore, dealing with the surface area of the electrode is a challenging task.135,136 Another class of capacitors is pseudocapacitors, which exhibit faradaic redox processes during charge/discharge. Redox reactions occur on or near the electrode surface in pseudocapacitor systems, allowing them to store greater capacitance than an EDLC.137 In pseudocapacitors, conductive polymers or metal oxides are employed as electrode materials.138 The performance of pseudocapacitors is influenced by the size of the electrode materials. The faradaic redox reaction takes place on the surface of nanoscale electrode materials. Moreover, the smaller the size, the greater the usage proportion. Because of the reduced ion and electron transfer mechanism in nanoscale electrodes, significant power density is achieved. The use of MXene-based materials in elevated performance supercapacitors has many promising features. First, both metal ions and polar organic molecules can intercalate MXenes. MXenes can electrochemically or chemically intercalate a diverse variety of mono-/multi-valent cations (e.g., Mg2+, K+, Na+, Li+, and NH4+), resulting in high volume capacity.62 Second, high conductivity MXenes increase the electrochemical efficiency of composite materials by allowing quick electrical transfer into other active materials. Furthermore, the MXene (Ti3C2Tx) exhibits pseudocapacitive activity when coupled with oxides, according to in situ XAS findings.139 Likewise, the surface functionalities such as –O, –F,–OH, etc., influence the ion adsorption and play a vital role in the volume capacity.140 To develop high-performance electrode materials for supercapacitors, the rational design of MXene materials is crucial. The functional groups, porosity and interlayer distance have a significant impact on the characteristics of MXene-based materials. In nanopores, for example, the fleet dispersal characteristics of ions may be observed, and the orientation of cation dipoles can be well-organized.141 The MXene's high interlayer spacing allows metal ions or organic molecules to be inserted more easily into supercapacitors.142 According to Mashtalir and coworkers, hydrazine intercalation reduces the MXene's surface groups (e.g., –OH and –F) generating a pillaring effect between MXene layers, hence increasing the interlayer distance and improving ion/molecule accessibility. For supercapacitors, Ti3C2Tx has been widely explored. The volumetric capacitance of the Ti3C2Tx paper electrodes in neutral and basic electrolytes exceeds that of the best all-carbon EDLCs and is equivalent to that of previously reported activated graphene-based electrodes.143 In a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, the rolled Ti3C2Tx clay electrode exhibits volumetric capacitance in the range of 900 F cm−3. As protons are the smallest cations, they have the most accessibility to electro-active sites. Furthermore, even at high charge/discharge rates, Ti3C2Tx exhibits excellent capacitive performance.25 Furthermore, excellent cyclability has also been portrayed by the MXene over 10000 cycles without fading of capacitance. Thin MXene electrodes on flexible substrates, on the other hand, show even greater rate capability.144 The interlamination distance is expanded by the added ions and shortened by the ion deintercalation, according to in situ XRD data. As a result, the volumetric contraction and expansion in the cycle charge/discharge operation will be revealed by the MXene pole. As a result, the stable interlayer aids in the preservation of the layered structure.145 The interlamination of a conjugated polymer is a good way to increase capacitance. Ti3C2Tx films having polyfluorene derivatives inserted can achieve high volumetric capacitance and excellent retention.146 Low volumetric energy storage and extended ion transport pathways for high charge/discharge rates emerge from strategies for aiding ion movement by creating nanoarchitectures with substantial porosity. The vertical orientation of 2D MXene nanosheets permits directional ion transport, resulting in thickness-independent electrochemical performances in thick MXene films, according to Xia and coworkers as illustrated in Fig. 11a–d.147
 Fig. 11  (a–d) Schematic illustration of ion transport in Ti3C2Tx MXene films. Ion transport in (a) horizontally stacked and (b) vertically aligned Ti3C2Tx MXene films. (c) Illustration of the surfactant enhanced lamellar structure of the MXLLC. (d) Illustration of the alignment method used in this work. Reproduced with permission,147 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
The electrode films produced with this technology have outstanding performance that is largely independent of film thickness up to 200 μm. As a result, 2D MXene materials are particularly appealing for supercapacitor applications. Furthermore, MXene surface treatment improves the electrochemical behavior of MXene-based electrodes.148 Calcination and alkalization can be used to remove the functional moiety on the surface of MXenes, which reduces the electron transport channel and increases the interlayer gap of MXenes. As a result, increased electronic conductivity can be obtained, allowing supercapacitors to attain good electrocatalytic activity.149 2D transition metal carbides (MXenes) can function at higher rates than ordinary EDLCs, according to Lukatskaya and coworkers (Fig. 12). Furthermore, they have higher areal and electrical capacitance than conducting polymers, transition metal oxides, and carbon.150 For MXene electrode topologies with increased ion accessibility, two rational designs were used. Consequently, a macroporous Ti3C2Tx MXene sheet outperformed the best carbon-based supercapacitors in terms of capacitance at higher scan rates. MXene hydrogels have outstanding volumetric capacitance that surpasses RuO2 volumetric performance. DFT calculations show that doping can change the MXene by narrowing the band gap. To boost electrochemical efficiency, both anions and cations can be used in doping technology. By inserting a dopant of Sn atoms, the band gap of Sc2CF2 can be reduced from 0.96 to 0.24 eV.151 Wen and coworkers on the other hand created nitrogen atom doped Ti3C2Tx and improved electrocatalytic activity. The nitrogen atom substitutes the C atom in the N doping procedure, causing the c lattice parameter of the Ti3C2Tx film to increase from 1.92 to 2.46 nm. Electrochemically active sites and a higher surface area are possible with this treatment, which improves electrochemical capacitance.152 MXenes can be employed in solid electrolyte supercapacitors with high volumetric capacitance in addition to liquid electrolyte supercapacitors.153 When stretched in a specific direction, MXenes exhibit high elastic moduli, which is beneficial for all solid-state supercapacitor applications.154 Zhang and coworkers used a spin-casting approach to create extremely conductive and transparent Ti3C2Tx films for solid-state supercapacitors.154 Furthermore, DC conductivities are great in transparent films with a high transparency (93%). The volumetric capacitance of these very transparent, conductive Ti3C2Tx sheets for supercapacitors is exceptional. Mixing Ti3C2Tx with single-walled carbon nanotubes yields asymmetric solid-state supercapacitor sheets with high capacitance, energy density, and extended lifespan. As a result, Ti3C2Tx films hold promise as future transparent, conductive, capacitive electrodes that might be used in a variety of high-performance portable and wearable devices. Many techniques, such as interlayer adjustment, modification by doping, surface modification, and integrating with other unique materials, can improve the electrocatalytic activity of MXene-based composites for supercapacitor applications. These approaches have significantly enhanced the characteristics of the MXene layer, resulting in a significant increase in supercapacitor capacitance and energy density. Furthermore, the use of MXene-based electrode materials in solid-state supercapacitors can considerably improve gravimetric and volumetric capacitances, making supercapacitors a suitable candidate for high-power transportation energy systems. However, new supercapacitor technologies with higher energy and power densities can still be developed. Porosity control, for example, is a more straightforward way to increase the surface area and hence enhance the EDLC than altering the curvature of 2D MXenes. As a result, advanced research and development is required to obtain breakthrough materials and methods for high-performance supercapacitors.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the MXene structure. (b) SEM image of the Ti3C2Tx MXene hydrogel cross section. (c) SEM image of the microporous templated Ti3C2Tx electrode cross section. Scale bars, 5 μm. Insets in (b) and (c) show schematically the ionic current pathway in electrodes of architectures, reproduced with permission,150 copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
3.7. MXenes as electrolyte additives
In the case of rechargeable energy storage devices, electrolytes with enhanced ionic conductivity, low cost, non-toxicity, chemical inertness, excellent compatibility, low interfacial resistance with electrodes, and a wide working voltage window are promising parameters.155–160 In this regard, aqueous electrolytes possess the characteristics of nonflammability and high ionic conductivity and a narrow working voltage window but the side reactions such as hydrogen and oxygen evolution severely damage the applicability of rechargeable batteries in practical applications. In aqueous rechargeable batteries, extending the working voltage window and avoiding the OER and HER are critical steps for increasing energy density and boosting performance.161,162 Sun and coworkers162,163 recently demonstrated that Ti3C2Tx may be used as an electrolyte additive in aqueous Zn-ion batteries (Fig. 13a–e). They found that adding Ti3C2Tx to ZnSO4 aqueous solution can speed up ion transport by lowering the Zn2+ concentration gradient at the electrode/electrolyte interface, contribute to the establishment of a rigorous solid electrolyte interface film, and control uniform initial Zn deposition for aqueous rechargeable Zn-ion batteries (Fig. 13a and b). The high adhesive potential between Ti3C2Tx MXenes and Zn foil was explained by DFT theoretical calculations, implying that the numerous surface functionalities of MXenes can act as seeding sites for ubiquitous Zn nucleation and subsequent homogeneous deposition. They also discovered that the amount of Ti3C2Tx additive used affects the ionic conductivity (Fig. 13c and d), ionic transport capabilities, reaction kinetics, SEI layer, and Zn plating/stripping features. The Zn metal batteries and Zn–V2O5 whole cell obtained dramatically better cycle performances in the modified ZnSO4–MXene electrolyte (0.5 mg mL−1 of MXene) (Fig. 13e). The thorough study of MXenes as an electrolyte addition opens up new possibilities for dendrite-free aqueous metal-based batteries. In another approach Zhao and co-workers documented a reported on the solvation structure of the regulating electrolyte. The developed MXene based three-dimensional potassium ion intercalated material had an increased interlayer spacing for the efficient storage of potassium ions. They found that an inorganic rich and thin SEI was established at the surface of the potassium ion pre-intercalated Ti3C2Tx electrode, which is advantageous for reaction kinetics and interfacial stability. Furthermore, 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx/activated carbon (AC) potassium-ion hybrid capacitors (PIHCs) were built as a proof of concept, and they demonstrated remarkable electrochemical performances. For highly reactive MXene-based anode materials in energy storage devices, these findings underscore the importance of both electrolyte optimization and rational structure design (Fig. 13f and g).164
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the effect of the MXene additive on the Zn deposition process. (b) In situ optical microscopy observation of Zn deposition at 4 mA cm−2 in a blank ZnSO4 electrolyte and MXene-added electrolyte. Density functional theory calculation models of (c) Ti3C2Tx adsorbed on Zn foil and (d) Zn atoms absorbed on Zn foil and Ti3C2Tx and the corresponding binding energies. (e) Long-term galvanostatic cycling of the Zn–Zn symmetrical cell at 1, 2 and 4 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, reproduced with permission from ref. 162. (f) Synthesis of 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx. (b–d) SEM images of 2D, 3D and 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx materials. (g) The cycling performance of 2D, 3D and 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx electrodes at 0.05 A g−1 for 300 cycles. Rate capability of the as-prepared electrodes at different current densities (0.05 A g−1 to 5 A g−1). Long-term cycling stability of the as-prepared electrodes at 1 A g−1 for 3000 cycles and CV curves of the 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx electrode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 between 0.01 and 3.0 V (vs. K+/K) in the initial three cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164. 
3.8. MXene based thin films for energy storage devices
Because of unsustainable fossil fuel usage as well as environmental pollution challenges, clean energy generation and storage has received a lot of attention in recent decades.163 Rechargeable batteries and solid-state capacitors (SCs) are two common types of energy storage devices used in consumer gadgets and electric vehicles (EVs).63,165 Various nanostructures and nanomaterials have been researched to show high potential in enhancing energy storage capability or creating functional devices as a result of the rapid growth of nanotechnology and nanoscience.166,167 2D MXenes combine the benefits of dimensionality-related physicochemical features with hydrophilicity, strong ion/electron conductivity, and ease of processing, leading to increased interest in using MXene-based materials in energy storage applications.68 MXene based thin films (MBTFs) with various compositions and architectures, in particular, have shown good ion/charge storage and efficient suppression of LiPS shuttling.168 We will discuss recent efforts to build MBTFs with desirable efficiency for energy storage devices. The commercialization of Li-ion batteries (LIBs) has been one of the most successful strategies for meeting the growing needs of portable devices and electric vehicles (EVs).169 Unfortunately, graphite, as the most commonly used anode material for LIBs, has a low specific capacity (372 mA h g−1) and poor rate capability.170 Various alternative anode materials, such as Si, Sn, TMOs, and TMDs, have been used in the past to increase LIB performance.171 However, enormous irreversible capacities, weak electrical conductivities, and rapid volume fluctuations during Li intercalation/deintercalation make their widespread use problematic. As a result, potential materials and combinations must have high conductivity, great mechanical strength, and the ability to accommodate rapid Li diffusion. Because of the natural abundance and low cost of Na and K resources, Na-ion batteries (SIBs) and K-ion batteries (PIBs) have been studied as prospective alternatives in large-scale energy storage applications.172–175 Furthermore, rechargeable multivalent ion batteries such as Mg-ion, Ca-ion, and Al-ion are gaining popularity.176 Developing adequate host materials for reversible and stable storage of these alkali metal ions, however, would remain a problem due to their enormous ionic radii. Due to their kinetics and thermodynamics of diffusion in the interlamellar space and metal-ion intercalation, various studies have revealed that MXenes can serve as either conductive matrices or electrochemically active materials to assist other promising candidates in recent years.177
The electrochemical performances of MXenes for ion storage, such as electrical conductivity, ion mobility, capacity, and so on, are largely determined by their surface terminations. For example, bare Ti3C2, which has good electrical conductivity, a low diffusion barrier, a high theoretical Li capacity, and a low open circuit voltage, is a better anode material for LIBs than Ti3C2Tx, which tends to deteriorate Li diffusion and decrease Li storage capacity.59 Xie and coworkers also showed that nonterminated MXenes have greater ion transport properties and capacities than O-terminated MXenes using first-principles simulations.54 Another study used bare Ti3C2 as an example to explore the electronic characteristics of the adsorption of Ca, K, Na, and Li atoms theoretically.178 The charge transfer from the adatoms to the Ti3C2 monolayer is shown in Fig. 14a, which shows the bonding charge distributions of Li, Na, K, and Ca adatoms in the Ti3C2Mx (M indicates adatoms) system. The optimal migration paths of Li, Na, K, and Ca on the Ti3C2 monolayer along the high symmetry line between energetically favorable adsorption sites on the surface are depicted in Fig. 14b. The computed diffusion barriers for Ca, K, Na, and Li are 0.118, 0.103, 0.096, and 0.068 eV, respectively, which are substantially lower than those of commercial graphite, which has a diffusion barrier of more than 0.3 eV for Li, indicating the potential of Ti3C2 as a high rate electrode material. The capacity of electrode materials for various ions is a fundamental characteristic that controls their practical uses. Based on the complete adsorption principle,53 metal ion storage capacities on O-terminated MXenes were predicted. For instance, Ti2CO2 displays the intended maximum capacity at 552, 487, 570, 264, and 288 mA h g−1 for fully adsorbed Al, Ca, Mg, K, and Na respectively, corresponding to its coverage. Multivalent metal ions with extra charges have higher theoretical capacities than monovalent metal ions, which is promising. To address the intrinsic sluggish ion migration caused by the large ionic radius for multivalent metal ion storage, structural engineering (e.g., flaws, interlayer gap, and hybridization) was recommended for MXene-based materials. Due to their lighter weight, bare MXene nanosheets with no surface groups have higher metal capacities. MXenes as anode materials for rechargeable metal ion batteries are gaining a lot of attention as a result of theoretical studies' predictions and knowledge, as well as the continual emergence of experimental research. To increase the electrical interaction between separated layers of MXenes, 2D graphene has been added to MBFs. Han and coworkers synthesized rGO/MXene sheets as freestanding LIB electrodes using a simple filtration method followed by heat treatment.179 They discovered that annealing may effectively increase the interface contact and charge transfer between MXenes and rGO nanosheets by removing the surface functional groups of both MXenes and GO. The electrochemically active Ti2CTx and rGO nanosheets efficiently prevent the layers from stacking and combine synergistically to produce ionically and electrically conducting electrodes. To obtain maximum surface area permeability and increased ion transport, processing a 2D MXene nanostructure into 3D frameworks is a preferred technique. A typical 3D microporous MXene film, for example, was created using a template approach (Fig. 14c).72 After removing the PMMA spheres during annealing, many macropores remained. As illustrated in Fig. 8b and c, the obtained flexible film is made up of a lot of Ti3C2Tx hollow spheres and has a thickness of around 13 mm. The same method was used to make 3D macroporous MXene films with different compositions (V2CTx and Mo2CTx). These 3D MXene films outperformed multilayer MXenes and MXene/CNT hybrid architectures when used directly as anodes for Na-ion storage. Reversible capacities of roughly 295, 290, and 310 mA h g−1 were held by 3D V2CTx, Mo2CTx, and Ti3C2Tx films after 1000 cycles at a high charging rate of 2.5C. Sulfur was also used as a template to create a flexible 3D MXene foam with a porous structure (Fig. 14d–f).57 The 3D porous MXene foam demonstrated increased lithium storage capacity and better ion transport thanks to its large active sites and foam structure. As a result, after 3500 cycles at 1 and 2 A g−1, the suggested electrode with optimal porosity retained capacities of roughly 220 and 180 mA h g−1, demonstrating both high capacity and great cycle stability (Fig. 14g–k). Rather than employing the template approach, which requires postprocessing to remove the template, Liu et al. used an electrolyte-induced self-assembly strategy with the help of GO to build a 3D porous structure in the MBF.63 The GO skeleton converts the thick and stacked MXene sheets into a 3D porous structure, while the MXene sheets provide high electrical conductivity to the hybrid film. As a result, the suggested MXene rGO hybrid film greatly enhances quick electrolyte ion diffusion and transport, as well as rapid electron transfer.
 Fig. 14  DFT calculations on MXenes as electrode materials for MIBs. (a) Bonding charge density for adatoms Li, Na, K, and Ca in the Ti3C2Mx system. (b) Schematic illustration of the top view of the energetically optimized migration pathways and the corresponding diffusion barrier profiles of Li, Na, K, and Ca on Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic preparation of the 3D macroporous MXene film. (d) Digital image of the flexible 3D macroporous MXene film and (e) cross-sectional SEM image, reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (f) Schematic preparation of the 3D porous MXene foam with a S template. (g) Cycle performance at 50 mA g−1 and (h) rate properties of the stacked MXene film and the 3D porous MXene foams. (i) Long-term cycle stability of the p-MXene-71 electrode. (j and k) Nyquist plots with the equivalent circuit before cycling and after 300 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
4. Summary and perspectives
Conclusively, the progress of MXenes and MXene based nanocomposites as potential candidates for the fabrication of a variety of electrodes in energy storage devices has been presented in terms of their properties, synthesis and electrochemical performance. First, existing preparation techniques describing their influence on the properties and structure of MXenes have been discussed in detail. Then the use of MXenes and MXene based nanocomposites as energy storage materials as well as the impact of interfacial functionalization and the interlayer structure have been discussed comprehensively. The unique 2D lamellar architecture and excellent conductivity of MXenes with fast ion/electron transfer rate and enhanced structural stability guarantee their use as conductive substrates in a variety of energy storage devices. MXenes are active materials exhibiting pseudocapacitive behavior in supercapacitors and metal ion batteries because of their abundant surface functional groups, which provide enough active sites for rapid surface redox reactions. Furthermore, due to their high ion diffusion mobility and low ion adsorption energy, MXenes can also be utilized as passivation materials in potassium/sodium/lithium/zinc metal batteries to prevent metal dendrite development. Likewise, MXene-based materials exhibit significantly increased electrochemical performance when mixed with other advanced materials such as Si, BP, and TMOs to produce a synergetic heterojunction. Although MXene-based nanomaterials have made significant progress, there are still a number of challenges with their electrochemical energy storage applications that have yet to be resolved.
(1) MXenes possess a wide range of applications because of their safe and green synthetic methodologies. As previously stated, the micro–nanoarchitectures and surface chemistry (pores, interlayer spacing, atomic defects, surface groups, heteroatom doping, etc.) of MXenes play a vital role in their electrochemical performance. Therefore, to improve MXene electrochemical performance, it's critical to synthesize them with exact layer numbers, enhanced interlayer spacing, programmable surface groups, and controllable atomic defects. However, current preparation procedures, which are dominated by HF-based etching, are unable to meet these requirements. In this context, a F-free approach such as cold vapor deposition (CVD) technology, which can control the surface functionalities and the production of highly pure MXenes, would be a promising approach in the future.
(2) Greater efforts should be carried out in developing MXene derived energy storage devices for practical applications. At present, MXene based materials are only employed on the laboratory scale, which needs to be addressed at the industrial level. This can be done by considering certain factors to evaluate the MXene based materials in energy storage devices, such as (i) the power and load density of the active material, (ii) the initial value of coulombic efficiency (ICE) should be improved (reported ICE is almost less than 65%) and (iii) the structural integrity of MXenes in the cycling process is critical, as it affects the efficiency and availability of MXene-based energy storage devices; therefore, more efficient preventative measures to prevent MXene oxidation should be taken.
(3) In different cycling processes, the electrochemical reaction pathways and structural evolution of MXene based electrodes need to be studied. For this purpose, in situ techniques including TEM, SEM, electrochemical Raman, XPS, etc., can be better tools in evaluating MXene based electrodes in terms of structural and component evolution such as interaction between the electrolyte and surface groups and the active formation of solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) films.
Conflicts of interest
The author declares that he has no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia is thankfully acknowledged for providing literature services. The author did not receive any funding to furnish this work.
References
J. Ali, T. Rasheed, M. Afreen, M. T. Anwar, Z. Nawaz, H. Anwar and K. Rizwan, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 727, 138610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rasheed, M. T. Anwar, N. Ahmad, F. Sher, S. U.-D. Khan, A. Ahmad, R. Khan and I. Wazeer, J. Environ. Manage., 2021, 287, 112257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rasheed, T. Hussain, M. T. Anwar, J. Ali, K. Rizwan, M. Bilal, F. H. Alshammari, N. Alwadai and A. S. Almuslem, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 737033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rasheed, A. Naveed, F. Nabeel, M. S. Ahmed, J. Ali and S. U.-D. Khan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 242, 122543 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Azoti and A. Elmarakbi, Compos. Struct., 2017, 168, 313–321 CrossRef .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Larcher and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Majeed, T. Rasheed, S. Shafi, A. R. Bagheri, T. A. Nguyen, N. ul Haq and M. Bilal, in Biopolymeric Nanomaterials, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 615–638 Search PubMed .
T. Rasheed, C. Li, F. Nabeel and T. A. Sherazi, Synth. Met., 2019, 248, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rasheed, F. Nabeel, A. Naveed, S. Majeed and T. A. Sherazi, Mater. Today Commun., 2019, 21, 100694 CrossRef CAS .
W. U. Rehman, A. A. Hassan, J. Ahmed, T. Rasheed, S. U.-D. Khan and A. M. Al-Mohaimeed, Synth. Met., 2020, 269, 116570 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cai, L. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Dong, H. Chen, X. Yi, J. Yuan, X. Xia and C. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 545–554 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, Z. Wang, Q. Yang, L. Tan, L. Dong and M. Dong, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, M. Zhu, W. Zhang, X. Zhen, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, C. Zhi and P. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3333–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, X. Li, Y. Jiao, H. Yan, A. Wu, G. Yang, Y. Wang, C. Tian and H. Fu, Nano Res., 2021, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Guo, J. Huo, Y. Liu, W. Wu, Y. Wang, M. Wu, H. Liu and G. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900159 CrossRef .
Z. Kang, M. A. Khan, Y. Gong, R. Javed, Y. Xu, D. Ye, H. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6089–6108 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Li, Z. Gong, J. Xie, T. Lu and L. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 587, 489–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, J. Li, Y. Li, P. Cai, C. Liu, G. Zou, H. Hou, L. Huang and X. Ji, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 459–466 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhong, H. Liu, D. Wei, J. Hu, H. Zhang, H. Hou, M. Peng, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125054 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Liu, W. Li, X. Guo, Y. Wang, G. Wang and D. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700283 CrossRef .
M. Naguib and Y. Gogotsi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 128–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Karlsson, J. Birch, J. Halim, M. W. Barsoum and P. O. Persson, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4955–4960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Borysiuk, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 265705 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, R. R. Unocic, B. L. Armstrong and J. Nanda, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9353–9358 RSC .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, F. Wang, A. G. Ricciardulli, M. R. Lohe, P. W. Blom and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 15717–15721 CrossRef .
T. Li, L. Yao, Q. Liu, J. Gu, R. Luo, J. Li, X. Yan, W. Wang, P. Liu and B. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6115–6119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Fang, R. Hu, K. Zhu, K. Ye, J. Yan, G. Wang and D. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005663 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiao, H. Yu, H. Jin, M. Wu, Y. Fang, J. Sun, Z. Hu, T. Li, J. Wu and L. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, X. Zhou, F. Chen, G. Gao, S. Wang, C. Shen, T. Chen, C. Zhi and P. Eklund, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3841–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Khazaei and M. Arai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. s. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov and D. Krishnan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099–5102 RSC .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 73–85 CrossRef .
G. Yang, W. Lei, C. Chen, S. Qin, L. Zhang, Y. Su, J. Wang, Z. Chen, L. Sun and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104954 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Jing, J. Ma, C. F. Du and Q. Yan, Small, 2019, 15, 1901503 CrossRef PubMed .

          J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Materials for Sustainable Energy: a Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles from, Nature Publishing Group,  2011, pp. 171–179 Search PubMed .
S. Qi, X. Xie, X. Peng, D. H. Ng, M. Wu, Q. Liu, J. Yang and J. Ma, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1900209 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, M. Mao, S. Qi and J. Ma, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 3755–3769 RSC .
M. R. Asghar, M. T. Anwar, T. Rasheed, A. Naveed, X. Yan and J. Zhang, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 654, 012017 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, C. Deng, X. Liao, Y. He, Z. Ma and H. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36969–36975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(8), 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Tao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Gan, C. Liang and W. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2491–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. Kent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, Q. Hu, J. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Wu and A. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 74–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhao, Q. Zhu, J. Miao, P. Zhang, P. Wan, L. He and B. Xu, Small, 2019, 15, 1904293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Du, Q. Liang, Y. Zheng, Y. Luo, H. Mao and Q. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33779–33784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tang, Z. Zhou and P. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16909–16916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Come, B. Dyatkin, V. Presser, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Anasori, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, X. Zhou, W. Deng, D. Lei and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3634–3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Small, 2013, 9, 1877–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, P. Zhang, W. Zheng, W. Tian, J. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 285, 94–102 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Niu, J. Z. He, B. N. Gu, M. C. Liu and Y. L. Chueh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2103558 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yang, H. Ji, J. Kim, H. Kim and Y. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5000–5005 RSC .
D. Xiong, X. Li, Z. Bai and S. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703419 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, J. Wang, H. Dou and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39610–39617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, M. Clites, G. Ying, S. Kota, J. Wang, V. Natu, X. Wang, E. Pomerantseva, M. Cao and M. W. Barsoum, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4533–4536 RSC .
G. Lv, J. Wang, Z. Shi and L. Fan, Mater. Lett., 2018, 219, 45–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, X. Xie, C. E. Ren, T. Makaryan, B. Anasori, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702410 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Eames and M. S. Islam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16270–16276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, Q. Xu, H. Liu, M. Tao, Y. Luo, S. Bao, C. Li and M. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 220–225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Zhao, Q. Yao and L. Guan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 270, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Zhu, X. Wu, N. Zhang and H. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 774, 601–609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, L. Wu, H. Dou and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 932–938 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Guo, L. Hu, Q. Xu, Y. Li, D. Liu and M. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 448–453 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, T. Makaryan, M. Zhao, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502161 CrossRef .
H. Huang, J. Cui, G. Liu, R. Bi and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, L. Xiu and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607017 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Du, M. Tao, W. Gao, Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, S. Bao and M. Xu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 117–125 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Cheng, Q. Li, L. Chang and L. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, X. Xie, S. Choi, Y. Zhao, H. Liu, C. Wang, S. Chang and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12445–12452 RSC .
J. Huang, R. Meng, L. Zu, Z. Wang, N. Feng, Z. Yang, Y. Yu and J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chang, K. Wang, S. Zhu, L. Huang, Z. He, M. Chen, H. Shao and J. Wang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tao, Y. Zhang, R. Zhan, B. Guo, Q. Xu and M. Xu, Mater. Lett., 2018, 230, 173–176 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, Y. Su, C. Zhou, L. Yao, J. Hu, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhou, N. Hu and Y. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 770, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohan and R. Paulose, J. Electron. Mater., 2018, 47, 6878–6885 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, T. Makaryan, J. Halim, M. Boota, S. Kota, B. Anasori, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie and M. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 513 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, J. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Wu and F. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 214, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, X. Jiang, G. Li, Q. Yao and J. Y. Lee, ChemNanoMat, 2018, 4, 56–60 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, Z. Qian, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, X. Hui, G. Jiang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104037 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. C. Kim, M. Bianchini, D. H. Seo, J. Rodriguez-Garcia and G. Ceder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702384 CrossRef .
J. C. Pramudita, D. Sehrawat, D. Goonetilleke and N. Sharma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602911 CrossRef .
X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Cao and G. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2018, 13, 2742–2757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, P. Nie, J. Jiang, B. Ding, H. Dou and X. Zhang, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1560–1565 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, X. Huang, T. Lin, T. Qiu, H. Huang, X. Zhu, Q. Gu, B. Luo and L. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 550–559 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, F. Li, Y. Liu, X. Yuan, L. Zhang and S. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 599–604 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, J. P. Zhou, Z. Q. Guo, Y. X. Lei and Q. U. Hassan, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2018, 53, 1700153 CrossRef .
C. Zeng, F. Xie, X. Yang, M. Jaroniec, L. Zhang and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 8676–8680 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, Z.-S. Wu, S. Zheng, X. Wang, J. Qin, S. Wang, X. Shi and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4792–4800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, H. B. Wu and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3061–3070 RSC .
J. Liang, Z. Sun, F. Li and H. Cheng, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 76–106 CrossRef .
J. Song, C. Zhang, X. Guo, J. Zhang, L. Luo, H. Liu, F. Wang and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16610–16616 RSC .
W. Wang, L. Huai, S. Wu, J. Shan, J. Zhu, Z. Liu, L. Yue and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 11619–11633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, C. Luo, G. Zhou, Z. Z. Pan, J. Ma, H. Nishihara, Y. B. He, F. Kang, W. Lv and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2100793 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rosenman, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, A. Garsuch and F. F. Chesneau, Adv.
Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500212 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. W. Seh, Z. Fu, R. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3780–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Sim, G. S. Yi, M. Je, Y. Lee and Y.-C. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 3979–3983 CrossRef .
X. Liang, Y. Rangom, C. Y. Kwok, Q. Pang and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603040 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Rao, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Meng, X. Qian, J. Liu, X. Shen, G. Qiao and R. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11047–11054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, D. Su, X. Xie, X. Guo, W. Bao, G. Shao and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29427–29433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, L. Liu, C. Wang, S. Choi, D. Wang and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702485 CrossRef .
L. Ma, G. Zhu, W. Zhang, P. Zhao, Y. Hu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, R. Chen, T. Chen and Z. Tie, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 6436–6446 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q. Liang, J. Han, Y. Tao, D. Liu, C. Zhang, W. Lv and Y. Quan-Hong, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3480–3489 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, X. Xie, J. Xu, X. Guo, J. Song, W. Wu, D. Su and G. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2017, 23, 12613–12619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, S. Zheng, J. Qin, X. Zhao, H. Shi, X. Wang, J. Chen and Z.-S. Wu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2381–2388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, R. Lv, A. Wang, W. Guo, X. Liu and J. Luo, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 15248–15253 CrossRef .
J. Peng, X. Chen, W. Ong, X. Zhao and N. Li, Chem, 2019, 5, 18–50 CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li, Y. Bai, H. Xiao, Y. Liu, R. Liu and G. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900326 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, J. Yu, L. Shi, Z. Wang, H. Liu, B. Yang, C. Li, C. Zhu and J. Xu, Small, 2018, 14, 1803786 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, Y. Chen, P. Li, F. Fu, Z. Wang and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18605–18610 RSC .
S. Luo, L. Xie, F. Han, W. Wei, Y. Huang, H. Zhang, M. Zhu, O. G. Schmidt and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901336 CrossRef .
M. Shi, B. Wang, Y. Shen, J. Jiang, W. Zhu, Y. Su, M. Narayanasamy, S. Angaiah, C. Yan and Q. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125627 CrossRef CAS .
R. Venkatkarthick, N. Rodthongkum, X. Zhang, S. Wang, P. Pattananuwat, Y. Zhao, R. Liu and J. Qin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4677–4689 CrossRef CAS .
M. Narayanasamy, B. Kirubasankar, M. Shi, S. Velayutham, B. Wang, S. Angaiah and C. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6412–6415 RSC .
A. VahidMohammadi, M. Mojtabavi, N. M. Caffrey, M. Wanunu and M. Beidaghi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806931 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Huang, S. Zhang, H. Ying, W. Yang, J. Wang, R. Guo and W. Han, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1218–1227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, L.-F. Que, F.-D. Yu, L. Deng, C. Liu, X.-L. Sui, L. Zhao and Z.-B. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 127116 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zou, P. Cai, C. Liu, J. Li, X. Gao, L. Xu, G. Zou, H. Hou, Z. Liu and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13540–13549 RSC .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2283 CrossRef .
A. Boisset, L. Athouël, J. Jacquemin, P. Porion, T. Brousse and M. Anouti, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7408–7422 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
Y. Tang, J. Zhu, C. Yang and F. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 685, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. M. Bak, X. Yu, X. Q. Yang, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500589 CrossRef .
J. Guo, Q. Peng, H. Fu, G. Zou and Q. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20923–20930 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, X. Ji, B. Zhang, C. Chen, Y. Ruan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mashtalir, M. R. Lukatskaya, A. I. Kolesnikov, E. Raymundo-Pinero, M. Naguib, M. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9128–9133 RSC .
Y. Tao, X. Xie, W. Lv, D.-M. Tang, D. Kong, Z. Huang, H. Nishihara, T. Ishii, B. Li and D. Golberg, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y.-Y. Peng, B. Akuzum, N. Kurra, M.-Q. Zhao, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, E. C. Kumbur, H. N. Alshareef, M.-D. Ger and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2847–2854 RSC .
N. Jäckel, B. Krüner, K. L. Van Aken, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, F. Kaasik, Y. Gogotsi and V. Presser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32089–32093 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Boota, M. Pasini, F. Galeotti, W. Porzio, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Halim and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2731–2738 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, T. S. Mathis, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, A. Dang, Z. Zhou, H. Cho, Y. Gogotsi and S. Yang, Nature, 2018, 557, 409–412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Yuan, C. Lin, Y. Yang, L. Xu, X. Du, J. Xie, J. Lin and J. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602725 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Wu, J. Zhang, G. Li, H. Huang, X. Zhang and Q. Jiang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 160, 537–540 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, S. Kota, Z. Lin, M.-Q. Zhao, N. Shpigel, M. D. Levi, J. Halim, P.-L. Taberna, M. W. Barsoum and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–6 Search PubMed .
E. Balcı, Ü. Ö. Akkuş and S. Berber, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5956–5961 RSC .
C. Yang, W. Que, X. Yin, Y. Tian, Y. Yang and M. Que, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 225, 416–424 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, S. Sahoo and S.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5726–5736 RSC .
C. Zhang, B. Anasori, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. H. Park, N. McEvoy, A. Shmeliov, G. S. Duesberg, J. N. Coleman, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702678 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Naveed, T. Rasheed, B. Raza, J. Chen, J. Yang, N. Yanna and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 44, 206–230 CrossRef .
T. Rasheed, A. Naveed, J. Chen, B. Raza and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 45, 1012–1039 CrossRef .
D. Chao and S.-Z. Qiao, Joule, 2020, 4, 1846–1851 CrossRef .
C. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. An, Q. Yang, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132748 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. Xie, B. Lu, J. Zhou and S. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1015–1033 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ming, H. Liang, G. Huang, Z. Bayhan and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Yang, X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 180–232 RSC .
C. Sun, C. Wu, X. Gu, C. Wang and Q. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu and A. Manthiram, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Z. Liu, G. Xie, X. Guo, Z. Guo, F. Song, G. Li, C. Chen, X. Xie, N. Zhang, B. Sun, S. Guo and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 26246–26253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 540–550 CrossRef .
E. Cha, M. D. Patel, J. Park, J. Hwang, V. Prasad, K. Cho and W. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 337–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2019, 366, 969 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tang, W. Li, L. Pan, C. P. Cullen, Y. Liu, A. Pakdel, D. Long, J. Yang, N. McEvoy and G. S. Duesberg, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800502 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Chem, 2018, 4, 972–996 CAS .
T. Mehtab, G. Yasin, M. Arif, M. Shakeel, R. M. Korai, M. Nadeem, N. Muhammad and X. Lu, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 21, 632–646 CrossRef .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan, S. Huang, Y. Von Lim, D. Fang, Y. Shang, M. E. Pam, J. Yu, D. Xiong, X. L. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3725–3732 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, S. Lian, F. Song, S. Chen, Z. Wu, X. Xie and N. Zhang, Small, 2021, 17, 2103626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y.-S. Hu, X. Qi, X. Rong, H. Li, X. Huang and L. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 5, 191–197 CrossRef .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, K. Sodeyama, H. Iinuma, R. Morita, K. Gotoh, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Er, J. Li, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11173–11179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Dall'Agnese, J. Li, Y. Gogotsi and W. Han, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18556–18563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Tahir Rasheed	Dr Tahir Rasheed is currently working as a researcher at the Interdisciplinary Research Center for Advanced Materials, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia. He completed his PhD degree and postdoctoral research in Polymer Chemistry at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His research interests focus on multiple disciplines including controllable synthesis, characterization and self-assembly of polymeric materials, polymer-based composites, nanomaterials & nanocomposites, and hybrid nanocomposites, with special emphasis on their potential applications in the field of sensing and biosensing, electrocatalysis, degradation and quantification of various emerging pollutants and energy storage devices.

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of different morphological structures of MXenes.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of MXenes by wet-etching methods. (b) Schematic describing the synthesis and dispersion of Ti3C2Tx in an organic solvent X. Reproduced with permission,26 copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Fluoride-free anodic etching of bulk Ti3AlC2 in a binary aqueous electrolyte. (i) Schematic of the etching and delamination process. (ii) The configuration of an electrochemical cell. (iii) Optical image of the as-received bulk Ti3AlC2. (iv) The aqueous dispersion of delaminated Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission,27 copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (d) Schematic demonstration of the basic etching routes, illustrating reactions between Ti3AlC2 and aqueous NaOH solution under different conditions. Reproduced with permission,28 copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  3D MXene architectures for LIBs. (a) Schematic illustration of the Ti3C2Tx lithiation process. The valence electron localization functions are shown with and without the additional lithium layer. Reproduced with permission,56 copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) SEM image of the 3D porous Ti3C2Tx MXene foam. (c) Rate performance of the stacked MXene film and the 3D porous MXene foam. (d) Long-term cycle stability of the 3D porous Ti3C2Tx MXene electrode. Reproduced with permission,57 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (e) Charge–discharge profiles of 3D FeS2@MXene for lithium ion storage; inset shows the SEM image of 3D FeS2@MXene. (f) Long-term galvanostatic cycling performance of the 3D FeS2@MXene nanohybrid, pure FeS2, and Ti3C2Tx MXenes for Li-ion storage at a current density of 10 A g−1, respectively. Reproduced with permission,58 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process for M′–c-Ti3C2Tx (M+ = Li+, Na+, K+, TBA+) by flocculation using MOH. (b) Zeta potential of Ti3C2Tx and Na–c-Ti3C2Tx 3D frameworks at pH ≈ 7. (c) Photographs of Ti3C2Tx MXene colloidal suspensions (left) and Na–c-Ti3C2Tx after flocculation (middle and right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 70, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the CoS/MXene composite. (c) Rate performance of CoS/MXene and charge–discharge curves at different current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the MX/SnS2 composite by vacuum-assisted filtration. (b) Cycling and rate performance of SnS2@MXene composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the CoNiO2/Ti3C2Tx composite; (b–d) FESEM (e–g) TEM images of Ti3C2Tx; (h) electrochemical performance of the CoNiO2/Ti3C2Tx composite including CV curves at 0.1 mV s−1; charge–discharge profiles at 100 mA g−1; rate performance; charge–discharge curves at different current densities; cycling performance and charge-transfer mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration diagram of the formation of M-KTO or M-NTO nanobelts and their atomic structures. (b) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves of M-NTO cycled at different current densities from 50 to 2000 mA g−1. (c) Rate performance of M-NTO at different current densities. (d) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of M-NTO for SIBs at 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of the MoSe2@MXene/C composite, (b) rate capabilities of MoSe2@MXene/C at different current densities and (c) comparison of the rate performance of MoSe2/MXene@C, MoSe2/MXene, MoSe2, and MXene at various current densities. (d) Long-term cycling discharge capacities and coulombic efficiencies of MoSe2/MXene@C at the current densities of 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the flexible and integrated a-Ti3C2–S/d-Ti3C2/PP electrode for Li–S batteries. (b) Schematic of the preparation of d-Ti3C2 nanosheets and the a-Ti3C2–S hybrid. (c) Electrochemical performance of the a-Ti3C2–S/d-Ti3C2/PP electrode tested. Reproduced with permission,120 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of MnOx@Ti3C2Tx. (b) Schematic illustration of the parallel circuitry at the nanoscale based on MnOx@Ti3C2Tx. (c) Rate performance of MnOx@Ti3C2Tx. Reproduced with permission126 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a–d) Schematic illustration of ion transport in Ti3C2Tx MXene films. Ion transport in (a) horizontally stacked and (b) vertically aligned Ti3C2Tx MXene films. (c) Illustration of the surfactant enhanced lamellar structure of the MXLLC. (d) Illustration of the alignment method used in this work. Reproduced with permission,147 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the MXene structure. (b) SEM image of the Ti3C2Tx MXene hydrogel cross section. (c) SEM image of the microporous templated Ti3C2Tx electrode cross section. Scale bars, 5 μm. Insets in (b) and (c) show schematically the ionic current pathway in electrodes of architectures, reproduced with permission,150 copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the effect of the MXene additive on the Zn deposition process. (b) In situ optical microscopy observation of Zn deposition at 4 mA cm−2 in a blank ZnSO4 electrolyte and MXene-added electrolyte. Density functional theory calculation models of (c) Ti3C2Tx adsorbed on Zn foil and (d) Zn atoms absorbed on Zn foil and Ti3C2Tx and the corresponding binding energies. (e) Long-term galvanostatic cycling of the Zn–Zn symmetrical cell at 1, 2 and 4 mA cm−2 with a capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, reproduced with permission from ref. 162. (f) Synthesis of 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx. (b–d) SEM images of 2D, 3D and 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx materials. (g) The cycling performance of 2D, 3D and 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx electrodes at 0.05 A g−1 for 300 cycles. Rate capability of the as-prepared electrodes at different current densities (0.05 A g−1 to 5 A g−1). Long-term cycling stability of the as-prepared electrodes at 1 A g−1 for 3000 cycles and CV curves of the 3D K+–Ti3C2Tx electrode at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 between 0.01 and 3.0 V (vs. K+/K) in the initial three cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 164.	 

 	Fig. 14  DFT calculations on MXenes as electrode materials for MIBs. (a) Bonding charge density for adatoms Li, Na, K, and Ca in the Ti3C2Mx system. (b) Schematic illustration of the top view of the energetically optimized migration pathways and the corresponding diffusion barrier profiles of Li, Na, K, and Ca on Ti3C2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic preparation of the 3D macroporous MXene film. (d) Digital image of the flexible 3D macroporous MXene film and (e) cross-sectional SEM image, reproduced with permission from ref. 72, copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (f) Schematic preparation of the 3D porous MXene foam with a S template. (g) Cycle performance at 50 mA g−1 and (h) rate properties of the stacked MXene film and the 3D porous MXene foams. (i) Long-term cycle stability of the p-MXene-71 electrode. (j and k) Nyquist plots with the equivalent circuit before cycling and after 300 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57 copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
