Novel nanostructured pHEMA–TiO 2 hybrid materials with efficient light-induced charge separation  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0NR00909A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0NR00909A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1807-1812Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNovel nanostructured pHEMA–TiO2 hybrid materials with efficient light-induced charge separation

        
          
            Pavlo 
            Gorbovyi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Andrii 
            Uklein
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Siteng 
            Tieng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ovidiu 
            Brinza
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mamadou 
            Traore
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Khay 
            Chhor
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luc 
            Museur
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Andrei 
            Kanaev
          
        
      *a
aLaboratoire d'Ingénierie des Matériaux et des Hautes Pressions, CNRS, Institut Galilée, Université Paris-Nord, 93430, Villetaneuse, France. E-mail: kanaev@limhp.univ-paris13.fr;  Fax: +33 1 4940341;   Tel: +33 1 49403430
bLaboratoire de Physique des Lasers—LPL CNRS, Institut Galilée, Université Paris-Nord, 93430, Villetaneuse, France. E-mail: luc.museur@univ-paris13.fr;  Fax: +33 1 49403200;   Tel: +33 1 49403724
Received 
      26th November 2010
    , Accepted 31st January 2011First published on 11th March 2011AbstractWe report on a new approach to the fabrication of an electronic material: organic–inorganic pHEMA–oxo-TiO2 hybrid with efficient light-induced separation of charges. Particular attention is paid to the material nanoscale morphology. The size-selected 5.0 nm titanium oxo-alkoxy nanoparticles are prepared in a sol–gel reactor with rapid (turbulent) fluid micromixing and the ligand exchange results in a stable nanoparticulate precursor in HEMA solution, in which polymerization can be induced thermally or by photons. The obtained hybrid materials demonstrate the highest quantum yield of photoinduced charge separation of 50% and can store photoinduced electrons at a number density above 10% Ti atoms.
A. Introduction
Much progress has been achieved during the last decade in the synthesis of new functional organic–inorganic hybrid materials as well as in the understanding of their physical properties.1–4 A large variety of such hybrids were developed in order to face different applications in photonics, sensors, biomedicine, photo-catalysis, solar cells, microfluidics, etc. Among them, titanium dioxide hybrids attract particular interest mainly due to a high refractive index, biocompatibility, and electron transport properties. A direct writing of photonic structures was recently demonstrated using 2-photon fs-laser polymerisation in TTIP–MAA (TTIP = titanium tetra-iso-propoxide; MAA = methacrylic acid) materials.5 The MDMO-PPV:TiO2 hybrid films were used as the active layer in a photovoltaic cell to provide external quantum efficiencies of up to 11%.6 Hybrid TiO2:polymer photovoltaic cells were demonstrated with the AM-1.5-power conversion efficiency of 0.22%.7 Original photochromic TiO2-based hybrids were proposed for photochemical conversion and storage of solar energy, which are capable of accumulating up to 10% Ti3+ centres.8,9 A novel photochromic material, highly porous crystalline titanium(IV) dicarboxylate has been demonstrated as a promising candidate for applications in smart photonic devices, sensors and catalysis.10
The exceptional electronic properties of these hybrids are related to those of TiO2 colloids discovered a long time ago,11 in which the electron–hole separation efficiency under UV illumination was reported below 16%, resulting in their visible darkening due to the trapped electrons. The absorption of a photon results in the electron transition from the valence band (VB) formed by O2− 2p-orbitals to the conduction band (CB) due to Ti4+ 3d-orbitals.12 The e−–h+ recombination can be prohibited in the alcohol solutions, which rapidly scavenge the photogenerated VB holes. This is consistent with a high electron loading capacity of 112 mM M−1 (Ti) observed in new porous TiO2 materials.13 Dissociation of excitons at the organic–inorganic nano-interface can enhance the photocarrier generation. The related mechanism is a basis for relevant charge-separation devices and intimately mixed at nanoscale biphasic materials deserve now much attention.14,15
The TiO2 gels are not fundamentally different from colloids, since they are colloidal in nature and formed by nanoparticles. As our studies have shown16,17titania alcogels offer even higher charge separation efficiency of ∼20–25%. In our previous papers,18,19 we have developed new photochromic pHEMA/TiO2-gel based hybrids (pHEMA = poly(2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)) with a high charge separation efficiency of 12% and electron loading capacity of 14%. Furthermore, we have observed that the electron transfer depends on the material microstructure, which can be affected by the materials chemistry and processing. Tuning a delay between the inorganic polycondensation (gelation) and organic polymerization stages of the system allows optimisation of the photochromic responses of the resulting nanocomposites.19 As these studies show, the building inorganic nanounits have a crucial importance for the material photonic sensitivity. In particular, hybrids formed of smallest Ti16O16(OEt)24(OEMA)8 nanobuilding block (OEMA is the deprotonated form of HEMA) covalently linked to the organic polymer pHEMA were developed:20–22 these structurally well-defined Ti16-based nanocomposites differ essentially from the other hybrids by nature of the internal interface and confinement of the photoactive sites and show a relatively low photonic sensitivity.
An important task in order to further increase the material photonic sensitivity is to properly design the nanoscale bulk interface between TiO2 and polymer that enables the charge injection into two different material components: VB-hole escapes into the organic one and CB-electron remains onto the inorganic one as Ti3+ polaron-like centre. In this sense, the nanoscale unit size has to be optimized and macroscopic quantity of the identical nanounits has to be assembled into the high-optical quality bulk material.
In the present communication we propose an original solution to the above problem by the size-selective fabrication of oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles, their surface exchange and covalent binding into a polymer network, which allows the material morphology control.
B. Results and discussion
B.1. Material preparation
The synthesis schema by Kameneva et al.18 has been proposed for the TiO2-gel based hybrid fabrication. However, the inorganic component morphology is poorly defined in this approach. Difficulties in experimental realisation of these systems are related to a high chemical reactivity of oxo-TiO2 clusters and nanoparticles. As a result of this reactivity, reaction products are highly sensitive to local composition of the reactive fluid. Its initial nonhomogeneity results in a generally broad particle size distribution. Because of that, substantially polydispersed samples are often subjected to analysis. This is a case of oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles prepared from the titanium tetra-iso-propoxide (TTIP) precursor.

B.1.1. Generation of nanoparticles. 
To overcome this problem, we made use of the sol–gel reactor described in ref. 23 and 24. It assures homogeneous reaction conditions of the mixed fluids and permits generation of monodispersed oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles of different sizes. Its main part is the T-mixer of Hartridge and Roughton type, which operates at high Reynolds numbers Re > 103 (Re = 4Qρ/πηd, where Q, ρ, and η are the fluid flow rate, density and dynamic viscosity and d is the tube diameter). The thermostatic stock solutions containing TTIP and water in 2-propanol solvent are injected into the mixer through two input tubes. This injection is exocentric: the fluids form a vortex before entering in the main tube. The two reagents' flow rates are maintained equal varying from 2 to 12 m s−1 by applying an external gas pressure (N2, purity 99.995%). The diameters of two input tubes (1.0 mm) and one main tube (2.0 mm) are chosen in order to assure a continuity of the Reynolds number.
The static T mixer performance has been studied by several groups and a considerable narrowing of the particle size distribution has been shown.25–27 In application to the sol–gel process, its advantage is related to the hierarchical growth mechanism of the structural units,28 in which reactivity stepwisely decreases with increase of size.
At low mixing rates, the basic colloids are strongly polydispersed. However, when the flow rate increases, the mean particle size and polydispersity decrease. We have observed this kinetics crossover at the Reynolds number Re ≈ 4500, which corresponds to the micromixing time of several milliseconds.24 Both the minimal mean particle size and the narrowest size distribution are attained at the Kolmogorov length of LK ≤ 3 μm, LK = (ν3/ε)1/4 where ε is the specific dissipated turbulent power and ν is the kinematic viscosity. It has been shown that the Damköhler numbers Da ≤ 1 are reached in these operating conditions, which correspond to the reagent mixing time shorter than the characteristic time of primary hydrolysis–condensation reactions resulting in nucleation.
Replacement of 2-propanol solvent by HEMA in the sol–gel reactor has several inconveniences. The dynamic viscosity of HEMA (0.0059 Pa·s at T = 20 °C29) is considerably higher than that of 2-propanol (0.00228869 Pa·s at T = 20 °C), which makes the injection difficult. Moreover, the solution viscosity even increases with the nanoparticle concentration. Together with low saturation pressure of HEMA vapor (preventing solvent removal by vacuum pumping) and high nanoparticle reactivity this does not allow obtaining concentrated nanoparticulate samples. For this reason, our approach consists in generation of dilute monodispersed TiO2 nanocolloids in 2-propanol with subsequent solvent replacement.
In present experiments, the sol particles were generated in 2-propanol solutions with TTIP at concentration CTi = 0.15 M and hydrolysis ratio H = 2.0 and at 20 °C. According to Azouani et al.,28nanoparticles nucleate in these conditions; however, their growth is strongly prohibited. The fabricated nanoparticles are not crystalline, of general formula TiO2−(x+y)/2(OiPr)x(OH)y, and are composed of a metal oxide core with surface propoxy (OiPr) and hydroxy (OH) groups.
The reactor temperature was controlled by a thermo-cryostat Haake, DC10K15. TTIP of 98% purity, 2-propanol (Interchim) and distilled water were used. A monomode optical fiber probe was developed to monitor in situ the particle size (2R) and the scattered light intensity (I) of a He–Ne laser by photon-correlated spectroscopy method, using a 16-bit, 255 channels PC board plugged digital correlator (PhotoCor Instruments). The observation volume defined by a mutual positioning of two monomode optical fibres is small enough (∼10−6 cm3) to prohibit multiple scattering events. The measurements (I,R) are carried out in the automatic sampling mode with the data accumulation over 60 s, which permits rejection of noisy data due to rare dust particles, which prohibit observation of much smaller nanoparticles.
The autocorrelation function (ACF) of the produced TiO2 nanoparticles in 2-propanol is shown in Fig. 1a. The mean particle hydrodynamic radius of 2.44 ± 0.1 nm is in agreement with previous measurements at similar experimental conditions.28 At the humidity control, this size is stable on a long time-scale exceeding a day, which is explained by vanishing of the dominant contribution of oxolation reaction into particle aggregation.
 Fig. 1  Characteristic ACFs of oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles after preparation in the sol–gel reactor ([Ti] = 0.15 M, H = 2, T = 20 °C, 2-propanol solution) (a) and after surface exchange with HEMA ([Ti] = 1.5 M) (b). 


B.1.2. Surface exchange and nanoparticle stability. 
The solvent exchange is carried out at the next stage. HEMA (97% purity, Aldrich) was preliminarily distilled in order to eliminate impurities and traces of hydroquinone (hQ), which is an inhibitor of spontaneous polymerization of the monomer. As we have recently shown,19 traces of hQ induce yellow coloration of the pHEMA–TiO2 hybrids due to the formation of the hQ–Ti complex, which does not induce charge separation and partially screens the interband absorption of TiO2.
The purified HEMA was added to the 2-propanol/TiO2 nanocolloids under stirring and vacuum pumping through the LN trap overnight (12 h). The 2-propanol elimination was controlled by an intensity decrease of the dominant symmetric νs(CCC) Raman band situated at ω2 = 818 cm−1.30 Our results presented in Fig. 2a show efficient elimination of 2-propanol from the solution at the end of this stage.
 Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of HEMA (1), 2-propanol (2) and oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles after surface exchange with HEMA at titanium molar concentrations of 1.5 M (3) and 3.0 M (4). (b) Molar ratio of the bound-to-free HEMA in oxo-TiO2 colloids after surface exchange with HEMAversustitanium molar concentration. 
The solvent exchange does not influence the particle size and aggregation state. Fig. 1b shows the ACF of the concentrated 1.5 M HEMA–TiO2 colloid, which was obtained after the 2-propanol substitution by HEMA with the volume ratio HEMA:2-propanol = 1:10. Obviously, the quality of the ACF (signal-to-noise) increases because of the 10-times higher nanoparticle concentration. Because of the higher HEMA dynamic viscosity η the measured ACF decay time τ looks longer; however, the particle radius R = 2.5 nm defined by R = kBTq2τ/3πη (where kB, T and q are correspondingly the Boltzmann constant, temperature and scattering vector) is conserved after the solvent exchange.
We have carried out additional experiments of the HEMA–TiO2 colloid stability. It appears that lower water solubility in HEMA compared to 2-propanol and stronger binding of –OEMA to Ti compared to that of –OiPr better protect the nanoparticles against agglomeration even in contact with a humid atmosphere (25 °C) during 1 day: the particle size was doubled only after 2 days and increased almost 20 times after 5 days. At the same time, the reference sample, which was kept isolated from the external source of humidity, conserved the initial particle size during the testing period. We remark that the 2-propanol–TiO2 colloid loses stability even after being isolated from atmosphere after 2 days; this can be explained by slower alcoxolation reactions between the surface hydroxyls and propoxy groups. Our results show an excellent stability of the new nanoparticulate HEMA–TiO2 precursor.
As it has been shown by Kameneva,18,31 an exchange between –OiPr and –OEMA groups takes place by HEMA addition to the TTIP/2-propanol solution: Ti(OiPr)4 + HEMA ↔ Ti(OiPr)4−x(OEMA)x + HOiPr(1)until the complete replacement of –OiPr ligands by –OEMA in TTIP is obtained (x = 4), which results in the Ti(OEMA)4 precursor available for both condensation and polymerisation. Class-II organic–inorganic hybrids with strong covalent bonds between two constituting components were synthesised on the basis of this.18 Therefore, for successful preparation of a new nanoparticulate titania precursor, we evidence in the following the relevant surface modification of the TiO2 nanoparticles.
More particularly, to follow the exchange of ligands, Kameneva31 has proposed two Raman bands at 1640 cm−1 (ω1) and 905 cm−1 (ω3). The first one has been earlier identified with the CC stretching vibration,32 while the second one has not attracted any attention so far. In fact, the first band can quantitatively represent the total amount of HEMA in the unitary volume of a solution (CHEMA-t), both free and bound to Ti. This is because the grafting occurs through the –OH bond, which is opposite to the polymerisable double bond CC. On the other hand, the ω3 band shows a specific sensitivity to the HEMA addition, which eqn (1) can accommodate.31
The C–C and C–O stretching modes of alcohols are strongly mixed and Raman bands in the range of ∼800–1000 cm−1 can be more appropriately assigned as a symmetric CCC (lower in frequency and stronger) and antisymmetric CCO stretch vibrations.33TTIP shows only medium intensity Raman band in this spectral region at 851 cm−1 assigned to the νs(CCC) mode.30 However, because of a relatively low Ti concentration in the colloids, only the solvent (2-propanol or HEMA) bands can be resolved in our measured spectra in Fig. 2a. The binding of alcohols to nanoparticles and formation of a Ti–O bond result in decoupling of the C–C and C–O vibrations. As a result, we assign the ω3 band to symmetric CCC stretch vibration of free HEMA.

Raman spectra of different TiO2 colloids in HEMA solution are shown in Fig. 2a. They evidence a decrease in the ω3 band intensity with an increase in the titania concentration from 0.15 M to 1.6 M and 3.0 M, which is presented in Fig. 2b. The intensity of the ω3 band can be described in the framework of a simple model involving eqn (1) with equilibrium constant keq and the amount of bound HEMA (CHEMA-b) in the unitary volume and taking into account relative decrease of CHEMA-t with an increase of the titania concentration (CTi): CHEMA-b/CHEMA-t = rHEMAαCTi/(1 − rTiCTi)(2)where rHEMA and rTi are ratios of the molar mass to density of corresponding HEMA and titania and α stands for the fraction of Ti atoms bound to HEMA. The experimental data in Fig. 2b are satisfactorily described by eqn (2) with α ≈ 0.4, which corresponds to the surface-to-volume ratio of number of Ti atoms in the colloidal nanoparticle: S/V ≈ 3rTi–Ti/R = 0.4. This signifies that the surface Ti atoms bind to equal number of OEMA ligands. Hence, the modified TiO2 nanoparticles in HEMA solution accommodate the monomers that can connect them to the pHEMA polymer network by strong covalent forces forming a member of Class-II hybrids.


B.1.3. Hybrid preparation. 
A polymerisation of the HEMA–TiO2 precursor was realised in the present work thermally with the addition of an AIBN initiator to the nanoparticulate precursor. Non-colored transparent hybrids were obtained after 24 h of heating at a temperature of 75 °C. Mabilleau et al.34 have recently proposed to monitor the monomer polymerization by Raman spectroscopy, observing characteristic vibrational peaks of CC at 1407 and 1641 cm−1, associated with CCH2 stretching and CC aliphatic stretching vibrations, respectively. The Raman spectra of our several obtained hybrids are shown in Fig. 3. They evidence a complete polymerization of the pure HEMA (b) and HEMA–TiO2 precursor with Ti concentration of 0.15 M (c). Indeed, the intensity of the two CC bands vanishes; at the same time, the intensity of the C–C band at 1455 cm−1 associated with the deformation of the C–H group increases indicating the elongation of the polymeric chain. On the other hand, some intensity of the CC peaks remains when the nanoparticle loading increases (Fig. 3d). Higher temperature treatment is known to provide diffusion possibilities and allows better steric adjustment for the efficient organic polymerisation of HEMA moieties. We have observed that both longer (75 °C/48 h) and higher temperature (90 °C/24 h) treatments decrease the non-polymerised organic component by up to 30% (temperatures above 110 °C were skipped in the present study, since they produce non-desirable yellowish coloration of samples). No systematic quantitative estimations of the extent of polymerisation were carried out because no safe procedure is available for peak normalisation between different samples. However, residual HEMA monomers were always observed in most concentrated hybrid samples (CTi ≥ 1.5 M) indicating that the corresponding organic polymerisation is extended but incomplete.
 Fig. 3  
Raman spectra of HEMA–oxo-TiO2 colloids (a), pHEMA (b) and polymerised hybrids at titanium molar concentrations of 0.15 M (c) and 1.5 M (d) (initiator AIBN, 75 °C, 12h). 
The nanoscale morphology of the prepared hybrid materials (size, shape and distribution of TiO2 particles in pHEMA polymer matrix) was characterised by JEOL2011 high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) operated at 200 keV with an emission type LaB6 (field emission). Also, a Gatan Imaging Filter 2000 system connected to the TEM offered us access to element maps, by energy filtered transmission electron microscopy (EFTEM). The resolution of the energy filter is 1 eV and the dimensional resolution is 1 nm. The corresponding images of the polymer (a) and hybrid (b and c) with titanium molar concentrations of 3.0 M are shown in Fig. 4. A comparison between HRTEM images (a) and (b) evidences a strong modification of the material morphology at nanoscale: while disordered polymer chains are observed in pure pHEMA, the polymer structure is superposed with that of the inorganic component in the hybrid. The unit size of the bright Ti domains (c) can be estimated as ∼4 nm, which is in agreement with the core size of the colloidal precursor nanoparticles (if the OEMA ligand length is subtracted from their hydrodynamic size of 5.0 nm). The nanoparticles are not aggregated with the mean interparticle distance close to the particle size. It seems, however, that the polymer chains are more organized in the hybrid than in the pure pHEMA, forming locally quasi-ordered domains with the period of 0.6–0.7 nm that can terminate/originate on/from nanoparticles. This may be a reason for not complete polymerisation of the hybrids.
 Fig. 4  
HRTEM (a and b) and EFTEM (c) images of pHEMA (a) and pHEMA–oxo-TiO2 hybrid (b and c) with titanium molar concentrations of 3.0 M. 

B.2. Photonic sensitivity
The interfacial charge-transfer in TiO2 gels,9,16 crystalline titanium alkoxide compounds13 and organic–inorganic hybrids18,19 enables domains with modified absorption, refraction, conductive and magnetic properties. Our fabricated hybrids differ from these previous materials by much lower polydispersity of the structural nanounit, which has an impact on the photochromic behaviour. The broadband UV–visible–IR absorption (dark continuum) has been earlier assigned to shallow (De ≈ 0.5 eV) polaronic Ti3+ centres. The charge storage process is associated with the rapid VB-hole exit and scavenging into the organic component followed by the localisation of a heavier CB-electron onto Ti4+ of the inorganic component. The process efficiency depends on the nature and extent of the hybrid interface which can be tailored through the materials chemistry and processing.
We have measured the photonic sensitivity of the prepared hybrids in pump-probe experiments, with nanosecond UV pump laser irradiation (MOPO by Spectra Physics: 7 ns, 355 nm). The pHEMA–TiO2 sample was shaped into a thin slab of 150 µm thickness and irradiated at normal incidence. The laser pulse-to-pulse energy was continuously monitored by J4-09 black coating sensor (Coherent). The sample absorbance was probed in situ by the collinear beam from a stabilized cw-laser diode module at λ = 640 nm, which spectrally fits the maximum of the Ti3+ visible continuum. To avoid signal contamination by the pump laser, each measurement point was accomplished during the time interval between two successive UV-laser pulses. The trapped electron concentration was calculated by using absorption cross-sections of both Ti4+ (355 nm) and Ti3+ (640 nm) centres, corresponding to 4.3 × 10−20 cm2 and 1.3 × 10−18 cm2 previously measured by simultaneous absorption and electronic paramagnetic resonance experiments.35 The data collection in real time was assured by LabView software.
The series presented in Fig. 5 was carried out with UV-laser fluence of 30 mJ cm−2. However, similar data were obtained with 3 times lower laser fluence of 10 mJ cm−2, which shows a negligible contribution of thermal and spontaneous relaxation processes in agreement with Kuznetsov et al.19 In agreement with the proposed model of the photoinduced processes in TiO2 gels and hybrids,16,19 our present results evidence an efficient photoinduced charge separation in the prepared samples γ = dNTi3+/dNph = 50% (Fig. 5a) as well as high charge storage capacity of Q = NTi3+/NTi4+ = 12% (Fig. 5b). The measured efficiency is to our knowledge the highest one reported up-to-date: it is more than a factor 4 higher than best previously reported values in the hybrid systems19 and 2 times higher compared to that in TiO2 alcogels.17 The concentrated hybrids produced from our nanoparticulate precursor conserve the high photonic sensitivity. Our measurements of the hybrid with even higher nanoparticle loading (CTi = 3.0 M) do not lead to any lowering of the (γ,Q) values. According to Kuznetsov et al.,19 the quantum efficiency of the photoinduced charge separation depends on the light VB hole lifetime in the vicinity of the heavier CB electron before it escapes onto the organic component. The considerable improvement of γ supports our previous conclusion about the key role of an organic–inorganic interface: both measured (γ,Q) values can than be considered as intrinsically related to the interface morphology (nature of components, particles size and polydispersity).
 Fig. 5  Photochromic sensitivity of the HEMA–oxo-TiO2 hybrid ([Ti] = 1.5 M, sample thickness δ = 150 µm): trapped electrons (Ti3+) absorbance versus laser dose (a) and determination of the quantum yield of the photoinduced charge separation (b). Laser irradiation conditions are: 355 nm, 7 ns, 30 mJ cm−2. The x–y error bars of the experimental points are 1%. 

          Titanium
          oxo-clusters offer a large variety of candidates for elaboration of organic–inorganic hybrids by the NBB (nanobuilding block) approach.4 Recent research was particularly focused on Ti16O16(OEt)32, Ti8O8(OOCR)16 and Ti6O6(OR)6(OOCR′)6 clusters. Generally fewer well-defined nanoparticles (NPs) can become a rich and versatile alternative to the oxo-clusters. In particular, small nanoclusters appear to be less efficient in the photoreduction Ti4+ → Ti3+,19 whereas larger structural units provide a higher efficiency. The selective fabrication of nanoparticles in macroscopic quantities will open a way to well-controlled NP-based NBB-type electronic hybrids.
C. Conclusions
A new approach is proposed to the fabrication of nanoparticulate organic–inorganic TiO2 hybrid materials with efficient light-induced separation of charges. A particular attention has been paid to the reagent micromixing, which is a critical problem in chemical process engineering. Tailoring of the reaction conditions permits control of particle polydispersity.
A rapid (turbulent) fluid micromixing associated with the intrinsic hierarchical mechanism of the sol–gel growth enables selective nanoparticle generation. The grafting of the surface –OEMA groups results in the stable nanoparticulate precursor in HEMA solution, in which inorganic mass density can be adjusted. The polymerization can be induced thermally or by photons.
The obtained hybrid materials made of the 5.0 nm nanoparticles demonstrate the highest quantum yield of the photoinduced charge separation of 50% and can store photoinduced electrons at a number density above 10% Ti atoms. We expect that further optimisation of these hybrid materials will bring even higher charge-separation efficiency. The irradiated domains possess interesting electronic, optic and magnetic properties that enable the material applications in 2D/3D laser micropatterning. In particular, r/w optical memory elements and switches may be realised.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by French grants of ANR and C'Nano and COST D41 Action of the European Commission.
References

          P. Gómez-Romero and C. Sanchez, Functional Hybrid Materials, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2003 Search PubMed .

          G. Kickelbick, Hybrid Materials: Synthesis, Characterization, and Applications, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .

Hybrid Nanocomposites for Nanotechnology: Electronic, Optical, Magnetic and Biomedical Applications, ed. L. Merhari, Springer, Limoges, France,  2009 Search PubMed .
C. Sanchez, L. Rozes, F. Ribot, C. Laberty-Robert, D. Grosso, C. Sassoye, C. Boissiere and L. Nicole, C. R. Chim., 2010, 13, 3 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sakellari, A. Gaidukeviciute, A. Giakoumaki, D. Gray, C. Fotakis, M. Farsari, M. Vamvakaki, C. Reinhardt, A. Ovsianikov and B. N. Chichkov, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2010, 100, 359 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. van Hal, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, W. J. H. Verhees, L. H. Slooff, W. J. H. van Gennip, P. Jonkheijm and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 118 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk and J. M. Kroon, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 634 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cottineau, M. Richard-Plouet, A. Rouet, E. Puzenat, H. Sutrisno, Y. Piffard, P.-E. Petit and L. Brohan, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1421 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cottineau, L. Brohan, M. Pregelj, P. Cevc, M. Richard-Plouet and D. Arcon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2602 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dan-Hardi, C. Serre, T. Frot, L. Rozes, G. Maurin, C. Sanchez and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10857 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, Ber. Bunsen-Ges. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 241 CAS .
N. Daude, C. Gout and C. Jouanin, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1977, 15, 3229 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Zou, G. D. Li, K. X. Wang, L. Li, J. Su and J. S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2112 RSC .
S. Miura, H. Naito, Y. Kanemitsu, Y. Matsuura, K. Matsukawa and H. Inoue, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 438–439, 253 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fadeeva, J. Koch, B. Chichkov, A. Kuznetsov, O. Kameneva, N. Bityurin, C. Sanchez and A. Kanaev, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2006, 84, 27 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuznetsov, O. Kameneva, A. Alexandrov, N. Bityurin, C. Sanchez, K. Chhor, Ph. Marteau and A. Kanaev, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 021403 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuznetsov, O. Kameneva, A. Alexandrov, N. Bityurin, K. Chhor and A. Kanaev, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 435 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kameneva, A. Kuznetsov, L. A. Smirnova, L. Rozes, C. Sanchez, A. Alexandrov, N. Bityurin, K. Chhor and A. Kanaev, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3380 RSC .
A. I. Kuznetsov, O. Kameneva, N. Bityurin, L. Rozes, C. Sanchez and A. Kanaev, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1248 RSC .
L. Rozes, N. Steunou, G. Fornasieri and C. Sanchez, Monatsh. Chem., 2006, 137, 501 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fornasieri, L. Rozes, S. Le Calvé, B. Alonso, D. Massiot, M. N. Rager, M. Evain, K. Boubekeur and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4869 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trabelsi, A. Janke, R. Hässler, N. E. Zafeiropoulos, G. Fornasieri, S. Bocchini, L. Rozes, M. Stamm, J.-F. Gérard and C. Sanchez, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 6068 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rivallin, M. Benmami, A. Kanaev and A. Gaunand, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2005, 83(A1), 67 CrossRef CAS .
R. Azouani, A. Michau, K. Hassouni, K. Chhor, J.-F. Bocquet, J.-L. Vignes and A. Kanaev, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2010, 88, 1123 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Marchisio, L. Rivautella and A. A. Barresi, AIChE J., 2006, 52, 1877 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gradl, H. C. Schwarzer, F. Schwertfirm, M. Manhart and W. Peukert, Chem. Eng. Process., 2006, 45, 908 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Marchisio, F. Omegna and A. A. Barresi, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 146, 456 CrossRef CAS .
R. Azouani, A. Soloviev, M. Benmami, K. Chhor, J.-F. Bocquet and A. Kanaev, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16243 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Biasutti, G. E. Roberts, F. P. Lucien and J. P. A. Heuts, Eur. Polym. J., 2003, 39, 429 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Moran, G. A. Bowmaker, R. P. Cooney, K. S. Finnie, J. R. Bartlett and J. L. Woolfrey, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 2741 CrossRef CAS .

          O. Kameneva, PhD thesis, University Paris-Nord, France,  2009 .
J. Xu, I. Stangel, I. S. Butler and D. F. R. Gilson, J. Dent. Res., 1997, 76, 596 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Finnie, V. Luca, P. D. Moran, J. R. Bartlett and J. L. Woolfrey, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 409 RSC .
G. Mabilleau, C. Cincu, M. F. Basle and D. Chappard, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2008, 39, 767 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuznetsov, O. Kameneva, L. Rozes, C. Sanchez, N. Bityurin and A. Kanaev, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 429, 523 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Characteristic ACFs of oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles after preparation in the sol–gel reactor ([Ti] = 0.15 M, H = 2, T = 20 °C, 2-propanol solution) (a) and after surface exchange with HEMA ([Ti] = 1.5 M) (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Raman spectra of HEMA (1), 2-propanol (2) and oxo-TiO2 nanoparticles after surface exchange with HEMA at titanium molar concentrations of 1.5 M (3) and 3.0 M (4). (b) Molar ratio of the bound-to-free HEMA in oxo-TiO2 colloids after surface exchange with HEMAversustitanium molar concentration.	 
Ti(OiPr)4 + HEMA ↔ Ti(OiPr)4−x(OEMA)x + HOiPr	(1)
CHEMA-b/CHEMA-t = rHEMAαCTi/(1 − rTiCTi)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  
Raman spectra of HEMA–oxo-TiO2 colloids (a), pHEMA (b) and polymerised hybrids at titanium molar concentrations of 0.15 M (c) and 1.5 M (d) (initiator AIBN, 75 °C, 12h).	 

 	Fig. 4  
HRTEM (a and b) and EFTEM (c) images of pHEMA (a) and pHEMA–oxo-TiO2 hybrid (b and c) with titanium molar concentrations of 3.0 M.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photochromic sensitivity of the HEMA–oxo-TiO2 hybrid ([Ti] = 1.5 M, sample thickness δ = 150 µm): trapped electrons (Ti3+) absorbance versus laser dose (a) and determination of the quantum yield of the photoinduced charge separation (b). Laser irradiation conditions are: 355 nm, 7 ns, 30 mJ cm−2. The x–y error bars of the experimental points are 1%.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
