Optical designs that improve the efficiency of Cu 2 ZnSn(S,Se) 4 solar cells   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42541J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42541J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1029-1036Optical designs that improve the efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells†

        
          
            Mark T. 
            Winkler‡
, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Wang‡
, 
      
        
          
            Oki 
            Gunawan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Harold J. 
            Hovel
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Teodor K. 
            Todorov
          
        
       and 

        
          
            David B. 
            Mitzi
          
        
      *
      IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, 1101 Kitchawan Rd, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA. E-mail: dmitzi@us.ibm.com;   Tel: +1 914-945-4176
Received 
      28th July 2014
    , Accepted 21st October 2013First published on 22nd October 2013AbstractWe present an optical-design approach that improves the short-circuit current and efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) solar cells by tuning the thickness of the upper-device layers in order to maximize transmission into the CZTSSe absorber. The design approach combines optical modeling of idealized planar devices with a semi-empirical approach for treating the impact of surface roughness. Experimentally, we demonstrate that the new device architecture — which emphasizes thinner CdS and transparent-conducting layers — increases short-circuit current by about 10% in champion-caliber devices. These improvements are directly realized in the power-conversion efficiencies of CZTSSe devices, resulting in a certified improvement in the overall record power-conversion efficiency for CZTSSe from 11.1% to 12.0%. We also report comparable improvements for devices with band gaps in the range of 1.1–1.3 eV.

Broader context
Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) absorbers are composed of earth-abundant and non-toxic metals, and are thus appealing for terawatt-scale thin-film solar cell deployment. We describe a new optical architecture for CZTSSe photovoltaic devices that improves the record power-conversion efficiency for this technology by increasing the amount of light absorbed in the CZTSSe layer. Using experimentally-verified analytical modeling, we identify the optimal optical design for CZTSSe solar cells and also demonstrate that the typical approach to solar-cell photon management — minimizing the number of photons reflected from the solar cell surface — does not maximize current for these devices. This difference in design arises due to the absorbing nature of the transparent conductor and CdS layers that lie atop the CZTSSe absorber. By implementing the new design using high-performance devices, we demonstrate an improvement in the world-record efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells from 11.1% to 12.0% at a band gap value of 1.16 eV, as well as near-champion performance across a much wider range of band gaps, ranging from ∼1.1 to ∼1.3 eV.

1. Introduction
Kesterite solar cells have recently demonstrated rapid technological progress, with power-conversion efficiencies (PCE) nearly doubling to >11% over the last 5 years.1,2 The most efficient kesterite solar cells to-date have been fabricated using the alloy Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe), which exhibits an intermediate chalcogen mixture and band gap (Eg) relative to the pure selenide Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe, Eg ≈ 1.0 eV) and sulfide Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS, Eg ≈ 1.5 eV). Despite this progress, the efficiency of kesterite solar cells remains far below that of devices with absorbers formed from more mature materials such as Cu(InxGa1–x)Se2–ySy (η = 20.4%), CdTe (η = 19.6%) and GaAs (η = 28.8%),3 representing a major obstacle to low-cost manufacturing.
The most efficient previously-reported CZTSSe devices have had band gaps around 1.13 eV,2 and are thus thermodynamically limited to a PCE of about 31%4,5 (when illuminated by the AM1.5G solar spectrum and including radiative emission into the substrate). The gap between the performance of existing CZTSSe solar cells and the thermodynamic limit can be understood as arising from sub-optimal short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc) and circuit non-idealities (i.e., series/shunt resistance and diode non-ideality). For example, the 11.1% device described in ref. 2 exhibits Jsc = 34.5 mA cm−2 and Voc = 460 mV,2 whereas the ideal values are 43.4 mA cm−2 and 820 mV, respectively. The efficiency gap of (30.7–11.1)% = 19.6% can be quantitatively assigned to non-idealities in the circuit (1.4% abs), Jsc (4.8% abs), and Voc (13.4% abs). Thus, while the Voc–deficit accounts for the majority of the efficiency gap between existing CZTSSe solar cells and the thermodynamic limit, it is clear that increasing Jsc in CZTSSe devices also represents an avenue for significant efficiency increases.
Sub-optimal current collection in CZTSSe has several underlying causes, which can generally be divided between photons that succeed or fail to penetrate the CZTSSe absorber layer. Photons that do not reach the CZTSSe layer generally do not produce mobile electron–hole pairs that contribute to Jsc. For example, reflection by the metal contacts or the active area of the device, as well as absorption in layers above the CZTSSe (such as the CdS buffer or transparent conducting oxide (TCO)), each decrease Jsc. Among photons that successfully penetrate the CZTSSe layer, some portion of these may also be uncollected if they are not absorbed close enough to the junction (outside of the drift/depletion width) or not absorbed at all due to partial transparency in the thin film. The conventional CZTSSe architecture and the distribution of its Jsc losses are summarized in Fig. 1. As is apparent in the figure, almost 75% of the Jsc-deficit is due to the design of the top stack; i.e., absorption in CdS/TCO or reflection from the active area of the device.
 Fig. 1  Current losses in CZTSSe solar cells. In world-record CZTSSe solar cells, Jsc is about 20% below the theoretical limit, implying that gains of 3–5% absolute are possible through better photon management. In the (A) baseline CZTSSe architecture, the source of current loss can be (B) distributed based on (C) analysis of EQE vs. wavelength. The cell used for this analysis has a band gap of 1.15 eV; losses are assigned by direct measurement of Jsc and EQE, reflectance, TCO absorption (from both ITO and ZnO), and contact geometry. CdS absorption and IR “uncollected” losses are then separated at the location of the CdS band gap as shown. 
The top layers of a CZTSSe solar cell serve several purposes. The CdS layer forms a rectifying heterojunction with the CZTSSe, facilitating carrier collection; whereas the TCO, which is typically formed by a thin layer of intrinsic ZnO (i-ZnO) followed by a thicker layer of Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) or Al-doped ZnO (AZO), provides a low resistance pathway to even lower-resistance metal gridlines. Although alternative (and less absorbing) materials have been investigated for CdS6 and ITO/ZnO,7 these alternatives have yet to demonstrate comparable performance. MgF2 is typically deposited on high-performing devices as an anti-reflection coating. Although exact device architectures vary, the highest performing devices have utilized CdS-layer thicknesses dCdS > 50 nm and TCO-layer thicknesses dTCO > 100 nm.1,2,8,9 While each layer has a distinct role (CdS → junction formation, TCO → current collection, MgF2 → anti-reflection), all three layers also act in concert to determine what fraction of incident light reaches the CZTSSe or is reflected from the device.
In this work, we describe and demonstrate optical designs that improve Jsc and η in CZTSSe solar cells. While previous work has considered approaches for minimizing broadband reflection from kesterite solar cells,10 we show through analytical modeling that maximizing total transmission into the CZTSSe absorbing layer requires a different device architecture than minimizing reflection. We also construct a semi-empirical device model to treat the effect of surface roughness; this model couples broadband optical properties to the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of champion-level devices to predict the impact of new device architectures on Jsc. Whereas the analytical approach maximizes the total number of photons that reach the absorber layer, the semi-empirical model gives higher weight to optical improvements in spectral regions exhibiting higher IQE and discounts them at other photon energies (e.g., near the band edge) where IQE is low. Both the analytical and empirical approaches show that thinner TCO and CdS layers should yield improvements of >10% in Jsc. By implementing this new device architecture using champion-caliber CZTSSe absorbers, we demonstrate this improvement in Jsc — and its corresponding impact on efficiency — for devices with band gaps in the range of 1.1–1.3 eV. We report an improvement in the overall certified record efficiency for CZTSSe devices to 12.0% at Eg = 1.16 eV.
2. Analytical optical modeling
Using a planar optical model of the CZTSSe device geometry (Fig. 1A), we calculated the optical transmission and reflection for a range of CdS, TCO, and MgF2 thicknesses using scattering-matrix techniques;11 the approach is briefly summarized in the Methods section below, with more extensive discussion in the ESI.† The transmittance t and reflectance r are calculated for each integer-wavelength value in the range 300–1200 nm, the spectral range over which there is significant photoresponse for high-efficiency CZTSSe devices.1 At every wavelength, a complex index of refraction ñ = n + ik is used to describe each layer. For ITO, ZnO, and MgF2, optical properties were measured using thin films deposited onto a Si wafer (spectroscopic ellipsometry for ITO and ZnO, broadband reflectivity for MgF2). For CZTS and CdS, measurements of as-grown films are not feasible due to significant surface roughness; therefore data from literature were used.12,13 The values of n and k used for all calculations are presented in Fig. SI-1.† The functions r(λ) and t(λ) are integrated against the solar spectrum to generate the total photon current reflected (JR) from the surface and transmitted (JT) into the CZTS substrate for a wide range of CdS, TCO, and MgF2 layer thicknesses (dCdS, dTCO, and dMgF2, respectively). For example, denoting photon flux in the AM1.5G solar spectrum as Nph and the electron charge as q, JR is calculated as:  
Because the index contrast between ZnO and ITO is relatively small, optical properties generally depend only on the total thickness of the combined TCO layer (dTCO = dITO + dZnO); we substantiate this claim with both modeling and experimental results in Fig. SI-2.† Thus, to simplify the presentation of the results, we perform all calculations assuming that the TCO is made up entirely of ITO. The devices discussed in Sections 3 and 4 include a thin ZnO layer, and we discuss this issue at greater length there.

Fig. 2 shows the results of these calculations for the total photon current reflected from the active device area (top) or transmitted into the CZTSSe layer (bottom) for a range of (dCdS, dTCO) values. At each point in Fig. 2, the plotted value represents an optimal choice for the value of dMgF2 (which ranges from 95–125 nm and is shown in Fig. SI-3†). Over the parameter range studied, JR varies from 0.4–4.3 mA cm−2 with the minimum value occurring for dCdS = 47 nm, dTCO = 66 nm, and dMgF2 = 102 nm; the total solar photon flux between 300 and 1200 nm, for comparison, is 46.4 mA cm−2. These results are in generally good agreement with ref. 10, which is notable given the use of a pure selenide CZTSe substrate in that study as well as an AZO (rather than ITO) transparent conducting layer. Generally, it is clear that the CdS/TCO/MgF2 stack can be tuned as a superb 3-layer anti-reflection coating, capable of rejecting fewer than 1% of incident photons in the 300–1200 nm range. This performance is due to the fact that it presents a relatively gradual index contrast between air (n0 = 1) and CZTSSe; for example, at λ = 750 nm: nCZTSSe = 2.84, nCdS = 2.41, nITO = nZnO = 1.85, and nMgF2 = 1.37.
 Fig. 2  Output of planar optical modeling. Total photon current that is reflected (top) and transmitted (bottom) into the CZTSSe absorber as a function of ITO and CdS thickness (note the separate color-scaling of the top and bottom figures). At each CdS/ITO combination, the results utilize the optimal MgF2 thickness. Note that the conditions for maximum transmittance are different than minimum reflectance. The markers labeled “1” and “2” denote the architecture of the baseline and improved devices, respectively, as described in the text. These marked points represent architectures considered experimentally in Fig. 1, 4 and 5. 
From Fig. 2, it is apparent that the total transmitted current JT varies over much larger range than JR, taking values from 34–44 mA cm−2. More notably, the maximum in transmission does not occur for the same values of dCdS and dTCO as the minimum in reflection. The maximum value of JT occurs for dCdS = 1 nm, dTCO = 50 nm, and dMgF2 = 98 nm (denoted as the JT,max design) — essentially favoring the total elimination of the CdS layer. In this geometry, JT is over 6 mA cm−2 larger than the value calculated for the geometry of our experimental baseline configuration represented in Fig. 1. The optimal JT is also more than 2.2 mA cm−2 higher than at the optimal point for reflection (denoted as the JR,min design), despite the fact that the reflected current (JR = 1.5 mA cm−2) is 1.0 mA cm−2 higher than its minimum value. These results are summarized in Table 1. We note that the calculated JT for the baseline condition (Point 1) is in good agreement with the experimentally-observed Jsc (32.5 mA cm−2, Fig. 1) after accounting for additional losses due to shadowing and the uncollected IR component (36.8 − 1.7 − 3.1 = 32 mA cm−2).
Table 1 Summary of key points in Fig. 2; points 1 and 2 are discussed further in Sections 3 and 4




Design

d
CdS nm

d
TCO nm

d
MgF2 nm

J
R mA cm−2

J
T mA cm−2





J
R,min

47
66
102
0.45
41.7



J
T,max

1
50
98
1.47
43.9


Point 1
50
240
116
1.66
36.8


Point 2
23
54
100
0.80
43.0




Transmission into the CZTSSe absorber sets an upper bound on the short-circuit current of a solar cell (i.e., Jsc < JT) because photocurrent-collection from the CdS and TCO layers is improbable. Thus, from the perspective of increasing η by maximizing Jsc, a key conclusion from these data is that minimizing reflectivity does not yield the optimal optical design for planar CZTSSe solar cells. Rather, the focus of optical design should be on optimizing transmission into the absorber layer. The origin of this discrepancy is the absorbing nature of the CdS: as a direct-gap material with a large absorption coefficient for photon energies above 2.4 eV (λ < 520 nm), a non-negligible fraction of the solar spectrum can be absorbed in this layer. Although CdS can participate effectively as a component of the dielectric stack to reduce reflection, it imposes a higher cost to transmission than it does a benefit to reflection — and thus should be made as thin as possible. This assessment presumes that other device characteristics (such as series and shunt resistance) are not compromised by the choice of dCdS and dITO; we address the practical impact of this conclusion in Section 4.
3. Semi-empirical device modeling
One measure of the accuracy of the analytical modeling described in section 2 is to directly compare the reflectivity spectrum of a finished solar cell device (fabrication discussed in Section 4) to the output of the calculation; this comparison is shown in Fig. 3A. Two lines are shown for the model output: one that treats the CZTSSe substrate as semi-infinite (blue line) and one that places a mirror at the back surface to approximate the effect of the Mo back-contact (red line). While the modeling does capture the general spectral shape and approximate value of the reflectivity, the difference between the two spectra — about 1.3 mA cm−2 when integrated against the AM1.5G spectrum — is not much smaller than the size of the improvement in Jsc being sought. Thus, it is unclear whether the analytical model is sufficiently accurate to quantitatively guide experimental efforts.
 Fig. 3  (A) Reflectivity of a CZTSSe solar cell (dashed line) compared to the output of the optical modeling; the blue and red lines treat the substrate as semi-infinite or backed by a mirror-like metal contact, respectively. The disagreement between experimental and modeling data is likely caused predominantly by surface roughness, as indicated by (B) atomic force microscopy of the surface of a finished CZTSSe solar cell. The roughness is present at length scales larger and smaller than the wavelength of incident photons. Inset: a higher-magnification image taken from the middle of a grain (note: the height scale for the inset is compressed 10× relative to the scale bar shown, i.e., 0–50 nm). 
One reason for this disagreement is likely the role of surface roughness. One assumption of the analytical modeling (Fig. 2) is that light is normally incident on planar interfaces, whereas the polycrystalline films used in this study exhibit varying degrees of roughness. There are established techniques for including surface roughness in optical models, such as geometric ray tracing14 or effective-medium approximations.15 However, choosing an appropriate model requires some knowledge of the length scale of surface roughness relative to the wavelength of the incident light. To quantify the degree of roughness in our CZTSSe films, we measured the surface morphology of finished devices (including MgF2) using atomic force microscopy. The results are shown in Fig. 3B, and they indicate significant surface roughness on many different length scales. In the large-area image, features that are hundreds of nanometers tall are clearly visible. These features likely arise from faceted CZTSSe grain boundaries and would introduce random geometric scattering. A higher magnification image (Fig. 3B, inset with a different color scale) also reveals nanoscale surface roughness, possibly arising from the grain structure of the MgF2, heterogeneous nucleation of nanoparticles during CdS deposition, or features intrinsic to the CZTSSe. Such small features — if they resided on an otherwise planar interface — could likely be modeled by an effective-medium approximation. However, the combined presence of random roughness on a variety of length scales presents a challenge to accurate optical modeling.
To circumvent these obstacles, we augment our analytical modeling with a semi-empirical device model. This model combines experimentally measured reflectivity with “synthetic” internal quantum efficiency (IQE) curves to generate an estimate of external quantum efficiency and Jsc (see block diagram in Fig. 4A). We synthesize IQE curves for practical reasons: whereas reflectivity is a fairly stable property regardless of the quality of the underlying device, champion-level solar cells are challenging to reproducibly fabricate due to the variation in absorber and heterojunction quality. Exploring dozens of experimental designs would therefore not be feasible. Thus, we synthesize champion IQE curves for various values of dCdS and dITO by modulating the IQE of an ∼11% device (Fig. 1) to reflect the impact of increasing or decreasing absorption in these layers:IQEsyn(λ) = e−αCdS(λ)ΔdCdSe−αTCO(λ)ΔdTCO × IQE11%(λ),where α(λ) is the wavelength-dependent absorption coefficient and Δd is the change in layer thickness relative to the baseline conditions (i.e., point “1” in Fig. 2). In Fig. 4B, we plot a series of examples of synthetic IQE curves for a range of CdS thicknesses. In combination with the experimentally measured reflectivity R(λ), EQE and Jsc are calculated as EQEsyn(λ) = IQEsyn(λ)(1 − R(λ)) and Jsc = q∫Nph(λ)EQEsyn(λ)dλ, respectively. This approach requires R(λ) for every combination of CdS and TCO layer thickness of interest, but only a single reference IQE dataset. This approach eliminates the variability of the underlying device quality — which could otherwise mask the effect of device structure on Jsc enhancement if experimental EQE data were used for each configuration.
 Fig. 4  Semi-empirical optical modeling. (A) A block diagram of the procedure followed for semi-empirical modeling. (B) Synthetic IQE functions are generated by modifying the IQE of champion devices (Fig. 1) to reflect the absorption of an arbitrary thickness of TCO and CdS; examples are shown for varying the CdS thickness. (C) Integration of experimental reflectivity against the AM1.5G spectrum for a range of CdS- and ITO-layer thicknesses identifies two reflectivity minima rather than one, as suggested in Fig. 2. (D) The change in current calculated using experimental reflectivity and synthetic IQE, measured relative to the baseline architecture (dCdS = 50 nm, dITO = 200 nm) for the range of conditions of “min 1” and “min 2” in Fig. 4C. The contributions of reduced absorption and reflection are distinguished in red and blue, respectively. 
Using this approach, we surveyed the region of phase space near the reflectance minimum and transmission maximum indicated by Fig. 2. CZTSSe devices were fabricated as described below in section 4, using a range of CdS and ITO layer-thicknesses and with a 10 nm-thick layer of i-ZnO deposited between the CdS and ITO layers. All devices were completed with a 105 nm-thick layer of MgF2 (selected because analytical modeling suggests it is nearly optimum for the parameter range studied). Reflectivity and external quantum efficiency were measured using a chopped monochromatic beam and a lock-in amplifier; reflectivity measurements included specular and diffuse components by using an integrating sphere. Over 50 conditions were studied from the possible combinations of dTCO/nm = (50, 70, 90, 110, 130, 170, 240, 300) and dCdS/nm = (25, 30, 35, 40, 50, 75, 100). Thinner CdS layers were not included in this matrix because device performance begins to degrade for dCdS < 25 nm under our fabrication conditions.
A selection of integrated reflectivity data is summarized in Fig. 4C; the data are plotted as a function of dTCO for several different values of dCdS. The general scale of the reflected photon current (1–4 mA cm−2) is in agreement with the analytical results shown in Fig. 2. The data also show reflectivity minima along the dTCO axis in the range of 50–100 nm. Whereas the analytical model indicates only a single reflectivity minimum, the experimental data show two minima: one near dTCO = 50 nm and another near dTCO = 100 nm; we label these two minima 1 and 2 in the figure for subsequent discussion. Given the deviations from the analytical modeling, we cannot rule out minima at dTCO < 50 nm. Although this seems unlikely given the index of refraction of ITO and the distribution of the AM1.5G spectrum, electrical considerations ultimately prevent consideration of thinner TCO layers: the sheet resistance of our sputtered ITO rapidly increases for dTCO < 50 nm, preventing devices from achieving acceptable series resistance with a metal collection grid that shadows <5% of total area.
The broadband reflectivity curves collected to generate Fig. 4C are used along with the appropriate synthetic IQE curve to generate a synthetic EQE and Jsc. Fig. 4D summarizes the results of this semi-empirical device model for a range of CdS-layer thicknesses at each of the reflectivity minima of Fig. 4C. In the figure, the current boost (relative to the baseline architecture) is separated into the effects of decreased absorption (obtained from the change in IQE) and reduced reflection (defined as non-absorptive change in Jsc). The dominant error in these data (estimated to be ∼0.5 mA cm−2 for any individual data point) arises from the reflectivity measurement. Fig. 4D indicates that Jsc should increase monotonically with decreasing dCdS; for the parameter range studied, the maximum Jsc is predicted to occur for dCdS = 25 nm and dTCO = 50 nm with ΔJsc = 3.2 ± 0.5 mA cm−2 relative to the baseline architecture. This point is labeled as point “2” in Fig. 2 and Table 1; the error bars of this data point overlap slightly with those of the next two closest points examined (ΔJsc = 2.4 and 2.3 mA cm−2).
Referring to Table 1 and the output of the analytical optical modeling, the semi-empirical model indicates a smaller ΔJsc than predicted by the analytical model (3.2 vs. 6.2 mA cm−2). About half of the difference between the two models (1.3 mA cm−2) can be accounted for by the reflectivity of real devices, which is larger than suggested by the planar model (i.e., Fig. 3A). Given the degree to which the experimental system deviates from the assumptions of the calculation (i.e., normal incidence upon planar, homogenous layers), some discrepancy between the measured and calculated reflectivity is unsurprising. In addition to increased reflectance, the semi-empirical model imposes the wavelength-dependence of device IQE: whereas the analytical results of Fig. 2 count equally any photon that penetrates the CZTSSe absorber layer, the semi-empirical model (Fig. 4D) discounts every photon by the IQE at the wavelength in question. For example, improvements in reflectivity at wavelengths λ > 900 nm will not contribute significantly to the predicted ΔJsc in the semi-empirical model due to the low IQE of CZTSSe devices in that spectral region. This spectral sensitivity causes the remainder of the difference in predicted ΔJsc between the two models. Overall, however, the semi-empirical and analytical models both suggest the same basic theme: thinner CdS and TCO layers should produce higher Jsc.
4. Confirmation with high-efficiency devices
To confirm the analytical and semi-empirical models of Sections 2 and 3, we fabricated high-performance CZTSSe devices with dCdS = 25 nm and dTCO = 50 nm and compared them to baseline conditions (dCdS = 50 nm and dTCO = 240 nm). The basic structure of a completed CZTSSe solar cell is shown schematically in Fig. 1 (top). The details of the hydrazine-based CZTSSe layer deposition have been described in detail elsewhere.2,16–18 A CdS layer is formed atop the CZTSSe by chemical bath deposition in a solution of cadmium sulfate and thiourea in ammonium hydroxide and water.19 A 10 nm-thick layer of ZnO followed by a layer of ITO is deposited by RF magnetron sputtering.20 Devices are completed with an appropriately designed Ni/Al collection grid (electron beam evaporation), mechanical scribing, and evaporation of a 105-nm layer of MgF2. A group of baseline and improved CdS/TCO layer samples were fabricated with (dCdS, dTCO) = (50 nm, 240 nm) and (25 nm, 50 nm), respectively.
In Fig. 5, the improvement of UV EQE is clearly evident in the improved (black line) optical design relative to the baseline (gray line). The prediction of the semi-empirical model is also shown (dashed line), and is in good agreement with the experimental results. Also in Fig. 5 (inset), Jsc is plotted against band gap for about 150 solar cell devices drawn from the baseline and improved designs; the band gap of the devices range from 1.1–1.3 eV. At all band gap values, the Jsc of the improved design is about 10% higher than the baseline design. The efficiency of the top ∼50 devices (red stars) are plotted in Fig. 6 as a function of band gap; previous champion devices across this band gap range from our lab1,2 are also shown along with the pure-sulfide CZTS9 and pure-selenide CZTSe8 champions (black stars). The boost in Jsc is transferred to device performance at all band gaps considered in this study, resulting in an overall improvement in the record efficiency for CZTSSe to 12.0% (certified by Newport Corporation, see Fig. SI-4†). Table 2 summarizes a selection of device parameters from the present and previous champion CZTS solar cells; additionally, the certified J–V properties of the new champion device are presented in Fig. SI-5.†
 Fig. 5  Comparison of external quantum efficiency (EQE) of devices based on the baseline (gray) and improved (black) optical designs; the prediction of the semi-empirical model is also shown (dashed, black) in the wavelength range for which the baseline device's QE is above the noise-floor of the measurement (λ > 340 nm). A significant improvement in the UV is observable. Inset: the short-circuit current Jsc for devices with the baseline (red) and improved (blue) optical stack (corresponding to points 1 and 2 on Fig. 2). Approximately 150 devices with band gaps in the range of 1.1 eV < Eg < 1.3 eV are represented on the plot, and all samples include a 105 nm layer of MgF2. An estimate of the distribution function was calculated and is shown for both optical architectures, with opacity of the blue and red region indicating likelihood of an experimental observation. Eg was calculated using the method described in ref. 2. The values of the band gap were randomly distributed within their error bar so that each data point is visible (otherwise the data points would form vertical rows that are an artifact of the wavelength sampling of the EQE measurement). 
 Fig. 6  Higher Jsc results in higher power-conversion efficiency. Implementing the improved optical design results in a new CZTSSe record efficiency (certified η = 12.0%, Eg = 1.16 eV), as well as significant improvements (red stars) in performance for high band gap devices in general. Improved efficiency is observed for band gaps as high as 1.27 eV (η = 10.9%). The black stars indicate previously reported record-efficiencies at each band gap (ref. 1, 2, 8 and 9). 
Table 2 Summary of selected device parameters of current and previous champion-CZTSSe solar-cell devices. Entries in the table represent high-performance devices at various band gaps, drawn from the black and red data points in Fig. 6, respectively. Data without a reference represent results reported for the first time in this manuscript.





E
g eV

V
oc mV

J
sc mA cm−2
FF %

η%
Ref




∼1.0
377
37.4
64.9
9.15

8



1.05
423
38.7
61.9
10.10

1



1.09
452
39.3
66.5
11.80
n/a


1.13
460
34.5
69.8
11.10

2



1.16
498
34.8
69.5
12.04
n/a


1.21
516
28.6
65.4
9.66

1



1.22
495
32.9
69.3
11.29
n/a


∼1.5
661
19.5
65.8
8.40

9





Finally, we comment briefly on some materials assumptions and issues. In this work, we have considered the i-ZnO and ITO to be interchangeable; for optical purposes, this approximation is fairly good because of the low index contrast between the two materials (see Fig. SI-1 and SI-2†). In CIGS and CZTSSe solar cells, i-ZnO provides electrical and chemical isolation between the ITO and the absorber, e.g., to avoid shunting between them. We find that a very thin layer of i-ZnO is sufficient for this purpose and utilize a layer thickness of dZnO = 10 nm for all samples. The samples in this study were limited to dTCO > 50 nm; given the sheet resistivity of the sputtered ITO films used in our devices, this thickness is the minimum that still permits acceptable levels of shadowing by the metal collection grid. We emphasize that high fill factors are still achievable using this thinner TCO design provided that the metal grid is designed appropriately (several cells represented in the Fig. 5 inset have FF > 70%, among the highest values for CZTSSe solar cells). Interestingly, Fig. 2 and Table 1 indicate that Jsc may be further increased by ∼1 mA cm−2 at even thinner CdS layers; however, we find that device characteristics and yield begin to degrade for dCdS < 25 nm. Future efforts to improve CdS-layer film density or to seek alternative, less-absorbing buffers could lead to further increases in Jsc and device efficiency.
5. Conclusion
We have presented and implemented new optical designs for CZTSSe solar cells that demonstrably improve Jsc by ∼10% and have produced a certified improvement in the CZTSSe efficiency record to 12.0%. The improvement in Jsc and efficiency is observed for all band gaps studied (1.1–1.3 eV). The new optical design prioritizes maximizing transmission to the CZTSSe absorber, which yields a different set of device parameters than attempting to minimize reflection. Specifically, the CdS buffer layer should be kept as thin as possible, while the total TCO layer-thickness should be in the range of about 50 nm. These design criteria are suggested by analytical modeling, confirmed by semi-empirical device modeling, and demonstrated in an experiment utilizing ∼150 devices. Through these improvements to the optical architecture, the record efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells has been improved to 12.0%.
6. Methods
Optical modeling
Optical modeling is performed using a scattering matrix approach.11 A 2 × 2 matrix derived from the boundary conditions on tangential electric and magnetic fields relates the forward- and reverse-propagating waves on each side of every interface; similarly, the forward- and reverse-propagating waves at extreme ends of an individual layer are related by the phase accumulated in the layer, which is determined by the complex index of refraction n and angle of propagation θ. A boundary and propagation matrix are defined for each interface and layer, respectively, and the product of all such matrices determines a single matrix that relates the forward- and reverse-propagating waves in air and the CZTSSe layer. Further details can be found in the ESI.†
Index of refraction measurements
The optical properties of ZnO and ITO are measured using spectroscopic ellipsometry; the measured films are grown on clean, oxide-free silicon wafers but are otherwise prepared as described in the Device Formation and Measurement section below. Measurements were taken at room temperature over the wavelength range 300–1200 nm at 1-nm increments (incident angle of 75°) with a Sopra ellipsometer. The index of refraction of MgF2, which is almost entirely real, is deduced using the Forouhi-Bloomer dispersion equations to fit measurements of the broadband reflectivity (n&k Technology 1500).
Device formation and measurement
Formation of the CZTSSe,2,16–18 CdS,19 and TCO20 layers are described in detail in the references. Devices have an approximate area of 0.45 cm2; current density and efficiency measurements of every device utilize the total cell area as measured for each device using a microscope-imaging system (calibrated during each measurement by using the dimension of the metal collection grid). The metal grid, optimized as necessary to accommodate thinner TCO layers, shadowed 4–5% of the active device area under all experimental conditions. Current–voltage properties are measured using a Keithley 2440 sourcemeter while devices are under illumination by a Newport solar simulator producing a simulated air mass 1.5 global (AM1.5G) spectrum. The output of the simulator is actively controlled and monitored for each measurement. EQE and reflectivity measurements are performed using a Protoflex system equipped with Xenon light source; monochromatic output is mechanically chopped at 246 Hz and monitored along with the experimental signal using SRS810 DSP lock-in amplifiers. Reflectivity measurements collect both specular and diffuse reflectance by using an integrating sphere. The 12.0% device was certified by Newport Corporation (Calibration certificate #0810, Fig SI-4†), in agreement with internal measurements.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Tayfun Gokman, Sean Seefeld, Morgan George, Morgan Gauthreaux, Rishi Khanna, Mark Reuter, and Sathish Thiruvengadam for technical assistance and helpful discussions; in addition, they thank S. Jay Chey, Parashara Panduranga, Sravankumar Munukuntla, Sankeerth Rajalingam, and Rich Ferlita for assistance with TCO, Ni/Al, and MgF2 deposition. This work was conducted as part of a joint development project between Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co., Ltd., Solar Frontier K. K. and IBM Corporation.
References
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, K. Wang and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1421–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 827–837 Search PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494–4500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Haight, N. Sakai, H. Hiroi, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193904 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Chung, T.-B. Song, B. Bob, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 805–814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W.-C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 72–76 CAS .
J. Mann, J. Li, I. Repins, K. Ramanathan, S. Glynn, C. DeHart and R. Noufi, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 472–475 CrossRef .

          H. A. Haus, Waves and fields in optoelectronics, Prentice Hall,  1984 Search PubMed .
S. Levcenko, G. Gurieva, M. Guc and A. Nateprov, Moldavian J. Phys. Sci, 2009, 8, 173–177 Search PubMed .

          L. Ward, in Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, ed, E. D. Palik, Academic, New York,  1997, vol. 2, p. 579 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao and M. A. Green, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1991, 38, 1925–1934 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Aspnes, Am. J. Phys., 1982, 50, 704 CrossRef .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 6–11 CAS .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156–E159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Todorov, H. Sugimoto, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen and D. B. Mitzi, IEEE J. Photovoltaics,  2013, in press Search PubMed .
M. A. Contreras, M. J. Romero, B. To, F. Hasoon, R. Noufi, S. Ward and K. Ramanathan, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403–404, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .

          S. J. Chey, W. Liu, M. Yuan, and D. B. Mitzi, 34th IEEE PVSC, Philadelphia, PA,  2009, pp. 001149–001153 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42541j‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) absorbers are composed of earth-abundant and non-toxic metals, and are thus appealing for terawatt-scale thin-film solar cell deployment. We describe a new optical architecture for CZTSSe photovoltaic devices that improves the record power-conversion efficiency for this technology by increasing the amount of light absorbed in the CZTSSe layer. Using experimentally-verified analytical modeling, we identify the optimal optical design for CZTSSe solar cells and also demonstrate that the typical approach to solar-cell photon management — minimizing the number of photons reflected from the solar cell surface — does not maximize current for these devices. This difference in design arises due to the absorbing nature of the transparent conductor and CdS layers that lie atop the CZTSSe absorber. By implementing the new design using high-performance devices, we demonstrate an improvement in the world-record efficiency of CZTSSe solar cells from 11.1% to 12.0% at a band gap value of 1.16 eV, as well as near-champion performance across a much wider range of band gaps, ranging from ∼1.1 to ∼1.3 eV.


 	Fig. 1  Current losses in CZTSSe solar cells. In world-record CZTSSe solar cells, Jsc is about 20% below the theoretical limit, implying that gains of 3–5% absolute are possible through better photon management. In the (A) baseline CZTSSe architecture, the source of current loss can be (B) distributed based on (C) analysis of EQE vs. wavelength. The cell used for this analysis has a band gap of 1.15 eV; losses are assigned by direct measurement of Jsc and EQE, reflectance, TCO absorption (from both ITO and ZnO), and contact geometry. CdS absorption and IR “uncollected” losses are then separated at the location of the CdS band gap as shown.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Output of planar optical modeling. Total photon current that is reflected (top) and transmitted (bottom) into the CZTSSe absorber as a function of ITO and CdS thickness (note the separate color-scaling of the top and bottom figures). At each CdS/ITO combination, the results utilize the optimal MgF2 thickness. Note that the conditions for maximum transmittance are different than minimum reflectance. The markers labeled “1” and “2” denote the architecture of the baseline and improved devices, respectively, as described in the text. These marked points represent architectures considered experimentally in Fig. 1, 4 and 5.	 


J
R,min
	47	66	102	0.45	41.7

J
T,max
	1	50	98	1.47	43.9
Point 1	50	240	116	1.66	36.8
Point 2	23	54	100	0.80	43.0

 	Fig. 3  (A) Reflectivity of a CZTSSe solar cell (dashed line) compared to the output of the optical modeling; the blue and red lines treat the substrate as semi-infinite or backed by a mirror-like metal contact, respectively. The disagreement between experimental and modeling data is likely caused predominantly by surface roughness, as indicated by (B) atomic force microscopy of the surface of a finished CZTSSe solar cell. The roughness is present at length scales larger and smaller than the wavelength of incident photons. Inset: a higher-magnification image taken from the middle of a grain (note: the height scale for the inset is compressed 10× relative to the scale bar shown, i.e., 0–50 nm).	 
IQEsyn(λ) = e−αCdS(λ)ΔdCdSe−αTCO(λ)ΔdTCO × IQE11%(λ),

 	Fig. 4  Semi-empirical optical modeling. (A) A block diagram of the procedure followed for semi-empirical modeling. (B) Synthetic IQE functions are generated by modifying the IQE of champion devices (Fig. 1) to reflect the absorption of an arbitrary thickness of TCO and CdS; examples are shown for varying the CdS thickness. (C) Integration of experimental reflectivity against the AM1.5G spectrum for a range of CdS- and ITO-layer thicknesses identifies two reflectivity minima rather than one, as suggested in Fig. 2. (D) The change in current calculated using experimental reflectivity and synthetic IQE, measured relative to the baseline architecture (dCdS = 50 nm, dITO = 200 nm) for the range of conditions of “min 1” and “min 2” in Fig. 4C. The contributions of reduced absorption and reflection are distinguished in red and blue, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of external quantum efficiency (EQE) of devices based on the baseline (gray) and improved (black) optical designs; the prediction of the semi-empirical model is also shown (dashed, black) in the wavelength range for which the baseline device's QE is above the noise-floor of the measurement (λ > 340 nm). A significant improvement in the UV is observable. Inset: the short-circuit current Jsc for devices with the baseline (red) and improved (blue) optical stack (corresponding to points 1 and 2 on Fig. 2). Approximately 150 devices with band gaps in the range of 1.1 eV < Eg < 1.3 eV are represented on the plot, and all samples include a 105 nm layer of MgF2. An estimate of the distribution function was calculated and is shown for both optical architectures, with opacity of the blue and red region indicating likelihood of an experimental observation. Eg was calculated using the method described in ref. 2. The values of the band gap were randomly distributed within their error bar so that each data point is visible (otherwise the data points would form vertical rows that are an artifact of the wavelength sampling of the EQE measurement).	 

 	Fig. 6  Higher Jsc results in higher power-conversion efficiency. Implementing the improved optical design results in a new CZTSSe record efficiency (certified η = 12.0%, Eg = 1.16 eV), as well as significant improvements (red stars) in performance for high band gap devices in general. Improved efficiency is observed for band gaps as high as 1.27 eV (η = 10.9%). The black stars indicate previously reported record-efficiencies at each band gap (ref. 1, 2, 8 and 9).	 

∼1.0	377	37.4	64.9	9.15	
8

1.05	423	38.7	61.9	10.10	
1

1.09	452	39.3	66.5	11.80	n/a
1.13	460	34.5	69.8	11.10	
2

1.16	498	34.8	69.5	12.04	n/a
1.21	516	28.6	65.4	9.66	
1

1.22	495	32.9	69.3	11.29	n/a
∼1.5	661	19.5	65.8	8.40	
9

Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee42541j
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
