Ag 2 Se/nylon self-supporting composite films for wearable photo-thermoelectric generators with high output characteristics   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA06064G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA06064G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 21080-21092Ag2Se/nylon self-supporting composite films for wearable photo-thermoelectric generators with high output characteristics†

        
          
            Zhen-yu 
            Yang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xin-zheng 
            Jin‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Wen-yan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen-hui 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yan-zhou 
            Lei
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science & Engineering, Key Laboratory of Advanced Technologies of Materials (Ministry of Education), Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China. E-mail: yongwang1976@swjtu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86 28 87603042
bAnalytical and Testing Center, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China
Received 
      31st July 2022
    , Accepted 31st August 2022First published on 31st August 2022AbstractRecently, the skyrocketing interest in smart wearable devices has led to innovations in energy-harvesting materials. Flexible thermoelectric (TE) materials have thus developed rapidly, but in this process TE performances have been over pursued, leaving the research of more practical TE self-supporting films at a less advanced level. In this work, Ag2Se/nylon self-supporting composite films with both excellent flexibility and leading TE performances (874.3 and 1825.1 μW m−1 K−2 with 80 and 90 wt% Ag2Se contents) were prepared by sequential chemical silver plating, selenization reaction and vacuum hot-pressing processes using nylon mesh as the flexible backbone, and the excellent photothermal (PT) effect of Ag2Se was introduced into the TE field for the first time to build a homogeneous synchronous photo-thermoelectric generator (PTEG). The PTEG can produce a high output voltage and power of 8.8 mV and 8.36 μW with low power NIR light irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 without a cooling source, and considerable output characteristics under visible light irradiation of different intensities can also be acquired. The superior output power can be attributed to the outstanding TE and PT characteristics of the sample, as well as the thickness optimization due to the self-supporting film. This work provides a new idea for preparing high performance flexible TE self-supporting films and developing PTEGs with high output characteristics, and the PTEGs are expected to be applied to self-powered systems for wearable devices.
1. Introduction
Global warming, environmental pollution, the substantial rising cost of fossil fuels and the explosive growth in demand for flexible wearable devices have together led to the rapid development of thermoelectric (TE) materials.1–7 Unlike traditional chemical batteries that are prone to failure and require frequent replacement, some TE generators can now achieve a conversion efficiency of 1% of the body's energy to meet the needs of most implanted and convenient electronic devices,8–10 such as wireless sensing networks,11 smartwatches and activity trackers.9 The dimensionless figure of merit ZT is the most important indicator of TE material properties,12 which defined as S2σT/κ, where S (μV K−1) is the Seebeck coefficient, σ (S cm−1) and T (K) represent the electrical conductivity and absolute temperature, respectively, and κ (W m−1 K−1) is the overall thermal conductivity in the direction of heat flow,13–15 which is composed of lattice thermal conductivity (κl) and carrier thermal conductivity (κe).16 The power factor (PF = S2σ) is also frequently used in some studies to evaluate the performance of TE materials.13–15 Therefore, optimization of the mutually unfavorable resistivity, Seebeck coefficient and thermal conductivity as a group is required to boost the ZT. Recently, several different concepts and strategies have been proposed in related research to make the material exhibit both high electrical conductivity and low thermal conductivity, such as electron energy filtering, phonon-glass electron-crystals, multicomponent nanostructures, and resonant energy level impurities.17
Although various bismuth and tellurium compounds have been rapidly developed to satisfy the high ZT demand in the past few decades, and some of them have even become common commercial products,18 their further development is severely limited by toxicity and scarcity, so it is crucial to explore and develop alternatives with low toxicity, high TE properties and earth abundance. As an n-type narrow bandgap semiconductor, Ag2Se has the advantages of low toxicity, high carrier mobility and low κl, which is a typical “phonon-glass electron-crystal” material,16 and it is also considered to be a strong contender for room-temperature (RT) TE materials.15,19 For now, the optimization of Ag2Se is mainly achieved by doping,20 and tuning the stoichiometric ratio21,22 and the synthesis process17,23 to improve its RT TE performance, and most of the related studies are focused on bulk materials. Although the energy conversion efficiency of bulk Ag2Se is already at the leading position in the field of thermoelectricity (ZT value close to 1),16,24,25 the flexibility of TE materials is also necessary to provide the required comfort (wearable electronics) and to better cover heat sources for higher energy conversion efficiency.26–30
Flexible TE films are currently divided into two main categories: non-self-supporting and self-supporting films, of which the former have flexible substrates at the top or bottom to confer flexibility to the composites.31 It is worth noting that there are clear separation interfaces in these materials and the substrates are not considered in the calculation of TE properties, so the substrates and TE layers are not considered as a whole.15,18,19,21 For instance, flexible films with a significant crystal orientation were obtained by successive ion sputtering of silver layers on flexible polyimide (PI) substrates and selenization reactions to generate silver selenide (Ag2Se), resulting in an ultra-high ZT value of 1.2 ± 0.42 for the sample with a TE layer thickness of about 1 μm.18 Hou et al. successfully deposited a single-phase compound on PI substrates by thermal evaporation, where the PF of the prepared Ag1.8Se reached 1700 μW m−1 K−2 due to its reduced effective mass and high degree of orientation.32 In addition, Yang et al. systematically investigated the phase composition, electrothermal transport and mechanical properties of AgCu (Se, S, Te), and the “brittle-plastic” and “n–p” transition phase diagrams of this system were drawn. On this basis, an ultra-thin inorganic flexible TE device based on a PI substrate with the thinnest 0.3 mm and the highest filling rate of 72% was developed, which greatly promotes the development of flexible thermoelectrics.33 From the above studies, it is not difficult to find that the PF and ZT values of the materials themselves are over pursued while ignoring the issues in their practical application.34 Specifically, excellent flexibility is undoubtedly provided by the presence of such a hierarchical structure, but on the one hand, the thicker substrates lead to a thermal energy loss and thus inhibit their energy conversion efficiency. For example, Kim et al. demonstrate that the presence of additional substrates reduces the output characteristics of TE devices by more than 50%.31 On the other hand, the thicknesses of TE layers in non-self-supporting films are mostly severely limited to less than 10 μm, which makes their output power always stay at a low level.35
As for the self-supporting composite films, they are always prepared by the co-blending process.36–38 Recently, Zhou et al.39 prepared a flexible free-standing polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF)/Ag2Se film with an extremely high filler content (90.5 wt%) by the high-speed shearing method inspired by nature, in which the “grapevine” and “grape shapes” were exhibited by PVDF and Ag2Se, respectively, to facilitate the formation of filler networks, and finally the film achieved a PF of 189.02 μW m−1 K−2. It can be found that there is a certain gap between its performance and the above non-self-supporting TE films. Therefore, the main problem of the current Ag2Se based self-supporting composite films is the relatively poor performance. The reason for this phenomenon is that the extremely low conductivity of the polymer matrix in the blend makes it difficult for TE fillers to form effective carrier pathways, while the lower S of the conductive polymer matrix can also have a negative effect. In summary, there is an urgent demand for a novel preparation process to obtain high-performance flexible self-supporting TE films with more suitable thicknesses.
A photo-thermoelectric generator (PTEG) is a new model of an energy harvester proposed in recent years, which is based on TE materials and introduces the photothermal (PT) step, thus enabling the process of regenerating electrical energy from the heat generated by light.40–42 A significant advantage is that the traditional heat convection and conduction can not only be applied to generate electricity in a light-free environment just like ordinary TE materials, but it can also take advantage of the neglected thermal radiation from ambient light sources (such as sunlight) to create an effective temperature difference for TE devices to generate electricity. Depending on the location where the PT and TE effects occur, PTEGs are divided into heterogeneous asynchronous and homogeneous synchronous devices.13 The construction of the former is based on the introduction of an additional PT layer to establish an effective temperature difference, and the greatest advantage of this structure is that the properties of the PT and TE layers can be regulated separately to achieve the construction of high-performance generators. For instance, a heterogeneous asynchronous PTEG was obtained in our previous study by optimizing the non-self-supporting Ag2Se TE layer and the polypyrrole (PPy) PT layer, respectively.43 The perfect crystal structure of Ag2Se and Bushy-PPy contribute to the excellent output characteristics of the device together. However, on the one hand, the macroscopic interface between the PT and TE layers in this structure leads to the loss of heat,42 and on the other hand, the construction of additional PT layers requires complicated process steps, which is not favorable for series production. Homogeneous synchronous PTEGs can effectively solve the problems of heat losses at macroscopic interfaces and in complex processes, but their output performances are greatly limited because few materials have excellent PT and TE properties at the same time.42,44,45 In addition to the excellent TE properties of Ag2Se discussed above, Ag2Se also has an excellent PT effect in the near-infrared (NIR) region, and yet this excellent characteristic is currently only used in PT therapy applications.46–48 Therefore, it may be desirable to synthesize a homogeneous synchronous Ag2Se-based PTEG with high performance characteristics and integrated PT–TE steps by a simple method.
In contrast to the conventional blending process for the preparation of self-supporting films, in this work, a commercial nylon mesh with the advantages of high heat resistance and flexibility was employed as a flexible pathway, on which silver was chemically plated with the more established silver mirror reaction, and subsequently, the selenization procedure was carried out to obtain composites composed of Ag2Se wrapped nylon fibers. Furthermore, in order to increase the stability of samples while further improving their TE properties, the hot-pressing step was introduced to obtain the final flexible self-supporting films. Since the nylon mesh is a sparse network of woven fibers, the Ag2Se in the final composite films is uniformly wrapped around the fibers. This phase distribution is exactly the opposite of the conventional “polymer wrapped conductive filler” state, thus giving the illusion of being non-self-supporting. However, on the one hand, there are no partition surfaces as in the non-self-supporting films, and on the other hand, every sample is considered as a whole to participate in the performance calculation, so the prepared samples are indeed self-supporting films. Meanwhile, it was found that the ordered nylon backbone did not seriously affect the formation of the conductive pathway and played a role in reducing the thermal conductivity, while enabling the composite films to maintain good flexibility with higher Ag2Se contents. The excellent PT characteristics of Ag2Se was demonstrated and applied for the first time in the field of TE materials. Finally, the constructed homogeneous synchronous PTEG achieved a significant output power under light due to the combination of excellent TE and PT characteristics and the optimized thickness. This work may provide a new perspective for the research and development of self-supporting TE flexible films and PTEGs.
2. Results and discussion
The detailed steps for the preparation of the composite films are presented in Fig. 1. Briefly, the final self-supporting composite films were obtained in this study using simple and mature chemical silver plating, selenization reaction and hot-pressing techniques, in turn. As shown in Fig. S1,† the nylon mesh (200 mesh) employed in this study is uniformly woven with fibers, the surfaces of which are relatively smooth and flat, without the existence of obvious impurities. The procedure of silver-plating on the nylon was carried out first, and it is worth noting that all the parameters in this process were consistent except for the reaction time. Fig. S2† shows the relationship between the loading quantity and the time and number of reactions. It is obvious that the loading quantity in the first half of the single reaction process exhibits a positive relationship with the time, but the growth rate decreases significantly with the further extension of time, which is the consequence of the gradual reduction of the silver ion concentration in the solution. The increase of the silver content from 50 to 60 min is very little (Fig. S2a†), and it can be expected that the subsequent reaction will be even slower, so the duration of one chemical silver-plating reaction is defined as 60 min. Meanwhile, it can be concluded from Fig. S2b† that the relationship between the loading quantity and reaction numbers is also proportional, which means that we can get Ag/nylon composite films with different mass fractions by controlling the time and number of silver-plating reactions.
 Fig. 1  Specific experimental procedure for the preparation of flexible self-supporting Ag2Se/nylon composite films. 
The morphologies of the Ag/nylon composite films with different loadings are shown in Fig. S3a–f.† When the content of silver is low, the silver particles are mainly wrapped uniformly on the surfaces of the nylon fibers to form dense silver layers, and then gradually filled into the interstices between the fibers as the loading increases. Furthermore, EDS analysis (Fig. S3g–l†) and XRD spectra (Fig. S4†) were used to demonstrate the successful synthesis of silver. It is found that the characteristic peaks of silver are exhibited in all composite films (JCPDS no. 04-0783), while other spurious peaks appear in the samples with a lower silver loading. The apparent reason for this phenomenon is that the thinner silver layer cannot completely block X-ray penetration; thus, the diffraction peaks of the nylon fibers inside and the silver chloride (JCPDS no. 31-1238) formed by the sensitizer tin dichloride with silver ions from the silver ammonia solution are revealed. As the thickness of the silver layer gradually increases, the signals of the inner materials are gradually masked so that only the characteristic peaks of silver are shown. At the same time, a significant increase in the half-peak width of the characteristic peak of sample 90Ag/10nylon can be observed, which corresponds to its microscopic morphology results, i.e., smaller grains bring a larger half-peak width (Fig. S5f†).
Based on the nylon mesh loaded with silver, the selenization reaction was introduced to obtain Ag2Se/nylon composite films. The morphologies of the film surfaces before and after the selenization reaction are shown in Fig. S5,† in which the grain shapes obviously changed from the original uniformly distributed morphologies to irregular shapes, which may be caused by the insertion of selenium atoms into the cubic structures of the silver lattice (4.07 × 4.07 × 4.07 Å3) to produce larger sized orthorhombic Ag2Se crystals (4.33 × 7.06 × 7.76 Å3).18 Fig. S6† shows the XRD pattern of the 20Ag2Se/80nylon composite film, which is used as a typical example to demonstrate the formation of Ag2Se because it shows only the characteristic peaks of nylon and Ag2Se (JCPDS no. 24-1041). Fig. S7† demonstrates that the TE properties of the composite films and their Seebeck coefficients fluctuate in a small range, mostly above −140 μV K−1, exhibiting the properties of pure Ag2Se.15,19 The reason is that although the Seebeck coefficient of the insulator is much higher than that of the TE material, the carrier transport path is only Ag2Se when the Ag2Se is connected in parallel with nylon, so the overall Seebeck coefficient of the composite is determined by the TE material around the flexible backbone, and such a Seebeck coefficient also implies that the selenization reaction is carried out very successfully, while the electrical conductivity of the composite films increases with the increase in the Ag2Se content, especially when the content is higher than 70 wt%. Finally, the PF values of the samples reach 266.8 and 653.8 μW m−1 K−2 with Ag2Se contents at 80 and 90 wt%, respectively. Although the performance of these samples is already in a leading position compared to that of the Ag2Se based self-supporting composite films reported so far (178.59–327.15 μW m−1 K−2),36–39,49 they are still far from that of bulk Ag2Se (about 2000 μW m−1 K−2) and thus their energy conversion efficiency is still limited in practical applications,16 which may be caused by severe carrier scattering due to the sparse Ag2Se grain structures (Fig. S5g–l†) and the large number of interfaces between nylon fibers and Ag2Se grains. Meanwhile, the apparent exfoliation of Ag2Se layers from nylon surfaces can be found in their low-magnification morphologies (Fig. S8†), which is attributed to the weak bonding between Ag2Se and nylon, and such a property will lead to a larger instability of composite films.
In order to solve the problem of easy shedding of Ag2Se layers in the above and to further enhance the TE properties of the composite films, a vacuum-assisted hot-pressing step was introduced. The temperature and pressure in the procedure were 200 °C and 20 MPa, respectively, while a vacuum environment was employed to avoid the oxidation of Ag2Se. As shown in Fig. S9,† a flattened morphology of the nylon mesh is presented after the hot-pressing treatment, but the original regular mesh structure is still maintained, which indicates that there is no disruption of the nylon pathway caused by this process to affect its role as a flexible substrate. The surface morphologies of the Ag2Se/nylon composite films after hot pressing are shown in Fig. 2a–f. The contact between Ag2Se and nylon fibers is obviously more solid, which effectively prevents the issue of the Ag2Se on fibers easily coming off. At the same time, it can be found from the high magnification SEM images (Fig. S10†) that the Ag2Se grain structures on the fibers have been significantly transformed from the original loose irregular crystals into dense bulk crystals, which is similar to the transformation of Ag2Se from one-dimensional crystals to bulk crystals in the previously reported hot-pressed non-self-supporting Ag2Se films and will greatly improve their carrier transport properties.15,43 It can also be noticed that the crystal sizes of Ag2Se in the hot-pressed films are mostly below 1 μm. A smaller grain size usually leads to a decrease in phonon thermal conductivity, which in turn must be beneficial to the reduction of the overall thermal conductivity of the sample. In addition to the crystals on the nylon fibers, the crystal structure of Ag2Se between the fibers is also of interest. As shown in Fig. S11,† the Ag2Se grains between the fibers remain in a relatively loose state when its content is 60 wt% and below, while when the content increases to 70 wt% and above, the loose crystals are significantly transformed to form a dense bulk structure which may induce a leap in their TE properties. It is reasonable to assume that the reason for this phenomenon is that when the Ag2Se content is low, the main pressure-bearing phase is the nylon fibers, and there is little Ag2Se between the fibers. The Ag2Se phase is not subjected to a large enough external force, thus maintaining the original loose structure. However, when the Ag2Se content is high, the Ag2Se between the fibers is sufficient to fill the gaps and even form a thicker layer on the surfaces of fibers, so that the Ag2Se grains between the fibers are also squeezed when the composite film is hot pressed and combined to form the dense block crystals. Meanwhile, it can be noted that the thicknesses of the composite films are generally distributed above 60 μm, which are several times higher compared to the thicknesses of the non-self-supporting films.18 The optimized thicknesses will not affect their output voltages but will lead to significant increases in their output current, which in turn will have a favorable impact on the subsequent output powers.
 Fig. 2  The surface morphologies of (a) 20Ag2Se/80nylon-h, (b) 40Ag2Se/60nylon-h, (c) 60Ag2Se/40nylon-h, (d) 70Ag2Se/30nylon-h, (e) 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h and (f) 90Ag2Se/10nylon-h. The (g) actual appearance and (h) flexibility of 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h. (i) XRD patterns of nylon mesh and Ag2Se/nylon composite films after hot-pressing. (j) The Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity and power factor of hot-pressed Ag2Se/nylon composite films with different contents at RT. 
The actual pattern of the final obtained composite film after hot pressing is shown in Fig. 2g, and it has excellent flexibility and can be easily bent (Fig. 2h). The XRD patterns of the hot-pressed nylon mesh and Ag2Se/nylon composite films with different contents are shown in Fig. 2i. All diffraction peaks of the composites are composed of nylon and Ag2Se characteristic peaks (JCPDS no. 24-1041), and there are no remaining obvious spurious peaks, which means that the hot-pressing process did not introduce obvious impurities or lead to the precipitation of silver or selenium. Meanwhile, it is noted that the relative intensity of the (201) planes perpendicular to the in-plane direction gradually increases as the content of Ag2Se increases. Specifically, when the Ag2Se content increases from 80 wt% to 90 wt%, the diffraction intensity of the (201) crystal plane of the composite film undergoes a dramatic increase, indicating a preferred orientation of out-of-plane growth along the (201) plane. Since the (201) planes are close to the (100) planes in Ag2Se crystals, it can be assumed that the degree of crystal orientation along the (100) planes gradually increases, which in turn results in the preferential growth of the crystal planes within the face in the directions of (010) and (001). The crystal planes in the (010) direction have been reported to have a higher TE property compared to the other two planes, so the gradual expansion of the orientation of (201) may also play a role in the improvement of the performance of the final composite films.18 EDS analysis (Fig. S12†) and the XPS wide spectrum (Fig. S13a†) were used to demonstrate the presence and uniform distribution of silver and selenium elements. Fig. S13b and c† show the high-resolution spectra of silver and selenium, respectively, where the peaks of 53.3 eV and 54.1 eV are related to the 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 binding energies of selenium and the peaks of 367.2 eV and 373.4 eV are related to the 3d5/2 and 3d3/2 binding energies of silver, respectively, proving that the oxidation state of silver is monovalent and the reduced state of selenium is divalent.
The RT TE properties of the Ag2Se/nylon composite films after hot-pressing are shown in Fig. 2j. With the gradual increase in the Ag2Se content, the absolute values of the Seebeck coefficients of the samples exhibit a gradual decrease from 158.3 μV K−1 at the beginning to 137.9 μV K−1 at the end, and all samples exhibit negative values and thus n-type semiconductor characteristics. The progressive decline of the absolute values of the Seebeck coefficients can be understood and the reason why this pattern does not appear in the previous section is perhaps because the hot-pressing process promotes the homogenization process of Ag2Se. It is well known that the TE properties of Ag2Se are greatly influenced by the silver–selenium ratio, where an improvement in the specific gravity of the selenium element always leads to an increase in the Seebeck coefficient and a decrease in the conductivity, while the exact opposite is true for the silver element.21,50 In the present experiment, the relative content of Ag2Se in the composite films is controlled by manipulating the silver loading in the chemical silver-plating process, so the Ag/nylon composite film with a higher silver loading is required to obtain a composite film with a higher Ag2Se content. Meanwhile, since the selenization reaction to generate Ag2Se is achieved by the entry of selenium atoms into the silver lattice, a step-by-step process is required for the reaction. Simply put, less selenization reaction time is required when the Ag/nylon composite film has a low relative sliver content, and more selenization time is needed when the silver content is high. Therefore, it can be easily deduced that the same time of selenization in our study leads to a decrease in the selenization degree of the final composite film with an increase in the silver content (corresponding to a subsequent increase in the Ag2Se content) and thus, the reduction of the Seebeck coefficient. The conductivity of the composite films continues to increase with the content of Ag2Se and shows a significant improvement compared to the samples without hot-pressing (Fig. S7†), which is undoubtedly the result of the combined optimization of the increased conductive pathways due to the increased Ag2Se content (Fig. S11†),and the crystal transformation from loose structures into dense bulk structures and orientation change described above. The final hot-pressed composite films achieve a conductivity of 393.3 and 958.9 S cm−1 at the Ag2Se mass fractions of 80 and 90%, respectively, and the higher conductivity further enables the PF to be improved to 874.3 and 1825.1 μW m−1 K−2, respectively, and the latter performance is even comparable to that of pure Ag2Se material.16,32,51 Fig. S14† illustrates the changes in the PF values of the composite films before and after hot-pressing. The PF values of the hot-pressed films increase more than one time compared to the samples without hot-pressing. The reason for the huge increase in the composite film with 20 wt% Ag2Se content can be attributed to the small number of conductive paths in the film making the conductivity base too small, and thus the slight growth in conductivity brings about a high multiplicative increase.
Since the TE performances of Ag2Se are inherently excellent, the studies on self-supporting films based on Ag2Se are also at the leading edge of related researches.36 Therefore, in order to demonstrate the superiority of the samples prepared in this paper, Fig. 3a compares the prepared hot-pressed Ag2Se/nylon composite films with 80 and 90 wt% Ag2Se contents with the reported Ag2Se-based self-supported films in terms of the PF.36–39,49 It is noteworthy that the Ag2Se contents of the compared composite films vary from 60–90.5 wt%, but they have all reached extreme values in their respective systems on the basis of maintaining flexibility, so that such a comparison is reasonable. As can be seen from the figure, this study is in an extremely leading position.
 Fig. 3  (a) A comparison of the power factors of the composite films with Ag2Se contents of 80 and 90 wt%, respectively, obtained in this work with other reported Ag2Se-based self-supporting films.36–39,49 (b) Carrier concentration, carrier mobility, (c) in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivities and (d) ZT values of composite films with gradually increasing mass ratios of Ag2Se to nylon after hot-pressing. (e) The solid heat transfer processes of the pure Ag2Se material and the Ag2Se/nylon composite simulated by COMSOL. The hot and cold ends are set to 330 K and 300 K, respectively, and the taken images are the states of samples at the 65th hour after the start of heat transfer. The curved parts of the isothermal surfaces show the role of nylon in hindering heat transfer in the overall material. (f) Resistance to bending was tested for hot-pressed composite films with Ag2Se mass fractions of 70, 80 and 90%, respectively. The state of the sample during bending is shown in the lower left panel, and conductivity was recorded every 100 cycles. 
Furthermore, Hall effect tests were performed to better understand the carrier transport characteristics of the hot-pressed composite films. As shown in Fig. 3b, the carrier concentration n and mobility μ of the prepared films both increase with the increase in the Ag2Se content, which further corresponds to the gradually increasing conductivity σ (σ = neμ), where e represents the electron quality. The increased μ can be attributed to the gradual formation of more conductive paths on the nylon fibers due to the higher content of Ag2Se, while the increased n corresponds to the reason for the decrease in the Seebeck coefficient in the previous section. The following explanation is given for the sudden increase in n and the abrupt decrease in μ when the Ag2Se content in the composite film is varied from 80 to 90 wt%: as we have discussed above, a higher sliver content requires more selenization time. Assuming a mass of 1 g for the nylon substrate, the Ag/nylon composite films with 15, 35, 50, 60, 75 and 90 wt% Ag content correspond to a mass of 0.18, 0.54, 1.00, 1.50, 3.00 and 9.00 g of Ag, respectively. Therefore, there is no significant increase in the sliver content of the first five components, but the sliver content of the sixth component increases abruptly, so it can be understood that the degree of selenization decreases slowly in the first five components, while the degree decreases significantly in the sixth component (corresponding to a significant increase in the ratio of silver to selenium). It is well known that the increase in the silver to selenium ratio in Ag2Se corresponds to the increase in n and decrease in μ, so it is completely understandable that when the Ag2Se content in the composite film increases from 80 to 90 wt%, the n increases dramatically and the μ decreases abruptly. It should also be noted that the slow increase in μ in the first five components may be attributed to the increase in μ due to the additional conductive pathways masking the effect of the increased silver to selenium ratio.
It is well known that the Seebeck coefficient of a TE material can usually be defined by using the following eqn (1). (1)where e, h, kB, n and m* represent the electron quantity, Planck constant, Boltzmann constant, carrier concentration and carrier effective mass, respectively.52 It can be seen from eqn (1) that the elevated n leads to a decrease in S, and a reduction in selenization (an increase in the silver-to-selenium ratio) leads exactly to an increase in n, which corresponds to the TE results tested in the previous section.
As another important parameter for TE materials, the thermal conductivities of composite films were also measured. As shown in Fig. 3c and Table S1,† the in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivities of the samples are distributed around 0.8 and 0.2 W m−1 K−1, exhibiting the same filler insensitivity and anisotropy as those reported so far for the self-supporting composite films,31,39 where the latter is perhaps the result of the presence of more heterogeneous interfaces in the vertical direction. It is certain that the lattice thermal conductivities of the samples should be smaller than the reported 0.21 W m−1 K−1 because they have similar Ag2Se grain sizes (Fig. S10†) to that reported in the literature and have a large number of Ag2Se/nylon phonon scattering interfaces.17,19 The thermal diffusivity, density and specific heat capacity of the composite films are shown in Table S1.† The density of the composite films increases significantly with the increase in the Ag2Se content, but since polymers tend to possess large specific heat capacities, there is a sudden decrease in their specific heat capacity with increasing Ag2Se content. In contrast, the thermal diffusivity of the composite films exhibits insensitive properties, which ultimately leads to the small irregular fluctuations in overall thermal conductivity. It is noteworthy that the graphite layers need to be manually sprayed to avoid light leakage in the process of thermal conductivity testing by the laser method, so the uneven thicknesses of the graphite layers may be the reason for the small irregular fluctuations of thermal diffusivity. Meanwhile, after high temperature and pressure pressing, the denseness of nylon increases, thereby enhancing its thermal conductivity, while the thermal conductivity of Ag2Se is also not very high. Therefore, the variation caused by changes in the composite film components may also be slight, and the combination of the above effects may be the reason for the insensitivity presented by the thermal conductivity of the samples. It can also be noted that these thermal conductivity values κ (κ = κl + κe) appear somewhat reduced compared to that of the pure bulk Ag2Se materials (about 1.0 W m−1 K−1),24,25 which may be due to the reduced κl caused by the small Ag2Se grains (Fig. S11†) and the interruption of the phonon transport process by the presence of nylon fibers.17,19,31 In order to show more clearly the role of nylon fibers in solid heat transfer, Fig. 3e shows the transient heat transfer processes of pure Ag2Se bulk and Ag2Se/nylon composites using COMSOL simulations. In order to observe more clearly the role of nylon fibers perpendicular or parallel to the heat transfer direction in the heat transfer process, the side and top views are shown, respectively. First, it can be seen that the isothermal planes inside the pure Ag2Se bulk appear to be flat, while the isothermal planes of the composite material undergo a significant bending phenomenon. The positions circled by dashed circles in the figure show the hindering effect of the two states of fibers on heat transfer, in the form of the isothermal planes at the nylon fibers lagging behind the isothermal planes at the Ag2Se phase, indicating that the nylon fibers play a role in impeding heat transfer either parallel or perpendicular to the direction of heat transfer. The final calculated ZT values (using in-plane thermal conductivity) of the composite films are shown in Fig. 3d. When the Ag2Se content is 80 and 90 wt%, the ZT values of the samples reach 0.32 and 0.68, respectively, which are comparable to those of bulk Ag2Se materials and non-self-supporting Ag2Se films and have high potential for application.15,16,21
It is very noteworthy that the purpose of this study is to prepare flexible self-supporting films, so in addition to the TE properties of the materials themselves, flexibility is also a key factor in determining whether the prepared samples can be practically applied to complex working environments. Therefore, the bending resistance of the composite films was tested, and the procedure has been described in detail in the Experimental section. Simply put, the ends of the sample were fixed by using two wooden blocks, and the reciprocating motion of one of the blocks was programmed to achieve cyclic bending of the sample and the variation of its resistance value was recorded at the same time. Since the critical TE performance of the samples with Ag2Se contents below 70 wt% is too inferior to be of practical value, flexibility measurements are not necessary. As shown in Fig. 3f, the conductivity of the composite films gradually decreases with the increasing cycle times, which is caused by the gradual cracking of the Ag2Se phase during the bending-recovery process. Meanwhile, it is clear that the flexibility of the sample decreases with increasing Ag2Se content. The conductivity of the sample with 80 wt% Ag2Se remains above 90% after one thousand cycles, while the content of 90 wt% causes its conductivity retention to plummet to 79.5%. Although a conductivity retention close to 80% is already a good sign of flexibility, we prefer to select the sample that has better stability. As a result, the 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h, which has excellent bending resistance and TE properties, will be selected for the subsequent tests.
However, in addition to the excellent TE properties required for homogeneous synchronous PTEGs with high output characteristics, the PT performance of the material itself is also of paramount importance. Although the PT effect of Ag2Se has been demonstrated for the treatment of tumor cells, there is no relevant application in the field of TE materials, so a series of studies on the PT behavior of Ag2Se composite films are necessary to be conducted. Fig. 4a shows the light absorption of Ag2Se particles in the visible and NIR light regions, which is a key point for the material to achieve an excellent PT effect. This datum was obtained by ultrasonically dispersing Ag2Se loaded on the unhot-pressed composite films into a liquid. It can be viewed from the figure that Ag2Se has more obvious absorption in both light bands, with the absorption in the visible region slightly worse than that in the NIR region, which means that Ag2Se may not only have an excellent PT effect in the NIR, but it may also have pretty good performance in visible light. Fig. S15† illustrates the heat maps of part of the 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h sample under NIR light irradiation with 180 mW cm−2 intensity for different times. The apparent PT effect of the sample is expressed in the form of distinct circles, and to better demonstrate the process of temperature change and the difference between the irradiated and unirradiated regions, the 3D temperature profiles are shown in Fig. 4b–e. Initially, the overall temperature of the film is at a level similar to RT, and a significant temperature peak appears when the sample is irradiated. The temperature peak increases gradually with the extension of irradiation time until heat balance could be achieved at around 30 s. On the one hand, the above phenomenon confirms the low thermal conductivity of the composite film, and on the other hand, it proves that thermal radiation can effectively produce a temperature difference at both ends of the sample without the existence of an active cooling device, which would be very beneficial for its application in wearable energy harvesting devices. Meanwhile, in order to record temperature changes of the samples and to identify which phase is responsible for the PT effect of the composite film, the corresponding curves of 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h, pure nylon after hot-pressing and the hot-pressed Ag/nylon film under NIR light irradiation are shown in Fig. 4f. It can be found that the pure nylon mesh is always maintained at RT when it is irradiated, while there is an extremely weak temperature increase in the Ag/nylon composite film. In contrast, the 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h sample can be warmed up to 53.6 °C, generating a temperature difference of about 28 K from the cold end, and this experimental result confirms that the excellent PT effect of the composite film is indeed provided by the Ag2Se phase.
 Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorption spectrum of Ag2Se, the result was obtained by dispersing a smaller amount of Ag2Se in ethanol and deducting the background. (b–e) Three-dimensional temperature distributions of 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h when it was irradiated with NIR light with a wavelength and light intensity of 808 nm and 180 mW cm−2, respectively. The data were recorded by using a digital thermal imaging camera and the transient temperature distributions at 0 s, 5 s, 15 s and 30 s are shown in the graph. (f) Temperature changes of the hot-pressed nylon mesh, hot-pressed Ag/nylon composite film, and 80Ag2Se/20nylon when irradiated for 100 s at 180 mW cm−2 light intensity of an 808 nm NIR light source. 
Generally speaking, there are many factors affecting the PT effect of materials, such as absorbance, surface topography, thermal conductivity of materials, etc.43 For metals such as gold and silver, on the one hand, the effective local surface plasmon resonance can only be triggered by some nanostructures (nanoparticles, nanorods, etc.) to generate PT properties,53–55 on the other hand, the extremely high thermal conductivity of sliver will make the produced heat dissipate quickly, so a poor PT effect is exhibited by the Ag/nylon composite film. For Ag2Se/nylon composite films, Ag2Se possesses excellent light absorption ability (Fig. 4a), and the extremely narrow band gap makes it easy for the electrons to leap back down to generate heat under the action of incident light.18 At the same time, its low thermal conductivity makes it difficult for heat to dissipate and thus better PT performances are exhibited.
Due to the excellent TE, flexural and PT properties of the 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h composite film, it was cut into rectangles 16 mm in length and 4 mm in width for the construction of the PTEG. The schematic diagram of the device consisting of four legs and its digital photos are shown in Fig. 5a and b. Based on our previous research, PI and PDMS polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) packages continue to be used. On the one hand, the PDMS layer can prevent the high temperature oxidation of Ag2Se when Ag2Se is irradiated, and on the other hand, the crack expansion of the material can be effectively suppressed to increase the bending resistance of the PTEG. Meanwhile, the extremely high light transmission (over 90%) of the PDMS layer will not have a significant impact on the PT characteristics of the composite films.43Fig. 5c illustrates the open-circuit output voltage (OCV) generated when the PTEG is irradiated at one end with different intensities of 808 nm NIR light. The OCV increases gradually when the device is irradiated by light and becomes constant with time, while it decreases rapidly when the light source is turned off. Meanwhile, it is obvious that the maximum OCV of the PTEG increases with increasing light power density, which is due to the fact that the irradiation of higher power light causes a subsequent improvement in the heat generated by the PT effect, thus establishing a greater temperature difference. And according to the equation V1 = S × ΔT, where V1 is the open-circuit output voltage, S and ΔT represent the Seebeck coefficient of the material and the temperature difference between the electrodes at the two ends, respectively, the establishment of a higher temperature difference logically leads to a higher OCV. Ultimately, the maximum OCV of 8.8 and 12.5 mV can be generated by the device under NIR light irradiation at 100 and 150 mW cm−2 intensities, respectively.
 Fig. 5  (a) The specific structure of the assembled PTEG and (b) a photograph of the actual sample. (c) The open-circuit voltages and (d) their cyclic outputs produced by the PTEG irradiated by 808 nm NIR light with different powers and 100 mW cm−2, where a single cycle consists of 100 s irradiation and 100 s light off time. (e) Output voltage and (f) power versus current at different NIR light radiation powers. (g) Comparison of the single-leg output power of the PTEG in our work with that in reported studies.13,40,42,43,56–58 (h) Open-circuit output voltages of the device at different intensities of visible light irradiation. 
The response speed of the device was likewise noted and defined in terms of the time required to reach 90% maximum OCV. As shown in Fig. S16,† the response rate of the device shows a positive relationship with the irradiation power, which means that a higher power enables a faster start-up of the PTEG. The cycling stability of the OCV of the device under 100 mW cm−2 power light irradiation is shown in Fig. 5d, where the cycling process is achieved by repeatedly switching the light source on and off for 100 s. The OCV of the PTEG is essentially the same during the four cycles, and this stable output characteristic offers the possibility of its application in areas requiring high signal stability such as sensors.
Immediately afterwards, the relationship of the output voltage and power to output current was acquired by connecting an adjustable resistor box in series in the circuit between the collector and the PTEG. As shown in Fig. 5e, the output voltage and current of the device show a clear inverse relationship, according to the formula V2 = I × R, where V2 is the output voltage, and I and R represent the output current and the resistance, respectively. Therefore, the growth in light power leads to an increase in the output voltage and a simultaneous increase in the output current, and a short-circuit current value of 3.6 mA can be obtained when using 100 mW cm−2 of optical radiation. Fig. 5f shows the relationship between the output power P and the current of the PTEG at different light intensities, and it is obvious that an increase in light intensity is accompanied by an increase in the output power (P = I2R, where I is the output current and R represents the load external resistance). It is well known that the maximum output power of the device can be acquired when the resistance of the series resistor box and the PTEG is the same for a fixed light intensity, so the corresponding curve exhibits the nature of a quadratic function and the best matching current and output power at that light intensity can be obtained on its symmetry axis.43 A very high output power of 8.3 and 15.8 μW can be reached when this PTEG is irradiated with light intensities of 100 and 150 mW cm−2, respectively. The power enhancement of the PTEG can be easily obtained by increasing the number of legs, so the single-leg output power of 2.1 and 4.0 μW with light intensities of 100 and 150 mW cm−2 of this device is used to compare it with the vast majority of the currently reported PTEGs,13,40,42,43,56–58 as shown in Fig. 5g. Also, the corresponding power density comparisons are shown in Table S2.†
It is well known that TE devices can generate electricity by establishing a potential difference using the temperature difference between the two ends of the TE material, and the output voltage is only related to the Seebeck coefficient of the material itself and the degree of temperature difference. However, the output power of the PTEG is not only determined by the output voltage, it is also heavily influenced by the output current. For non-self-supporting films, although high PF values have been achieved, the thickness limitation problem leads to high resistances, which in turn suppresses the output current. The self-supporting film prepared in this work can effectively avoid the thickness problem and thus achieve a multiplicative increase in output current, resulting in higher output power. Therefore, the absolute leadership of this PTEG can be attributed to the high TE and PT properties of the composite film and most importantly to the thickness advantage brought by the self-supporting film.
The output characteristics of the PTEG under visible light were also tested. As shown in Fig. 5h, the PTEG can also generate excellent output voltages of 4.3 and 6.3 mV and have good cycling characteristics, and the output powers of 1.73 and 3.86 μW can be obtained under visible light irradiation at 1 and 1.5 S (AM 1.5G) intensities (Fig. S17d†), respectively. Although the output performance is somewhat lower than those of the NIR light due to the relatively lower light absorption ability under visible light irradiation, it is also at higher output levels than have been reported so far. The remaining visible characteristics of the PTEG are similar the analysis of the NIR performance described above, so the corresponding sections are not repeated here (Fig. S17†).
Finally, to demonstrate the usefulness of the PTEG in a real-life environment, a multimeter was used to record the OCV of the device under real sunlight (Fig. 6a). From Fig. 6b, it can be seen that the OCV of the PTEG in the shade was close to zero because there was no temperature difference established at that time, but when the device was placed under real sunlight, it produced 4.63 mV OCV (Fig. 6c), which proves the practical application potential of the device constructed by using self-supporting Ag2Se/nylon composite films.
 Fig. 6  (a) Test environment of the PTEG under real sunlight. The OCV generated when the PTEG is placed (b) in the shade and (c) under real sunlight. The test was conducted in Chengdu, China, at 15:00 with a solar altitude angle of about 64°. 
3. Conclusions
In this work, a flexible PTEG with high output characteristics based on a Ag2Se/nylon self-supporting film has been constructed. Unlike the conventionally blended self-supporting materials, the Ag2Se/nylon self-supporting films with high TE performance (0.32 and 0.68 ZT values with 80 and 90 wt% Ag2Se contents) and flexibility have been obtained by chemical silver plating, the selenization reaction and the vacuum hot-pressing process using commercial nylon mesh as the backbone. This study has also introduced the excellent PT effect of Ag2Se into the field of TE materials for the first time, and therefore the above self-supporting sample has been applied to construct a PTEG. The prepared PTEG can produce output voltages of 8.8 and 12.5 mV and extremely high output powers of 8.36 and 15.8 μW under NIR light irradiation of 100 mW cm−2 and 150 mW cm−2 intensities, occupying a leading position compared to the PTEGs reported so far. In conclusion, this study has provided a new idea for the preparation of high-performance TE self-supporting films and demonstrated the potential of the PTEG built from the Ag2Se/nylon composite films for application in the field of smart wearable devices.
4. Experimental
4.1 Materials
Selenium powder (AR) was purchased from Shanghai Maclean Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. Ethanol (AR), hydrochloric acid (HCl, AR), stannous chloride dihydrate (SnCl2·2H2O, AR), ammonia (NH3·H2O, AR), potassium hydroxide (KOH, AR), potassium sodium tartrate tetrahydrate (KNaC4H12O10·4H2O, AR), silver nitrate (AgNO3, AR) and sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na2S·9H2O) were bought from Chengdu Chron Chemicals Co., Ltd. All chemicals were not further purified prior to use.
4.2 Preparation of Ag/nylon films
3.57 g of SnCl2·2H2O was dissolved in 100 mL of deionized water, and then 4 mL of HCl was slowly poured into the solution. When the solution became homogeneous, 0.5 g of nylon mesh (90.9 cm2) was immersed in it, stirred for half an hour and then removed and rinsed several times with deionized water to obtain a nylon mesh with completed sensitization treatment.
1 g of AgNO3 and 0.6 g of KOH were dissolved in 94 mL of deionized water to form a gray precipitate. Subsequently, 6 mL of NH3·H2O was added slowly to the solution containing the precipitate to get the clarified Tollens' reagent. The above sensitized nylon mesh was placed in this solution, and the Ag/nylon composite films with different loadings were obtained by controlling the reaction time and times of the silver mirror reaction. The quality of the nylon mesh was obtained by weighing it before the reaction, and the mass fractions of silver and nylon in the composite films were calculated based on the changes of the quality of the films before and after the reaction. The samples were named xAg/ynylon, where x and y are the approximate mass fraction percentages of each in the composite films, respectively. For example, when the mass fractions of silver and nylon in the composite film are 20.3 and 79.7%, respectively, it will be named 20Ag/80nylon.
4.3 Preparation of Ag2Se/nylon films
The selenide solution was synthesized according to the reported process.18 Precisely, 3 g of Na2S·9H2O and 1 g of selenium powder were dispersed in a conical flask containing 100 mL of deionized water and mixed thoroughly. Following this, the Ag/nylon composite films acquired above were placed in the solution and the conical flask was bundled in a constant temperature shaking system for 2 h with shaking at 30 °C to obtain the Ag2Se/nylon composite films, and they were named xAg2Se/ynylon, where x and y are the approximate mass fraction percentages of each in the composite films, respectively.
The final hot-pressed Ag2Se/nylon composite films were achieved by using a vacuum hot pressing device at a pressure of 20 MPa and a temperature of 200 °C for 30 min. To distinguish the hot-pressed and the unpressed composite films more easily, the names of the hot-pressing films were given as xAg2Se/ynylon-h.
4.4 Assembly of the PTEG
First, the circuit was preset on a PI flexible substrate by coating with silver paint. Then, the 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h sample was cut into 16 mm × 4 mm strips and their two ends were glued together with the circuit. Finally, after the silver paint was cured, the device was encapsulated with PDMS in the form of a scraping film.
4.5 Morphology and spectral observations
The surface morphologies of nylon mesh and composite films of xAg/ynylon, xAg2Se/ynylon and xAg2Se/ynylon-h, and the cross-sectional morphologies of the xAg2Se/ynylon-h films were investigated in detail using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JSM 7800F, JEOL Inc., Japan), where the cross-sectional samples were prepared by cutting in liquid nitrogen. Furthermore, an energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS, X-Max 80, Oxford Instruments Inc., UK) was used to certify the distributions of elemental Ag and Se in the xAg2Se/ynylon and xAg2Se/ynylon-h films, and X-ray diffraction (XRD, GIAXRD, Empyrean, Malvern Panalytical Ltd., Holland) with Cu Kα radiation was adopted to characterize their crystal structures. Finally, the Ag and Se elements and their valence states contained in 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h were described using an X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS, AXIS Ultra DLD, Kratos Inc., U.K.) with Al Kα radiation, and the light-absorbing properties of Ag2Se were evaluated by using a UV-vis-NIR spectrophotometer (UV-3600i Plus SHIMADZU CO., LTD, Japan).
4.6 Modeling
In this section, a multi-physics finite-element simulator (COMSOL) was used to simulate the transient heat transfer process of the samples. Two geometric models similar to bulk Ag2Se and the prepared composite film were built on the basis of the solid heat transfer module and the respective properties of Ag2Se and nylon were assigned by using the input parameters. The thermal conductivities of nylon and Ag2Se were defined as 0.25 and 1.00 W m−1 K−1, which was obtained from COMSOL and reported studies, respectively.24,39 The initial temperature of the models was set to 300 K, and the temperatures of the cold and hot ends were set as 300 K and 330 K, respectively. Except for the cold and hot ends, the remaining surfaces of the model that were in contact with the environment were defined as thermally insulated. The final adopted pictures are the instantaneous states of the 65th hour of the heat conduction process.
4.7 TE measurements
First, the conductivities of Ag2Se/nylon composite films before and after hot pressing were measured by using a four-probe test system (FT-203, Guangzhou Four Probes Technology Co., China), and the carrier concentration and mobility of the final samples were acquired using a Hall effect test system (H500, MMR Technologies, Inc., USA), where the thicknesses of the films were obtained from the cross sections observed by FESEM. Then, the RT Seebeck coefficients of the composite films at 300 K were obtained using a test system (Patent Number: ZL 2019 1 0704017.8 (P. R. China), calibrated via the nickel sheet) built by us. The detailed structure of the device has been represented in detail in our previous work, proving that the system possesses a high degree of accuracy.13,39 Finally, the thermal conductivities of the overall film were calculated by using κ = D × C × ρ, where D and C represent the thermal diffusion coefficient and specific heat capacity, respectively, which were measured by the laser flash method (LFA 467 HyperFlash, NETZSCH Inc., Germany) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC 204 F1 Phoenix, NETZSCH Inc., Germany). It is worth noting that all samples were sprayed with graphite during the former test to prevent light leakage and the specific heat capacity tests were in accordance with the standard ASTM E1269. The ρ is the density of the sample at 300 K.
4.8 Bending resistance measurements
The flexural fatigue resistance of the composite films was also collected by using a self-built system. The prepared films were glued to the PI substrates with silver paint and encapsulated by PDMS to prevent the samples from debonding from the electrode during the cycling processes. Two blocks of wood were used to clamp the ends of the samples and one block was programmed to make a reciprocating motion, thus driving the bending and recovery of the samples. In the bent state, the samples were always curved at an angle of 90° and the resistance was collected every 100 bends and recoveries.
4.9 PT measurements
The surfaces of the nylon mesh, Ag/nylon films and 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h were irradiated by using a NIR light source (LSR808H-FC-8W, LASEVER Inc., China) with 180 mW cm−2 intensity; the temperature changes were recorded by using a digital thermal imaging camera (T620, FLIR System, Inc., USA).
4.10 PTEG measurements
In previous work, we have demonstrated that the adoption of high transmittance PDMS packaging can avoid oxidation with little reduction in PT effects, so the PDMS layer was continued to be utilized in this work.43 During the measurement, one side (about one-half of the sample) of several strips was irradiated with NIR light (LSR808H-FC-5W, LASEVER Inc., China), visible light from a xenon lamp AM 1.5 filter (HSX-F300, NBet Inc., China) and real sunlight (solar altitude angle 76°, Chengdu, China) to obtain the related output characteristics of the device, and the other side was covered with aluminum foil to avoid exposure to light. At the same time, a series of output characteristics of the device were recorded using a multimeter system (Keithley DAQ6510, Tektronix Inc., USA).
Author contributions
Z.-Y. Y. and X.-Z. J. contributed equally to this work (co-first authors). Z.-Y. Y. conducted the development of the experimental protocol, testing and analysis of data, and writing of the article. X.-Z. J. and W.-Y. W. participated in the experimental session and the discussion part of the results. C.-H. H. and Y.-Z. L. were involved in the mapping and testing steps respectively. Y. W. provided valuable guidance on this study.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51673159) and the Youth Science and Technology Innovation Team of Sichuan Province of Functional Polymer Composites (2021JDTD0009). The assistance of the Analytical and Testing Center of Southwest Jiaotong University in thermoelectric coefficient testing, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, field emission scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction is greatly appreciated. Sincere thanks are likewise extended to Sichuan University for their tremendous support in thermal conductivity related testing and Hall measurements.
References
Q. Zhang, Y. Sun, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6829–6851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hamid Elsheikh, D. A. Shnawah, M. F. M. Sabri, S. B. M. Said, M. Haji Hassan, M. B. Ali Bashir and M. Mohamad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 337–355 CrossRef .
W. He, G. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Ji, G. Li and X. Zhao, Appl. Energy, 2015, 143, 1–25 CrossRef .
X. L. Shi, J. Zou and Z. G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7399–7515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang and H. Xie, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Ren, P. Lv, Y. Liu, H. Shao, C. Wang, C. Tang, Y. Zhou and M. Shuai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7242–7255 RSC .
J. Lv, Z. Gong, Z. He, J. Yang, Y. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Liu, M. Fan and W.-M. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12435–12444 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Yang, X. L. Shi, X. Shi, L. Chen, M. S. Dargusch, J. Zou and Z. G. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807916 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-Y. Chen, X.-L. Shi, J. Zou and Z.-G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105684 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, B. Zhou, Q. Zheng, L. Wang, W. Jiang and G. J. Snyder, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. M. Siddique, S. Mahmud and B. V. Heyst, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 73, 730–744 CrossRef .
J. He and T. M. Tritt, Science, 2017, 357, 6358 Search PubMed .
X. Z. Jin, H. Li, Y. Wang, Z. Y. Yang, X. D. Qi, J. H. Yang and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 27083–27095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, M. Zhang, Y. Yang, H. Deng and Q. Fu, Compos. Commun., 2021, 27, 100869 CrossRef .
Y. Ding, Y. Qiu, K. Cai, Q. Yao, S. Chen, L. Chen and J. He, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 841 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Sun, D. Bao, T. Liu, W. D. Liu, C. Liu, J. Tang, D. Zhou, L. Yang and Z. G. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51523–51529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Perez-Taborda, O. Caballero-Calero, L. Vera-Londono, F. Briones and M. Martin-Gonzalez, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702024 CrossRef .
Y. Lei, R. Qi, M. Chen, H. Chen, C. Xing, F. Sui, L. Gu, W. He, Y. Zhang, T. Baba, T. Baba, H. Lin, T. Mori, K. Koumoto, Y. Lin and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 34, 2104786 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Jiang, Y. Ding, K. Cai, L. Tong, Y. Lu, W. Zhao and P. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9646–9655 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, J. H. Zhang, J. M. Li, J. Zhang and X. Y. Qin, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 8397 RSC .
Q. Gao, W. Wang, Y. Lu, K. Cai, Y. Li, Z. Wang, M. Wu, C. Huang and J. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 14327–14333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Day, F. Drymiotis, T. Zhang, D. Rhodes, X. Shi, L. Chen and G. J. Snyder, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 7568 RSC .
K. Zhou, J. Chen, R. Zheng, X. Ke, T. Zhang, X. Shi and L. Chen, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 12490–12495 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, T. R. Wei, H. Chen, J. Xiao, M. Zhu, K. Zhao and X. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 60192–60199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, B. L. Zhang, H. W. Ming, L. Wang, Y. Zu and X. Y. Qin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 34543–34549 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, J. Shi, Y. Hao, L. Wang, X. Qin and J. Yu, Compos. Commun., 2021, 27, 100822 CrossRef .
X. He, Y. Hao, M. He, X. Qin, L. Wang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 60498–60507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, J. Shi, Y. Hao, M. He, J. Cai, X. Qin, L. Wang and J. Yu, Carbon Energy, 2022, 4, 621–632 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qu, C. Ming, P. Qiu, K. Xu, Q. Xu, Q. Yao, P. Lu, H. Zeng, X. Shi and L. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 6586–6594 RSC .
S. Yang, P. Qiu, L. Chen and X. Shi, Small Sci., 2021, 1, 2100005 CrossRef .
S. J. Kim, J. H. We and B. J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1959–1965 RSC .
S. Hou, Y. Liu, L. Yin, C. Chen, Z. Wu, J. Wang, Y. Luo, W. Xue, X. Liu, Q. Zhang and F. Cao, Nano Energy, 2021, 87, 106223 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, S. Yang, P. Qiu, L. Peng, T. R. Wei, Z. Zang, X. Shi and L. Chen, Science, 2022, 377, 854–858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, T. Sun, Y. Fan, L. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Yang and W. Jiang, Polymer, 2019, 167, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Mo, J.-Y. Kim, Y. H. Kang, S. Y. Cho and K.-S. Jang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15970–15975 CrossRef CAS .
D. Park, M. Kim and J. Kim, Polymers, 2020, 12, 2932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Park, H. Ju and J. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2021, 93, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
D. Park, M. Kim and J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 884, 161098 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, C. Sun, H. Deng and Q. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51506–51516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Wen, X. Liu, J. F. Bao, G. K. Li, T. Feng, F. Zhang, D. Liu and X. S. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 21401–21410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xin, Z. Hu, Z. Fang, M. Chaudhary, H. Xiang, X. Xu, L. Aigouy and Z. Chen, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 22, 100859 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Jin, X. D. Qi, Y. Wang, J. H. Yang, H. Li, Z. W. Zhou and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8808–8822 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yang, X. Z. Jin, C. H. Huang, Y. Z. Lei and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 33370–33382 CrossRef .
B. Kim, M. Han and E. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2066–2074 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Lan, J. Xu, W. Zhou, C. Liu, C. Liu, P. Liu, M. Li and F. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 43155–43162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Khan, A. Talib, S. Pandey, M. L. Bhaisare, G. Gedda and H. F. Wu, Colloids Surf., B, 2017, 159, 564–570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. Liu, K. Luo, X. Yin, X. Lin and C. Zhu, Chem.–Asian J., 2019, 14, 155–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yin, X. Li, C. Zhu, X. Lin and Z. Xie, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 4850–4857 RSC .
D. Park, M. Kim and J. Kim, Polymers, 2021, 13, 210 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mi, P. Qiu, T. Zhang, Y. Lv, X. Shi and L. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 133903 CrossRef .
J. Niu, T. Chen, G. Liang, H. Ma, X. Zhang, P. Fan and Z. Zheng, Mater. Lett., 2022, 312, 131662 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Lou, J. Yang, K. Cai, Y. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Qiu, Y. Lu, Z. Wang, M. Wu, J. He and S. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2106902 CrossRef .
J. S. Ibrahim, N. Hanafi, T. A. El-Tayeb and M. A. Sliem, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2022, 264, 120221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, X. Liu, Y. Pei, Y. Ling, P. Wu and C. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 7949–7962 RSC .
J. Li, J. Han, T. Xu, C. Guo, X. Bu, H. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7102–7110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. T. Li, H. T. Ren, H. K. Peng, B. C. Shiu, Y. Wang, C. W. Lou and J. H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 55072–55082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kim, H. Shin, T. Park, H. Lim and E. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5483–5489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, Y.-J. Lin, C.-M. Chiu, W. Yang, B. Zhang, D. Yun, Y. Xie and Z.-H. Lin, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 588–595 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06064g‡ Co-first author.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Specific experimental procedure for the preparation of flexible self-supporting Ag2Se/nylon composite films.	 

 	Fig. 2  The surface morphologies of (a) 20Ag2Se/80nylon-h, (b) 40Ag2Se/60nylon-h, (c) 60Ag2Se/40nylon-h, (d) 70Ag2Se/30nylon-h, (e) 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h and (f) 90Ag2Se/10nylon-h. The (g) actual appearance and (h) flexibility of 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h. (i) XRD patterns of nylon mesh and Ag2Se/nylon composite films after hot-pressing. (j) The Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity and power factor of hot-pressed Ag2Se/nylon composite films with different contents at RT.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A comparison of the power factors of the composite films with Ag2Se contents of 80 and 90 wt%, respectively, obtained in this work with other reported Ag2Se-based self-supporting films.36–39,49 (b) Carrier concentration, carrier mobility, (c) in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivities and (d) ZT values of composite films with gradually increasing mass ratios of Ag2Se to nylon after hot-pressing. (e) The solid heat transfer processes of the pure Ag2Se material and the Ag2Se/nylon composite simulated by COMSOL. The hot and cold ends are set to 330 K and 300 K, respectively, and the taken images are the states of samples at the 65th hour after the start of heat transfer. The curved parts of the isothermal surfaces show the role of nylon in hindering heat transfer in the overall material. (f) Resistance to bending was tested for hot-pressed composite films with Ag2Se mass fractions of 70, 80 and 90%, respectively. The state of the sample during bending is shown in the lower left panel, and conductivity was recorded every 100 cycles.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) UV-vis absorption spectrum of Ag2Se, the result was obtained by dispersing a smaller amount of Ag2Se in ethanol and deducting the background. (b–e) Three-dimensional temperature distributions of 80Ag2Se/20nylon-h when it was irradiated with NIR light with a wavelength and light intensity of 808 nm and 180 mW cm−2, respectively. The data were recorded by using a digital thermal imaging camera and the transient temperature distributions at 0 s, 5 s, 15 s and 30 s are shown in the graph. (f) Temperature changes of the hot-pressed nylon mesh, hot-pressed Ag/nylon composite film, and 80Ag2Se/20nylon when irradiated for 100 s at 180 mW cm−2 light intensity of an 808 nm NIR light source.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The specific structure of the assembled PTEG and (b) a photograph of the actual sample. (c) The open-circuit voltages and (d) their cyclic outputs produced by the PTEG irradiated by 808 nm NIR light with different powers and 100 mW cm−2, where a single cycle consists of 100 s irradiation and 100 s light off time. (e) Output voltage and (f) power versus current at different NIR light radiation powers. (g) Comparison of the single-leg output power of the PTEG in our work with that in reported studies.13,40,42,43,56–58 (h) Open-circuit output voltages of the device at different intensities of visible light irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Test environment of the PTEG under real sunlight. The OCV generated when the PTEG is placed (b) in the shade and (c) under real sunlight. The test was conducted in Chengdu, China, at 15:00 with a solar altitude angle of about 64°.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ta06064g
‡ Co-first author.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
