Advances in synthesis and application of near-infrared absorbing squaraine dyes  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA23048A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA23048A
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 7667-7676Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsAdvances in synthesis and application of near-infrared absorbing squaraine dyes

        
          
            Lei 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhengquan 
            Yan
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Hongyao 
            Xu
          
        
      *b
aAnhui Provincial Laboratory of Biomimetic Sensor and Detecting Technology and Department of Material and Chemical Industry, West Anhui University, Lu'an, 237012, P. R. China. E-mail: yzhq2008@yahoo.com.cn;   Tel: +86 5643305801
bCollege of Material Science and Engineering and State Key Laboratory for Modification of Chemical Fibers and Polymer Materials, Donghua University, Shanghai, 201620, P. R. China. E-mail: hongyaoxu@163.com
Received 
      24th November 2012
    , Accepted 12th February 2013First published on 12th February 2013AbstractDue to the specially rigid, planar and zwitterionic structures, squaraine dyes have strong absorption (ε ≥ 105 L mol−1 cm−1) in the visible to near-infrared region. Therefore, squaraine dyes have been extensively investigated from both fundamental and technological viewpoints. To present the readers a better understanding of the important dyes, in this article, we will highlight the recent synthetic developments of squaraine derivatives as a class of functional near infrared absorbing optic materials and their application in the areas of anti-aggregation, sensor, solar cell, nonlinear optics and self-assembly functional materials based on our own work during the recent years.
1. Introduction
With the rapid development of optical information technologies, especially with the application of various light sources and the development of solar energy, the quantity and quality of photoelectric functional materials in need are sharply increasing day by day. Design, preparation and application of optical functional materials with novel structures and excellent performance have become one of the hotspots for researchers to pursue in the world today. Organic optical absorbing materials have attracted extensive attention because of the advantage of their improved solution processability, facile and scalable synthesis, and the ability to tune their chemical and physical properties via molecular design.1–3 Different conjugated organic optical absorbing materials, i.e., phthalocyanine, metal complex, polymethine cyanine, polyacetylenes, squaraine, radical dyes, azo, and their derivatives that possess strong and stable optical properties have been developed and widely applied in the fields of printing and dyeing, photo-detector, biological probe, photodynamic therapy, optical data storage, laser printing, optical-emitting effect transistor, nonlinear optics, infrared photography and solar cells, and even in our daily life.4,5 Among these ones identified, squaraine dyes are a particularly promising one widely applied in nonlinear optics,6 light-emitting diodes,7 colorimetric sensors,8,9 bio-imaging,10 solar cells,11 fluorescence probes,12,13 phototransistors,14 photodynamic therapy,15 and so on.
Squaraine dyes were first reported by Triebs et al.16 in 1965, who reported the formation of an insoluble product when pyrrole was reacted with 3,4-dihydroxy-3-cyclobutene-1,2-dione (squaric acid). Squaraines are 1,3-disubstituted squaric acid derivatives with a general structure shown in Scheme 1. The quadrupolar donor–π–acceptor–π–donor structure is characterized by the central C4O2 cyclobutadione bridge comprising an electron-deficient Hückel ring, which can be represented in a number of forms and the charge is considered to be largely delocalized over the whole molecule, i.e., squaraine molecules typically contain an electron deficient central four-membered ring and two electron-donating groups in a donor–acceptor–donor (D–A–D) form with a resonance stabilized π-conjugated zwitterionic structure.
 Scheme 1  The π-conjugated zwitterionic structures of squaraine molecules. 
Due to the specially rigid, planar and zwitterionic structures, squaraines have strong absorption (ε ≥ 105 L mol−1 cm−1) in the visible to near-IR region. The intense absorption properties of squaraines are suitable for applications related to the photosensitization phenomenon. Owing to the fact that a number of aromatic and heterocyclic systems with varying donor strengths are available, i.e., N,N-dialkylanilines, benzothiazoles, phenols, azulenes, pyrroles, indoles, quinolones, and so on, a plethora of multifunctional derivatives from the parent squaraine skeleton with tunable optical properties in the visible to the near-IR range have been designed and synthesized. They possessed very promising long-wavelength absorption properties and high extinction coefficients, and so been widely applied. Squaraine chemistry has been one of the most important center stages of research from both fundamental and technological viewpoints.17,18 The following sections will highlight the recent synthetic development and applications of squaraine derivatives as near-infrared absorbing materials based on our own work during the recent years, which will be obviously different from the previous overviews18–20 summarizing squaraine dyes comprehensively in the literature.
2. Mechanisms of syntheses of squaraines
According to the molecular structures, squaraine dyes can be classified into symmetrical squaraines and unsymmetrical squaraines, the former with the same electron-donating groups at both ends of molecules while the later with different ones. Both of them are generally prepared by the condensation of squaric acid with electron-rich aromatic or heterocyclic compounds such as N,N-dialkylanilines, benzothiazoles, phenols, azulenes, pyrroles, and so on.
For the preparation of symmetrical squaraines, the synthesis is rather simple (Scheme 2a). It involves all the reactions of 2 equiv. of electron-rich aromatic or heterocyclic compounds with 1 equiv. of squaric acid, preferably in n-butanol or i-propanol/toluene or benzene (1:1) at reflux temperatures in high yields. While the general synthetic methodology used for the preparation of unsymmetrical squaraines is complex as shown in Scheme 2bvia adopting multi-step reactions in poor yields.
 Scheme 2  The synthetic routes of symmetrical squaraines (a) and unsymmetrical squaraines (b). 
In general, the squaraine formation reaction belongs to nucleophilic substitution reaction and the reaction will be much easier with the increase in the electron-donating ability of aromatic or heterocyclic compounds. Reaction solvent, temperature and concentration of drying reagent can also affect the yield of the resultant squaraine. The general synthetic method used widely was developed by Sprenger et al.,21 where squaraines were prepared in an azeotropic cosolvent containing benzene and 1-butanol. After that, Law et al.22 had found that an optimal yield could be obtained when the condensation reaction was carried out in refluxing 2-propanol (90 min) in the presence of ≥3 equiv. of tributyl orthoformate, using the synthesis of 4-dimethylamino phenyl-4′-methoxyphenyl squaraine as a model reaction. The reaction condition developed in Law's work was superior to that reported earlier by Sprenger.21 The authors explained that esterification of the cyclobutenedione reactant was the major side reaction during squaraine synthesis. To use 2-propanol as a reaction solvent could suppress the side (esterification) reaction of the reactant by a steric effect and also minimized the secondary reaction of the squaraine product by lowering the reaction temperature. The optimal refluxing temperature was among 78–98 °C.
But once the electrophilic reagents are changed into pyrroles, quinolines and their derivatives, things may be very different. In 2004, Jyothish et al.23 reported that condensation of quinaldinium salts containing electron-donating substituents with squaric acid gave only the semi-squaraines under the given conditions. However, with salts possessing electronegative and electron-withdrawing groups, the squaraine dyes were isolated in quantitative yields (Scheme 3).
 Scheme 3  The possible reactions between the quinaldinium salt and squaric acid. 
For the results above, the authors thought that the presence of electron-donating groups on the benzene ring of the quinaldinium salts (1a–c) reduced the acidity of the hydrogen atoms of the 2-methyl group and thereby decreased the formation of the enamine nucleophile. Nevertheless, the enamine formed could react with squaric acid, resulting in the corresponding semi-squaraine (2a–c). Further, the electrophilic terminus of these semi-squaraines was rendered less reactive by the electron-donating substituents, and hence further reaction with the less acidic salts became extremely difficult. So the reaction stopped with the formation of the semi-squaraine only. On the other hand, in the presence of electronegative (1e, 1f) and electron-withdrawing substituents (1g, 1h), the hydrogen atoms in the 2-methyl group were relatively more acidic and thereby favor the formation of the enamine nucleophile very efficiently. These salts yielded higher concentrations of the nucleophile and hence resulted in the corresponding semi-squaraine intermediates (2e–h) followed by formation of the corresponding squaraine dyes (3e–h) in quantitative yields.
Yagi et al.,24 designed and synthesized a series of arene- and thiophene-bridged bis-squarylium dyes using the corresponding bis-squaric acids as precursors as shown in Scheme 4. All these dyes exhibited the large and intense electronic absorption ranging from the visible to the near-infrared region. While with the increase in the number of aromatic-bridged rings in the spacer, it would lead to a blue shift of the absorption maxima due to disruption of π-electron conjugation. So a variety of electronic structures of bis-squarylium π-conjugation systems was developed by combination of the spacer with different heterocycles. Later the group25 further developed a method to synthesize some linearly π-extended squarylium oligomers by repeating the introduction of squarate moieties into the iodinated sites of the indolino-squarylium followed by condensation with a 1-butyl-2,3,3-trimethyl indolium salt, whose optical and electronic properties could be effectively tuned by changing the aromatic and/or heterocyclic linkers.
 Scheme 4  Synthetic routes of a series of arene- and thiophene-bridged bis-squarylium dyes. 
3. Properties and applications
3.1 Developed methods to improve squaraine stability
Stability is an important property for organic optic materials, which will have great influence on their practical applications in optical fields as photoelectric active materials. Although squaraine dyes have promising photophysical properties, in many cases they are susceptible to chemical attack by nucleophilic molecules, such as cyanide anion, thiol-containing biomolecules, and so on. In addition, aggregations of squaraines also result in red-shifts (J-type aggregation), blue-shift (H-type aggregation) or quenching in the absorption spectra, which are detrimental for their practical applications. Therefore, how to overcome the aggregation effect of optical chromophores and to improve their thermal and optical stabilities at the same time remains to be a big challenge. Unremitting efforts have been done and great progress has been made to improve it. Tatsuura et al., reported that the coherent length of J aggregates was confined by a structural boundary rather than by phonons and the conformations of the aggregates could change with the alteration of temperature.26
Early in 1996, Bello et al.27 reported that the introduction of a hydroxy group or an amino group ortho to the squarylium residue in the arylamine series tended to give dyes with good stability. This may be due to the intramolecular hydrogen bond formed between the hydroxy group or amino group and the carbonyl oxygen atom of the squarylium ring, which can improve the chemical stability by increasing steric hindrance effects. Kim et al.,28 illustrated that introducing an electron-donating group, such as hydroperimidine containing quinaldine, into the dye molecule afforded considerable protection against fading, and the terminal group had also significant influence on the formation of perimidine squarylium dye aggregate.
Another possible solution is to encapsulate squaraine dyes inside a protective molecular container. The literature described supramolecular encapsulation strategies using macrocyclic host molecules such as cyclodextrins,29 but this approach suffered from its inherent reversibility. An innovative alternative is to irreversibly encapsulate the dye as a rotaxane. For example, Arunkumar et al.30 had developed a simple, two-step synthetic method to prepare squaraine-derived rotaxanes. The encapsulating macrocycle could greatly increase the chemical stability of the squaraine thread and inhibit aggregation-induced broadening of its absorption spectrum. It provided a possibility to prepare a wide range of squaraine-derived rotaxanes with useful photophysical, photochemical, and mechanical properties.
Johnson et al.31 also reported that encapsulation of a squaraine dye with a macrocyclic cage to form a rotaxane provided good chemical stability to the dye for several weeks. As shown in Scheme 5, the rotaxane cage protects the squaraine ring from nucleophilic attack and provides better stability. This approach also helps prevent the aggregation of squaraine dyes which is vital for the fabrication of solid state devices. However, the thermal stability and photo stability were not reported by this way, which are both vital for the fabrication of solid state devices.
 Scheme 5  Synthetic routes of squaraine-derived rotaxanes. 
To overcome the aggregation effect and to improve their thermal and optical stabilities of zwitterionic squaraines at the same time, our group32 recently have explored a generic and effective approach to solve the issue in solid states or in solutions containing their bad solvents by designing two kinds of squaraine-containing POSS-based hybrids (H1 and H2) with different molecular architecture shown in Scheme 6.
 Scheme 6  Synthetic routes of squaraine-containing POSS-based hybrids (H1 and H2). 
The results confirmed that incorporating “huge” inorganic nano-sized octavinyl-silsesquioxane units into organic molecules through covalent bonding connection at molecular levels could effectively overcome the aggregation effect of organic chromophoric groups, and significantly enhanced their thermal, chemical and photostability. Incorporation of “huge” inorganic nano-sized octavinyl-silsesquioxane units could decrease the strong dipole–dipole and π–π stack interactions, inhibit the intermolecular charge-transfer between adjacent squaraine molecules, which overcame effective molecular aggregation. The chemical and thermal stability resulted from the barrier effect of inorganic POSS by limiting heat transfer, the barrier of oxidatively stable POSS, and the steric protection provided by the huge cage-like polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) as well as the insulation of inorganic POSS. The work provides a generic and effective strategy to prepare optically stable materials with high thermal and photostability.
3.2 Molecular designs for metal ion and bio-molecule sensors
With the rapid development of the modern industry, agriculture, and mining industry, environmental and biological monitoring is getting more and more important for us day by day. Among all the analytical methods developed, the most common ones are instrumentally intensive, which requires complicated and expensive instrumentation and cumbersome laboratory procedures, and so can not be used widely and conveniently.33 Colorimetric sensors have drawn more and more attention owing to saving the experimental cost, simplifying the sensing process, and even only utilizing naked eyes instead of the complex instruments. Squaraines are one of the most popular colorimetric ones resulting from their strong absorption in the region from red to near-infrared, which can efficiently eliminate the background absorption in the visible region in aqueous media to improve the sensitivity and selectivity. Binding of substrates to squaraine can occur either to the oxygen atom of the electron deficient cyclobutene ring or to an ionophore which is integrated into the squaraine dye resulting in a measurable change in the absorption peaks or intensity, even the color complete alteration. For example, Yagi et al.,34 found that some transition metal ions, such as Cr3+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+ and Cu2+ could exclusively coordinated with an electronically neutral methine-bridged bisquarylium dye, and induced drastic absorption spectral changes with hypsochromic shifts (Δλ; 59–197 nm). Thus, the methine-bridged bisquarylium dye should be potentially applicable as the molecular sensory material for transition metal cations. A large number of squaraine derivatives have been developed as probes for the detection of a variety of metal ions or biomolecules.
For the applications above, good water solubility is essential to prevent adverse effects of the analysis. Generally, the water solubility can be improved by attaching charged or neutral water-solubilizing residues to the dye, such as sulfonate group, quaternary ammonium groups, carbohydrates, oligonucleotides, polyethylene glycol residues and phosphonate monoesters, which have all been considered for this purpose. In 1997, a squaraine incorporating four carboxylic acid attaching groups was synthesized and used as a chemosensor for pH by Isgor et al.35 (Scheme 7), which realized squaraine-based chemosensors for pH in 100% aqueous solutions.
 Scheme 7  The synthetic route of a squaraine incorporating four carboxylic groups. 
Tarazi et al.,36 developed an unsymmetrical squarylium dye with both carboxylic group and sulfonic acid group, which made the dye pretty soluble. The squaraine had good sensitivity to Fe(III) and Co(II) ions owing to the fact that the squarylium moiety of the dye could complex transition metal ions by interacting with their d-orbitals. Basheer et al.,37 designed and synthesized an unsymmetrical cationic squaraine dye (USqH+) by reacting a semi-squaric acid derivative 3-[4-(N,N-dioctylamino) phenyl]-4-hydroxycyclobutene-1,2-dione with the squarylium dye shown in Scheme 8. Addition of micromolar amounts of Hg2+ and Pb2+ to solutions of USqH+ could bring about significant changes in its absorption spectrum, resulting in a change in colour of the solution from green to pink, making it true to visually detect Hg2+ and Pb2+ in the presence of other metal ions.
 Scheme 8  The synthetic route of the unsymmetrical cationic squaraine dye USqH+. 
To make the stronger bonding ability of squaraine dyes to metal ions, a squaraine derivative with a lariat-crown ether cation-receptor unit was designed and synthesized by Oguz et al.38 as Na+-selective chemosensor (Scheme 9) that worked in aqueous media. The work confirmed that squaraines were likely to have excellent sensing action to the red-NIR region of the spectrum with judicious choice of the receptor units by appropriate derivatization.
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of the sodium selective chemosensor. 
To improve the selectivity and sensitivity of heavy metal Hg2+ detection in the aqueous medium, a near-infrared absorbing colorimetric method was developed and applied successfully in practical detection of trace Hg2+ in synthetic Hg2+ samples and natural Hg2+ samples in our group recently,9 based on the decrement of bis-dibenzo-18-crown-6-based squaraine (BCSQ) UV-visible absorption intensity (ΔA) (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of action mechanism and color change of BCSQ to Hg2+. 
The high selectivity was achieved by using a crown-ether ring as the anchoring group with Hg2+ based on the oxygen affinity nature as well as the same size of the mercuric ion as that of crown-ester ring,39,40 and the good sensitivity could be significantly realized owing to the fact that the strong near-IR absorption of squaraine groups can efficiently eliminate the strong background absorption in the visible region in aqueous media.
For applications in bio-molecular detection, Reddington et al.41 reported the synthesis of some squaraines containing both phosphonate group and succinate (Scheme 10).
 Scheme 10  Synthetic route of indolium-based squaraine phosphonates. 
Because the phosphonate group may carry two negative charges at some biologically relevant pH values, it offers the possibility of water-soluble labels with enhanced resistance to aggregation and therefore to more brightly labeled substrates. Their results showed that these squaraine derivatives had tremendous potential to label proteins and oligonucleotides with good selectivity and sensitivity. The work was representative examples of phosphonic acid groups attached directly to the aromatic residues of cyanine and squaraine dyes used to label proteins and oligonucleotides.
It is well known that the electron deficient central cyclobutene ring of squaraine dyes is vulnerable to nucleophilic attack which will break the conjugation of the dye resulting in the bleaching of the color.42 To improve the detection sensitivity under normal physiological conditions and achieve fast real-time detection of cysteine, recently in our group, N-methyl-N-hydroxyethyl aniline squaraine as a probe was developed8 by adopting hydrophilic hydroxyl groups as the terminal groups to increase its water solubility, and using a strategy without any other substituted groups around the electron-deficient cyclobutene ring to reduce the steric hindrance effect and to accelerate the addition reaction between the electron-deficient cyclobutene ring and the electron-rich sulfhydryl group (Fig. 2). The proposed method was applied to analyse synthetic amino acid samples and human serum samples with the advantages of simplicity, rapidity, high selectivity and sensitivity. This is the first report on real- time detection of cysteine under normal physiological conditions.
 Fig. 2  The schematic illustration of action mechanism and color change of N-methyl-N-hydroxyethyl aniline squaraine to amino acids. 
3.3 Applications in dye-sensitized solar cells
As we all know, environmental concerns and the finite nature of fossil fuels have led to great interest and growing development in the field of renewable energy sources. Global energy crisis has brought about worldwide attention and is to be an important problem in the modern society. Solar energy conversion is one of the most promising ways to resolve this problem. Among all the methods to utilize solar energy, dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is an effective one to convert solar energy into electron energy directly and has been attracting considerable attention since the pioneering work in 1991.43 Squaraine dyes, as an important near infrared absorbing material with ultra-strong molar absorption coefficients (ε ≥ 105 L mol−1 cm−1), are a particularly promising class of dyes widely applied in solar cells as photo sensitizers. However, photoelectric conversion efficiencies of the solar cell devices based on symmetrical squaraine dyes were very poor. And recently the researches mainly concentrated on unsymmetrical squaraine dyes as photosensitizers for a unidirectional flow of electrons on excitation of unsymmetrical squaraine dyes, which is helpful to the improved charge separation from the excited state of symmetrical squaraine dyes.18 For example, Paek et al.44 designed a series of stable, unsymmetrical squaraine near-IR sensitizers (JK-216 and JK-217 shown in Scheme 11).
 Scheme 11  Synthesis of JK-216 and JK-217. 
The dyes could be assembled using both thiophenyl pyrrolyl and indolium groups, exhibiting a panchromatic light harvesting up to 780 nm and an excellent stability under a light soaking test at 60 °C for 1000 h used in solar cells. The author explained that the enhanced long-term stability was attributed to the substituted hexyloxy groups and nonplanar dimethyl fluorene amino units by preventing the approach of acceptors to the TiO2 surface, resulting in prevention of dark current. This work represented a significant progress as a possible usage of “photovoltaic windows” such as green house and develops more efficient near-IR dyes and their usage.
Maeda et al.,45 reported the synthesis of a novel class of bis-squaraines with linearly extended π-conjugated structures achieved by the Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling of tributylstannyl squarate and terminally iodinated squarylium dyes (Scheme 12). The dyes, in which indole, benzothiazol, and aniline moieties were adopted as terminal aromatic components, were designed to possess not only remarkable responses in the NIR region over 750 nm but also a panchromatic response. This strategy for the design of NIR absorbing squarylium dyes for DSSC applications was very simple and had potential for the development of sensitizers harvesting long-wavelength light.
 Scheme 12  The synthetic route of the bis-squaraines with linearly extended π-conjugated structures. 
To further improve the photovoltaic performances of DSSCs, Maeda et al.,46 further developed four novel unsymmetrical squarylium dyes consisting of heterocycles possessing large π-conjugation systems, i.e., quinolinium, benz[c,d]indolium, benzopyrylium, and benzo-1-thiopyrylium shown in Scheme 13. Their research results confirmed that carboxylic acid groups with strong anchoring ability can promote electron injection in addition to stable immobilization of the squaryliums on the surface of TiO2. Additionally, the unsymmetrical structure of squarylium dyes would be anticipated to make optimal charge flow upon photoexcitation.
 Scheme 13  The structures of the unsymmetrical squarylium dyes consisting of heterocycles. 
Recently, Etgar et al.47 designed and prepared a squaraine dye called VG1-C10 shown in Scheme 14, which was further hybridized with CdSe quantum dots to get a quantum dots/squaraine hybrid. As a sensitizer, the resultant hybrid was well applied for the dye-sensitized solar cell. The power conversion efficiency of a dye-sensitized solar cell with tailored squaraine hybrid dye was greatly enhanced by 47%, due to Förster resonance energy transfer from CdSe quantum dots to the squaraine dye.
 Scheme 14  Synthetic route of the symmetric squaraine (VG1-C10). 
Shi et al.48 had illustrated that both a red-shifted absorption maximum as well as panchromatic absorption could be an efficient method to improve the solar power conversion efficiency. Incorporating other donor and acceptor moieties on the indoline termini of squaraine dyes not only increased the hole-electron separation in the excited state to improve the molar absorbance coefficient, also provided additional absorption in the higher-energy region of the spectrum. Fu et al.49 designed a novel squaraine molecule with no diradical character or small contribution of the diradicaloid component to resonance, which might open a new possibility for the improvement of the photovoltaic performance through a judicious design on squaraine dyes. However, the performances of DSSCs based on squaraine dyes are still poor and not satisfied so far. Therefore, to study and summarize the relationship between property and structures to improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency remains to be of vital significance.
To investigate the mechanism of the structures on the properties of dye sensitized solar cells, some squaraine dyes with different arching groups and conjugating degrees (4a, 4b and 4c shown in Scheme 15) were designed and applied in dye sensitized solar cell devices in our group too.11 Both theoretical calculation and experimental results confirmed that the substituent groups with stronger anchoring ability, the molecules with larger conjugated system and stronger polarity were all beneficial to enhance the conversion efficiency of DSSCs owing to the increase of the driving force for photo induced electron injection and reduction of electron recombination probability. This work will provide a detailed guidance to construct the building of organic solar cell sensitizers with nice properties in the future.
 Scheme 15  Synthetic route of squaraine dyes (4a, 4b and 4c) with different structures. 
3.4 Two-photon absorption nonlinear optics
With the fast development of modern laser technologies in both civilian and military applications in recent years, nonlinear optical materials have attracted more and more considerable interest to protect human eyes, optical sensors, and sensitive optical components from laser damage. Different conjugated organic optical materials that exhibit strong nonlinear optical property and fast response time have been designed and prepared.50
In the literatures, there were a few reports of squaraines pertained to the two-photon absorption properties. The general synthesis strategy to synthesize good squaraine dyes with excellent two-photon absorption properties were to separate the terminal donor groups from the central squarylium acceptor core by conjugated bridges composed of vinylene groups, styrene groups or other electron-rich heterocycles.18
By this means, Chung et al.51 reported some conjugated squaraines in which the terminal donor groups and the central squarylium acceptor core were connected by substituted pyrrole conjugated bridges. The dyes showed extremely large two-photon absorption cross sections (δ) at photon wavelengths of ca. 1 μm, closing to the 1PA absorption edge. Odom et al.52 designed and synthesized a novel porphyrin-based squaraine derivative using in situ deprotection of the trimethylsilyl-protected meso-ethynyl-substituted porphyrin followed by Sonogashira coupling with the diiodosquaraine derivative shown in Scheme 16.
 Scheme 16  Synthesis of porphyrin-based squaraine derivatives. 
Owing to the fact that linear absorption spectra of both squaraines and porphyrins exhibited large transition dipole moment bands, and the S0–S1 transition energies of bis(indolinylidenemethyl) squaraines closely matched those of porphyrins, the target porphyrin-based squaraine derivative had strong and broad two-photon absorption spectrum with the δmax value of 11000 GM and δ >780 GM over a 750 nm-wide wavelength range. The squaraine could have applications in broadband NIR pulse suppression including the whole telecommunications range (1300–1550 nm).
Shi et al.53 developed a novel low-bandgap conjugated polymer based on squaraine with strong two-photon absorption shown in Fig. 3, i.e., a new low-bandgap π-conjugated D–A copolymer of squaraine and pyridopyrazine. Their study confirmed that with increasing the degree of conjugation and delocalization of π-electrons, two-photon absorption of the squaraine-based polymer will improve accordingly.
 Fig. 3  The chemical structure of the target squaraine-based polymer. 
Makowski et al.6 recently developed an indole-based squaraine dye with ethylhexyl groups (shown in Scheme 17) to lower the melting temperature to below the decomposition temperature, so that melt-processing was possible. The crystalline material exhibited a melting temperature of 222 °C, which was sufficiently low to allow for melt-processing without significant thermal decomposition. Crystallization of the dye from the melt was exceedingly slow so easily formed amorphous glasses. The materials would be an attractive candidate for devices that required integration of a nonlinear optical solid in complex shapes.
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of an indole-based squaraine dye with ethylhexyl groups. 
3.5 Self-assembly supramolecular materials
Supramolecular self-assembly is a ubiquitous natural phenomenon capable of spontaneously forming multiple ordered structures within a system composing of many individual subunits linked through non-covalent bonds, such as H-bond, van der Waals force, metal-to-ligand bonding, electrostatic force, hydrophobic-hydrophilic interaction, and π–π stacking,54–56 among which H-bond and π–π stacking are two of the most important interactions ranging from DNA and proteins to macroscopic virus and bacteria. A variety of functional self-assembly materials have been mimicked and used as novel catalytic, magnetic, electronic and optical properties.57,58 Squaraines, as a kind of zwitterionic, rigid and plane molecules, are easy to H-type or J-type self-assemble owing to strong intermolecular π–π stacking interactions. But how to control and get ideal self-assembled squaraine-based functional materials with desirable properties will have great importance.
Yagi et al.59 reported some metallo supramolecular assemblies from polymethylene-bridged squaraine dimers by extended allosteric chelation of the folded H-aggregates (Shown in Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  The illustration of metallo supramolecular assemblies. 
The authors explained that chelation of the negatively charged oxygen in the central cyclobutenoate to Ca2+ ion was essential to the formation of the H-foldamer. The preorganized unit foldamer facilitates cooperative allosteric chelation to Ca2+ ions, resulting in the unprecedented formation of a metallo supramolecular one-dimensional array of squaraine H-type aggregates. The results provided new insights to explore the potential of squaraine dyes in the field of supramolecular dye chemistry. Ajayaghosh et al.60 illustrated that flexible chain-linked bis-squaraines upon binding with Ca2+ could self-assembly into a 1D spherical micellar assembly shown in Scheme 18 with high molar absorptivity and strong thermal stability. The cation–arene interaction of the aromatic moiety of the podand chain could not only increase the complex stability, but also facilitated the hierarchical assembly to spherical micelles. The stronger absorption intensity than its mother squaraine was attributed to the difference in the dipole orientation of the chromophores.
 Scheme 18  Schematic representation of Ca2+ induced self-assembly processes. 
Stoll et al.61 presented their initial studies on the synthesis of a novel chiral squaraine dye (shown in Scheme 19) and the investigation of its unique assembly behavior in aqueous solution and on a solid substrate.
 Scheme 19  Route to chiral squaraine via a two-step, one-pot procedure. 
Although in aqueous solution, aggregation of the chiral squaraine was dominated by the hydrophobic effect, self-assembly on HOPG was governed by alkyl-chain-substrate as well as squaraine–squaraine interactions. On HOPG, the squaraines' alkyl side chains could separate the squaraines from the graphite, and at the same time directed the squaraine into self-assembly, thereby giving rise to an unprecedented self-templating effect by the specific molecular structure as well as by the chirality of the synthesized squaraine dye. These observations should facilitate the future design of related self-assembled materials for (supra)molecular electronics.
To further investigate the influence of molecular architectures on their optic performances, some squaraine molecules (2a, 2b and 2c), with different terminal hydrogen bond recognition abilities, were identified and designed in our group too (shown in Fig. 5).62
 Fig. 5  The schematic illustration of self-assembly and properties of squaraines 2a, 2b and 2c. 
The resultant squaraine dyes could be controllably constructed into a series of supramolecular self-assemblies with different morphologies and dimensions via a simple solution-based self-assembly method under mild conditions. And their absorption spectra properties changed regularly with the increasing regularity of the self-assemblies while the thermal stability decreases reversibly, i.e., the thermal stability of zwitterionic squaraine molecules showed good anti-hydrogen bonding effect. At the same time, λem and Stokes shift of 2c were much smaller than that of 2b abnormally. This might be attributed to the fact that the molecular thermal vibration of the rigid supramolecular assembly from 2c was much weaker than that of 2b or 2a, which caused less energy loss, further resulted in the decrease of λem and Stokes shift of 2c. The results confirmed that there were strong synergetic reinforcing effects between H-bond recognition and π–π stacking interaction between squaraine molecules. The work provides a novel route for designing novel nanostructured self-assembled functional materials with preferable properties via a simple molecular structural design of zwitterionic molecules.
4. Conclusions
Squaraine, as a class of functional near -infrared absorbing optic materials, have been at the center stage of research for the past several years from both fundamental and technological viewpoints. Owing to that the electron-donating groups in the molecules can be changed by N,N-dialkylanilines, benzothiazoles, phenols, azulenes, pyrroles, indoles and quinolones, squaraines optical properties can be tuned to a great extent by structural modifications or controllable self-assembly to suit a specific application. Now a great many multifunctional squaraines with promising long-wavelength absorption properties and high extinction coefficients have been designed and applied widely as highly stable advanced materials, molecular probes, solar cell sensitizers, nonlinear optics and self-assembly functional materials. It is expected that the chemistry and applications of squaraines will have a greater and better future in the coming years.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from the National Natural Science Fund of China (No: 21277103) and College Outstanding Young Talent Fund of Anhui Province (No: 2011SQRL148).
Notes and references
Y. Wang, J. L. Liu, H. D. Tran, M. Mecklenburg, X. N. Guan, A. Z. Stieg, B. C. Regan, D. C. Martin and R. B. Kaner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9251–9262 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Hammond, J. Sinness, S. Dubbury, K. A. Firestone, J. B. Benedict, Z. Wawrzak, O. Clot, P. J. Reid and L. R. Dalton, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6752–6764 RSC .
C. Prabhakar, K. Bhanuprakash, V. J. Rao, M. Balamuralikrishna and D. N. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6077–6089 CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, H. Z. Chen and M. Wang, Prog. Nat. Sci., 1999, 9, 241–247 CAS .
K. Y. Law, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 449–486 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Makowski, B. Valle, K. D. Singer and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2848–2850 RSC .
J. Q. Qu, J. Y. Zhang, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen, F. Jaiser, X. H. Yang and D. Neher, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8297–8306 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Yan, S. Y. Guang, H. Y. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Analyst, 2011, 136, 1916–1921 RSC .
L. Hu, Y. F. Zhang, L. Nie, C. G. Xie and Z. Q. Yan, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2013, 104, 87–91 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Gassensmith, J. M. Baumes and B. D. Smith, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6329–6338 RSC .
Z. Q. Yan, S. Y. Guang, X. Y. Su and H. Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8894–8900 CAS .
D. Oushiki, H. Kojima, Y. Takahashi, T. Komatsu, T. Terai, K. Hanaoka, M. Nishikawa, Y. Takakura and T. Nagano, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 4404–4410 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsui, M. Fukushima, Y. Kubota, K. Funabiki and M. Shiro, Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 1931–1935 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. Wöbkenberg, J. G. Labram, J.-M. Swiecicki, K. Parkhomenko, D. Sredojevic, J.-P. Gisselbrecht, M. D. L. Dago, D. D. C. Bradley, J.-P. Djukic and T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3673–3680 RSC .
P. F. Santos, L. V. Reis, P. Almeida, A. S. Oliveira and L. F. V. Ferreira, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 160, 159–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Treibs and K. Jacob, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1965, 4, 694 CrossRef .
L. Beverina and P. Salice, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 1207–1225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sreejith, P. Carol, P. Chithra and A. Ajayaghosh, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 264–274 RSC .
S. Yagi and H. Nakazumi, Functional Dyes, 2006, 215–255 CrossRef .
S. Yagi and H. Nakazumi, Top. Heterocycl. Chem., 2008, 14, 133–181 CrossRef CAS .
H.-E. Sprenger and W. Ziegenbein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1967, 6, 553–554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Law and F. C. Bailey, J. Org. Chem., 1992, 57, 3278–3286 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jyothish, K. T. Arun and D. Ramaiah, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 3965–3968 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagi, T. Ohta, N. Akagi and H. Nakazumi, Dyes Pigm., 2008, 77, 525–536 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagi, Y. Nakasaku, T. Maed, H. Nakazumi and Y. Sakurai, Dyes Pigm., 2011, 90, 211–218 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tatsuura, M. Q. Tian, M. Furuki, Y. Sato, I. Iwasa and L. S. Pu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 2704–2706 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bello and J. O. Ajayi, Dyes Pigm., 1996, 31, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kim, J.-H. Kim, J.-Z. Cui, Y.-S. Gal, S.-H. Jin and K. Koh, Dyes Pigm., 2002, 55, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, K. G. Thomas, M. V. George and P. V. Kamat, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1992, 88, 3419–3422 RSC .
E. Arunkumar, C. C. Forbes, B. C. Noll and B. D. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3288–3289 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Johnson, N. Fu, E. Arunkumar, W. M. Leevy, S. T. Gammon, D. Piwnica-Worms and B. D. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5528–5531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Yan, H. Y. Xu, S. Y. Guang, X. Zhao, W. L. Fan and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Ma, S. C. Zhang, Z. Q. Lin, Y. Y. Liu, Z. Xing, C. D. Yang and X. R. Zhang, Analyst, 2009, 134, 1863–1867 RSC .
S. Yagi, Y. Fujie, Y. Hyodo and H. Nakazumi, Dyes Pigm., 2002, 52, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Isgor and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron Lett., 1997, 38, 7417–7420 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tarazi, N. Narayanan, J. Sowell, G. Patonay and L. Strekowski, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2002, 58, 257–264 CrossRef .
M. C. S. Basheer, A. K. G. Thomas, C. H. Suresh and S. Das, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 605–610 CrossRef CAS .
U. Oguz and E. U. Akkaya, Tetrahedron Lett., 1998, 39, 5857–5860 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Avirah, K. Jyothish and D. Ramaiah, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Yan, L. Hu, L. Nie and H. Lv, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2011, 79, 661–665 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Reddington, Bioconjugate Chem., 2007, 18, 2178–2190 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Ros-Lis, B. Garcia, D. Jimenez, R. Martinez-Manez, F. Sancenon, J. Soto, F. Gonzalvo and M. C. Valldecabres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4064–4065 CrossRef CAS .
B. Oregan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paek, H. Choi, C. Kim, N. Cho, S. So, K. Song, M. K. Nazeeruddin and J. Ko, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2874–2876 RSC .
T. Maeda, Y. Hamamura, K. Miyanaga, N. Shima, S. Yagi and H. Nakazumi, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5994–5997 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maeda, N. Shima, T. Tsukamoto, S. Yagi and H. Nakazumi, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 2481–2487 CrossRef CAS .
L. Etgar, J. Park, C. Barolo, V. Lesnyak, S. K. Panda, P. Quagliotto, S. G. Hickey, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Eychmuller, G. Viscardi and M. Gratzel, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 2748–2752 RSC .
Y. R. Shi, R. B. M. Hill, J. H. Yum, A. Dualeh, S. Barlow, M. Gratzel, S. R. Marder and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6619–6621 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fu, L. Lei, K. Sun, P. Xia, H. Y. Yuan, D. Xiao and Z. H. I. Li, Renewable Energy, 2012, 38, 163–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Yan, Y. F. Chen, H. Y. Xu, S. Y. Guang and L. F. Li, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2011, 53, 535–539 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Chung, S. J. Zheng, T. Odani, L. Beverina, J. Fu, L. A. Padilha, A. Biesso, J. M. Hales, X. W. Zhan, K. Schmidt, A. J. Ye, E. Zojer, S. Barlow, D. J. Hagan, E. W. Van Stryland, Y. P. Yi, Z. G. Shuai, G. A. Pagani, J. L. Bredas, J. W. Perry and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14444–14445 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Odom, S. Webster, L. A. Padilha, D. Peceli, H. Hu, G. Nootz, S. J. Chung, S. Ohira, J. D. Matichak, O. V. Przhonska, A. D. Kachkovski, S. Barlow, J. L. Bredas, H. L. Anderson, D. J. Hagan, E. W. Van Stryland and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7510–7511 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Shi, W. Q. Chen, J. F. Xiang, X. M. Duan and X. W. Zhan, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 3759–3765 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suzuki and K. Hanabusa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 455–463 RSC .
S. De Feyter and F. C. De Schryver, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 139–393 RSC .
J. L. Li and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3196–3216 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. A. De Greef, M. M. J. Smulders, M. Wolffs, A. P. H. J. Schenning, R. P. Sijbesma and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5687–5754 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Iha, K. L. Wooley, A. M. Nystrom, D. J. Burke, M. J. Kade and C. J. Hawker, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5620–5686 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagi, Y. Hyodo, M. Hirose, H. Nakazumi, Y. Sakurai and A. Ajayaghosh, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 1999–2002 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ajayaghosh, P. Chithra, R. Varghese and K. P. Divya, Chem. Commun., 2008, 969–971 RSC .
R. S. Stoll, N. Severin, J. P. Rabe and S. Hecht, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Yan, S. Y. Guang, H. Y. Xu, X. Y. Su and X. Y. Liu, RSC Adv. Search PubMed  , Submitted, ID: RA-ART-02-2013-040690.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  The π-conjugated zwitterionic structures of squaraine molecules.	 

 	Scheme 2  The synthetic routes of symmetrical squaraines (a) and unsymmetrical squaraines (b).	 

 	Scheme 3  The possible reactions between the quinaldinium salt and squaric acid.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthetic routes of a series of arene- and thiophene-bridged bis-squarylium dyes.	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthetic routes of squaraine-derived rotaxanes.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthetic routes of squaraine-containing POSS-based hybrids (H1 and H2).	 

 	Scheme 7  The synthetic route of a squaraine incorporating four carboxylic groups.	 

 	Scheme 8  The synthetic route of the unsymmetrical cationic squaraine dye USqH+.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of the sodium selective chemosensor.	 

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of action mechanism and color change of BCSQ to Hg2+.	 

 	Scheme 10  Synthetic route of indolium-based squaraine phosphonates.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic illustration of action mechanism and color change of N-methyl-N-hydroxyethyl aniline squaraine to amino acids.	 

 	Scheme 11  Synthesis of JK-216 and JK-217.	 

 	Scheme 12  The synthetic route of the bis-squaraines with linearly extended π-conjugated structures.	 

 	Scheme 13  The structures of the unsymmetrical squarylium dyes consisting of heterocycles.	 

 	Scheme 14  Synthetic route of the symmetric squaraine (VG1-C10).	 

 	Scheme 15  Synthetic route of squaraine dyes (4a, 4b and 4c) with different structures.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthesis of porphyrin-based squaraine derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 3  The chemical structure of the target squaraine-based polymer.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of an indole-based squaraine dye with ethylhexyl groups.	 

 	Fig. 4  The illustration of metallo supramolecular assemblies.	 

 	Scheme 18  Schematic representation of Ca2+ induced self-assembly processes.	 

 	Scheme 19  Route to chiral squaraine via a two-step, one-pot procedure.	 

 	Fig. 5  The schematic illustration of self-assembly and properties of squaraines 2a, 2b and 2c.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
