Near infrared emitting quantum dots: synthesis, luminescence properties and applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC04065J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC04065J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13662-13679Near infrared emitting quantum dots: synthesis, luminescence properties and applications

        
          
            Yue 
            Ma
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            William W. 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: yuzhang@jlu.edu.cn; wyu6000@gmail.com
bDepartment of Chemistry and Physics, Louisiana State University, Shreveport, LA 71115, USA
Received 
      26th July 2019
    , Accepted 1st October 2019First published on 1st October 2019AbstractNear-infrared (NIR) luminescent quantum dots (QDs) have been studied very intensively. These QDs have excellent optical properties. Their emitting wavelength can be adjusted by their size and composition, and falls in the telecommunication window, making these QDs promising materials for telecommunication. NIR light has small background interference and large penetration depth, which make NIR QDs advantageous in bio-imaging applications. This paper reviews the synthesis and optical properties of several representative NIR QDs, including traditional cadmium, mercury, lead, silver, and indium based QDs, as well as I–III–IV ternary QDs. Typical applications of QDs with NIR luminescence properties, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), in biology, luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs), doped glasses/fibers, and optical sensing, are also discussed.
Yue Ma
Yue Ma is a master student at the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, Jilin University. Her current research work is on the preparation of NIR quantum dots and their applications.
Yu Zhang
Yu Zhang received his PhD degree from Jilin University. In 2010, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University. He has studied and worked at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and Pennsylvania State University, and engaged in nano-optoelectronics research at the City University of Hong Kong. His research interests include semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in optoelectronic devices.
William W. Yu
William Yu obtained his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests are solution dispersible nanomaterials and their applications in alternative energy, biomedicine, and environmental remediation.
1. Introduction
Materials research is a foundation of technology development. Semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), also known as quantum dots (QDs), have been developing rapidly in recent years and have become very promising in the manufacture of optical devices. QDs are generally spherical or spheroidal and often have a diameter between 2 and 20 nm. When the size of the QD is smaller than or close to the exciton Bohr radius, the continuous band structure in the material becomes discrete due to the quantum confinement effect, and the band gap can be adjusted by changing the size of the particles. QDs have continuous and wide excitation spectra, and the position of the PL peaks can be controlled by changing their physical size and composition ratio. The emission peak width is narrow, and the Stokes displacement is large, which can avoid the overlap of the emission spectrum and the excitation spectrum, and is beneficial for the detection of the fluorescence signal. QDs also have strong anti-photobleaching ability, strong fluorescence intensity and high stability; their fluorescence intensity does not decrease significantly with time.
Near-infrared (NIR) emission QDs have outstanding application advantages in laser, energy, photodetection, and biomedical applications.1–3 They have significantly improved the application performance of NIR optoelectronic devices, reduced energy consumption, and broadened the application fields, especially with advantages in fields with large scale integrated circuits. At the same time, the excellent photostability and biocompatibility of NIR QDs make them ideal bioluminescent probes. Over the past decades, synthetic methods of QDs with NIR emission wavelengths have been continuously improved, and the photoluminescence quantum yield (PL QY) has been greatly increased, making them more applicable to NIR devices.
QDs with visible emission were synthesized earlier, and then the CdTe QD emission wavelength was extended to the NIR region.4 Soon after that, NIR QDs containing Cd, Hg, and Pb began to develop rapidly, but the potential toxicity from these metals greatly limits their application prospects. In recent years, with the continuous development of theories and technologies, people have gained deeper understanding of the growth and structural control of nanoscale particles, prompting the successful preparation of new low-toxic NIR QDs, such as I–III–VI, I–VI, and II–V family NIR QDs.
At present, there are two main ways to prepare colloidal QDs, namely organic phase synthesis and aqueous phase preparation. The QDs prepared in the organic phase usually have high PL QY, narrow photoluminescence half width, good monodispersity and high stability, but there are some disadvantages like toxic reagents, high experimental cost, and raised synthetic process safety issues. The preparation of QDs in the aqueous phase is non-toxic, inexpensive, simple to operate, environmentally friendly, and easily reproducible. At the same time, these QDs have superior biocompatibility and can be directly applied to biological systems. However, except CdTe and HgTe, most of the QDs prepared in the aqueous phase have poor luminescence properties, and generally require a means such as selective precipitation/separation, ultraviolet illumination, and changing the QD structure to increase the PL QY. QDs synthesized in the organic phase are insoluble in water, so extra procedures are needed for biological applications. Hydrophobic ligands could be replaced by some water-soluble bifunctional molecules through ligand exchange. Encapsulating QDs with amphiphilic polymers or silica is also a good solution.5–7
In this work, the synthesis and optical properties of colloidal NIR luminescent QDs such as Cd, Hg, Pb, Ag, In, and Ga based simple and combinatory QDs are reviewed, and their main applications in NIR QD-LEDs, the biomedical field, luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs), doped glasses and fibers, and optical sensing are summarized. Table 1 lists the wavelength range and bandgap of some representative NIR QDs. The Bohr radius of a QD material can be calculated by  
Table 1 Wavelength range, bulk bandgap and Bohr radius of typical NIR QDs




QD
Wavelength (nm)
Bulk bandgap (eV)
Bohr radius (nm)




CdTe
530–8008,9
1.510
1011


CdHgTe
600–135012
0–1.513




HgTe
700–200014,15
−0.1516
8017


Cd3P2
450–150018
0.5519
1818


Cd3As2
530–200020
−0.1921
4720


PbS
800–220022–24
0.4125
1825


PbSe
600–250026–28
0.2829
4630


PbTe
1245–162529
0.3129
15029


Ag2S
660–12273,31
0.9–1.132
2.233


Ag2Se
700–133034,35
0.1532




Ag2Te
995–130036,37
0.6732




InP
390–72038
1.2729
1539


InAs
800–140040,41
0.3629
3430


CuInS2
500–95042–44
1.5345
4.146


AgInS2
600–80047,48
1.8745
5.549


AgInSe2
700–125050,51
1.2445




CuInSe2
640–97552
1.0445
10.645




where me* and mh* are the effective masses of the electron and hole, respectively; e is the electron charge; and ε is the dielectric constant.
2. Synthesis and properties of NIR QDs
2.1 Cd and Hg based NIR QDs
Peng et al.53 developed a reproducible one-pot synthesis of high-quality nanorods and nanoparticles of CdTe, CdSe, and CdS using CdO as the cadmium precursor. This one-pot synthetic scheme was considered as a major advance toward green-chemistry due to its mild and simple reaction conditions. In addition to CdO, Yu et al. further used 1-octadcene (ODE) as a noncoordinating solvent (to replace the P-containing solvents for a greener process) for the synthesis of CdTe.9 Monodisperse CdTe QDs of zinc blende and wurtzite crystal structures, nanorods, and nano-tetrapods were synthesized in this noncoordinating solvent system. The obtained QDs have a PL peak wavelength ranging from 530 to 760 nm without any size sorting. The UV-vis and PL spectra of the as-prepared CdTe QDs are shown in Fig. 1. Yang et al.54 proposed a non-injection synthesis of CdTe QDs so that it can be used in large-scale preparation. The absorption spectra of their CdTe QDs have five exciton absorption peaks, showing good size monodispersity.
 Fig. 1  UV-vis and PL spectra of CdTe QDs.9 
Rogach et al.8 synthesized thiol-capped CdTe QDs by an aqueous phase method, using thioglycolic acid and mercaptopropionic acid as ligands. Their emission wavelength can be adjusted between 500 and 700 nm and 530 and 800 nm, respectively, and the PL QY can reach up to 60%. In 2012, Lu and co-workers designed a series of short RGD (arginine–glycine–aspartic acid) peptide ligands and developed a one-pot aqueous synthesis of integrin-binding CdTe and CdZnTe QDs.55 The optimal ligand CRGDS (cysteine–arginine–glycine–aspartic–serine) provides the CdTe QDs with a well-defined wavelength range of 500–650 nm and PL QY up to 15%.
Surface defects and nonradiative decay can be reduced by coating QDs with shells. The CdTe/CdSe core–shell QD is a type-II structure. Seo et al.56 prepared the CdTe core from cadmium 2,4-pentanedionate (C10H14CdO4) and trioctylphosphine-Te (TOP-Te). Then diethyl zinc (Et2Zn) or triethyl aluminum (Et3Al) and TOP-Se were slowly added to the core solution and reacted with excess cationic Cd to form the CdSe shell (alkyl metals were used as an activating agent of selenium). The PL QY of the CdTe QDs prepared by this method is 10–20%, and the PL QY of CdTe/CdSe QDs is 15–25%, while the stability is also improved. CdTe/CdS core–shell QDs of type-II structure can also be prepared to improve both the stability and optical properties.57 Samanta et al. synthesized CdTe/CdS/ZnS and CdTe/CdSe/ZnS core/shell/shell QDs directly in the aqueous phase, using glutathione (GSH) as a ligand to reduce the toxicity of the nanocrystals.58 The PL QY significantly increases after the deposition of one and two monolayers of CdS or CdSe on the CdTe core, and NIR emission with peak wavelengths of up to 730 nm was obtained.
Rogach et al. also reported the colloidal preparation of coloradoite crystal structure thioglycerol-capped HgTe nanocrystals with a size ranging from 3 to 6 nm.14 The HgTe QDs have room-temperature NIR luminescence covering the spectral region from 800 to 1400 nm with a maximum located at 1080 nm and a reasonably high quantum yield of 48%, which partly overlaps with the 1.3 μm telecommunications window. A classic aqueous synthesis method avoids the instability and uncontrollable growth due to high reactivity.59 Mercury acetate was dissolved in ethanol, and hexadecylamine was added to form white aminomercuric chloride as a mercury precursor. Te powder was dissolved in TOP to form a TOP-Te complex, which was slowly dropped into the mercury precursor solution. The solution slowly turned brown and eventually formed a precipitate. The mixture was cooled to −78 °C for 10 minutes until solidified. The crystals were washed and centrifuged several times with ethanol to finally obtain a brown powder, which was soluble in toluene. Harrison et al. reported that HgTe QDs would have a shift of the PL band towards longer wavelengths with the PL intensity gradually declining if heated for progressively longer times.60 A similar gradual red shift was observed after weeks of storage at room temperature. Then they capped the HgTe QDs with a shell of a wider-bandgap material CdS, which improved both the PL QY and the long term storage stability of the samples.15 As for organic phase synthesis, Green et al.17 obtained HgTe QDs using a similar method to Murray's.61
In addition, QDs based on Cd or Hg and containing more than two elements (ternary QDs) were successfully synthesized. Jiang et al. used trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) as the organic phase to prepare CdTexSe1−x/CdS QDs under high temperature conditions.62 For aqueous phase synthesis, Qian et al. synthesized CdHgTe/CdS QDs with mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) as a stabilizer.63 Harrison et al. prepared CdHgTe QDs with dihydroxypropyl mercaptan as stabilizer, and obtained CdHgTe QDs with an emission wavelength of 600–1350 nm by adjusting the ratios of Cd, Hg and Te.12 Morgan et al. used thioglycolic acid as a stabilizer to prepare CdMnTe QDs, then added mercury salts to obtain CdMnTe/Hg QDs, and successfully used them for in vivo experiments.64
Cd3P2 and Cd3As2 QDs are typical representatives of II–V family QDs. They were prepared in a similar manner to InP QDs using (TMS)3P and (TMS)3As as starting materials. Due to the high reactivity of (TMS)3P and (TMS)3As, the reaction precursors are consumed very quickly during the synthesis, making it difficult to control the particle size and emission wavelength. Xie et al.18 and Miao et al.65 made the fluorescence emission wavelength of Cd3P2 QDs from 450 to 1500 nm by adjusting the ligand concentration and reaction temperature, respectively. Harris et al.20 used a two-step method to achieve particle size control of Cd3As2 QDs. After the formation of small size Cd3As2 QDs, the reaction precursors were continuously added to allow the QDs to continue to grow. Finally, Cd3As2 QDs covering an emission range of 530 to 2000 nm were obtained. The fluorescence emission windows of Cd3P2 and Cd3As2 QDs are relatively wide, reaching near-infrared from visible light, and the PL QY reaches 60%. However, the shortcomings of these QDs are that they contain the toxic Cd element and need expensive and highly toxic (TMS)3P or (TMS)3As making the synthesis process cumbersome and unsafe. In addition, the fluorescence stability of these QDs still needs to be improved.
2.2 Lead chalcogenide QDs
Lead chalcogenide (PbX, X = S, Se, and Te) QDs have narrow bandgaps, which makes them promising materials in NIR emission. Bulk PbS is a cubic crystal structure and has a bandgap of 0.41 eV and a Bohr radius of 18 nm. Hines and Scholes first synthesized colloidal NIR emitting PbS QDs (800–1800 nm).22 They used lead oxide (PbO) and bis(trimethylsilyl)sulfide ((TMS)2S) as the lead and sulfur precursors, respectively. Oleic acid (OA) was applied as the stabilizing ligand and the reaction was carried out in a noncoordinating solvent of ODE. The size of the QDs can be tuned by varying a series of conditions such as the amount of OA, the molar ratios of PbO to OA or (TMS)2S, the injection temperature, the reaction time, the growth temperature, and the growth time.
Another synthesis method of PbS QDs reported by Cademartiri et al.66 and Joo et al.67 is to use lead chloride (PbCl2) and sulfur (S) as the precursors and oleylamine (OLA) as the ligand. In this method spherical PbS QDs were prepared, whose wavelength ranged from 1245 to 1625 nm. The synthesis route using PbCl2 is greener and has the advantages of convenient synthetic procedures and cost-effectiveness. Moreels et al. improved the method by adding TOP into the S precursor solution, and the as-prepared PbS QDs have first excitonic absorption peaks in the range of 925–2100 nm and they are highly luminescent, with PL QY values between 20 and 90%.23 The PL and absorption spectra are shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  (a) Photoluminescence and (b) absorption of PbS QDs during growth.23 
Using the same route but replacing TOP with tributylphosphine (TBP), the thus synthesized PbS QDs have an emission wavelength from 705 to 900 nm and their PL QY is 60–90%, comparable to those synthesized by other routes.24 In order to obtain QDs that are stable in the air, Ren et al. synthesized PbS/CdS core/shell QDs by cation exchange.68 OA capped PbS QDs were reported to have PL QYs between 40 and 60% (the highest value was 80%) for the emission peak in the range of 1100 to 1300 nm, and between 25% and 40% for the emission peaks ranging from 1300 to 1600 nm.69
Bulk PbSe has a band gap of 0.28 eV and its exciton Bohr radius is 46 nm at room temperature. Studies have shown that PbSe QDs displayed a strong size dependence in their temperature-induced band gap variation. The temperature coefficient (dEg/dT) of PbSe QDs evolves from initially negative values to zero and then to positive values with the increase of the QD size.70,71 When the particle size is smaller than the critical size, 4.88 nm, the temperature coefficient dEg/dT is also dependent on the temperature.
Murray and coworkers firstly reported the synthesis of well-controlled colloidal PbSe QDs by rapidly injecting a room temperature solution of lead oleate and TOPSe into a rapidly stirred solution containing diphenylether.26 The diameter of the as-synthesized PbSe QDs could be tuned from 3.5 to 15 nm and a size distribution of about 10% was obtained, which could be further narrowed down to 5% by size-selective precipitation. Yu et al.27 synthesized spherical PbSe QDs with NIR absorption of 1100–2520 nm in a noncoordinating solvent. The as-prepared PbSe QDs are single domains of rock-salt PbSe, and showed a size-distribution of 5–7%. Evans et al. reported ultra-small PbSe QDs with fluorescence in the NIR region with remarkable quantum efficiencies greater than 50% from the reaction system of PbO–TOPSe–OA.72 Oleylamine (OLA)-capped PbSe QDs were prepared by using PbCl2–OLA solution as a lead precursor and Se–ODE as a selenium precursor. At a specific reaction temperature, the Se precursor is injected into the Pb precursor for the reaction. Studies have shown that the forbidden bandwidth of PbSe body materials changes with temperature.73,74
Dai et al. studied the stability of PbSe QDs on varied particle concentration, particle size, temperature, and light (UV and room light illumination or darkness).75 As shown in Fig. 3, PbSe QDs with air exposure in this work showed blue-shifts in the PL spectrum. PbSe QDs with UV irradiation also showed blue-shifts. PbSe QDs under nitrogen showed better stability and preserved the optical properties even with UV irradiation or heating at mild temperatures. The air-contact instability was attributed to destructive oxidation and kinetic collision induced decomposition. PbSe QDs’ chemical instability toward oxidation often leads to uncontrollable changes in the optical and electronic properties of devices. Klimov and co-workers presented a simple method to enhance the stability of PbSe QDs against oxidation and to improve their optical properties through reaction with molecular chlorine.76 The chlorine molecules preferentially etch out surface Se ions and react with Pb ions to form a thin PbCl2 passivation layer which effectively prevents oxidation during long-term air exposure while passivating surface trap states to increase the PL efficiency and decrease photocharging. Ultra-small PbSe QDs of 1 to 3 nm were prepared by Ma et al. and the QD size was controlled by adjusting the growth temperature.28
 Fig. 3  (a) Temporal blue-shifts of the first excitonic absorption peak of 5.0 nm PbSe QD powder and solutions stored under darkness in air. (b) Temporal blue-shifts of the first absorption peaks of different-sized PbSe QDs exposed to room light in air; the concentrations of these PbSe QDs were identical (1.0 μM). Temporal evolution of the absorption spectra of 5.0 nm PbSe QDs exposed to (c) UV light and (d) room light in air. Both of the PbSe QD concentrations shown here were identical (0.86 μM). (e) Temporal blue-shifts of the first excitonic absorption peaks derived from panels (c and d). Temporal evolution of the absorption spectra of PbSe nanocrystal solution stored in a nitrogen atmosphere under (f) darkness, (g) UV light, or (h) different temperatures with exposure to room light.75 
Zhang et al. proved that PbSe QDs’ PL intensity drops sharply when exposed to the air environment, so they synthesized PbSe/CdSe core/shell QDs and got dramatically improved stability.77 Stouwdam et al. prepared PbSe/PbS core/shell NCs using TOP-S and (TMS)2S as sulfur sources, but they did not show increased stability compared with PbSe core QDs.78 The ‘‘successive ion layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR)’’ technology79 was employed to form air-stable PbSe/CdSe core/shell QDs with improved PL and a PL QY of 70%, and the thickness of the CdSe shell was accurately controlled.77 A suitable amount of TBP would increase the PL QY of fresh-made PbSe NCs from 70% to 92% and the PL QY of oxidized PbSe QDs from 11% to 89%. Adopting TBP passivation before the growth of the CdSe shell over the PbSe core can also improve the interface state between the PbSe core and the CdSe shell.80 PbSe/CdSe/ZnSe QDs were synthesized through SILAR layer-by-layer control.81 PbSe plain QDs can be further protected from air oxidation with an increased PL QY by adding ZnSe shells on PbSe/CdSe.
In addition to the above-mentioned synthetic methods for PbSe core/shell QDs, Klimov and colleagues proposed an ion exchange synthesis route for stabilizing lead chalcogenide QDs.82 The Pb ions on the surface of the PbSe QDs were replaced by Cd ions to obtain the expected PbSe/CdSe core–shell QDs. A ZnS shell can be further grown on new PbSe/CdSe QDs (Fig. 4 and 5).
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of PbSe/CdSe and PbSe/CdSe/ZnS QDs.82 
 Fig. 5  PL spectra of a series of aliquots taken during growth of a ZnS shell on PbSe/CdSe QDs. Arrows denote the forward progress of the reaction.82 
Bulk PbTe has a narrow bandgap of 0.31 eV at room temperature and a large Bohr radius of 150 nm. PbTe QDs were first synthesized by Reynoso et al. in doped glasses in 1995.83 In 2004, Lu et al.84 synthesized both spherical and cubic-shaped PbTe QDs. They concluded that size-selective precipitation was essential to achieve a size distribution of about 7%. Murphy et al.85 reported a route to derive PbTe QDs, substituting diphenyl ether with the more environmentally friendly solvent ODE, and substituting lead acetate trihydrate with PbO as the initial source of lead. Reaction parameters such as oleic acid/Pb/Te ratios and concentrations and injection and growth temperatures were optimized, and the QDs with their first exciton absorption peaks at relevant telecommunication wavelengths of 1300–1600 nm have a size distribution of ∼7%, while the QDs with their first exciton absorption peaks around 1000 nm have a size distribution of 13%.
PbTe QDs are not stable and their PL is drastically quenched when exposed to air or moist solvents. Core/shell structures have been demonstrated in various materials to be able to protect the core materials. In 2009, Lambert et al.86 extended the method of Pietryga et al.82 to the formation of PbTe/CdTe core/shell QDs and demonstrated the combination of the PbTe rock salt structure and the CdTe zinc blende structure with direct observation of HRTEM. Protesescu et al.87 developed an all-solution-based strategy for obtaining PbTe/CdTe QDs by combining the colloidal synthesis of PbTe QDs with post-synthetic cation exchange to form PbTe/CdTe core–shell QDs in 2016. In this work, the colloidal synthesis of PbTe QDs was optimized to enable wavelength tuning of the PL maxima in the range of 1.5 to 3.2 μm. Higher temperatures, higher OA/Pb ratios, and longer reaction times led to larger QD size. These QDs have good air stability and the spectra are the same after one year of storage under ambient conditions.
2.3 Silver chalcogenide QDs
The bulk band gap of Ag2S is 1 eV, and it becomes wider when Ag2S is reduced to the nanometer scale due to the quantum size effect, so that Ag2S QDs can exhibit special properties and unique luminous characteristics different from the bulk material. Ag2S QDs have the characteristics of an asymmetric emission spectrum, high fluorescence intensity, good light stability, good biocompatibility, good nonlinear optical property and large magnetoresistance effect, giving them great application potential in the preparation of fluorescent molecular probes, biosensing, optics and electronic devices. Ag2S has many different shape structures. Monoclinic α-Ag2S is stable below 178 °C, body-centered cubic β-Ag2S is stable between 178 and 600 °C, and face-centered cubic γ-Ag2S is stable above 600 °C.
In 1999, Brelle et al.88 synthesized cysteine and glutathione-stabilized Ag2S QDs with an average diameter of 9 nm, but no luminescence was reported. Du et al.89 prepared single-crystalline, monodisperse Ag2S QDs with a size of ∼10 nm via the pyrolysis of (C2H5)2NCS2Ag in a mixture of OA, ODA and ODE, and observed NIR photoluminescence properties (Fig. 6). The as-obtained Ag2S QDs are the first observed to present NIR emission (1058 nm). Subsequently, Jiang et al.31 reported emission-tunable spherical NIR Ag2S QDs covering 690 to 1227 nm using a two-step procedure. Small-sized Ag2S QDs were synthesized by injecting (TMS)2S into a mixture of silver acetate (AgAc), myristic acid (MA), 1-octylamine and ODE at a given temperature under an argon flow. Large-sized Ag2S QDs were prepared by dropwise adding AgNO3 and 1-octylamine dissolved in toluene and sulfur solution into a toluene solution containing small-sized Ag2S QDs. Hong et al.90 obtained oil-soluble Ag2S QDs which emitted around 1200 nm in organic phases, and then used dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) as a new ligand for phase transfer to get water-soluble Ag2S QDs. The PL QY of 6PEG (six-armed polyethylene glycol) Ag2S QDs was determined as approximately 15.5%. In contrast, direct aqueous phase synthesis can achieve water-soluble Ag2S QDs of higher PL QY. Hocaoglu et al.91 reported a synthetic route for typical preparation of colloidally stable, highly cytocompatible and highly luminescent Ag2S QDs by an aqueous phase method with a 2MPA (2-mercaptopropionic acid) coating. The size of these QDs can be tuned between 2.3 and 3.1 nm and the emission wavelength can be tuned between 780 and 950 nm by varying the Ag:S and 2MPA:Ag ratios and the reaction temperature. These Ag2S-2MPA NIR QDs showed better PL QYs in the range of 7–39% with improved cytocompatibility.
 Fig. 6  Synthesis of Ag2S NIR QDs from a single source precursor of (C2H5)2NCS2Ag.89 
The combination of Ag2S and a broadband semiconductor material such as ZnS is beneficial to improve the luminescence properties of Ag2S QDs. Jiang et al.92 developed a novel thiol-based noninjection approach for the synthesis of low-toxicity NIR Ag2S and Ag2S/ZnS core/shell QDs using 1-octanethiol as both a ligand and sulfur source. The PL intensity of the synthesised Ag2S core was extremely weak but significantly increased after the growth of a ZnS shell on the Ag2S core, and the PL QY was increased from 0.02% to 3.8%. However, Chaudhuri et al.93 proposed a novel hollow Ag2S/ZnS structure and the PL QY of Ag2S decreased from 89 to 39% when coated with ZnS, because of the crystal strain induced in a heterostructure with a ZnS thick shell.
Ag2Se usually has two stable solid phases. One is semiconductor β-Ag2Se, which is synthesized at low temperature and shows an orthorhombic crystal lattice. Another is metallic α-Ag2Se, which is synthesized at high temperature and shows a body-centered cubic lattice. Photoluminescent Ag2Se QDs were first reported by Yarema et al. in 2011.94 Ag2Se QDs with a PL QY of 1.7% were obtained using lithium bis(trimethylsilyl)amide (Li[N(SiMe3)2]). Zhu et al.34 used 1-octanethiol as a capping ligand, CH3COOAg and TOP-Se as precursors and ODE as the solvent in a hot injection method for preparing Ag2Se QDs. Their PL wavelength was tunable from 1080 to 1330 nm, and their PL QY reached 9.58%. Then the Ag2Se QDs were transferred to the aqueous phase by ligand exchange. Dong et al. dissolved AgNO3 in a mixture of OLA and toluene under heating to prepare the Ag precursor while NaHSe was the Se precursor. On mixing the two precursors with 1-dodecanethiol while stirring and heating to 180 °C, oil-soluble 1-dodecanethiol-capped Ag2Se QDs were obtained after 1 h.95 Sahu et al.96 proposed another method for synthesizing Ag2Se QDs with average diameters between 2.7 and 10.4 nm that exhibit absorption in the NIR.
As for synthesis in aqueous phases, Gu et al.35 first synthesized water-dispersible Ag2Se QDs with a PL emission wavelength range of 700–820 nm. L-Alanine (Ala), AgNO3 and NaOH were mixed in a reaction flask, and stirred at 90 °C to produce an Ag+–Ala complex. GSH, Na2SeO3, NADPH and GR were mixed with Britton–Robison buffer (BR buffer) to obtain a Se precursor at room temperature. The Se precursor was injected into the Ag+–Ala complex reaction flask and after stirring at 90 °C for 10 minutes the color of the solution changed from colorless to brownish yellow to give the desired Ag2Se QDs. In addition, Wang et al. proposed an ion exchange reaction preparation method.97 Water-soluble Ag2Se QDs were prepared by using water-soluble ZnSe nanoparticles as a precursor and trisodium citrate as a stabilizer. Yarema et al.94 also reported a synthesis route of Ag2Se/ZnSe core–shell QDs that increased the PL intensity by 40% with better stability than Ag2Se QDs.
There are fewer reports on the synthesis of Ag2Te QDs. Sahu et al. used a one-pot, single-step synthesis route to prepare Ag2Te colloidal QDs using AgNO3, tellurium shot and TOP.98 They pointed out that the stability of Ag2Te QDs in air depends on the solvent. In addition, the stability is related to the concentration of Ag2Te QDs dissolved, where the higher the concentration, the faster the precipitation and the worse the stability, which is similar to the PbSe QD stability observed by Dai et al.75 Yarema et al.94 also reported photoluminescent Ag2Te QDs with an average diameter of 3.2 nm. Chen et al.99 reported a synthesis of Ag2Te QDs using facile cation exchange between Ag+ and Cd2+ ions in aqueous solution and obtained Ag2Te QDs with PL emission peak wavelengths ranging from 900 to 1300 nm and a PL QY of 2.1%. The optical characterization of CdTe QDs and Ag2Te QDs and the scheme of the work are shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Optical characterization of CdTe and Ag2Te QDs. (a) Absorption spectra of CdTe QDs synthesized with various reaction times (from bottom to top: 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 150 min). (b) Photoluminescence spectra of CdTe QDs synthesized with various reaction times (from left to right: 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 150 min). (c) Absorption spectra of Ag2Te QDs prepared from CdTe QDs via cation exchange (the corresponding CdTe and Ag2Te QDs are depicted in the same color). (d) Photoluminescence spectra of Ag2Te QDs prepared from CdTe QDs via cation exchange (the corresponding CdTe and Ag2Te QDs are depicted in the same color). (e) Photographs of the CdTe (left) and Ag2Te QDs (right) prepared via cation exchange (a rectangular label attached to the back of the bottle can be visualized through the CdTe QD solution). (f) Schematic illustration of the aqueous synthesis of Ag2Te QDs and Ag2Te/ZnS core/shell QDs through cation exchange of CdTe QDs with Ag+.99 
2.4 In and Ga based NIR QDs
In 1994, the Nozik100 team reported the first synthesis of well-crystallized InP QDs of zinc blende structure in the strong quantum confinement regime, and determined the dependence of the III–V QD bandgap on the QD size. The size of the QDs is calculated from the absorption spectra of the QDs. InCl3 and Na2C2O4 were mixed in CH3CN, and P(SiMe3)3 was injected at room temperature to prepare the InP precursor. The configured InP precursor is placed in TOPO or a mixture of TOPO and TOP, and reacted at a high temperature until InP crystals are formed; the crystallization takes 3 to 6 days. This method of synthesizing III–V QDs is similar to the hot-injection method of synthesizing II–IV QDs, but requires a long reaction time and the resulting InP size distribution is not uniform.
A synthetic strategy in non-coordinating solvents which is generally applicable for the synthesis of III–V semiconductor nanocrystals was reported in 2002 by Peng's group, using a low-cost, green non-coordinating solvent (ODE), and long-chain alkyl indium as the indium source, P(SiMe3)3 as the phosphorus source, and a long-chain alkyl acid as the ligand to synthesize InP QDs.101 The reaction took only a few hours and the particle uniformity is good. However, the QDs obtained are sensitive to air. The choices of reactants and ligands are limited, and the particle size can only be adjusted in a small range. The growth of nearly monodisperse InAs through a similar scheme was also observed in the report.
A similar method was used to synthesize other binary and ternary III–V QDs (for example, GaInP2).102,103–105 Alivisatos’ group40 reported InAs QDs with sizes between 2.5 and 6 nm and size distributions of 10–15% in 1996. They used InCl3 and As(SiMe3)3 reacted at temperatures between 240 and 265 °C and used TOP as both the solvent and capping agent. The thus obtained QDs showed evident confinement effects and size dependent absorption and emission features. Cao et al.106 synthesized core/shell QDs with an InAs core and III–V semiconductor shells (InP and GaAs) or II–VI semiconductor shells (CdSe, ZnSe, and ZnS). Later in 2007, Peng and his team38 add octylamine into the previous synthesis system, and successfully reduced the synthesis temperature from 270 to 180 °C, solving the problem that InMA3 is easily decomposed into In2O3 at high temperatures, greatly improving the size adjustment of InP QDs, and broadening the range of PL wavelengths. In 2009, Bawendi and his team detected intermediates in the synthesis of InP QDs by NMR.107 It is proposed that the P source is completely consumed during the InP nucleation process, resulting in insufficient supply of the P source during the growth phase, so it can only be grown by intergranular ripening. In other words, the InP size uniformity problem stems from insufficient control of the nucleation and growth processes. Different from other research,38,108 it states that the action of the amine is to reduce the activity of the precursor.
The surface characteristics of QDs also have an effect on the uniformity of size. In 2010 Chaudret and co-workers used NMR combined with IR to study the surface structure of InP QDs.109 The study found that InP QDs have a three-layer structure with an indium core of sphalerite structure, a partially oxidized shell on the surface, and finally an organic ligand layer. The decarboxylation coupling reaction that occurs during nucleation and growth generates water, thereby providing an oxidizing environment. It is speculated that it is likely that the formation of InP QDs is limited by the formation of an oxide shell. In 2012, it was reported that InP QDs are easily oxidized by exposing to air, and In2O3 is formed on the surface.110 There is also an amorphous mixed oxide layer in the middle of the InP/ZnS core–shell structure. The condensation reaction of carboxylic acid occurs on the surface of InP QDs, resulting in the formation of an oxide layer.111
When InP QDs are synthesized, nucleation and growth cannot be effectively separated, resulting in non-uniformity of the final particles. An important factor that causes nucleation and growth to be difficult to separate is that the P source reacts too quickly during the reaction. Bawendi's group112 replaced P(SiMe3)3 with P(GeMe3)3 with a lower activity, and the uniformity of the finally synthesized InP QDs was slightly improved. Cossairt's team113 continued to do a series of related research. In 2013 they explained the role of acid in the synthesis of InP. They believe that there are competitive reactions during nucleation. The protons in the reaction system convert part of P(SiMe3)3 to HP(SiMe3)2, then both P(SiMe3)3 and HP(SiMe3)2 react with the indium source, making the nucleation heterogeneous. They also experimented with dual P sources, but the InP uniformity did not improve.114 Finally, they concluded that merely separating the nucleation and growth processes does not solve the problem. Bawendi's team also confirmed that adjusting the P-source activity alone did not improve the InP homogeneity.115
The development of InP QDs is still subject to some constraints. Almost all InP QDs are synthesized using (TMS)3P as the P-source, while (TMS)3P is a toxic and expensive reagent, resulting in complex synthesis processes and higher costs. In addition, due to the limitation of the band gap of InP semiconductors, the fluorescence emission wavelengths of InP QDs reported in the literature are shorter than 750 nm; it is still difficult to obtain longer NIR wavelengths.
2.5 Ternary QDs
In comparison to binary QDs, ternary I–III–VI QDs do not contain highly toxic elements and are considered as promising green materials. The band gaps of ternary I–III–VI materials are 1.05 eV for CuInSe2, 1.53 eV for CuInS2, 1.87 eV for AgInS2 and 1.24 eV for AgInSe2. Since Bawendi's group52 reported Cu–In–Se QDs with fluorescent properties, I–III–VI semiconductor materials, including CuInS2, CuInSe2, AgInS2 and AgInSe2, have quickly caught the attention of researchers.
These materials do not contain toxic elements such as Cd, Pb, and Hg, and have suitable NIR band gaps, so they are suitable as novel low-toxicity infrared QDs. For I–III–VI QDs, the atomic ratio of Cu (or Ag) to In in the product directly affects the emission wavelength and fluorescence intensity of the QDs, but how to regulate the atomic ratio in the product is a challenging problem.
In 1999, Li et al.116 used the solvothermal method to synthesize CuInSe2 QDs at 280 °C with ethylene diamine as a solvent. The method is a gentle and controllable new path, which opens up the hydrothermal synthesis of ternary QDs. In 2003, Stephanie et al.117 used (PPh3)2CuIn(SEt)4 and (PPh3)2CuIn(SePh)4 as single source precursors dissolved in dioctyl phthalate non-coordinating solvent and synthesized CuInS2 and CuInSe2 by thermal decomposition. The size of the CuInS2 QDs is 3 to 30 nm. Wang et al.118 prepared CuInS2 QDs using thiourea and oxalic acid in an autoclave at 250 °C for 5 days. Zhong et al.119 used CuAc and In(Ac)3 as independent cationic reaction precursors to form intermediate complexes with dodecyl mercaptan in non-coordinating solvents at higher reaction temperatures. The intermediate composite is further thermally decomposed to obtain CuInS2 QDs. By adjusting the reaction temperature and time, ternary QDs of different particle size, shape and fluorescence properties are obtained. Xie et al. introduced thiol into the reaction system, and used the strong binding ability of the sulfhydryl group to inhibit the reactivity of the Cu precursor, so that the reactivity of the Cu and In precursors was well balanced, and then successfully prepared CuInS2 QDs with a fluorescence emission range covering 500 to 950 nm.44 In addition, mercaptans can be used not only as ligands to balance the activity of cationic precursors, but also as sulfur precursors for the preparation of CuInS2 QDs.120 Using a similar method to Murray et al.,61 Elena et al.121 added OA to In(Ac)3, CuI, and DDT at 80 °C. The mixture with ODE was heated to 220 °C to obtain a CuInS2 QD core. Next, a zinc precursor solution was added and reacted at 215 °C for 30 min to obtain a water-soluble CuInS2/ZnS QD. Guo et al.122 added CuCl, InCl3·4H2O and triethanolamine to a three-necked flask and stirred at 80 °C for 15 min under a nitrogen flow, and then the mixture was heated up to 180 °C. The Cu precursor was injected into the solution and the temperature was kept at 180 °C for 1 h to obtain CuInS2 QDs.
In 2012, Chung et al.47 used an organic phase one-step method to control the nucleation rate by adjusting the reaction temperature and the amount of the sulfur source to synthesize AgInS2 QDs with an adjustable particle size. The emission wavelength covers the range of 610–718 nm, but the PL QY is only 3–15%. Torimot et al.123 successfully prepared tetragonal Zn–Ag–In–S (ZAIS) QDs by pyrolysis of (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)(S2CN(C2H5)2)4, inhibited the formation of non-radiative composite defects by doping of Zn2+, and the PL QY increased to 24%. In addition, Ogawa et al.124 prepared AgInS2 QDs by organic thermal injection, and simultaneously used dodecyl mercaptan as a ligand to effectively passivate the surface defects of the QDs with a QY of up to 40%.
In order to broaden the application of QDs in aqueous environments, Tang et al.125 realized the transition of hydrophobicity to hydrophilicity of Ag–In–S QDs by ligand exchange, but a large number of surface defects were generated and the PL QY decreased from 41% to 17%. Therefore, people began to try aqueous phase synthesis. Yang et al.126 prepared Zn–Ag–In–S QDs by an aqueous phase reflux method using mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) as a ligand. However, due to the lower synthesis temperature, the crystallinity of the QDs is poor, and a large number of non-radiative composite defects are formed, resulting in a PL QY of less than 10%. Allen et al.127 prepared AgInSe2 QDs with an emission wavelength ranging from 950 to 1250 nm based on the thermolysis of an Ag–In–thiolate complex followed by anion exchange. In this work, they prepared AgInSe2/ZnS core/shell QDs with a PL QY up to about 40% and an emission peak wavelength ranging from 700 to 820 nm. Subsequently, Raevskaya et al.128 synthesized Ag–In–S QDs by an aqueous method by changing the amount of Ag+, but the PL QY was only 12%. In the same year, Song et al.129 synthesized Zn–Ag–In–S QDs using cysteine as a ligand and stabilizer, and further stabilized the crystal structure by Zn2+ doping, effectively reducing the number of non-radiative composite channels, and its PL QY reached 15%. In addition, glutathione (GSH) was used as a ligand to synthesize water-soluble Zn–Ag–In–S QDs.130 Reductive GSH can protect the growth of QDs. The band structure of Zn–Ag–In–S QDs can be controlled by adjusting the ratio between cations, and the PL QY is up to 27.6%. Therefore, the selection of a suitable ligand is key to the synthesis of high quality water-soluble Ag–In–S QDs.
Although the synthesis of I–III–VI QDs has been studied intensively over the years, there is no report on their stability under various conditions such as chemical, photo, and thermal. Xie et al.44 revealed that CuInS2 QDs are stable in solution under ambient conditions if no amines are present, while the absorption spectrum of the QDs would blue-shift quite rapidly and the PL brightness decrease under the same conditions if there were amines in the solution. AgInSe2 QDs do not have good air stability, and the PL will decrease when exposed to air.
3. Applications of NIR emitting QDs

          3.1
         NIR QD-LEDs
Compared with traditional organic materials, semiconductor QDs have many advantages such as high PL QY, easy adjustment of the emission wavelength, strong photoelectric performance, and short preparation period, which are suitable for preparing LED devices. QD-LEDs emitting in the infrared have potential for low manufacturing costs, tunable emission wavelengths and substrate flexibility. LEDs can be either electroluminescent (EL) or photoluminescent (PL) due to different device mechanisms. One is to make the QDs emissive under the action of an external electric field, and the other is that the QDs emit under the action of an external light source.
In 1994, Colvin et al. first used CdSe in combination with p-paraphenylene vinylene (PPV) to prepare a two-layer LED device, successfully utilizing the effect of the QD size dependence to adjust the wavelength of the device.131 In 1997, Kumar et al. used spin-coating to prepare CdS QDs and PPV polymer into laminated LED devices.132 Electroluminescent diodes of near-infrared colloidal QDs were developed later. Electroluminescent infrared QD devices have two structural forms: one is that the NIR QDs form a luminescent film separately; the other is that the NIR QDs are mixed with other polymers to form a mixed luminescence film.
Steckel et al. reported a single-monolayer structure.133 The QDs were partially embedded in a polymer, and the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of this device was low. An electroluminescent NIR QD device using an NIR PbSe QD independent film structure was first proposed to deposit a PbSe QD film sandwiched between an organic polymer electron transport layer (ETL) and a hole transport layer (HTL). This PbSe QD-LED's EQE is measured to be 0.001%. The 1 mm diameter devices were run at 10 mA and 20 V, corresponding to a 200 mW peak input electrical power. The power efficiency of these devices is no better than 0.1%.
Since the 20th century, research reports on QD electroluminescent diodes have increased. The structure of the QD electroluminescent diode is generally composed of an anode, an electron injecting layer, an electron transporting layer, a QD emitting layer, a hole transporting layer, a hole injecting layer, and a cathode. Hu et al.134 studied electrical components of NIR PbSe QD thin film layers produced by the layer spin coating method, and designed a multilayer device that can obtain better luminous efficiency. The composition of the electroluminescent device is ITO/PEDOT:PSS/EDT treated NIR PbSe/ZnO/Al (EDT = 1,2-ethanedithiol; Fig. 8). In 2009, Chocmdhury et al.135 used NIR PbSe QDs mixed with poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethyl-hexyloxy)-1,4-phenylene vinylene] (MEH-PPV) as a light-emitting layer to produce an electroluminescent NIR QD-LED with high color purity and high efficiency. In 2016, Sargent's team used NIR PbS QDs doped with a perovskite matrix to overcome the problem that both luminous efficiency and charge transport cannot be combined, increasing the electroluminescence EQE to 4.9%.136 In the same year, they used solution processing to prepare multilayer perovskite NIR electroluminescent LEDs with different particle sizes, increasing their EQE to 8.8%.137
 Fig. 8  Schematic device structure of electroluminescent LEDs.134 
Compared with electroluminescent LEDs, the fabrication cost of photoluminescent LEDs is often lower, and the fluorescence efficiency is higher. QD phosphors are considered to be new materials to replace the traditional YAG:Ce phosphors due to their high color purity, narrow band gap, easy adjustment of the light emission wavelength, low cost and easy preparation. QD phosphor LEDs generally use a GaN blue chip as an excitation source. Cd family materials were first used to make photoluminescent QD-LEDs. In 2000, Lee et al. made a color phosphor LED composite of CdSe/ZnS QDs and a polymer, with a GaN blue LED as an excitation light source.138 Yan et al. fabricated LEDs using GaN chips as the excitation source and PbSe QDs as the emitting materials and reached an EQE of 2.52% (Fig. 9).139
 Fig. 9  Manufacturing of NIR photoluminescent LEDs and a working LED photo taken by an NIR-camera.139 
Environmentally friendly materials such as CuInS2 and AgInS2 have also received attention, but their properties are still far from those of Cd family QD materials.140,141 The study of NIR QD phosphors is even more behind, and mostly on Pb family QDs (Table 2).134,139
Table 2 Main performance of NIR QD-LEDs




QD
Emission mechanism
Wavelength (nm)
EQE (%)
Structure
Ref.




PbSe
EL
1320–1560
—
Ag/Mg:Ag/ETL/PbSe QDs/HTL/ITO/Glass

133



InAs/ZnSe
EL
1300
0.5



142



PbS
EL
1000–1600
—
Ag/Mg/PbS QDs/ITO/Glass

143



PbSe
EL
1412
0.73
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/EDT treated PbSe QDs/ZnO QDs/Al

134



PbSe
EL
1150–1590
3
QDs mixed with MEH–PPV

144



PbS
EL
1391
3.8
ITO/TiO2/QDs-in-perovskite emission layer/poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene)/MoO3/Ag




PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1
EL
750–770
8.8
ITO/TiO2/PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1/poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorence)/MoO3/Au

137



PbSe
PL
950
2.52



139



PbS
EL
950–1650
2
Al/ZnO/PbS/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/Glass

145



PbS/CdS
EL
1163–1341
4.3
Au/MoO3/CBP/QDs/ZnO/ITO

146



PbS/CdS
EL
920
2
Gold/P3HT/QDs/TiO2/FTO

147



PbSe
PL
980
5.3



148





3.2 Biomedical applications
In 1998, two research groups of Alivisatos149 and Nie150 solved the biocompatibility problem of QDs as bioprobes for the first time. Alivisatos’ group149 labeled mouse cells using silica-coated CdSe/CdS core–shell QDs and Nie's group150 used mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) to transfer QDs from chloroform to aqueous solution, and QDs began to be used in biological applications. For biological tissues, the fluorescent label in the visible light is significantly attenuated by the living tissues, resulting in the fluorescence signal from deep tissues being undetectable. The NIR wavelengths of 650 to 900 nm and 1200 to 1600 nm have relatively large penetration depth, thus becoming the main windows for bioluminescent markers and in vivo imaging.151
At present, many studies using CdTe QDs for tumor imaging have been reported [1].152 Cai et al.153 used RGD (arginine–glycine–aspartic acid) peptide-labeled CdTe/ZnS QDs for targeted imaging of tumor vessels. Li et al.154 also connected the RGD peptide to the surface of CdTe QDs emitting with NIR fluorescence, and then injected them into mice transplanted with U87MG tumors, and the tumor and its boundary were clearly observed under excitation light. Zhang et al.1 prepared DNA functionalized Zn2+ doped CdTe QDs using a hydrothermal one-pot strategy, and used them for targeted imaging of living tumors. The study showed that the biotoxicity of CdTe QDs was reduced due to the doped Zn2+ and the presence of DNA.
Due to the potential cytotoxicity of the Pb and Cd elements, the research and application of such QDs in the field of biomedical imaging are limited. In contrast, low toxicity QDs such as I–III–VI and I–VI QDs are more suitable for biological applications. Pons et al.42 compared the biotoxicity of CuInS2/ZnS and CdTeSe/CdZnS QDs by observing the inflammation of mice. The weights of the right axillary lymph nodes (RALN) and the right lateral thoracic lymph nodes (RLTLN) dissected 7 days post-injection were compared (Fig. 10). The results showed that a significant inflammatory response was not caused until the concentration of CuInS2/ZnS QDs increased to 10 times the concentration of inflammation caused by CdTeSe/CdZnS QDs (10 pmol), confirming that CuInS2/ZnS QDs without Cd were indeed much less toxic.
 Fig. 10  Weights of the RALN and RLTLN dissected 7 days post-injection with different injected doses of CdTeSe/CdZnS (left panel) and CuInS2/ZnS (right panel) QDs. The data are mean ± SEM (n = 6 per group).42 
The toxicity and pharmacokinetic studies of Ag2S QDs in mice showed that intravenously injected Ag2S QDs can be gradually removed from the body and there is no significant toxicity.155 Zhang et al.156 and Hong et al.90 applied water-soluble modified and biologically modified Ag2S QDs to cells for specific labeling and mouse in vivo tumor imaging, and Ag2S QDs showed high signal to noise ratio and high resolution in imaging. In addition, Ag2S QDs were used for real-time imaging of lymphatic vessels, blood flow, and angiogenesis.157 Wang et al.3 coupled the surface of Ag2S QDs with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) antibody and successfully targeted U87MG tumors. Tang et al.158 linked thiopropionic acid-coated Ag2S QDs to the tumor-targeting arginine–glycine–aspartic acid–(D)phenylalanine–lysine (cRGDfK) peptide to obtain targeted Ag2S QDs with a hydrated particle size of less than 10 nm, and successfully applied them to the imaging of 4T1luc tumor tissue in mice. Tan et al. reported conjugating S-nitrosothiols with glutathiose-stabilized Ag2S QDs for controlled nitric oxide release and NIR fluorescence imaging.159 The obtained QDs release NO under UV or visible irradiation, and hardly discharge NO under NIR excitation. Thus they can be used as an imaging and NO delivery vehicle when excited with UV or visible irradiation (as a fluorescence imaging platform) and excited with NIR irradiation (releasing NO).
Along with the development of NIR fluorescent Ag2S, Ag2Se QDs have also been applied to biological imaging. Dong et al.95 prepared Ag2Se QDs with an emission wavelength of 1300 nm by a solvothermal method and applied them to in vivo imaging. The results showed that the background interference was small and the resolution was high. Gu et al.35 synthesized NIR fluorescent Ag2Se QDs under mild conditions using a quasi-biological system. By changing the ratio of the precursors, Ag2Se QDs with three fluorescence emission wavelengths of 700, 730 and 820 nm were obtained and used for in vivo imaging in mice.
3.3 Luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs)
Luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs)160,161 are being widely studied to harvest solar energy. Compared with the traditional way of directly using solar panels to receive sunlight, fluorescent concentrating solar photovoltaic devices have the advantages of a high performance–cost ratio and small battery thermal effect.162,163 Organic fluorescent molecules have been used as light absorbers in the early research of fluorescent concentrators due to their extremely high PL QY and good compatibility with polymer materials.164–166 However, due to their serious overlap of the absorption and emission spectra, the self-reabsorption in practical performance limits the efficiency of the concentrating channel. Compared with traditional dye molecules, QDs have superior light stability, high PL QY, especially high molar extinction coefficients, and separately adjustable fluorescence emission and absorption spectra, making QD-based solar concentrators greatly improved in performance.
Wilton et al. modeled PbSe QD LSCs using an LSC Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulation.167 PbSe QDs were used as the active fluorescent material and the self-absorption could be reduced by utilizing Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between two different sizes of PbSe QDs. The LSC Monte Carlo simulation algorithm in the work can be extended to LSCs with other NIR QDs. Kaysir et al.168 developed a mode to quantify the gain of stimulated-LSCs (s-LSCs) considering the effects of different important physical parameters and determine the net optical output power. The work investigated the performance of different existing material systems and suggested a set of optimal parameters, which will inform identification of suitable material systems for the realization of practical s-LSC systems. Zhou et al. fabricated a low reabsorption emission loss, highly efficient LSC by embedding NIR PbS/CdS core/shell QDs in a polymer matrix.169 The LSC exhibits an optical efficiency of 6.1%. Waldron et al. fabricated LSCs with high PL QY (>70%) PbSe QDs, and the sample showed a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.74%.170 The LSC PCE is confirmed to be dependent on the QD concentration. The PCE first rises sharply with increasing QD concentration, and then reaches a peak and begins to fall as the concentration continues to increase. The experimental results of induced excitons in the colloidal Pb family of QDs by Shabaev et al.171 found that when an incident single photon has kinetic energy four times that of the QD energy gap, one photon can generate three excitons; in other words, the photons are magnified three times, and the PL QY increases by 300%.
As for LSCs based on heavy-metal-free QDs, Knowles et al.172 reported a high-gain full-spectrum LSC using bright CuInS2/CdS QDs as phosphors, and the gain for a 120 cm × 120 cm device is 33. Meinardi et al.173 demonstrated high-efficiency large-area LSCs based on NIR I–III–VI2 QDs with an optical PCE of up to 3.27%. Sumner et al.174 reported LSCs based on CuInS2/CdS QDs phosphors with optical PCEs up to 5.7% under AM1.5 illumination for G = 6.7×.
Increasing the PL QY of QDs and maintaining their high PL QY during device fabrication is key to improving the LSC device performance. How to improve the light stability of polymer materials is an important issue to be solved. LSCs based on low toxicity I–III–VI QDs will become an attractive research direction in the future.
3.4 Doped glasses and fibers
QDs have some unique properties such as quantum confinement effects, size effects, and surface effects, making them different from bulk materials. Glass has good light transmission and is easy to process, and can be drawn into optical fibers. QD doped glass improves the chemical and thermal stability of QDs, and has an ultra-fast nonlinear response time and strong third-order nonlinear optical effects, so it can be applied to the field of optical communication. QD doped glass has tunable broadband illumination, and has shown optical amplification,175 so QD doped fibers can be prepared for fiber amplifiers with larger bandwidth and better amplification performance.176,177 Klimov et al. first proposed and proved the application potential of QDs in optical amplifiers by using the larger optical gain of CdSe QDs in the visible light region.178
Borrelli and Smith mixed and melted a QD precursor with a glass batch together at high temperature, and obtained glass and let QDs grow inside to get QD doped glass in 1994.179 The high temperature causes the volatilization of S, Se and other elements. Fabrication methods with low melting temperatures using glass systems like tellurite and phosphate glasses have been developed but the obtained glasses have inferior mechanical properties.176,180–182 In 1998, Rajh et al. doped QDs into transparent silicate glasses using a sol–gel method at a low temperature.183 The method was also used by other researchers to obtain QD doped glasses at low temperatures.184,185 However, in the process of preparing bulk glass, it is difficult to eliminate residual stress during gel cooling and drying, which causes the cracking of the glass. Therefore, the sol–gel method is suitable for the preparation of QD doped thin films. In addition, the sol–gel method was only reported to synthesize quartz glass. Cander et al. used the ion implantation method to obtain different sizes of PbSe QDs on the surface by electron beam heat treatment.186 Due to the particularity of the ion implantation method, QDs can only be formed on the surface of the glass, and it is difficult to prepare large-scale QD doped glass.
As QDs are sensitive to high temperatures, and the element residuals in the glass would continue to grow QDs at high temperature, therefore, QDs in a fiber drawn by a conventional tube method will grow and exceed the exciton Bohr radius. Thus it is necessary to prepare QD-doped optical fibers at low temperatures. Guerreiro et al. used PbS doped glass to obtain passive continuous-wave mode locking in a laser.187 In this work, they showed room-temperature absorption spectra of PbS QD doped glasses with different QD sizes and quantum confinement is clearly observed in the increasing shift to shorter wavelengths of the well-resolved absorption resonances with decreasing QD size. Near transform-limited 4.6 ps laser pulses at a 110 MHz repetition rate with a wide tunable range of 1207–1307 nm were obtained. The absorption saturation intensity of the PbS doped glasses was measured to be 0.2 MW cm−2. Subsequently, Malyarevich et al. achieved passive Q switching of a 1.54 μm Er:Yb:glass laser using PbS-doped phosphate glass as an intracavity saturable absorber.188 To decrease the volatility of the chalcogenide compounds in the process of glass synthesis, glass modifiers were used to obtain semiconducting PbS in the batch melt. The temperatures for glass synthesis and the glass transition were 1100 °C and 400 °C, respectively, resulting in increases of the concentration and uniformity of the PbS QD size distribution in the glass and the decrease of the necessary duration of secondary thermal processing. In 2007, Heck et al. reported the first observation of passive mode locking in two-section QD lasers operating at a wavelength of 1.55 μm.189 Pulse generation at 4.6 GHz from a 9 mm long device is verified by background-free autocorrelation, RF-spectra and real-time oscilloscope traces. The output pulses are stretched in time and heavily up-chirped with a value of 20 ps nm−1. They also observed Q-switching over a large operating regime from a 7 mm long device. Kuntz et al. reviewed the results on GaAs-based high-speed mode locked QD lasers and optical amplifiers with an operation wavelength centered at 1.29 μm.190 They discussed the dependences of device properties on the operating parameters from the experimental data obtained with integrated fiber-based QD device modules.
QD doped fibers prepared by injecting QDs into hollow fibers have high requirements for core matrix materials. The refractive index, spectral transmission range, and photo curing rate of the core material all have important influences on the performance. For a liquid-core optical fiber, the core material is generally a light-curing adhesive which is easily aged under continuous laser irradiation, and thus often results in poor light stability. However, the conventional fiber drawing technology is difficult to use to prepare a QD doped glass fiber with stronger luminescence compared to a liquid-core optical fiber. Hreibi et al. reported the fabrication and characterization of a PbSe QD liquid-core fiber.177 They used a capillary waveguide of pure silica with an outer diameter of 120 μm and a core diameter of 17 μm to make the liquid-core optical fiber. A 20 cm-long piece of fiber was immersed in the liquid medium containing PbSe QDs dispersed in toluene for 10 min to completely fill the core. Good amplified spontaneous emission was obtained in the IR range upon pumping the QDs with a 532 nm CW-laser. Cheng et al.191 put a UV-curing gel solution containing PbSe QDs into a hollow fiber, and then solidified the core to prepare a multimode PbSe QD fiber. The QD fiber outputs continuous and stable 1550 nm laser light under 980 nm laser pumping. Zhang et al.192 reported a theoretical model based on a three-level system by combining the light propagation equations and the rate equations in order to calculate the guided spontaneous emission spectra of a PbSe QD filled fiber, which can be applied to both single and multimode fibers. Wu et al.193 fabricated liquid-core fibers with an 18 cm-length heating area by filling PbSe QDs with a series of particle sizes. In this work, the temperature effect on the emission of the QD filled fiber for different QD particle sizes, fiber lengths, and doping concentrations was investigated. The mechanisms of peak shift and intensity loss were confirmed.
3.5 Optical sensing
QDs can be used in optical sensors such as fluorescence conversion sensors, fluorescence resonance energy sensors, phosphorescence conversion sensors and positioning sensors, which are applied to the detection of metal ions and small molecules. Most of the reagents used in the traditional fluorescence method are organic fluorescent dyes, which have the disadvantages of low fluorescence intensity and poor light stability, so that the sensitivity and detection range of the detection are limited. The fluorescence properties of QDs are sensitive to external actuators and easy to monitor, thus making use of the development of QD fluorescence has become a hot research topic. There are many problems in imaging in the visible region, such as the absorption and scattering of endogenous substances (melanin, anaerobic hemoglobin, bilirubin, water, etc.) in biological tissues.194 In the NIR-I (650–900 nm) and NIR-II (1000–1200 nm) regions, tissues have low scattering, absorption, and autofluorescence backgrounds. A NIR source can achieve maximum penetration depth in biological tissues and perform deep tissue imaging.
In 2002, Chen and Rosenzweig discovered that thioglycerol-coated CdS QDs could detect Cu2+ in the presence of Zn2+.195 They also found that QD coatings played a crucial role in the detection of metal ions. In 2008, Xia et al.196 prepared NIR-emitting CdTe/CdSe core–shell QDs and applied them to tap water and tea samples for the determination of the content of Cu. Pang's group exploited the NIR electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL) of Ag2Se QDs for the detection of dopamine with a limit of detection of 0.1 μM and a Ksv value of 2.0 × 105 M−1.197 Srinivasan et al. developed an optical immunosensor for the detection of C. parvum in water by immobilizing antioocyst McAb on NIR-emitting Ag2S@silica core–shell nanospheres, which exhibited an intense emission peak at 896 nm.198 Yan et al. prepared Ag2Se QDs via aqueous methods under mild conditions and added concanavalin A (ConA) to induce the aggregation of Ag2Se by means of hydrogen bonds.199 The detection limit for ConA was 0.08 μg mL−1 and it was also found that normal physiological levels of cations, anions, and amino acids did not interfere with the recognition of ConA. Kim and Lee developed a PbS QD based infrared sensor by using interlayer energy band gap manipulation.200 The sensor in this work constitutes various ratios of PbS QDs in a poly[2,6-(4,4-bis-(2-ethylhexyl)-4H-cyclopenta[2,1-b;3,4-b′]dithiophene)-alt-4,7(2,1,3-benzothiadiazole)] (PCPDTBT) matrix, which are sandwiched by two metal electrodes, and was optimized by changing the PbS QD mixture ratio, layer stacking order, and sensitive layer thickness. The evaluated sensitivity and linearity were 54 μA mW−1 and 4%, respectively. The development of highly fluorescent materials for the selective and sensitive detection of ibuprofen (IBP) was reported using novel nonionic alginate polymers and CdTe QDs.201 The synthesized materials were used as an optical sensor to detect IBP based on multiple hydrogen bonding interactions between the sensor and IBP. The sensor was highly selective to IBP in the presence of other potentially competing compounds, and had a remarkably low detection limit of 0.004 μmol L−1 (S/N = 3). Jiang et al. synthesized biocompatible NIR emitting Ag2S QDs and developed a novel Ag2S QD based fluorescent sensor for highly selective and sensitive detection of Cu2+. This method showed a low limit of detection of 27.6 nM for Cu2+ sensing in a wide linear concentration range of 25 nM–10 μM.202
4. Summary and outlook
The NIR luminescent QDs have a series of advantages. The synthetic methods of traditional Cd, Pb, and Hg based QDs have matured, and the PL QY has reached a high level. Therefore, there have been fewer major improvements in the synthesis methods of these QDs in the past three years. The study of these classical QDs has focused on applications. These QDs are usually surface optimized prior to use or doped with some kinds of ions during synthesis. In recent years, contrary to the limited development of traditional QDs containing toxic elements such as Cd, Pb, and Hg, emerging low-toxicity I–VI, III–V and I–III–IV ternary QDs have begun to gradually replace them. Silver chalcogenide is well suited for biological and medical applications because the emitting wavelength just covers the second NIR window. However, the research on the luminescence mechanism of Ag materials is not enough. Silver chalcogenide QDs still have problems of decomposition, agglomeration, annihilation and photobleaching, which will be the main problem to be solved in further studies. As for the III–V group, the emitting wavelength of these QDs still cannot be adjusted in a broad range at present, and better synthetic methods are needed. Investigations regarding the safety and possible toxicological effects of III–V QDs are also in their infancy. InP QDs were recently reported to be essentially non-toxic for the pristine QDs but were proved to be toxic for aged QDs. In the application of biological imaging and medical treatment, on one hand, researchers continue to optimize traditional QDs, using methods such as surface treatment to reduce their cytotoxicity. On the other hand, non-toxic QDs are also more widely used. Deeper studies of the chemical reaction mechanism involved in the synthetic process is needed in order to optimize the luminescence efficiency of I–III–VI QDs. More detailed and comprehensive research on the toxicity and stability under various conditions including chemical, light and thermal influences should be carried out for further evaluation and improvements. The optical stability and temperature stability of QDs in glass, including the laser damage threshold, and photo-darkening and brightening, are also factors that affect the device properties. There are also requirements for the transmittance and refractive index of the glass itself, so finding better glass systems as the matrix materials is also a need in the future of device manufacturing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51772123, 11674127, and 11674126), Jilin Province Science Fund for Excellent Young Scholars (20170520129JH), and BORSF Professorship.
References
C. Zhang, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, G. Zhou, X. Ke, H. Wang, P. Tinnefeld and Z. He, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 5843–5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. S. Hong, Y. J. Zhang, G. C. Chen, F. Li, H. J. Dai and Q. B. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3695–3702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and X. P. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3324–3326 RSC .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 123, 1389–1395 CrossRef .
W. W. Yu, E. Chang, R. Drezek and V. L. Colvin, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2006, 348, 781–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Wuister, I. Swart, F. van Driel, S. G. Hickey and d. M. D. Celso, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pellegrino, L. Manna, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, D. Koktysh, A. L. Rogach, S. Keller, J. Rädler, G. Natile and W. J. Parak, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 703–707 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, N. Gaponik, V. Lesnyak, A. Shavel, A. Eychmu1ller, Y. P. Rakovich and J. F. Donegan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14628–14637 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Yu, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, J. Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4300–4308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, H. Liu, Y. Gao, D. Qin and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19207–19212 RSC .
S. Mackowski, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 412, 96–106 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kemhaw, M. G. Burr, A. Eychmuller and A. L. Rogach, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2000, 69–70, 355–360 CrossRef .
A. Bouazzi, Y. Marfaing and J. Mimila-Arroyo, Rev. Phys. Appl., 1978, 13, 145–154 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Rogach, S. V. Kershaw, M. Burt, M. Harrison, A. Kornowski, A. EychmMller and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 552–555 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, A. EychmMller and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 123–125 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Bornstein, Semiconductors, Springer, Berlin,  1982, vol. 17b Search PubMed .
M. Green, G. Wakefield and P. J. Dobson, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1076–1078 RSC .
R. Xie, J. Zhang, F. Zhao, W. Yang and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3820–3822 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sierański, J. Szatkowski and J. Misiewicz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 7331–7337 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Harris, P. M. Allen, H. S. Han, B. J. Walker, J. Lee and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4676–4679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Aubin, L. G. Caron and J. P. Jay-Gerin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1977, 15, 3872–3878 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, Y. Justo, B. D. Geyter, K. Haustraete, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2004, 2011, 2004–2012 Search PubMed .
L. Tan, Y. Zhou, F. Ren, D. Benetti, F. Yang, H. Zhao, F. Rosei, M. Chaker and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10250–10260 RSC .
P. Zeng, W. Li, Y. Zhao and M. Liu, NANO, 2018, 13, 1850060 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, S. H. Sun, W. Gaschler, H. Doyle, T. A. Betley and C. R. Kagan, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2001, 45, 47–56 CAS .
W. W. Yu, J. C. Falkner, B. S. Shih and V. L. Colvin, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3318–3322 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, S. L. Swisher, T. Ewers, J. Engel, V. E. Ferry, H. A. Atwater and A. P. Alivisatos, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8140–8147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Rogach, A. Eychmuller, S. G. Hickey and S. V. Kershaw, Small, 2007, 3, 536–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. Wise, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 773–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jiang, Z. Q. Tian, C. N. Zhu, Z. L. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 24, 3–5 CrossRef .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and L. Tan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 296, 91–124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Li, X. Chen and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 4918–4923 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. Zhu, P. Jiang, Z. L. Zhang, D. L. Zhu, Z. Q. Tian and D. W. Pang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1186–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Gu, R. Cui, Z. L. Zhang, Z. X. Xie and D. W. Pang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 79–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang, F. Zhang, J. Xia, S. Bi and Y. Xia, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 126, 115–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yarema, S. Pichler, M. Sytnyk, R. Seyrkammer, R. T. Lechner, G. Fritz-Popovski, D. Jarzab, K. Szendrei, R. Resel, O. Korovyanko, M. A. Loi, O. Paris, G. Hesser and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3758–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xie, D. Battaglia and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15432–15433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Yang, T. C. He, Y. Gao, H. V. Demir, X. W. Sun and H. D. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 021917 CrossRef .
A. A. Guzelian, U. Banin, A. V. Kadavanic, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 1432–1434 CrossRef CAS .
U. Banin, C. J. Lee, A. A. Guzelian, A. V. Kadavanich, A. P. Alivisatos, W. Jaskolski, G. W. Bryant, A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 2306–2309 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pons, E. Pic, N. Lequeux, E. Cassette, L. Bezdetnay, F. Guillemin, F. Marchal and B. Dubertret, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2531–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, Y. Chen, J. Cao, J. Tian, Z. Qian, S. Achilefu and Y. Gu, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3029–3037 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Xie, M. Rutherford and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5691–5697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, Z. Bai and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3167–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kolny-Olesiak and H. Weller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12221–12237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chuang, H. Jung, C. H. Lee and S. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4227–4232 RSC .
L. Tan, S. Liu, X. Li, I. S. Chronakis and Y. Shen, Colloids Surf., B, 2015, 125, 222–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hamanaka, T. Ogawa, M. Tsuzuki and T. Kuzuya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1786–1792 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, L. Qu and Y. Gu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7077–7085 RSC .
M. A. Langevin, A. M. Ritcey and C. N. Allen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3476–3482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Yang, H. Wu, K. R. Williams and Y. C. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6712–6715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, M. Feng, J. Hu, C. Chen, J. Wang, X. Wang, H. Xu and J. R. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6362–6370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Seo and S. W. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2715–2717 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, X. Kong, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Tu, J. Zhao and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8587–8593 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samanta, Z. Deng and Y. Liu, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8205–8215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O. M. Piepenbrock, T. Stirner, S. M. Kelly and M. O’Neill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7087–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Harrison, S. V. Kershaw, M. G. Burt, A. L. Rogach, A. EychmMller and H. Weller, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2721–2723 RSC .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, A. Singhal, J. N. Zheng, C. Wang and W. C. W. Chan, J. Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4845–4854 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Qian, C. Q. Dong, J. L. Peng, X. Qiu, Y. Xu and J. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16852–16857 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Morgan, S. English, W. Chan, V. Chernomordik, A. Russo, P. D. Smith and A. Gandjbakhche, Acad. Radiol., 2005, 12, 313–323 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Miao, S. G. Hickey, B. Rellinghaus, C. Waurisch and A. Eychmuller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5613–5615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cademartiri, J. Bertolotti, R. Sapienza, D. Wiersma, G. v. Freymann and G. A. Ozin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 671–673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joo, H. B. Na, T. Yu, J. H. Yu, Y. W. Kim, F. X. Wu, J. Z. Zhang and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11100–11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ren, H. Zhao, F. Vetrone and D. Ma, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7800–7804 RSC .
K. A. Abel, J. N. Shan, J. C. Boyer, F. Harris and F. C. J. M. v. Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3794–3796 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Z. Hu, B. Zou, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11435–11440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Cheng, T. Zhang, Q. Dai, T. Cui, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Curr. Nanosci., 2012, 8, 2012 Search PubMed .
C. M. Evans, L. Guo, J. J. Peterson, S. Maccagnano-Zacher and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dalven, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1970, 24, 1015–1017 CrossRef CAS .
C. Keffer, T. M. Hayes and A. Bienenstock, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1970, 2, 1966–1976 CrossRef .
Q. Dai, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Li, R. Li, B. Zou, J. Seo, Y. Wang, M. Liu and W. W. Yu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12320–12324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Bae, J. Joo, L. A. Padilha, J. Won, D. C. Lee, Q. Lin, W. K. Koh, H. Luo, V. I. Klimov and J. M. Pietryga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20160–20168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Dai, X. Li, Q. Cui, Z. Gu, B. Zou, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1279–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Stouwdam, J. Shan, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. F. Young and M. Raudsepp, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 1086–1092 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Li, A. Y. Wang, W. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12567–12575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Q. Dai, X. Li, B. Zou, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 3721–3729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Dai, X. Li, J. Liang, V. L. Colvin, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9583–9587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pietryga, D. J. Werder, D. J. Williams, J. L. Casson, R. D. Schaller, V. I. Klimov and J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4879–4885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. S. Reynoso, A. M. Paula, R. F. Cuevas, N. J. A. Medeiros, O. L. Alves, C. L. Cesar and L. C. Barbosa, Electron. Lett., 1995, 31, 1013–1015 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Lu, J. Y. Fang, K. L. Stokes and J. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11798–11799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Murphy, M. C. Beard, A. G. Norman, S. P. Ahrenkiel, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Mićic, R. J. Ellingson and A. J. Nozik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3241–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lambert, B. D. Geyter, I. Moreels and Z. Hens, J. Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 778–780 CrossRef CAS .
L. Protesescu, T. Zund, M. I. Bodnarchuk and M. V. Kovalenko, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 670–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Brelle, J. Z. Zhang, L. Nguyen and R. K. Mehra, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 10194–10201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Du, B. Xu, T. Fu, M. Cai, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1470–1471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Hong, J. T. Robinson, Y. J. Zhang, S. Diao, A. L. Antaris, Q. Wang and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9818–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hocaoglu, M. N. Çizmeciyan, R. Erdem, C. Ozen, A. Kurt, A. Sennaroglu and H. Y. Acar, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14674–14681 RSC .
P. Jiang, R. Wang and Z. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56789–56793 RSC .
R. G. Chaudhuri and S. Paria, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23385–23390 CrossRef .
M. Yarema, S. Pichler, M. Sytnyk, R. Seyrkammer, R. T. Lechner, G. FritzPopovski, D. Jarzab, K. Szendrei, R. Resel, O. Korovyanko, M. A. Loi, O. Paris, G. Hesser and W. Heiss, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3758–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dong, C. Li, G. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Deng and Q. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2503–2509 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sahu, A. Khare, D. D. Deng and D. J. Norris, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5458–5460 RSC .
S. B. Wang, B. Hu, C. C. Liu and S. H. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 325, 351–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sahu, L. Qi, M. S. Kang, D. Deng and D. J. Norris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6509–6512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X. He, L. Gao and N. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1149–1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O.
I. Micic, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. R. Sprague and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4966–4969 CrossRef CAS .
D. Battaglia and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1027–1030 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micié, J. R. Sprague, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. L. Machol and A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 7754–7759 CrossRef .
O. I. Micic, S. P. Ahrenkiel and A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 78, 4022–4024 CrossRef .
A. A. Guzelian, J. E. B. Katari, A. V. Kadavanich, U. Banin, K. Hamad, E. Juban and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7212–7219 CrossRef CAS .
O. I. Micié and A. J. Nozik, J. Lumin., 1996, 70, 95–107 CrossRef .
Y. Cao and U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9692–9702 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Allen, B. J. Walker and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 760–762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Protière and P. Reiss, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2417–2419,  10.1039/b701092c .
A. C. Gagneux, F. Delpech, C. Nayral, A. Cornejo, Y. Coppel and B. Chaudret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18147–18157 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jasinski, V. J. Leppert, S.-T. Lam, G. A. Gibson, K. Nauka, C. C. Yang and Z. L. Zhou, Solid State Commun., 2007, 141, 624–627 CrossRef CAS .
H. Virieux, M. L. Troedec, A. Cros-Gagneux, W. S. Ojo, F. Delpech, C. Nayral, H. Martinez and B. Chaudret, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19701–19708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Harris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20211–20213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Gary and B. M. Cossairt, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2463–2469 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Gary, B. A. Glassy and B. M. Cossairt, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1734–1744 CrossRef CAS .
D. Franke, D. K. Harris, L. Xie, K. F. Jensen and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14299–14303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Xie, J. Huang and Y. Qian, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1456–1459 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Castro, S. G. Bailey, R. P. Raffaelle, K. K. Banger and A. F. Hepp, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 3142–3147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, W. Gao, R. Cong and T. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 137, 99–101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Zhong, Y. Zou, M. F. Ye, Y. J. He, J. P. Ye, C. He, C. H. Yang and Y. F. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6434–6443 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, T. J. Daou, I. Texier, T. T. K. Chi, N. Q. Liem and P. Reiss, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2422–2429 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Speranskaya, N. V. Beloglazova, S. Abe, T. Aubert, P. F. Smet, D. Poelman, I. Y. Goryacheva, D. S. Saeger and Z. Hens, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7567–7575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, G. Chang, W. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. He, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 647, 51–54 CrossRef CAS .
T. Torimoto, T. Adachi, K. I. Okazaki, M. Sakuraoka, T. Shibayama, B. Ohtani, A. Kudo and S. Kuwabata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12388–12389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ogawa, T. Kuzuya, Y. Hamanaka and K. Sumiyama, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2226–2231 RSC .
X. Tang, W. B. A. Ho and J. M. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9769–9773 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, W. Guo, T. Zhang, W. Yang, L. Su, L. Fang, H. Wang, X. Gong and J. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 8518–8527 RSC .
M. A. Langevin, A. M. Ritcey and C. N. Allen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3476–3482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Raevskaya, M. V. Ivanchenko, O. L. Stroyuk, S. Y. Kuchmiy and V. F. Plyusnin, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 135 CrossRef .
J. Song, T. Jiang, T. Guo, L. Liu, H. Wang, T. Xia, W. Zhang, X. Ye, M. Yang, L. Zhu, R. Xia and X. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 1627–1633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, C. Ma, W. Zhang, S. Yang, S. Wang, L. Lv, L. Zhu, R. Xia and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7909–7918 RSC .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Aliisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Kumar, M. P. Joshi, C. S. Friend, P. N. Prasad and R. Burzynski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 1388–1390 CrossRef .
J. S. Steckel, S. Coe-Sullivan, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1862–1866 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, R. Henderson, Y. Zhang, G. You, L. Wei, Y. Bai, J. Wang and J. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 375202 CrossRef PubMed .
Kaushik Roy Choudhury, Dong Woo Song and So Franky, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, Z. Yang, G. Walters, R. Comin, Z. Ning, E. Beauregard, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, V. C. Sundar, J. R. Heine, M. G. Bawendi and K. F. Jensen, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1102–1105 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yan, X. Shen, Y. Zhang, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Feng, J. Yin, J. Zhao and W. W. Yu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 54109–54114 RSC .
X. Kang, Y. Yang, L. Wang, S. Wei and D. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27713–27719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Hong, H. K. Park, J. H. Oh, H. Yang and Y. R. Do, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18939–18949 RSC .
N. TessLer, V. Medvedev, M. Kazes, S. Kan and U. Banin, Science, 2002, 295, 1506–1508 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Bakueva, S. Musikhin, M. A. Hines, T. W. F. Chang, M. Tzolov, G. D. Scholes and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2895–2897 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Choudhury, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 073110 CrossRef .
L. Sun, J. J. Choi, D. Stachnik, A. C. Bartnik, B. R. Hyun, G. G. Malliaras, T. Hanrath and F. W. Wise, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Supran, K. W. Song, G. W. Hwang, R. E. Correa, J. Scherer, E. A. Dauler, Y. Shirasaki, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sanchez, E. Binetti, J. A. Torre, G. Garcia-Belmonte, M. Striccoli and I. Mora-Sero, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8551–8555 RSC .
Y. Wang, X. Bai, T. Wang, L. Yan, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang and W. W. Yu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 215703 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Marcel, M. Mario, G. Peter, W. Shimon and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2015 CrossRef PubMed .
W. C. W. Chan and S. Nie, Science, 1998, 281, 2016–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma and X. Su, Analyst, 2010, 135, 1867–1877 RSC .
S. J. Cho, D. Maysinger, M. Jain, B. Roder, S. Hackbarth and F. M. Winnik, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1974–1980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Cai, D. W. Shin, K. Chen, O. Gheysens, Q. Cao, S. X. Wang, S. S. Gambhir and X. Chen, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 669–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. Li, X. Wang, F. Liu, Y. Cheng, B. Zhang and D. Shi, Theranostics, 2012, 2, 769–776 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, C. N. Zhu, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Tian and D. W. Pang, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Hong, W. He, K. Zhou, K. Yang, F. Li, G. Chen, Z. Liu, H. Dai and Q. Wang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 3639–3646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Y. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, L. Li, D. Wu and Q. Wang, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 393–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tang, J. P. Xue, B. G. Xu, D. Shen, G. P. Sudlow and S. Achilefu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 220–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, A. Wan and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11163–11171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goetzberger and W. Greube, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 14, 123–139 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Weber and J. Lambe, Appl. Opt., 1976, 15, 2299–2300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Mansour, H. M. A. Killa, S. A. El-Wanees and M. Y. El-Sayed, Polym. Test., 2005, 24, 519–525 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Mansour, M. G. El-Shaarawy, S. M. El-Bashir, M. K. El-Mansy and M. Hammam, Polym. Test., 2002, 21, 277–281 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sansregret, J. M. Drake, W. R. L. Thomas and M. L. Lesiecki, Appl. Opt., 1983, 22, 573–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Currie, J. K. Mapel, T. D. Heidel, S. Goffri and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2008, 321, 226–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and R. R. Lunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Wilton, M. R. Fetterman, J. J. Low, G. You, Z. Jiang and J. Xu, Opt. Express, 2014, 22(1), A35–A43 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. R. Kaysir, S. Fleming and A. Argyros, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, A1546–A1559 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, D. Benetti, Z. Fan, H. Zhao, D. Ma, A. O. Govorov, A. Vomiero and F. Rosei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501913 CrossRef .
D. L. Waldron, A. Preske, J. M. Zawodny, T. D. Krauss and M. C. Gupta, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 095205 CrossRef .
A. Shabaev, A. L. Efors and A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2856–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Knowles, T. B. Kilburn, D. G. Alzate, S. McDowall and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9129–9132 RSC .
F. Meinardi, H. McDaniel, F. Carulli, A. Colombo, K. A. Velizhanin, N. S. Makarov, R. Simonutti, V. I. Klimov and S. Brovelli, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 878–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sumner, S. Eiselt, T. B. Kilburn, C. Erickson, B. Carlson, D. R. Gamelin, S. McDowall and D. L. Patrick, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3252–3260 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dong, B. Wu, F. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Peng, D. Chen, E. Wu and J. Qiu, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 9335–9339 CrossRef CAS .

          G. J. Jacob, L. C. Barbosa and C. L. Cesar, presented in part at the Proc. SPIE, 2005, 124–129.
A. Hreibi, F. Gérôme, J.-L. Auguste, Q. Dai, W. W. Yu and J.-M. Blondy, Lasers & Electro-optics. IEEE, 2010 DOI:10.1364/CLEO.2010.JTuD42 .
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. Leatherdale, H. J. Eisler and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 2000, 290, 314–317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. F. Borrelli and D. W. Smith, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1994, 180, 0–31 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Melekhin, E. V. Kolobkova, A. A. Lipovskii, A. V. D. Petrikov, V. M. Malyarevich and G. Savitsky, Glass Phys. Chem., 2008, 34, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Kolobkova, A. A. Lipovskii and V. D. Petrikov, Glass Phys. Chem., 2002, 28, 246–250 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Savitski, N. N. Posnov, P. V. Prokoshin, A. M. Malyarevich, K. V. Yumashev, M. I. Demchuk and A. A. Lipovskii, Appl. Phys. B: Lasers Opt., 2002, 75, 841–846 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rajh, M. I. Vucemilovic, N. M. Dimitrijevic, O. I. Micic and A. J. Nozik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1988, 143, 305–308 CrossRef CAS .
J. Planelles-Aragó, J. L. Beatriz, E. Cordoncillo, P. Escribano, F. Pellé, B. Viana and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5193–5199 RSC .
B. Mashford, J. Baldauf, T. L. Nguyen, A. M. Funston and P. Mulvaney, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 094305 CrossRef .
D. A. Carder, A. Markwitz, R. J. Reeves, J. Kennedy and F. Fang, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2013, 307, 154–157 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Guerreiro, S. Ten, N. F. Borrelli, J. Butty, G. E. Jabbour and N. Peyghambarian, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 1595–1597 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Malyarevich, I. A. Denisov, V. G. Savitsky, K. V. Yumashev and A. A. Lipovskii, Appl. Opt., 2000, 39, 4345–4347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. R. Heck, E. Bente, B. Smalbrugge, Y. S. Oei, M. K. Smit, S. Anantathanasarn and R. Nötzel, Opt. Express, 2007, 15, 16292–16301 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kuntz, G. Fiol, M. Laemmlin, C. Meuer and D. Bimberg, Proc. IEEE, 2007, 95, 1767–1778 CAS .
C. Cheng, J. Bo, J. Yan and X. Cheng, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2013, 25, 572–575 CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Wu, T. Zhang, P. Gu, H. Chu, T. Cui, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Zhao and W. W. Yu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 2000 CrossRef .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, L. Yan, Y. Jiang, T. Zhang, Y. Feng, H. Chu, Y. Wang, J. Zhao and W. W. Yu, Opt. Mater. Express, 2014, 4, 1856–1865 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Sevick-Muraca, J. P. Houston and M. Gurfinkel, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 642–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen and Z. Rosenzweig, Anal. Chem., 2002, 74, 5132–5138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia and C. Zhu, Analyst, 2008, 133, 928–932 RSC .
R. Cui, Y. P. Gu, L. Bao, J. Y. Zhao, B. P. Qi, Z. L. Zhang, Z. X. Xie and D. W. Pang, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 8932–8935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Srinivasan, C. Thiruppathiraja, K. Subramanian and K. Dinakaran, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 62399–62403 RSC .
S. Yan, L. Zhang, Y. Tang and Y. Lv, Analyst, 2014, 139, 4210–4215 RSC .
S. Kim and K. Lee, J. Korean Phys. Soc., 2018, 73, 343–348 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Tawfik, B. T. Huy, M. Sharipov, A. Abd-Elaal and Y.-I. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 256, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, S. Li, M. Han, Y. Liu and Z. Chen, Analyst, 2019, 144, 2604–2610 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Yue Ma
	Yue Ma is a master student at the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, Jilin University. Her current research work is on the preparation of NIR quantum dots and their applications.

Yu Zhang
	Yu Zhang received his PhD degree from Jilin University. In 2010, he joined the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University. He has studied and worked at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and Pennsylvania State University, and engaged in nano-optoelectronics research at the City University of Hong Kong. His research interests include semiconductor nanomaterials and their applications in optoelectronic devices.

William W. Yu
	William Yu obtained his PhD degree from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests are solution dispersible nanomaterials and their applications in alternative energy, biomedicine, and environmental remediation.

 		 

CdTe	530–8008,9	1.510	1011
CdHgTe	600–135012	0–1.513	

HgTe	700–200014,15	−0.1516	8017
Cd3P2	450–150018	0.5519	1818
Cd3As2	530–200020	−0.1921	4720
PbS	800–220022–24	0.4125	1825
PbSe	600–250026–28	0.2829	4630
PbTe	1245–162529	0.3129	15029
Ag2S	660–12273,31	0.9–1.132	2.233
Ag2Se	700–133034,35	0.1532	

Ag2Te	995–130036,37	0.6732	

InP	390–72038	1.2729	1539
InAs	800–140040,41	0.3629	3430
CuInS2	500–95042–44	1.5345	4.146
AgInS2	600–80047,48	1.8745	5.549
AgInSe2	700–125050,51	1.2445	

CuInSe2	640–97552	1.0445	10.645

 	Fig. 1  UV-vis and PL spectra of CdTe QDs.9	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photoluminescence and (b) absorption of PbS QDs during growth.23	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Temporal blue-shifts of the first excitonic absorption peak of 5.0 nm PbSe QD powder and solutions stored under darkness in air. (b) Temporal blue-shifts of the first absorption peaks of different-sized PbSe QDs exposed to room light in air; the concentrations of these PbSe QDs were identical (1.0 μM). Temporal evolution of the absorption spectra of 5.0 nm PbSe QDs exposed to (c) UV light and (d) room light in air. Both of the PbSe QD concentrations shown here were identical (0.86 μM). (e) Temporal blue-shifts of the first excitonic absorption peaks derived from panels (c and d). Temporal evolution of the absorption spectra of PbSe nanocrystal solution stored in a nitrogen atmosphere under (f) darkness, (g) UV light, or (h) different temperatures with exposure to room light.75	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of PbSe/CdSe and PbSe/CdSe/ZnS QDs.82	 

 	Fig. 5  PL spectra of a series of aliquots taken during growth of a ZnS shell on PbSe/CdSe QDs. Arrows denote the forward progress of the reaction.82	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthesis of Ag2S NIR QDs from a single source precursor of (C2H5)2NCS2Ag.89	 

 	Fig. 7  Optical characterization of CdTe and Ag2Te QDs. (a) Absorption spectra of CdTe QDs synthesized with various reaction times (from bottom to top: 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 150 min). (b) Photoluminescence spectra of CdTe QDs synthesized with various reaction times (from left to right: 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, and 150 min). (c) Absorption spectra of Ag2Te QDs prepared from CdTe QDs via cation exchange (the corresponding CdTe and Ag2Te QDs are depicted in the same color). (d) Photoluminescence spectra of Ag2Te QDs prepared from CdTe QDs via cation exchange (the corresponding CdTe and Ag2Te QDs are depicted in the same color). (e) Photographs of the CdTe (left) and Ag2Te QDs (right) prepared via cation exchange (a rectangular label attached to the back of the bottle can be visualized through the CdTe QD solution). (f) Schematic illustration of the aqueous synthesis of Ag2Te QDs and Ag2Te/ZnS core/shell QDs through cation exchange of CdTe QDs with Ag+.99	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic device structure of electroluminescent LEDs.134	 

 	Fig. 9  Manufacturing of NIR photoluminescent LEDs and a working LED photo taken by an NIR-camera.139	 

PbSe	EL	1320–1560	—	Ag/Mg:Ag/ETL/PbSe QDs/HTL/ITO/Glass	
133

InAs/ZnSe	EL	1300	0.5	
	
142

PbS	EL	1000–1600	—	Ag/Mg/PbS QDs/ITO/Glass	
143

PbSe	EL	1412	0.73	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/EDT treated PbSe QDs/ZnO QDs/Al	
134

PbSe	EL	1150–1590	3	QDs mixed with MEH–PPV	
144

PbS	EL	1391	3.8	ITO/TiO2/QDs-in-perovskite emission layer/poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorene)/MoO3/Ag	

PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1	EL	750–770	8.8	ITO/TiO2/PEA2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1/poly(9,9′-dioctylfluorence)/MoO3/Au	
137

PbSe	PL	950	2.52	
	
139

PbS	EL	950–1650	2	Al/ZnO/PbS/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/Glass	
145

PbS/CdS	EL	1163–1341	4.3	Au/MoO3/CBP/QDs/ZnO/ITO	
146

PbS/CdS	EL	920	2	Gold/P3HT/QDs/TiO2/FTO	
147

PbSe	PL	980	5.3	
	
148


 	Fig. 10  Weights of the RALN and RLTLN dissected 7 days post-injection with different injected doses of CdTeSe/CdZnS (left panel) and CuInS2/ZnS (right panel) QDs. The data are mean ± SEM (n = 6 per group).42	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
