Stability of inverted organic solar cells with ZnO contact layers deposited from precursor solutions   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE02488E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE02488E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 592-601Stability of inverted organic solar cells with ZnO contact layers deposited from precursor solutions†

        
          
            Bradley A. 
            MacLeod
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bertrand J. 
            Tremolet de Villers
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Philip 
            Schulz
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Paul F. 
            Ndione
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyungchul 
            Kim
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Anthony J. 
            Giordano
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Seth R. 
            Marder
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Samuel 
            Graham
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Joseph J. 
            Berry
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Antoine 
            Kahn
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Dana C. 
            Olson
          
        
      *a
aChemistry & Nanoscience Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: dana.olson@nrel.gov;  Fax: +1 303 384 6430;   Tel: +1 303 384 6575
bDepartment of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA
cSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
dSchool of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Organic Photonics and Electronics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
Received 
      5th August 2014
    , Accepted 2nd December 2014First published on 10th December 2014AbstractWe report on investigations of the stability of inverted organic solar cells with ZnO electron collecting interlayer that are solution-processed from zinc acetate (ZnAc) or diethylzinc (deZn) precursors. Characterization of the respective solar cells suggests that the two materials initially function similarly in devices, however, we find that devices with ZnO from the deZn precursor are more stable under long-term illumination and load than devices with ZnO from the ZnAc precursor. A dipolar phosphonic acid that reduces the ZnO work function also improved device performance and stability when compared with unmodified ZnAc-based ZnO, but was problematic for deZn-based ZnO. The long-term device degradation analyses shows that the improved devices had increased and significantly more stable open-circuit voltage and fill factor characteristics. Chemical analyses suggests that defects in the ZnO films, most likely interstitial zinc, may be responsible for the observed disparities in stability within organic solar cells.

Broader context
Since as far back as at least 2005,1 it has been suggested that a polymer-based solution-processed organic photovoltaic (OPV) device with a 10% power conversion efficiency (PCE) would be sufficient for stimulating commercialization, which would in turn allow for the cost savings of larger-scale materials development and ultimately yield low-cost photovoltaic modules that could compete with conventional photovoltaic technologies in electrical power generation. At least one recent report demonstrated independently-verified PCEs above this threshold for a tandem OPV laboratory cell processed from solution.2 While OPVs will inevitably continue producing incremental progress in PCE, the devices will also need advanced stability in order to withstand long-term operations and to be of use in commercial applications of any kind. In a 2011 levelized cost of electricity analysis it was demonstrated that a 10% OPV module could reach parity with silicon PV modules after about 3–4 years of operation, and could approximately halve the cost of the silicon PV if the module could remain operative for 15 years.3 This analysis demonstrated clear incentive for researchers producing champion OPV cells to simultaneously pursue improvements in both device efficiency and lifetime. Toward this end, we report on our investigation of the effect of one transparent electrical contact layer on the stability of OPV devices.

Introduction
There have been many advances that have improved OPV device stability, including the development of active layer materials that are more photochemically stable,4 the selection of polymeric side-chains that enhance thermal and morphological stability,5 the advent of the inverted architecture (one in which readily oxidized materials where removed from air-interfaces),6 and improved encapsulation techniques.7 While the complete OPV module will likely include encapsulation with inverted architecture, the ultimate advancement in OPV device stability has not yet been realized. In this letter we report on studies of OPV devices with an inverted architecture which were intentionally tested without encapsulation to focus on the efficacy and stability of ZnO electron-collecting interlayers processed from two different precursor solutions.
The implementation of inverted architectures has improved OPV device lifetimes over that of conventional architectures from the scale of minutes to hours, days, and years (extrapolated).8 In this context, our choice of material for enhancing electron collection at the transparent conducting electrode is thin film ZnO, due to its n-type conductivity and optical transmission at wavelengths important for solar energy conversion. Thin film ZnO can be fabricated in a number of ways, including but not limited to atomic layer deposition, chemical vapor deposition, pulsed laser deposition, RF magnetron sputtering, sol–gel, and solution-processed nanoparticles.9–11 The solution precursor method is attractive in the laboratory and perhaps for large-scale production because the precursors are readily available from chemical manufactures in large quantities (requiring few steps from precursor to ZnO thin films), and they can be processed at near-ambient conditions from solution.
The most widely used ZnO sol–gel precursor to date has been zinc acetate (ZnAc), usually dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol, often with the addition of ethanolamine, a sol stabilizer. The full conversion of the ZnAc precursor into ZnO requires thermal annealing at a high temperature, typically above 280 °C, due to it's high decomposition temperature.6,12–14 Recently, Sun et al.15 fabricated inverted organic photovoltaic devices using ZnO as a buried electron-collecting interlayer, from the ZnAc precursor, showing that lower annealing temperatures could result in functional devices. Their findings indicated that the highest-temperature conversion used (200 °C) produced higher quality materials than lower temperatures (130 °C and 150 °C), presumably because lower temperatures were insufficient to fully convert precursors to ZnO. In our recent work, we have demonstrated that the ZnO layer can be formed from diethylzinc (deZn) precursor with a much lower thermal annealing temperature of the deZn precursor film at 120 °C.16,17 For brevity, we will use the designations ZnAc and deZn to refer to the thermally converted ZnO films, unless otherwise specified, e.g. ZnAc precursor for the unconverted material or ZnAc devices for devices utilizing the converted ZnO film of that precursor. As Foong et al. have suggested, the use of the deZn precursor is favorable in the laboratory over the ZnAc precursor as it is readily converted at lower temperatures, making it more suitable for fabrication on flexible substrates.11 With this precedence for establishing a low-temperature ZnO layer from precursor solutions, we investigated these two materials to compare their performance in PCE and device stability.
We show here that the current–voltage device characterization and various materials properties of the ZnO films suggest that the two precursors can yield ZnO layers that are similar in many ways, including initial OPV performance, though the ZnAc precursor film requires a much higher thermal annealing temperature than the deZn precursor film. Yet, the deZn precursor yields devices that are significantly more stable in open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor parameters when the non-encapsulated device is subjected to continuous illumination under a resistive load.
We also demonstrate a second method for simultaneously improving device efficiency and stability by modifying the surface of the ZnO interlayer. This is achieved by self-assembly of dipolar phosphonic acids (PAs), which have previously shown enhancement of efficiency by increasing the work function of hole-collecting contacts in conventional architecture OPV devices,18 or by decreasing the work function of the electron-collecting ZnO contact in inverted OPV devices,17 through systematic variation of the magnitude and orientation of the molecular dipole moment, relative to the oxide surface. A dipolar PA on the surface of ZnO from ZnAc can improve both the performance and stability of the device, but when implemented on the surface of ZnO from deZn can have mixed effects which are dominated by rapid loss in photocurrent and complete failure of some devices.
In order to explain the differences in these ZnO materials, we discuss analyses of the thin films using grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) absorption/reflection spectroscopy, and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. To our knowledge this is the first report comparing stability under continuous load and illumination of devices utilizing ZnO layers from two common solution precursors, both with and without functionalized surface modification.
Results and discussion
We initially compared performance of deZn annealed at 120 °C to ZnAc annealed at temperatures from 130 to 300 °C, following the most common processes established in the literature mentioned above. This was performed with the intent of directly comparing performance of both precursors when annealed at the lowest temperatures – conditions that are most favorable for commercial prospects of processing on flexible substrates. However, our studies show ZnAc performed significantly better when annealed at 300 °C, as compared to the lower temperatures investigated by Sun et al.15 As mentioned above, this result was expected based upon the known temperature requirements of the thermal decomposition of the ZnAc precursor.12–14 We therefore focus this paper on the comparison of OPV devices that use deZn annealed at 120 °C and ZnAc annealed at 300 °C, which gave the best PCE performance in our laboratory, and include extensions of this work comparing the lower annealing temperatures for ZnAc in the ESI.†
Inverted OPV devices were fabricated with active layers composed of a blend of regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and indene-C60 bisadduct (ICBA). As shown in Table 1, the initial average device performance of the ZnAc devices (3.94 ± 0.46%) was slightly better than, although statistically similar to, the deZn devices (3.80 ± 0.33%). This similarity in initial performance was also observed for devices with BHJ active layers of poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl] (PCDTBT) and C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM): the average PCE of ZnAc devices was 6.19 ± 0.26% versus 6.20 ± 0.13% for deZn devices (see ESI† for further details). However, when the P3HT:ICBA devices were tested under a resistive load and continuous illumination at near one-sun intensities, the performance of the two device types diverged significantly.
Table 1 Performance characteristic parameters for the devices with unmodified and PA-modified ZnO electrodes from the two precursors, taken after one hour exposure to the degradation solar simulator. Standard deviations are given for the number of samples averaged and the champion performance from each electrode type are given




Electrode
Qty

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Best PCE (%)




ZnAc
10
0.745 ± 0.070
10.0 ± 0.4
52.9 ± 2.0
3.94 ± 0.46
4.77


ZnAc with PA
10
0.767 ± 0.015
10.1 ± 0.6
63.6 ± 3.3
4.91 ± 0.49
5.64


deZn
10
0.744 ± 0.025
9.5 ± 0.4
53.5 ± 3.1
3.80 ± 0.33
4.34


deZn with PA
5
0.779 ± 0.005
9.0 ± 0.5
57.6 ± 3.5
4.06 ± 0.41
4.55





Fig. 1 shows the evolution of the current–voltage response curves for typical devices from each precursor, with continuous illumination exceeding 600 hours. For the ZnAc device (Fig. 1a), degradation is observed in all photovoltaic characteristics within the power quadrant of the response curve. Further, the device develops substantial current leakage in reverse-bias. In contrast, the deZn device (Fig. 1b) shows much better stability in VOC, and much better stability to the development of the reverse-bias current leakage. The characteristic parameters were calculated and the statistical mean of 10 devices, with one standard deviation, are plotted versus time in Fig. 2. While the initial performance characteristics are similar between these devices (Table 1), the VOC (Fig. 2a) and fill factor (Fig. 2b) in the deZn devices were more stable over the course of this experiment. The decay of short-circuit current density (JSC, Fig. 2c) was similar in both devices, where photocurrent loss in the first 100 to 200 hours was more rapid than at later times, as has previously been observed for OPV devices.16 The net result upon extended exposure was that the deZn-based devices suffered less degradation of their initial performance.
 Fig. 1  The current density response to applied voltage, under solar simulator irradiation, of typical devices with (a) ZnAc, (b) deZn, (c) PA-modified ZnAc, and (d) PA-modified deZn electrodes. The periodic measurements trend in time with the arrows, from measurements after one hour exposure (black solid line) to about 640 hours of continuous exposure (red dashed line). 
 Fig. 2  Average performance characteristic parameters of devices with ZnAc (red circles), deZn (blue triangles), PA-modified ZnAc (green squares), and PA-modified deZn (gray diamonds) electrodes: (a) VOC, (b) fill factor, (c) JSC, and (d) power conversion efficiency, all as a function of time exposed to the degradation solar simulator. Bars indicated ± one standard deviation of the mean. 
We have recently demonstrated that spincoating of dipolar PAs on ZnO contacts can improve the device performance by mitigation of ambient oxygen adsorption to the ZnO contact over time.17 In that previous work, dark shelf-storage of devices without PA modification resulted in oxygen adsorption in the ZnO layer, resulting in degraded device performance (S-shaped current–voltage response curves) and stability. It has been established that oxygen chemisorption occurs readily at room temperature on non-stoichiometric ZnO surfaces, specifically to interstitial zinc (Zni) defects, and the reverse desorption reaction occurs readily under UV irradiation.19 While UV irradiation could reverse the S-shaped response that developed in dark ambient exposure, PA modification was able to passivate the ZnO layer, mitigating the S-kink effect.
Following this previous work, we spincoated a PA on the ZnAc and deZn films. Fig. 3 shows the secondary electron cutoff region of UV photoelectron spectra and indicates a work function reduction of ∼0.6 eV when the PA (1-cyano-2-(4-(diethylamino)phenyl)vinylphosphonic acid, shown in inset) is used to modify a ZnAc surface. The extracted performance characteristics of the measurements upon one hour exposure to the solar simulator are given in Table 1, as the mean of several devices, for both ZnAc and deZn, with and without the PA modifier. Similar to the previous work, the lowered work function resulted in substantially larger VOC for PA-modified deZn as well as for PA-modified ZnAc electrodes.
 Fig. 3  Secondary electron cut-off region of the UV photoelectron spectra for ZnAc (red circles) and PA-modified ZnAc (green squares), with binding energy referenced to the Fermi level, and extrapolated work function, Φ. Inset shows the PA molecular structure. 
As indicated in Table 1, the PA modification improved VOC and fill factor for the ZnAc and deZn devices. However, the PA-modified deZn devices experienced a rapid decrease in JSC, and about half of those originally measured failed catastrophically within minutes (excluded from the graphical and tabulated data for clarity). We attribute the rapid current decay and failure of a portion of the PA-modified deZn devices to reaction of the PA with some portion of the deZn surface (discussed below), disrupting the charge collection rate at this contact.17 The PA-modified devices were similarly tested for degradation and the evolution of the current–voltage response of typical devices is depicted in Fig. 1.
We compare the improvement of the extracted performance characteristics of the devices in Fig. 2. The PA-modified deZn devices with initial performance enhancements showed a more rapid initial decay in JSC than the devices with other electrodes, which may be due to the same decay mechanisms as the other subset of these devices that failed completely, within minutes. However, it is apparent that both PA-modified deZn and PA-modified ZnAc devices had improved stability of fill factor and VOC. The observed improvement in fill factor for PA-modified ZnAc was significantly greater than that observed for the unmodified ZnAc, the unmodified deZn, or even for the PA-modified deZn, while the VOC of the PA-modified deZn devices remained higher than all other devices, over the course of the experiment. In addition to the enhancement of VOC, the PA modifier reduces the distribution in measured VOCs (see the standard deviation in Table 1 and Fig. 2a). We note that devices with a PCDTBT-based active layer and unmodified ZnAc and deZn electrodes showed a smaller distribution than any of the devices discussed here, which may be due either to differences in the reactivity with the active layer and the electrode, differences in the device processing, or differences in the solar simulator instruments used (see ESI†). With this reduction in distribution for the P3HT-based devices, we postulate that the PA modifier may be effectively homogenizing the energetics at the surface of the ZnO electrode, even though it appears to have a detrimental effect on many of the deZn devices.
In all cases, initial currents were similar to the unmodified ZnAc devices. The deZn and PA-modified ZnAc device currents remained higher than ZnAc device currents over the course of the degradation experiment, while the rate of current decay in PA-modified deZn devices was initially much more rapid than the other devices, but slowed considerably thereafter. As we observed similar trends for improved device characteristics relative to the unmodified ZnAc devices, we infer that the use of a different precursor or the use of a surface modifier have similar effects on the ZnO/organic interface in the device: they may reduce the quantity of detrimental surface states on the ZnO, form a favorable interface with organic semiconductors in the OPV device, and lead to increased fill factor, increased VOC, and improved current retention under irradiation. In order to understand the mechanism for the differences observed in device degradation, for both of the ZnO precursors and with the PA surface modifier, thin films of ZnO from the two precursors were investigated by a variety of techniques.
ZnO thin films were prepared on fused silica substrates for comparison of their optical properties. Films from the two precursors showed different bandgaps: 3.28 eV for ZnAc and 3.38 eV for deZn (see ESI† for bandgap determination from UV-Vis). Fig. 4a shows the peak-normalized PL of the films from both precursors as well as the PA-modified ZnAc, each measured at room temperature. The deZn showed a larger ratio of midgap (∼2.3 eV) to the near-band-edge (NBE) emission, than either of the other samples. While the true nature of luminescent transitions in ZnO continues to be debated, this green band emission in ZnO is commonly attributed to a collection of transitions involving a deeply-positioned oxygen vacancy (VO).9
 Fig. 4  (a) Room-temperature PL measurements of deZn (blue triangles), ZnAc (red circles), and PA-modified ZnAc (green squares), each normalized to the peak intensity in the NBE region. The NBE region of each spectrum is shown in (a), (b), and (c), respectively, with the solid vertical line showing the optical bandgap of each sample (see ESI† for further details). 
The observed difference in midgap emissions agrees qualitatively with this assigned defect; whereas the ZnAc molecule contains two oxygen atoms covalently bound to the zinc atom, the deZn precursor has no oxygen bound to the Zn atom (except for coordinated tetrahydrofuran in solution) and the reaction of the deZn precursor occurs much more rapidly in ambient than does ZnAc,20 suggesting there may be a higher concentration of VO during ZnO growth from deZn. Of the oxygen-deficient ZnO defects, the VO is much less mobile than interstitial zinc (Zni).19 It seems likely that the kinetically-driven decomposition of the deZn precursor into ZnO may result in bulk-trapped VO, whereas the ZnAc decomposition may react slow enough to allow oxygen incorporation, while also having more covalently-bonded oxygen available for stoichiometric incorporation during the decomposition.
The assignment of this PL transition to VO is further supported by XPS measurements of the O 1s spectral region of the respective ZnO surfaces prepared on ITO substrates (see Fig. 5, and in the ESI† for lower annealing temperatures of ZnAc). The ratio of oxygen coordinated in the ZnO lattice to non-stoichiometric oxygen amounts to 1.9 in ZnAc and 1.5 in deZn, which indicates that there is relatively less stoichiometric oxygen present in deZn crystallites. However, the increased concentration of these oxygen defects in the deZn does not appear to adversely affect the performance of solar cells, initially or over extended illumination. This suggests that a high concentration of bulk-trapped VO does not impact the ZnO's function as an n-type contact interlayer.
 Fig. 5  XPS O 1s intensity for ZnAc (red circles) and deZn (blue triangles). Solid lines represent fits to the raw data, with the lower binding energy mode of the assumed bimodal distribution being attributed to ZnO lattice oxygen species. 

Fig. 4b–d show the NBE PL region for deZn, ZnAc, and PA-modified ZnAc, respectively. Although deconvolution of the spectrum is very challenging, as there is significant broadening at room temperature, it is clearly observed that the peak of NBE for each sample is redshifted from the respective optical bandgap by different amounts. This difference in energy, ΔE, is ∼15 meV for deZn, versus ∼64 meV for ZnAc. Interestingly, the PA-modification of ZnAc results in a blueshift of the NBE peak, reducing ΔE by ∼13 meV, while the optical gap is unchanged. The PL of PA-modified deZn was initially neglected, due to it's poor performance in devices, however, PL from samples prepared separately also show a slight blueshift (∼9 meV) of the NBE peak for PA-modified deZn, relative to a control sample without PA modification (see ESI†).
Low-temperature measurements of PL which are energetically closer to the optical bandgap are suggestive of reduced densities of shallow defects, and this difference, observed here at room temperature, correlates with the observed improvements in OPV device stability (Fig. 2); the deZn devices and the ZnAc devices with PA modifiers were both more stable than ZnAc devices without modifiers, and both showed a smaller NBE peak shifts with respect to their optical bandgaps. Photoluminescent decay from the Zni donor states are typically described as 0.2 to 0.3 eV below the band-to-band transition,21,22 which is apparently larger than the observed differences here, where ΔE is the difference of the room temperature bandgap derived from UV-Vis, and the room temperature NBE emission measured by PL. However, the Zni is known to be a localization center for excitons in ZnO, which can result in binding energies on the order of 10 s of meV.23,24 Energy differences on these scales could account for the difference in NBE peak position for the samples investigated here, part of the difference between ZnAc and deZn or perhaps the entire difference between PA-modified and unmodified ZnOs. Further, experiments utilizing high excitation fluence have been shown to generate excitonic plasmas for samples with relatively large concentrations of both donor and acceptor type defects, reducing the NBE transition energy by approximately 50 meV at 10 K,24 a similar magnitude for the difference in room temperature NBE peak position observed here for ZnAc relative to deZn; a difference in the ratio of Zni to VO defects in ZnAc and deZn could account for the observed difference in ΔE at room temperature. While the chemical nature of the differences in PL observed here in ambient at steady-state cannot be fully discerned, reduced temperatures, time resolution, or excitation power dependence of PL measurements could identify the exact defect structures that are responsible.24
In addition to these chemical analyses, we performed structural analysis of the ZnO films. Fig. 6 shows the 2θ-dependence of GIXRD for the thin films of ZnO prepared on fused silica, with the peaks referenced to the diffraction data of hexagonal wurtzite ZnO structure (JCPDS #361451). Taking into account the low intensity and large broadening of the peaks, the uncertainty in microstrain, and the uncertainty of crystalline geometries, the grain size of the samples cannot accurately be represented by the Scherrer method. However, assuming the samples are identically aligned in the GIXRD system, we can assume larger grain sizes for narrower XRD peak width,25 with the deZn showing a larger grain size than the ZnAc. Additionally, the deZn peaks are more intense, suggesting a higher degree of crystallinity. These interpretations are consistent with AFM topography; deZn has qualitatively larger and more-uniform distributions in topographic grains (Fig. 7a) with more-distinct grain boundaries in the phase images (Fig. 7b) than ZnAc (Fig. 7c and d).
 Fig. 6  GIXRD spectra of deZn (blue triangles) and ZnAc (red circles) with powder diffraction crystal peak references (dotted lines) for wurtzite ZnO. 
 Fig. 7  AFM images of (a) deZn topography and (b) phase, and (c) ZnAc topography and (d) phase. The full-scale coloration is 20 nm for topography (a and c) and 7° for phase images (b and d). 
The deZn film shows a preference for the (100) and (101) planes, which contain non-polar surfaces, in contrast to the ZnAc film, which shows preference for the (002) plane containing the Zn-polar (001) and O-polar (00) surfaces. This difference in structural preference for the two precursors has precedence in the literature. The observed orientation of the deZn is very similar to that previously observed by Beek et al. for spincoated deZn films.20 Ohyama et al. reported XRD of ZnAc dipcoated from an ethanolamine/2-methoxyethanol solution which showed (002)-plane preferential orientation, in addition to observing less-intense (100) and (101) peaks, when the film was annealed at various temperatures in the range of 300 to 800 °C, but lacked such ordering when annealed at 200 °C.26 This is consistent with our present and past27 observations, which show the ZnAc films having (002)-plane preferential orientation, but with relatively weak ordering. In addition, Sun et al. showed no preferential orientation in XRD analysis of ZnAc spincoated from an ethanolamine/2-methoxyethanol solution for films annealed at 130, 150, and 200 °C, suggesting the formation of a an amorphous thin film;28 we also observe a lower degree of crystallinity for these lower annealing temperatures of ZnAc (see ESI†).
While the films are expected on average to be composed of both amorphous and polycrystalline domains, the surface-sensitive aspect of the GIXRD measurements suggests that the observed differences in the two ZnO films would be descriptive of differences in exposed microcrystalline ZnO surfaces. These divergent surfaces likely have different surface energies and reactivities with the PA modifiers and/or the organic semiconductors of the active layer. In one study looking at the difference in reactivity of polar and nonpolar ZnO surfaces, Feng et al. electrodeposited polythiophene on ZnAc (similarly prepared with ethanolamine) and proposed that the ZnAc catalyzed Zn–S covalent bonding, whereas the same was not observed when ZnO nanorods were grown on a ZnAc seed layer prior to the polythiophene deposition. This difference in reactivity was attributed to the difference in the polarity of the surfaces, as measured by X-ray diffraction.29 Relating those observations to the current study, we propose that ZnO surfaces that contain more polar faces (ZnAc) may be reacting with the organic semiconductor materials within the active layer and disrupting the interface, which could be the cause of the observed faster degradation in the unmodified-ZnAc devices. Further, the differences in the surface-exposed microcrystalline surfaces, and their respective surface energies, likely accommodate varying degrees of non-stoichiometric defect structures (such as the Zni), which may then be the cause of reactivity with organic active layers or with the PA modifiers used in the current study.
Considering this scenario, we propose a scheme by which the observed trends in OPV device stability may be attributed. If the Zni is the cause of the larger ΔE observed for PL of ZnAc, it is likely that the Zni species are most-easily accommodated at the crystallite/atmosphere interface during growth from ambient solution processing: the higher surface energy of more-polar ZnAc surfaces would more readily accommodate these Zni species, and the slower reaction rate of the ZnAc decomposition would more easily support the propagation of surface Zni in oxygen-deficient decomposition conditions. Although covalent oxygen in ZnAc precursor does not itself describe oxygen deficient conditions, the nature of the polar crystallite surfaces may catalyze decomposition of ZnAc to oxygen-containing products such as acetone and carbon dioxide,12 leading to more oxygen deficient conditions at the surface of crystallite during growth. Conversely, the relatively rapid rate of decomposition of the deZn precursor, and the lack of covalent oxygen, leads primarily to VO in oxygen-deficient conditions.
While it is not expected that ZnAc or deZn contains exclusively one of these two main defects, the PL suggests deZn has much higher concentrations of VO than does ZnAc, and that ZnAc contains more Zni than deZn. When organic semiconductor molecules are then deposited in the fabrication of the OPV device, they destructively react with the Zni (such as the previously observed Zn–S structures29), which is found in higher densities on the ZnAc surface. A lowered concentration of Zni at the deZn surface would show less reactivity with the organic active layer, resulting in a more stable device. Solution processing of the PA modifier on the ZnAc surface may also form free zinc phosphonate complexes with the higher concentration of Zni species at the surface, which either wash away during spincoating or remain as less-reactive molecules condensed at this interface in the device assembly. As for the apparent etching of deZn when exposed to the PA modifier, it may be that a higher concentration of VO makes adjacent zinc sites more susceptible to etching by the PA. In the case of ZnAc (or initially, some of the deZn samples), the PA modifier would also react with surface hydroxyl species,30 leading to a shift the local work function and as observed in the device measurements here, the homogenization of the electron contact.
Experimental details
ZnO thin films preparation
Differing protocols in otherwise similar procedures are noted, as some parameters were optimized throughout the course of this investigation. ZnO precursors are prepared using chemicals as-received (Sigma Aldrich) and are used within an hour. The deZn solution is prepared in a purified nitrogen filled glovebox (<1 PPM water, <2 PPM oxygen) from 15 wt% deZn in toluene diluted by four parts anhydrous tetrahydrofuran, and filtered through a 0.45 m pore size nylon membrane. Caution: diethylzinc is pyrophoric, but when purchased in solution with toluene and handled in an inert atmosphere, it is relatively stable. Dilution with tetrahydrofuran further stabilizes the deZn solution in the presence of oxidants.20 The ZnAc sol–gel is prepared in air from 0.75 M anhydrous ZnAc and 0.75 M ethanolamine in 2-methoxyethanol; at later times, for the degradation analysis of P3HT-based devices, 0.5 M concentrations were used instead as it achieved thinner ZnO films and better JSC in devices. The ZnAc sol–gel is heated within the range of 45 to 55 °C and stirred on a hotplate for 15 minutes, or until fully dissolved, filtered with a 0.45 m pore-size nylon membrane, and allowed to cool to room temperature. ZnO films were formed on substrates that varied, depending on the requirements of a given experiment. The UPS and XPS measurements used ZnO formed on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass (Colorado Concepts, LLC, 15 Ω sq−1). UV-Vis, PL, and GIXRD measurements used ZnO formed on fused silica substrates. AFM measurements were performed on ITO-coated glass from patterned substrates (Thin Film Devices, Inc. part #551, 4 nm RMS surface roughness, 10 Ω sq−1). PL was additionally characterized on the coated and uncoated-glass sections of the Thin Film Devices ITO substrates, although not reported here. The device measurements were performed on the patterned ITO-coated glass substrates as well, where the patterning defined the geometry of the transparent electrode. In all cases, the underlying substrates are similarly treated by ultrasonication for 5 minutes in acetone, 5 minutes in isopropyl alcohol, and then blown dry with nitrogen gas. The substrates are then UV-ozone cleaned for 15 minutes (Jelight Company Inc., UVO Cleaner 42). The ITO-glass substrates are then spin-coated with the ZnO precursor solution at 7000 RPM for 1 min in air (20% relative humidity, 24 °C). It should be noted that relative humidity of the unconditioned laboratory at NREL may range from moderate (50%) in the summer to very dry (<10%) winter, and this is known to affect the rate of oxidation in the precursor conversion.20,31 The deZn films are annealed for 10 min on a hotplate that is pre-heated to 120 °C, rinsed with deionized water, rinsed with ethanol, blown dry with nitrogen gas, and allowed to dry for an additional 10 min at 120 °C, before allowing to cool to room temperature. The annealing procedure for ZnAc is based on previously-developed in-house recipes and differs from that of deZn; the ZnAc-based films are placed on a preheated hotplate and annealed for 5 min and subsequently allowed to cool to room temperature. All resulting films are typically 25 nm thick, as measured by atomic force microscope, with variations of about ±5 nm.
Phosphonic acid synthesis
A solution of 4-(diethylamino)benzaldehyde (5.0 g, 28.2 mmol) and diethyl cyanomethylphosphonate (4.5 mL, 28.6 mmol) in methanol (approximately 15 mL) was allowed to stir at room temperature and piperidine (20 drops) was added along with approximately 0.5 g of molecular sieves (4 A). The reaction mixture was allowed to stir at room temperature over the course of 48 hours. The reaction mixture was subsequently diluted with dichloromethane. Volatiles were removed from the reaction vessel and the resulting thick oil was added to a silica gel column for purification (eluting with 3.5:1.5 dichloromethane:ethyl acetate). Removal of volatiles afforded diethyl (1-cyano-2-(4-(diethylamino)phenyl)vinyl)phosphonate as a thick yellow oil (7.3 g, 77%). 1H NMR (399.96 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.84 (d, J = 9.2 Hz, 2H), 7.74 (d, J = 21.2 Hz, 1H), 6.62 (d, J = 9.2 Hz, 2H), 4.14 (m, 4H), 3.40 (q, J = 7.2 Hz, 4H), 1.34 (td, J = 7.2, 0.4, 6H), 1.18 (t, J = 6.8 Hz, 6H). 13C{1H} (100.58 MHz, CDCl3) δ 158.5 (d, J = 7.9 Hz), 151.5, 133.8, 120.2 (d, J = 18.2 Hz), 117.5 (d, J = 11.1 Hz), 111.1, 88.4 (d, J = 203.1 Hz), 63.1 (d, J = 5.6 Hz), 44.9, 16.4 (d, J = 6.6 Hz), 12.7. 31P{1H} NMR (161.91 MHz, CDCl3) δ 15.72. Elemental analysis calculated (found): C 60.70 (60.00), H 7.49 (7.46), N 8.33 (8.21). EI-MS exact mass calculated (found) for [M+], m/z: 336.1603 (336.1605).
The (1-cyano-2-(4-(diethylamino)phenyl)vinyl)phosphonate (4.0 g, 11.9 mmol) was dissolved in dry dichloromethane (approximately 75 mL) and bromotrimethylsilane (6.4 mL, 47.7 mmol) was added via syringe. The reaction vessel was sealed with a greased stopper and tallowed to stir at room temperature overnight. Volatiles were removed under reduced pressure and the resulting thick oil was dissolved in a 10:1 mixture of methanol:deionized water (approximately 50 mL) 48 hours. Volatiles were removed under reduced pressure and the impure yellow solid was recrystallized from hot ethanol to afford the title compound as a bright yellow solid (2.9 g, 88%). 1H NMR (300.23 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 7.81 (d, J = 9.9 Hz, 2H), 7.58 (d, J = 19.8 Hz, 1H), 7.76 (d, J = 9.0 Hz, 2H), 3.42 (m, 4H), 1.11 (t, J = 6.6 Hz, 6H). 13C{1H} NMR (75.50 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 153.9 (d, J = 6.8 Hz), 150.4, 132.4, 119.5 (d, J = 8.5 Hz), 118.5 (d, J = 10.9), 111.0, 94.8 (d, J = 190.8 Hz), 43.9, 12.4. 31P{1H} NMR (161.91 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 8.93. Elemental analysis calculated (found): C 55.71 (55.75), H 6.11 (6.18), N 10.00 (9.99). EI-MS found for [M + H]+: 281.0.
Device fabrication
Inverted architecture OPVs were of the structure ITO/ZnO (with or without PA modifier)/P3HT:ICBA/MoO3/Ag. The active layer solution was prepared in the same nitrogen glovebox from a blend of 1 part P3HT (Plextronics Plexcore OS 2100, lot #11-11753) and 1 part ICBA (Plextronics lot #10-11344), with total solids concentration of 34 mg mL−1 in 1,2-dichlorobenzene. The active layer solution was stirred at 60 °C for several hours before use. The active layer solutions were deposited and spincoated (800 RPM, 30 s) onto the ZnO and ZnO/PA films immediately upon loading into the glovebox. The wet films were then allowed to dry slowly in the glovebox, in individual covered Petri dishes, until the films appeared completely dried, usually taking approximately 1 to 2 hours. The films were further annealed on a preheated hotplate for 10 minutes at 150 °C. The BHJ films are transferred to a second nitrogen glovebox (<0.1 PPM water and <0.1 PPM oxygen) with an integrated thermal evaporator (Angstrom Engineering Inc.). Molybdenum(VI) oxide (99.99%, Sigma Aldrich) is deposited by thermal evaporation at a rate of 0.1 Å s−1 to form a 10 nm thick hole-collecting interlayer of MoOx. Silver (99.99%, Kurt J. Lesker Company) top contacts are thermally evaporated with a shadow mask covering the substrates, at a rate of 0.5 Å s−1 to a thickness of 100 nm, such that the overlap of the masked silver deposition features and the underlying patterned ITO defines in a geometric active area of approximately 0.10 cm2 (measured by optical microscope). Devices were stored in the evaporator nitrogen glovebox environment until testing.
Device measurements
For lifetime measurements, un-encapsulated solar cells were exposed to constant illumination from a sulphur plasma lamp (color temperature ∼5300 K) at an intensity of 80 to 85% one sun. Each cell was covered by a metal mask allowing only 0.061 cm2 of illumination area in order to eliminate stray current edge effects. Several silicon photodiodes with KG5 filters were used to monitor the light intensity at various points on the sample holder platform. Custom-built electronics were used to measure the current–voltage (I–V) responses of the cell at periodic time intervals, with the initial values reported after one hour exposure to eliminate burn-in transients. I–V data presented here has been scaled to ‘one-sun equivalent’ values without consideration of spectral mismatch between the sulphur plasma and xenon arc lamp emissions. Between I–V measurements, the devices were held at a static load of 510 Ω. All lifetime studies were carried out in an ambient environment in which relative humidity varied between 15 to 40%. Samples were cooled by a liquid chiller set to 25 °C, with the device surface measuring ∼30 °C.
Characterization of ZnO films
The crystalline structure of the ZnO films deposited on fused-silica substrates was examined by GIXRD (Rigaku D/Max-2500) with CuKα radiation, λ = 1.5418 Å, at a grazing angle of 0.3 °C between the X-ray beam and the film surface. The surface profile of ZnO films was measured by AFM (Asylum MFP-3D) in non-contact mode. PL measurements (Horiba Jobin Yvon Labram HR800) of ZnO films were performed in ambient laboratory conditions with a 325 nm excitation source (Kimmon He–Cd), using an 1800 lines mm−1 grating with integration time of 3 s, and a 40× objective. UPS (Kratos Axis-Ultra spectrophotometer) was used to measure work function of PA-modified and unmodified ZnO films, with He I excitation at 21.2 eV and a −10 V sample bias. Further X-ray photoemission spectroscopy measurements were performed at a custom built spectrometer described elsewhere,32 employing Al Kα radiation excitation energy of 1486.7 eV, with survey spectra recorded at 50 eV pass energy and high-resolution scans at 25 eV pass energy.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have demonstrated that the properties of ZnO deposited from precursor solution methods depend sensitively on the chosen precursor route. Films of ZnO can be formed from deZn at much lower temperatures than from ZnAc, and led to enhanced stability of PCE in inverted organic solar cells, with improved VOC and fill factor parameters. PA modification of ZnAc electrodes lead to substantial improvements in VOC and fill factor, while the modification of the deZn electrode was problematic. The difference in device stability appears to originate from the different chemical nature of the ZnO surfaces, specifically the presence of Zni defects at the surface and their subsequent interactions with the adjacent organic active layer. These defects appear to be reduced by switching to the deZn precursor and are likely eliminated or passivated by the PA modification of electrodes from either precursor. The device degradation analysis, in combination with thin films characterization, provides insight into methods for improving both initial device performance and device lifetime, the combination of which are required for improving the prospects for commercialization of organic photovoltaics.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Center for Interface Science: Solar Electric Materials, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Award no. DE-SC0001084. B. J. T. V. was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract no. DE-AC36-08GO28308 with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory through the Department of Energy Solar Energy Technology Program. A. J. G. acknowledges funding from the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fellowship program and the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship DGE-0644493. K. Z. acknowledges the support by the U.S. Department of Energy/National Renewable Energy Laboratorys Laboratory Directed Research and Development program under Contract no. DE-AC36-08GO28308. The authors thank Plextronics, Inc. for providing ICBA and P3HT.
References
C. J. Brabec, J. A. Hauch, P. Schilinsky and C. Waldauf, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 50–52 CrossRef .
J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1446 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Azzopardi, C. J. M. Emmott, A. Urbina, F. C. Krebs, J. Mutale and J. Nelson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3741–3753 Search PubMed .

          M. Manceau, A. Rivaton and J.-L. Gardette, Stability and Degradation of Organic and Polymer Solar Cells, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2012, ch. 4, pp. 71–108 Search PubMed .
I. Cardinaletti, J. Kesters, S. Bertho, B. Conings, F. Piersimoni, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen, M. Nesladek, B. Van Mele, G. Van Assche, K. Vandewal, A. Salleo, D. Vanderzande, W. Maes and J. V. Manca, J. Photonics Energy, 2014, 4, 040997 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. White, D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, N. Kopidakis and D. S. Ginley, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 143517 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. Müller-Meskamp, J. Fahlteich and F. C. Krebs, Stability and Degradation of Organic and Polymer Solar Cells, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2012, ch. 10, pp. 269–329 Search PubMed .
M. T. Lloyd, D. C. Olson, P. Lu, E. Fang, D. L. Moore, M. S. White, M. O. Reese, D. S. Ginley and J. W. P. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7638 RSC .
Ü. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, V. Avrutin, S. J. Cho and H. Morkoç, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-J. Lee, J. Wang, S. R. Cheng and J. W. P. Hsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9128–9133 CAS .
T. R. B. Foong, S. P. Singh, P. Sonar, Z.-E. Ooi, K. L. Chan and A. Dodabalapur, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 22, 20896–20901 Search PubMed .
T. Arii and A. Kishi, Thermochim. Acta, 2003, 400, 175–185 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Ghule, K. Ghule, C.-Y. Chen, W.-Y. Chen, S.-H. Tzing, H. Chang and Y.-C. Ling, J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 39, 1202–1208 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Lin and Y.-Y. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 113, 334–337 CAS .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Lloyd, C. H. Peters, A. Garcia, I. V. Kauvar, J. J. Berry, M. O. Reese, M. D. McGehee, D. S. Ginley and D. C. Olson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1382–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Cowan, P. Schulz, A. J. Giordano, B. A. MacLeod, A. Garcia, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn, D. S. Ginley, E. L. Ratcliff and D. C. Olson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4671–4680 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Ratcliff, J. Meyer, K. X. Steirer, N. R. Armstrong, D. C. Olson and A. Kahn, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 744–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bonasewicz, W. Hirschwald and G. Neumann, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 2270–2278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. E. Beek, L. H. Slooff, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ahn, Y. Y. Kim, D. C. Kim, S. K. Mohanta and H. K. Cho, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 013502 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Han, H. S. Shim, J. H. Seo, S. M. Park, B. K. Min, J. Kim and J. K. Song, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 505, 51–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Han, H. S. Shim, J. H. Seo, S. Y. Kim, S. M. Park and J. K. Song, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 084306 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Klingshirn, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 782–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Stokes and A. J. C. Wilson, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, 1944, 56, 174–181 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ohyama, H. Kozuka, T. Yoko and S. Sakka, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1996, 104, 296–300 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Olson, S. E. Shaheen, M. S. White, W. J. Mitchell, M. F. A. M. van Hest, R. T. Collins and D. S. Ginley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 264–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, C. J. Takacs, S. R. Cowan, J. H. Seo, X. Gong, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2226–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, A. S. Wan and E. Garfunkel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9852–9863 CAS .
P. J. Hotchkiss, M. Malicki, A. J. Giordano, N. R. Armstrong and S. R. Marder, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3107 RSC .
D. J. D. Moet, L. J. A. Koster, B. de Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5856–5861 CrossRef CAS .
C. I. Wu, Y. Hirose, H. Sirringhaus and A. Kahn, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 43–47 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Annealing temperature studies for ZnAc-based ZnO films, characterized by UV-Vis, X-ray & UV photoelectron spectroscopies, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction, and current–voltage response in organic solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee02488eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
Since as far back as at least 2005,1 it has been suggested that a polymer-based solution-processed organic photovoltaic (OPV) device with a 10% power conversion efficiency (PCE) would be sufficient for stimulating commercialization, which would in turn allow for the cost savings of larger-scale materials development and ultimately yield low-cost photovoltaic modules that could compete with conventional photovoltaic technologies in electrical power generation. At least one recent report demonstrated independently-verified PCEs above this threshold for a tandem OPV laboratory cell processed from solution.2 While OPVs will inevitably continue producing incremental progress in PCE, the devices will also need advanced stability in order to withstand long-term operations and to be of use in commercial applications of any kind. In a 2011 levelized cost of electricity analysis it was demonstrated that a 10% OPV module could reach parity with silicon PV modules after about 3–4 years of operation, and could approximately halve the cost of the silicon PV if the module could remain operative for 15 years.3 This analysis demonstrated clear incentive for researchers producing champion OPV cells to simultaneously pursue improvements in both device efficiency and lifetime. Toward this end, we report on our investigation of the effect of one transparent electrical contact layer on the stability of OPV devices.


ZnAc	10	0.745 ± 0.070	10.0 ± 0.4	52.9 ± 2.0	3.94 ± 0.46	4.77
ZnAc with PA	10	0.767 ± 0.015	10.1 ± 0.6	63.6 ± 3.3	4.91 ± 0.49	5.64
deZn	10	0.744 ± 0.025	9.5 ± 0.4	53.5 ± 3.1	3.80 ± 0.33	4.34
deZn with PA	5	0.779 ± 0.005	9.0 ± 0.5	57.6 ± 3.5	4.06 ± 0.41	4.55

 	Fig. 1  The current density response to applied voltage, under solar simulator irradiation, of typical devices with (a) ZnAc, (b) deZn, (c) PA-modified ZnAc, and (d) PA-modified deZn electrodes. The periodic measurements trend in time with the arrows, from measurements after one hour exposure (black solid line) to about 640 hours of continuous exposure (red dashed line).	 

 	Fig. 2  Average performance characteristic parameters of devices with ZnAc (red circles), deZn (blue triangles), PA-modified ZnAc (green squares), and PA-modified deZn (gray diamonds) electrodes: (a) VOC, (b) fill factor, (c) JSC, and (d) power conversion efficiency, all as a function of time exposed to the degradation solar simulator. Bars indicated ± one standard deviation of the mean.	 

 	Fig. 3  Secondary electron cut-off region of the UV photoelectron spectra for ZnAc (red circles) and PA-modified ZnAc (green squares), with binding energy referenced to the Fermi level, and extrapolated work function, Φ. Inset shows the PA molecular structure.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Room-temperature PL measurements of deZn (blue triangles), ZnAc (red circles), and PA-modified ZnAc (green squares), each normalized to the peak intensity in the NBE region. The NBE region of each spectrum is shown in (a), (b), and (c), respectively, with the solid vertical line showing the optical bandgap of each sample (see ESI† for further details).	 

 	Fig. 5  XPS O 1s intensity for ZnAc (red circles) and deZn (blue triangles). Solid lines represent fits to the raw data, with the lower binding energy mode of the assumed bimodal distribution being attributed to ZnO lattice oxygen species.	 

 	Fig. 6  GIXRD spectra of deZn (blue triangles) and ZnAc (red circles) with powder diffraction crystal peak references (dotted lines) for wurtzite ZnO.	 

 	Fig. 7  AFM images of (a) deZn topography and (b) phase, and (c) ZnAc topography and (d) phase. The full-scale coloration is 20 nm for topography (a and c) and 7° for phase images (b and d).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Annealing temperature studies for ZnAc-based ZnO films, characterized by UV-Vis, X-ray & UV photoelectron spectroscopies, grazing incidence X-ray diffraction, and current–voltage response in organic solar cells. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ee02488e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
