Donor–acceptor block copolymers for photovoltaic applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM00665C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM00665C
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10788-10797Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsDonor–acceptor block copolymers for photovoltaic applications

        
          
            Michael 
            Sommer†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Sven 
            Huettner
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Mukundan 
            Thelakkat
          
          
        
      *a
aApplied Functional Polymers, Macromolecular Chemistry I, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstrasse 30, 95440, Bayreuth, Germany. E-mail: mukundan.thelakkat@uni-bayreuth.de;  Fax: +49-(0)-921-553109;   Tel: +49-(0)-921-553108
bCavendish Laboratory, JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, United Kingdom. E-mail: sh538@cam.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 1223 337073
Received 
      11th March 2010
    , Accepted 19th July 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      2nd September 2010
    AbstractExtensive research activities in polymer synthesis and device engineering have been devoted to the development of donor–acceptor (D–A) bulk heterojunction solar cells in the last years. In such devices, several photophysical processes occur all of which have to be optimized for efficient operation. First, excitons created upon light absorption need to reach the D/A interface within their exciton diffusion length (10– 20 nm), where they may dissociate into holes and electrons. Subsequent charge transport and finally charge collection at the electrodes can occur, given that co-continous pathways of donor and acceptor domains are provided. Owing to the small exciton diffusion lengths and the required optical absorption length of 100–200 nm, vertically aligned pathways with a high aspect ratio of either phase should percolate through the film. The morphologies resulting from this ideal situation resemble those of vertically oriented microphase separated block copolymer thin films, and hence suggest the importance of D–A block copolymers for organic photovoltaics. Furthermore, the covalent bond between the donor and acceptor blocks is not only desired to improve morphology control, but also to enhance long term stability of the device. The potential of block copolymers with electronic functionality to microphase separate into well-defined microstructures with several tens of nanometers in size thus addresses the morphological requirements mentioned above. This article gives an overview of donor–acceptor block copolymers and summarises recent developments of this field.Michael SommerMichael Sommer received his diploma degree in polymer chemistry at the University of Bayreuth, Germany, in 2005. In 2009 he finished his PhD thesis “Novel Semiconductor Block Copolymers for Organic Electronic Devices: Synthesis, Properties and Applications” (summa cum laude) under the supervision of Prof. M. Thelakkat at the same University. After a short post-doc period at Bayreuth he joined the group of Prof. W. Huck at the University of Cambridge, UK. His research interests include controlled polymerisation methods, self-assembly of electronically active materials and structure-function relationships.Sven HuettnerSven Huettner studied physics at the University of Bayreuth and obtained his diploma degree in 2006. During his PhD thesis from 2006–2010 (summa cum laude) under the supervision of Prof. Thelakkat (Bayreuth) and Prof. U. Steiner (Cambridge), he worked on the electronic characterization and self-assembly of functionalized block copolymers for field effect transistors and photovoltaic cells. Currently he is focusing on spectroscopy of conjugated materials in the group of R. Friend at the University of Cambridge.Mukundan ThelakkatMukundan Thelakkat received his M.Sc. in Chemistry in 1980 from Calicut University followed by M.Phil. in Physical Chemistry from Kerala University, India. In 1992 he obtained his PhD in polymer chemistry from Friedrich Schiller University Jena and worked as a postdoc at BASF AG Ludwigshafen. In 2004 he finished his habilitation in Macromolecular Chemistry at Bayreuth. After a research stay at GE Global Research, USA, he joined as Professor for Applied Functional Polymers at the University of Bayreuth in 2006. His research interests include self-assembly and multi-scale functional control in organic devices using organic semiconductors and functional block copolymer architecture.
1. Introduction
Since the first report of an efficient organic photovoltaic (OPV) device made by C. Tang et al. in 1986,1 power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) are evolving together with an increased understanding of the underlying fundamental processes occuring in active layers of an electron donor (D) and an electron acceptor (A).2,3 The concept of processing the two materials together from solution, referred to as bulk heterojunction, has been the starting point for an ongoing increase in PCE.4,5 Usually, conjugated polymers are used as the donor material together with fullerene acceptors. The most prominent D–A couple used within this context is poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and a C60 derivative, PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester), which yield PCEs of 4-5%.6–8 Various strategies for further increasing the PCE have been realised. Novel materials with favourable electronic properties have shown the most promising results. For example, the short circuit current (JSC) was increased above 10 mA/cm2 using low-band gap donor polymers that absorb light beyond 650 nm.9–11 Numerous low-bandgap conjugated polymers have been presented, and readers interested in this field are directed to recent reviews.12,13 Furthermore, the open circuit voltage (VOC) can be improved by altering the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the fullerene acceptor.14–16 A simultaneous increase in the JSC as well as in the VOC can be achieved by lowering the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor polymer, while maintaining its low bandgap character. Especially this latter approach together with the use of a light harvesting fullerene, PC71BM, has led to very high PCEs of ∼7%.17,18
Thus, the bulk heterojunction of conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives has become the standard device architecture for state-of-the-art high-efficiency polymer solar cells. While fullerenes are mostly used as acceptor materials for testing new conjugated donor polymers, bulk heterojunctions consisting of mixtures of two polymers are less used. Such polymer/polymer- based devices exhibit PCEs up to ∼2%.19
When two materials – being either two polymers or one polymer and one fullerene derivative – are processed from solution, the components phase separate during film formation. Depending on various factors such as molecular weight, composition, miscibility, use of processing agents, (co)solvents, etc., the phase separation process is intentionally frozen-in at stages that are determined to deliver a maximum PCE. If desired, the morphology can further be coarsened and crystallinity of semicrystalline polymers can be improved through post-production annealing steps, e.g. thermal annealing or solvent vapour annealing.
All the above mentioned methods have proven to efficiently tune the blend morphology of OPVs.20–26 However, a higher level of morphological control is still desirable due to the following points: i) The microstructures of active layers in OPVs are non-equilibrium structures. Further phase separation and coarsening of the domain therefore may occur, ii) the phase separated domains are ill-defined in terms of shape and iii) the purity of phase separated domains can be an issue since they contain small amounts of their counterpart. Additionally, the optimized bulk heterojunction devices absorb only part of the incident light due to very thin absorbing layers (< 100 nm). If the active layer is fully microphase separated in the same domain size as the exciton diffusion length, then there will be no conflict between a thick absorbtion layer and the small exciton diffusion length. This can improve the light harvesting considerably.
The optimal active layer morphology depends on the balance of several constraints: The exciton diffusion length (typically 5–10 nm),27,28 the geminate charge capture radius (usually >15 nm for low dielectric materials),29 the film thickness providing sufficient photon absorption (>100 nm) and the existence of sufficient percolation paths for charges to reach the respective electrodes.
Block copolymers self-assemble into well-ordered nanoscopic morphologies that can be tuned in size and shape when the molecular weight and the length of the individual blocks are varied.30 Block copolymers that carry electronic functions therefore hold great promise for the application in OPV's. Co-continous morphologies suitable for photovoltaic active layers include cylindrical, lamellar or gyroidal phases. The construction of such microstructures from donor–acceptor block copolymers via self-assembly thus might contribute to the dilemma between the need of having ordered transport pathways and sufficient optical absorption on a length scale commensurate with the exciton diffusion length.31,32 Furthermore, techniques for preparing ordered microstructures – i.e. macroscopically aligned domains that are oriented perpendicular to the electrodes - are well-established and have been successfully demonstrated using conventional block copolymers without electronic functions.33–35 A graphical illustration of various morphological scenarios from active layers from blends and block copolymers is depicted in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Different donor acceptor active layer morphologies between the devices` electrodes. The left drawing depicts a polymer blend morphology with undefined and inhomogeneous domains. In the middle and at the right, schematic active layer morphologies of disordered and vertically aligned microphase separated block copolymer thin films are shown. Dark and light gray domains correspond to the donor and the acceptor phase, respectively. 
When using block copolymers for OPVs, two different approaches can generally be distinguished. On the one hand, block copolymers without electronic functions can be used as structure-directing templates and/or sacrifycing blocks for creating ordered structures. For example, McGehee et al. used poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(propylene oxide)-b-poly(ethylene oxide) triblock copolymer films to generate porous TiO2 films. These films were then used as the device electrode, and the pores were backfilled with poly(3-hexylthiophene).36 Snaith et al. investigated the structure-function relation in liquid electrolyte dye-sensitised solar cells. By employing poly(4-fluorostyrene)-b-poly(D,L-lactide) block copolymers, highly ordered cylindrical and gyroidal TiO2 films were prepared and used in liquid electrolyte dye-sensitised solar cells.37 On the other hand, reasonable combinations of electronically active polymer blocks can be covalently linked to obtain fully functionalised donor–acceptor block copolymers enabling the use of a single block copolymer without the need of any further templating. This feature article focuses on the latter concept by outlining the various chemical approaches and highlighting recent advances in this emerging field.
2. Donor–acceptor block copolymers with conjugated or fullerene acceptor blocks
In this chapter, fully functionalised block copolymers with conjugated segments and/or fullerenes are discussed. The most common approach is to use conjugated polymers (donor material) as a macroinitator for the controlled radical polymerisation of precursor blocks to which side-chain fullerenes are attached. The first D–A block copolymers with suitable electronic properties for charge separation were synthesised in the group of Hadziioannou et al., using a conjugated poly(phenylene vinylene) (PPV) block as macroinitiator for the nitroxide mediated radical polymerisation (NMRP) of a second styrenic coil block. This second segment was converted to the acceptor block by attaching C60 molecules (Scheme 2a).38 As pointed out by the authors, very strong interactions between the fullerenes, either due to partial cross-linking39 or crystallisation40 possibly accounted for the lack of microdomain formation after C60 functionalisation. Using a main chain P3HT block and atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) of methacrylates, a precursor block copolymer was synthesized by Jo et al. Further esterification of the second block with [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid yielded the final block copolymer (Scheme 2c).41 Wudl et al. presented a similar block copolymer architecture based on P3HT and side-chain fullerenes. Here, a P3HT macroinitiator for reversible addition fragmentation transfer polymerization (RAFT) was synthesized and used for polymerising a precursor coil block. The conversion of this coil block with C60 finally yielded the desired block copolymer (Scheme 2d). These block copolymers were reported to exhibit disappointing device performances and therefore found applications as compatibilisers in P3HT:PCBM blends.42 While all of the above mentioned approaches use fullerene units in the side chain, multiblock copolymers comprised of P3HT and fullerenes in the main chain were presented by Hiorns et al. recently. Here, polycondensation of P3HT with phenolic endgroups and a main-chain fullerene polymer with bromine endgroups was employed to couple the two blocks (Scheme 2e).43
 Scheme 2  Different donor–acceptor block copolymer architectures reported in the literature. Conjugated main chain or side chain segments provide the donor function while the acceptor function is taken care of side-chain fullerene polymer blocks or conjugated segments. a) Rod-coil block copolymer DEH-PPV-b-P(BA-stat-C60MS) by Hadzioannou et al. b) Side-chain block copolymer by Frechet et al. c) Rod-coil block copolymer P3HT-b-C60 by Jo et al. d) Rod-coil block copolymer P3HT-b-C60 by Wudl et al.e) P3HT-main-chain multiblock copolymers by Hiorns et al., f) All-conjugated triblock copolymer by Scherf et al. g) All-conjugated multiblock copolymer (DBAB)n by Bonner et al. 
Ring opening metathesis polymerisation (ROMP) is another important polymerisation method in the context of synthesizing fully functionalised D–A block copolymers. In the group of Frechét et al., ROMP was employed to polymerise two macromonomers containing pendant P3HT and fullerene units (Scheme 2b). While photovoltaic devices with the block copolymer as the active layer were not reported, these materials were utilised as compatibilisers in P3HT:PCBM blend solar cells showing an enhanced morphological long-term stability.44 ROMP was also used to polymerise functional monomers carrying porphyrins and fullerenes.45 In the case of all-conjugated block copolymers, condensation chemistry is used to couple individually polymerised donor and acceptor polymers. For example, Scherf et al. synthesised D–A triblock copolymers from monobromo-terminated P3HT and dibromo-terminated cyano-substituted PPVs via Yamamoto coupling (Scheme 2f).46 In the group of Bonner et al. multiblock copolymers comprised of PPV blocks and sulfonated PPV blocks, in which the individual main-chain conjugated segments are bridged by a flexible unit ((DBAB)n), were synthesised (Scheme 2g).47 The chemical structures of these fully functionalised block copolymers are summarised in Scheme 2.
When using the pure block copolymer as a single material in solar cells, a photovoltaic effect was observed in two cases. Devices made of DEH-PPV-b-P(BA-stat-C60MS) (Scheme 2a) delivered a short circuit current JSC of 5 μA/cm2 and an open circuit voltage VOC of 0.2 V.40 For the (DBAB)n block copolymer (Scheme 2g), values of JSC = 0.058 mA/cm2 and VOC = 1.1 V were obtained.48
The D and A moieties used in the majority of the above mentioned synthetic approaches towards donor–acceptor block copolymers are conjugated polymers and fullerene derivatives. Here, special attention has to be given to the introduction of appropriate solubilising groups. A low weight fraction of e.g alkyl chains renders the polymer insoluble whereas a solubilising group fraction that is too high will result in poor performance of the device since the amount of active material decreases. This is a general issue in such systems, becoming clearly visible in the case of polymers containing fullerene.49 Perylene bisimide (PBI) as an alternative electron acceptor has been investigated to a minor extent since the power conversion efficiencies of solution-processed devices did not reach those of comparable polymer-fullerene cells.50–52 The main reason was seen in the uncontrolled crystallisation of PBI, resulting in large crystals concomitant with poor morphological control.50 Yet, the suitable electronic properties and the absorption in the visible range make this acceptor compound interesting for light harvesting applications and apparently, PBI is regaining interest for photovoltaic applications.53–55 In addition, the chemical derivatisation of the PBI core is feasible since the two distinct imide positions can be substituted independently without altering the electronic properties.56 Making use of these facts, Thelakkat et al. designed a highly soluble and polymerisable perylene bisimide derivative bearing a branched alkyl substituent at the one imide position and a linear, acrylate-functionalised alkyl spacer at the other imide position. The incorporation of this monomer into block copolymers with poly(triphenylamine) as the donor yielded highly soluble donor–acceptor block copolymers exhibiting all important requirements for photovoltaic applications.57 The valuable design and synthesis of this polymerisable electron conducting monomer marked the beginning of a variety of block copolymers with side-chain crystalline perylene bisimide blocks and amorphous donor blocks (Scheme 3). The next section summarises the most important results on such amorphous-crystalline block copolymers covering the synthesis, morphology and application in OPVs.
 Scheme 3  Various amorphous-crystalline donor–acceptor block copolymers synthesised by nitroxide mediated radical polymerisation. The side-chain crystallinity in PPerAcr is caused by the strong π–π interaction of the PBI units. a) PvTPA-b-PPerAcr: poly(triphenylamine)-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylat), PvDMTPA-b-PPerAcr: poly[bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-4′-vinylphenylamine]-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylat), b) PvDMTPD-b-PPerAcr: poly[N,N′-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-N-phenyl-N′-4-vinylphenyl-(1,1′biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine]-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylat), c) G2-b-PPerAcr: second generation dendritic-linear block copolymer comprised of an amorphous TPA dendron and side-chain crystalline PPerAcr. 
3. Block copolymers based on amorphous donor blocks and crystalline perylene bisimide blocks
With the advent of the polymerisable acceptor monomer perylene bisimide acrylate (PerAcr),57 an electronically eligible donor monomer and a suitable polymerisation method had to be picked from the toolbox of organic and polymer chemistry. We chose vinyltriphenylamine (vTPA) as a starting point since the preparation of vTPA requires one simple Buchwald–Hartwig coupling of 4-bromostyrene and diphenylamine. Furthermore, the energy levels of TPA form sufficient HOMO offset with perylene bisimide. This assures a driving force for efficient electron transfer from D to A. Using nitroxide mediated radical polymerisation (NMRP) sequential polymerisation of vTPA and PerAcr was performed starting with a common unimolecular alkoxyamine (Scheme 3a).58
In order to vary the HOMO offset at the D–A heterojunction and the hole mobility of the donor block, triphenylamine and tetraphenylbenzidine monomers with two methoxy substituents were prepared as well (Scheme 3a,b).59,60 The charge carrier mobility of PvDMTPD is expected to be higher compared to PvDMTPA, since low molecular weight tetraphenylbenzidines (TPDs) have shown higher values compared to simple TPAs.61,62 The methoxygroups in PvDMTPD were introduced for the sake of solubility. Since these electron-rich groups also give rise to tuning of the HOMO level,63 they provide an important tool not only for controlling solubility but also the electronic properties. We therefore synthesised different donor homopolymers and block copolymers with PvDMTPA, PvDMTPD and PPerAcr (Scheme 3a,b). Very recently, a dendritic-linear block copolymer comprised of TPA and PPerAcr was synthesised (Scheme 3c).64 It was shown by cyclic voltammetry that the HOMO level shifts from 5.3 eV for the TPA dendron64 to 5.2 eV for PvTPA to 5.0 eV for PvDMTPA. This HOMO level position of PvDMTPA is maintained in PvDMTPD, which carries tetraphenylbenzidine moieties (Fig. 1a).59 Recent studies on the charge carrier mobilities of these amorphous donor materials confirm an increase from PvTPA to PvDMTPA to PvDMTPD.65,66 The charge carrier mobility of PvDMTPD is highest among the three linear donor polymers, reaching 10−4 cm2/Vs in organic field effect transistors (Fig. 1b).66 The electronic properties of PPerAcr are shown as well. Here, the charge carrier mobilities depend much more on the thermal history compared to amorphous materials (Fig. 1b).67
 Fig. 1  a) Schematic depiction of the estimated energy levels in eV. b) Transfer characteristics of PPerAcr before and after annealing above the Tm (drain voltage 20 V) (positive gate voltage) and of PvTPA, PvDMTPA and PvDMTPD after spin casting from toluene (negative gate voltage). The HOMO value changed only slightly from 5.2 eV in PvTPA to 5.0 eV in PvDMTPA and PvDMTPD, but the gain in charge carrier mobility was almost two orders of magnitude, which improved the performance of the cell considerably in this hole conductor series. 
The process of phase separation is critical in blends of amorphous donor polymers and PBI acceptors, being either small molecules or polymers. Also, it has been shown that the crystallisation of low molecular weight PBIs blended with conjugated polymers can result in large and inhomogeneous crystals.50,51 On the other hand, blends of amorphous donor polymers and PPerAcr form micron-sized domains. Block copolymers with one amorphous block and one side-chain crystalline PPerAcr block can solve this problem quite elegantly by confining perylene bisimide crystallisation to nanometer-sized, either cylindrical or lamellar domains.68 This block copolymer approach is thus unique in controlling the size and the shape of the PPerAcr acceptor microdomains, and can be used to tune down the structural features to the range of the exciton diffusion length. A first demonstration of photovoltaic devices with these fully functionalised block copolymers as active materials was made by Lindner et al. In Fig. 2, TEM images of thin film cross sections of the block copolymer PvTPA-b-PPerAcr (Fig. 2b) and of the analogous blend film (Fig. 2a) are shown. A large scale macroscopic phase separation is impeded in the block copolymer due to the covalent connectivity of the two blocks. The larger interface of D and A in the block copolymer film gives rise to a higher degree of photoluminescence quenching (Fig. 2c) and finally leads to a six-fold external quantum efficiency (EQE) and to a ten-fold improvement in the power conversion efficiency.69 In the block copolymer film, more excitons can reach the D–A interface where they are separated into holes and electrons (Fig. 2d).
 Fig. 2  Morphology and device performance of a PvTPA-b-PPerAcr vs. its analogous blend. a) Cross sectional TEM of active layers of the PvTPA:PPerAcr blend and b) of the PvTPA-b-PPerAcr block copolymer (BC). c) Optical density and photoluminescence quenching. d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) of these same films. The films are stained with RuO4, bright regions in a) and b) are due to PPerAcr domains. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69 
Evidently, the domains in Fig. 2b seem to be oriented rather parallel than perpendicular to the substrate. Recently, we have shown that controlled solvent vapour annealing of such spin coated films leads to the evolution of horizontally aligned lamellae with long-range order.70 A vertical orientation of such functional thin film morphologies therefore remains to be done.
Further optimisation of morphology includes tuning the size of microphase separated domains via controlling molecular weight,71 as well as using better performing block copolymers PvDMTPA-b-PPerAcr led to improved short circuit currents of 1.23 cm2/Vs and PCEs of ∼0.3%.59 The most promising block copolymer PvDMTPD-b-PPerAcr with a relatively high charge carrier mobility and an improved HOMO level offset did not show promising morphologies owing to the short block length of the PvDMTPD block used.59 Attempts to synthesise PvDMTPD-b-PPerAcr block copolymers with larger PvDMTPD blocks with 15–20 kg/mol were unsuccessfull, most probably due to termination reactions.72 We therefore believe that the design of a block copolymer PvDMTPD-b-PPerAcr, in which the synergetic effects of an improved hole transfer efficiency, an acceptable charge carrier mobility and a desired morphology are fulfilled, can lead to high power conversion efficiencies.
4. Block copolymers comprised of poly(3-hexylthiophene) and perylene bisimide
High charge carrier mobilities of the donor segments can be realised by employing conjugated, semi-crystalline polymers.73 A further advantage of this class of materials over the amorphous side-chain poly(triarylamines) is the extended absorption in the visible range. The objective of synthesising block copolymers with poly(3-hexythiophene) (P3HT) and PerAcr involves the combination of the Grignard Metathese Polymerization (GRIM) and controlled radical polymerisation methods. McCullough et al. presented P3HT-rod-coil block copolymers prepared by NMRP and reversible addition fragmentation termination polymerization (RAFT).74 Recently, two protocols towards block copolymers comprised of P3HT and perylene bisimide appeared. Emrick et al. used Stille and Heck reactions to generate a P3HT macroinitiator for the NMRP of a perylene bisimide monomer (Scheme 4a),75 while Frechét et al. synthesised a P3HT macroinitiator for the RAFT of PerAcr by the condensation of amine-terminated P3HT and carboxylic acid-functionalised RAFT-agent (Scheme 4b).76 A different approach was developed by Segalman et al., who made extensive use of click chemistry (Scheme 4c). A precursor block copolymer with P3HT was first generated by clicking alkyne-terminated P3HT to a azide-endfunctionalised precursor polyacrylate. After deprotection, azide-functionalised perylene bisimides were “clicked” to the alkyne side groups.77
 Scheme 4  Double-crystalline block copolymers based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) P3HT and perylene bisimide by Emrick et al. (a), Frechét et al. (b), Segalman et al. (c) and Thelakkat et al. (d) 
Using a protocol from the McCullough group78 to introduce different endgroups to the P3HT chain in situ, we prepared P3HT macroinitiators for NMRP in only one step.79 These macroinitiators were then employed to polymerise PerAcr (Scheme 4d).
In general, the phase behaviour of double-crystalline block copolymers is strongly influenced by crystallisation.80 Same is true for P3HT-b-PPerAcr.81 Therefore, all physical and electronic properties will entirely depend on the (post)processing conditions. Accordingly, large differences are found between block copolymers P3HT-b-PPerAcr synthesised via different chemical routes. In a recent study using a P3HT-b-PPerAcr block copolymer a PCE of 0.49% was demonstrated.75 Here, a low molecular weight P3HT block of 5.5 kg/mol (GPC) was used, and the active layers were thermally annealed prior to electrode deposition. Block copolymers synthesised in the group of Segalman et al. showed PCE values up to 0.03%. Here the length of the P3HT block used was approx. 32 repeat units, and the number of perylene bisimide units was set to ∼10.77 Furthermore the active PBI monomer was diluted with n-butylacrylate at different degrees. While this ensures enhanced solubility to the second block, it also may be detrimental to electron transport at the same time. We observed a drastic influence of the block copolymer molecular weight when maintaining the PPerAcr fraction at 55 wt.-%.82 Lower molecular weights (Mn,P3HT = 9 kg/mol) gave thereby poor performances, yielding a maximum PCE of 0.007% (Fig. 3a). Devices made from higher molecular weight block copolymers (Mn,P3HT = 17 kg/mol) exhibited a twentyfold improvement to η = 0.2%. This was ascribed to a higher degree of P3HT crystallinity and larger domain sizes.82 Importantly, we were able to measure outstanding external quantum efficiencies of 30% for the higher molecular weight block coploymer (Fig. 3b). These results are encouraging, especially when considering that maximum EQE values of only ∼20% were obtained for blend devices comprised of P3HT and low molecular weight perylene bisimides.51,52,76
 Fig. 3  Photovoltaic performance of P3HT-b-PPerAcr block copolymers of different molecular weights of 16 kg/mol (1) and 30 kg/mol (2) after processing from chlorobenzene solutions. a) J-V-curves under AM 1.5G conditions (100 mW/cm2) and b) external quantum efficiency EQE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright [2009], American Institute of Physics. 
5. Other systems
Finally it has to be mentioned that the thin film morphology considered to be ideal for OPV performance31,32 (cf.Scheme 1) has up to now not been achieved using direct self-assembly of fully functionalised donor–acceptor block copolymers. On the contrary, short oligomeric systems with both donor and acceptor groups have recently been shown to form morphologies highly suitable for OPV devices. Using self-assembly of liquid-crystalline monodisperse donor–acceptor block cooligomers comprised of flourene-bithiophene and perylene bisimide, Wang et al. observed impressive vertically oriented and phase separated lamellar structures in thin films (Scheme 5). Using solvent vapour annealing, long-range order of domains was achieved, and concomitantly the EQE and PCE was increased to 46% and 1.5%, respectively. These are the highest values for single molecule material-based OPVs.83
 Scheme 5  Monodisperse liquid-crystalline donor acceptor block co-oligomers by Wang et al. 
6. Conclusions
Various block copolymer architectures and polymerisation methods have been employed to generate donor–acceptor block copolymers carrying all functionalities required for photovoltaic applications. While several block copolymers with conjugated donor segments and side-chain fullerenes have been presented, no significant device performance was observed. The discrepancy in device performance between fullerene-based block copolymers and state-of-the-art conjugated polymer-fullerene blend cells is therefore large, and the question whether well-defined block copolymers can have morphological advantages over their blend analogs remains unanswered. Therefore, instead of being directly used as a single active material, block copolymers comprised of P3HT and C60 have found applications as blend compatibilisers in P3HT/PCBM blend cells.42,44,84
Donor–acceptor block copolymers with amorphous triarylamine segments and side-chain crystalline perylene bisimide (PBI) segments show exciting nanostructures and outperform their analogous blend systems by far. However, the limited charge carrier mobilities and the moderate absorption of the donor blocks are inherent drawbacks of such systems. Relief might be produced by replacing this donor function with conjugated semicrystalline blocks such as P3HT. In this respect, double-crystalline block copolymers comprised of P3HT and side-chain crystalline PBI blocks are promising materials which are just at the beginning to be investigated. But these materials not only address the issues of an improved hole carrier mobility and an extended UV-vis absorption. More importantly, they enable to confine PBI units to microdomains, thus preventing uncontrolled crystallisation observed in blends of conjugated polymers and low molecular weight PBIs. The structure formation in such double-crystalline donor–acceptor block copolymers is governed by several processes and therefore complex. Here, the interplay of segregation and crystallisation depends on the molecular weight and composition, and accordingly huge differences are observed in the device parameters when different block copolymers are compared. While these variations in device performance are remarkable at first glance, they also indicate a large potential of device optimisation. Clearly, further results both from experimental work as well as from simulations31,32 are necessary to fully understand the behaviour of competing crystallisation, segregation, and the resulting microstructures, which ultimately determine charge separation, charge recombination, and charge transport. This concept of donor–acceptor block copolymers demands new materials with better light harvesting and requires much more optimization in devices and a detailed study of device physics exploring the intricacies of morphology related charge separation and charge transport processes in order to exploit its potentials. For example, low-band gap polymers and C71 derivatives may be integrated into block copolymers to obtain both active materials and compatibilizers for blends. The present limitation of this concept is the lack of well-established synthetic techniques to obtain large amounts of well-controlled novel block copolymers with a variety of new hole conductors and electron conductors, whose energy levels and absorption properties can be tuned complementary to one another. This feature article is aimed at triggering more activities in the semiconductor block copolymer architecture and their application in organic photovoltaics.
7. Acknowledgements
Financial support of this work by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB 481, SPP 1355), the European Science Foundation (EUROCORES SOHYDs) and the Polyfilm EU Research Training Network is gratefully acknowledged. S.H. acknowledges a scholarship from the Bayerische Graduiertenförderung.
8. References
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 18 .
B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4688 CrossRef CAS .

          T. M. Clarke, J. R. Durrant, Chem Rev. DOI:10.1021/cr900271s.
G. Yu, J. Gao and J. C. Hummelen, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .
Ryes Ryes.
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864 CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, J. Gilot and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2556 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, H.-Y. Chen, S. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16144 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bundgaard and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 954 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, S.-H. Yang and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lenes, G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, F. B. Kooistra, S. C. Veenstra, J. C. Hummelen and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1377 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Ross, C. M. Cardona, D. M. Guldi, S. G. Sankaranarayanan, M. O. Reese, N. Kopidakis, J. Peet, B. Walker, G. C. Bazan, E. Van Keuren, B. C. Holloway and M. Drees, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 208 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3840 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 45 RSC .
J. K. Li, W. L. Ma, C. J. Brabec, J. Yuen, J. S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miller, G. Fanchini, Y.-Y. Lin, C. Li, C. W. Chen, W. F. Su and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 306 RSC .
A. Moulé and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3028 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Campbell, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, R. A. Marsh, C. R. McNeill, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3942 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, U. Asawapirom, U. Scherf, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2175 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516 CrossRef CAS .
C. Groves, R. A. Marsh and N. C. Greenham, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114903 CrossRef CAS .

          I. W. Hamley, The physics of block copolymers, Oxford University Press, Oxford 1998 Search PubMed .
G. Buxton and N. Clarke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 085207 CrossRef .
M. Shah and V. Ganesan, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 543 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, M. J. Misner and T. P. Russell, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2119 CrossRef CAS .
T. Thurn-Albrecht, J. DeRouchey, T. P. Russell and H. M. Jaeger, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3250 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Angelescu, J. H. Waller, R. A. Register and P. M. Chaikin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1878 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, S. Ludwigs, M. A. Hillmyer, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2813 CrossRef CAS .
U. Stalmach, B. de Boer, C. Videlot, P. F. van Hutten and G. Hadziioannou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5464 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. van der Veen, B. de Boer, U. Stalmach, K. I. van de Wetering and G. Hadziioannou, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 3673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barrau, T. Heiser, F. Richard, C. Brochon, C. Ngov, K. van de Wetering, G. Hadziioannou, D. V. Anokhin and D. A. Ivanov, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2701 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Lee, A. Cirpan, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1483 RSC .
C. Yang, J. K. Lee, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5416 RSC .
R. C. Hiorns, E. Cloutet, E. Ibarboure, A. Khoukh, H. Bejbouji, L. Vignau and H. Cramail, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6033 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, Z. T. Ball, N. Watanabe and J. M. J. Frechet, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 206 CrossRef CAS .
R. Charvet, S. Acharya, J. P. Hill, M. Akada, M. Liao, S. Seki, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki and K. Ariga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18030 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tu, H. Li, M. Forster, R. Heiderhoff, L. J. Balk and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4327 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Choi, J. Haliburton, T. Cleveland, R. Li, S.-S. Sun, A. Ledbetter and C. E. Bonner, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 4317 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Sun, C. Zhang, A. Ledbetter, S. Choi, K. Seo, C. E. Bonner, M. Drees and N. S. Sariciftci, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 043117 CrossRef .
M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1097 RSC .
J. J. Dittmer, R. Lazzaroni, P. Leclere, P. Moretti, M. Granstrom, K. Petritsch, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, J. L. Bredas, H. Rost and A. B. Holmes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 53 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Dittmer, E. A. Marseglia and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1270 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Shin, H.-H. Jeong, M.-K. Kim, S.-H. Jin, M.-R. Kim, J.-K. Lee, J. W. Lee and Y.-S. Gal, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 384 RSC .
P. E. Keivanidis, I. A. Howard and R. H. Friend, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Foster, C. E. Finlayson, P. E. Keivanidis, Y.-S. Huang, I. Hwang, R. H. Friend, M. B. J. Otten, L.-P. Lu, E. Schwartz, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2023 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shoaee, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, W. Duffy, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5445 RSC .
A. Wicklein, A. S. Lang, M. A. S. Muth and M. Thelakkat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14442 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lindner and M. Thelakkat, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8832 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hawker, A. W. Bosman and E. Harth, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, S. M. Lindner and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1493 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer and M. Thelakkat, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2006, 36, 245 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stolka, D. M. Pai, D. S. Renfer and J. F. Yanus, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. Ed., 1983, 21, 969 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abkowitz and D. M. Pai, Philos. Mag. B, 1986, 53, 193 CAS .
E. Bellmann, S. E. Shaheen, R. H. Grubbs, S. R. Marder, B. Kippelen and N. Peyghambarian, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 399 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Lang, F. R. Kogler, M. Sommer, U. Wiesner and M. Thelakkat, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1243 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Barea, G. Garcia- Belmonte, M. Sommer, S. Huettner, H. J. Bolink and M. Thelakkat, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 3351 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huettner, M. Sommer and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 073503 CrossRef .
S. Huettner, M. Sommer and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 093302 CrossRef .
M. Sommer, S. Huettner, S. Wunder and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2523 CrossRef .
S. M. Lindner, S. Huettner, A. Chiche, M. Thelakkat and G. Krausch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huettner, M. Sommer, A. Chiche, G. Krausch, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4206 RSC .
S. King, M. Sommer, S. Huettner, M. Thelakkat and S. A. Haque, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5436 RSC .
M. Sommer, S. Huettner and M. Thelakkat, Adv. Poly. Sci., 2010, 228, 123 .
Z. Bao, A. Dodabalapur and A. J. Lovinger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 4108 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Iovu, C. R. Craley, M. Jeffries-El, A. B. Krankowski, R. Zhang, T. Kowalewski and R. D. McCullough, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4733 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, A. Cirpan, T. P. Russell and T. Emrick, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rajaram, P. B. Armstrong, B. J. Kim and J. M. J. Fréchet, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1775 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, B. McCulloch, S. Kim and R. A. Segalman, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4219 RSC .
M. Jeffries-El, G. Sauve and R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1017 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sommer, A. Lang and M. Thelakkat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7901 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Castillo and A. J. Müller, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 516 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Kohn, M. Sommer, S. Huettner, M. Thelakkat, T. Thurn-Albrecht, Macromolecules, submitted Search PubMed.
M. Sommer, S. Huettner, U. Steiner and M. Thelakkat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 183308 CrossRef .
L. Bu, X. Guo, B. Yu, Y. Qu, Z. Xie, D. Yan, Y. Geng and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13242 CrossRef CAS .
J. U. Lee, J. W. Jung, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and W. H. Jo, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 105201 CrossRef .

Footnote† Present address: Melville Laboratory for Polymer Synthesis, Department of Chemistry, Lensfield Road, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1EW, United Kingdom, E-mail: mailto:ms928@cam.ac.ukThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:
Michael Sommer	Michael Sommer received his diploma degree in polymer chemistry at the University of Bayreuth, Germany, in 2005. In 2009 he finished his PhD thesis “Novel Semiconductor Block Copolymers for Organic Electronic Devices: Synthesis, Properties and Applications” (summa cum laude) under the supervision of Prof. M. Thelakkat at the same University. After a short post-doc period at Bayreuth he joined the group of Prof. W. Huck at the University of Cambridge, UK. His research interests include controlled polymerisation methods, self-assembly of electronically active materials and structure-function relationships.
Sven Huettner	Sven Huettner studied physics at the University of Bayreuth and obtained his diploma degree in 2006. During his PhD thesis from 2006–2010 (summa cum laude) under the supervision of Prof. Thelakkat (Bayreuth) and Prof. U. Steiner (Cambridge), he worked on the electronic characterization and self-assembly of functionalized block copolymers for field effect transistors and photovoltaic cells. Currently he is focusing on spectroscopy of conjugated materials in the group of R. Friend at the University of Cambridge.
Mukundan Thelakkat	Mukundan Thelakkat received his M.Sc. in Chemistry in 1980 from Calicut University followed by M.Phil. in Physical Chemistry from Kerala University, India. In 1992 he obtained his PhD in polymer chemistry from Friedrich Schiller University Jena and worked as a postdoc at BASF AG Ludwigshafen. In 2004 he finished his habilitation in Macromolecular Chemistry at Bayreuth. After a research stay at GE Global Research, USA, he joined as Professor for Applied Functional Polymers at the University of Bayreuth in 2006. His research interests include self-assembly and multi-scale functional control in organic devices using organic semiconductors and functional block copolymer architecture.

 	Scheme 1  Different donor acceptor active layer morphologies between the devices` electrodes. The left drawing depicts a polymer blend morphology with undefined and inhomogeneous domains. In the middle and at the right, schematic active layer morphologies of disordered and vertically aligned microphase separated block copolymer thin films are shown. Dark and light gray domains correspond to the donor and the acceptor phase, respectively.	 

 	Scheme 2  Different donor–acceptor block copolymer architectures reported in the literature. Conjugated main chain or side chain segments provide the donor function while the acceptor function is taken care of side-chain fullerene polymer blocks or conjugated segments. a) Rod-coil block copolymer DEH-PPV-b-P(BA-stat-C60MS) by Hadzioannou et al. b) Side-chain block copolymer by Frechet et al. c) Rod-coil block copolymer P3HT-b-C60 by Jo et al. d) Rod-coil block copolymer P3HT-b-C60 by Wudl et al.e) P3HT-main-chain multiblock copolymers by Hiorns et al., f) All-conjugated triblock copolymer by Scherf et al. g) All-conjugated multiblock copolymer (DBAB)n by Bonner et al.	 

 	Scheme 3  Various amorphous-crystalline donor–acceptor block copolymers synthesised by nitroxide mediated radical polymerisation. The side-chain crystallinity in PPerAcr is caused by the strong π–π interaction of the PBI units. a) PvTPA-b-PPerAcr: poly(triphenylamine)-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylat), PvDMTPA-b-PPerAcr: poly[bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-4′-vinylphenylamine]-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylat), b) PvDMTPD-b-PPerAcr: poly[N,N′-bis(4-methoxyphenyl)-N-phenyl-N′-4-vinylphenyl-(1,1′biphenyl)-4,4′-diamine]-b-poly(perylene bisimide acrylat), c) G2-b-PPerAcr: second generation dendritic-linear block copolymer comprised of an amorphous TPA dendron and side-chain crystalline PPerAcr.	 

 	Fig. 1  a) Schematic depiction of the estimated energy levels in eV. b) Transfer characteristics of PPerAcr before and after annealing above the Tm (drain voltage 20 V) (positive gate voltage) and of PvTPA, PvDMTPA and PvDMTPD after spin casting from toluene (negative gate voltage). The HOMO value changed only slightly from 5.2 eV in PvTPA to 5.0 eV in PvDMTPA and PvDMTPD, but the gain in charge carrier mobility was almost two orders of magnitude, which improved the performance of the cell considerably in this hole conductor series.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphology and device performance of a PvTPA-b-PPerAcr vs. its analogous blend. a) Cross sectional TEM of active layers of the PvTPA:PPerAcr blend and b) of the PvTPA-b-PPerAcr block copolymer (BC). c) Optical density and photoluminescence quenching. d) External quantum efficiency (EQE) of these same films. The films are stained with RuO4, bright regions in a) and b) are due to PPerAcr domains. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69	 

 	Scheme 4  Double-crystalline block copolymers based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) P3HT and perylene bisimide by Emrick et al. (a), Frechét et al. (b), Segalman et al. (c) and Thelakkat et al. (d)	 

 	Fig. 3  Photovoltaic performance of P3HT-b-PPerAcr block copolymers of different molecular weights of 16 kg/mol (1) and 30 kg/mol (2) after processing from chlorobenzene solutions. a) J-V-curves under AM 1.5G conditions (100 mW/cm2) and b) external quantum efficiency EQE. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright [2009], American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Scheme 5  Monodisperse liquid-crystalline donor acceptor block co-oligomers by Wang et al.	 
Footnote
† Present address: Melville Laboratory for Polymer Synthesis, Department of Chemistry, Lensfield Road, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1EW, United Kingdom, E-mail: mailto:ms928@cam.ac.uk

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
