Near-infrared random lasing realized in a perovskite CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 thin film   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC02818G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC02818G
(Communication)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8373-8379Near-infrared random lasing realized in a perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 thin film†

        
          
            Zhi-Feng 
            Shi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xu-Guang 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ting-Ting 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yong-Tao 
            Tian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuan-Tao 
            Zhang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xin-Jian 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Guo-Tong 
            Du
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Physics and Laboratory of Material Physics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, China. E-mail: shizf@zzu.edu.cn; lixj@zzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-371-67766629;   Tel: +86-150-9333-9165
bState Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Qianjin Street 2699, Changchun 130012, China.  Fax: +86-431-85168270;   Tel: +86-139-4419-3954
Received 
      6th July 2016
    , Accepted 17th August 2016First published on 17th August 2016AbstractIn this paper, we present a detailed investigation on the optical properties of a solution-processed organic–inorganic halide perovskite CH3NH3PbI3 thin film. Using temperature-dependent photoluminescence measurements, a structural phase transition from the tetragonal to orthorhombic phase states was observed at a critical temperature of ∼160 K. Our results revealed an exciton binding energy of 45.5 ± 12.6 meV and an optical phonon energy of 37 ± 5.9 meV, along with an abnormal blue-shift of the bandgap in the high-temperature tetragonal phase. Interestingly, under high density optical pumping, a coherent random lasing action was observed at room-temperature with a threshold energy of 102 μJ cm−2, which can be ascribed to the high optical gain and strong multiple scattering provided by the polycrystalline gain boundary in random gain media. The results obtained on the unique optical properties of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin film support the potential of such organic–inorganic perovskites for use in novel and low-cost semiconductor laser applications.
Introduction
Solution-processed organic–inorganic halide perovskites (CH3NH3PbX3, MAPbX3, X = I, Br, Cl) are fascinating for their great capabilities in the cost-effective and large-scale manufacturing of optoelectronic devices.1–3 This upsurge was initially driven by the perovskite photovoltaic field that achieved a remarkable power conversion efficiency above 20% in the short term.4 Compared to the intensive efforts in solar cell applications, the optical properties of hybrid halide perovskites have been less investigated. Given the rapid rise in performance of perovskite photovoltaic devices and their applications in electroluminescent devices, exploring the optical properties of such materials is becoming an important issue. Therefore, a small number of studies focused on the excitonic properties and carrier recombination lifetime of such perovskite materials have been performed to investigate their inherent optical properties, revealing the optoelectronic processes accompanied by established theoretical models.5–7 Recent studies have estimated values of the exciton binding energy (Eb) of MAPbI3 ranging from 20 to 50 meV because the exciton characteristics of hybrid perovskites are sensitive to the synthesis, composition and structure details.7,8 It can be expected that a high optical gain would make these materials promising candidates for light-emitting diodes and low-cost coherent light sources that can be easily tuned across the entire visible spectrum.9 Up to now, optically pumped lasing in well-defined perovskites has been well demonstrated in single crystalline MAPbX3 nanostructures with regular cavity shapes, which support a Fabry–Perot and/or whispering gallery mode cavity laser.10–13 Besides, optically pumped lasing realized in solution-processed MAPbX3 polycrystalline thin films was also reported in Deschler's and Xing's studies.14,15 Deschler et al. constructed a vertical laser cavity by using a dielectric bottom mirror and an evaporated gold as the top mirror, and demonstrated the operation of optically pumped lasing with a Fabry–Perot resonance mode.14 In Xing's study, excellent coherent light emission properties were reported from spontaneous emission to amplified spontaneous emission with increasing pumping intensity, and the wavelength-tunability of the amplified spontaneous emission was also demonstrated.15 However, the lasing action in irregular and nanosized MAPbX3, random lasing, which has the potential to be infiltrated into biological tissues and to serve in pinpoint detection, has been rarely explored yet. As it is well known, random lasing is a phenomenon that has been discovered in some disordered media, such as ZnO, rhodamine dye, etc.16–18 An unique advantage of random lasers compared with conventional lasers lies in their low-cost and simple processing technology, so they can be realized in coatings on the surface of arbitrary shapes, thus finding applications in displays and lighting.17 In this sense, the combination of perovskites and random lasers shall have a very bright future in practical applications.
In this work, we report on the steady-state optical properties of a solution-processed MAPbI3 thin film by using temperature-dependent and excitation power-dependent PL measurements. A structural phase transition at ∼160 K was revealed by examining the temperature dependence of the peak positions and widths, and the corresponding Eb of ∼45.5 ± 12.6 meV and optical phonon energy of ∼37 ± 5.9 meV were extracted by fitting the obtained experimental data. By means of optical pumping with a pulsed laser, near-infrared (NIR) coherent random lasing was observed at room-temperature (RT) with a threshold energy of 102 μJ cm−2, suggesting significant potential for future applications in optoelectronics.
Experimental
For the synthesis of the MAPbI3 thin film, commercially available indium tin oxide (ITO, 8 Ω per square resistance) glass was used as the substrate, which was pre-cleaned with acetone, ethyl alcohol, and de-ionized water several times. And the preparation process of MAPbI3 was carried out in a nitrogen-filled glove box. In the experiment, a two-step spin-coating method was employed. Firstly, a PbI2 film was prepared by spin-coating the PbI2 solution (1 mol L−1, dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide) on ITO glass at 500 rmp for 5 s and 3000 rmp for 20 s, and then dried at 100 °C for 10 min in the glove box. Secondly, a 200 μL portion of the MAI solution dissolved in 2-propanol at a concentration of 0.05 mol L−1 was dropped on the PbI2-coated ITO glass, and then the sample was spun at 500 rmp for 5 s and 2000 rmp for 20 s, followed by annealing on a hot plate at 100 °C for 10 min to evaporate the solvent and for a better coverage.
The microstructures of the products were investigated using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; JSM-6700F). The crystallinity characterization was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Panalytical X'Pert Pro). Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) together with SEM was utilized to study the composition of the MAPbI3 thin film. The absorption spectra of the products were measured using a Shimadzu UV-3150 spectrophotometer. The steady-state PL spectra were recorded at different temperatures by using a double grating spectrofluorometer (Horiba; Fluorolog-3) equipped with a closed-cycle helium cryostat (Jannis CCS-100) and a digital temperature controller (LakeShore-325) to provide a continuous temperature variation from 10 to 300 K. The excitation wavelength was set to 467 nm, with a bandpass of 3 nm. The power-dependent steady-state PL measurement was performed by using a He–Cd laser as the excitation source with a laser line of 325 nm. For high density excitation, the excitation source was replaced by a frequency-tripled Nd:YAG laser (λ = 355 nm). The pulse width and repetition rate of the laser were 1 ns and 1000 Hz, respectively, and the excitation laser was guided and focused to a spot of 1.5 mm in diameter.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a presents the typical surface morphology of a MAPbI3 layer, which displays a full surface coverage featuring evenly distributed cuboids. And the average cuboid size is determined to be ∼200 nm. From the corresponding cross-sectional SEM image of the MAPbI3 thin film produced (shown in the inset of Fig. 1a), one can clearly observe that the cuboids are densely packed with a thickness of about 450 nm. The formation and structural characteristics of the MAPbI3 thin film were further confirmed by the XRD 2θ pattern shown in Fig. 1b. The characteristic and dominant diffraction peaks at 14.35° and 28.66° could be assigned to the (110) and (220) planes of crystalline MAPbI3, suggesting the formation of a tetragonal perovskite structure (space group I4/mcm, a = 8.896 Å, c = 12.698 Å).19 Analysis of the peak full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) using the Debye–Scherrer equation provides an estimated crystalline size of ∼190 nm, and the data are in quite reasonable agreement with the small particles observed in the top-view SEM image of the MAPbI3 layer. Further, we performed EDS measurements to determine the Pb/I atom ratio in the MAPbI3 thin film produced. As shown in Fig. 1c, no other chemical impurities were detected except for the well-known compositions, and the incorporated Pb and I elements have a molar ratio of 1:2.89. Considering the appearance of a weak signal of the PbI2 phase (Fig. 1b), the non-stoichiometric ratio of perovskite product in a sense is understandable. To evaluate the optical properties of the MAPbI3 thin film, absorption and PL spectra were both characterized at RT in the visible region. As shown in Fig. 1d, the absorption spectrum has an obvious absorption onset at about 781 nm, which is agreement with the previously reported results on solution-processed MAPbI3 films.3 The purple line displays the corresponding PL spectrum of the MAPbI3 thin film. A strong NIR emission, centered at ∼771 nm, can be observed when the perovskite product was excited by a 467 nm continuous-wave laser, and no obvious sub-bandgap emission typically associated with the defects in perovskites was detected, thus evidencing a high-quality perovskite product with a low defect density. Using the integrating sphere system, we obtained a relatively high PL quantum efficiency of about 22%, indicating few nonradiative decay pathways in the resulting MAPbI3 thin film.
 Fig. 1  (a) SEM images, and (b) XRD 2θ scans of the MAPbI3 thin film. (c) EDS spectra of the obtained MAPbI3 product. The inset shows the corresponding photograph of the MAPbI3 sample. (d) Absorption, and PL spectra measured at RT (300 K) of the MAPbI3 thin film. 
In order to better understand the optical transition mechanisms of the resulting MAPbI3 thin film, temperature-dependent PL measurements were carried out with the temperature ranging from 300 K (RT) to 77 K. As shown in Fig. 2a, a strong emission peak at ∼771 nm dominates the PL spectrum at 300 K, which is generally assigned to the free exciton or free carrier related recombination.14,20 As the temperature decreases from 300 K to 160 K, the corresponding emission intensity increases accordingly, accompanied by a continuous red-shift of the emission peak. This phenomenon is a trend opposite to the well-known Varshni relation, and may be due to the change in the material properties. This counterintuitive behaviour was also observed in CuCl(Br/I) semiconductors, and the interplay between the electron–phonon renormalization and thermal expansion was presumably the main cause because the above two factors have opposite effects on the bandgap of semiconductors.21 As the temperature decreases further, the dominant emission peak begins to blue-shift, and the corresponding emission intensity also increases monotonously (shown in Fig. 2b). More importantly, a new emission peak at the high-energy side emerges, with the peak position at around 746 nm. Such an anomalous and interesting behavior has been observed in previous studies, and maybe due to the structural phase transition of organometal halide perovskites in different temperature regions, in detail, a structural phase transition at 160 K from the high-temperature tetragonal phase to the low-temperature orthorhombic phase (shown in Fig. 2c).19,22,23 The high-temperature tetragonal phase, which contributes to the emission peak at 759–791 nm, corresponds to the collective rotation (around the c-axis) of each PbI6 octahedron from its symmetric position in the simple cubic structure, while the low-temperature orthorhombic phase, giving the emission peak at 746 nm, corresponds to the tilting of PbI6 octahedra out of the ab plane. The above discussion is consistent with the theoretical calculation results, which reveal that the orthorhombic phase possesses a bigger bandgap than the tetragonal phase.24 An additional observation is that the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 product still exists although the temperature is as low as 77 K, which indicates an incomplete phase transition and is also the signal of phase coexistence in such solution-processed hybrid perovskites. The above discussions of the phase coexistence phenomenon can be further confirmed by temperature-dependent XRD measurements (Fig. S1, ESI†) performed at three typical temperature points (300, 160, and 77 K).
 Fig. 2  (a) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the MAPbI3 thin film measured from 160 to 300 K. (b) The evolution of PL spectra for the MAPbI3 thin film measured at different temperatures (77 to 160 K). (c) Shift of the photon energy of the MAPbI3 thin film as a function of the measured temperature (77 to 300 K), showing a structural phase transition at ∼160 K. (d) Experimental data and fitting curve of photon energy in the temperature range of 160–300 K. (e) Integrated PL intensity, and (f) FWHM of the MAPbI3 layer as a function of temperature. 
It is noteworthy that a shoulder on the low-energy side, ∼813 nm, begins to emerge as the temperature decreases to 100 K and below, and the corresponding proportion in the spectra gradually increases, which can be more clearly observed in Fig. S2 and Table S1 (ESI†). Herein, we take the PL spectrum at 77 K as the research object, and it was consistently fitted by Gaussian distributions (Fig. S3, ESI†) centered at around 746, 780, and 813 nm, respectively. As deduced from foregone research, the low-energy PL tail at 813 nm could be assigned to trap-mediated radiative recombination.25 In our case, the MAPbI3 polycrystalline thin film is characterized by small crystallites with a high distribution density. Such crystals lack well-defined facets and are randomly packed, and the interfacial areas between these poorly defined crystallites are likely the locations of trap states. In other words, trap-mediated radiative recombination or self-trapped excitons critically depend on the dimensionality of the crystalline system. In addition, from the temperature quenching process of trap-mediated emission, one can observe the trend of thermal occupation of the free exciton states at the cost of self-trapped exciton states at high temperature, which may be due to the smaller binding energy of trapped excitons. Of course, the energetics of the undesired trap states are also affected by the phase transitions, which most likely derive from the associated alteration in the electronic band structure that may lead to different energy offsets between band edges and trap levels.
Considering the fact that the tetragonal phase of MAPbI3 is stable in the temperature range of 160–300 K, we further investigated its physical parameters, bandgap, Eb, and exciton–phonon interaction based on the obtained PL data. As shown in Fig. 2d, we plotted the photon energy of the dominant emission peak as a function of temperature, and the temperature sensitivity of the photon energy was analyzed according to the empirical express, ET = E0 + αT, where ET is the measured photon energy, E0 is the fitting parameter at T = 0, and α is the temperature sensitivity coefficient. A typical value of the fitted α was calculated as 0.251 ± 0.013 meV K−1. Further, we plotted the integrated PL intensity in the temperature range of 160–300 K as a function of temperature to determine the Eb of the MAPbI3 product. As shown in Fig. 2e, the nearly exponential increase of the PL intensity can be assigned to the thermal ionization of excitons and thermally activated nonradiative recombination mechanisms. The overall temperature quenching behavior can be described by the equation:26 (1)where I0 is the emission intensity at 0 K, A is a proportional constant, and Eb is the exciton binding energy of the thermal quenching process. The best fitting, as shown in Fig. 2e, gives the value of Eb as 45.5 ± 12.6 meV. The obtained result is in good agreement with the previously reported values measured or evaluated by various experimental and theoretical pathways.5,23,27 Theoretically, the relatively high Eb of MAPbI3 in our case ensures exciton survival well above RT, highlighting the strong potentiality of this material for the development of exciton-related optoelectronic devices.
In addition, we investigated the linewidth broadening behavior of the PL emission peak (160–300 K) of MAPbI3 to examine the exciton–phonon interaction in the carrier recombination process, and the summarized data (shown in Fig. 2f) are fitted using the independent Boson model:28 (2)where Γ0 is the inhomogeneous broadening contribution, σ and Γop are the exciton–acoustic phonon interaction and exciton–optical phonon contribution to the linewidth broadening, respectively, and ℏωop is the optical phonon energy. One can see from the equation that the first term Γ0 is the dominant contributor to Γ(T) at low temperature levels. And at relatively high temperature levels, the contributions from acoustic and optical phonons dominate over that of Γ0, inducing a non-linear increase of the linewidth ultimately. Herein, an assumption was made that the contribution to linewidth broadening from the acoustic phonons could be neglected because the emission peak is characterized by a single radiative recombination pathway in the temperature range of 160–300 K, that is to say, the value of σ in eqn (2) is defined as 0. Given the energies of Γ0, Γop, and ℏωop in MAPbI3 being nearly independent of temperature, their constant values are found to be 40 ± 3.6 meV, 105 ± 30.2 meV, and 37 ± 5.9 meV, respectively. It is worth mentioning that the value of ℏωop obtained above matches well with the recent observation of Quarti et al.,29 and the corresponding energy is related to the torsion mode of organic cations in perovskites.
To better understand the emission mechanisms of the MAPbI3 thin film produced, we performed the power-dependent PL measurement and adjusted the excitation power by one order of magnitude, and the corresponding PL spectra are plotted in Fig. 3a. It can be seen that, in the whole range of excitation power, the shape and peak position of the emission remain unchanged. The integrated PL intensity of the emission peak is also plotted against the excitation power in Fig. 3b on a log–log scale. It is known that in direct bandgap semiconductors and under non-resonant excitation conditions, the PL intensity is a power-law function of the excitation power,30IPL = IβEX, where β denotes the non-linear component. By fitting the experimental data, a superlinear relation with β ∼ 1.29 holds for the curve, which affirms the excitonic characteristics of the spontaneous emission from the MAPbI3 thin film (note that 1 < β < 2 accounts for the recombination of excitons including free excitons and bound excitons).31 Besides, an additional observation is that the bandwidth of the emission peak monotonically increases with the excitation power, as illustrated in Fig. 3c. Such a band broadening effect suggests the evolution of a carrier recombination channel in MAPbI3. Herein, we attribute the interesting phenomenon to the contribution of free carrier recombination (a higher energy tail at ∼1.727 eV), which occurs at relatively high excitation levels in general and acts as a competitor to exciton-related recombination (Fig. S4, ESI†). Due to the screening effect of free carriers by high-density excitation, the Eb of perovskites will be reduced and in such a case excited states will tend to dissociate into free carriers rather than recombination radiatively, and the direct consequence is that the contribution/component of free carrier recombination in spatial spectra increases with the excitation power. The coexistence of exciton and free carrier recombinations in the PL spectra has been observed in other materials with their Eb comparable to or slightly higher than the RT thermal ionization energy (∼26 meV),32 but this is not the case for the MAPbBr3 material because of its relatively higher Eb than MAPbI3. We further performed the power-dependent PL measurement at 170 K and also plotted the integrated PL intensity against the excitation power, (seen in Fig. S5, ESI†), and a smaller value was derived to be ∼1.20, which can be interpreted by the reduced thermal dissociation of excitons at low temperature. The excellent exciton-related emission of the MAPbI3 material makes its suitable for use in optoelectronic device applications, such as light-emitting diodes and laser diodes, because a high optical gain could be guaranteed by the exciton effects of PL characteristics.
 Fig. 3  (a) Steady-state PL spectra recorded under excitation powers from 0.1 to 3.0 mW. (b) The relationship between the integrated PL intensity and the excitation power. (c) The relation between the bandwidth of the emission peak and the excitation power. 
The MAPbI3 thin film also demonstrates a significant light enhancement for lasing with a low threshold under high density optical pumping by a pulsed laser. Fig. 4 shows the emission characteristics of the MAPbI3 thin film under different optical pumping energies ranging from 92 to 535 μJ cm−2 at RT. Under low optical pumping energy, only very broad spontaneous emission spectra can be observed with the spectra centered at ∼775 nm. As the pumping energy increases, some dramatic sharp peaks with a linewidth as narrow as ∼0.4 nm emerge from the broad spontaneous peak. Upon further increasing the pumping energy to higher values, the number and intensity of the sharp peaks also increase. Moreover, the dependence of the integrated emission intensity on the pumping energy is given in the inset of Fig. 4, and the observed non-linear increase of the emission intensity is an indicator of the lasing phenomenon from the MAPbI3 thin film and the corresponding lasing threshold is determined to be 102 μJ cm−2.
 Fig. 4  PL spectra of the MAPbI3 thin film recorded at RT as a function of the optical pumping energy. The inset is the dependence of the integrated PL intensity on the pump energy showing the lasing threshold. 
The realization of lasing action in the MAPbI3 thin film produced without any artificially designed resonant cavity prompts us to consider the possible resonance model because it is well known that the lasing action requires appropriate optical feedback. Herein, a random lasing mode is proposed for the following discussion, considering four aspects mainly. (1) The shape and size of the MAPbI3 crystalline grains in our case are difficult to support either a Fabry–Perot or a whispering gallery mode cavity because the laser oscillation action depends strongly on the morphology of the gain media. (2) From the spectra characterizations shown in Fig. 4, one detail is important to note: the irregular evolution of the observed peaks shows direct evidence of the determined random lasing action; with the increase of the pumping energy, the position of the lasing peaks is randomly changed, and the wavelength spacing between two adjacent peaks does not have a fixed value. The above features elucidate the intrinsic traits of a random lasing mode.16,33 (3) Angle-dependent PL measurements on optically pumping lasing at the same pumping energy were carried out for further verification. As shown in Fig. 5a, both spectra display distinct lasing peaks with different peak positions and linewidths although the measurement conditions are the same, manifesting a random lasing action rather than a specific resonant mode.34 (4) The dependence of the excitation area (Ath) on the lasing threshold (Pth) under a constant pumping energy was also investigated and the obtained data are plotted in Fig. 5b on a logarithmic scale. As the excitation area increases, the corresponding Pth gradually decreases. And a good fit for the experimental data could be found by using the empirical formula Pth = K·A−xth, where K is a constant. The best fitting yields a typical x value of ∼0.68. A functional relation Ath2/3 = K·Pth−1 can be therefore achieved by simple derivation of the above equation. As deduced from foregone research, the threshold characteristics in our case are in good agreement with the coherent random laser theory,35 in which the relationship Ath2/3 ∼ Pth−1 is satisfied on the premise that the gain media behave like a quasi-three-dimensional random model. Therefore, it is concluded that the lasing action observed in MAPbI3 can be classified as random lasing.
 Fig. 5  (a) Lasing emission spectra of the MAPbI3 sample taken from different placement angles relative to the detector. The recording configuration is shown in the inset. (b) Variation of the lasing threshold as a function of the excitation area on a logarithmic scale. (c) A schematic diagram of the formation of a closed-loop laser cavity via random scattering provided by the polycrystalline grain boundary. 
The proposed random lasing mechanism is schematically depicted in Fig. 5c, in which MAPbI3 crystalline grains, randomly arranged with a somewhat loose morphology, can be regarded as both the random gain media and multiple scattering units. The light emission obtained undergoes multiple random scatterings at the high-density grain boundaries. On some occasions, the transmitted photons can return to a scattering path from which they were scattered before, forming closed-loop cavities.16,33,36 When the optical gain exceeds the loss, lasing oscillation occurs at the resonant frequency of the corresponding feedback loop. As the light feedback path distributes randomly in size and direction in the MAPbI3 thin film, the light transmission/oscillation process in the gain media does not solely, in turn, result in non-uniform spacings between adjacent peaks in PL spectra under above-threshold pumping energies, and also in a multidirectional laser output.
There are still some additional points involved in the investigations on the optical properties of MAPbI3 that deserve comments herein. Firstly, it is worth mentioning that most random lasing has only been achieved in wide bandgap semiconductors with a high Eb, implying a high exciton oscillation strength, such as ZnO and SnO2. The observation of NIR lasing from the MAPbI3 thin film can be ascribed to the high optical gain and excellent light scattering capability, pointing toward potential optoelectronic applications of such materials. Secondly, due to the well-known hypersensitivity of lead perovskite materials in air with moisture and their poor thermal stability, the perovskite-type hybrids are easily decomposed after a long period of storage or a high-density pumping process, and such a chemical reaction process is irreversible even when the resulting perovskites are annealed again. Therefore, it is difficult for us at present to optically pump perovskites substantially above the threshold for a long time or such materials cannot survive under a high excitation level. Thus, the lack of consistency and stability is the barrier to be overcome for their future application. Although there have been some initial studies of stability in perovskite light emitters, there is still much to learn from the large body of work on stabilizing perovskite solar cells. Thirdly, from the application point of view, it is more meaningful to fabricate perovskite-based random laser diodes undoubtedly. Early organic conjugated polymer lasers were demonstrated in the 1990s, pioneering a field of solution-processed semiconductor light emitters.37 Now, over two decades later, the field of light emission is still in search of a solution-processed material capable of electrically driven lasing. More importantly, although perovskites have shown initial promise in their applications for light emission, much remains to be done before these materials can realize the ultimate goal of low-threshold electrically driven lasing in continuous-wave mode.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we have investigated the optical properties of a solution-processed MAPbI3 thin film in detail using temperature-dependent and excitation power-dependent PL measurements. A tetragonal-to-orthorhombic structural phase transition was observed within a cooling process from high to low temperatures, and the critical temperature is ∼160 K. The optical characteristics of the PL emission peaks and the anomalous shifts of the peak positions are highly correspondent with the phase states in MAPbI3 at different temperature levels. Moreover, we further estimated the Eb (45.5 ± 12.6 meV) and optical phonon energy (37 ± 5.9 meV) of MAPbI3 in the high-temperature tetragonal phase based on the experimental data. More importantly, NIR lasing action was achieved from the MAPbI3 thin film under optical pumping at RT. Such lasing mechanisms were identified as multimode random lasing based on further experimental verification. Our investigations demonstrate the unique optical properties of such organic–inorganic perovskites, promoting their future application in cost-effective coherent light sources and suggesting new opportunities.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61176044 and 11504331), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2015M582193), the Science and Technology Research Project of Henan Province (162300410229), the Postdoctoral Research Sponsorship in Henan Province (2015008), the Outstanding Young Talent Research Fund of Zhengzhou University (1521317001), and the Startup Research Fund of Zhengzhou University (1512317003).
Notes and references
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Song, J. H. Li, X. M. Li, L. M. Xu, Y. H. Dong and H. B. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, X. G. Sun, D. Wu, T. T. Xu, S. W. Zhuang, Y. T. Tian, X. J. Li and G. T. Du, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10035 RSC .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu and J. Seo, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D. Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 Search PubMed .
T. S. Kao, Y. H. Chou, C. H. Chou, F. C. Chen and T. C. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 231108 CrossRef .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Sum and N. Mathews, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2518 CAS .
B. R. Sutherland and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 295 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Zhu, Y. P. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. M. Li, J. Z. Song, L. Xiao, H. B. Zeng and H. D. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Liu, S. T. Ha, Q. Zhang, M. D. I. Mata, C. Magen, J. Arbiol, T. C. Sum and Q. H. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland, M. M. Adachi, C. T. O. Wong and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D. D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. F. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cao, Y. G. Zhao, S. T. Ho, E. W. Seelig, Q. H. Wang and R. P. H. Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 2278 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Wiersma, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, 259 CrossRef .
Z. F. Shi, Y. T. Zhang, X. C. Xia, W. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Dong, B. L. Zhang and G. T. Du, Nanoscale, 2013, 113, 5080 RSC .
W. G. Kong, Z. Ye, Z. Qi, B. P. Zhang, M. Wang, A. R. Iman and H. Z. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16405 RSC .
F. Yuan, Z. X. Wu, H. Dong, B. Xia, J. Xin, S. Y. Ning, L. Ma and X. Hou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 261106 CrossRef .
P. Dey, J. Paul, J. Bylsma, D. Karaiskaj, J. M. Luther, M. C. Beard and A. H. Romero, Solid State Commun., 2013, 165, 49 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, A. Bera, C. Ma, Y. M. Du, Y. Yang, L. Li and T. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22476 RSC .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11566 CAS .
X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, D. Niesner, H. M. Zhu, Z. Norman, J. S. Owen, O. Yaffe, B. J. Kudisch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Jiang, H. Jung and K. Ploog, J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 64, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rudin, T. L. Reinecke and B. Segall, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 11218 CrossRef CAS .
C. Quarti, G. Grancini, E. Mosconi, P. Bruno, J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 5, 279 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Schmidt, K. Lischka and W. Zulehner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 8989 CrossRef .
H. Shibata, M. Sakai, A. Yamada, K. Matsubara, K. Sakurai, H. Tampo, S. Ishizuka, K. K. Kim and S. Niki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 6113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, K. S. Wong and G. K. L. Wong, Proc. SPIE, 1999, 3624, 13 CrossRef CAS  , International Society for Optical Engineering, San Jose, CA, USA.
D. S. Wiersma, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Shi, Y. T. Zhang, X. J. Cui, S. W. Zhuang, B. Wu, X. W. Chu, X. Dong, B. L. Zhang and G. T. Du, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13813 RSC .
S. F. Yu, C. Yuen, S. P. Lau and H. W. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3244 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Ma, P. L. Chen, D. S. Li, Y. Y. Zhang and D. R. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 251109 CrossRef .
N. Tessler, G. J. Denton and R. H. Friend, Nature, 1996, 382, 695 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc02818gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) SEM images, and (b) XRD 2θ scans of the MAPbI3 thin film. (c) EDS spectra of the obtained MAPbI3 product. The inset shows the corresponding photograph of the MAPbI3 sample. (d) Absorption, and PL spectra measured at RT (300 K) of the MAPbI3 thin film.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the MAPbI3 thin film measured from 160 to 300 K. (b) The evolution of PL spectra for the MAPbI3 thin film measured at different temperatures (77 to 160 K). (c) Shift of the photon energy of the MAPbI3 thin film as a function of the measured temperature (77 to 300 K), showing a structural phase transition at ∼160 K. (d) Experimental data and fitting curve of photon energy in the temperature range of 160–300 K. (e) Integrated PL intensity, and (f) FWHM of the MAPbI3 layer as a function of temperature.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Steady-state PL spectra recorded under excitation powers from 0.1 to 3.0 mW. (b) The relationship between the integrated PL intensity and the excitation power. (c) The relation between the bandwidth of the emission peak and the excitation power.	 

 	Fig. 4  PL spectra of the MAPbI3 thin film recorded at RT as a function of the optical pumping energy. The inset is the dependence of the integrated PL intensity on the pump energy showing the lasing threshold.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Lasing emission spectra of the MAPbI3 sample taken from different placement angles relative to the detector. The recording configuration is shown in the inset. (b) Variation of the lasing threshold as a function of the excitation area on a logarithmic scale. (c) A schematic diagram of the formation of a closed-loop laser cavity via random scattering provided by the polycrystalline grain boundary.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc02818g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
