Interfacial passivation of wide-bandgap perovskite solar cells and tandem solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA04330G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA04330G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 21939-21947Interfacial passivation of wide-bandgap perovskite solar cells and tandem solar cells†

        
          
            Rui 
            Xia‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Yibo 
            Xu‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Bingbing 
            Chen‡
c, 
      
        
          
            Hiroyuki 
            Kanda
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Marius 
            Franckevičius
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Rokas 
            Gegevičius
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Shubo 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yifeng 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Daming 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianning 
            Ding
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ningyi 
            Yuan
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Zhao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Cristina 
            Roldán-Carmona
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodan 
            Zhang
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Paul J. 
            Dyson
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Mohammad Khaja 
            Nazeeruddin
          
        
      *d
aState Key Lab of Photovoltaic Science and Technology, Trina Solar, Changzhou, 213031, China
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center for Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Province Cultivation Base for State Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic Science and Technology, Changzhou University, Changzhou, 213164, China. E-mail: nyyuan@cczu.edu.cn
cInstitute of Photoelectronic Thin Film Devices and Technology of Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. E-mail: xdzhang@nankai.edu.cn
dGroup for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Sion, CH-1951, Switzerland. E-mail: Cristina.roldancarmona@epfl.ch; mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch
eDepartment of Molecular Compound Physics, Center for Physical Sciences and Technology, Saulėtekio Avenue 3, LT-10257 Vilnius, Lithuania
fInstitut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
Received 
      22nd May 2021
    , Accepted 19th August 2021First published on 19th August 2021AbstractPerovskite/silicon tandem solar cells offer the potential to surpass the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of single-junction solar devices beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit at relatively low costs. However, obtaining wide-bandgap materials that provide improved efficiency and appropriate stability is very challenging due to their increased trap density and frequent phase instability under light. Here we report stable wide-bandgap (∼1.7 eV) perovskite devices achieving efficiencies of 19.67%, and open-circuit voltages (Voc) above 1.2 V via a suitable combination of vacuum-assisted solution processing (VASP) and interfacial passivation. Such a facile approach can be translated to multiple perovskite compositions, enabling the fabrication of efficient and stable wide-bandgap cells and their integration into monolithic silicon tandem structures with 24.01% PCE, one of the highest efficiencies for n-i-p tandem devices reported so far.
Introduction
Owing to the advantages of high PCE and low fabrication cost, organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted extensive interest in both academic and industrial fields. The certified PCE of single junction PSCs has been boosted to 25.5% in 2020, demonstrating a very rapid development and a potential for commercialization.1–4 Perovskite materials are also ideal components for multi-junction tandem cells due to their easily tunable bandgap via ion exchange.5,6 This allows a better optimization of sunlight absorption to surpass the single-junction PCE limit above 30%,7,8 ensuring a lower levelized cost of electricity. To build a tandem cell, the most promising route relies on processing a wide-bandgap perovskite (1.65–1.75 eV) on top of a lower bandgap material such as silicon, copper indium gallium selenide, or mixed Pb/Sn perovskites.9–11 However, the fast self-assembling crystallization of ionic components favors incomplete coordination for the Pb cage and the promotion of crystal defects accumulated at the grain surfaces.12 This limitation is of particular importance in wider bandgap perovskites (>1.65 eV), needed for highly efficient tandem solar cells, as strong thermalization and non-radiative recombination provide considerable losses in Voc.13–15 In addition, wide-bandgap perovskites are especially prone to low fill factors (FFs), resulting in tandem cell values typically below 77%.16–18
In attempting to reduce crystal defects, several strategies have been applied to enhance the homogeneous nucleation and uniform growth of the crystalline layer. Among them, vacuum assisted solution processing (VASP) has been successfully implemented in iodide rich perovskites, providing an improved crystal size while reducing the bulk defect density.19 The method allowed the fabrication of solar cells with PCE exceeding 20% on 1 cm2 active area without the use of antisolvents, accompanied by a remarkable operational stability even in ambient air.20 An alternative approach relies on material passivation, which eliminates bulk and surface defects by incorporating suitable additives into the perovskite. Among them, interfacial passivation is usually conducted by depositing an additional layer at the top interface, resulting in promoted carrier transport and retarded charge recombination.21–25 In recent years, an extensive list of passivates have been proposed for iodide rich perovskites, notably those based on imidazolium ionic liquids, low dimensional perovskites or polymer additives.26–28 Yet, the list of passivates is limited for wide-bandgap materials, which generally exhibit low photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) and phase instability. This sets the low Voc as the major hindrance, and calls for deeper analysis to provide guidance to discover suitable alternatives for application in wide-bandgap cells.29,30
In this work, we propose a fast and economical solution to amend large bandgap perovskites by using a combination of VASP and surface passivation treatment, using a highly symmetric guanidinium cation (CH6N3Br, termed GuaBr). As previously demonstrated in the literature41–43 this passivate induces the formation of numerous hydrogen bonds, resulting in reduced non-radiative recombination and enhanced thermal resistance, enabling the fabrication of highly efficient wide-bandgap cells (∼1.7 eV) with PCE values exceeding 19.6%. With this strategy, not only the Voc but also the FF are considerably improved, achieving values over 1.22 V and 80% respectively. Our approach provides a material with strong resistance to light-induced degradation, especially prone to occur at high temperatures (85 °C), and the suppression of trap mediated potential barriers impeding carrier transport across interfaces. This methodology has also been tested in a set of perovskite materials with bandgaps ranging from 1.58 to 1.78 eV, demonstrating its general applicability to a broad range of perovskite compositions. Importantly, we additionally verified the facile applicability to tandem structures by fabricating regular Si/perovskite two terminal tandem devices, resulting in an efficiency value of 24% and Voc of up to 1.92 V.
Results and discussion
The device architecture used in this study is illustrated in Fig. 1a.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure. (b) XRD patterns of perovskite films with/without GuaBr treatment. (c) UV-vis absorption (continuous line) and PL (dotted line) spectra excited at 500 nm. (d) Surface SEM images (bar in SEM is 500 nm) and (e) AFM images of films shown in (b). GuaBr was coated from a solution with a concentration of 1 mg mL−1. 
n-i-p PSCs were fabricated on FTO substrates using a previously reported architecture,31 containing TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD as electron- and hole-transport layers (ETL and HTL respectively). Mixed CsxFA1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3 compounds (named hereafter as CsxBr1−y) were prepared by VASP treatment (see ESI, Fig. S1†), followed by the deposition of a very thin layer of GuaBr prior to the HTL spin-coating. We initially employed a perovskite solution of Cs0.15Br0.3 containing a small percentage of PbI2 excess (∼5%), as it is generally required for obtaining improved performances in state-of-the art cells.32 However, in our case, we observed that excess PbI2 (5% mol) was inevitably reacting with GuaBr after the passivation step, promoting its migration through the layer and later reaction with the bulk material (Fig. S2†). We therefore employed stoichiometric films without using PbI2 excess (Fig. 1b). The films treated with GuaBr were stable under thermal treatment, and did not evolve into different phases, with Gua+ mainly passivating the grain surface defects (see later discussion). Fig. 1c depicts the UV-vis absorption as well as photoluminescence (PL) spectra of both types of perovskites. As confirmed by the data, GuaBr treatment has no obvious effect on the optical features, and both systems exhibit broad and intense absorption in their UV-vis spectra, with a similar onset located at ∼1.7 eV. In addition, they have a very homogeneous and pinhole-free polycrystalline morphology, with grain sizes ranging from 100 to 600 nm, (see surface scanning electron microscopy, SEM, images in Fig. 1d). We observed no obvious increment in the crystal sizes after GuaBr treatment, and a considerable decrease in film roughness, as detected by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. 1e). Therefore, although coating with GuaBr has no impact on the optical features, it provides a smoother and more uniform surface, plausibly by filling the inter-grain space and film imperfections, as better illustrated in Fig. S3.† These observations agree with previous reports,33 in which the Gua+ cation is mainly located at the film surface and grain boundaries, and therefore does not react with the perovskite component.
The cross-sectional SEM image of the planar PSC, coated with GuaBr is illustrated in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 2  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a typical device employing GuaBr passivation. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images (left) and EDX mapping of Br component distribution (right) of perovskite films prepared on the FTO/TiO2 substrate with and without GuaBr. (c) UPS spectra and (d) energy band diagram of the perovskite with and without GuaBr passivation. 
We can clearly differentiate a very thin film of 65 nm TiO2, followed by 500 nm of perovskite, covered with spiro-OMeTAD (250 nm)/Au (80 nm). We investigated the distribution of GuaBr in the film by mapping the Br content using energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Films containing FTO/TiO2/perovskite were first analyzed, and later treated with GuaBr (Fig. 2b). Both samples are characterized by having a homogeneous distribution of Br along the film cross-section, without the detection of Br enriched layers at the top surface (as we would have expected from the formation of the GuaBr top layer). At the same time, the absolute Br signal increases considerably after GuaBr treatment. This further suggests that GuaBr diffuses through the grain boundaries instead of staying as an individual top layer, providing strong passivation to both the surface and bulk. We additionally investigated the energetics of the interface by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). The results, summarized in Fig. 2c, show a small change in the perovskite Fermi level (EF) from −3.66 eV to −3.73 eV after coating with GuaBr, together with a shift in the valence band (from 1.66 eV to 1.54 eV with respect to EF). This implies a shift in the valence band (VB) from −5.32 eV (pristine perovskite) to −5.27 eV for the GuaBr coated film, as illustrated in the energy level diagram shown in Fig. 2d. If we compare the PL spectra of the perovskite treated and untreated with Gua+, the PL position is the same in both cases, denoting no impact in the bandgap value induced by Gua+. Therefore, the change in the Fermi level implies the partial alteration of the n-doped character of the perovskite, induced by the deposition of GuaBr. Similar observations have been described in recent publications.44 The coating with specific polymers controls the Fermi-level at the perovskite surface, altering the band structure and the carrier dynamics at the surface. As a consequence, compared to spiro-OMeTAD (HOMO level −5.2 eV), the perovskite interface seems better aligned after coating with GuaBr, which additionally benefits charge transport to the electrode, minimizing energy loss.34
The photovoltaic performance obtained from PSCs before and after GuaBr treatment, measured under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) irradiation, is summarized in Fig. 3. We first investigated the effect of GuaBr using several solution concentrations (1, 3, 5, and 7 mg mL−1, Fig. S4†), and we observed a continuous increase in Voc after GuaBr treatment. However, a clear limitation in Jsc and FF was evident when using concentrations of GuaBr higher than 3 mg mL−1. The best photovoltaic performances, obtained for 1 mg mL−1 GuaBr, are presented in Fig. 3a.
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves, (b) IPCE spectra, and (c) statistics of photovoltaic parameters (20 solar cells per condition) obtained for devices before and after GuaBr passivation (1 mg mL−1). 
We observe an improvement in device efficiency from 18.23% (17.86% on average) to 19.67% (19.02% on average) mainly motivated by changes in Voc and FF. As also confirmed by the statistical analysis presented in Fig. 3c, the current density is very similar in all cases, showing on average less than 1% difference. This is also supported by the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) presented in Fig. 3b, which exhibited values over 80% in the region between 350 and 700 nm, providing a very similar value for the integrated current density. The champion cells of each condition provided current densities of 19.30 mA cm−2 (pristine) and 19.45 mA cm−2 (GuaBr), fully consistent with those obtained in J–V curves. In contrast, both of the Voc and FF values showed important differences after GuaBr treatment, resulting in average values improving from 1.17 V and 0.76 (pristine perovskite) to 1.21 V and 0.79 (GuaBr treatment), respectively. We note that very low hysteresis was observed in both types of cells, which show a hysteresis index of ∼0.073.
The J–V curves corresponding to the champion cells under forward scans are presented in Fig. S5.†
We also investigated the operational stability of wide-bandgap PSCs treated with GuaBr as the passivate. Cells prepared using different concentrations of GuaBr were tested under continuous 1 sun illumination at maximum power point (MPP) tracking (25 °C). As generally reported in the literature, the stability curve of PSCs under MMP tracking is characterized by a fast decay (<100 h) followed by a more stabilized region, both of them clearly identified in our cells. Due to this phenomenon, Cs0.15Br0.3 cells containing the pristine material lose 20% of their initial efficiency within the first 100 h, and degradation continues relatively quickly, losing ∼50% of their PCE after 1000 h of the test (see Fig. 4a). However, those cells treated with GuaBr exhibited a general improvement in their stability, reducing the degradation in both the burn-in and the plateau regions. The best long-term results were achieved for perovskites treated with 1–3 mg mL−1 GuaBr passivate, allowing them to maintain 80% of their initial PCE after 1000 h of the test. Note that any improvement in stabilizing high PCE in wide-bandgap perovskites is crucial for decreasing the levelized cost of electricity in perovskite–Si tandems, which is paramount for them to become an economically attractive option in the future. We here attribute the improvement in durability to the reduced defect density in the bulk and at the surface, and modified energetics at the interface after Gua+ deposition.
 Fig. 4  (a) MPP tracking of non-encapsulated wide-bandgap cells measured at 25 °C in argon. (b) Electric field-dependent average photoluminescence lifetimes of the pristine and GuaBr treated CsxBr1−y perovskite films obtained at different aging times under light illumination at room (top) and elevated 85 °C (bottom) temperature conditions. The average PL lifetimes were obtained from double exponential fits of PL decay kinetics presented in Fig. S7 and S8† according to:  
With this in mind, we additionally investigated the role of GuaBr as a passivating agent in carrier trapping and charge extraction properties. For this purpose, we combined time-resolved photoluminescence (trPL) and voltage-dependent trPL experiments on the fresh and aged perovskite films, and devices stored at room temperature and 85 °C under full sunlight illumination.
Fig. S6† shows the photoluminescence decay kinetics, which were fitted with biexponential functions (see extracted fitting parameters summarized in Table S1†). All perovskite films exhibit a fast decay component which is typically attributed to the electron trapping process, and a long-lasting decay component, associated with Shockley Read Hall (SHR) recombination.35 The PL decay kinetics of the as-prepared perovskites varies depending on whether they were treated with GuaBr. Although all fresh films contain identical long-lived decay components of around 150–160 ns, the short-lived PL decay component is quite sensitive to perovskite composition. Untreated perovskite films exhibit a fast 5.7 ns decay component, whereas it increases up to 9.6 and 40.5 ns when perovskites are treated with 1 and 3 mg mL−1 of GuaBr, respectively. This suggests that the GuaBr treatment suppresses the carrier trapping process thus having a positive effect on the material quality.36–38 We further noticed a slight variation of PL decay kinetics when the perovskites were kept under room temperature conditions up to 600 h. The most pronounced change in PL lifetimes is observed in the untreated perovskite films, showing a decrease in PL lifetime from 166.8 ns (50 h of aging) to 90.9 ns (200 h). The reduced PL lifetime of the slow decay part, and the rise of the relative amplitude of the fast component, indicates that during aging the density of the non-radiative recombination centers is increased both within the bulk and on the surface. This indicates a deterioration of the perovskite quality due to light-induced processes such as migration of halide species or material decomposition during aging. Meanwhile, PL lifetime in GuaBr treated perovskite films is less affected and shows almost unchanged PL decay profiles, which also correlates with the MPP tracking experiments.
To gain further insights into the role of GuaBr treatment in carrier transport properties, we additionally performed electric-field-dependent time-resolved photoluminescence experiments in solar cell devices aged under different conditions. Fig. S7† shows the voltage-dependent PL decay kinetics of PSCs under the applied external voltages ranging from 0 to 2.5 V. The dependences of the average photoluminescence lifetimes, calculated from the double exponential fit on the applied voltage, are summarized in Fig. 4b. It is clear that at room temperature, and before the aging, the average PL lifetimes show very weak voltage dependences in all solar cells, suggesting that charge carrier extraction processes across the interfaces are very similar between devices. This additionally suggests that fresh solar cells have low defect concentration both in the bulk and interfaces, which is beneficial for achieving high-efficiency. Meanwhile, further device aging resulted in a slight reduction of the average PL lifetimes, but a more pronounced electric field-induced PL lifetime quenching becomes noticeable for reference devices after 200 h of aging.
The difference between films becomes more obvious when the cells are exposed to high temperatures (Fig. S8†). This results in an immediate acceleration of the PL decay profiles in all perovskite devices, while being most significant in the untreated perovskite solar cells. The average PL lifetime of the reference devices decreased fivefold in 25 h and was completely quenched after 150 h of aging. Meanwhile, the PL decay in the device employing 1 mg mL−1 of GuaBr decreased only two times during the first 25 h and later remained unchanged, whereas aging has a minimal low influence on the PL decay rate of the device treated with 3 mg mL−1 of GuaBr.
Therefore, assuming that the performance parameters of the devices deteriorate during aging, the decrease in average PL lifetime might be associated with an increased number of defect sites. We note that both electron- and hole-traps at the grain boundaries and interfaces can be formed, leading to non-radiative recombination losses of both electrons and holes.39 However, electric-field dependent PL quenching suggests that in addition to traps, perovskite aging can lead to the formation of potential barriers impeding carrier transport across the interfaces. Because the formation of a potential barrier can be based on trap mediated carrier accumulation, trapped carriers cannot escape deep traps, and due to coulombic repulsion, they form barriers for other carriers. Therefore, in order to reduce the carrier population, an additional field is required to accelerate their transfer through the interface. It is noteworthy that by increasing the GuaBr content in the surface treatment the devices become more resistant against thermally induced photodegradation. This suggests that a certain amount of GuaBr can passivate trap states or even reduce their formation during solar cell aging, which is beneficial for retaining device performance over the long run.
Considering the above results obtained for the Cs0.15Br0.3 absorber, we further extended the application to a series of perovskite compositions, i.e. CsxFA1−xPb(IyBr1−y)3, with the aim of preparing a broad range of wide-bandgaps materials with improved performance and applicability (see detailed information in Tables S2 and S3†). We first adjusted y values to provide bandgaps ranging from 1.59 to 1.76 eV, and later fine-tuned the x content between 0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.25, exhibited in Fig. 5. In the former case, the bandgap values were strongly shifted from 1.752 to 1.698, 1.626, and 1.580 eV after increasing y from 0.6 to 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9 (x = 0.15, Fig. 5a) respectively. Similarly, varying x from 0.1 to 0.25 (y = 0.7) provided a gradual blue shift in the absorption onset from 738.9 to 717.3 nm (shown in Fig. 5c), and a bandgap change from 1.678 (x = 0.1) to 1.698 (x = 0.15), 1.714 (x = 0.2), and 1.729 eV (x = 0.25), respectively. The results demonstrated in Fig. 5b and d confirmed that there is a general improvement in device performance after applying GuaBr passivation, providing a very strong amelioration in Voc and FF (see device parameters in Fig. S9 and S10†).
 Fig. 5  UV-visible absorption and PL spectra of perovskite films with different compositions deposited on glass, (a) is for Cs0.15Br1−y and (b) is for CsxBr0.3. Statistical analysis of the PCE obtained for the PSC applying different perovskite compositions with (filled symbols) and without (open symbols) GuaBr treatment, (c) is for Cs0.15Br1−y and (d) is for CsxBr0.3. 
We additionally verified the application of this approach to tandem architectures by fabricating monolithic Si/perovskite tandem cells. The device architecture consisted of a bottom silicon heterojunction (SHJ) cell covered by a wide-bandgap Cs0.15Br0.2 perovskite, with an active aperture area of 0.509 cm2 (see the device schematic in Fig. 6a). Note that we did not use the pyramid-shaped front surface typical for commercialized devices, which increases considerably the absorbed light and therefore the potential output of the cell. Instead, we prepared home-designed SHJ cells with polished front surfaces, and deposited the perovskite directly on top (n-i-p architecture). This approach provided high simplicity to the fabrication process, enabling the preparation of high-quality layers by using solution based methodologies (see detailed fabrication in the ESI†). We first deposited ITO (used here as the charge recombination layer) on top of the Si- bottom cell, and then SnO2 as the ETL. The perovskite material (light-harvester) was then deposited via the one-step spin-coating method assisted with anti-solvent, and later treated with GuaBr as previously described. We additionally employed a combination of spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx (buffer layer) as the HTM, and indium zinc oxide (IZO) as the transparent conductive electrode, followed by PDMS (antireflection coating), and Au as the metallic contact. The cross-sectional SEM image of a typical tandem device is presented in Fig. 6b. A uniform and homogeneous perovskite layer could be grown on the c-Si(n) substrate, providing a compact and pinhole-free film of ∼700 nm thick. The J–V curves of the tandem cells, with and without incorporating the GuaBr passivate, are displayed in Fig. 6c (see photovoltaic parameters in Table S4†). By using the passivation treatment, the tandem cell exhibited a maximum PCE of 24.01% (Jsc = 17.33 mA cm2; Voc = 1.92 V; FF = 0.723, forward scan), and an average PCE of 21.89% (Jsc = 16.16 mA cm2; Voc = 1.895 V; FF = 0.69; see statistical analysis in Fig. S11†). We note that the efficiency was significantly improved when compared to the reference cell, as using the pristine material leads to a champion PCE value of 22.93%, (19.72%, on average). Similar to the single-junction cells, the hysteresis index for the champion tandem cells is not influenced by the GuaBr treatment, providing a value of 0.115 for the control group and 0.116 for cells passivated with GuaBr. In accordance with our previous data, described for single-junction perovskite top cells, such improvement was mainly related to an increase in Voc after passivation, providing one of the highest PCE values reported in the literature for n-i-p tandem configurations. For comparison, we have listed the silicon/perovskite 2-terminal tandem solar cell data of the n-i-p configuration reported in the literature in Table S5.†40 Interestingly, we detected very similar Jsc values for both top cells, but the Si-subcells showed slight differences according to the top-cell surface treatment (17.37 mA cm−2 using GuaBr versus 17.52 mA cm−2 for non-passivated cells), also detected by an increased light-response in the 800–1000 nm region of IPCE spectra, Fig. 6d.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation and (b) cross-sectional SEM picture of the tandem Si/perovskite solar cell. (c) J–V curves measured under 1 sun AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) obtained for tandem devices with and without GuaBr passivation in the perovskite absorber. (d) IPCE curves of cells presented in (c). 
Conclusions
This work reports the successful combination of VASP and GuaBr passivation applied to wide-bandgap perovskites, enabling the delivery of efficiencies over 19.6% (∼1.7 eV) and increased operational stability. According to trPL and voltage-dependent trPL experiments, devices treated with GuaBr exhibit minimized carrier-trapping processes, and suppressed long-term degradation under light and high temperature (85 °C) conditions, which facilitates the preparation of multiple wide-bandgap perovskites with improved Voc and FF. Our study emphasizes the importance of developing suitable passivation strategies applied to wide-bandgap materials, providing a facile and successful approach easily transferrable to tandem architectures.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1500105), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20200187), and the Key R&D Project of Jiangsu Province (BE2017006-3). The research leading to these results has also received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under grant agreement no. 763977 of the PerTPV project. The authors would like to thank the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF 20021E_186390) for financial support.
References
S. Albrecht and B. Rech, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16196 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png, (accessed February 2021).
T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 828 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E.-C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y.-B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700228 CrossRef .
Y. J. Jiang, I. Almansouri, S. J. Huang, T. Young, Y. Li, Y. Peng, Q. C. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, Y. B. Cheng, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2006, 4, 5679 RSC .
J. Werner, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 5, 1700731 CrossRef .
M. Jošt, L. Kegelmann, L. Korte and S. Albrecht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904102 CrossRef .
Z. Song, C. Chen, C. Li, R. Awni, D. Zhao and Y. Yan, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2019, 34, 093001 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wali, N. K. Elumalai, Y. Iqbal, A. Uddin and R. Jose, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 84, 89 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jošt, L. Kegelmann, L. Korte and S. Albrecht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904102 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y.-H. Jia, H.-H. Fang, M. A. Loi, F.-Y. Xie, L. Gong, M.-C. Qin, X.-H. Lu, C.-P. Wong and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803130 CrossRef .
K. A. Bush, K. Frohna, R. Prasanna, R. E. Beal, T. Leijtens, S. A. Swifter and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 428 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. D. Bastiani, C. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, D. –J. Xue, B. Chen, H. Chen, B. Bahrami, A. H. Chowdhury, A. Johnston, S.-W. Baek, Z. Huang, M. Wei, Y. Dong, J. Troughton, R. Jalmood, A. J. Mirabelli, T. G. Allen, E. V. Kerschaver, M. I. Saidaminov, D. Baran, Q. Qiao, K. Zhu, S. D. Wolf and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kohnen, M. Jošt, A. B. Morales-Vilches, P. Tockhorn, A. Al-Ashouri, B. Macco, L. Kegelmann, L. Korte, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, B. Stannowski and S. Albrecht, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1995 RSC .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, X. Li, J. V. Milić, D. J. Kubicki, N. Pellet, J. Luo, T. LaGrange, P. Mettraux, L. Emsley, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4482 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Cao, J.-P. Wang, H.-H. Fang, M. A. Loi, N. Zhao and C.-P. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701048 CrossRef .
E. Akman and S. Akin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2006087 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Akin, A. Hinderhofer, F. T. Eickemeyer, H. Zhu, J. Seo, J. Zhang, F. Schreiber, H. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. I. Dar and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. Huang, A. Zhao, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 8840 RSC .
D. Luo, R. Su, W. Zhang, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 44 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xia, X. Gao, Y. Zhang, N. Drigo, V. I. E. Queloz, F. F. Tirani, R. Scopelliti, Z. Huang, X. Fang, S. Kinge, Z. Fei, C. Roldán-Carmona, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. J. Dyson, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xia, Z. Fei, N. Drigo, F. D. Bobbink, Z. Huang, R. Jasiūnas, M. Franckevičius, V. Gulbinas, M. Mensi, X. Fang, C. Roldán-Carmona, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. J. Dyson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902021 CrossRef .
Q. Yao, Q. Xue, Z. Li, K. Zhang, T. Zhang, N. Li, S. Yang, C. J. Brabec, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, F. Che, M. Wei, Y. Zhao, M. I. Saidaminov, P. Todorović, D. Broberg, G. Walters, F. Tan, T. Zhuang, B. Sun, Z. Liang, H. Yuan, E. Fron, J. Kim, Z. Yang, O. Voznyy, M. Asta and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3100 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Bush, K. Frohna, R. Prasanna, R. E. Beal, T. Leijtens, S. A. Swifter and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Chen, R. Li, Y. Xu, J. Feng, D. Yang, N. Yuan, W.-H. Zhang, S. Liu and J. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J.-P. C. Baena, J. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, W. Yang, Z. Wang, A. Sadhanala, Q. Hu, R. Su, R. Shivanna, G. F. Trindade, J. F. Watts, Z. Xu, T. Liu, K. Chen, F. Ye, P. Wu, L. Zhao, J. Wu, Y. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, W. Zhang, R. H. Friend, Q. H. Gong, H. J. Snaith and R. Zhu, Science, 2018, 360, 1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Drigo, C. Roldan-Carmona, M. Franckevičius, K.-H. Lin, R. Gegevičius, H. Kim, P. A. Schouwink, A. A. Sutanto, S. Olthof, M. Sohail, K. Meerholz, V. Gulbinas, C. Corminboeuf, S. Paek and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ansari, E. Shirzadi, M. Salavati-Niasari, T. LaGrange, K. Nonomura, J.-H. Yum, K. Sivula, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel, P. J. Dyson and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11428–11433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. Isikgor, F. Furlan, J. Liu, E. Ugur, M. K. Eswaran, A. S. Subbiah, E. Yengel, M. D. Bastiani, G. T. Harrison, S. Zhumagali, C. T. Howells, E. Aydin, M. Wang, N. Gasparini, T. G. Allen, A. Rehman, E. V. Kerschaver, D. Baran and S. D. Wolf, Joule, 2021, 5, 1566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, W. Tang, R. Yuan, Y. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Wu, W. Yin, N. Yuan, J. Ding and W. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 2050 RSC .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, C. Han, B. Shi, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 7, 100045 CrossRef .
N. D. Pham, C. Zhang, V. T. Tiong, S. Zhang, G. Will, A. Bou, J. Bisquert, P. E. Shaw, A. Du, G. J. Wilson and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806479 CrossRef .
A. D. Jodlowski, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, M. Salado, M. Ralaiarisoa, S. Ahmad, N. Koch, L. Camacho, G. de Miguel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 972 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4694 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kanda, N. Shibayama, M. Abuhelaiqa, S. Paek, R. Kaneko, N. Klipfel, A. A. Sutanto, C. Roldan Carmona, A. J. Huckaba, H. Kim, C. Momblona, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17113 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04330g‡ These authors contribute equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure. (b) XRD patterns of perovskite films with/without GuaBr treatment. (c) UV-vis absorption (continuous line) and PL (dotted line) spectra excited at 500 nm. (d) Surface SEM images (bar in SEM is 500 nm) and (e) AFM images of films shown in (b). GuaBr was coated from a solution with a concentration of 1 mg mL−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of a typical device employing GuaBr passivation. (b) Cross-sectional SEM images (left) and EDX mapping of Br component distribution (right) of perovskite films prepared on the FTO/TiO2 substrate with and without GuaBr. (c) UPS spectra and (d) energy band diagram of the perovskite with and without GuaBr passivation.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V curves, (b) IPCE spectra, and (c) statistics of photovoltaic parameters (20 solar cells per condition) obtained for devices before and after GuaBr passivation (1 mg mL−1).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) MPP tracking of non-encapsulated wide-bandgap cells measured at 25 °C in argon. (b) Electric field-dependent average photoluminescence lifetimes of the pristine and GuaBr treated CsxBr1−y perovskite films obtained at different aging times under light illumination at room (top) and elevated 85 °C (bottom) temperature conditions. The average PL lifetimes were obtained from double exponential fits of PL decay kinetics presented in Fig. S7 and S8† according to: 	 

 	Fig. 5  UV-visible absorption and PL spectra of perovskite films with different compositions deposited on glass, (a) is for Cs0.15Br1−y and (b) is for CsxBr0.3. Statistical analysis of the PCE obtained for the PSC applying different perovskite compositions with (filled symbols) and without (open symbols) GuaBr treatment, (c) is for Cs0.15Br1−y and (d) is for CsxBr0.3.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation and (b) cross-sectional SEM picture of the tandem Si/perovskite solar cell. (c) J–V curves measured under 1 sun AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) obtained for tandem devices with and without GuaBr passivation in the perovskite absorber. (d) IPCE curves of cells presented in (c).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta04330g
‡ These authors contribute equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
