Microwave assisted synthesis of CdSe nanocrystals for straightforward integration into composite photovoltaic devices   - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B505891K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B505891K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4367-4372Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMicrowave assisted synthesis of CdSe nanocrystals for straightforward integration into composite photovoltaic devices†

        
          
            Andrea V. 
            Firth
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Ye 
            Tao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dashan 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianfu 
            Ding
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Farid 
            Bensebaa
          
        
      
National Research Council, 1200 Montreal Rd, Ottawa, Canada. E-mail: Andrea.Firth@nrc.ca;  Fax: +1 613 991 2384;   Tel: +1 613 993 9573
Received 
      27th April 2005
    , Accepted 26th July 2005First published on 23rd August 2005AbstractA preparative route for a nanocrystalline CdSe/polymer nanocomposite that is easily integrated into photovoltaic device fabrication has been developed. Microwave assisted synthesis is used to initiate the reaction of relatively safe, inexpensive and air stable precursors. Particles size may be varied from 20 Å to 60 Å in diameter. The CdSe nanocrystals show near band-edge photoemission, are crystalline and may be incorporated into a poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diyl-alt-9-octylcarbazole-3,6-diyl) copolymer. This polymer/CdSe composite can be directly cast, without complicated work-up, for the preparation of photovoltaic devices.
Introduction
Photovoltaic devices based on nanoparticle/polymer blends offer cost effective alternatives to current solar cell technology.1 The use of CdSe nanocrystals in a polymer matrix has been shown to provide active photovoltaic devices.2,3 In this system, the CdSe absorbs light, generates electron–hole pairs, donates holes, and accepts electrons from the polymer. Analogously, the polymer also generates electron–hole pairs, but acts as the hole conducting component. The combination of polymer and inorganic semiconductor is advantageous since a greater portion of the solar spectrum is absorbed. Typically, semiconductor polymers absorb lights in the ultraviolet region, whereas CdSe nanocrystals may be prepared to absorb light throughout the visible range. The resulting mixture has the ability to exploit a significant portion of the solar spectrum. In addition, a large number of interfaces between the hole conducting material and the electron conducting material are obtained with homogeneous distribution throughout the active layer. By incorporating well dispersed heterojunctions, the material is expected to have more efficient charge separation. Extracting charge is facilitated by short paths to the electrodes; as such, film thickness is typically on the order of 100 nm. Such devices have been shown to obtain a power conversion efficiency of 1.8%.4 The preparation of such solar cells is simplified by solution processing, when compared to crystal growth techniques. Solution processing offers advantages in cost savings and promises to be less onerous, less hazardous, and produces less waste.
In this paper we report the development of a method for the preparation of CdSe nanoparticles which makes use of starting materials that are less hazardous than most preparative techniques,5,6 requires only one step under ambient conditions and produces no waste material. The product mixture is directly integrated into active devices after a solvent evaporation step that is required to increase the concentration of nanoparticles in solution. The evaporated solvent is sufficiently clean to be recycled, thus no waste material is generated. In addition the scale of the reaction is conducive to the preparation of large area solar panels.
The group of Gedanken has provided a simple technique for the preparation of CdSe nanoparticles by making use of microwave heating.5 The only drawback to directly applying this technique in our work is that insufficient control over the particle size exists, such that the semiconductor precipitates from solution. This introduces problems when attempting to put solution processing of devices into practice. Several well established methods have been reported for preparing CdSe with precise control of particle size.5–7 Reducing the number of steps in these methods and working under ambient conditions would simplify the fabrication process. We have developed a preparative method by assimilating the best characteristics of both of these approaches. A coordinating solvent with sufficient steric hindrance is included to prevent agglomeration of smaller semiconductor nanoparticles; in addition microwave heating is applied as the means of activating the reaction.
Experimental
Microwave assisted synthesis of CdSe nanoparticles was carried out in a Mars 5 X CEM system with a 2.45 GHz working frequency. Temperature control was provided with a fibre optic thermocouple enclosed in a threaded side arm near the solution. This modification has the advantage of allowing precise adjustment of the reaction temperature to a setting lower than the solvent boiling point and avoids the risk of superheating the solvent. Cd(OAc)2·H2O (0.5 g, 1.9 mmol) and Se (0.15 g, 1.9 mmol) were suspended in cyclohexanone (50 mL). The mixture was heated to 145 °C for varying lengths of time (between 30 seconds and 15 minutes). The solution was decanted from the unreacted starting materials and the volume then reduced to 5 mL by evaporation providing a mixture consisting of approximately 50 mg of CdSe per mL of solvent. CdS, PbS and PbSe can also be prepared by this method. Poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diyl-alt-9-octylcarbazole-3,6-diyl), in a ratio of three fluorene to one carbazole, [P(F3-alt-Cz)], was synthesized by literature methods.8 The energy bandgap of these copolymers is tunable by simply changing the ratio of the fluorene and carbazole groups.8 P(F3-alt-Cz)
				(0.010 g, 6.8 × 10−5 mmol) was introduced to a 2 mL portion of the CdSe product mixture. When P(F3-alt-Cz) was included in situ during CdSe evolution, there was no observable difference in the characteristics of the final product.
X-Ray diffraction patterns were collected on a Bruker D8 diffraction system using Cu-Kα radiation. UV-vis absorption spectra were collected on a Hewlett-Packard 8453 spectrophotometer. Fluorescence spectra were collected on a Spex Fluorolog 3 spectrometer. The TEM samples were prepared by suspending a CdSe precipitate in acetone followed by sonication for several minutes. One drop of the dilute CdSe/acetone suspension was place onto a carbon-coated holey TEM copper grid and was dried in air. The dried grid was then loaded into a double tilt sample holder. The sample was thus examined with a Philips CM20 STEM equipped with a Gatan UltraScan 1000 CCD camera and an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer: INCA Energy TEM 200. TEM images were taken at 200 kV.
Results and discussion
The use of fluorene (F) and carbazole (Cz) copolymers as the hole conducting material was considered suitable, as indicated by previous successful studies.9 This material system also has ideal electron affinity and ionization potential agreement with CdSe (Fig. 1)10 Transfer of electrons to CdSe from the alternating copolymer P(F3-alt-Cz) is favoured, while transfer of holes from P(F3-alt-Cz) to CdSe is marginally preferred. The work function of the aluminium electrode is aligned such that collection of electrons from the conduction band of the CdSe nanocrystals is possible, while the indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode is intended to collect holes from the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of the polymer.
 Fig. 1  Energy diagram for ITO/[(F3-alt-Cz)
					(35 Å CdSe)]/Al devices. 
Microwave heating has the advantage of accurate temperature control with even heating throughout the sample. Conventional heating methods rely on heat transfer from the walls of the reaction vessel and as such will have a less uniform temperature throughout the sample when compared to microwave heating. Evidence exists that quenching the microwaves also quenches particle growth.11 The particle sized was regulated by modifying the reaction time. When the reaction time was restricted to less than one minute it was possible to isolate CdSe nanocrystals with an average diameter of 20 Å. Allowing the reaction to proceed for longer than ten minutes provided material on the order of 60 Å in diameter. This mixture remains stable in solution. The preparation appears resistant to oxygen and moisture, and provides luminescent material (solution quantum yield, 3–9%‡) when prepared and handled in air. Starting materials were used as received from the manufacturer and no attempt was made to dry or purify them.
The nature of the solvent, for this particular reaction, is critical to CdSe nanocrystal formation. Firstly, the solvent acts as a susceptor for the microwave radiation, and as a result, requires a moderately high dipole moment such that the reaction can proceed efficiently. Secondly, the solvent acts as a capping agent to inhibit aggregation. And finally, cyclohexanone is believed to assist in the formation of CdSe by facilitating the reduction of Se0 to Se2−. When cyclohexanone was replaced with a variety of alternate solvents, it was not possible to achieve nanocrystalline CdS, CdSe, PbS or PbSe although bulk material was obtained in the case where dimethylformamide was used as the solvent.
When alternative ketones were used in lieu of cyclohexanone, it became apparent that the relative acidity of the α-carbon of the various ketones influenced the formation of nanocrystals (Table 1). For example, when 2-pentanone or 3-pentanone was the reaction solvent there was no evidence of nanoparticle formation. However when 2,4-pentanedione was substituted for the reaction solvent, CdSe nanocrystals quickly formed, although it was not possible to isolate small particles.
Table 1 Comparison of pKa of the α-hydrogen of the solvent vs. CdSe formation




Solvent
pKa
Boiling point/°C
Reactivity







16.712
155
Nanoparticles formed





8.912
139
Nanoparticles formed





19–2013
101
No visible reaction





19–2013
102
No visible reaction




The relative boiling points of the pentanones were considered as the root cause for the relative activity of these solvents. Further investigation, that included the synthesis of CdS and PbS, established that the low boiling point of the 2-pentanone or 3-pentanone did not correlate to the lack of nanoparticle formation. In cyclohexanone the reaction of Cd(OAc)2 and S proceeds at temperatures below 100 °C as does the reaction of Pb(OAc)2 with S. There was no evidence of nanocrystallite formation in the 2-pentanone or 3-pentanone for these two systems. When a small amount of cyclohexanone was mixed into the pentanone, the reaction was initiated. Subsequent to addition of cyclohexanone, formation of neither PbS nor CdS was evident at the temperatures below 100 °C. These experiments conclude that the low boiling temperature of 2-pentanone or 3-pentanone is not responsible for the inability to form nanoparticles.
The mechanism of the reaction likely follows from tautomerization of the ketone to the enol. This equilibrium can be catalyzed by acid or base. The catalytic group may be a product of the decomposition of Cd(OAc)2. Evidence that acid does form is substantiated with the substitution of CdCl2 for Cd(OAc)2. In this case the reaction proceeds to a given point, and then fails to continue. HCl, being a strong acid, as opposed to HOAc, reaches its equilibrium concentration, and inhibits the further liberation of Cl−.14 When trimethyl amine is added to the reaction mixture, a white precipitate forms (HCl·N(CH2CH3)3) and the formation of CdSe resumes. Since it has been established that HCl does form when CdCl2 is used as the cadmium precursor, it is possible to infer that HOAc forms when Cd(OAc)2 is made the reactant.
Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC-MS) studies of the product mixture provides mass spectra that can be associated with two organic complexes in addition to cyclohexanone. One mass spectrum can be assigned to the cyclohexanone adduct of selenium, Se·2cyclohexanone. A second mass spectrum associated with an organic by-product of cyclohexanone is also evident. This spectrum includes signals attributable to the fragments associated with McLafferty rearrangement, a signature of ketone decomposition. Further investigation of this complex did not establish the identity more accurately. Identifying the nature of both this unknown product and the mechanism by which the reaction proceeds is important in establishing the generality of this process, and its applicability to different material systems. As such the mechanism does merit future exploration.
The scanning electron micrograph (SEM) image depicted in Fig. 2 was taken of a powder sample of CdSe. In three dimensions there appear spherical particles whose size is on the order of 50 nm.
 Fig. 2  SEM image of CdSe powder sample. Scale = 5 µm. 

Fig. 3 presents a low resolution transmission electron micrograph (TEM) image of the as-synthesized CdSe nanoparticles. This 2-D perspective of the sample is consistent with the SEM image. Large spherical assemblies are evident. Closer inspection reveals that the clusters consist of assemblies of hundreds of smaller nanoparticles. These smaller particles are approximately 30 Å in diameter. Fig. 4 is a high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the same as-synthesized nanoparticles showing striations from the lattice images that are the signature of crystalline material. Such assemblies are desirable since an interconnect between nanoparticles does form, allowing for the means by which the electrons may travel to the anode.
 Fig. 3  Bright field TEM image of the as-synthesized CdSe particles. Scale = 50 nm 
 Fig. 4  HRTEM image of the as-synthesize CdSe nanoparticles. Scale = 10 nm. A few particles including a, b and c are circled for clarity. 
Crystallography of individual nanoparticles can be determined by carefully examining the one- (consisting of lines) or two-dimensional (consisting of rays of dots) lattice structures and also by measuring the lattice spacings. It is worth noting that due to the random orientation of the particles, not every particle in the image will reveal a 2-D symmetry lattice. The TEM data give interspacing distance (d) values of 0.342, 0.340, and 0.348 nm for nanoparticles a, b and c respectively (Fig. 4). These values are in agreement with the lattice parameters of a hexagonal structure (a0
				= 0.4299 nm, d002
				= 0.351 nm) and a cubic structure (a0
				= 0.6077 nm and d100
				= 0.351 nm), although electron diffraction data indicate that the cubic structure is the dominant phase. X-Ray diffraction data also showed the presence of both hexagonal and cubic structures.
Absorption studies of both solution and thin film samples of the CdSe establish quantum confinement. The wavelength of the onset of absorption varies from 475 nm to 610 nm depending on the reaction conditions. These values are significantly blue shifted when compared to bulk CdSe. Analysis of the spectra indicates that, although the nanoparticles associate in space into large spheres, their electronic wavefunctions do not overlap and thus the electron system is confined within the individual nanocrystals. Absorption spectra are consistent with nanoparticles on the order of 20 Å to 60 Å in diameter. Comparison of the absorption and emission characteristics of the solution spectra demonstrates that the emission wavelength is red shifted by approximately 0.2 eV from the onset of absorption (Fig. 5). This value is consistent with near band-edge emission and as a result we can be confident that radiative emission is not from deep level traps.§ The full width at half the maximum of the photoluminescence signal was independent of the particle size at 55 ± 5 nm.
 Fig. 5  Absorption (—) and photoluminescence (- - - -) spectra of CdSe nanocrystals in cyclohexanone. 
Thin films of CdSe/polymer composites can be cast directly from the mother solution with only one solvent evaporation step. It was not considered necessary to exchange the capping group from cyclohexanone to pyridine since the inter-particle separation does not become significantly smaller, when compared to trioctylphosphine;3 and as a result the transport properties would not be enhanced simply by the exchange of surface functionality brought about by the additional steps.15 Although annealing the sample may have improved the transport characteristics16 of the semiconductor, the restrictions imposed by the polymer prohibited high temperature annealing. Size selective precipitation was also omitted, since in a photovoltaic cell, a narrow size distribution is not beneficial. The as-prepared mixture is reduced in volume by solvent evaporation. It was found that the initial mixture was too dilute to allow sufficient loading of CdSe. By reducing the volume of the reaction product to 10% of the initial value it was possible to prepare sufficiently thick and smooth films. By manipulating the concentration of material within the solvent as well as the speed of rotation during spin coating, films from 50 nm to 250 nm thick can be achieved. The films are of high enough quality for the preparation of photovoltaic devices. TEM analysis of composite material that is spin cast, as thin films, onto glass slides indicates that the morphology of the nanoparticle is not significantly different from that seen in pure CdSe films, with small nanoparticles clustering to form larger spherical assemblies. Since the optical properties of the assemblies, both photoluminescence and absorption, are consistent with quantum confinement, it appears that the clustering does not distort the desired light absorption properties afforded by individual nanoparticles.
Photovoltaic devices were fabricated in a three-step process. A blend of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and poly(styrene sulfonate), PEDOT-PSS, was spin cast to a thickness of 600 Å onto UV–ozone treated indium tin oxide. The polymer/CdSe solution was spin cast to a thickness of 2000 Å, followed by the vacuum deposition of a 600 to 1500 Å layer of aluminium.

Fig. 6 illustrates the current density as a function of voltage for a polymer/CdSe device. Measurements were conducted in the dark and with the sample illuminated by an AM 1.5 direct light source. From analysis of the short-circuit current (Isc
				= 4.6 µA cm−2) and open-circuit voltage (Voc
				= 800 mV) it is possible to establish the generation of a photocurrent. The device behaviour is consistent with a photovoltaic cell, as there is an increase in current density with the introduction of light over the leakage current although the power conversion efficiency is low (FF = 0.39, ηAM1.5d
				= 1.5 × 10−3%).
 Fig. 6  Semilogarithmic plot of current density (µA cm−2)
					vs. voltage (V) for a CdSe/polymer device in the dark (○) and illuminated by an AM 1.5 direct light source (●). 
Analogous devices that omitted the polymer component in one case and the CdSe component in a second case were prepared to help establish the contribution from both the polymer and CdSe to the photovoltaic effect. The current–voltage response of the different samples was compared under narrow band illumination from 300 nm to 600 nm (Fig. 7). The device containing only P(F3-alt-Cz) in the active layer demonstrated a photoresponse only when illuminated at wavelengths less than 400 nm. The composite sample provided photocurrent when illuminated through to approximately 550 nm. The comparison of the spectral response of these devices correlates the photovoltaic behaviour to the hybrid material and not simply the polymer component.
 Fig. 7  Photoresponse of devices containing polymer (●), CdSe (□) and CdSe/polymer (○) in the active layer 
To help establish the interaction between the polymer and the nanocrystals, photoluminescence studies were undertaken. The photoluminescence efficiency of several samples of films incorporating increasing percentage weights of CdSe in a P(F3-alt-Cz) matrix were measured. The photoluminescence quantum yields of films were measured using an integrating sphere in combination with a fluorimeter in accordance with the method of Pålsson and Monkman.17 The excitation wavelength was 450 nm during measurements for nanoparticle quantum yield and 360 nm during measurements for polymer quantum yield. The quantum yield of the polymer when excited at 360 nm was measured with increasing weight% of CdSe (Fig. 8). As the percentage of CdSe increased the photoluminescence efficiency decays. It was not possible to eliminate Förster exciton transfer in this case since the energy of emission of the polymer does overlap with the absorption spectrum of the CdSe nanocrystals. With this material system, however, it was also possible to measure the change in photoluminescence efficiency of the CdSe nanocrystals with increasing weights of polymer. The emission peak related to radiative recombination within the CdSe is sufficiently well separated from the absorption onset of P(F3-alt-Cz) that it is feasible to excite the CdSe nanocrystals independently from the polymer simply by choosing excitation wavelengths greater than 400 nm. When the composite thin films were excited at 450 nm, it was possible to observe the emission signal of the CdSe nanocrystals only. Förster transfer from CdSe to the polymer is eliminated in this manner and thus we may infer hole transfer from CdSe to the polymer. Decay in the photoluminescence efficiency for the CdSe is observed in an analogous manner to the polymer photoluminescence quenching. Fig. 8 depicts the decay in photoluminescence quantum yield and goes toward establishing the interaction between P(F3-alt-Cz) and the CdSe nanocrystals.
 Fig. 8  Photoluminescence quantum yield (%) of CdSe (□) and P(F3-alt-Cz)
					(○)
					vs. wt% polymer when excited with a wavelength of 450 nm and 360 nm respectively. 
Conclusions
In conclusion we have shown that microwave assisted synthesis of CdSe nanocrystals may be used to prepare nanocomposite photovoltaic films under mild conditions. The energy levels of both components of the nanocomposite are tunable allowing the possibility for future improvement in the power efficiency. With access to such straightforward solution processing of devices it is possible to advance this area of investigation quickly, economically and efficiently.
Acknowledgements
We thank P. Whitfield, N. Drolet, J. Lu, R. Barjovanu, Y. Li, C. Py and K. Faid for helpful discussion and assistance. Support of this project by Innovative Research Initiative is greatly appreciated.
References
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sarciftci and J. C. Mummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .
N. Greenham, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B, 1996, 54, 176281 .
W. U. Huyn, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, E. Marx and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 961 CrossRef CAS .
O. Palchic, R. Kerner, A. Gedanken, A. M. Weiss, M. A. Slifkin and V. Palchik, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 874 RSC .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Ding, M. Day, Y. Tao and M. D'iorio, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Ramsdale, J. A. Barker, A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie and R. H. Friend, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4266 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kucur, J. Riegler, G. A. Urban and T. Nann, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 2333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wada, H. Kuramoto, J. Anand, T. Kitamura, T. Sakata, M. Hirotaro and S. Yanagida, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1936 RSC .

          E. P. Serjeant and B. Dempsey, Ionisation Constants of Organic Acids in Aqueous Solution, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1979 Search PubMed .

          J. March, Advanced Organic Chemistry, 4th edn., John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1992 Search PubMed .
L. Qu, Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 333–337 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Leatherdale, C. R. Kagan, N. Y. Morgan, S. A. Empodocles, M. A. Kastner and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 62, 2669 Search PubMed .
M. Drndić, M. V. Jarosz, N. Y. Morgan, M. A. Kastner and M. G. Bawendi, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 7498–7503 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pålsson and A. P. Monkman, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 757 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD pattern; emission and absorption spectra with extended spectral range. See http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/b505891k‡ As compared to Rhodamine 101 in methanol, λex
					= 530 nm.§ ESI† includes additional absorption and emission spectra extended to lower energy to support this claim.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy diagram for ITO/[(F3-alt-Cz)
					(35 Å CdSe)]/Al devices.	 



	16.712	155	Nanoparticles formed


	8.912	139	Nanoparticles formed


	19–2013	101	No visible reaction


	19–2013	102	No visible reaction

 	Fig. 2  SEM image of CdSe powder sample. Scale = 5 µm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bright field TEM image of the as-synthesized CdSe particles. Scale = 50 nm	 

 	Fig. 4  HRTEM image of the as-synthesize CdSe nanoparticles. Scale = 10 nm. A few particles including a, b and c are circled for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 5  Absorption (—) and photoluminescence (- - - -) spectra of CdSe nanocrystals in cyclohexanone.	 

 	Fig. 6  Semilogarithmic plot of current density (µA cm−2)
					vs. voltage (V) for a CdSe/polymer device in the dark (○) and illuminated by an AM 1.5 direct light source (●).	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoresponse of devices containing polymer (●), CdSe (□) and CdSe/polymer (○) in the active layer	 

 	Fig. 8  Photoluminescence quantum yield (%) of CdSe (□) and P(F3-alt-Cz)
					(○)
					vs. wt% polymer when excited with a wavelength of 450 nm and 360 nm respectively.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: XRD pattern; emission and absorption spectra with extended spectral range. See http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/b505891k
‡ As compared to Rhodamine 101 in methanol, λex
					= 530 nm.
§ ESI† includes additional absorption and emission spectra extended to lower energy to support this claim.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
