New advances in nanographene chemistry  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00183H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00183H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6616-6643New advances in nanographene chemistry

        
          
            Akimitsu 
            Narita
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao-Ye 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinliang 
            Feng
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Klaus 
            Müllen
          
          
        
      *a
aMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany. E-mail: muellen@mpip-mainz.mpg.de
bCenter for Advancing Electronics Dresden (CFAED) & Department of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Dresden University of Technology, Walther-Hempel-Bau Mommsenstrasse 4, 01062 Dresden, Germany
Received 
      28th February 2015
    First published on 17th July 2015AbstractNanographenes, or extended polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, have been attracting renewed and more widespread attention since the first experimental demonstration of graphene in 2004. However, the atomically precise fabrication of nanographenes has thus far been achieved only through synthetic organic chemistry. The precise synthesis of quasi-zero-dimensional nanographenes, i.e. graphene molecules, has witnessed rapid developments over the past few years, and these developments can be summarized in four categories: (1) non-conventional methods, (2) structures incorporating seven- or eight-membered rings, (3) selective heteroatom doping, and (4) direct edge functionalization. On the other hand, one-dimensional extension of the graphene molecules leads to the formation of graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with high aspect ratios. The synthesis of structurally well-defined GNRs has been achieved by extending nanographene synthesis to longitudinally extended polymeric systems. Access to GNRs thus becomes possible through the solution-mediated or surface-assisted cyclodehydrogenation, or “graphitization,” of tailor-made polyphenylene precursors. In this review, we describe recent progress in the “bottom-up” chemical syntheses of structurally well-defined nanographenes, namely graphene molecules and GNRs.
Akimitsu Narita
Akimitsu Narita was born in Yokohama, Japan in 1986. He received his Bachelor's (2008) and Master's (2010) degrees in Chemistry at the University of Tokyo under the supervision of Professor Eiichi Nakamura. In March 2014, he obtained his PhD in the group of Professor Klaus Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) in Mainz. He was an Early-Stage Researcher in the Marie-Curie Initial Training Network (ITN) “SUPERIOR” for three years from May 2010. Beginning in August 2014, he became a project leader in the Synthetic Chemistry Department at MPIP. His current research focuses on the bottom-up organic synthesis of functional graphene molecules and graphene nanoribbons.
Xiao-Ye Wang
Xiao-Ye Wang was born in China in 1989. He received his Bachelor's degree in chemistry from Nankai University in 2009. In the same year, he joined Professor Jian Pei's group at Peking University as a graduate student and obtained his PhD degree in organic materials chemistry in July 2014. Then he joined the group of Professor Klaus Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) for postdoctoral research. His research interests include organic electronic materials and devices as well as bottom-up synthesis of heteroatom-doped graphene molecules and graphene nanoribbons.
Xinliang Feng
Xinliang Feng, after obtaining his Master's degree in organic chemistry from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in March 2004, joined the group of Prof. K. Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) and obtained his PhD in April 2008. He became a group leader at MPIP in December 2007. Since June 2010, he has been a professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University and became a distinguished group leader at MPIP in 2012. In August 2014, he became a chair professor at Dresden University of Technology. His current scientific interests include graphene, two-dimensional nanomaterials, organic conjugated materials, and carbon-rich molecules and materials for electronic and energy-related applications.
Klaus Müllen
Klaus Müllen received his PhD in 1972 at the University of Basel (Professor F. Garson) after completing his Diploma in Chemistry at the University of Cologne (Professor E. Vogel) in 1969. He pursued postdoctoral research in the group of J. F. M. Oth at ETH Zurich, where he received his habilitation in 1977 and was appointed a Privatdozent. In 1979, he became a Professor in Organic Chemistry at the University of Cologne and accepted an offer of a chair in Organic Chemistry at the University of Mainz in 1983. In 1989, he became a scientific member of the Max Planck Society and has been the director of the Synthetic Chemistry Department at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. He served as President of the German Chemical Society for two years, beginning January 2008. His current research focuses on synthetic macromolecular chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, and materials science.
I. Introduction
After the first experimental demonstration of graphene, a monolayer of graphite, by Geim and Novoselov in 2004, numerous research groups with different backgrounds have investigated this material.1–4 Graphene has been shown to have a variety of exceptional properties, particularly extremely high charge-carrier mobilities, making it a promising material for future nanoelectronics. However, the lack of a bandgap hinders the straightforward application of graphene in field-effect transistor (FET) devices.5 In contrast to infinite graphene with a zero bandgap, structurally confined nanoscale graphene segments, which are called nanographenes or graphene quantum dots (GQDs), show non-zero bandgaps that are mainly governed by their size and edge configurations.6–8 Whereas “top-down” methods, such as hydrothermal or lithographic “cutting” of graphene, cannot control the resulting structure or size distribution of the nanographenes, “bottom-up” chemical synthesis provides access to monodisperse nanographenes with perfectly defined structures and properties.7,9,10
Chemical syntheses of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were pioneered by Scholl11–13 and Clar14–16 and further developed throughout the 20th century, as summarized in our previous review article.9 In particular, after highly efficient synthesis of hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (p-HBC, 2) was established through the oxidative intramolecular cyclodehydrogenation of hexaphenylbenzene (1) (Fig. 1), a wide variety of π-extended PAHs were obtained by employing tailor-made oligophenylenes as precursors.9 Such PAHs, consisting of sp2 carbon frameworks extending over 1 nm, can be regarded as the smallest possible nanographenes, or graphene molecules.10,17 In the last decade, the extended PAHs have thus attracted renewed synthetic interest and more interdisciplinary attention as structurally well-defined graphene molecules with great potential in future applications, such as in nanoelectronics, optoelectronics and spintronics.18–23
 Fig. 1  Synthesis of hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (p-HBC 2) through intramolecular oxidative cyclodehydrogenation. 
One-dimensional extension of graphene molecules leads to ribbon-shaped nanographenes with high aspect ratios, which are called graphene nanoribbons (GNRs).24,25 In this article, we defined GNRs as nanographenes with the aspect ratios of larger than 10, in order to clearly distinguish them from oblong-shaped graphene molecules.17 GNRs are categorized by their edge structures, as typically represented by armchair and zigzag configurations (Fig. 2). The width of the armchair and zigzag GNRs is generally defined by the number “N” as shown in Fig. 2. The width and the edge structure of the GNRs critically define their physical properties.26 GNRs with zigzag edge structures are predicted to show localized edge states that can be spin-polarized, which might allow their application to spintronic devices such as spin valve.27–30 On the other hand, armchair-edge GNRs have non-magnetic semiconducting properties with relatively larger bandgaps, which increase as their width decreases.26 The armchair GNRs are also predicted to possess high charge-carrier mobilities, which paves the way toward logic applications.24,31
 Fig. 2  Structures of N = 9 armchair and N = 6 zigzag GNRs with the instruction for the counting of number “N”. 
The preparation of GNRs has primarily been conducted using “top-down” methods, such as lithographic cutting of graphene sheets32–34 and unzipping of carbon nanotubes.35,36 FET devices based on GNRs have been demonstrated, suggesting their considerable potential as emerging semiconductor materials. However, such “top-down” methods are incapable of precise structural control, leading to GNRs with ill-defined widths and edge structures. To reliably tune the (opto-)electronic and spintronic properties of the GNRs, it is imperative to control their structures with atomic precision, which can be achieved by employing the “bottom-up” strategy based on organic synthesis.
The solution-synthesis protocol developed for the preparation of graphene molecules can be successfully applied to longitudinally extended polymeric systems, which enables the formation of structurally well-defined GNRs, in stark contrast to the “top-down” fabricated GNRs with “random” structures.17,25 A variety of rationally designed polyphenylene precursors have thus been “graphitized” through intramolecular cyclodehydrogenation to provide a number of GNRs with different widths, edge structures and heteroatom doping. Furthermore, in 2010, direct growth of structurally perfect GNRs was achieved on metal surfaces under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions.37 Whereas the majority of solution-synthesized GNRs have limited solubility and thus cannot be microscopically investigated, the surface-synthesis protocol allowed in situ visualization of the entire GNR formation process with atomic resolution using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). This complementary synthetic protocol under UHV conditions enabled the synthesis and direct characterization of unprecedented GNR structures that have been unattainable through solution synthesis, including nitrogen-doped GNRs. Furthermore, GNR heterojunctions have experimentally been demonstrated, featuring semiconductor heterostructures with a straddling gap (type I) and a staggered gap (type II).38,39
Comprehensive reviews on the bottom-up chemical syntheses of graphene molecules9,20,23,40–48 and GNRs have been reported.17,25 Thus, in this review, we focus on the most recent advances in the field. In particular, we first discuss the progress in the synthesis of graphene molecules in four aspects: (1) newly developed, “non-conventional” synthetic methods for graphene molecules, (2) “defective” graphene molecules, involving embedded seven- or eight-membered rings, (3) heteroatom doping of graphene molecules at defined positions and (4) chemical modification of the edges of graphene molecules without prior functionalization. The syntheses and derivatizations of open-shell graphene molecules,23,46,49–53 contorted PAHs,20 fullerene fragments,54–57 acenes,46,58–61 rylenes,62,63 helicenes,64–68 and truxenes69,70 have been extensively reviewed very recently and are therefore not included in this article. In the second section, the latest developments in the bottom-up synthesis of GNRs from molecular precursors are summarized, focusing on (1) solution-mediated and (2) surface-assisted synthesis of structurally well-defined GNRs and their characterization. Additionally, (3) formation of GNR confined in carbon nanotubes is also described. We have recently published a personal account article, describing our own contributions over the last decade to the development of the GNR synthesis.25 In the current review article, we provide an overview of the recent advancements in this field, featuring the results that are not covered in the previous article.
II. Synthesis of graphene molecules
Non-conventional approaches for nanographene synthesis
Over the past two decades, concise, high-yielding and scalable synthetic methods have been developed for synthesizing graphene molecules.9,40 These methods are typically based on intramolecular oxidative cyclodehydrogenation, namely the Scholl reaction,11,71 of rationally designed oligophenylene precursors (Fig. 1). A wide variety of graphene molecules have thus been synthesized, with different sizes, symmetries and edge structures. Large oligophenylene precursors have conventionally been prepared through cyclotrimerization of diphenylacetylene derivatives or through a combination of substitution and metal-catalysed coupling reactions as well as Diels–Alder cycloaddition of alkyne and tetraphenylcyclopentadienone derivatives.9,40,72,73 The oxidative cyclodehydrogenation can be performed with a variety of oxidants and Lewis acids,71 including Cu(OTf)2/AlCl3,74 FeCl3,75 MoCl5,76 2,3-dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone (DDQ)/Brønsted or Lewis acid,77 and [bis(trifluoroacetoxy)iodo]benzene (PIFA)/BF3·Et2O.78
Nevertheless, the scopes of these synthetic methods have been limited by several factors, including incomplete “graphitization,”79 chlorination74 and unexpected structural rearrangements80–83 during the Scholl reaction. Furthermore, oligophenylene precursors, corresponding to the desired graphene molecules, were often inaccessible in the conventional manner. This renders it essential to develop new, “non-conventional” methods for the synthesis of nanographene, which enables preparation of graphene molecules with tailorable (opto-)electronic properties.
In 2013, Dichtel et al. reported the synthesis of dibenzo-fused p-HBC 6avia sequential benzannulation and cyclodehydrogenation (Fig. 3).84 Readily accessible di(arylethynyl)benzene derivatives 3 could be benzannulated by treatment with 2-(phenylethynyl)benzaldehyde, Cu(OTf)2, and CF3CO2H to afford precursors 4 in excellent yields, despite the high steric congestion. Interestingly, the following cyclodehydrogenation of 4a could be performed in a controlled manner, selectively yielding partially fused product 5a in a shorter reaction time, i.e., ∼20 min. An extended reaction time of 240 min led to completely fused graphene molecule 6a (C50) with 50 sp2 carbon atoms in the aromatic core (Fig. 3). Formation of graphene molecule 6b was not observed, probably because of the high steric hindrance caused by the additional tBu groups, affording partially fused 5b as the final product.
 Fig. 3  Syntheses of partially fused PAHs 5 and fully fused graphene molecule 6avia benzannulation and cyclodehydrogenation. 
Partially fused PAHs 5 have distinct non-planar structures with a theoretically estimated dihedral torsion angle of 56°. Notably, PAH 5b exhibited enhanced visible absorption compared with that of fully fused graphene molecule 6a, with an optical gap of 2.32 eV derived from its UV-Vis absorption spectrum. This value was smaller than the 2.53 eV optical gap of fully fused molecule 6a, suggesting that the structural non-planarity has an effect on the (opto-)electronic properties of graphene molecules.85
This synthetic protocol can be applied to other (arylethynyl)benzene derivatives,86 providing potential access to previously unavailable graphene molecules, including contorted species with open bonds at selective positions. Furthermore, the benzannulation strategy has proven to be also effective for poly(phenylene ethynylene)s to yield sterically congested polymers with diarylnaphthalene units,87 which might serve as precursors for GNRs.
In 2014, Wei and his colleagues developed an elegant two-step synthetic route for obtaining C3 symmetrically substituted hexa-cata-hexabenzocoronenes (c-HBCs) 9, which had been unobtainable through existing methods (Fig. 4).88 Starting from 1,3,5-tri(bromomethyl)-benzene (7), 1,3,5-tribenzylbenzene derivatives (TBBs, 8) were prepared via three-fold Suzuki coupling with phenylboronic acid derivatives. Subsequently, TBBs 8 were reacted with three equivalents of benzaldehyde building blocks under the presence of FeCl3 and acetic anhydride as oxidant/Lewis acid and dehydrating agent, respectively. Remarkably, c-HBCs 9 could be obtained in one pot, where a sequence of Friedel–Crafts hydroarylation, intramolecular alkylation, dehydrogenative aromatization, and intramolecular cyclodehydrogenation occurred. By using thienaldehyde instead of benzaldehyde, this synthetic method provided access to sym-tribenzotetrathieno-coronenes (TBTTC, 10), which had been sought after previous syntheses of dibenzotetrathienocoronene (DBTTC)89,90 and hexathienocoronene (HTC)91,92 (see Fig. 12). Moreover, phenanthraldehyde could be employed in this protocol to obtain unprecedented C3 symmetrical graphene molecule 11 with 72 sp2 carbon atoms in the aromatic core (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Facile two-step synthetic route for obtaining C3 symmetrical c-HBC 9, TBTTC 10 and graphene molecule 11. 
The use of aryne chemistry is also a convenient method for the synthesis of PAHs, involving [4+2] or [2+2+2] cycloadditions.45,93 In particular, Perez, Guitian, Peña, and co-workers have demonstrated that the palladium-catalysed cyclotrimerization of arynes enables very efficient preparation of triphenylene94 and a variety of its extended derivatives,93 including hexabenzo[a,c,g,i,m,o]triphenylene (C42),95 hexabenzo[a,c,k,m,u,w]trinaphthylene (C54)96 and hexabenzo[a,c,o,q,c1,e1]trianthrycene (C66).97 By further advancing this method, they recently developed a simple synthetic protocol for C3 symmetrical PAH 17 (C78), starting from bisbenzyne precursor 12 and perylene (14) (Fig. 5).98 Perylene (14) was first reacted with aryne 13, which was generated in situ from 12 by treatment with CsF, providing triflate 15via a Diels–Alder cycloaddition. With careful optimization of the reaction temperature and solvent, triflate 15 could be selectively precipitated from the reaction mixture, without further formation of aryne 16. Under the presence of CsF and a catalytic amount of [Pd2(dba)3] (dba = dibenzylideneacetone), triflate 15 was successfully converted to PAH 17 through the palladium-catalysed cyclotrimerization of the in situ generated aryne 16. PAH 17 could be sublimed onto a bilayer of NaCl on Cu(111), and high-resolution atomic force microscopy (AFM) and STM analyses revealed its molecular structure and orbitals with atomic resolution.
 Fig. 5  Synthesis of PAH 17 (C78) through two-step cycloadditions of arynes. 
Although syntheses via cyclotrimerization of arynes often require multi-step preparation of aryne precursors, cyclotrimerization of o-dibromoarenes through Yamamoto coupling can serve as a complementary approach.99 The Yamamoto conditions can also tolerate silyl groups, which are unstable in the presence of fluoride used for the in situ generation of arynes. In 2014, Bunz and co-workers employed this approach of Yamamoto coupling to synthesize unprecedented large starphenes, i.e., trideca-starphene 19 (C54) and hexadeca-starphenes 21 (C66) from dibromotetracene 18 and dibromopentacene 20, respectively (Fig. 6).100 Triisopropylsilyl (TIPS)-ethynyl groups were successfully installed on starphenes 19 and 21, which made them highly soluble in organic solvents, thereby allowing their characterization using NMR and X-ray crystallography. The optical gaps of starphenes 19 and 21 were estimated from their UV-Vis absorption spectra to be 2.29 and 1.76 eV, respectively, which were approximately 0.2 eV smaller than those of linear precursors 18 and 20.
 Fig. 6  Syntheses of trideca-starphene 19 and hexadeca-starphenes 21 from dibromotetracene 18 and dibromopentacene 20, respectively, through Yamamoto coupling. 
In addition to the palladium-catalysed [2+2+2] cycloaddition and nickel-mediated Yamamoto coupling, other metal-catalysed reactions are also very useful for constructing graphene molecules.56,101–103 For instance, palladium-catalysed C–H arylation has been widely used for the preparation of non-planar PAHs incorporating five-membered rings,56 and palladium-catalysed double cross coupling can extend 1,2-dibromoarenes with 9-stannafluorenes, leading to various triphenylene derivatives.101 Amsharov et al. developed an Al2O3-mediated C–H arylation of fluoroarenes via C–F activation, allowing the unconventional use of C–F bonds for the intramolecular aryl–aryl coupling of PAHs, for example, to obtain PAH 23 (C46) from fluoroarene 22 (Fig. 7).104,105
 Fig. 7  Syntheses of PAH 23 through Al2O3-mediated C–H arylation and of graphene molecules 26 and 29via platinum-catalysed and ICl-mediated cycloaromatization, respectively. 
Furthermore, ruthenium- or platinum-catalysed electrophilic cycloaromatization of ortho-alkynylated biaryls is a versatile method to form phenanthrene structures, as represented by the conversion of precursor 24 to [6]phenacene 25, which enabled the synthesis of graphene molecule 26 (C52) through subsequent cyclodehydrogenation (Fig. 7).56,106–108 Here, ICl-mediated cycloaromatization of ortho-alkynylated biaryls can serve as a metal-free alternative method for obtaining halogenated phenacenes, which can be directly used for further coupling reactions or dehalogenated by simple treatment with n-butyllithium.103,106,107,109,110 Although the platinum-catalysed cycloaromatization of precursor 27 was unsuccessful, the use of ICl allowed conversion of 27 to [4]phenacene 28, followed by graphitization to graphene molecule 29 (C52) (Fig. 7).106 Further details regarding such metal-catalysed or metal-mediated reactions can be found in recent review articles.56,101–103,111,112
Graphene molecules with seven- or eight-membered rings
As two-dimensionally confined structures of graphene, nanographenes, in principle, consist of only six-membered rings. However, microscopy studies have revealed that graphene also contains rings of other sizes, including five-, seven- and eight-membered rings, as defects, particularly at the grain boundaries of graphene sheets grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD).113–117 Therefore, extended PAHs containing non-six-membered rings can indeed be considered as graphene molecules, which allow model studies of “defective” graphene and may also find applications in (opto-)electronics. PAHs with five-membered rings have been extensively synthesized and investigated as fullerene fragments and their derivatives following the pioneering works by Scott et al.44,54–57,102,118 However, there are only scarce examples of graphene molecules containing seven- or eight-membered rings.
PAHs with a central n-membered ring that is completely surrounded by fused benzenoid rings are called [n]circulenes, based on the definition by Wynberg.119–121 According to this definition, corannulene and coronene are [5]circulene and [6]circulene, respectively. Moreover, [7]circulene and [8]circulene can be regarded as graphene molecules containing seven- and eight-membered rings, respectively. [7]Circulene was first synthesized by Yamamoto and Nakazaki et al. in 1983,122 followed by [7.7]circulene in 1991, which incorporated two seven-membered rings.123 Nevertheless, graphene molecules with embedded seven-membered rings, other than the circulenes, had remained elusive.
In 2012, Miao et al. reported a curved graphene molecule 31 with an embedded seven-membered ring (Fig. 8), which is π-isoelectronic to p-HBC 2 (C42).124 The synthesis consisted of the oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of hexaphenylbenzene-based precursor 30, which was prepared via the Diels–Alder cycloaddition of a tetraphenylcyclopentadienone derivative and an aryne generated in situ from 10-bromo-5H-dibenzo[a,d]cycloheptene (Fig. 8). Introduction of alkoxyl groups at ortho or para positions to the reaction sites was found to be crucial for achieving the complete cyclodehydrogenation process; otherwise, a mixture of inseparable products was obtained. In a follow-up report in 2015, they synthesized two new aromatic saddles, C70H26 (34a,b) and C70H30 (36a,b), with two embedded heptagons.125 The synthesis was carried out through saddle-shaped diketones (32a,b) as the key precursors, bearing two tropone subunits incorporated in the well-known framework of p-HBC. These aromatic saddles 34 and 36 were successfully obtained by π-extension on the carbonyl groups of precursor 32 and further oxidative cyclodehydrogenation. The saddle-shaped structures of these graphene molecules were unambiguously characterized by single-crystal X-ray analysis.
 Fig. 8  Syntheses of graphene molecules 31, 34, 36 and 38 with embedded seven-membered rings through cyclodehydrogenation. 
In 2013, Durola and co-workers conducted oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of sterically congested precursor 37 and unexpectedly obtained graphene molecule 38 (C66) as a major product (Fig. 8), whose structure was confirmed by X-ray crystallographic analysis.126 Although the expected C3 symmetric graphene molecule was not obtained due to the rearrangement during the Scholl reaction, graphene molecule 38 is one of the rare examples with an embedded seven-membered ring. This result provides further insights into the rearrangements or migration of aryl groups in the Scholl reaction, which still remain elusive.
In 2013, Scott, Itami, and co-workers made major progress, achieving concise, two-step synthesis of grossly warped graphene molecule 42 (C80) with five embedded seven-membered rings and one five-membered ring at the centre (Fig. 9).127 Starting from corannulene (39), precursors 40 and 41 were obtained by palladium-catalysed direct C–H arylation with arylboroxins, using o-chloranil as an oxidant.128,129 Remarkably, the intramolecular cyclisation of precursors 40 and 41 efficiently provided grossly warped graphene molecule 42 in good yields, overcoming the high steric demand to form five distorted seven-membered rings. Because of its highly non-planar structure, graphene molecule 42 showed good solubility in common organic solvents, and, astonishingly, graphene molecule 42b with tert-butyl groups could be dissolved even in hexane. Graphene molecule 42 was comprehensively characterized spectroscopically, and X-ray crystallographic analysis revealed that 42 possessed a unique double-concave structure. Although the oxidative cyclodehydrogenation has been employed almost exclusively for preparing of planar graphene molecules, the above-mentioned recent results clearly demonstrated that it is also a very powerful method for synthesizing non-planar graphene molecules.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis of grossly warped graphene molecules 42 through C–H arylation and cyclodehydrogenation of corannulene (39). 
Whereas [7]circulene was synthesized in 1983,122 [8]circulene had not been achieved until recently, probably because of its highly strained and instable structure.130 The first synthetic attempt was reported in 1976 by Wennerström et al., but photocyclisation of [2,2](3,6)phenanthrenophanediene in the final step did not afford the [8]circulene, presumably owing to the high steric demand.131 In 2013, Wu and co-workers reported the first synthesis of peri-substituted [8]circulene 44 through four-fold palladium-catalysed annulations of tetraiodo-substituted tetraphenylene 43 with diarylethynes (Fig. 10).132 Octaaryl-[8]circulene 44 could be obtained in remarkable 60–75% yields, corresponding to ∼88–93% for each annulation step, allowing the preparation of several hundred milligrams of 44. [8]Circulene 44 was unambiguously characterized through NMR and X-ray crystallographic analyses, which revealed its non-planar saddle-like structure.
 Fig. 10  Syntheses of [8]circulene 44 through palladium-catalysed annulation and of tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46 through oxidative cyclodehydrogenation or a sequence of Diels–Alder cycloaddition and palladium-catalysed C–H arylation. DBU: 1,8-diaza-bicycloundec-7-ene; DMA: N,N-dimethylacetamide. 
Later in the same year, Sakamoto and Suzuki reported the synthesis of tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46via oxidative cyclodehydrogenation (Fig. 10).133 Cycloocta-o,p,o,p,o,p,o,p-phenylene 45a was prepared as a precursor through Suzuki coupling of o-terphenylboronic ester and o-dibromobenzene. Precursor 45a was subsequently subjected to cyclodehydrogenation with Cu(OTf)2 and AlCl3, affording tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46a in 7% yield. Because the intermolecular coupling to form a dimeric byproduct was found to be one reason for the low yield, precursor 45b with eight methyl groups was subsequently prepared. Oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of precursor 45b with FeCl3 provided octamethyl-tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46b in an improved (35%) yield. X-ray crystallographic analysis of tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46a showed its deep saddle structure with two S4-symmetrical conformers, which were twisted from the D2d-symmetrical ground-state structure revealed by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. This observation provided evidence for the theoretically predicted pseudorotation of tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46via a non-planar transition state.
At almost the same time, Whalley and co-workers developed another synthetic route for tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46a based on a sequence of Diels–Alder cycloaddition and palladium-catalysed C–H arylation (Fig. 10).134 In the first step, dibenzocyclooctadiyne 47 was subjected to two-fold Diels–Alder reactions with 2,5-diarylthiophene-1-oxide 48 to afford tetrabenzocyclooctane precursor 49. Interestingly, Diels–Alder reactions using 2,5-diphenylfuran or 2,5-diphenylthiophene dioxide instead of 48 required higher temperatures, resulting in the decomposition of dibenzocyclooctadiyne 47. This result indicated the high potential of thiophene-1-oxides as the dienes in the Diels–Alder reactions although they have rarely been used for this purpose. Subsequently, the palladium-catalysed C–H arylation of precursor 49 afforded tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46a in 24% yield. Because of its full benzenoid structure, tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46 exhibited high stability, in contrast to the parent [8]circulene, without any deterioration under ambient conditions over five months or at 100 °C for 24 h.
Apart from the [8]circulene derivatives, there are scarce examples of graphene molecules with embedded eight-membered rings. In 2014, our group reported the synthesis of biphenylene-based PAH 51, incorporating one eight-membered and one four-membered rings, through oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of octaarylbiphenylene 50 (Fig. 11).135 The cyclodehydrogenation did not proceed further, probably because of the high steric demand, selectively providing PAH 51 in 90% yield. The UV-Vis absorption and emission spectra of PAH 51 revealed its relatively large optical bandgap of ∼2.8 eV and an emission at 552 nm, respectively. A large Stokes shift of 4000 cm−1 was observed, which indicated partial planarization of PAH 51 in the excited state.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis of biphenylene-based PAH 51, containing one eight-membered ring and one four-membered ring, via cyclodehydrogenation of octaarylbiphenylene 50. 
Heteroatom-doped graphene molecules
Heteroatom-doped graphene is a new class of materials that possess properties and functions different from those of the parent graphene.136–138 However, the heteroatom doping of graphene sheets with precise structural control has not been achieved, hindering studies of structure–property relationships at the atomic or molecular level. By contrast, bottom-up organic synthesis can provide structurally defined heteroatom-doped graphene fragments with perfect control not only of the size, periphery and substituent, but also of the doping concentration and position. Although a wide variety of heteroatom-doped structures have been developed for small PAHs, until recently there had been only a few examples for expanded PAHs.41,60,139–141
As typical examples of nitrogen (N)-doped graphene molecules, we developed a series of pyrrole-fused azacoronenes 52–55 (Fig. 12), together with Takase, Nishinaga and their colleagues, through the oxidative cyclodehydrogenation of corresponding hexaarylbenzenes.142,143 These PAHs incorporating electron-rich pyrrole-type nitrogens exhibited up to four reversible oxidation processes in the electrochemical measurements. They were also easily oxidized by chemical oxidants, e.g., SbCl5, to generate radical cations and dications.
 Fig. 12  Representative examples of N-doped PAHs. R1: H or 4-trifluoromethylphenyl; R2: methyl, n-butyl or n-dodecyl; Ar1: p-butoxyphenyl; Ar2: p-nitrophenyl; R5: phenyl, 4-methoxyphenyl, 4-bromophenyl, methyl, hexyl, etc.; R6: 2-ethylhexyl or 2-decyltetradecyl; X: H, Br, trimethylstannyl, etc. 
The stepwise replacement of pyrrole rings with dialkoxybenzenes significantly changed their optical and electronic properties in both neutral and oxidized states. For example, the emission colours of these compounds changed from red to green as the number of pyrrole rings decreased from six (52) to three (55) (Fig. 12). The quinoidal resonance structures of 522+ and 532+ stabilized these dication species, inducing higher oxidation potentials in the next step from dication to trication states, which was not observed for 542+ and 552+. In the dication states, hexaazacoronene 522+ and pentaazacoronene 532+ exhibited a closed-shell character. On the other hand, an open-shell character was theoretically predicted for tetraazacoronene 542+ and triazacoronene 552+. The introduction of dialkoxybenzenes instead of pyrrole rings prohibited the charge/spin delocalization in the π-system, which resulted in “weakly interacting” spins with an open-shell character. In addition, small S1–T1 energy gaps (<0.36 eV) were observed in this family of compounds, which is very interesting, particularly in the field of molecular photonics, considering the possibility of thermally activated T1 to S1 intersystem crossing.144
In 2014, Stępień and co-workers explored a new type of expanded hexapyrrolohexaazacoronenes 56 and 57 with interrupted peripheral conjugation, by introducing saturated methylene bridges (Fig. 12).145 These molecules can also be regarded as the first examples of N-doped graphene molecules with embedded seven-membered rings. The synthesis was conducted from substituted hexapyrrolylbenzenes in a two-step condensation–aromatization sequence, i.e., a Lewis acid-catalysed bridging with p-nitrobenzaldehyde followed by oxidative cyclodehydrogenation. Notably, the peripheral bridges could be aromatized through oxidative dehydrogenation, and subsequent nucleophilic additions proceeded in a perfectly stereospecific manner, allowing functionalization with a variety of substituents. These new azacoronenes with methylene bridges exhibited easily accessible higher oxidation states. Remarkably, contrary to the cases of 52–55, a tetracationic species 574+ could be chemically generated by oxidation with SbCl5, which was presumably enabled by the disrupted peripheral conjugation.
In contrast to the electron-rich pyrrole-fused graphene molecules, incorporation of imine-type nitrogen in the PAH framework by fusing pyridine or pyrimidine rings creates electron-deficient N-doped graphene molecules. In 2002, Draper et al. reported the first example of such a molecule, namely, N-doped p-HBC 58a (Fig. 12), through the oxidative dehydrogenation of a corresponding pyrimidine-incorporated hexaarylbenzene precursor.146 N-doped p-HBC 58a served as a versatile ligand for metal (e.g., PdII and RuII) complexes.147 The photophysical properties of N-doped p-HBC 58a were demonstrated to be effectively modulated by metal coordination.
In 2014, Draper et al. performed methoxy functionalization on the periphery to obtain N-doped p-HBC 58b and found that the cyclodehydrogenation process was promoted by incorporating electron-donating methoxy groups.148 The photophysical and electronic properties were profoundly affected by the methoxy substitution. Furthermore, the X-ray crystal structure of 58b revealed that the intermolecular hydrogen bonds involving methoxy groups and nitrogen atoms assist the molecules to arrange in a head-to-tail manner in the columnar stack.
The family of PAHs doped with imine-type nitrogens also includes azacoronene derivatives. For example, 1,5,9-triazacoronene 59 was synthesized by Wei et al. with a threefold Pictet–Spengler reaction as the key step (Fig. 12).149 These compounds exhibited an electron-deficient nature compared to the all-carbon analogue. Recently, Liu et al. reported a novel thiophene-fused azacoronene 60, featuring two imine-type nitrogens on the skeleton.150 Azacoronene 60 bearing bromo or trimethylstannyl groups could be further functionalized through Stille coupling, which also allowed incorporation of 60 into conjugated polymers. Azacoronene 60 with two fused thiophene rings was relatively electron-rich and showed hole mobilities of up to 0.028 cm2 V−1 s−1 in FET devices. Furthermore, conjugated polymers incorporating azacoronene 60 functioned as the donor material in organic photovoltaic devices, which exhibited a high open-circuit voltage of 0.89 V and a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.8%.
In 2014, we reported the synthesis of dibenzo-9a-azaphenalene (61), which features a N-doped zigzag-edge structure (Fig. 12).151 With 61 as the basic unit, its dimer 62 was also successfully synthesized, suggesting the possibility of further lateral extension toward N-doped zigzag-edge GNRs. Dibenzoazaphenalenes 61 and 62 are featured with azomethine ylide structures, showing extremely high chemical reactivity, and thus they were generated only under inert conditions. Azomethine ylide 61 could be employed in 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reactions with various dipolarophiles, providing a unique pathway to N-doped PAHs with fused pyrrole rings.152 Nozaki et al. found that 61 can also react with fullerene C60 to form an adduct.153
Furthermore, generation of 61 at a high temperature provided self-dimerization product 63 in 51% yield, which might serve as a precursor for an unprecedented p-HBC with two nitrogen atoms inside the aromatic core.151 In 2015, Ito and Nozaki et al. achieved an unprecedented synthesis of 6b2-azapentabenzo[bc,ef,hi,kl,no]corannulene 64 based on the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylide 61 with 2,2′,6-trichlorodiphenylacetylene, followed by three-fold Pd-catalysed cyclisation (Fig. 12).154 N-doped corannulene derivative 64 is a rare example of bowl-shaped PAHs with heteroatom doping inside the aromatic framework, and demonstrated distinctly different structural and opto-electronic properties compared to the parent corannulene. These results indicate a high potential of the azomethine ylide chemistry based on 61 and its derivatives for exploring a new class of N-doped PAHs, which cannot be accessed by other synthetic methods.
In 2015, Anand and co-workers reported a metal-assisted cyclodimerization of doubly N-confused dipyrrin into azaheptalene 65.155 Single-crystal X-ray analysis revealed the planar structure of 65 with two embedded seven-membered rings. In the same year, Gryko and co-workers reported a photochemical direct arylation method to convert phenanthro[9,10-d]-imidazole derivatives with 2-halogenoaryl substituent into phenanthro[9′,10′:4,5]imidazo[1,2-f]-phenanthridines, such as N-doped PAH 66, in high yields.156 This reaction occurred without a need of any photosensitizer or base, presumably through the formation of a radical anion as a critical step.
Thiophene-fused PAHs have been extensively explored because of their wide applications in organic electronic devices.157–159 From the synthetic point of view, several beautiful thiophene-annulated structures have also been developed, such as octathio[8]circulene (“sulflower”),160 tetrathienoteropyrene,161 thiophene-fused heptalenes162 and coranulenes.163 Here we focus on π-extended PAHs, mainly consisting of hexagonal rings, as sulphur (S)-doped graphene molecules. We synthesized a tribenzothiophene-fused p-HBC 67 as the first example of such molecules with embedded thiophene rings (Fig. 13).164 In 2011, Draper et al. reported p-HBC 68 with an embedded thiophene ring via oxidative cyclodehydrogenation.165 They could also obtain a dimer of S-doped p-HBC 68 through intermolecular oxidative coupling at the thiophene rings, which showed concentration-dependent optical properties governed by the relative orientation between the two S-doped HBC planes.
 Fig. 13  Examples of S-doped graphene molecules. R represents hydrogen or alkyl substituents. 
In addition to these examples based on p-HBC, Nuckolls et al. developed a synthesis of dibenzotetrathienocoronene (DBTTC) 69, a thiophene-fused c-HBC analogue (Fig. 13).89,90 The aromatic core of 69 could self-assemble into a columnar superstructure, which merged into a three-dimensional network of supramolecular cables. When the acceptor C60 was evaporated into this network, a nanostructured p–n bulk heterojunction was formed, providing a PCE of 1.9% in a solar cell device. Furthermore, solution-processed photovoltaic devices of DBTTC 69 and phenyl-C70-butyric acid methyl ester (PC70BM) showed a PCE of 2.7%, where a supramolecular complex between 69 and PC70BM was demonstrated to play an important role in the charge separation process.166
More recently, we synthesized a class of fully thiophene-annulated coronenes, namely, hexathienocoronenes (HTCs) 70 and 71, which are stronger electron donors with higher HOMO levels compared to DBTTC 69 (Fig. 13).91 Based on single-crystal X-ray analysis, HTC 71 adopted an almost planar conformation due to the relatively weak steric congestion of the six peripheral thiophene rings. Columnar stacking was also observed for 71, providing suitable charge transport channels. The skeleton of HTC 71 was later used to construct a gemini-type amphiphile, which yielded various ordered assemblies in solution, at the liquid–solid interface and in the solid state.92 Remarkably, the blend of amphiphile 71 and PC60BM exhibited photoconductive properties with a large on/off ratio of 6 × 104. The synthesis of TBTTC 10 by Wei et al. (Fig. 4) further enriched the diversity of the family of thiophene-fused c-HBC analogues as described above.
Boron (B) atoms have also been incorporated in PAHs, resulting in intriguing properties. Generally, B-containing compounds are unstable toward moisture and oxygen owing to the intrinsic high reactivity of B atoms. Bulky substituents are thus typically required to kinetically protect the Lewis acidic B centre.167 However, the steric bulkiness prevents intermolecular interactions in the solid state, which is detrimental to charge transport properties. Yamaguchi et al. proposed a new strategy for stabilizing tri-coordinated boron-containing π-systems by “structural constraint.”168,169 The planarized skeleton was highly stable and could be handled without any special precautions. Using this strategy, Yamaguchi et al. achieved the synthesis of the first example of B-doped graphene molecule 72, which contained two boron atoms inside the carbon framework (Fig. 14).170 The key step of the synthesis consisted of oxidative cyclodehydrogenation using FeCl3. The boron atoms had a significant contribution to the molecular orbitals, which induced broad absorption over the entire visible region as well as fluorescence extending to the NIR region. They also demonstrated syntheses of extended triphenylborane 73171 and internally B-doped PAH 74 with two fused-thiophene rings and an embedded seven-membered ring (Fig. 14).169 In 2015, Wagner and co-workers reported a modular synthesis of B-doped PAHs, including 7,14-diborabisanthene 75.172 The replacement of the two meso carbons of bisanthene with B atoms turned a near-infrared dye into an efficient blue fluorescent compound (75) with a high quantum yield of 78%.
 Fig. 14  Examples of B- and BN-doped PAHs. Mes: mesityl; X: H, Br or Ph; R: n-butyl or n-hexyl. 
Another approach to incorporating B atoms in π-conjugated systems consists of replacing the common CC unit with its isoelectronic BN unit, which has led to a new class of compounds that have properties distinct from those of their carbon analogues but maintain structural similarity.139–141 The dipolar BN unit has a significant impact on the molecular orbitals, intermolecular interactions and photophysical and redox properties of the π-system, providing a unique strategy for molecular engineering.173–178 In 2015, Pei et al. reviewed the history and progress of BN-substituted PAHs, and proposed that suitable BN-containing PAHs could be used as precursors for the bottom-up construction of BN-doped graphenes with well-defined structures.139 Here we mainly focus on large BN-embedded π-skeletons, which are model compounds and potential precursors for BN-doped graphenes.
Piers and co-workers developed a series of BN-embedded PAHs, such as BN-substituted pyrene (76)179 and dibenzo[g,p]chrysene (77),180 which raised modern research interest in this field. In 2011, Hatakeyama, Seki and Nakamura et al. reported the first step toward extended BN-doped PAHs, demonstrating the synthesis of BN-doped hexabenzotetracene 78 through tandem intramolecular electrophilic arene borylation (Fig. 14).178 In 2014, Pei et al. pioneered a straightforward strategy toward BN-doped graphene molecules by employing azaacenes as a platform for constructing large BN-embedded π-systems.181 As a proof of concept, π-extended BN heterocoronene derivatives 79 with two BN units were synthesized from 6,13-dihydro-6,13-diazapentacene (Fig. 14). The ring-closure step involved the efficient construction of two B–N bonds and four B–C bonds through an electrophilic borylation method. The introduction of BN units in the skeleton had a pronounced influence on its electronic properties and molecular geometry. The molecules showed a tendency to pack into a columnar structure, which facilitated the formation of one-dimensional micro-ribbons through solution-processed self-assembly. FET devices based on the micro-ribbons exhibited hole mobilities of up to 0.23 cm2 V−1 s−1. Photoconductive properties were also observed, indicating the potential application of BN-embedded graphene molecules for organic photovoltaics. This work also paved a way toward the fabrication of BN-doped graphenes based on the π-extension of BN-containing PAHs.
In 2015, Pei et al. and Zhang et al. almost simultaneously reported their independent syntheses of C3-symmetric BN heterocoronene 80 with three BN units (Fig. 14).182,183 The planar and aromatic structure of 80 was clearly revealed by the single-crystal X-ray analysis and NMR spectroscopy. The UV-Vis absorption and emission spectra of 80 showed blue-shifted peaks compared to those of a similarly alkoxylated coronene,184 demonstrating an increase of the energy gap as a result of the BN doping.182 The phenyl groups at the B positions were selectively replaced with hydroxy groups in wet organic solvents, which further increased the energy gap.183 In the same year, Bettinger et al. successfully constructed B3N3-doped p-HBC 81 by thermolysis of a tris(2-biphenylyl)borazine precursor at 550 °C.185 The structure was verified by mass spectrometry and infrared and solid-state NMR spectroscopy. B3N3-doped p-HBC 81 was also sublimated onto Au(111) surfaces for STM characterization, which showed that this molecule lies flat on the surface in a 2D pattern.
Phosphorus (P)-doped graphene molecules are another very interesting class of compounds, considering the remarkable (opto-)electronic properties of phosphole-based materials.186–188 Nevertheless, there are only a few examples of PAHs with embedded P atoms. In 2011, Hatakeyama and Nakamura et al. reported the synthesis of P-doped PAH 82 through the tandem phospha-Friedel–Crafts reaction, demonstrating the extended π-conjugation over the entire molecule (Fig. 15).189 In 2014, they further extended the synthesis and obtained P-doped PAH 83 with high structural distortion.190 On the other hand, Réau and co-workers succeeded in the preparation of planar P-doped PAH 84via photocyclisation.191 Notably, the (opto-)electronic properties of PAH 84 could be starkly modified by utilizing the reactivity of the P centre, e.g., through transformations into thiooxophosphole, oxophosphole and phospholiums, allowing fine-tuning of its energy gap.
 Fig. 15  Examples of P-doped PAHs. 
Direct edge functionalization of graphene molecules
Although the physical properties of graphene molecules are governed primarily by their aromatic core structures, substituents at their peripheries also play a major role.21,192 For example, alkyl chains as the substituents can change the solubility and the phase-forming and self-assembly behaviour of graphene molecules, which in turn affect, e.g., the performance of (opto-)electronic devices fabricated with them. By introducing electron-donating or electron-withdrawing groups as substituents, it is also possible to directly modify their (opto-)electronic properties. Moreover, substitution with chemically reactive substituents such as halogens allows further structural functionalization of graphene molecules.
Nevertheless, the introduction of different substituents at the edges of graphene molecules often requires tedious synthetic input, starting from the modification of basic building blocks. Moreover, the scope of substituents that can be introduced is often limited because of their instability or incompatibility under the reaction conditions. For example, the oxidative cyclodehydrogenation could be hampered by increased steric hindrance or modification of the electronic energy levels by the substitution. Therefore, direct edge functionalization of already formed graphene molecules is desirable but yet remains underexplored.
Halogens on the edges of graphene molecules can be converted to cyano groups,193,194 and be used for various metal-catalysed coupling reactions, such as Sonogashira, Suzuki and Buchwald coupling with terminal alkynes,195,196 boronic acids/esters197 and primary/secondary amines,193,194 respectively. Moreover, alkoxy and ester groups can also be introduced via palladium-catalysed coupling reactions.193 Nevertheless, these methods require the prior introduction of halogens.
In 2013, we reported a very efficient edge chlorination protocol for extended graphene molecules that consists simply of refluxing with an excess amount of iodine monochloride and a catalytic amount of AlCl3 in carbon tetrachloride.198 Syntheses of a series of perchlorinated graphene molecules, as represented by 85–89, have thus been achieved in excellent yields, with the number of sp2 carbon atoms ranging from 42 to 222 (Fig. 16). The electronic energy levels of the graphene molecules were lowered by the edge chlorination, providing an unprecedented class of n-type graphene molecules that function as electron transporting materials. The bandgaps of the graphene molecules were also reduced compared to their parent molecules. Furthermore, the planarity of the graphene molecules was distorted by the steric hindrance between the chloro groups densely attached on the peripheral positions, which drastically enhanced their solubility. The increased solubility enabled their liquid-phase characterizations, solution processing and even X-ray single-crystal analysis of unprecedentedly large PAH molecules, including 88 with 96 sp2 carbons. Interestingly, the crystal structure of 88 showed that the “gulf” position199 of graphene molecules was not chlorinated (Fig. 16), most likely due to the steric hindrance caused by the two chloro groups installed on the neighbouring positions.
 Fig. 16  Examples of edge-chlorinated graphene molecules. 
The chloro groups installed at the peripheries of the graphene molecules can be employed for further chemical functionalizations. Based on perchlorinated HBC 85, we very recently demonstrated edge-thiolation of graphene molecule, which provided unprecedented tri-sulphur-annulated HBC (TSHBC) 90 and di-sulphur-annulated HBC (DSHBC) 91 densely decorated with arylthio groups (Fig. 17).200 X-ray single-crystal analysis unambiguously demonstrated the structures of HBCs 90 and 91 with embedded thiophene rings, which constitute a new class of S-doped graphene molecules with S-annulated peripheries. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum of TSHBC 90 showed a significant red shift of 100 nm compared to that of parent p-HBC 2, indicating a decrease in the optical bandgap of 0.5 eV. Electrochemical studies of TSHBC 90 revealed three reversible reduction processes, which could be tuned by introducing electron-donating or electron-withdrawing groups on the arylthio substituents.
 Fig. 17  Synthesis of sulphur-annulated graphene molecules 90 and 91 through the thiolation of perchlorinated HBC 85. DMI: 1,3-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone. 
Shinokubo and co-workers applied the iridium-catalysed direct borylation reaction201 to p-HBC derivatives, such as 92, providing diborylated p-HBC 93 (Fig. 18).202,203 Starting from diborylated p-HBC 93, they synthesized a variety of p-HBC derivatives.202,204 First, diborylated p-HBC 93 was oxidized to dihydroxy-p-HBC 94 and then methylated to afford dimethoxy-p-HBC 95. p-HBC bistriflate 96 was also prepared from dihydroxy-p-HBC 94, which could be employed for various palladium-catalysed coupling reactions. Alkynyl-substituted p-HBC 97 and diamino-p-HBC 98 could thus be obtained through Sonogashira coupling and Buchwald–Hartwig amination, respectively. Furthermore, p-HBC bistriflate 96 could also be cyanated to dicyano-p-HBC 99 based on a cyanation protocol reported by Takagi et al.205 The photophysical properties of the p-HBC derivatives were strongly affected by their substituents, which demonstrated the significance of such direct edge functionalization protocols to easily introduce electron-donating and electron-withdrawing groups.
 Fig. 18  Derivatizations of p-HBC via iridium-catalysed direct edge borylation. Ar: mesityl; cod: cycloocta-l,5-diene; dtbpy: 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridyl; BPin: (pinacolato)boron; DBU: 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene; dba: dibenzylideneacetone; BINAP: 2,2′-bis(diphenylphosphino)-1,1′-binaphthyl; DPPF: 1,1′-diphenylphosphinoferrocene. 
The direct edge functionalization is of great importance not only for the modification of the peripheral substituents, but also for the construction of novel aromatic structures, as elegantly demonstrated by Scott, Itami et al. with the two-step synthesis of grossly warped graphene molecule 42 from corannulene (39) (Fig. 9).127 The direct palladium-catalysed C–H arylation with o-chloranil as the oxidant was shown to occur exclusively at the K-regions of PAHs, which allowed their selective two-step π-extension, for instance, from phenanthrene to dibenzo[g,p]chrysene.129 Moreover, Itami et al. very recently made a further advancement, realising direct one-step π-extension of PAHs at the K-regions through palladium-catalysed double C–H activation.206 Additionally, Scott et al. also reported iridium-catalysed five-fold borylation of corannulene (39) to afford 1,3,5,7,9-pentakis(BPin)corannulene (BPin = (pinacolato)boron), which provided facile access to a defined molecular fragment of [5,5]nanotube207 and the third synthetic route to graphene molecule 42via a single isomer of precursor 40.127 Scott et al. also pioneered π-extension at the bay regions of perylene and bisanthene through the Diels–Alder reaction.208,209 Notably, the bay regions of such PAHs can function as the dienophiles and undergo cycloadditions with activated ethylenes and acetylenes, as well as with arynes, providing facile access to PAHs extended at the bay positions.210–213
III. Synthesis of graphene nanoribbon
Solution-mediated synthesis of graphene nanoribbons
Whereas graphene molecules that are smaller than 5 nm can not bridge two electrodes in electronic devices, one-dimensionally extended GNRs allows fabrication of transistors based on single GNR strands, which is essential for the logic applications.24,31 Bottom-up synthetic efforts toward GNRs date back to 1970, when Stille et al. reported the first attempt to synthesize a fully conjugated ladder-type polymer consisting of hexagonal and pentagonal aromatic rings.214 Although such aromatic ladder-type polymers were not recognized as “GNRs” at that time, their aromatic, ribbon-like structures can indeed be viewed as GNRs with defined defects, i.e., five-membered rings. Nevertheless, the ladder-type polymer obtained by Stille et al. was almost insoluble due to strong π–π stacking interactions, leaving the structural characterization inconclusive at that time.215 This solubility problem was solved in 1994 by Schlüter et al., who introduced flexible alkyl loops that wrapped the aromatic polymers.215,216 Thanks to the increased solubility and improved synthetic procedure, the formation of an aromatic ladder-type polymer could be unambiguously confirmed by elemental analysis, solid-state 13C NMR and transmission ultraviolet spectroscopy, as well as through investigation of structurally related model compounds.
In 1993, Scherf et al. reported a fully conjugated ladder-type polymer, called “angular polyacene,” that consisted only of six-membered rings; this polymer can be considered one of the narrowest possible GNRs with a defined structure.217,218 The synthesis was carried out through carbonyl olefination of functionalized poly(para-phenylene) with B2S3217,218 or through McMurry coupling.219 In 1994, Swager et al. synthesized the same ladder-type polymer with different substituents through intramolecular electrophilic substitution with arylethynyl groups via the formation of a vinyl cations under an acidic condition.220
In an attempt to prepare wider ladder-type polymers, or GNRs, we have extended the nanographene synthesis based on oxidative cyclodehydrogenation to polymeric systems, using longitudinally elongated polyphenylenes as precursors.25 Beginning in 2001, syntheses of structurally defined GNRs were attempted using A2B2-type Diels–Alder polymerization for the preparation of polyphenylene precursors.221,222 However, this approach was unsuccessful because of the formation of numerous structural isomers during the polymerization step, resulting in a mixture of randomly kinked GNRs. Since 2000, Osuka et al. have developed the synthesis of one-dimensionally extended porphyrin tapes, achieving porphyrin 24-er in 2009 as the longest to date.223–226 Although the porphyrin tapes are neither PAHs nor GNRs by definition, they are exquisite examples of structurally well-defined aromatic nanoribbons.

Through A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization. 
The previous synthetic attempts that employed A2B2-type Diels–Alder polymerization did not afford structurally defined GNRs due to the structural isomerization. Thus, we have next performed the synthesis of GNRs through A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization, which can circumvent this problem. In 2008, structurally well-defined and straight N = 9 armchair GNRs were obtained for the first time using this polymerization method.227 With bulky alkyl chains at the peripheral positions, the GNRs were highly dispersible in organic solvents, allowing their liquid-phase processing and visualization on a graphite surface by STM. Nevertheless, the length of the observed GNRs was only up to ∼12 nm, which prompted us to develop other synthetic protocols for obtaining longer GNRs, namely, by enhancing the degree of polymerization during the synthesis of the polyphenylene precursors.
The low polymerization efficiency was considered to be due to the high steric hindrance between the coupling monomers and to the high rigidity of the poly(p-phenylene) backbone structure. We have thus devised the use of a kinked and more flexible poly(o-phenylene-p-phenylene) 102 as a GNR precursor.228 Polyphenylene precursor 102 was synthesized through a microwave-assisted A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization of o-dibromobenzenes 100 and benzene-1,4-diboronic ester 101 (Fig. 19). Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) analysis of the resulting polyphenylene 102b with dodecyl chains indicated a number-average molecular weight (Mn) of 9900 g mol−1 and a polydispersity index (PDI) of 1.4 against a poly(styrene) (PS) standard. This Mn value corresponded to the average length of approximately 25 nm for planarized GNR 103b, suggesting the advantage of such kinked polyphenylene backbones for the synthesis of longer GNRs via the A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization.
 Fig. 19  Synthesis of GNRs 103, 106 and 109 with various widths based on A2B2-type Suzuki polymerizations. BPin: (pinacolato)boron. 
Noted that the “molecular weights” from the SEC analyses are only approximate values estimated based on available calibration curves of existing polymer standards and do not represent the absolute molecular weights, which can be measured using laser light scattering experiments.229 Nevertheless, because the SEC molecular weights are useful for roughly comparing the sizes of polymers with similar structures, we include the SEC data in this article solely for this purpose.
In 2013, Jo and his colleagues extended the synthesis of GNR 103 by using naphthalene diboronic ester 104 and anthracene diboronic ester 107 in place of benzene diboronic ester 101 to obtain wider GNRs 106 and 109, respectively (Fig. 19).230 Whereas the degree of cyclodehydrogenation was demonstrated to be 100% for precursor 102 based on the relative intensities of aromatic protons in NMR spectra, the values for precursors 105 and 108 were determined to be 78% and 75%, respectively. This result suggested that cyclodehydrogenation has limited efficiency for precursors containing naphthalene or anthracene units. Notably, thin-film FET devices fabricated with GNRs 103c, 106 and 109 all exhibited ambipolar transport properties. Wider GNRs showed higher FET performances, and GNR 109 displayed the highest hole and electron mobilities of 3.25 × 10−2 and 7.11 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, probably as a result of the most extended π-conjugation.
In addition to modifying the width and edge structure, heteroatom doping of aromatic frameworks is another promising method for drastically modifying the electronic properties of GNRs, as discussed above for graphene molecules. Jo et al. conducted N-doping of GNRs using a mixture of dibromobenzene 100 and 2,3-dibromo-5,6-bis-dodecyloxy-pyrazine in the Suzuki polymerization with naphthalene diboronic ester 104.231 By changing the mixing ratio between the dibromopyrazine and dibromobenzene 100, GNR precursors with different degrees of N-doping could be obtained. Upon cyclodehydrogenation, 100% conversion into N-doped GNRs 110 and 111 (Fig. 20) was indicated by the NMR analysis. Notably, a higher degree of N-doping reduced the hole mobilities of the GNRs while increasing the electron mobilities. This result demonstrated that the charge-transfer behaviour of the GNRs could be tuned from ambipolar to n-type by N-doping. GNR 111 with the highest degree of N-doping exhibited the highest electron mobility of 1.02 × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was two orders of magnitude higher than that of non-doped GNR 106. Moreover, the threshold voltages of the GNRs varied from +20 V for non-doped GNR 106 to −6 V for N-doped GNR 111.
 Fig. 20  Structures of N-doped GNRs 110 and 111 prepared through A2B2-type Suzuki polymerizations. 
We have also synthesized GNR 114 featuring a unique “necklace-like” structure through the A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization of 4,4′-dibromobiphenyl-based precursor 112 and benzene-1,4-diboronic ester 101 (Fig. 21).232 Polyphenylene precursor 113 was obtained with a weight-average molecular weight (Mw) of 6900 g mol−1 and a PDI of 1.7 according to SEC analysis against a PS standard. MALDI-TOF MS analysis of precursor 113 displayed mass peaks up to m/z = 17000, corresponding to 113 with ten repeating units, which converted to GNR 114 with the length of approximately 13 nm. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum of GNR 114 revealed its relatively smaller optical bandgap of ∼1.4 eV, which was in line with the DFT calculation.
 Fig. 21  Synthesis of “necklace-like” GNR 114 through A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization of naphthalene-based monomer 112 and laterally extended GNRs 117 and 120 through AA-type Yamamoto polymerizations of p-terphenyl-based monomer 115 and o-terphenyl-based monomer 118, respectively. Obtained GNR 120 was rather short and mixed with shorter graphene molecules. 


Through AA-type Yamamoto polymerization. 
Although the use of the A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization enabled the preparation of various structurally defined GNRs, the longitudinal extensions of these GNRs, i.e., molecular weights of the polyphenylene precursors, were limited. This restriction was possibly a result of the inefficiency of the A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization and/or the necessity of two different monomers causing stoichiometry problems.233,234 The heterogeneous biphasic conditions of the Suzuki polymerization might also have a detrimental effect. Therefore, AA-type Yamamoto polymerization was considered to be more advantageous because this method requires only one dihalogenated monomer and is thus free of the stoichiometry problem. Moreover, the Yamamoto coupling is also known to be highly efficient in sterically hindered systems,235,236 which is important for the preparation of sterically congested GNR precursors.
In 2012, we synthesized laterally extended GNR 117 through the AA-type Yamamoto polymerization of dichlorinated monomer 115 (Fig. 21).237 Notably, the Yamamoto polymerization of 115 proceeded very efficiently, yielding polyphenylene precursor 116 with an Mw of 52000 g mol−1, an Mn of 44000 g mol−1 and a PDI of 1.2 according to SEC analysis against a PS standard, which were clearly higher than the molecular weights achieved using the A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization. The laterally extended GNR 117 with an estimated width of 1.54–1.98 nm featured a significantly lowered optical bandgap of approximately 1.1 eV with broad absorption into the near-infrared region of the optical spectrum.
We have next attempted a synthesis of even wider GNR 120 with an estimated width of ∼2.1 nm, corresponding to N = 18 armchair GNR, by employing monomer 118 (Fig. 21).238 While monomer 115 with a dichlorinated p-terphenyl backbone structure yielded GNR 117 with the same width as 115, monomer 118 with a dichlorinated o-terphenyl backbone led to GNR 120, which was twice as wide as the monomer. However, the AA-type Yamamoto polymerization of monomer 118 afforded polyphenylene precursor 119 with a relatively low Mw of 10000 g mol−1, an Mn of 7200 g mol−1 and a PDI of 1.4 based on SEC analysis against a PS standard, presumably because of high steric hindrance during the polymerization. The observed optical bandgap of GNR 120 was approximately 1.6 eV. These results indicated that the obtained GNR 120 was rather short, and mixed with oblong-shaped graphene molecules, based on the definition given in the introduction. Additionally, such relatively large graphene molecules could be successfully sublimed and integrated into FET devices through vapour-phase transport deposition, showing better on–off ratio compared to those processed from a liquid phase.239
In 2014, Sinitskii et al. reported the gram-scale synthesis and comprehensive characterizations of chevron-type GNR 123 through the AA-type Yamamoto polymerization of 6,11-dibromo-1,2,3,4-tetraphenyltriphenylene (121)240 and subsequent cyclodehydrogenation (Fig. 22).241 GNR 123 had previously been prepared in our group using the solution synthesis242 as well as the surface-assisted method37 as will be discussed in the next section. Nevertheless, they have demonstrated the well defined structure of the solution synthesized GNR 123 for the first time using STM under UHV conditions, clearly observing the planarization of three-dimensional precursor 122 into planar GNR 123.241 UV-Vis absorption measurements of GNR 123 in a dispersion revealed its optical bandgap of approximately 1.6 eV.243
 Fig. 22  Synthesis of pristine and N-doped chevron-type GNRs 123 and 126, respectively, based on AA-type Yamamoto polymerizations. N-doped precursor 125 and GNR 126 are obtained as mixtures of structural isomers. 
Moreover, using the same synthetic strategy, Sinitskii et al. conducted a solution synthesis of N-doped, chevron-type GNR 126, starting from 5-(6,11-dibromo-1,3,4-triphenyltriphenylen-2-yl)pyrimidine (124) (Fig. 22).244 STM analysis revealed a defined structure of GNR 126 similar to that of GNR 123, and energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements corroborated the successful N-doping. The optical bandgap of GNR 126 was derived from its UV-Vis absorption spectrum to be approximately 1.6 eV, which was the same as that in its non-doped analogue, GNR 123.


Through AB-type Diels–Alder polymerization. 
The use of the AA-type Yamamoto and A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization methods has enabled bottom-up synthesis of structurally defined GNRs with different widths and edge structures, reaching a length of >100 nm with chevron-type GNR 123.241
However, such metal-catalysed coupling reactions are generally limited by the use of expensive catalysts and relatively low molecular weights, in most cases leading to GNRs shorter than 50 nm. Turning back to the traditional polyphenylene synthesis, the Diels–Alder reaction is still appealing because it reproducibly offers Mw values higher than 100000 g mol−1 based on SEC analyses in many systems.221,245,246 Moreover, no catalyst or additive is necessary for the Diels–Alder reaction, which is highly advantageous for larger-scale syntheses.
In 2014, we have for the first time reported an AB-type Diels–Alder polymerization to prepare GNR 129 with a “cove-type” edge structure, which simultaneously enabled unprecedentedly high longitudinal extension over 600 nm (Fig. 23).229 King et al. has coined a term “gulf” for such edge configuration in 2008,199 but we use the term “cove-type” for these GNRs in this review, following older literature.9,40,81 In this approach, tetraphenylcyclopentadienone-based monomer 127 was rationally designed such that all the structural isomers of the resulting precursor 128 would lead to a single, straight GNR 129 with an estimated width of 0.69–1.13 nm (Fig. 23).229 Furthermore, C–C bond formation at undesired positions during the cyclodehydrogenation of 128 is hindered by the steric repulsion between benzene rings and bulky alkyl chains, ensuring the non-kinked and uniform structure of the resulting GNR 129.
 Fig. 23  Synthesis of GNRs 129 and 133 through AB-type Diels–Alder polymerization of monomers 127 and 131, respectively. 
The AB-type Diels–Alder polymerization of monomer 127a afforded precursor 128a with a markedly high Mw of 640000 g mol−1, an Mn of 340000 g mol−1 and a PDI of 1.9 based on SEC analysis, thereby proving the remarkably high efficiency of this polymerization method. The UV-Vis absorption spectrum of GNR 129 revealed a large optical bandgap of ∼1.9 eV, which was in excellent agreement with theoretical predictions.247 The edge chlorination method developed for the graphene molecules (Fig. 16) also proved to be applicable for GNR 129c to afford chlorinated GNR 130, which demonstrated lowered optical bandgap as expected by the theory (Fig. 24).198,247
 Fig. 24  Edge chlorination of GNR 129c to GNR 130. 
Furthermore, deposition of isolated strands of GNR 129a was achieved by immersing a functionalized Si/SiO2 substrate in a diluted dispersion of 129a, demonstrating that the GNRs extended over 600 nm.249,250 By treating the Si/SiO2 substrate with silane derivatives with different hydrophobicities, it is possible to control the density of the deposited GNRs.250 Transistor devices could be fabricated by directly depositing metal electrodes on such GNR strands, which exhibited good electrical conduction through the isolated GNRs.249,251
In 2014, we have achieved lateral extension of GNR 129 by using monomer 131 with four additional benzene rings at the peripheries of monomer 127 (Fig. 23).252 Notably, the Diels–Alder polymerization of monomer 131 led to polyphenylene precursor 132 with a high Mw of 550000 g mol−1, an Mn of 150000 g mol−1 and a PDI of 3.8 based on SEC analysis against the PS standard, which was comparable to the highest molecular weight values obtained for the narrower precursor 128. The resulting GNR 132 exhibited broad absorption profile into the NIR region with a lowered optical bandgap of approximately 1.2 eV, which was in good agreement with the DFT-calculated bandgap.253 Ultrafast terahertz (THz) photoconductivity measurements demonstrated excellent intrinsic mobility of GNR 132, similar to that of the narrower GNR 129a.248 Moreover, the broad absorption of GNR 132 enabled spectroscopic characterizations at a wider range of wavelengths, as represented by Raman and pump–probe THz photoconductivity analyses, which is indispensable for in-depth studies on the fundamental properties of such GNR structures.

Surface-assisted synthesis of graphene nanoribbons

Synthesis under UHV conditions. 
A number of structurally defined GNRs with different widths, edge structures and heteroatom doping have been successfully synthesized based on the solution-mediated method, as discussed in the previous section. However, microscopic visualization with atomic resolution and in-depth physical characterizations of such GNRs have remained a challenge because of their strong aggregation tendency and the difficulty of placing isolated strands of such GNRs on a surface without any contamination. In 2010, in collaboration with Fasel and his colleagues, we have developed a complementary approach to this solution synthesis, i.e., direct growth of GNRs on metal surfaces under UHV conditions.37 Using this surface-assisted method, atomically precise structures of the resulting GNRs can be clearly observed in situ using the state-of-the-art high-resolution STM.
This method combines the surface-assisted coupling of aryl halides developed for the preparation of molecular wires254 and covalently bonded networks255–257 with surface-catalysed cyclodehydrogenation, which we demonstrated for the synthesis of a defined triangular PAH, tribenzo[a,g,m]coronene, from a cyclic polyphenylene, cyclohexa-o-p-o-p-o-p-phenylene.258 In the surface synthesis of the GNRs, the corresponding polyphenylene precursors are first fabricated from rationally designed, dihalogenated monomers through the surface-assisted coupling of aryl halides. Here, biradical intermediates are generated through carbon–halogen bond cleavage upon thermal treatment of the monomer on the surface, followed by radical polymerization. Subsequently, the polyphenylene precursors are “planarized” and “graphitized” through surface-catalysed cyclodehydrogenation by annealing at higher temperatures to produce the desired GNRs. All these processes can be monitored using high-resolution STM, allowing full control over each synthetic step.
With Fasel and his colleagues, we have performed the first attempt for the surface-assisted synthesis of GNRs using 6,11-dibromo-1,2,3,4-tetraphenyltriphenylene (121) as the starting monomer,37 which we had previously synthesized as the monomer of blue-light-emitting polymer 122240 as well as for the solution synthesis of chevron-type GNR 123259 (Fig. 22). Remarkably, monomer 121 could be polymerized to polyphenylene 122 upon sublimation onto a Au(111) surface and thermal activation at 250 °C, followed by planarization and graphitization at 440 °C into atomically precise GNR 123 with the length of up to approximately 100 nm,260 which could be revealed by in situ high-resolution STM analysis.
By using 10,10′-dibromo-9,9′-bianthryl (134) as the monomer instead of monomer 121, we could obtain N = 7 armchair GNR 136 in a similar manner (Fig. 25a), which could clearly be visualized by in situ high-resolution STM (Fig. 25b).37 STS measurements revealed that the electronic bandgap of GNR 136 is 2.3 eV on the Au(111) surfaces261 in agreement with the theoretical estimation.262 Following our report, many other research groups have successfully prepared and studied atomically precise GNR 136. Grill et al. measured the conductivity of a single nanoribbon of 136 using an STM pulling technique.263 Liljeroth and Swart et al. obtained atomically resolved AFM images of GNR 136 and demonstrated creation of a single GNR-Au bond by removing one hydrogen atom with a local high voltage pulse.264 Moreover, Huang and Wee et al. showed that N = 7 GNR 136 could be fused in parallel with neighbouring nanoribbons on Ag(111) surfaces, leading to the formation of N = 14 and 21 armchair GNRs.265
 Fig. 25  (a) Surface-assisted synthesis of N = 7 armchair GNR 136, chiral (3,1)-GNR 137, and N = 13 armchair GNR 140. (b)–(d) STM images of (b) GNR 136 on an Au(111) surface, (c) GNR 137 on a Cu(111) surface, and (d) GNR 140 on an Au(111) surface with (b and d) partly or (c) completely overlaid molecular models (light blue). Panel b also shows partially overlaid DFT-based STM simulation (gray scale). The circular features in panel c are bromine atoms trapped between GNRs. (b) Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 37), Copyright (2010). (c) and (d) Reprinted with permission from (c) ref. 266; Copyright 2014 and (d) ref. 267; Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Spatially aligned GNRs can be grown by using stepped Au(788) surfaces, in contrast to the formation of randomly oriented GNRs on Au(111) surfaces. This spatial alignment allowed the detailed investigation of the occupied electronic states of the GNRs through angle-resolved UV photoemission spectroscopy (ARUPS).260,261 Such spatially well-aligned GNRs also enabled studies of their optical properties on the metal surfaces using reflectance difference spectroscopy (RDS), revealing the strong anisotropy of GNR 136 and its optical bandgap of 2.1 eV.262 The difference between this optical bandgap and the DFT-calculated electronic bandgap of 3.7 eV could be explained by the exciton binding energy. On the other hand, the electronic bandgap observed by the STS analyses was revealed to be reduced by the polarization of the metallic substrates.262
In 2014, Han and Asao et al. demonstrated that the same monomer 134 undergoes intermolecular cyclodehydrogenation at different configurations on a Cu(111) surface, leading to an unprecedented formation of chiral-edge (3,1)-GNR 137 with atomic precision (Fig. 25a and c).266 In contrast to the GNR synthesis on a Au(111) surface, where the biradical intermediates can freely diffuse, the monomers on a Cu(111) surface are demobilized even at elevated temperatures and the cyclodehydrogenation occurs only inside preassembled domains. Thus the resulting GNRs are distributed along distinct directions relative to the Cu(111) atomic rows, which is predetermined by the self-assembly of the monomers.
By extending dibromobianthryl monomer 134 to 2,2′-di[(1,1′-biphenyl)-2-yl]-10,10′-dibromo-9,9′-bianthracene (138) with two extra biphenyl units at the peripheries, Fischer, Crommie, and co-workers achieved a selective synthesis of laterally extended N = 13 armchair GNR 140 on a Au(111) surface and visualized its atomically precise structure by high-resolution STM (Fig. 25a and d).267 STS analysis revealed the electronic bandgap of N = 13 GNR 140 on Au(111) to be approximately 1.4 eV, which was approximately 1 eV smaller than the STS bandgap of N = 7 GNR 136.261,263
In 2015, these authors reported a GNR heterojunction or block copolymer, consisting of two GNR segments with different widths.39 Through co-sublimation of monomers 134 and 138, a mixture of N = 7–13 GNR heterojunctions such as 141 could be obtained, as revealed by in situ STM observation (Fig. 26). STM and STS investigations revealed that the N = 7–13 GNR heterojunctions have height-dependent electronic structures, which are similar to that of type I semiconductor junctions, thereby demonstrating molecular bandgap engineering in a single strand of GNR.
 Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structure of N = 7–13 GNR heterojunction 141 and (b) its high-resolution STM image on an Au(111) surface. Inset: STM image of a larger area, showing various N = 7–13 GNR heterojunctions. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 39), Copyright (2015). 
In the same year, with Fuchs and Chi we described a surface synthesis of N = 5 armchair GNRs on Au(111), starting from 1,4,5,8-tetrabromonaphthalene (142) as the monomer (Fig. 27a and b).268 In contrast to above-mentioned examples, the preparation of GNR 142 did not require the final cyclodehydrogenation step and could be completed at significantly lower temperature, i.e., ∼300 °C. High-resolution STM analyses demonstrated that Au–naphthalene hybrid, bis(1,8-naphthylene)diaurate, was formed as an intermediate, which enabled the selective synthesis of the desired N = 5 armchair GNR structure.
 Fig. 27  (a) Surface-assisted synthesis of N = 5 armchair GNR 143 and cove-edged GNR 146. (b and c) STM images on Au(111) surfaces of (b) GNR 143 and (c) GNR 146.108 (b) Inset: DFT-simulated STM image of GNR 143. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268; Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, with Ruffieux and Fasel we developed a synthetic route toward cove-edged GNR 146 employing 11,11′-dibromo-5,5′-bischrysene (144) as the monomer (Fig. 27a and c).108 Whereas a variety of GNRs with armchair-type edges have been achieved, GNR 146 is the first GNR with the cove edge structure. Short dimer and tetramer of GNR 146 were separately synthesized in solution as model compounds, and single-crystal X-ray analysis of the tetramer revealed non-planar structures of such cove-edged GNRs with alternate “up-down” conformations of the peripheral benzene rings. DFT calculations predicted a bandgap of 1.70 eV for cove-edged GNR 146, which is relatively lower than that of slightly broader GNR 129.253
Whereas most of the surface fabrication of GNRs has thus far been performed with triphenylene- and bianthryl-based monomers 121 and 134, respectively, and their derivatives, it is also possible to design feasible syntheses based on simpler oligophenylene monomers. In 2014, Amsharov et al. reported an attempt to synthesize N = 15 armchair GNR 149 from dibromo-p-pentaphenyl 147 as the monomer (Fig. 28a).269 STM analysis revealed the formation of broad GNRs with a width of 2.1 nm, consistent with the molecular models (Fig. 28c and d). However, a certain amount of defects could not be avoided, suggesting difficulties in fabricating atomically precise N = 15 GNR 149 from this monomer. In 2015, Basagni and Sedona et al. reported the synthesis of N = 6 armchair GNR 152 from dibromo-p-terphenyl 150 through the formation of poly(para-phenylene) (PPP 151) and subsequent fusion of neighbouring PPPs (Fig. 28a).270 By controlling the annealing temperature, PPP 151 and GNR 152 could be obtained with high selectivity and their atomically precise structures were revealed by STM observations (Fig. 28e and f, respectively). Additionally, Endo et al. showed that GNRs can be prepared on a Au(111) surface from n-alkane as the monomer, but precise structural control remains elusive.271
 Fig. 28  Surface-assisted syntheses of (a) N = 15 armchair GNR 149 from dibromo-p-pentaphenyl 147 and (b) N = 6 armchair GNR 152 from dibromo-p-terphenyl 150. (c)–(f) STM images of (c), (d) GNR 149, (e) PPP 151 and (f) GNR 152 on Au(111) surfaces with partly overlaid molecular models. (c and d) Reprinted from ref. 269, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier. (e and f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 270; Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 


N-doping of GNRs under UHV conditions. 
Similar to the solution-mediated synthesis, selectively N-doped GNRs can be fabricated on metal surfaces under UHV conditions by using N-doped monomers.38,272,273 For example, Bronner, Hecht and Tegeder et al. reported that the use of 4,4′-(6,11-dibromo-1,4-diphenyltriphenylene-2,3-diyl)dipyridine (153) as the monomer led to the formation of N-doped GNR 155 on a Au(111) surface, following the procedure developed for the preparation of non-doped GNRs (Fig. 29a).272 With Du and Gao we revealed atomically precise structures of N-doped GNR 155 by high-resolution STM, showing an interesting side-by-side alignment with the neighbouring GNRs in an antiparallel arrangement, which was slightly shifted to maximize the attractive N⋯H interactions (Fig. 29b).273 Such alignment was not observed for non-doped chevron-type GNR 123, which showed apparently no interaction between two GNRs.37,38
 Fig. 29  (a) Surface-assisted synthesis of N-doped chevron-type GNR 155 and GNR heterojunction 157. (b) High-resolution STM image of N-doped GNR 155, showing an antiparallel alignment to maximize the attractive N⋯H interactions. DFT-based STM simulation model and a formula chemical structure are partially overlaid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273; Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (c and d) STM images of GNR heterojunction 157. In panel d, the N-doped and non-doped GNR segments are highlighted in blue and light grey, respectively, as determined from the panels e and f. (e and f) Differential conductance dI/dV maps observed at bias voltages of (e) −0.35 V and (f) −1.65 V. The heterostructure profiles seen in the panel c are drawn as blue or white dashed lines in panels d–f as a guide to the eye. Scale bars in panels (c)–(f) indicates 2 nm. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 38), Copyright (2014). 
Moreover, chevron-type GNRs with different degree of N-doping could be synthesized, containing one, two or four nitrogen atoms in each repeating unit, by employing tetraphenyltriphenylene-based monomers with different degrees of N-doping, such as 153 and 5,5′-(6,11-dibromo-1,4-diphenyltriphenylene-2,3-diyl)dipyrimidine (156) (Fig. 29).38,272,273 Theoretical as well as experimental investigations showed that the N-doping drastically lowered the electronic energy levels of the GNRs to induce n-type semiconductor properties, while not significantly affecting the bandgap. The shift of the energy levels critically depends on the degree of N-doping, which enabled precise tuning of the energy offset by molecularly controlling the degree of the doping.
In 2014, together with Fasel and co-workers, we reported the synthesis of GNR heterojunction 157, consisting of short segments of N-doped and non-doped chevron-type GNRs, through the alternating deposition of N- and non-doped monomers 156 and 121, respectively (Fig. 29a).38 In an STM image of GNR heterojunction 157, the N-doped GNR segment cannot be distinguished from the non-doped segment at first glance, but the attractive antiparallel alignment between the N-doped segments provides an indication (Fig. 29c). Moreover, the differential conductance dI/dV maps exhibited a clear inversion of the contrast when measured at bias voltages of −0.35 and −1.65 V (Fig. 29e and f, respectively), which enabled assignment of the N-doped and non-doped segments as highlighted in blue and light grey, respectively, in Fig. 29d. GNR heterojunction 157 featured a type II staggered gap configuration with a band offset of ∼0.5 eV, thus realizing a molecular p–n junction in a single GNR.
Although the surface-assisted synthesis enabled the preparation and characterization of atomically precise GNRs with different widths, edge structures, heteroatom doping and heterojunctions, such GNRs are all bound to the metal surfaces and thus cannot be directly integrated into electronic devices. This makes it imperative to develop a reliable method for cleanly transferring the GNRs from the metal surfaces onto Si/SiO2 or other dielectric substrates. One way to achieve this is to grow the GNRs on epitaxial Au(111) films on mica substrates. Both the mica substrates and the thin gold films can be easily removed from the GNRs, allowing their transfer onto an arbitrary substrate, such as SiO2, CaF2, and Al2O3.38 This transfer method allowed the fabrication of working FET devices based on surface-synthesized GNRs.274 Nevertheless, further improvements in the transfer and device fabrication processes are needed to obtain GNR-based FET devices with the high performance predicted by theoretical studies. On the other hand, the direct growth of GNRs on insulating substrates is more desirable because it will allow for the fabrication of electronic devices without the complicated transfer process. One possible way to achieve this goal is to use photo-induced coupling of dibrominated monomers followed by graphitization under e-bean irradiation.275 Using this method, monomer 134 could indeed be converted to GNR-like structures on a mica substrate, although obtaining precise structural control is still in progress.


Synthesis under CVD conditions. 
The surface-assisted GNR synthesis can reliably produce atomically precise structures, but this method under UHV conditions requires complex and expensive setups and is highly time-consuming, which hinders the preparation of large amounts of GNRs and thus their practical application. Therefore, it is straightforward to attempt to synthesize GNRs under low-vacuum conditions with simpler setups. In 2014, Sakaguchi and Nakae et al. reported the fabrication of GNR films under CVD conditions at a pressure of 1 Torr with a flow of argon gas.276 The synthesis was performed by annealing dihalogenated monomers on Au(111) surfaces, similar to the UHV method. Monomer 134, a mixture of 3,9-dibromoperylene and 3,10-dibromoperylene, and 1,4-bis(4-bromophenyl)-2,3,6,11-tetraphenyltriphenylene were employed as monomers to obtain bulk films of multilayer GNRs with three different widths, corresponding to N = 7, 5 and 9 armchair GNRs, respectively.
The GNR films CVD-grown on Au(111) surfaces could be transferred onto any substrate using a wet process, which enabled UV-Vis absorption analysis of the GNRs. The absorption spectra revealed optical bandgaps of 0.8, 1.6 and 1.3 eV for N = 5, 7 and 9 GNRs, respectively, which was in agreement with the theoretically predicted trend. FET devices were also fabricated on transferred GNR films, exhibiting a charge-carrier mobility of up to 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. Moreover, the GNR films also showed photoconductivity with a current gain upon illumination of up to 7.3%, which is better than the value of 2.7% measured for P3HT. This result indicated that such CVD-grown GNRs could function as excellent photoconductors. Nevertheless, more detailed studies and comprehensive characterizations are necessary to elucidate if the CVD-grown GNRs are chemically identical as GNRs fabricated from the same monomers under the UHV conditions.

Synthesis of GNRs confined in carbon nanotubes
Bottom-up GNR synthesis has also been reported through thermal or electron (e)-beam mediated polymerization and fusion of aromatic molecules that are confined inside single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs).277–279 In 2011, Talyzin and Anoshkin et al. demonstrated that perylene and coronene confined in SWCNTs could be converted into GNRs encapsulated in the SWCNTs (GNR@SWCNT) by heating at approximately 400–500 °C (Fig. 30a).277 The aromatic molecules were closely aligned one-dimensionally inside the SWCNT, enabling the polymerization and fusion into GNRs. The structures of the resulting GNRs were dependent on the starting monomer. In 2015, Shinohara et al. succeeded in studying the optical properties of the GNRs inside SWCNTs by covalent functionalization of the nanotube walls with 4-bromobenzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate.280 The excitonic absorption peaks of the nanotubes were efficiently suppressed, revealing the optical transitions of the coronene-based GNRs at 1.5 and 3.4 eV.
 Fig. 30  (a) A TEM image of a GNR@SWCNT prepared from coronene (top) and its model (bottom); light blue: GNR, red: SWCNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277; Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic illustration of the confinement of fullerene derivative 158 in a SWCNT; grey: carbon, red: oxygen, purple: nitrogen, yellow: sulphur. (c) An aberration-corrected high-resolution TEM image, (d) a simulated TEM image, and (e) a molecular model of a GNR with sulphur-terminated edges confined in a SWCNT; grey: carbon, yellow: sulphur. (b), (d), (e), (f) Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials (ref. 278), Copyright (2011). 
In 2011, Khlobystov et al. reported the fabrication of GNR@SWCNT with sulphur-terminated edges from S-containing fullerene derivative 158 (Fig. 30b) or a mixture of pristine fullerene and tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) confined in SWCNTs.278 By e-beam irradiation, such monomers could be fused to S-doped GNRs inside a SWCNT, where the S atoms terminated the reactive edges of the as-formed GNRs (Fig. 30c–e). This is in contrast to the fact that pristine fullerenes are transformed into narrower guest-SWCNTs inside host-SWCNTs through a similar treatment.281 Additionally, such S-doped GNRs could also be generated from TTF alone confined in SWCNTs.278,279 The GNRs fabricated inside the SWCNTs feature highly uniform widths and very smooth edge structures compared to top-down fabricated GNRs, but the structural precision achievable by this method is considerably lower than that of the other bottom-up synthetic approaches described in the previous section. Moreover, selective removal of the CNTs without affecting the confined GNRs is highly challenging, hindering further studies and application of such GNRs.
IV. Conclusions and outlook
Recent advancements in the chemical synthesis of nanographenes with newly developed “non-conventional” methods have vastly expanded the scope of available graphene molecules, including a variety of symmetries, configurations, embedded seven- or eight-membered rings, heteroatom doping, and edge functionalization. The synthesis was further extended to the longitudinally extended polymeric systems, providing access to structurally well-defined GNRs with varying configurations, i.e., different widths, lengths, edge structures and selectively doped heteroatoms. Precise GNR synthesis has been achieved using both the conventional solution-mediated method and the modern surface-based approach under UHV conditions. The structural variations in graphene molecules and GNRs have allowed fine-tuning of their (opto-)electronic properties, which would be the basis for the future application of such nanocarbon materials.
In particular, heteroatom doping was found to be an effective strategy modulating the electronic properties of graphene molecules and GNRs. Heteroatom doping in different structures with varying doping positions and concentrations, as well as the incorporation of other main group elements beyond the examples summarized above, would further enrich their chemistry. Particularly, further developments of B-, BN- and P-doped graphene molecules, as well as syntheses of silicon (Si)-, germanium (Ge)- and selenium (Se)-doped graphene molecules are awaited. Regarding GNRs, the fabrication of N-doped structures with different configurations and doping concentrations and the preparation of S-, B-, or BN-doped analogues will be an important next step. Pushing the limit of the size and doping concentration will not only provide new materials with interesting properties but also enable elucidation of the fundamental structure–property relationships of heteroatom-doped graphene molecules and GNRs.
Although most of the GNRs synthesized to date feature, in principle, armchair edge structures, GNRs with a zigzag edge configuration are predicted to show localized edge states that can be spin polarized, and thus these GNRs are interesting for spintronic applications.27–29 We have been working on the surface-assisted synthesis of partial and full zigzag GNRs and have obtained positive indications that such GNRs indeed possess localized states at the edges.
In addition to heteroatom doping and the zigzag edge configuration, further major challenges in the synthesis of GNRs include (1) obtaining GNRs with different widths, particularly lateral extension over 3 nm to achieve a bandgap smaller than 1 eV; (2) incorporating non-six-membered rings, such as five-, seven- or eight-membered rings, which will also serve as models of grain boundaries in graphene; (3) structurally distorting GNRs in similar manners to contorted graphene molecules; (4) achieving greater control in fabricating GNR heterojunctions or block copolymers to form longer “blocks” and (5) functionalizing the GNR edges and/or terminals, for example, to tune the energy levels with electron-donating/-withdrawing groups or to enhance the affinity to desired substrates or electrode materials. These are all important challenges for the future nanoelectronic and optoelectronic applications of such nanographene materials.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge all of our distinguished partner groups and dedicated associates, who enabled our contributions to the achievements described in this article. We thank the financial support by EU Projects GENIUS (ITN-264694), UPGRADE and MoQuaS, ERC-Adv.-Grant 267160 (NANOGRAPH), Graphene Flagship (No. CNECT-ICT-604391), the Office of Naval Research BRC Program (molecular synthesis and characterization) and DFG Priority Program SPP 1459. We are also thankful to fruitful collaborations with BASF SE, Ludwigshafen.
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2009, 324, 875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Falko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rieger and K. Müllen, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2010, 23, 315 CAS .
M. Bacon, S. J. Bradley and T. Nann, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. W. Hwang, M.-K. Kim, D. Y. Shin, D. H. Shin, C. O. Kim, S. B. Yang, J. H. Park, E. Hwang, S.-H. Choi, G. Ko, S. Sim, C. Sone, H. J. Choi, S. Bae and B. H. Hong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6531 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Scholl and C. Seer, Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1912, 394, 111 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Scholl and C. Seer, Chem. Ber., 1922, 55, 330 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Scholl, C. Seer and R. Weitzenböck, Chem. Ber., 1910, 43, 2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Clar and J. F. Stephen, Tetrahedron, 1965, 21, 467 CrossRef CAS .
E. Clar and W. schmidt, Tetrahedron, 1979, 35, 2673 CrossRef CAS .
E. Clar and D. G. Stewart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1953, 75, 2667 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan and L.-s. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3295 RSC .
K. K. Baldridge and J. S. Siegel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ball, Y. Zhong, Y. Wu, C. Schenck, F. Ng, M. Steigerwald, S. Xiao and C. Nuckolls, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Pisula, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Morita, S. Suzuki, K. Sato and T. Takui, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Zeng and J. Wu, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 2894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Narita, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Yazyev, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Terrones, A. R. Botello-Méndez, J. Campos-Delgado, F. López-Urías, Y. I. Vega-Cantú, F. J. Rodríguez-Macías, A. L. Elías, E. Muñoz-Sandoval, A. G. Cano-Márquez, J.-C. Charlier and H. Terrones, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 351 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Nature, 2006, 444, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Yazyev, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 056501 CrossRef .
W. Y. Kim and K. S. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-R. Wang, Y. Shi and R. Zhang, Chin. Phys. B, 2013, 22, 098505 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Han, B. Özyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Y. Lin, M. Rooks and P. Avouris, Physica E, 2007, 40, 228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tapaszto, G. Dobrik, P. Lambin and L. P. Biro, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Kosynkin, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, J. R. Lomeda, A. Dimiev, B. K. Price and J. M. Tour, Nature, 2009, 458, 872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, L. Zhang, X. Wang, G. Diankov and H. Dai, Nature, 2009, 458, 877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. P. Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. Feng, K. Müllen and R. Fasel, Nature, 2010, 466, 470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, C. A. Pignedoli, L. Talirz, P. Ruffieux, H. Söde, L. Liang, V. Meunier, R. Berger, R. Li, X. Feng, K. Müllen and R. Fasel, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chen, T. Cao, C. Chen, Z. Pedramrazi, D. Haberer, D. G. de Oteyza, F. R. Fischer, S. G. Louie and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Watson, A. Fechtenkötter and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jiang, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6113 RSC .
B. Schmaltz, T. Weil and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Segawa, T. Maekawa and K. Itami, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sygula, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, H. Ge, S. H. Liu and J. Yin, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 22727 RSC .
Z. Sun, Q. Ye, C. Chi and J. Wu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7857 RSC .
Y. Tobe, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Tsefrikas and L. T. Scott, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Zeng and J. Wu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4151 RSC .
T. Kubo, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 111 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kubo, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Konishi, Y. Hirao, H. Kurata, T. Kubo, M. Nakano and K. Kamada, Pure Appl. Chem., 2014, 86, 497 CrossRef CAS .
T. Amaya and T. Hirao, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mojica, J. A. Alonso and F. Méndez, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2013, 26, 526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jin, J. Zhao, N. Asao and Y. Yamamoto, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 3554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Schmidt and D. Lentz, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 171 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Bettinger and C. Tönshoff, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Watanabe, K.-Y. Chen, Y. J. Chang and T. J. Chow, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mateo-Alonso, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6311 RSC .
U. H. F. Bunz, J. U. Engelhart, B. D. Lindner and M. Schaffroth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, C. Li and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1938 RSC .
W. Jiang, Y. Li and Z. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Saleh, C. Shen and J. Crassous, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3680 RSC .
M. Gingras, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 968 RSC .
M. Gingras, G. Felix and R. Peresutti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1007 RSC .
M. Gingras, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1051 RSC .
Y. Shen and C.-F. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Shi, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. Wu, S. Hua Liu and J. Yin, Curr. Org. Chem., 2012, 16, 2124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grzybowski, K. Skonieczny, H. Butenschön and D. T. Gryko, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dorel, C. Manzano, M. Grisolia, W.-H. Soe, C. Joachim and A. M. Echavarren, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6932 RSC .
A. Matsumoto, M. Suzuki, D. Kuzuhara, H. Hayashi, N. Aratani and H. Yamada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Simpson, J. D. Brand, A. J. Berresheim, L. Przybilla, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2002, 8, 1424 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Sarhan and C. Bolm, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2730 RSC .
S. R. Waldvogel and S. Trosien, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9109 RSC .
L. Zhai, R. Shukla and R. Rathore, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 3474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. King, J. Kroulík, C. R. Robertson, P. Rempala, C. L. Hilton, J. D. Korinek and L. M. Gortari, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 2279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Morgenroth, C. Kübel, M. Müller, U. M. Wiesler, A. J. Berresheim, M. Wagner and K. Müllen, Carbon, 1998, 36, 833 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Ormsby, T. D. Black, C. L. Hilton, Bharat and B. T. King, Tetrahedron, 2008, 64, 11370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dötz, J. D. Brand, S. Ito, L. Gherghel and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 7707 CrossRef .
K. Yoshimura, L. Przybilla, S. Ito, J. D. Brand, M. Wehmeir, H. J. Räder and K. Müllen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2001, 202, 215 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dou, X. Yang, G. J. Bodwell, M. Wagner, V. Enkelmann and K. Müllen, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 2485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arslan, F. J. Uribe-Romo, B. J. Smith and W. R. Dichtel, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3973 RSC .
A. C. Whalley, K. N. Plunkett, A. A. Gorodetsky, C. L. Schenck, C.-Y. Chiu, M. L. Steigerwald and C. Nuckolls, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 132 RSC .
S. J. Hein, H. Arslan, I. Keresztes and W. R. Dichtel, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 4416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Arslan, J. D. Saathoff, D. N. Bunck, P. Clancy and W. R. Dichtel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, H. Peng, G. Zhang, Q. Lu, J. Chang, Y. Dong, X. Shi and J. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Gorodetsky, C.-Y. Chiu, T. Schiros, M. Palma, M. Cox, Z. Jia, W. Sattler, I. Kymissis, M. Steigerwald and C. Nuckolls, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chiu, B. Kim, A. A. Gorodetsky, W. Sattler, S. Wei, A. Sattler, M. Steigerwald and C. Nuckolls, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1480 RSC .
L. Chen, S. R. Puniredd, Y.-Z. Tan, M. Baumgarten, U. Zschieschang, V. Enkelmann, W. Pisula, X. Feng, H. Klauk and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, K. S. Mali, S. R. Puniredd, M. Baumgarten, K. Parvez, W. Pisula, S. De Feyter and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pérez, D. Peña and E. Guitián, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 5981 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Peña, S. Escudero, D. Pérez, E. Guitián and L. Castedo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 2659 CrossRef .
D. Peña, D. Pérez, E. Guitián and L. Castedo, Org. Lett., 1999, 1, 1555 CrossRef .
C. Romero, D. Peña, D. Pérez and E. Guitián, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Alonso, A. E. Díaz-Álvarez, A. Criado, D. Pérez, D. Peña and E. Guitián, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schuler, S. Collazos, L. Gross, G. Meyer, D. Pérez, E. Guitián and D. Peña, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Zhou and T. Yamamoto, J. Organomet. Chem., 1991, 414, 119 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Rüdiger, M. Porz, M. Schaffroth, F. Rominger and U. H. F. Bunz, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 12725 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Shimizu and T. Hiyama, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 8069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-N. Feng, Y.-C. Hsieh and Y.-T. Wu, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 266 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Hitt and J. M. O'Connor, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 7904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Amsharov, M. A. Kabdulov and M. Jansen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Amsharov and P. Merz, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-A. Chen and R.-S. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 8023 CrossRef CAS .
T.-A. Chen and R.-S. Liu, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, B.-W. Li, Y.-Z. Tan, A. Giannakopoulos, C. Sanchez-Sanchez, D. Beljonne, P. Ruffieux, R. Fasel, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6097 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yan, K. Cai, C. Zhang and D. Zhao, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 4654 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Li, C.-I. Wang, H.-Y. Liao, R. Chaudhuri and R.-S. Liu, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 9203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Thilgen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ohno, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2013, 2, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Huang, C. S. Ruiz-Vargas, A. M. van der Zande, W. S. Whitney, M. P. Levendorf, J. W. Kevek, S. Garg, J. S. Alden, C. J. Hustedt, Y. Zhu, J. Park, P. L. McEuen and D. A. Muller, Nature, 2011, 469, 389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, Z. Lee, W. Regan, C. Kisielowski, M. F. Crommie and A. Zettl, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kurasch, J. Kotakoski, O. Lehtinen, V. Skákalová, J. Smet, C. E. Krill, A. V. Krasheninnikov and U. Kaiser, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lahiri, Y. Lin, P. Bozkurt, I. I. Oleynik and M. Batzill, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. László and L. Philippe, New J. Phys., 2013, 15, 035024 CrossRef .
Y.-T. Wu and J. S. Siegel, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto and H. Matsubara, J. Synth. Org. Chem., Jpn., 1995, 53, 318 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Dopper and H. Wynberg, Tetrahedron Lett., 1972, 13, 763 CrossRef .
T. J. Seiders and J. S. Siegel, Chem. Br., 1995, 31, 313 Search PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, T. Harada, M. Nakazaki, T. Naka, Y. Kai, S. Harada and N. Kasai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 7171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, Y. Saitho, D. Iwaki and T. Ooka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30, 1173 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Xu, R. Mao and Q. Miao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Cheung, X. Xu and Q. Miao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pradhan, P. Dechambenoit, H. Bock and F. Durola, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 2266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kawasumi, Q. Zhang, Y. Segawa, L. T. Scott and K. Itami, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, K. Kawasumi, Y. Segawa, K. Itami and L. T. Scott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mochida, K. Kawasumi, Y. Segawa and K. Itami, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Salcedo, L. E. Sansores, A. Picazo and L. Sansón, THEOCHEM, 2004, 678, 211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Thulin and O. Wennerström, Acta Chem. Scand., Ser. B, 1976, 30, 369 CrossRef .
C.-N. Feng, M.-Y. Kuo and Y.-T. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sakamoto and T. Suzuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Miller, A. K. Duncan, S. T. Schneebeli, D. L. Gray and A. C. Whalley, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 3705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schlütter, T. Nishiuchi, V. Enkelmann and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1538 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067 RSC .
U. N. Maiti, W. J. Lee, J. M. Lee, Y. Oh, J. Y. Kim, J. E. Kim, J. Shim, T. H. Han and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Liu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335 RSC .
X.-Y. Wang, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Campbell, A. J. V. Marwitz and S. Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. D. Bosdet and W. E. Piers, Can. J. Chem., 2009, 87, 8 CrossRef .
M. Takase, V. Enkelmann, D. Sebastiani, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Takase, T. Narita, W. Fujita, M. S. Asano, T. Nishinaga, H. Benten, K. Yoza and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gońka, P. J. Chmielewski, T. Lis and M. Stępień, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16399 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Draper, D. J. Gregg and R. Madathil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Draper, D. J. Gregg, E. R. Schofield, W. R. Browne, M. Duati, J. G. Vos and P. Passaniti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Wijesinghe, B. S. Lankage, G. M. O. Maille, S. D. Perera, D. Nolan, L. Wang and S. M. Draper, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10637 RSC .
J. F. Wei, B. Han, Q. A. Guo, X. Y. Shi, W. L. Wang and N. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. He, A. B. Pun, L. M. Klivansky, A. M. McGough, Y. Ye, J. Zhu, J. Guo, S. J. Teat and Y. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3920 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berger, A. Giannakopoulos, P. Ravat, M. Wagner, D. Beljonne, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Berger, M. Wagner, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 436 RSC .
S. Ito, Y. Tokimaru and K. Nozaki, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 221 RSC .
S. Ito, Y. Tokimaru and K. Nozaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Gadekar, B. K. Reddy and V. G. Anand, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8342 RSC .
K. Skonieczny and D. T. Gryko, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 5753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Cinar and T. Ozturk, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 3036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takimiya, I. Osaka, T. Mori and M. Nakano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, X.-Y. Wang, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Synlett, 2014, 313 CAS .
K. Y. Chernichenko, V. V. Sumerin, R. V. Shpanchenko, E. S. Balenkova and V. G. Nenajdenko, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, X.-Y. Wang, K. Shi, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 4378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Oshima, A. Fukazawa, T. Sasamori and S. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-Q. Lu, Y.-N. Zhou, X.-Y. Yan, K. Shi, Y.-Q. Zheng, M. Luo, X.-C. Wang, J. Pei, H. Xia, L. Zoppi, K. K. Baldridge, J. S. Siegel and X.-Y. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1681 RSC .
X. Feng, J. Wu, M. Ai, W. Pisula, L. Zhi, J. P. Rabe and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Martin, B. Gil, S. D. Perera and S. M. Draper, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 3616 RSC .
S. J. Kang, J. B. Kim, C.-Y. Chiu, S. Ahn, T. Schiros, S. S. Lee, K. G. Yager, M. F. Toney, Y.-L. Loo and C. Nuckolls, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Escande and M. J. Ingleson, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6257 RSC .
Z. Zhou, A. Wakamiya, T. Kushida and S. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Saito, K. Matsuo and S. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dou, S. Saito, K. Matsuo, I. Hisaki and S. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsuo, S. Saito and S. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Hertz, M. Bolte, H.-W. Lerner and M. Wagner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015 DOI:10.1002/anie.201502977 .
X.-Y. Wang, H.-R. Lin, T. Lei, D.-C. Yang, F.-D. Zhuang, J.-Y. Wang, S.-C. Yuan and J. Pei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Wang, F.-D. Zhuang, X. Zhou, D.-C. Yang, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8152 RSC .
J. S. A. Ishibashi, J. L. Marshall, A. Mazière, G. J. Lovinger, B. Li, L. N. Zakharov, A. Dargelos, A. Graciaa, A. Chrostowska and S.-Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Neue, J. F. Araneda, W. E. Piers and M. Parvez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, F. Zhang, J. Liu, R. Z. Tang, Y. B. Fu, D. Q. Wu, Q. Xu, X. D. Zhuang, G. F. He and X. L. Feng, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 5714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hatakeyama, S. Hashimoto, S. Seki and M. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. D. Bosdet, W. E. Piers, T. S. Sorensen and M. Parvez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. H. Emslie, W. E. Piers and M. Parvez, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Wang, F.-D. Zhuang, R.-B. Wang, X.-C. Wang, X.-Y. Cao, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Wang, F.-D. Zhuang, X.-C. Wang, X.-Y. Cao, J.-Y. Wang and J. Pei, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4368 RSC .
G. Li, W.-W. Xiong, P.-Y. Gu, J. Cao, J. Zhu, R. Ganguly, Y. Li, A. C. Grimsdale and Q. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, H. Zhang, J. Liang, H. Ge, C. Chi, J. Wu, S. H. Liu and J. Yin, J. Org. Chem., 2012, 77, 11319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krieg, F. Reicherter, P. Haiss, M. Ströbele, K. Eichele, M.-J. Treanor, R. Schaub and H. F. Bettinger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Matano and H. Imahori, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2009, 7, 1258 CAS .
T. Baumgartner and R. Réau, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4681 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stolar and T. Baumgartner, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hatakeyama, S. Hashimoto and M. Nakamura, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 2130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hashimoto, S. Nakatsuka, M. Nakamura and T. Hatakeyama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-A. Bouit, A. Escande, R. Szűcs, D. Szieberth, C. Lescop, L. Nyulászi, M. Hissler and R. Réau, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sergeyev, W. Pisula and Y. H. Geerts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1902 RSC .
S. Ito, M. Wehmeier, J. D. Brand, C. Kübel, R. Epsch, J. P. Rabe and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2000, 6, 4327 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, X. Dou, W. Pisula, X. Y. Yang, D. Q. Wu, G. Floudas, X. L. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 702 RSC .
J. Wu, A. Fechtenkötter, J. Gauss, M. D. Watson, M. Kastler, C. Fechtenkötter, M. Wagner and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Dössel, V. Kamm, I. A. Howard, F. Laquai, W. Pisula, X. Feng, C. Li, M. Takase, T. Kudernac, S. De Feyter and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5876 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ravat, T. Marszalek, W. Pisula, K. Müllen and M. Baumgarten, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Tan, B. Yang, K. Parvez, A. Narita, S. Osella, D. Beljonne, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2646 Search PubMed .
C. L. Hilton, J. M. Crowfoot, P. Rempala and B. T. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Tan, S. Osella, Y. Liu, B. Yang, D. Beljonne, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. I. Mkhalid, J. H. Barnard, T. B. Marder, J. M. Murphy and J. F. Hartwig, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 890 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Yamaguchi, S. Hiroto and H. Shinokubo, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shinokubo, Proc. Jpn. Acad., Ser. B, 2014, 90, 1 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yamaguchi, S. Ito, B. S. Lee, S. Hiroto, D. Kim and H. Shinokubo, Chem. – Asian J., 2013, 8, 178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takagi and Y. Sakakibara, Chem. Lett., 1989, 1957 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ozaki, K. Kawasumi, M. Shibata, H. Ito and K. Itami, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Eliseeva and L. T. Scott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Fort, P. M. Donovan and L. T. Scott, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Fort and L. T. Scott, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Fort and L. T. Scott, Tetrahedron Lett., 2011, 52, 2051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. Jiao, K.-W. Huang and J. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 14672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Fort, M. S. Jeffreys and L. T. Scott, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8102 RSC .
A. Konishi, Y. Hirao, K. Matsumoto, H. Kurata and T. Kubo, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 592 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Stille, G. K. Noren and L. Green, J. Polym. Sci., Part A-1: Polym. Chem., 1970, 8, 2245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Schlüter, M. Löffler and V. Enkelmann, Nature, 1994, 368, 831 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Löffler, A.-D. Schlüter, K. Gessler, W. Saenger, J.-M. Toussaint and J.-L. Brédas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 2209 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chmil and U. Scherf, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1993, 14, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chmil and U. Scherf, Acta Polym., 1997, 48, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Scherf, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 1853 RSC .
M. B. Goldfinger and T. M. Swager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 7895 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Shifrina, M. S. Averina, A. L. Rusanov, M. Wagner and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3525 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Wu, L. Gherghel, M. D. Watson, J. X. Li, Z. H. Wang, C. D. Simpson, U. Kolb and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 7082 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikeda, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka and A. Osuka, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 943 RSC .
A. Tsuda and A. Osuka, Science, 2001, 293, 79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsuda, H. Furuta and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 2549 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yang, X. Dou, A. Rouhanipour, L. J. Zhi, H. J. Rader and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dössel, L. Gherghel, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2540 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Narita, X. Feng, Y. Hernandez, S. A. Jensen, M. Bonn, H. Yang, I. A. Verzhbitskiy, C. Casiraghi, M. R. Hansen, A. H. R. Koch, G. Fytas, O. Ivasenko, B. Li, K. S. Mali, T. Balandina, S. Mahesh, S. De Feyter and K. Müllen, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Kim, J. W. Jung and W. H. Jo, Carbon, 2013, 63, 202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Kim, J. W. Lee and W. H. Jo, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 2768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Schwab, A. Narita, S. Osella, Y. Hu, A. Maghsoumi, A. Mavrinsky, W. Pisula, C. Castiglioni, M. Tommasini, D. Beljonne, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Chem. – Asian J., 2015 DOI:10.1002/asia.201500450 .
W. H. Carothers, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1936, 32, 39 RSC .

          G. G. Odian, Principles of Polymerization, J. Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ,  2004 Search PubMed .
S. Setayesh, A. C. Grimsdale, T. Weil, V. Enkelmann, K. Müllen, F. Meghdadi, E. J. W. List and G. Leising, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, H.-J. Cho, B.-J. Jung, N. S. Cho and H.-K. Shim, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8523 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Schwab, A. Narita, Y. Hernandez, T. Balandina, K. S. Mali, S. De Feyter, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. El Gemayel, A. Narita, L. F. Dössel, R. S. Sundaram, A. Kiersnowski, W. Pisula, M. R. Hansen, A. C. Ferrari, E. Orgiu, X. Feng, K. Müllen and P. Samori, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 6301 RSC .
A. N. Abbas, B. Liu, A. Narita, L. F. Dössel, B. Yang, W. Zhang, J. Tang, K. L. Wang, H. J. Räder, X. Feng, K. Müllen and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saleh, M. Baumgarten, A. Mavrinskiy, T. Schäfer and K. Müllen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 137 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Vo, M. Shekhirev, D. A. Kunkel, M. D. Morton, E. Berglund, L. Kong, P. M. Wilson, P. A. Dowben, A. Enders and A. Sinitskii, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3189 Search PubMed .

          M. Saleh, PhD thesis, University of Mainz, Germany,  2010 .
T. H. Vo, M. Shekhirev, A. Lipatov, R. A. Korlacki and A. Sinitskii, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 173, 105 CAS .
T. H. Vo, M. Shekhirev, D. A. Kunkel, F. Orange, M. J. F. Guinel, A. Enders and A. Sinitskii, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4172 RSC .
U. Kumar and T. X. Neenan, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 124 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Fujimoto, M. A. Hickner, C. J. Cornelius and D. A. Loy, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5010 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. P. Villegas, P. B. Mendonça and A. R. Rocha, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Jensen, R. Ulbricht, A. Narita, X. Feng, K. Müllen, T. Hertel, D. Turchinovich and M. Bonn, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Abbas, G. Liu, A. Narita, M. Orosco, X. Feng, K. Müllen and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Konnerth, C. Cervetti, A. Narita, X. Feng, K. Müllen, A. Hoyer, M. Burghard, K. Kern, M. Dressel and L. Bogani, Nanoscale, 2015 10.1039/C4NR07378A .
U. Zschieschang, H. Klauk, I. B. Müller, A. J. Strudwick, T. Hintermann, M. G. Schwab, A. Narita, X. Feng, K. Müllen and R. T. Weitz, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1400010 Search PubMed .
A. Narita, I. A. Verzhbitskiy, W. Frederickx, K. S. Mali, S. A. Jensen, M. R. Hansen, M. Bonn, S. De Feyter, C. Casiraghi, X. Feng and K. Müllen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Osella, A. Narita, M. G. Schwab, Y. Hernandez, X. Feng, K. Müllen and D. Beljonne, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lafferentz, F. Ample, H. Yu, S. Hecht, C. Joachim and L. Grill, Science, 2009, 323, 1193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grill, M. Dyer, L. Lafferentz, M. Persson, M. V. Peters and S. Hecht, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bieri, M. Treier, J. Cai, K. Aït-Mansour, P. Ruffieux, O. Groning, P. Groning, M. Kastler, R. Rieger, X. Feng, K. Müllen and R. Fasel, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6919 RSC .
L. Lafferentz, V. Eberhardt, C. Dri, C. Africh, G. Comelli, F. Esch, S. Hecht and L. Grill, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Treier, C. A. Pignedoli, T. Laino, R. Rieger, K. Müllen, D. Passerone and R. Fasel, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Saleh, PhD thesis, University of Mainz, Germany,  2010 .
S. Linden, D. Zhong, A. Timmer, N. Aghdassi, J. H. Franke, H. Zhang, X. Feng, K. Müllen, H. Fuchs, L. Chi and H. Zacharias, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 216801 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ruffieux, J. Cai, N. C. Plumb, L. Patthey, D. Prezzi, A. Ferretti, E. Molinari, X. Feng, K. Müllen, C. A. Pignedoli and R. Fasel, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Denk, M. Hohage, P. Zeppenfeld, J. Cai, C. A. Pignedoli, H. Söde, R. Fasel, X. Feng, K. Müllen, S. Wang, D. Prezzi, A. Ferretti, A. Ruini, E. Molinari and P. Ruffieux, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4253 CAS .
M. Koch, F. Ample, C. Joachim and L. Grill, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. van der Lit, M. P. Boneschanscher, D. Vanmaekelbergh, M. Ijäs, A. Uppstu, M. Ervasti, A. Harju, P. Liljeroth and I. Swart, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2023 Search PubMed .
H. Huang, D. Wei, J. Sun, S. L. Wong, Y. P. Feng, A. H. C. Neto and A. T. S. Wee, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 983 Search PubMed .
P. Han, K. Akagi, F. Federici Canova, H. Mutoh, S. Shiraki, K. Iwaya, P. S. Weiss, N. Asao and T. Hitosugi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chen, D. G. de Oteyza, Z. Pedramrazi, C. Chen, F. R. Fischer and M. F. Crommie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Lin, K. Sun, L. Chen, Y. Zagranyarski, N. Aghdassi, S. Duhm, Q. Li, D. Zhong, Y. Li, K. Müllen, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Abdurakhmanova, N. Amsharov, S. Stepanow, M. Jansen, K. Kern and K. Amsharov, Carbon, 2014, 77, 1187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Basagni, F. Sedona, C. A. Pignedoli, M. Cattelan, L. Nicolas, M. Casarin and M. Sambi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Endo, M. Nakamura, K. Amemiya and H. Ozaki, Surf. Sci., 2015, 635, 44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bronner, S. Stremlau, M. Gille, F. Brauße, A. Haase, S. Hecht and P. Tegeder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, G. Li, J. Lu, X. Lin, S. Du, R. Berger, X. Feng, K. Müllen and H.-J. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 023101 CrossRef PubMed .
P. B. Bennett, Z. Pedramrazi, A. Madani, Y.-C. Chen, D. G. de Oteyza, C. Chen, F. R. Fischer, M. F. Crommie and J. Bokor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 253114 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-A. Palma, K. Diller, R. Berger, A. Welle, J. Björk, J. L. Cabellos, D. J. Mowbray, A. C. Papageorgiou, N. P. Ivleva, S. Matich, E. Margapoti, R. Niessner, B. Menges, J. Reichert, X. Feng, H. J. Räder, F. Klappenberger, A. Rubio, K. Müllen and J. V. Barth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sakaguchi, Y. Kawagoe, Y. Hirano, T. Iruka, M. Yano and T. Nakae, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Talyzin, I. V. Anoshkin, A. V. Krasheninnikov, R. M. Nieminen, A. G. Nasibulin, H. Jiang and E. I. Kauppinen, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chuvilin, E. Bichoutskaia, M. C. Gimenez-Lopez, T. W. Chamberlain, G. A. Rance, N. Kuganathan, J. Biskupek, U. Kaiser and A. N. Khlobystov, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Chamberlain, J. Biskupek, G. A. Rance, A. Chuvilin, T. J. Alexander, E. Bichoutskaia, U. Kaiser and A. N. Khlobystov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. E. Lim, Y. Miyata, M. Fujihara, S. Okada, Z. Liu, Arifin, K. Sato, H. Omachi, R. Kitaura, S. Irle, K. Suenaga and H. Shinohara, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bandow, M. Takizawa, K. Hirahara, M. Yudasaka and S. Iijima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 337, 48 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Akimitsu Narita
	Akimitsu Narita was born in Yokohama, Japan in 1986. He received his Bachelor's (2008) and Master's (2010) degrees in Chemistry at the University of Tokyo under the supervision of Professor Eiichi Nakamura. In March 2014, he obtained his PhD in the group of Professor Klaus Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) in Mainz. He was an Early-Stage Researcher in the Marie-Curie Initial Training Network (ITN) “SUPERIOR” for three years from May 2010. Beginning in August 2014, he became a project leader in the Synthetic Chemistry Department at MPIP. His current research focuses on the bottom-up organic synthesis of functional graphene molecules and graphene nanoribbons.

Xiao-Ye Wang
	Xiao-Ye Wang was born in China in 1989. He received his Bachelor's degree in chemistry from Nankai University in 2009. In the same year, he joined Professor Jian Pei's group at Peking University as a graduate student and obtained his PhD degree in organic materials chemistry in July 2014. Then he joined the group of Professor Klaus Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) for postdoctoral research. His research interests include organic electronic materials and devices as well as bottom-up synthesis of heteroatom-doped graphene molecules and graphene nanoribbons.

Xinliang Feng
	Xinliang Feng, after obtaining his Master's degree in organic chemistry from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in March 2004, joined the group of Prof. K. Müllen at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research (MPIP) and obtained his PhD in April 2008. He became a group leader at MPIP in December 2007. Since June 2010, he has been a professor at Shanghai Jiao Tong University and became a distinguished group leader at MPIP in 2012. In August 2014, he became a chair professor at Dresden University of Technology. His current scientific interests include graphene, two-dimensional nanomaterials, organic conjugated materials, and carbon-rich molecules and materials for electronic and energy-related applications.

Klaus Müllen
	Klaus Müllen received his PhD in 1972 at the University of Basel (Professor F. Garson) after completing his Diploma in Chemistry at the University of Cologne (Professor E. Vogel) in 1969. He pursued postdoctoral research in the group of J. F. M. Oth at ETH Zurich, where he received his habilitation in 1977 and was appointed a Privatdozent. In 1979, he became a Professor in Organic Chemistry at the University of Cologne and accepted an offer of a chair in Organic Chemistry at the University of Mainz in 1983. In 1989, he became a scientific member of the Max Planck Society and has been the director of the Synthetic Chemistry Department at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. He served as President of the German Chemical Society for two years, beginning January 2008. His current research focuses on synthetic macromolecular chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, and materials science.

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis of hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (p-HBC 2) through intramolecular oxidative cyclodehydrogenation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of N = 9 armchair and N = 6 zigzag GNRs with the instruction for the counting of number “N”.	 

 	Fig. 3  Syntheses of partially fused PAHs 5 and fully fused graphene molecule 6avia benzannulation and cyclodehydrogenation.	 

 	Fig. 4  Facile two-step synthetic route for obtaining C3 symmetrical c-HBC 9, TBTTC 10 and graphene molecule 11.	 

 	Fig. 5  Synthesis of PAH 17 (C78) through two-step cycloadditions of arynes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Syntheses of trideca-starphene 19 and hexadeca-starphenes 21 from dibromotetracene 18 and dibromopentacene 20, respectively, through Yamamoto coupling.	 

 	Fig. 7  Syntheses of PAH 23 through Al2O3-mediated C–H arylation and of graphene molecules 26 and 29via platinum-catalysed and ICl-mediated cycloaromatization, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Syntheses of graphene molecules 31, 34, 36 and 38 with embedded seven-membered rings through cyclodehydrogenation.	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis of grossly warped graphene molecules 42 through C–H arylation and cyclodehydrogenation of corannulene (39).	 

 	Fig. 10  Syntheses of [8]circulene 44 through palladium-catalysed annulation and of tetrabenzo[8]circulene 46 through oxidative cyclodehydrogenation or a sequence of Diels–Alder cycloaddition and palladium-catalysed C–H arylation. DBU: 1,8-diaza-bicycloundec-7-ene; DMA: N,N-dimethylacetamide.	 

 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of biphenylene-based PAH 51, containing one eight-membered ring and one four-membered ring, via cyclodehydrogenation of octaarylbiphenylene 50.	 

 	Fig. 12  Representative examples of N-doped PAHs. R1: H or 4-trifluoromethylphenyl; R2: methyl, n-butyl or n-dodecyl; Ar1: p-butoxyphenyl; Ar2: p-nitrophenyl; R5: phenyl, 4-methoxyphenyl, 4-bromophenyl, methyl, hexyl, etc.; R6: 2-ethylhexyl or 2-decyltetradecyl; X: H, Br, trimethylstannyl, etc.	 

 	Fig. 13  Examples of S-doped graphene molecules. R represents hydrogen or alkyl substituents.	 

 	Fig. 14  Examples of B- and BN-doped PAHs. Mes: mesityl; X: H, Br or Ph; R: n-butyl or n-hexyl.	 

 	Fig. 15  Examples of P-doped PAHs.	 

 	Fig. 16  Examples of edge-chlorinated graphene molecules.	 

 	Fig. 17  Synthesis of sulphur-annulated graphene molecules 90 and 91 through the thiolation of perchlorinated HBC 85. DMI: 1,3-dimethyl-2-imidazolidinone.	 

 	Fig. 18  Derivatizations of p-HBC via iridium-catalysed direct edge borylation. Ar: mesityl; cod: cycloocta-l,5-diene; dtbpy: 4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridyl; BPin: (pinacolato)boron; DBU: 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene; dba: dibenzylideneacetone; BINAP: 2,2′-bis(diphenylphosphino)-1,1′-binaphthyl; DPPF: 1,1′-diphenylphosphinoferrocene.	 

 	Fig. 19  Synthesis of GNRs 103, 106 and 109 with various widths based on A2B2-type Suzuki polymerizations. BPin: (pinacolato)boron.	 

 	Fig. 20  Structures of N-doped GNRs 110 and 111 prepared through A2B2-type Suzuki polymerizations.	 

 	Fig. 21  Synthesis of “necklace-like” GNR 114 through A2B2-type Suzuki polymerization of naphthalene-based monomer 112 and laterally extended GNRs 117 and 120 through AA-type Yamamoto polymerizations of p-terphenyl-based monomer 115 and o-terphenyl-based monomer 118, respectively. Obtained GNR 120 was rather short and mixed with shorter graphene molecules.	 

 	Fig. 22  Synthesis of pristine and N-doped chevron-type GNRs 123 and 126, respectively, based on AA-type Yamamoto polymerizations. N-doped precursor 125 and GNR 126 are obtained as mixtures of structural isomers.	 

 	Fig. 23  Synthesis of GNRs 129 and 133 through AB-type Diels–Alder polymerization of monomers 127 and 131, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 24  Edge chlorination of GNR 129c to GNR 130.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Surface-assisted synthesis of N = 7 armchair GNR 136, chiral (3,1)-GNR 137, and N = 13 armchair GNR 140. (b)–(d) STM images of (b) GNR 136 on an Au(111) surface, (c) GNR 137 on a Cu(111) surface, and (d) GNR 140 on an Au(111) surface with (b and d) partly or (c) completely overlaid molecular models (light blue). Panel b also shows partially overlaid DFT-based STM simulation (gray scale). The circular features in panel c are bromine atoms trapped between GNRs. (b) Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (ref. 37), Copyright (2010). (c) and (d) Reprinted with permission from (c) ref. 266; Copyright 2014 and (d) ref. 267; Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Chemical structure of N = 7–13 GNR heterojunction 141 and (b) its high-resolution STM image on an Au(111) surface. Inset: STM image of a larger area, showing various N = 7–13 GNR heterojunctions. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 39), Copyright (2015).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Surface-assisted synthesis of N = 5 armchair GNR 143 and cove-edged GNR 146. (b and c) STM images on Au(111) surfaces of (b) GNR 143 and (c) GNR 146.108 (b) Inset: DFT-simulated STM image of GNR 143. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268; Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Surface-assisted syntheses of (a) N = 15 armchair GNR 149 from dibromo-p-pentaphenyl 147 and (b) N = 6 armchair GNR 152 from dibromo-p-terphenyl 150. (c)–(f) STM images of (c), (d) GNR 149, (e) PPP 151 and (f) GNR 152 on Au(111) surfaces with partly overlaid molecular models. (c and d) Reprinted from ref. 269, Copyright (2014), with permission from Elsevier. (e and f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 270; Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Surface-assisted synthesis of N-doped chevron-type GNR 155 and GNR heterojunction 157. (b) High-resolution STM image of N-doped GNR 155, showing an antiparallel alignment to maximize the attractive N⋯H interactions. DFT-based STM simulation model and a formula chemical structure are partially overlaid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273; Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (c and d) STM images of GNR heterojunction 157. In panel d, the N-doped and non-doped GNR segments are highlighted in blue and light grey, respectively, as determined from the panels e and f. (e and f) Differential conductance dI/dV maps observed at bias voltages of (e) −0.35 V and (f) −1.65 V. The heterostructure profiles seen in the panel c are drawn as blue or white dashed lines in panels d–f as a guide to the eye. Scale bars in panels (c)–(f) indicates 2 nm. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Nanotechnology (ref. 38), Copyright (2014).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) A TEM image of a GNR@SWCNT prepared from coronene (top) and its model (bottom); light blue: GNR, red: SWCNT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277; Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic illustration of the confinement of fullerene derivative 158 in a SWCNT; grey: carbon, red: oxygen, purple: nitrogen, yellow: sulphur. (c) An aberration-corrected high-resolution TEM image, (d) a simulated TEM image, and (e) a molecular model of a GNR with sulphur-terminated edges confined in a SWCNT; grey: carbon, yellow: sulphur. (b), (d), (e), (f) Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials (ref. 278), Copyright (2011).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
