A high-response transparent heater based on a CuS nanosheet film with superior mechanical flexibility and chemical stability   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR09667D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR09667D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6531-6538A high-response transparent heater based on a CuS nanosheet film with superior mechanical flexibility and chemical stability†

        
          
            Shuyao 
            Xie‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Teng 
            Li‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Zijie 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yanan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangyang 
            Liu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Wenxi 
            Guo
          
        
      *a
aResearch Institute for Soft Matter and Biomimetics, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory for Soft Functional Materials Research, Department of Physics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. E-mail: wxguo@xmu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore, 117542, Singapore
Received 
      28th December 2017
    , Accepted 7th March 2018First published on 7th March 2018AbstractTransparent heaters are widely used in technologies such as window defrosting/defogging, displays, gas sensing, and medical equipment. Apart from mechanical robustness and electrical and optical reliabilities, outstanding chemical stability is also critical to the application of transparent heaters. In this regard, we first present a highly flexible and large-area CuS transparent heater fabricated by a colloidal crackle pattern method with an optimized sheet resistance (Rs) as low as 21.5 Ω sq−1 at a ∼80% transmittance. The CuS transparent heater exhibits remarkable mechanical robustness during bending tests as well as high chemical stability against acid and alkali environments. In the application as a transparent heater, the CuS heater demonstrates a high thermal resistance of 197 °C W−1 cm2 with a fast switching time (<30 s), requiring low input voltages (<4.5 V) to achieve uniform temperatures of ∼110 °C across large areas. The temperature of the wearable CuS heater, which is stuck on the skin, can be real-time controlled through a Bluetooth device in a cell phone wirelessly. Based on the wireless control system, we demonstrated an application of the CuS heater in snow removal for solar panels. These CuS network TCEs with high flexibility, transparency, conductivity, and chemical stability could be widely used in wearable electronic products.
1. Introduction
Transparent conducting electrodes (TCEs) as an essential components of optoelectronic device1,2 are widely used in photovoltaic cells,3 organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs),4 sensors,5 touchscreens,6 and displays.7 Recently, an interesting application of TCEs, in which they are used as visibly transparent heaters, has attracted wide attention.8 A good-performance transparent heater can serve in defrosting,9 smart windows,10 pixelated heating display,11 and point-of-care disposable devices,12,13 where TCEs Joule-heated to around 70–150 °C would suffice.14–16 Tin-doped indium oxide (ITO) exhibits superior optoelectronic properties and has been used as TCEs extensively owing to its high transparency (∼90%) and conductivity (10 Ω sq−1).17 However, film brittleness and low abundance limit its suitability for the flexible heater applications.18 Moreover, in terms of the thermal properties, ITO exhibits slow thermal response and poor thermal stability and consumes higher power.19 Significant efforts have been made to develop ITO-free TCEs including metal oxide,20 graphene,21 and conductive organic (PEDOT:PSS)22 films as well as the networks of carbon nanotubes (CNTs),23 metal nanowires,24,25 metal mesh,26 and hybrid film.27–29 Carbon materials including graphene and CNTs are abundant, highly chemically stable, and very promising to be the next-generation of TCEs. However, the CNTs and graphene with high quality are usually prepared via thermal and plasma CVD techniques that increase the fabrication cost.1 Han and co-workers30 fabricated the first transparent film heater using single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) with a sheet resistance (Rs) of 580 Ω sq−1 (79% transmittance) at an operating voltage of 60 V. As the fabrication and scalability of the SWNT films are expensive and process-intensive, these transparent heaters were later replaced using multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWNT) films. Jang and co-workers15 fabricated the heaters using vertically aligned MWNT directly transferred to a substrate. However, the fabricated heaters possessed a high Rs (∼700 Ω sq−1) and moderate transmittance (83%). In the case of the graphene film with an optimum transmittance of ∼80%, a saturation temperature of 42 °C was achieved by applying 60 V for 2 min. Grain boundaries and a high contact resistance between graphene flakes are probably responsible for this high input voltage.8 In the recent years, metal TCEs fabricated by solution coating, photolithography, and a self-forming template method have attracted wide attention due to the high conductivity and mechanical flexibility of the metals. In addition, the metal network TCEs can retain high transmittance even when their resistances are sharply decreased.31 However, there are still some problems for the most widely used metals, including silver (Ag) and copper (Cu), in the application of heaters. Although the Ag-network films exhibit a superior electrical conductivity, their high material cost still presents a challenge to the mass production of heaters. On the other hand, Cu is only 6% less conductive than Ag, ∼100 times cheaper, and ∼1000 times more abundant than Ag.32 However, Cu nanomeshes are prone to oxidation even when exposed to the air under ambient conditions, which are not suitable for outdoor applications (i.e., exposure to different weathers and solutions with different pHs).
Herein, we introduced CuS TCEs, which are a well-known narrow-band-gap p-type conducting materials, on different flexible transparent substrates as heaters for the first time. It is worth to note that recently, vacuum sputtering and solution deposition are the widely used techniques to prepare the CuS TCEs.33–36 Although some progress in enhancing the optoelectronic performance has been achieved by optimizing the preparation conditions, it still suffers from low transmittance with poor conductivity (only ∼60% transmittance when the film thickness is 50 nm and further enhancement in the transmittance results in a thinner CuS layer, which leads to a very high Rs.37). To address this problem, construction of continuous conducting films into a mesh structure with periodic or random lines is an effective strategy to enhance the transmittance of a TCE. In this regard, the transmittance of the mesh TCEs can be significantly increased, whereas the Rs slightly increases. In this study, two strategies are developed to enhance the performance of the CuS TCEs. First, to obtain the CuS network films, we employed colloidal cracks as templates for large-scale fabrication of the CuS network films for a highly flexible transparent heater. Second, to enhance the thermal resistance of the CuS heaters, sheet-like CuS with a large area was fabricated by sulphur treatment in an ethanol solution. This CuS heater exhibits remarkable conductivity, transmittance, and mechanical robustness as well as high chemical stability against acid and alkali environments. Due to the highly interconnected structure with no cross-bar junctions and the sheet-like architecture that provides a larger specific surface area, the CuS heater demonstrates a high thermal resistance with a fast switching time and low input voltages. In addition, the CuS transparent heaters were utilized in wearable electronics or thermotherapy by integrating electronic circuitries and wireless temperature controls. Based on the wireless control system, we demonstrated an application of the CuS heater in snow removal for solar panels.
2. Experimental
2.1. Fabrication of TCEs
The TiO2 nanoparticle powder (120 mg, P25 Degussa) was dispersed in 1 mL ethanol by rigorous ultrasonication for 15 min to form a suspension. Further, 0.16 mL ethyl acetate was added to the suspension to enhance crackle formation with a lesser film thickness. The solution was then used for scrap-coating on the PET substrates. The volume of the solution varied with respect to the substrate size. Typically, 30 μL of solution was drop-coated per cm square area of the substrate. The crackle network pattern formed spontaneously in the coated layer was left to dry in the air. Cu metal was deposited sequentially at room temperature by a DC-sputtering system (MSP-620) with a background pressure below 1.0 × 10−4 Pa, a DC power of 100 W, and a high-purity Ar gas flow. The gas flow was controlled to be 80 sccm. Sputtering time of the CuS network film was 0.5 h. The TiO2 template was lifted-off from the substrate by washing in ethyl alcohol with mild sonication. Then, we immersed the film in a saturated sulfur ethanol solution for 20 h in an oven at an operating temperature of 60 °C. Through this process, a Cu grid was transferred to a CuS grid totally.
2.2. Characterization
The sophisticated surface of the films was examined by SEM (Karl Zeiss, ∑-HD). Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analysis was performed using a field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) system (SU-70). The film transmission over a range of 300–2000 nm was measured by a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (lambda 750). The light microimage was obtained by Olympus BX43. The Rs was examined by a four-point probe instrument (RST-8). The XRD image was obtained using a Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer. The voltage was applied using a Keithley 2450 source meter, and thermal imaging was carried out using a thermal imager (Fluke TiS40). The thermal images were analysed using the Smartview 3.14 software. The XPS spectra were measured by a Thermo Fisher Scientific Escalab 250Xi X-ray photoelectron spectrometer.
3. Results and discussion

Fig. 1 schematically illustrates our key process steps for producing highly conductive, transparent, and flexible films by a self-forming crackle template method, as previously reported by Giridhar U Kulkarni.38 At first, a colloidal dispersion synthesized using a commercial TiO2 nanoparticle powder, ethanol, and ethyl acetate was blade-coated on a PET substrate as a template layer, which is illustrated in Fig. 1a. With the evaporation of an organic solvent (Fig. 1b), uniform and controllable cracks were self-formed all over the film after drying. The crackle network template is highly scalable, and a crackle network of a given length scale can be achieved over large areas with a high degree of uniformity.39 After the cracks were formed, Cu was deposited onto these cracks by DC-magnetron sputtering on polyethylene terephthalate (PET) before these crackle patterns were removed by mechanical lapping and ultrasonic vibration, as shown in Fig. 1c. Finally, the CuS crack film (Fig. 1d) was obtained after sulfur treatment in an ethanol solution at 60 °C for 20 h.
 Fig. 1  A schematic of the fabrication procedures for preparing the flexible transparent CuS nanosheet heater by a crackle template method. (a) A colloidal TiO2 solution was dispersed and blade-coated on a PET substrate; (b) evaporation in the air to form crackles; (c) Cu was deposited on the crackle template by DC-sputtering; and (d) sulfur treatment for 20 h. 
The image of the obtained flexible CuS transparent heater on PET with the size 10 × 20 cm2 is displayed in Fig. 2a, indicating high transmittance visible by the naked eyes. The enlarged optical microscopy and SEM images of this CuS TCE before and after removing the templates are shown in Fig. 2b–d, demonstrating that the colloidal TiO2 is uniformly self-formed all over the film (see in Fig. S1†) and all the cracked templates are removed after deposition of Cu. The crack width ranged from 2 to 100 μm (Fig. S2†), which could be accurately controlled by adjusting the colloid concentration, drying temperature, colloid dosage, and ambient humidity. Fig. 2e displays the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the CuS networks after 20 h sulphur treatment. Several typical diffraction peaks located at 27.4°, 29.4°, 31.8°, and 48.1° can be readily indexed to the lattice planes of (101), (102), (103), and (110) of a pure hexagonal CuS phase according to the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS card no. 06-0464).40 Furthermore, a sharp peak at 471 cm−1 in the Raman spectrum, as displayed in Fig. 2f, can be attributed to the lattice vibrations (S–S stretching) of CuS. The CuS networks were also examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements, and the corresponding results are shown in Fig. S3.† The Cu 2p XPS spectrum of the CuS networks reveals two main peaks locating at 952.0 eV and 932.2 eV, matching well with Cu 2p 1/2 and Cu 2p 3/2, respectively. Furthermore, both the S 2p peaks at 162.0 eV (2p3/2) and 163.2 eV (2p1/2) refer to CuS,41 indicating that all the Cu networks are converted into CuS.
 Fig. 2  Morphology and structure of the CuS network TCE. (a) An image of a typical obtained CuS network film. (b) Optical microscopy image of the CuS network. (c–d) are SEM images of the CuS network film. (e–f) XRD and Raman spectra of the corresponding CuS network TCE. 

Fig. 3a and b depict the SEM images showing the morphology of the CuS networks. It is apparent that the Cu networks are transformed into the CuS networks, which have a high-density sheet-like structure. These networks were crisscross and inlaid with each other. Thus, the networks were seamless, which could enhance the conductivity and mechanical flexibility. It is worth to note that the size of these nanosheets was inhomogeneous from several nanometers to several hundred nanometers, and this special structure provided a larger specific surface area to participate in heating as compared to other planar constructions. The energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) mapping corresponding to Cu and S is displayed in Fig. 3c and d. It is obvious that both S and Cu elements are uniformly distributed on the whole networks; this indicates that the Cu networks are successfully converted into the CuS networks after sulphur treatment.
 Fig. 3  (a–b) SEM images of the CuS network film. (c–d) EDS images of as-fabricated CuS network film. 
To demonstrate the potential of the CuS nanosheet network film as an electrode for the transparent heater, a macroscale CuS network/PET film with a size of 100 × 50 mm2 under a two-terminal side-contact configuration was employed, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4a. The DC voltage was supplied by a power and passed through a copper or silver contact at the film edge. The temperature of the film was monitored using an IR thermometer. Fig. 4b and c show the thermal images of the CuS network transparent heater that can be stuck on the human skin and bent at different curvatures without degradation in performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of layouts for CuS network film heater. (b) A graph and a thermal image of flexible transparent heater affixed on wrist as a wearable heater. (c) Thermal images of transparent heater at different curvatures. 
The transmittance of the optimized CuS network films (∼21.5 Ω sq−1) at 550 nm was ∼80%. The whole spectra were nearly monotonous over the entire region of 400–2000 nm, as shown in Fig. 5a. The flat and broad transmittance is suitable for the heaters applied in display devices and solar panels.15,42Fig. 5b shows the time-dependent temperature profiles of the CuS network heater. The profile depicts the temperature of a CuS network heat device (Rs = 21.5 Ω sq−1), and the plots are obtained every five seconds with respect to the input voltages ranging from 1.5 to 4.5 V. In each case, there is a plateau maximum after the temperature increases in few seconds (i.e., the response time). The maximum temperatures varied approximately linearly with the input powers. Thus, a higher applied voltage can reduce the response time since the input power is the only factor to decide the ultimate temperature. The film heater was able to reach a temperature above 100 °C with a low input voltage (4.5 V) in a short time (25 s). This higher temperature at a low input voltage implies the efficient transduction of the electrical energy into Joule heating.13 The efficient transduction of the electrical energy into Joule heating for the CuS network heat may be attributed to the crackles that are highly interconnected with each other with no cross-bar junctions, and the sheet-like architecture provides a larger specific surface area to participate in heating as compared to other planar architectures. Thermal resistance (R = ΔT/P) is one of the key factors for evaluating the performance of the film heaters. When there is heat on the object, thermal resistance refers to the ratio between the temperature change (ΔT) of the object and the power (P) of the heat source. A high thermal resistance implies that the object needs less power to maintain the object temperature and has a good thermal insulation performance. In Fig. 5c, according to the five points in the plot of the maximum temperatures with respect to the input powers, the thermal resistance of the CuS heater reaches up to 197 °C W−1 cm2. The thermal stability of the transparent heater was further tested by switching the applied voltage from 0 to 3.5 V for 1000 cycles (see Fig. 5d). As seen from the plot, the temperature remained quite stable under an applied voltage of 3.5 V after 1000 cycles.
 Fig. 5  (a) Transmittance of the CuS heater in a wide spectral range. The inset picture shows an image of the formed CuS heater by a bush as background. (b) Time-dependent temperature profiles of CuS network film heaters (200 mm × 150 mm) under its operation at different input voltages (Rs = 21.5 Ω sq−1). (c) Temperature versus power plot for the CuS transparent heater. (d) Switching cycles for the CuS heater with 0 and 3.5 V applied voltages. 
Chemical stability is critical for TCEs as a transparent heater to be applied in various fields, especially in the outdoor applications.
As shown in Fig. 6a, to investigate the chemical stability of the CuS heaters, we immersed the CuS and Cu heaters into the aqueous solutions with different pH values equalled 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13 for 2 h to measure the corrosion resistance of the conducting films. Only small fluctuations in Rs were observed for the CuS heater when the pH values were changed, whereas the Cu heater suffered from serious erosion in the acidic solutions; this indicated the remarkable corrosion resistance of the CuS heater. Fig. 6b shows the thermal oxidation tests of the Cu and CuS heaters on the PET substrates under harsh conditions. The Rs of the CuS film remained remarkably stable over a period of 12 days when the temperature was 60 °C in the humid air with an 80% relative humidity. By contrast, the Rs of the Cu film increased exponentially, and the film changed from reddish orange to grey and black due to the conversion of Cu into CuO. Fig. 6c illustrates the change of Rs of CuS, Cu, and ITO/PET with bending cycles at a bending radius of 1.2 cm. A negligible increase in Rs was observed for both CuS (21.5 Ω sq−1) and Cu (0.84 Ω sq−1), whereas the Rs of the commercialized ITO/PET (70 Ω sq−1) films increased ∼6 folds after 500 bending cycles. Fig. 6d shows the digital images of the working light-emitting diode (LED) connected to a releasing and twisting CuS heater as the segments of external circuits. No obvious change in the brightness of the LED was observed from Video S1 (see ESI†).
 Fig. 6  (a) Normalized Rsversus different pH values of the Cu and the CuS heaters. (b) The variation trend of the Rs of Cu and CuS heaters as function of the baking time in the humid air with 80% relative humidity at 60 °C. (c) The variations in resistance of Cu, CuS and ITO heaters on PET film as a function of the number of bending cycles. (d) Digital images of working LED connect with bending and twisting CuS heater at different positions as segments of external circuits after 500 time twisting tests. 
The CuS transparent heater can be utilized in wearable electronics or thermotherapy by integrating this heater into the electronic circuitries for wireless temperature controls. Fig. 7a shows a wireless temperature control that involves a mobile device with a bluetooth module, a microcontroller unit for temperature control, and a CuS heater. The temperature controls consisted of a communication module, a control module, and an energy module. Herein, the temperature was set up by a mobile application software (APP), as shown in Fig. 7c. Then, the bluetooth module in the cell phone can communicate with this entire temperature control system wirelessly. The digital output signal sent from the cell phone controlled the output of the energy module applied to the heaters to adjust their temperatures. Moreover, the temperature of the heaters was read out by a thermal imager. The correlations between target temperatures set on the cell phone and achieved temperatures measured by the thermal imager are illustrated in Fig. 7b. It is obvious that average deviation is very small (<±1 °C). The thermal images of our CuS network films controlled by Bluetooth and the corresponding temperature as functions of time are shown in Fig. 7c and d, respectively. We successively increased the temperature to 41 °C, 45 °C, and 50 °C and then decreased to 43 °C using the cell phone with Bluetooth, and then, the temperature was determined by the thermal imager. The real-time temperature change was obtained and is expressed in the curve shown Fig. 7d.
 Fig. 7  Application example of the CuS nanosheet TCEs in cellphone controlled wearable heaters. (a) Schematic diagrams of wireless temperature control system. (b) The correlation between target temperature and achieved temperature. (c–d) Thermal images of CuS heater controlled by Bluetooth in cellphone and its corresponding time-dependent temperature profiles. 
The large-area CuS network heater covered on the silicon solar panels can be effectively used for snow removal. In winter, the silicon solar panels in cold regions cannot work well as the thick snow or ice covers them. In this regard, a large-area transparent heater is required to remove the snow/ice. With high chemical stability and mechanical flexibility, this CuS network heater will work well in the harsh environments such as acid rain, moist weather, and so on. Fig. 8a schematically illustrates an application example of the CuS networks for snow removal for the solar panels, in which the CuS network heater is installed between the panels and snow. Then, the J–V curves of the silicon solar cell as a function of the heating time of the CuS network film heater were measured, as shown in Fig. 8b. Herein, the thickness of the ice was ∼4 mm on a silicon solar cell, the output voltage was 3.5 V, and the J–V curves were measured every 15 seconds. The corresponding power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the silicon solar cell as a function of the heating time is shown in Fig. 8c. It is obvious that the PCE of the solar cell (∼0.08%) increases slowly during the first three J–V measurements; this can because the ice just starts to melt. Then, the PCE increased sharply as part of ice melted into water and flowed away. Finally, after 135 s, all of the ice was removed, and a PCE of 15.7% was achieved, which was 17% smaller than that of the solar cell without a heater on it.
 Fig. 8  Application example of the CuS networks in snow removal for solar panels. (a) A picture of large-area solar panels covered by snow during the winter. The schematic and photograph show the detail structure of CuS heater worked on the solar panels. (b) J–V curves of the silicon solar cell as function of the heating time of the CuS network film heater. (c) The corresponding power conversion efficiency of silicon solar cell as function of the heating time of the CuS network film heater. 
4. Conclusions
In this study, large-scale, low-cost, and flexible CuS TCFs based on the colloidal crackle patterns were fabricated on different flexible substrates and employed as a transparent heater for the first time. The obtained film in this study exhibits a low Rs (21.5 Ω sq−1) with a high transmittance (∼80%). The CuS network electrode exhibits remarkable mechanical flexibility under 500 bending cycles at a bending radius of 1.2 cm and high chemical stability during acid and alkali tests. In addition, this CuS heater has demonstrated fast temperature switching (<30 s) with low input voltages (<4.5 V), yielding a thermal resistance of 197 °C W−1 cm2. The temperature of the wearable CuS heater was successfully controlled by Bluetooth in a cell phone wirelessly, and it was demonstrated that the CuS heaters could be utilized for snow removal by this wireless control system; this indicated their potential applications in wearable electronic products.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 51502253, No. U1405226), the Fujian Natural Science Foundation (No. 2017J01104), the Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (2016A030310369), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (No. 20720160127), the “111” Project (B16029), Fujian Provincial Bureau of Science & Technology (2014H6022), and the 1000 Talents Program from Xiamen University.
Notes and references
W. Guo, Z. Xu, F. Zhang, S. Xie, H. Xu and X. Y. Liu, Recent Development of Transparent Conducting Oxide-Free Flexible Thin-Film Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8855–8884 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, W. Guo and C. Pan, Transparent conducting oxide-free and Pt-free flexible dye-sensitized solar cells employing CuS-nanosheet networks as counter electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6569–6576 CAS .
H. Hwang, A. Kim, Z. Zhong, H.-C. Kwon, S. Jeong and J. Moon, Reducible-Shell-Derived Pure-Copper-Nanowire Network and Its Application to Transparent Conducting Electrodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6545–6554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, Z. He, N. S. Lennhoff, D. A. Banach and J. Kanicki, Transparent flexible plastic substrates for organic light-emitting devices, J. Electron. Mater., 2004, 33, 312–320 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Ravi Kumar, K. Woo and J. Moon, Promising wet chemical strategies to synthesize Cu nanowires for emerging electronic applications, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17195–17210 RSC .
X. Zhang, W. Guo, G. Gao, M. Que, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, CuS nanotrough-networks for highly stable transparent conducting electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4733–4739 RSC .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Roll-to-roll production of 30-inch graphene films for transparent electrodes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sui, Y. Huang, L. Huang, J. Liang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Flexible and Transparent Electrothermal Film Heaters Based on Graphene Materials, Small, 2011, 7, 3186–3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Adhikari and D. Sarkar, Hydrothermal synthesis and electrochromism of WO3 nanocuboids, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20145–20153 RSC .
H. Kim, Y. Kim, K. S. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, A. R. Jang, S. H. Han, D. H. Yoon, K. S. Suh, H. S. Shin, T. Kim and W. S. Yang, Flexible Thermochromic Window Based on Hybridized VO2/Graphene, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5769–5776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Zhang, V. Malyarchuk, L. Jia, K.-I. Jang, R. Chad Webb, H. Fu, Y. Shi, G. Zhou, L. Shi, D. Shah, X. Huang, B. Xu, C. Yu, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Epidermal photonic devices for quantitative imaging of temperature and thermal transport characteristics of the skin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Li, Y. Xin, T. Yang and Z. Guo, Transparent superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic coatings for self-cleaning and anti-fogging, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 033701 CrossRef .
T. Kim, Y. W. Kim, H. S. Lee, H. Kim, W. S. Yang and K. S. Suh, Uniformly Interconnected Silver-Nanowire Networks for Transparent Film Heaters, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1250–1255 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, L. Zhu, D.-J. Jeong, K. Chun, Y.-Y. Bang, S.-R. Kim, J.-H. Kim and S.-K. Oh, Transparent flexible heater based on hybrid of carbon nanotubes and silver nanowires, Carbon, 2013, 63, 530–536 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Jang, S. K. Jeon and S. H. Nahm, The manufacture of a transparent film heater by spinning multi-walled carbon nanotubes, Carbon, 2011, 49, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, J. S. Kim, S. B. Jo, S. H. Kim, J. S. Kim, B. Kang, H. J. Jeong, S. Y. Jeong, G.-W. Lee and K. Cho, Graphene oxide as a multi-functional p-dopant of transparent single-walled carbon nanotube films for optoelectronic devices, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7735–7742 RSC .
R. Gupta and G. U. Kulkarni, Holistic Method for Evaluating Large Area Transparent Conducting Electrodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 730–736 CAS .
A. Kumar and C. Zhou, The Race To Replace Tin-Doped Indium Oxide: Which Material Will Win?, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 11–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, J. Lee, S. Jeong, S. Yang, J.-H. Ko, H.-G. Im, S.-W. Baek, J.-Y. Lee and B.-S. Bae, High-performance hybrid plastic films: a robust electrode platform for thin-film optoelectronics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1811–1817 CAS .
A. Y. Kim, M. K. Kim, C. Hudaya, J. H. Park, D. Byun, J. C. Lim and J. K. Lee, Oxidation-resistant hybrid metal oxides/metal nanodots/silver nanowires for high performance flexible transparent heaters, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3307–3313 RSC .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Large-area ultrathin films of reduced graphene oxide as a transparent and flexible electronic material, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vosgueritchian, D. J. Lipomi and Z. Bao, Highly Conductive and Transparent PEDOT:PSS Films with a Fluorosurfactant for Stretchable and Flexible Transparent Electrodes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Transparent, Conductive Carbon Nanotube Films, Science, 2004, 305, 1273–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kim, Y. Won, K. Woo, C.-H. Kim and J. Moon, Highly Transparent Low Resistance ZnO/Ag Nanowire/ZnO Composite Electrode for Thin Film Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1081–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Solution-Processed Metal Nanowire Mesh Transparent Electrodes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, D. Kong, Z. Ruan, P.-C. Hsu, S. Wang, Z. Yu, T. J. Carney, L. Hu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, A transparent electrode based on a metal nanotrough network, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, G. Wang, A. Yang, X. Tao, X. Liu, Y. Shen and Z. Zheng, A Transparent, Flexible, Low-Temperature, and Solution-Processible Graphene Composite Electrode, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2893–2902 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Lee, K. Lee, S.-Y. Kim, H. Lee, J. Park, K.-H. Choi, H.-K. Kim, D.-G. Kim, D.-Y. Lee, S. Nam and J.-U. Park, High-Performance, Transparent, and Stretchable Electrodes Using Graphene–Metal Nanowire Hybrid Structures, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2814–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Yang, B.-S. Kong, D.-H. Jung, Y.-K. Baek, C.-S. Han, S.-K. Oh and H.-T. Jung, Recent advances in hybrids of carbon nanotube network films and nanomaterials for their potential applications as transparent conducting films, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1361–1373 RSC .
Y. H. Yoon, J. W. Song, D. Kim, J. Kim, J. K. Park, S. K. Oh and C. S. Han, Transparent Film Heater Using Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4284–4287 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Langley, M. Lagrange, G. Giusti, C. Jimenez, Y. Brechet, N. D. Nguyen and D. Bellet, Metallic nanowire networks: effects of thermal annealing on electrical resistance, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13535–13543 RSC .

          S. Jewell and S. M. Kimball, Mineral commodity summaries,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. Cuevas, R. Romero, D. Leinen, E. A. Dalchiele, J. R. Ramos-Barrado and F. Martin, Effect of the stoichiometry of CuxS thin films on the optical and electrical properties and the solar thermal performance, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 199–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Bagul, S. D. Chavhan and R. Sharma, Growth and characterization of CuxS (x = 1.0, 1.76, and 2.0) thin films grown by solution growth technique (SGT), J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 1623–1629 CrossRef CAS .
P. Parreira, G. Lavareda, A. Amaral, A. M. Botelho do Rego, O. Conde, J. Valente, F. Nunes and C. Nunes de Carvalho, Transparent p-type CuxS thin films, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 5099–5104 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, T. Li, F. Zhang, X. Hong, S. Xie, M. Ye, W. Guo and X. Liu, Highly flexible, transparent and conducting CuS-nanosheet networks for flexible quantum-dot solar cells, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3826–3833 RSC .
K. D. Yuan, J. J. Wu, M. L. Liu, L. L. Zhang, F. F. Xu, L. D. Chen and F. Q. Huang, Fabrication and microstructure of p-type transparent conducting CuS thin film and its application in dye-sensitized solar cell, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 132106 CrossRef .
S. Kiruthika, K. Rao, A. Kumar, R. Gupta and G. Kulkarni, Metal wire network based transparent conducting electrodes fabricated using interconnected crackled layer as template, Mater. Res. Express, 2014, 1, 026301 CrossRef .
S. Kiruthika, R. Gupta, K. D. M. Rao, S. Chakraborty, N. Padmavathy and G. U. Kulkarni, Large area solution processed transparent conducting electrode based on highly interconnected Cu wire network, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2089–2094 RSC .
K. Tezuka, W. C. Sheets, R. Kurihara, Y. J. Shan, H. Imoto, T. J. Marks and K. R. Poeppelmeier, Synthesis of covellite (CuS) from the elements, Solid State Sci., 2007, 9, 95–99 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xi, H. Liu, W. Li, L. Zhu, H. Geng, L. Quan and W. Liang, Fabricating CuS counter electrode for quantum dots-sensitized solar cells via electro-deposition and sulfurization of Cu2O, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 329–335 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, B. D. Ahn, C. H. Kim, K. A. Jeon, H. S. Kang and S. Y. Lee, Heat generation properties of Ga doped ZnO thin films prepared by rf-magnetron sputtering for transparent heaters, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 1330–1333 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr09667d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  A schematic of the fabrication procedures for preparing the flexible transparent CuS nanosheet heater by a crackle template method. (a) A colloidal TiO2 solution was dispersed and blade-coated on a PET substrate; (b) evaporation in the air to form crackles; (c) Cu was deposited on the crackle template by DC-sputtering; and (d) sulfur treatment for 20 h.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphology and structure of the CuS network TCE. (a) An image of a typical obtained CuS network film. (b) Optical microscopy image of the CuS network. (c–d) are SEM images of the CuS network film. (e–f) XRD and Raman spectra of the corresponding CuS network TCE.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a–b) SEM images of the CuS network film. (c–d) EDS images of as-fabricated CuS network film.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of layouts for CuS network film heater. (b) A graph and a thermal image of flexible transparent heater affixed on wrist as a wearable heater. (c) Thermal images of transparent heater at different curvatures.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Transmittance of the CuS heater in a wide spectral range. The inset picture shows an image of the formed CuS heater by a bush as background. (b) Time-dependent temperature profiles of CuS network film heaters (200 mm × 150 mm) under its operation at different input voltages (Rs = 21.5 Ω sq−1). (c) Temperature versus power plot for the CuS transparent heater. (d) Switching cycles for the CuS heater with 0 and 3.5 V applied voltages.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Normalized Rsversus different pH values of the Cu and the CuS heaters. (b) The variation trend of the Rs of Cu and CuS heaters as function of the baking time in the humid air with 80% relative humidity at 60 °C. (c) The variations in resistance of Cu, CuS and ITO heaters on PET film as a function of the number of bending cycles. (d) Digital images of working LED connect with bending and twisting CuS heater at different positions as segments of external circuits after 500 time twisting tests.	 

 	Fig. 7  Application example of the CuS nanosheet TCEs in cellphone controlled wearable heaters. (a) Schematic diagrams of wireless temperature control system. (b) The correlation between target temperature and achieved temperature. (c–d) Thermal images of CuS heater controlled by Bluetooth in cellphone and its corresponding time-dependent temperature profiles.	 

 	Fig. 8  Application example of the CuS networks in snow removal for solar panels. (a) A picture of large-area solar panels covered by snow during the winter. The schematic and photograph show the detail structure of CuS heater worked on the solar panels. (b) J–V curves of the silicon solar cell as function of the heating time of the CuS network film heater. (c) The corresponding power conversion efficiency of silicon solar cell as function of the heating time of the CuS network film heater.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr09667d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
