Photon management to reduce energy loss in perovskite solar cells  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01488E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01488E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 7250-7329Photon management to reduce energy loss in perovskite solar cells

        
          
            Cong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Shijian 
            Zheng
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Hongwei 
            Song
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Material Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment, Hebei University of Technology, Dingzigu Road 1, Tianjin 300130, People's Republic of China. E-mail: sjzheng@hebut.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, 2699 Qianjin Street, Changchun, 130012, People's Republic of China. E-mail: songhw@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      11th December 2020
    First published on 12th May 2021AbstractDespite the rapid development of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) over the past few years, the conversion of solar energy into electricity is not efficient enough or cost-competitive yet. The principal energy loss in the conversion of solar energy to electricity fundamentally originates from the non-absorption of low-energy photons ascribed to Shockley–Queisser limits and thermalization losses of high-energy photons. Enhancing the light-harvesting efficiency of the perovskite photoactive layer by developing efficient photo management strategies with functional materials and arrays remains a long-standing challenge. Here, we briefly review the historical research trials and future research trends to overcome the fundamental loss mechanisms in PSCs, including upconversion, downconversion, scattering, tandem/graded structures, texturing, anti-reflection, and luminescent solar concentrators. We will deeply emphasize the availability and analyze the importance of a fine device structure, fluorescence efficiency, material proportion, and integration position for performance improvement. The unique energy level structure arising from the 4fn inner shell configuration of the trivalent rare-earth ions gives multifarious options for efficient light-harvesting by upconversion and downconversion. Tandem or graded PSCs by combining a series of subcells with varying bandgaps seek to rectify the spectral mismatch. Plasmonic nanostructures function as a secondary light source to augment the light-trapping within the perovskite layer and carrier transporting layer, enabling enhanced carrier generation. Texturing the interior using controllable micro/nanoarrays can realize light–matter interactions. Anti-reflective coatings on the top glass cover of the PSCs bring about better transmission and glare reduction. Photon concentration through perovskite-based luminescent solar concentrators offers a path to increase efficiency at reduced cost and plays a role in building-integrated photovoltaics. Distinct from other published reviews, we here systematically and hierarchically present all of the photon management strategies in PSCs by presenting the theoretical possibilities and summarizing the experimental results, expecting to inspire future research in the field of photovoltaics, phototransistors, photoelectrochemical sensors, photocatalysis, and especially light-emitting diodes. We further assess the overall possibilities of the strategies based on ultimate efficiency prospects, material requirements, and developmental outlook.
Cong Chen
Cong Chen received his PhD degree from Jilin University in June 2019. Previously, he studied and did scientific research at Jilin University focused on perovskites, and quantum dots sensitized solar cells under the supervision of Prof. Hongwei Song. In July 2019, he joined Hebei University of technology as an associate professor. He is the youngest special-term “Yuanguang scholar” in Hebei University of Technology. His main topic of interest is the design of solar cells having high efficiency.
Hongwei Song
Hongwei Song received his PhD degree in Condensed Material Physics from Changchun Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) in 1996. From 1996 to 2000, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the Institute of Physics, CAS, Nagoya Institute of Technology, and University of California at Berkeley in turn. Since 2007 he has worked at Jilin University as a full professor. He is currently an editorial advisory board member of Scientific Reports. He has published over 300 scientific papers and two book chapters. His research interests have been focused on the spectral physics of rare-earth ions and their optoelectronic applications.
1. Introduction
Dealing with the energy crisis is an urgent task for current human needs. Among a variety of emerging renewable energy sources (biomass energy, wind energy, hydroelectric power, geothermal energy, and nuclear energy), solar energy has been considered the most abundant, renewable, and environment-friendly energy form.1–5 If 0.1% of the sunlight that reaches the earth's surface could be converted by photovoltaics with an average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 10%, the converted electrical energy can fully meet our energy needs.6 Photovoltaic technologies produce electricity from sunlight using solar cells and have the potency to meet a considerable fraction of future energy demands and deal with the energy crisis and environmental issues.7 Creutzig et al. concluded that photovoltaics could supply 30–50% of electricity in competitive markets.8 To date, silicon (Si) based solar cells represent about 90% of the world's total photovoltaic production.9–11 Latterly, organic and inorganic hybrid perovskite-based solar cells (PSCs) have undergone rapid development and shown great potential as next-generation photovoltaics due to their high PCEs and low-cost solution process.12–14 Hybrid perovskites form a large group of crystals that all share the same type of crystal structure based on CaTiO3, namely ABX3 (Fig. 1a), with A cations, such as methylammonium (MA+) and cesium (Cs+); B cations such as tin (Sn2+) and lead (Pb2+); and halides, such as iodide (I−), bromide (Br−), and chloride (Cl−), as the X anion (Fig. 1b).4,15,16 Some derivatives “A2BB′X6” double perovskite materials have also been studied.17–22 In 2009, Kojima et al. applied MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 as an absorber for the first time in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and achieved a PCE of 3.8%.23 Currently, PSCs have reached PCEs above 25%, outperforming Cu(In,Ga)(Se,S)2, CdTe, and Si-based solar cells.24–29 This expeditious and unexampled progress in PCE is due in part to intense efforts to develop novel device architectures that are energetically favorable for carrier generation and extraction, coupled with regulating the crystallization process of perovskite photoactive films.30–32 However, the record efficiency of 25.5% is still below the theoretical limit of a single-junction photovoltaic device due to the energy loss from the intrinsic properties of the perovskite photoactive material.33–35 In detail, the energy loss is related to low energy photons that cannot be absorbed while high energy photons are not used efficiently. In the optical aspect, there is still much room to further improve the absorption of PSCs by reducing the reflection loss and parasitic absorption.36–39
 Fig. 1  (a) The crystalline structure of the (a-1) typical ABX3 and (a-2) double A2BB′X6 perovskite; (b) potential A-site cations, metals, and halides for perovskite structure, and (c) bandgaps (left) and best PCEs (right) of variously studied perovskites; suitable materials for solar cells should have direct bandgaps of around 1.1 to 2.0 eV. (d) Record PCEs for single-junction solar cells plotted as a function of perovskite bandgap and compared to the Shockley–Queisser limit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60, copyright 2016, AAAS. 
For the low energy photon loss, the photons’ energy is not enough to excite the semiconductor and generate electron–hole pairs.40,41 As we know, AM 1.5G sunlight extends over a wide range of usable wavelengths of 280–2500 nm (∼0.5–4.4 eV).30,42 The bandgap and best-recorded PCEs of various typical perovskite materials (Fig. 1c) indicate the inefficient use of the solar spectrum. Fortunately, there are some low bandgap constituents with perovskite structures that have attractive properties.43–45 The representative Sn or Sn/Pb-based halides, MASnI3, FASnI3, and CsSnI3 could exhibit direct bandgaps of around 1.20, 1.41, and 1.3 eV, respectively, which are even narrower and more attractive than the pure Pb-based or Bi/Sb-based analogues.46–51 However, the Sn-based perovskite layer tends to degrade due to the natural oxidization of Sn2+ to Sn4+, which deteriorates the semiconducting properties. The morphology of ASnX3 perovskite will also result in reduced photovoltaic behavior and stability.52–56 Generally, the spectral response range of PSCs is mainly concentrated in the visible region.57–59 The PCE of PSCs is limited by the Shockley–Queisser limit and could only achieve about 31% for non-concentrated sunlight irradiation with an optimized bandgap (Fig. 1d).60 From the perspective of the total energy losses, previous studies demonstrated that the below bandgap loss is the dominant loss process for PSCs with a bandgap of 1.55 eV, which accounts for 41.1%.61–64 This brings a major issue for enhancing the light-harvesting and reducing the energy loss of PSCs since most of the solar irradiation lies in the UV and IR regions.65 Given the 1.6 eV bandgap perovskite, the corresponding PSCs could utilize 300–775 nm region incident photons, while wasting the sunlight region from 775 nm to 2500 nm,66,67 indicating that a considerable part of the energy over the near-infrared (NIR) region cannot be utilized by the most studied perovskite layer. Obviously, insufficient spectral utilization has been a big obstacle to improve further the short-circuit current densities (JSC) and PCE of PSCs.50,52,68–72
The inefficiently used high-energy photons are usually related to the thermalization of carriers and optical loss.60,73–77 As for the thermalization of carriers, a high-energy photon can only generate one electron–hole pair. When a photon with an energy Eph exceeding the perovskite bandgap Egap is absorbed, the excess energy Eph − Egap is typically lost to phonon emission, i.e., heat.78–80 As for the optical loss, it also originated from the short light path in the perovskite layer, the absorption losses in the transparent conductive oxide (ITO, FTO, etc.) layer, ETL, HTL, and back electrode (Au, Ag, Cu, etc.) due to their non-zero extinction coefficient, and the reflections at the air/glass interface.37,67,81–83 From the perspective of theory and experiment, previous results show that the dominant optical loss can reach 25% for experimentally optimized PSCs with the power conversion efficiency of 19%, while the optical loss climbs up to 40% for a thin-active-layer design.84 With the rapid development of the photovoltaic industry over the past few decades, there is an urgent need for enhancing the light absorption capacity of perovskite materials and broadening the optical response range of devices by utilizing the UV and NIR parts of sunlight efficiently.85 The present review highlights the latest advances to reduce the spectral mismatch losses and broaden the optical response range of PSCs in improving the light-harvesting of PSCs.
An alternative approach to increase the theoretical efficiency beyond the Shockley–Queisser limit is to adapt the solar spectrum through upconversion (UC).67,86,87 The original research on UC can be dated back to the early work in 1959 by Bloembergen, who introduced rare-earth ions (REs)-doped materials as NIR quantum counters.88 Today, UC is a rapidly developing research field in bioimaging, medical therapy, lasers, detector, sensors, and solar energy harvesting.89–92 It is a fascinating nonlinear optical phenomenon, which enables to turn low-energy photon into higher-energy luminescence emissions.93–95 In 1983, Saxena firstly proposed the application of UC in solar cells.96 Based on the maximum efficiency of single-junction solar cells, Trupke and Green studied the theory of UC enhancement and revealed that a configuration consisting of a solar cell with a bandgap of 2 eV and an ideal upconverter system attached to its rear could achieve a maximum PCE of 47.6% under constant sunlight and 62.18% under concentrated sunlight.97 Latterly, Johnson and Conibeer calculated that the limited theoretical PCE of a 1.2 eV Si-based solar cell with an additional ideal upconverter illuminated by nonconcentrated light is 40%, higher than that of 33.25% for a radiative limit efficiency.67 Therefore, integrating the UC material layer inside or outside of a solar cell, especially for the most efficient but wide-bandgap Pb-based PSCs, will realize the effective use of low energy photon. Benefiting from the UC mechanism, breaking through the intrinsic flaw limitation of the bandgap for PSCs is possible.98–100 Recently, researchers put intense research efforts into RE-doped UC nanomaterials to reduce the sub-bandgap energy loss in PSCs. We here will focus on the UC to broaden the response in the NIR spectrum and enhance the efficiency of PSCs.
In the case of downconversion (DC), it is the optical process of converting high-energy photons into lower-energy ones, which can be efficiently absorbed by the solar cell.101–104 The primary DC materials include RE doped compounds, semiconductor oxides, organic dyes, and quantum dots. DC has shown the potential to improve the JSC for various solar cell technologies.103,105–107 Previously, R. Rothemund presented an optical model to investigate the positive effect of DC layers on photovoltaic module performance.108 In another investigation, Lipovšek et al. used 3-D ray tracing and Mie scattering theory to predict that solar cells could exhibit an increased JSC by 6% from a DC layer.109,110 The model accounted for several parameters, such as layer thickness, phosphor size distribution, and volume concentration. Attempting to extend the spectral response range of PSCs to the UV region represents a fundamental approach to increasing the UV light utilization and, thus, the efficiency of PSCs. In addition to the spectrum utilization, it has been shown that the PSCs suffer from stability problems associated with incident UV radiation on TiO2, which is the typical electron-transporting material but exhibits photocatalytic features for the degradation of perovskite. DC materials applied to PSCs could exhibit the function of UV protection but not UV blocking.62,111,112 It can also be applied to enhance the spectral response of PSCs to lower wavelengths (190–400 nm).113 In this regard, the UC strategy enabling simultaneous improvement in the UV-light absorption and stability could be in high demand.
Considering the below-bandgap absorption loss and the thermal-relaxation loss of hot carrier, the PCE of single-junction solar cells cannot exceed the Shockley–Quiesser limit.114,115 From the perspective of device structure design, the concept of tandem cells can be introduced to broaden the spectral response of photovoltaic devices through complementary absorption.116,117 Tandem or graded cells, which are usually connected either mechanically or monolithically into a single configuration, seek to rectify the spectral mismatch by combining a series of subcells with varying bandgaps.118–120 The concept of tandem cells was initially proposed by Wolf in 1960.40,121 Recently, the national renewable energy laboratory (NREL) has refreshed a best PCE of 32.9% of double junction (not concentrated) thin-film solar cells.24,25 In double-junction tandem solar cells, a “top cell” with a large bandgap absorbs high-energy photons but permits lower-energy photons to transmit. Then the transmitted photon is then utilized by the “bottom cell” which has a small bandgap. In such a situation, the higher-energy photons generate a high open voltage (VOC) to reduce the thermalization loss in the top cell while the transmitted low-energy photons are absorbed in the bottom cell, leading to broader harvesting of the solar spectrum. In the PSCs configuration, several cells with different bandgaps can be monolithically connected in series, which is a promising strategy for improving the PCE of single-junction solar cells beyond the S–Q limit. Several distinct advantages illustrated that the PSCs could serve as the candidate for tandem solar cell application. The first and most important, the bandgap of the perovskite layer can be tuned in the range of 1.17–3.10 eV through compositional engineering.11,122 Secondly, PSCs possess a higher and more stabilized PCE, compared to traditional organic solar cells and DSSCs.123–127 Third, the perovskite materials are earth-abundant, low-cost, and low-temperature processing.128,129 Almansouri et al. have predicted that a practical PCE of ≈30% in two-terminal (2T) perovskite/Si tandem solar cell is achievable.33,130 In 2020, the NREL announced that the latest certified efficiency of the 2T perovskite/Si tandem solar cell is 29.5%, achieved by Oxford photovoltaic.25 The existing review papers have made a very systematic summary of the tandem cell of perovskite/Si, perovskite/CIGS, and perovskite/CdTe-based photovoltaics.114,117,120,131–134 We here will focus on the review of perovskite/perovskite, perovskite/organic, perovskite/dye, and perovskite/quantum dots tandem solar cells, which could extend the spectral response of PSCs.
In addition to the conversion and broadening of the spectrum, it is also an essential factor for improving the performance of PSCs to adequately respond to the response wavelength range (300–800 nm). Plasmonic effects, which is the interaction of incident light photons with the conduction electrons of metal nanostructures, have been considered as an efficient route for increasing light absorption.135,136 The optical properties of metal nanostructures have been studied since the time of Faraday.137 In recent years, the research interest in metal nanoparticles has intensified, in particular, due to the discovery of Raman scattering.138–140 Plasmonic metal nanostructures (such as nanoparticles, nanorods, nanoshells, nanostars, etc.) have novel optical properties like surface plasmon resonance (SPR), which arise due to the collective oscillation of conduction electrons at the metal surface induced by the incident electromagnetic field.137,141,142 Until now, there has been a great deal of work in the fields of optical communication, surface-enhanced spectroscopy, and solar cells. Especially in thin-film solar cells, substantial local field enhancement around metal nanoparticles can increase the light absorption of solar cells. As a matter of fact, the introduction of plasmonic nanoparticles into photovoltaics applications has led to an emerging research area, usually called plasmon-enhanced solar cells. By employing plasmonic effects such as strong scattering, generation of hot electrons, and amplified near fields in photovoltaic devices, light-harvesting in the visible and NIR regions can be enhanced.143–145 Previously, Schaadt et al. deposited Au nanoparticles on Si-based solar cells and obtained an enhanced response of up to 80% at wavelengths around 500 nm.146 Pillai et al. deposited Ag particles on 1.25 μm thick and planar Si-based solar cells and obtained an increased photocurrent by 33% and 19%, respectively.147 Enhancements from plasmons have also been observed in other semiconductor solar cells.148–152 Currently, the reported metal nanoparticles in PSCs are generally utilized by being incorporated into the solution of the interfacial carrier modification layer or photoactive layer to increase light-harvesting.87,90,153,154 From another point of view, due to the toxicity of Pb in perovskite materials, researchers believe that the thickness of the perovskite layer should be further reduced on the existing basis to decrease the usage and pollution of Pb. This implies that light-harvesting by metal nanoparticles may be crucial for perovskite films to generate the required photocurrent.
In addition to generating highly efficient electricity, PSCs have a unique use as a translucent window for buildings. To improve the transparency of PSCs, most of the approaches are focused on developing transparent electrodes, such as ultrathin Au electrodes, Ag nanowires, transparent polymers, and transparent metal oxides, and the perovskite layer itself. According to existing studies, the thickness of the perovskite photoactive layer required must be at least 370 nm to completely capture light with photonic energy efficiently. However, both efficiency and transparency depend on the thickness of the perovskite layer and are contradictory. On the one hand, increasing the thickness of the perovskite layer will reduce the transparency of PSCs. On the other hand, reducing the thickness of the perovskite layer to increase transparency leads to decreased efficiency, as previously demonstrated in the manufacture of ultra-thin PSCs. To overcome this dilemma, a promising texturing method, which can simultaneously enhance light absorption and transmission beyond the wavelength range of the perovskite photoactive layer, has proved to be a feasible solution for enhancing the light-trapping capability of PSCs.155,156 In an ergodic optical medium, the light intensity can be up to n2 times the incident light intensity, with n being the local index of refraction or two times that if a diffusively reflective surface is placed behind.157 Through the optimization of the structure, the PCE of the device can be maintained as far as possible while ensuring the transmission. Xiao's group simulated two different sets of textures of cylindrical nanopillars and an array of cylindrical nanoholes by FDTD for MAPbI3 based PSCs.158 They found that an optimized textured structure could induce the PCE enhancement of 30.48%, indicating that the light trapping structure is essential in thin-film PSCs.
Similar to traditional thin-film solar cells, FTO/glass or PEN/ITO must be used as a transparent conductive substrate in the device structure of PSCs, which makes the incident light must pass through the transparent conductive substrate before reaching the perovskite photoactive layer.159 Fresnel reflection at the air–substrate interface of a solar cell inevitably occurs, causing an optical loss in photovoltaic performance.160–162 According to classical electromagnetic theory, reflection is born out of a transition in the medium in which light is traveling.163 Generally, the reflectivity determined by the difference of the diffraction index between the conductive substrate and air and incident angle is inevitable, especially for long-wavelength light.114,164 Trapping the incident light in the perovskite layers by fabricating an anti-reflection layer has been an effective route to reduce the reflection loss. For a solar cell fabricated on a planar glass substrate, 4% of the incident light at normal incidence will be reflected at the air–glass interface. This value can go up to 30% as all incident angles are taken into consideration.163 To reduce the reflection, it is well known that introducing an interface modification layer or anti-reflection layer at the substrate/air interface or inside the device structure can reduce reflection losses. Directly, attaching a haze layer in front of the PSCs could be a straightforward and practical approach to reduce the reflection loss and improve the light absorption over a broad optical spectrum without affecting the device fabrication process.
Solar concentration technology represents a practical approach to reduce the cost of photovoltaic by decreasing their active area used for generating the same amount of electrical power.165,166 A luminescent solar concentrator (LSC), which is one of the most striking photonic devices that relies on the so-called Stokes shift engineering launcher, has been proposed as a useful complement for photovoltaic modules to realize the building of integrated photovoltaic devices, such as translucent solar windows.167,168 The earliest LSC typed configuration appeared as a grant proposal in 1973 by Lerner.169–171 To date, a higher PCE of 14.5% has been achieved using a tandem planar solar concentrator by employing a mixture of dyes combined with CIGS solar cells.166 The LSC has again become the interest of many groups around the world.166 The fluorescence quantum efficiency, a key feature for LSCs, is the ratio of photons emitted from the panel edges to the total number of absorbed photons.172 To date, various types of fluorophores have been used as light converters for LSCs, including organic dyes, quantum dots, and RE doped compounds. Today, the optical quantum efficiency has been exceeded 20% for the device with active areas of 100 cm2 for Stokes shift-engineered CdSe, CdSe/CdTe, CdSe/ZnS, and carbon quantum dots.173 We conclude these performances can be further improved by enhancing the quantum yield of semiconductor nanocrystals. Perovskite quantum dots (CsPbBr3, Cs2PbBr4, Cs2AgBiBr6, etc.) have absolute advantages for LSC application, including an absorption band that spans a large portion of the solar spectrum, high quantum yields higher 90%, large Stokes shift, strong luminescence matching well with the attached solar cells and a refractive index of 2.5, indicating the possibility of more efficient confinement for the LSC application.167,174 Here, we will focus on the influence of perovskite nanocrystals as an absorption light source on LSC, and we also look forward to their future application potential combined with efficient PSCs.
Distinct from other published reviews, we here systematically and hierarchically presented all of the photon management strategies to reduce energy loss in PSCs. This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, a brief overview of the fundamental aspects of UC and its application in every structural part of PSCs is presented. In Section 3, we discussed the theoretical framework and types of DC luminescent materials for PSCs. In Section 4, the tandem or graded PSCs are discussed. In Section 5, a brief overview of the mechanisms of SPR and its function in PSCs is presented. In Section 6, we introduce the texturing method in the internal structure of PSCs for light-trapping. In Section 7, we overview the anti-reflection for photon recycling by reducing the surface reflection loss in PSCs. In Section 8, we discuss the LSC of perovskite nanocrystals for enhancing the photovoltaic performance of traditional Si-based solar cells and PSCs. In every section, the mechanism, device structure, high-resolution characterization, theoretical simulation, preparation method, manufacturing technique, and efficient photovoltaic applications are discussed, as is organized in Fig. 2. The photoelectric characteristics and the enhanced factor are summarized in the corresponding tables. Finally, this review ends with a summary of the perspectives and challenges related to the use of different functions in PSCs to harness a broader range of the solar spectrum, attaining higher efficiencies.67 This work guides experimentalists and theorists toward and demonstrates an approach to reduce the energy loss of perovskite-based devices, including photovoltaics, photodetector, and photoelectrochemical cells. This review will also guide research in luminescence and related biomedical imaging fields.
 Fig. 2  The overall distribution of this review, including UC, DC, tandem, SPR, texturing, anti-reflection, and LSC effect. Specifically, we will summarize the photon management strategies from the perspective of working mechanism, device structure, high-resolution characterization, theoretical simulation, preparation method, manufacturing technique, and their future application. Up-conversion mechanism: Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; down-conversion structure: Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; tandem characterization: Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, copyright 2019, Elsevier; plasmon simulation: Reprinted with permission from ref. 176, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society; texturing method: Reprinted with permission from ref. 177, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; anti-reflection manufacturing: Reprinted with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; LSC application: Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
2. Upconversion for NIR light-harvesting
As we all know, efficient PSCs should respond in a broad spectral range, for example, from the visible light region to the NIR region (∼190–2500 nm), and effectively convert the incident light into carriers.180,181 Although the PSCs can absorb the visible light part of sunlight effectively, there exists a significant energy loss for the sub-bandgap photon transmission in the NIR spectral parts of sunlight.182,183 With nearly 40% of the energy wasted owing to sub-bandgap losses in solar cells, utilizing the NIR part of sunlight for photovoltaic improvement is tremendous.184 A practical approach to decrease the sub-bandgap loss in PSCs is applying the UC materials that absorb NIR light and upconvert it to higher visible energy photons via a non-linear optical process.99,185–187 UC is anti-Stokes radiation by a two-step excitation process.188 Individually, the material is lifted from the ground state to the high-energy state by absorbing two NIR photons through the intermediate state. This is followed by the emission of high excited energy states. Generally, UC materials consist of a host material (e.g., NaYF4 and NaGdF4) and RE dopants (typically, Yb3+/Ho3+, Yb3+/Er3+, or Yb3+/Tm3+ couples).67,189,190 In general, REs refer to the lanthanide elements in the atomic sequence 57 (lanthanum)–71 (lutetium) in the periodic table of elements, as well as the scandium and yttrium of the third subgroup (17 items in total), which possess rich energy levels arising from the 4f configurations.191–195 As for the most typical configuration of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ based UC materials, Yb3+ acts as an NIR sensitizer and Er3+ acts as a visible photon emitter. RE doped UC materials can give rise to various emissions with wavelengths covering the UV, visible, and NIR.196 Given UC application in PSCs, the UC materials are required to satisfy the following demands: (1) excellent spectral matching between the photovoltaic response of PSCs and the emission spectrum of UC materials. Precisely, the excitation range (absorption range) of UC materials needs to cover an as broad as possible NIR range in which the PSCs have no photovoltaic response, whereas the emitted light should be within the optimal photoelectric response range of PSCs (300–800 nm). (2) Effective UC luminescence yield and lower UC threshold. Usually, the power density of the sunlight within 100 nm in the NIR range is less than 10 mW cm−2, and this demands that the UC materials could emit visible light efficiently at lower excitation power. (3) The UC material needs to have good transmittance in the photovoltaic response wavelength range of the solar cell, thereby avoiding the absorption loss of visible light by the UC layer.85 Here, we systematically list the research on UC effect in PSCs, and summarize the relevant photovoltaic characteristics data in the table. To show the superiority of device structure and straighten up the enhancement of UC effect in PSCs, we classify the application of UC materials from every functional structure perspective.
2.1 Upconversion in electron transporting layers
Compared to traditional thin-film photovoltaics, PSCs exhibit strong compatibility in the mesoporous layer part, which can accommodate the introduction of many dielectric nanomaterials, such as Al2O3 and ZrO2, etc.197–199 This allows researchers to place dielectric UC materials inside the device structure, rather than the outside structures of the solar cell such as Si and GaAs. There are several works that reported the incorporation of the UC layer in the mesoporous or scaffold layer of PSCs.190,200–203 Early on, He et al. applied monodisperse NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles as the mesoporous layer for PSCs applications.200 The UC layers can convert the NIR into 408, 523, 542, and 655 nm emissions, which are associated with the 2H9/2–4I15/2, 2H11/2–4I15/2, 4S3/2–4I15/2, and 4F9/2–4I15/2 transitions of Er3+ (Fig. 3a). From the device structure in Fig. 3b, it can be seen the converted light was effective utilization by perovskite photoactive layer, leading to an enhanced PCE from 16.8% to 17.8%. Further characterization showed that a stable JSC could be increased from 19.5 mA cm−2 under standard sunlight to 19.9 mA cm−2 with an additional 980 nm laser, demonstrating the positive role of the UC in enhancing the PCE of PSCs. Similarly, Jongmin Roh et al. also found that the hexagonal β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoprism modified PSCs in the mesoporous layer could exhibit an overall enhancement of 13.74% compared to bare TiO2-based PSCs.190 By examining the J–V characteristics (JSC = 0.027 mA cm−2, VOC = 0.374 V) under 980 nm laser irradiation, they attributed the enhanced PCE to the active UC luminescence properties of the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoprisms. Que et al. synthesized and applied β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4 core–shell them into the electron transporting layers (ETLs) of PSCs to enhance the photocurrent densities and PCE, which is attributed to the UC effect of the UC nanoparticles by the FDTD simulation results.85 Recently, Guo et al. synthesized β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+,Sc3+@NaYF4 nanoparticles with additional Sc3+ to enhance the luminescence efficiency,202 leading to the efficient PSCs with PCE of 20.19%, higher than that of 17.44% for control devices with a single TiO2 mesoporous layer. Li et al. revealed that incorporating the NaYbF4:Ho3+ nanoparticles into ZrO2 as the scaffold layer could achieve a PCE of 14.32%, which is increased by 28.8% compared with the bare ZrO2 based PSCs (11.12%).203 The enhanced IPCE response (Fig. 3c) over a broad range of 400–600 nm indicates that incorporating nanoparticles will boost the light-harvesting and lower carrier recombination. Additionally, a small response peaking at approximately 970 nm reveals the UC effects for spectrum widening. It should be noted that the JSC reached 25.16 mA cm−2 at 40% concentration, which is higher than the value of most studies. Although the luminescence yield of UC nanomaterials is limited at the current time, they possess the advantage and possibility of being combined inside with concepts such as photonics and plasmonics for enhancing the device performance of PSCs.106 Liang et al. synthesized the small-sized β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles and incorporated them into the TiO2 mesoporous layer.201 The proposed energy transfer from the core–shell nanoparticles to MAPbI3 induces the optimized PCE of 16.27%, higher than 13.98% for the control devices. The above findings mainly concentrate on the devices with only one sensitizer to absorb NIR photons at 980 nm. Wang et al. prepared dual-sensitized β-NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+ to absorb NIR photons at 980 nm and 808 nm for PSC applications.204 Compared with the control device, the PSCs with expanded absorption range could exhibit a best PCE of 19.23%, which improved by 7.13% compared with the control device. The enhanced PCE was found to be due to UC, light scattering, and effective electron injection by characterizing time-resolved UC fluorescence spectra and optical transmission and reflectance spectra.
 Fig. 3  (a) The UC fluorescence spectrum of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles under a 980 nm laser excitation. The corresponding energy transitions are shown as an inset. (b) Scheme of the energy transfer process in MAPbI3 based PSCs using the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles as electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) IPCE spectra and integrated JSC with NaYbF4:Ho3+ nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image of Y3+ doped LiGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UC nanocrystals. (e) PL spectra of LiGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles. The inset shows luminescent LiGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ solution (∼0.1 wt%) under the irradiation of 980 nm diode laser. (f) The photocurrent density as a function of time curves measured at 0.8 V under AM 1.5G and 980 nm laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (g) schematic of the LBIC/fluorescence mapping experimental setups. The NIR laser is focused on the perovskite/HTL interface from the FTO side. (h and i) The red and green fluorescence mapping was recorded simultaneously during LBIC mapping. Each pixel in (e) and (f) represents the fluorescence signal integrated for red fluorescence in the range of 630–680 nm and green fluorescence in the range of 517–560 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 211, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (g) photos showing the phenomena of solution (j-1 an j-2), glass/PTAA films (j-3 and j-4) and glass/γ-CsPbI3/PTAA films (j-5 and j-6) without and with NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4 nanoparticles under the irradiation of a 980 nm laser. (k) The reflectance spectra of the PTAA films with different concentrations of NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4 nanoparticles on γ-CsPbI3 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society. (l) Scheme of the energy transfer process in PSCs by using the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ mesoporous electrodes. (m) The JSC measured at 0.94 V under AM 1.5G with 980 nm NIR laser irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Although the RE doped NaYF4 nanoparticles exhibit practical UC effect, previous studies have found that pure RE doped NaYF4 nanoparticles could induce electron trapping in PSCs due to the limitation of carrier transport. Recently, researchers found that SiO2 nanoparticles could exhibit insulating properties as a shell coating on the RE doped NaYF4 nanoparticles to overcome the electron trapping. Hu et al. incorporated a highly uniform core/shell-structured hexagonal β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2 into PSCs to achieve enhanced PCE.205 They attributed the PCE enhancement to the scattering centers for increasing light capture and the additional photocurrent generated by UC. Similarly, Zhang et al. applied NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@SiO2 nanoprisms for enhancing the photovoltaic parameters of carbon-based PSCs.65 They concluded that the enhanced JSC is attributed to broadened light response to the NIR region and the improved light-scattering effect, while the higher FFs are related to the reduced carrier recombination at the interface of perovskite/TiO2 through the passivation effect of the SiO2 capping layer. Qi et al. designed a novel bilayer electron-transport scaffold, including SiO2/NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2 modified TiO2 nanorods to improve the performance of PSCs.206 It is concluded that the 1D nanorods structure underneath the TiO2 scaffold can facilitate carrier transportation. As a result, the modified PSCs exhibit the best PCE of 14.52%, higher than that of 14.21% for pure SiO2 modified TiO2 nanorods-based PSCs. Under a 980 nm laser irradiation (300 mW), the SiO2/NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2 modified TiO2 nanorod-based PSCs exhibit a PCE of 0.12%, while that of the SiO2 modified TiO2 nanorod based cell is 0.00097%, indicating the utilization of the NIR light.
In addition to applying NaYF4 matrix-based UC materials, Zhang et al. synthesized Er3+-doped TiO2 nanorod arrays as UC materials for PSC applications with an optimized PCE of 10.6%.207 The Er3+-doped TiO2 nanorods exhibit a broad absorption from 710 to 1200 nm and upconvert it into visible green light. They ascribed the enhanced performance to the UC effect and enhanced electron-injection efficiency. They also prepared Er3+, Yb3+, Li+, and Ho3+, Yb3+, Mg2+ tri-doped TiO2 with an enhanced UC emission for PSCs applications.208,209 Wang et al. proved that TiO2:Yb3+,Er3+ nanorod arrays with the UC luminescence spectra could boost the PCE to 13.4%, which is 20.8% higher than that of control PSCs.210 The above results indicate that incorporating RE doped TiO2 based ETLs could provide a promising route to reducing the energy loss in PSCs.
2.2 Upconversion in hole transporting layers
Although most of the studies have placed UC materials in the ETLs (the mesoporous or scaffold layer), some recent studies have placed them in the hole transporting layers (HTLs). Deng et al. prepared the mono-disperse, single tetragonal-phase Li(Gd,Y)F4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles (Fig. 3d) with green luminescence (Fig. 3e) and integrated them into the HTLs of PSCs.63 The optimized UC nanocrystals could produce an increased average PCE by over 25%, with a steady JSC of 22.90 mA cm−2. Furthermore, they also observed an increased JSC value of 23.39 mA cm−2 when the 980 nm laser was applied (Fig. 3f), indicating the utilization of low energy loss. In order to quantify the UC contribution, Sebag et al. performed the light-beam-induced current/fluorescence mapping technique to correlate UC emission and the contributed photocurrent, together with the morphology of the devices under the excitation of a NIR laser at 975 nm for Yb3+,Er3+ co-doped KY7F22 nanoparticles based PSCs (Fig. 3g).211 When the laser spot irradiates from the part without nanoparticles to the part with nanoparticles, there was a ∼3-fold increase in photocurrent, which was attributed to the UC contribution. The decreased ratio in the fluorescence spectrum of green/red light is related to the better response of the perovskite photoactive layer to green light (Fig. 3h and i). This work directly proves that the UC fluorescence and perovskite collect the generated fluorescence, highlighting the role of UC in improving the performance of PSC devices.
The core–shell structured UC nanoparticles were also embedded in HTL for device optimization. Liang et al. synthesized core–shell-structured NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4 nanoparticles and integrated them into the HTL for improving PCE in γ-CsPbI3 based PSCs.212 Compared with the control devices, the JSC and PCE of the modified device reached up to 19.17 mA cm−2 and 15.86%, respectively, which is increased by as much as 1.91% and 2.26% than that of the control device. Although NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4 nanoparticles possess UC fluorescence properties, they identified that the limited fluorescence quantum efficiency (<1%) makes it play a minimal role in devices (Fig. 3j). Further characterization proved that the nanoparticles mainly served as scattering centers, which extended the sunlight optical path by combining with scattering and reflecting effects (Fig. 3k). Such research reviews are also recognized by many researchers, who believe that scattering and reflection effects play a more dominant role in photovoltaic devices.213–215
2.3 Upconversion in perovskite photoactive layers
In addition to the configuration in the carrier transport layers, some studies have also placed UC in the perovskite photoactive layer of the PSCs. By overcoming the severe compatibility issue with the help of a ligand-exchange strategy, Meng et al. demonstrated in situ growth of β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystals with bright UC fluorescence and embedded them into the perovskite film for PSC applications (Fig. 3l).216 Specifically, the ligand-exchange processed β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanocrystals could serve as nucleation sites for the crystallization growth of perovskite films. The PCE difference indicates that β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ based PSCs could achieve a PCE of 19.70%, while the bare β-NaYF4 based devices achieve a PCE of 19.49% (Fig. 3m), indicating the contribution of UC. Under concentrated irradiation of 980 nm laser with a power density of 3 W cm−2, the PSCs also exhibited a PCE of 0.37%, 740-fold enhanced to the pristine PSC (η = 0.0005%).
Despite the enormous potential of nanoparticles for photovoltaic applications, the low efficiency of UC luminescence has severely hampered their practical use in photovoltaic applications. Many strategies have recently been explored to enhance the luminescence intensity of RE-doped nanoparticles (such as host lattice modification, doping concentration optimization, core/shell nanostructure design, and surface plasmon coupling),217 but the quantum yield of the most efficient nanoparticles remains very low (<10%). Recently, the discovery of localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) in semiconductor nanoparticles has opened a new regime in plasmonics and could provide a strategy for enhancing the UC luminescence of RE-doped UC nanoparticles.87,193,218 Usually, the collective oscillation behavior of free electrons in nanostructures oscillating with the incident light field is called LSPR (which we will introduce in detail in Section 5). Recent studies revealed that some semiconductor nanocrystals could exhibit strong LSPR absorption. More importantly, the LSPR absorption band of semiconductor nanocrystals is located in the NIR region, which can make full use of the abundant NIR energy. Therefore, the combination of semiconductor and UC nanostructures can effectively increase the fluorescence intensity of UC. Previously, our group firstly demonstrated the distinctive photonic and photoelectric properties of Cu2−xS semiconductor plasmon nanoparticles and their unique interactions for enhancing the UC photoluminescence of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles. With the addition of a MoO3 spacer, the UC luminescence intensity of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles can be improved and exhibited extraordinary power-dependent behavior, as shown in Fig. 4a. Specifically, The UC luminescence enhancement is mainly induced by the scattering of plasmon Cu2−xS nanoparticles at lower excitation power. We proposed a model to explain the mechanism of interaction between Cu2−xS plasmon nanoparticles, NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles and enhanced UC luminescence, that is, the plasmon scattering effect at lower excitation power and electron diffusion via a two-photon interband transition of Cu2−xS at higher excitation power (Fig. 4b). Differently, when the 980 nm excitation power is higher than 0.7 W mm−2, the electrons arising from the valence band of Cu2−xS can be excited into the direct conduction band of Cu2−xS through a two-photon process (Fig. 4c). These findings provide insights into the LSPR in semiconductors for applications in photoelectric devices. Then, we demonstrate that the broadband semiconductor plasmon (800–1600 nm) of Cu2−xS could serve as an antenna to sensitize UC of Er2O3 nanoparticles (Fig. 4d and e).193 The overall UC luminescence of the Cu2−xS@SiO2@Er2O3 composites can be enhanced by a factor of ∼1000, with a maximal quantum efficiency of 14.3% under excitation, leading to the expanded NIR response and considerably improved PCE (Fig. 4f). Under AM 1.5G irradiation, the composites in PSCs enhanced the photocurrent via electron transfer from oxygen defects to the conduction band of TiO2. The PCE of the best-performing solar cell reached 18.8% at a concentration of 15 suns (Fig. 4g), which is consistent with the high quantum efficiency and effective electronic transition. This result indicates that the electron transfer and re-absorption of UC luminescence both contributed to the enhancement of PCE under irradiation of 15 suns. Recently, Xu et al. found that the LSPR could help the UC nanoparticles (NaCsWO3@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+) exhibit an enhanced UCL intensity by more than 124 times for widening the spectral response range and then improving the photocurrent of PSCs.219 More importantly, the combination of semiconductor and UC nanostructures gives researchers an excellent reference to improve the NIR response of PSCs by increasing the UCL intensity with the LSPR effect in the traditional UC materials to reduce the energy loss.
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of the enhanced factors of UC fluorescence. (b) Schematic illustration for the UC fluorescence enhancement at high excitation power and low excitation power in the Cu2−xS–MoO3–NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ composites. (c) Schematic illustration of the electron injection process for Cu2−xS–MoO3–NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (d) fabrication process of the nanocomposites and their application in PSCs. (e) Schematic of the mechanism of UC broadband emission in the nanocomposites. (f) IPCE curves of the best-performing PSC. (g) J–V curves of the best-performing PSC with different light intensities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (h) broadband NIR sunlight-harvesting for PSCs, (i) the absorption spectra of the perovskite, IR806, and UC nanoparticles, and the emission spectrum of IR806. (j) PL spectra of UC nanoparticles in DMF excited by a laser, inset is the photographs of the UC nanoparticles before and after ligand exchange treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223, copyright 2017, Elsevier; (j) AM 1.5G spectrum shows the fraction absorbed by PSCs and the spectral regions that can be utilized through the UC process. (k) Schematic of UC populating for the UC nanoparticles/IR-783 dye/Au nanorods composite film at simulated sunlight excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society. 
Despite, confined by the lower quantum yield and smaller absorption cross-section of the traditional RE doped UC nanoparticles, its application is still a significant challenge. To further increase the fluorescence intensity and fluorescence efficiency, a novel class of UC nanomaterials with broadband, low-power NIR excitation, and high overall luminescence quantum yield were developed by combining an organic NIR dye as a sensitizer and traditional RE doped NaYF4 nanoparticles, which makes them highly promising as a spectral converter for applications in solar cells.196 The dye-sensitization on UC nanomaterials can effectively enhance UC fluorescence intensity and efficiency.220 For instance, Zou et al. developed a strategy to enhance the UC luminescence of NaYF4:Yb,Er nanoparticles, in which IR-806 dye molecules acted as an antenna to absorb NIR photons at a broad wavelength range, and then transferred the energy to Yb3+.182,221,222 Lai et al. reported incorporating IR806 dye-sensitized UC nanocrystals modified PSCs could exhibit a PCE of 17.49%, higher than that of 13.52% for the control device (Fig. 4h).223 Three characteristic Er3+ emission bands at 510–530 nm, 530–570 nm, and 630–680 nm, corresponding to 2H11/2 → 4I15/2, the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 and the 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 transitions are observed in the PL spectrum of IR806-UC nanoparticles (Fig. 4i). This strategy provides a feasible way to enable the most efficient harvesting of NIR sunlight for PSCs. Until now, there is no literature on improving the performance of PSCs by using dye and metal-enhanced UC nanoparticles. Very recently, our group enhanced the UC luminescence by synthesizing the IR-783 dye-sensitized core/shell NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+ UC nanoparticles.224Fig. 4j reveals the schematic diagram of a solar spectrum conversion process by a UC nanoparticles/IR-783 dye/Au nanorods composite film, and the energy-level diagram and the UC processes under the excitation of around 808 nm are shown in Fig. 4k. The luminescence intensity was increased by 120 times under the sensitization of dye molecules and the LSPR effect of Au nanorods. As a result, the rationally designed UC nanoparticles were assembled on the SnO2 layer of the PSCs, resulting in a high PCE of 20.5%. As far as we know, this is the highest PCE for the PSCs based on UC. Under the 1 W cm−2 irradiation, the PCE can be further enhanced to 21.1%. This work provides an effective method for increasing the fluorescence intensity and luminescent quantum yield utilized in the PSCs and is of considerable significance to the future concentrating PSCs. The results show that the enhanced PCE is due to the combination of the NIR spectrum and the enhanced light collection induced by the scattering effect of the rationally designed UC nanoparticles. We conclude that this previous work could provide a strategy for enhancing the luminescent quantum yield of UC nanoparticles and further applied in the PSCs, which is of great significance for future PSCs that use sunlight concentrators.
Very recently, the RE ions doped semiconductor nanocrystals (CsPbF3:Zn2+,Yb3+,Tm3+) have been proved to absorb two or more NIR photons and convert them into a high-frequency emission photon via multi-step energy transfer, which surpasses the bandgap energy of the semiconductor, thus inducing photoelectric response.220,225–227 Our group demonstrated a novel class of sensitive CsPbF3:Zn2+,Yb3+,Tm3+ based perovskite UC nanocrystal, which could exhibit excellent responsivity at 980 nm NIR region and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 135%.228 For future research, to effectively avoid the influence of dielectric materials on the internal charge transfer of perovskites and achieve better lattice matching characteristics with a perovskite photoactive layer in PSCs, we believe that RE doped semiconductor-based UC materials, especially for the RE doped perovskite UC nanocrystals (CsPbBr3, CsPbCl3, etc.), have great potential in achieving effective UC and reducing light loss.
There are also some problems that need to be clarified for researchers. Although the above result demonstrates that the RE based UC materials applied inside PSCs could provide additional photocurrent and a potential application in the field of NIR light-sensitive response photodetectors for expanding the effective absorption spectrum, almost none of these works mentions or avoids mentioning the fluorescence quantum efficiency of UC nanomaterials. In other words, the fluorescence quantum efficiency of UC nanomaterials at this stage is very low, and it also needs very high energy to excite, such as a high-power 980 nm laser. Therefore, the photovoltaic performance improvement (PCE, JSC, FF, and VOC) of PSCs is primarily attributed to enhanced scattering, improved carrier transport, and suppressed carrier recombination.
2.4 Upconversion out of PSCs
Although the fluorescence intensity and efficiency of UC materials can be enhanced by the plasmonic effect of semiconductors and the compound effect of dyes, integrating RE doped NaYF4 nanoparticles inside of the PSC device still faces a challenge of carrier recombination effects because of the dielectric properties. The upconverting nanoparticles usually act as severe recombination centers, leading to photocurrent loss due to the direct contact between the UC nanoparticles and the perovskite. In the process of introducing the UC materials into the device structure, special attention to the size, thickness, and uniformity of UC material must be paid for researchers. More important, high internal UC quantum yield values at low irradiance suitable for photovoltaics have been reported only for monocrystalline and multi-crystalline materials.229 According to a model from earlier research from Si and CIGS-based solar cells, the UC layer is usually placed at the rear side of a solar cell to capture the transmitted photons to enhance photovoltaic response independently.230,231 This has relatively large requirements for photovoltaic devices. The significant advantage of the rear side strategy is that the UC layer has no influence on the existing device structure. Researchers need to optimize the fluorescence characteristics of the UC material itself and the photoelectric efficiency of the PSCs independently.
Based on the above independent development strategy, our group firstly demonstrated the application of the transparent LiYF4:2% Yb3+,1% Er3+ single crystal with an internal quantum efficiency of 5.72% as an independent luminescent upconverter in front of PSCs (Fig. 5a).232 As is illustrated in Fig. 5b, we can see that the PCE can be enhanced by 7.9% under the irradiation of simulated sunlight by 7 suns, illustrating the positive effect of UC for PSCs under multiple solar light constants. The power-dependent enhancement efficiencies of the PSCs with LiYF4:2% Yb3+,1% Er3+ crystals reveal that the UC effect can play a very positive role under high power light. This work was the first to use UC single crystals in the research of PSCs, and to directly improve the performance of the device under the excitation of sunlight rather than laser light. Also, on the front of the PSCs, Tang et al. utilized a Yb3+ and Er3+ co-doped TACN based fluorotellurite glass as a UC converter.233 Under 980 nm irradiation with a power density of 10 W cm−2, the PSC could achieve a PCE of 0.18% (Fig. 5c). The above results show that applying UC on the front side of PSCs has an essential effect on improving the utilization of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the J–V curves of the PSCs under simulated sunlight excitation. (b) Enhanced PCE of the PSCs and Si-based solar cells with LiYF4:2% Yb3+,1% Er3+ crystals dependent on the excitation power density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (c) the J–V curves of MAPbI3−xClx-based PSCs using TACN-1.0 glass under 980 nm laser irradiation with different power supply. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (d) cross-sectional SEM image of the complete UC modified PSCs. (e) J–V curves of four optimized cells with and without the UC layer under 1.5 W cm−2. The inset figure shows the emission images of the corresponding UC layer. (f) PCEs are changing as a function of power density. (g) AM 1.5G spectrum shows the fraction response by PSCs through the UC and DC process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In contrast to the UC front side strategies, a UC material layer is preferentially placed on the backside of a PSC, where it takes up the sub-bandgap part of the solar spectrum and re-emits visible light, which now is resonant to the bandgap of the PSCs. Based on a semi-transparent electrode, we develop a NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/Ag composite based UC layer (Fig. 5d) on the backside of the PSCs.234 This design enables multi-functional effects, including harvesting NIR light, plasmonic scattering, reflection, and luminescent enhancement. For testing the spectrum widening effect on device performance, we introduced the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+, NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+, and NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ composite layer, respectively, to modify PSCs under 1.5 W cm−2 illumination. The J–V results reveal that the relative gain of PCE is 6.8%, 4.3%, and 11.8%, indicating that the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ composite layer could exhibit the best UC effects for NIR utilization (Fig. 5e). Further depositing an Ag LSPR layer, the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+/NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+ composite layer-based device exhibits an optimized PCE of 19.2% (Fig. 5f), increased by about 20% under 1.5 W cm−2 illumination, suggesting the great potential for application in the spectral broadening of PSCs (Fig. 5g). Very recently, Kinoshita et al. obtained a photocurrent under excitation at 938 nm for PSCs by attaching the UC layer behind with sensitizing a rubrene triplet with an osmium complex donor having singlet-to-triplet absorption in the NIR range.235 Above all, the UC layer covered the backside of PSCs could absorb the transmitted photons with low-energy and re-emitted visible light with high energy, which can contribute to the formation of extra electron–hole pairs in PSCs with higher photocurrent.
In the above, although PSCs have a higher tolerance in a device structure than traditional organic and DSSCs, the thickness of the entire device needs to be controlled within 1 μm, which places high requirements on the size and thickness of the UC material. In the last part of this section, the introduction of UC single-crystals outside of the PSCs can effectively avoid carrier recombination and thus enhance the electrical performance. Simultaneously, a UC single crystal with high efficiency and high fluorescence intensity can be used to place on the outside of the PSCs, and the performance of the device can be further enhanced through optimization of the structure, such as the LSPR and photonic crystal structure for UC luminescence enhancement.87,94 It should also be noted that the light transmission of the UC single-crystal for visible light also needs to be considered when placed outside the device.
In the section summary, from the current point of view, the UC mechanism is the only way to break through the limited efficiency of the Shockley–Queisser limit of a perovskite-based single-junction solar cell. Most of the UC strategies to improve the spectral response of PSCs have been positively promoted. Of course, this improvement in photovoltaic performance may be the synergistic result of multiple strategies, such as UC, scattering, and promoted crystallization of perovskite. Nevertheless, under the excitation of a 980 nm laser or multiple sunlight, it is unquestionable whether the UC-based PSCs could exhibit an extra eye-catching photocurrent, which is not possible with traditional PSCs. At present, most of the research is focused on RE doped UC materials, especially RE doped NaYF4 and LiYF4 materials, which are mainly concentrated in some trivalent REs with matching intermediate energy levels, such as Er3+, Tm3+, Ho3+, etc. (by using Yb3+ as a sensitizer). Although REs can provide efficient UC coupling, the massive gains in PCE could not be achieved as theoretically predicted, and the practical application of UC materials in solar cells still faces enormous challenges. The main reason is that the f–f absorption band of REs is relatively narrow, which is the key to UC luminescence to achieve broadband UC absorption/excitation, leading to the luminous efficiency and absorption cross-section of the existing UC materials. The trivalent REs have the common issue of small absorption cross-section and narrow excitation band. Simultaneously, the REs that can produce UC luminescence often have richer and denser intermediate state energy levels, which enhances the coupling between the excited state electrons and the lattice, that is, the electron–phonon coupling, making its UC fluorescence efficiency less than ideal. Currently recognized as the most efficient UC luminescent material RE doped NaYF4 system, their luminescence quantum efficiency is still less than 10%, while the nanomaterials have a lower quantum yield. Thus, realizing UC absorption in a broadband is of decisive significance for the UC of the whole solar spectrum in the future (Table 1).
Table 1 Summary of UC host materials with their photovoltaic parameters investigated in the literature






Sample
Size
Ref.
Position
Emission peaks
Perovskite
Function
Initial PCE (%)
Optimized PCE (%)
Enhanced factor (%)
Dominant factor
NIR excitation
Excitation source




1
NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@SiO2
1.4 μm (150 nm)

65

ETLs (scaffold)
450, 477 and 650 nm
MAPbI3
UC + scatter + electricity
12.46
14.47
16.1

J
SC/FF

J
SC = 4.54 μA
0.05 W, 980 nm


2
NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4
45–50 nm

85

ETLs
452, 476, and 648 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
14.1
16.9
19.8

J
SC/VOC/FF
PCE = 0.083%
500 mW, 980 nm


3
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
550–600 nm

190

ETLs
408, 523, 543 and 655 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
15.98
14.05
13.74

J
SC/FF

J
SC = 0.027 mA cm−2
1 W, 980 nm


4
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
16.3 nm

200

ETLs
408, 523, 542 and 655 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
16.8
17.8
6.0

J
SC/FF
PCE = 0.3%
980 nm


5
NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2
50 nm

201

ETLs
345, 362, 450, 477, 650 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity + scatter
13.98
16.27
16.4

J
SC/FF
—
—


6
NaYbF4:Ho3+
70–100 nm

203

ETLs (scaffold)
540, 644 and 750 nm
FA0.4MA0.6PbI3
Electricity + UC
11.12
14.32
28.8

J
SC/VOC/FF
—
—


7
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
30 nm

236

ETLs
520, 545 and 660 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
15.19
17.23
13.4

J
SC

—
—


8
β-NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+
22.1 nm

204

ETLs
523, 541 and 659 nm
Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
UC
17.95
19.23
7.13

J
SC

—
—


9
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2
316 nm

205

ETLs (mesoporous)
408, 523, 542, and 655 nm
MAPbI3
UC + scatter + electricity
8.19
9.92
21.1

J
SC

—
—


10
SiO2/NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2
1300 nm (120 nm)

206

ETLs (scaffold)
522, 540 and 654 nm
MAPbI3
Electricity
14.21
14.52
2.2

J
SC

PCE = 0.12%
300 mW, 980 nm


11
TiO2:Er3+
1 μm (100 nm)

207

ETLs
522, 540 and 654 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
UC + electricity
9.1
10.6
16.5

J
SC/VOC/FF
—
—


12
TiO2:Er3+,Yb3+,Li+
30 nm

208

ETLs
525, 545, 658 nm
Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
UC + electricity
14.0
16.5
17.9

J
SC/VOC
—
—


13
TiO2:Ho3+,Yb3+,Mg2+
30 nm

209

ETLs
547 and 663nm
Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
UC + electricity
15.2
16.3
7.2

J
SC/VOC
—
—


14
TiO2:Er3+,Yb3+
400 nm (50 nm)

210

ETLs
525, 545 and 658 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
Electricity + UC
10.9
13.4
22.9

J
SC/VOC/FF
—
—


15
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+
50 nm

224

ETLs
414, 526, 546 and 660 nm
MAPbI3
UC + scattering + electricity
19.4
21.1
8.8

J
SC/FF
—
1 W cm−2, sun


16
Li(Gd,Y)F4:Yb3+,Er3+
45 nm

63

HTLs
520, 540 and 650 nm
MAPbI3
Electricity + UC
14.69
18.34
24.8

J
SC/VOC/FF
—
—


17
KY7F22:Yb3+,Er3+
183 nm

211

HTLs
408, 525, 543 and 655 nm
Cs0.05FA0.79MA0.16PbI2.5Br0.5
UC
16.0
16.5 (front side)
3.1

J
SC

—
—


18
KY7F22:Yb3+,Er3+
183 nm

211

HTLs
408, 525, 543 and 655 nm
Cs0.05FA0.79MA0.16PbI2.5Br0.5
UC
16.0
16.8 (rear side)
5.0

J
SC

—
—


19
NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4
∼37 nm

212

HTLs
408 and 540 nm
CsPbI3
Electricity + scattering + reflection
15.51
15.86
2.3

J
SC

—
—


20
NaCsWO3@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
44.5 nm

219

HTLs
521, 540, and 654 nm
(FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x
UC + electricity
16.01
18.28
17.99

J
SC/VOC/FF
—
—


21
β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
12 nm

216

Perovskite
522, 542 and 655 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
13.46
19.70
46.4

J
SC/FF
PCE = 0.37%
980 nm


22
mCu2−xS@SiO2@Er2O3
45 nm

193

Perovskite
650 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
16.2
17.8 (15 sun)
9.9

J
SC/VOC
PCE = 18.8%




23
IR806
17 nm

223

Perovskite
522, 542, 655 nm
MAPbI3
UC + electricity
13.52
17.49
29.4

J
SC/FF
PCE = 0.382%
780 nm filter


24
LiYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
Crystals

232

Front
547, 556, 674 nm
MAPbI3
UC
11.87
11 (∼7 sun)
7.9

J
SC







25
Fluorotellurite glass:Yb3+,Er3+
Crystals

233

Front
510–565 nm and 635–690 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
UC
—
—
—

J
SC


J
SC = 0.32 mA cm−2
10 W cm−2


26
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+
480 nm

234

Rear
527 and 548 nm
MAPbI3
UC
16.1
17.2 (15 sun)
6.8

J
SC

—
—


27
NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+
480 nm

234

Rear
368, 383, 457, 480 nm
MAPbI3
UC
16.1
16.8 (15 sun)
4.3

J
SC

—
—


28
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+
480 nm

234

Rear
368, 383, 457, 480, 527, 548 nm
MAPbI3
UC
16.1
18.0 (15 sun)
11.8

J
SC

—
—




3. Downconversion/shifting for UV utilization
3.1 Theoretical study of downconversion improved solar cells
Extending the spectral response in the UV region and enhancing the UV-light stability are two remaining challenges for PSCs.62,237–239 The conversion process from high energy photon to low energy photon usually includes two different ways: DC and downshifting.101 DC is the process of converting high-energy photons into two low-energy photons, which is also called quantum clipping.240,241 There is a similar mechanism called downshifting, which is the typical photoluminescence process by converting one high-energy photon into another photon with lower energy. Downshifting can be regarded as a subsection of DC. Although the two processes are similar, their quantum efficiency is different. In the downshifting process, quantum efficiency will undoubtedly be less than 100%.242 Due to the slight thermal loss of DC, its quantum efficiency is equal to or greater than 100%, so it has better potential to improve the performance of solar cells than downshifting. Fig. 6a shows a schematic diagram of downshifting and DC processing. Once the photons are continuously emitted and absorbed, two photons with lower energy can be obtained in DC processing.243 If the wavelength is equal to the wavelength associated with the bandgap of the perovskite, the DC material can be used to improve the efficiency of PSCs. A similar process can occur in downshifting, but as mentioned before, only one photon can be produced for each absorbed photon. Hovel et al. first explored the method to improve the performance of solar cells using the DC layer.244 Since then, theoretical and experimental studies have been carried out on DC materials.105,107,245,246 The traditional materials for the DC layer in solar cells are luminescent organic dyes, quantum dots, organic metal complexes, and so on.171 The efficiency of different solar cells has been improved, such as crystalline Si,243,247,248 CdTe,249,250 CIGS solar cells,251 organic solar cells,252 and DSSCs.67,253 While DC phosphors have been investigated for decades in the lighting industry, the possibility of DC converted sunlight to improve the performance of solar cells was first treated theoretically by Trupke et al.104 They demonstrated that a Si-based solar cell with an ideal DC layer could exhibit an optimized PCE of 38.6%, which is in comparison to the limiting efficiency of 30.9% for the same solar cell without a DC layer present.104 According to studies on the concept of the DC effect from Rothemund, the DC-induced PCE enhancement in solar cells depends on several parameters, including the refractive indices and extinction coefficients of the materials, the film thickness, the particle volume, and size distribution (Fig. 6b).108 Benjamin Lipovšek illustrated that a simulated JSC of 10.62 mA cm−2 and a boost of 6.3% could be obtained by optimizing the DC layer in organic solar cells.109,110 Introducing DC materials can change the absorption curve (Fig. 6c), which reveals the obvious regions of absorption and emission of the DC materials. Fig. 6d shows the DC effect of the violet dye for λ < 400 nm, and of the yellow dye for λ > 400 nm for CIGS application. The yellow dye absorbs nearly all the emission of the violet dye and efficiently reemits down-shifted photons centered around 540 nm. Under AM 1.5G illumination, it can be seen that the introduction of fluorescent dyes can effectively improve the spectral EQE response of photovoltaic devices in the UV region (Fig. 6e).
 Fig. 6  (a) Energy diagram shows different behaviors schematically among a DC and a downshifting material used to harvest the photo in a solar cell. (b) Optical processes and losses for a downshifting layer placed on top of a solar cell. Absorbed and downshifted photons hit the underlying solar cell directly via total reflection or re-absorption and re-emission. Non-absorbed photons are transmitted without a change of wavelength into the solar cell. Optical losses are due to reflection at the front side and interfaces. Due to isotropic emission, individual fractions of down-shifted photons escape through the front side escape cone and the side of the downshifting layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108, copyright 2014, Elsevier; (c) simulated absorbance in the typical organic solar cell without (dashed line) and with (full line) the downshifting layer applied to the front side of the cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110, copyright 2015, Elsevier; (d) downshifting for CIGS-based solar cells with a mixture of two organic dyes: (d) the violet organic dye absorbs strongly in the low-wavelength region, the yellow organic dye between 400 nm and 500 nm. (e) Fitting the EQE spectrum with a constant LDS efficiency results in small errors because of a change of ηPL for the short-λ two-step absorption and re-emission process. A wavelength-depended LDS efficiency perfectly fits the experimental data. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108, copyright 2014, Elsevier; (f) schematic of the solar cell structures considered in the simulations DC enhanced UV utilization. (g) and (h) Stand for the results for the structure of the solar cell with nBackground of 1.5. Panels (g) and (h) are the absorption profiles calculated for the PSCs with thicknesses of 250 nm and 500 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113, copyright 2018, Run. 
Integrating DC phosphors into PSCs can be a feasible approach because it could remove a load of spectral matching from the halide perovskite semiconductor and minimizes the thermalization losses in the devices. In order to obtain a more efficient DC effect, the researchers need to carefully design and synthesize the efficient DC materials for PSCs application. For example, the DC material must have high emission efficiency, and its light absorption band should not overlap with the absorption of the active layer in the device, so a light-emitting material whose central absorption peak is in the UV region of the solar spectrum can be selected. In addition to the expansion of the spectrum, DC materials can also effectively reduce the performance degradation of PSCs caused by high-energy UV light. Whilst the same role could be fulfilled by a UV filter, the DC layer does not block the incident UV light but ‘recycles’ it to be used for photocurrent generation in PSCs. Miguel Alexandre et al. focuses on the calculation of the photocurrent gains resulting from the DC effect in PSCs from a theoretical point of view, as well as the reduced effects of UV-induced stability on the devices. The planar structure of PSCs is exhibited in Fig. 6f, in which the DC encapsulant layer was modeled as the front of the incident light layer. In the simulation process, they chose a Gaussian profile to emulate the absorption profiles and then multiplied with the solar photon flux, based on the ASTM G-173 global irradiance spectra, to calculate the hypothetical absorption flux in a thick DC layer. Fig. 6g and h reveal the absorption profiles calculated for the PSCs with perovskite thickness of 250 and 500 nm, respectively. Their results revealed that the optimized DC layer could achieve a marginal increase by 2% (∼0.6 mA cm−2) in photocurrent.113
It has been proved that RE-doped phosphors were able to take up one high-energy incident photon and convert it into two or more low-energy photons. RE-doped phosphors, organic dyes, complexes, and quantum dots have all been suggested to be utilized for achieving the DC effect for PSCs.98,100,254 There are some key characteristics for DC materials, including broadband absorption, high absorption coefficient, and quantum efficiency, high transmittance in the response region, large Stokes shift to minimize self-absorption losses, and excellent stability.101,196 Nanomaterials and bulk materials, as the source of DC fluorescence, have pervasive research work to improve the PCE of PSCs. At the current time, nanomaterials can show excellent fluorescence characteristics, even more than 100% quantum cutting efficiency.241,255–259 At the same time, there are many kinds of DC materials, including RE doped materials, semiconductor quantum dot materials, silicon nanocrystals, as well as carbon-based materials and metal complexes, which can show excellent fluorescence characteristics.260–262 Therefore, we mainly classify and summarize the DC effect on PSCs according to the types of DC materials, which is convenient for readers to research progress and prospects of DC materials for PSCs.
3.2 REs-based downconversion phosphors
Due to their specific 4f electronic structure, the RE doped DC phosphors are ideal candidates for extending the response wavelength of PSCs to the UV region.263 Hence, applying the RE based DC effect to PSCs is a practical approach to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.264 Some previous research using RE luminescence has been proposed to improve the photovoltaic performance of PSCs, including Y2O3, NaGdF4, Sr2CeO4, YVO4:Eu3+, ZnGa2O4:Eu3+, or CeO2:Eu3+, etc.265–267 Jia et al. deposited NaYF4:Eu3+ on the nonconducting side of the conducting glass to extend the spectral response range for PSCs and alleviate the photocatalytic activity of TiO2.265 NaYF4:Eu3+ absorbed the UV light and exhibited emission peaks located at 595 nm, 614 nm, 650 nm, and 700 nm, assigned to the typical 5D0–7F1, 5D0–7F2, 5D0–7F3, 5D0–7F4 transition of Eu3+, respectively (Fig. 7a). As a result, the NaYF4:Eu3+ modified PSCs exhibited a PCE of 19.89% and a JSC of 23.06 mA cm−2, higher than that of 16.99% and 20.65 mA cm−2 for the control device (Fig. 7b). N. Chander et al. found that YVO4:Eu3+ modified PSCs could exhibit improved light stability and provide an 8.5% enhancement in JSC due to the DC effect.266 Chen et al. found that the PSC device with the CeO2:Eu3+–TiO2 composite electrode could exhibit a PCE of 10.8%, higher than that of 10.1% for bare TiO2 based PSCs and 8.0% for undoped CeO2 based PSCs.267
 Fig. 7  (a) Photoluminescence emission spectra of the NaYF4:Eu3+ powder excited at 375 nm. (b) The IPCE spectra of l PSCs with or without NaYF4:Eu3+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265, copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) the device structure of the doped YVO4 based PSCs. (d) The excitation and emission spectrum of YVO4:Eu3+ and YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+ (λem = 343 nm, λex = 621 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 268, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (e) schematic configuration of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ based PSCs. (f) Representative J–V curves of PSCs with and without SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ under darkness, and AM 1.5G illumination. (g) The IPCE curves of PSCs with and without SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. The inset shows the excitation and emission spectra of the SAED film. (h) UV stability for control, inside and outside of the SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ based PSCs under 365 nm UV-light irradiation. (i) Optical energy storage effect for the devices with and without SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ after simulated light was turned off. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
It is efficient to utilize UV light compared to the bare TiO2 based PSC. Our group proposed a similar way to optimize the mesoporous TiO2 (m-TiO2) with DC materials.268 We incorporated the YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+ with intensive luminescence into the m-TiO2 as a luminescent DC layer in PSCs (Fig. 7c). Fig. 7d presents the excitation and emission spectrum of YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+ nanoparticles. It can be seen that the modified PSCs could exhibit an optimized PCE of 17.9%, which shows an improvement of 9.8% compared with the control device. This work also reveals that the YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+ modified PSCs could exhibit enhanced UV stability, maintaining 70% initial efficiency after 60 h of UV light irradiation. Rahman et al. found that the Eu3+ based DC nanomaterial, Sr2CeO4:Eu3+, could achieve a photocurrent of 23.70 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 18.95% due to the harvesting and re-emitting of UV-light in the visible range through the DC effect.269 They also reported that the application of Sr2CeO4:Sm3+ modified PSCs could exhibit an enhancement of 11.4% in photocurrent and 16.2% in PCE.270 Moreover, the Sr2CeO4:Eu3+ and Sr2CeO4:Sm3+ based PSCs could exhibit enhanced UV stability. Kim et al. introduced Au@Y2O3:Eu3+ nanoparticles with a quantum yield above 80% to enhance the PCE of PSCs.271 The Au layer on the Y2O3:Eu3+ nanoparticle could amplify the converted visible light by up to 170%, resulting in an enhanced PCE of 16.1%, as compared to the value of 15.2% for control PSCs. Hun et al. found a mixing Y3Al5O12:Ce3+ phosphor layer with TiO2 could help to achieve higher PCE than of PSCs based pure TiO2 nanoparticles due to the effective utilization of light via the DC effect made by the YAG:Ce3+ nanoparticles.272 Hou et al. synthesized and incorporated a ZnGa2O4:Eu3+ nanophosphor m-TiO2 layer of PSCs.273 They obtained the highest PCE of 14.34% with a JSC of 25.02 mA cm−2, much higher than that of 10.67% and JSC of 20.2 mA cm−2 for control PSCs. Tawalare et al. found that ZnB2O4:Mn2+ and Ba9Sc2Si6O24:Eu2+ phosphors by the solid-state reaction can protect PSC from UV radiations and thus decrease the degradation.274 These results revealed that RE doped phosphors as efficient DC materials not only improve the effective utilization of UV light but also enhance the light stability of PSCs.
Although much research work at this stage has proved the practical DC effect of RE-based nanomaterials, the efficient DC materials with uniform and dispersed nanocrystals are difficultly synthesized because of the few appropriate precursor complexes, the high crystalline temperatures, and the agglomeration of RE nanocrystals.275 Meanwhile, there are many organic functional groups on the surface of the nanoparticles prepared by the oil phase method, causing severe recombination of carriers at the interface. There is an urgent need to develop a method capable of large-scale and uniform preparation of DC nanomaterials. Recently, our group developed the pulsed laser deposition approach to preparing the SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ photon DC layer for PSC applications (Fig. 7e).62 We found that the SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ modification could depress the light-induced deep trap states in the perovskite photoactive layer, achieving an optimized PCE of 17.8% (Fig. 7f and g). The devices with SAED exhibited significantly improved UV light stability by the remaining 92% of the initial PCE values after UV irradiation (Fig. 7h). More importantly, we additionally obtained a solar energy storage effect (Fig. 7i) after light illumination is turned off, due to the long-persistent luminescence of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+.276,277 Very recently, we also introduced another long-lasting phosphor layer, Y2O2S:Eu3+,Ti4+,Mg2+, to achieve DC effects and energy-storage function.278 The Y2O2S:Eu3+,Ti4+,Mg2+ modified devices could exhibit a considerably improved PCE, suppressed hysteretic effects, and highly prolonged light stability. Above, introducing DC material with long-lasting effect in PSCs not only reduces energy loss in UV and light-induced instability by photoconversion from UV to visible light but also represents a new strategy for solar energy storage. Based on the same matrix of Sr4Al14O25, Cui et al. found that the Sr4Al14O25:Mn4+,Mg2+ modified PSCs could exhibit a 7.7% increase in PCE as compared with that of the control devices.279 Above all, the phosphor layer coating can achieve the function of UV-protection and waterproof capability, resulting in a reduced moisture-degradation of perovskite films.
Although the above studies indicate that DC can effectively improve UV light utilization in PSCs,101,104,107 various loss mechanisms, including the reflection losses, need to be considered. Roh et al. tried to embed a composite of green Lu3Al5O12:Ce3+ and orange α-SiAlON:Eu2+ in a glass as a DC converter.280 As for the stability, the DC converter-based PSCs exhibit a PCE of 440% larger than that of conventional PSCs after 100 h long UV-irradiation, revealing the enhanced UV stability. Not consistent with previous studies, they found that the JSC of PSCs slightly decreases from 21.33 mA cm−2 to 17.29 mA cm−2 with the introduction of the DC converter. They attributed the reduced PCE and JSC to the reflectance effect at the interface. This work gives an ample warning to the application of DC for PSCs. That is, the DC material has prominent scattering and reflection effects, which will, in turn, affect the transmittance of visible light. Therefore, when introducing DC materials, it is necessary to consider the thickness and the size of the material and avoid blocking the spectrum in the effective response range of PSCs.
3.3 Semiconductor oxides
Although the above-mentioned RE doped DCs have been used as active fluorescent DC layers, the dielectric properties of the phosphors need to be fine-tuned. As is proved, these phosphors have no conductive properties, and their role inside of PSCs is mainly a stent effect, which cannot promote the separation of excitons and the transport of photogenerated carriers. Inspired by the luminescent DC effects of RE dopants, our group tried to prepared the Sm3+ and Eu3+ co-doped TiO2 as ETLs to convert UV light into visible light for PSC applications.281 The PL spectra and energy transfer pathway for Sm3+ and Eu3+ co-doped TiO2 films are exhibited in Fig. 8a and b. Furthermore, the PSCs can sustain at least 80% of their initial PCE over 25 days of full sunlight irradiation or UV irradiation. Very recently, Chen et al. show that the Eu3+ doped TiO2 could effectively convert damaging UV photons into useful visible luminescence for reducing energy loss in the UV region (Fig. 8c).282 The optimized bandgap alignment at the Eu–TiO2/perovskite interface could facilitate efficient carrier extraction, leading to an enhanced PCE of 21.40%, with increased JSC and VOC. More importantly, the Eu3+ doped TiO2 modified PSCs could exhibit remarkably improved UV stability, retaining 75% of the initial PCE after exposure to UV illumination for 500 h. Jiang et al. also found that the 1.0 wt% Eu3+ doped TiO2 based PSCs could exhibit an enhanced PCE of 15.79% and IPCE value (Fig. 8d), which is related to the photoluminescence of the TiO2:Eu3+ nanocrystals.239 Some other types of RE doped TiO2 nanostructures have also been explored to reduce the energy loss and improve the photovoltaic characteristics of PSCs.283 As we all know, PSCs using TiO2 as ETLs have achieved high efficiency but tend to degrade under full spectral illumination due to UV photocatalysis. To avoid the photocatalytic properties of the TiO2 matrix, some researchers replaced TiO2 with other semiconductor oxides. Roose et al. found that Ga3+ doped SnO2 could exhibit favorable stability under full solar spectrum illumination.284 Lee et al. found that UV irradiation on the ZnGa2O4 film could result in an additional current of 110 μA cm−2, confirming the efficient UV utilization (Fig. 8e).285 Hwang et al. introduced a core/shell-structured CdS/TiO2 electrode to enhance the UV utilization and light stability of PSCs.286 The CdS shell can suppress the intrinsic trap, suppress the decomposition caused by defect catalysis, and then exhibit highly improved light stability.287 In addition to CdS, Ito et al. introduced an Sb2S3 surface blocking layer with a suitable energy band position between TiO2 and perovskite to improve the photovoltaic performance by reducing the carrier recombination in TiO2 but also promote the light stability of an unencapsulated device (Fig. 8f).288 Yin et al. demonstrated that applying 2D-TiS2 nanosheets as an effective ETL in planar PSCs could help to exhibit a PCE of 17.37% and excellent UV stability.289 Shin et al. proved that La–BaSnO3 could improve the stability of PSCs, with a steady-state PCE of 21.2%.290 Luo et al. designed Fe2O3 nanoisland that could induce a promising PCE of 18.2%, with improved UV light stability.291
 Fig. 8  (a) PL spectra of TiO2:Sm3+,Eu3+, and TiO2:Eu3+ films excited by 405 nm and 395 nm, respectively. (b) The schematic diagram of energy transfer pathway from Sm3+ to Eu3+ ions in TiO2 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (c) schematic illustrations of the device configuration of n–i–p planar PSCs employing Eu3+ doped TiO2 as ETLs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282, copyright 2020, Elsevier; (d) IPCE curves of PSCs with different TiO2:Eu3+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (e) absorbance curves of TiO2/ZnGa2O4 composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285, copyright 2019, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics; (f) variation of PCE with the time of PSCs during light exposure without encapsulation in the air for 12 h. The inset pictures are the photographs of PSCs after the light exposure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 288, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.4 Organic fluorescent materials
Besides the traditional RE dopants and semiconductors, organic materials with efficient fluorescence were developed to improve the light utilization of PSCs.5,292 Bella et al. showed that fluorinated photopolymer V570 coatings on the front side of PSCs (Fig. 9a) could induce the enhanced UV utilization and light stability, with obviously enhanced IPCE response (Fig. 9b).293 Meanwhile, the coatings could form a significant hydrophobic barrier toward environmental moisture on the rear side. Same using V570 in PSCs, Stefan Schlisske et al. report colorful PSCs by combining Violet 570, Yellow 083, and Red 300 by digital inkjet-printing processes.294 The perceived color of the devices can be tuned independently from the shape of the device. Unlike the improved PCE results from Bella et al., Stefan Schlisske et al. found that colored PSCs exhibited decreased PCE due to inevitable absorption of the dye with excessive concentration or excessive thickness (Fig. 9c). Inspired by nature compounds, Jing Cao et al. tuned the interfacial chemical interactions (Fig. 9d) and reduced the electron recombination by using the sinapoyl malate interlayer (Fig. 9e) at the ETL/perovskite interface for the UV-resistant PSCs, thus improving PCE up to 20.5%.295 Tsai et al. proved that the biaxially-extended octithiophene-based conjugated polymers (Fig. 9f) as a HTL could improve UV-photostability under continuous irradiation by a 365 nm UV irradiation for 200 min.296 Gheno et al. found that the S-tetrazine molecule allowed to reduce the loss of JSC and improved the stability of PSCs.297 Also, the conjugated side-chain groups (Fig. 9g) of polymers could facilitate its UV absorption function when applied in the structure of HTL in PSCs. Recently, studies focused on applying Kremer fluorescent blue, Eu-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline, bathophenanthroline, 2,2′-methylenebis(4-tert-octyl-6-benzotriazole phenol) were also used to improve the spectral response and photostability of PSCs, leading to an increased photocurrent density.68,111,298,299 Very recently, Hwang et al. developed a water-repellent platinum(II) complex, Pt–F, as a luminescent DC layer for PSCs application, obtaining an improved PCE from 21.4% to 22.0%.254 The enhanced photovoltaic can be attributed to the long-range photon DC effect of Pt–F. In addition, the introduction of Pt–F films remarkably enhanced the stability of PSCs under UV irradiation as well as humid conditions, owing to fluoroalkyl functional groups for moisture resistance.
 Fig. 9  (a) Digital photograph of a V570 coated PSC when exposed to UV light. (b) IPCE curves of the coated and uncoated devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 293, copyright 2016, AAAS; (c) graph of the EQE (normalized to 700 nm) of a PSC coated with up to four red down-shifting layers. Left inset is the photograph of a bare inkjet-printed PSCs with no LDS layer present, and right is a photograph of inkjet-printed LDS layers with different thicknesses placed on top of PSCs while illuminated by a solar simulator. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (d) structure of sinapoyl malate. (e) Schematic illustration of Sinapoyl malate assembled at the interface between TiO2 and perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 295, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (f) chemical structures of the studied polymeric HTLs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) S-tetrazine molecule and associated photophysical steps. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (h) the chemical formula of a water-repellent platinum(II) complex, Pt–F, with DC effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (i) stability of the control and ETPM modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 300, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society. 
Although the above organic materials exhibited significant results in terms of DC effects, there are still two issues of their low quantum efficiency and the low stability that need to be considered. Prolonged light irradiation will cause the decomposition of organic materials. In order to solve the above two problems, our group recently developed that the REs complexes for application in PSCs. The REs complexes possess a broadband absorption in the UV region ascribed to the 5D0 to 7FJ (J = 1, 2, 3, and 4) transitions of Eu3+, which can effectively transfer the absorbed UV energy to REs, and help PSCs to achieve higher photocurrent and stability. We demonstrate that the Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA can improve the PCE from 17.00 to 19.07% for effective utilization of incident UV light and reduced carrier recombination (Fig. 9h).300 Meanwhile, Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA could enhance the light stability of the device (Fig. 9i). In another work, we also introduced Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA to further improve the absorption of devices in the UV region, giving rise to the highest photovoltaic performance of 19.5% and photocurrent of 27.1 mA cm−2 among the reported transparent PSCs, indicating the great potential for application in the spectral broadening of PSCs.234 Above, the organic material-based DC layer can function as an efficient photon DC layer for reducing energy loss in the UV region and act as a “chemical edge sealant” that enhances the environmental stability of PSCs.
3.5 Quantum dots
Recently, semiconductor quantum dots have been considered to be an excellent way to achieve DC and spectral expansion in PSCs and other typical photovoltaics.4,301–307 Our group proved that the CsPbBr3 quantum dot (Fig. 10a) modification could boost the vapor phase (Fig. 10b) and solution-processed PSCs with a PCE of 16.4% and 20.8% by the DC effect in the UV region and suppresses carrier recombination (Fig. 10c).237 Besides, we observed a “colorful” phenomenon due to the luminescence properties of quantum dots (Fig. 10d). The conversion of the UV light eliminated a significant loss mechanism that deteriorates perovskite stability. Wang et al. found that the Mn2+ doping in CsPbCl3 quantum dots could induce an intermediate quantum state and boost the higher quantum yield of ∼60% (Fig. 10e).308 The CsPbCl3:Mn2+ quantum dots could improve PCE and EQE (Fig. 10f) accompanied by enhanced stability for PSCs. They also enhance the PCE of organic and Si-based solar cells of 3.21% and 2.98%, respectively, by insulating the CsPbCl3:Mn2+ quantum dots. Because of the excellent DC effect, perovskite nanocrystals are also widely used in photodetector to achieve better response and stability.309 Zou et al. applied CsPbBr3 quantum dots acting as an efficient DC layer to convert UV light into 510 nm light and a protective layer to prevent degradation of the hybrid perovskite for achieving a higher detectivity to UV-C, with an increased value to 1.4 mA W−1 and 2.4 × 1011 jones, respectively. Tong et al. also prepared a dual-phase CsPbBr3–Cs4PbBr6 material on the rear side to achieve faster, highly sensitive photodetection.310 As a result, the modified photodetector could exhibit a fast response time and high responsivity. In addition to perovskite nanocrystals, silicon quantum dots are fascinating materials for photovoltaics because of their superior properties, including high quantum-confined photoluminescence, nontoxicity, and earth-abundant nature.311–313 More importantly, silicon quantum dots exhibit an efficient DC effect for converting shorter wavelength excitation light (300–530nm) into the visible region light (550–800nm). Very recently, Wang et al. incorporated the silicon quantum dots inside of PSCs (Fig. 10g) to extend external quantum efficiencies over a wide wavelength range of 360–760nm.262 By converting short wavelength (300–530 nm) light to a perovskite-operating visible band (380–775 nm), the silicon quantum dots modified PSCs could yield an enhanced photocurrent density of 21.2mA cm−2 and PCE of 19.3%. Wang et al. introduced typical traditional ZnSe quantum dots on the rear side of PSCs for yielding an increased PCE from 16.6% to 17.3%, with delayed destruction speed under the UV irradiation.314 These works provide a successful strategy toward efficient PSCs and perovskite-based photodetectors by quantum dots for effective UV light utilization and thus energy loss reduction.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of the synthesized CsPbBr3 nanocrystals under the illumination of 365 nm light source. (b) Schematic of CsPbBr3 modified PSC devices by vapor deposition technology with organic MAI and inorganic PbI2 source. (c) J–V characteristics of the control and CsPbBr3 coated PSCs. (d) The luminescence of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal modified devices varies as a function of time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237, copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (e) energy bandgap alignment diagram of CsPbCl3:Mn2+ quantum dot. (f) EQE spectra of PSCs with different thickness CsPbCl3:Mn2+. Inset is the schematic structure of total devices coated with CsPbCl3:Mn2+ layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. (g) The device structure of the silicon quantum dot modified PSCs. (h) Schematic illustration of quantum-assisted sunlight reabsorption processes at perovskite/silicon quantum dot interfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. 
3.6 Carbon materials
It is always an exciting topic to build low-cost DC materials with high quantum yield. Due to high electrical conductivity, chemical stability, low cost, multiformity, and high efficiency in terms of electrical and fluorescent properties, carbon materials have made undeniable contributions. Some typical and famous carbon materials, especially graphite, carbon black, carbon nanotube, graphene, and graphdiyne, possess characteristics of DC fluorescence.315–320 Carbon materials with different dimensions were formed by different strategies of atom bonding, leading to the carrier transport behaviors with clear distinction.321,322 Generally, 0D carbon materials, fullerene, and its derivatives have good solubility and high electron density, which are considered ideal electron transport materials in PSCs.322–324 From the perspective of theoretical simulation, Hosseini et al. applied luminescent graphene quantum dots on top of a PSC to build a simple optical model for improving the light-harvesting efficiency and stability.325 Their calculated results revealed that a graphene quantum dot layer with 94% quantum yield could induce a remarkable enhancement in IPCE and thereby an enhanced photocurrent by more than 40% in the spectral range of 300–400 nm (Fig. 11a–c). They predicted that the graphene quantum dots could offer a definite possibility of achieving highly photo-stable PSCs under full spectral illumination without the requirement of an additional UV filter. Based on existing theoretical research, our results indicate that the introduction of fluorescent carbon dots in the m-TiO2 layer (Fig. 11d and e) could convert UV to blue light for efficient PSC applications.326 We revealed that the fluorescent carbon dot modified PSCs could exhibit an improved PCE of 16.4% and maintain nearly 70% of their initial PCE after 12 h of full sunlight illumination (Fig. 11f and g). Our results further proved that the DC effect of fluorescent carbon dots is a novel and practical approach to improving the PCE and photostability of PSCs. Similarly, Wang et al. revealed that introducing carbon dots (Fig. 11h) into SnO2 could reduce the trap-state density and increase the mobility in SnO2 films, leading to PSCs with a high PCE of over 20% with better UV stability after exposure to UV illumination.327 Bian et al. developed N-doped graphene quantum dots with a quantum yield of 80% to convert UV light into visible photons for γ-CsPbI3 based PSCs applications.328 Photographs taken under visible light and 365 nm UV light of samples with a different layer of N-doped graphene quantum dots deposited on FTO glass is shown in Fig. 11i. The N-doped graphene quantum dots could serve as an active DC layer to harvest the UV light, leading to the optimized PSCs with an increased JSC of 19.15 mA cm−2 and a PCE of 16.02%, compared with that of 18.67 mA cm−2 and 15.53% for control devices, which proved the effective strategy in improving the stability by suppressing the UV light from entering the device. Zhang et al. used γ-GD quantum dots in PSCs as a surface modifier to enhance UV and thermal stability.112 Li et al. report a solution-processed carbon quantum dots could help to achieve higher PCE, VOC and JSC.329 Xie et al. demonstrate that the addition of C60 to PCBM can effectively improve the device performance of 19.31% and retain 91.3% of its initial PCE over 1056 hours of continuous illumination.330 Wang et al. found that μGR crosslinking could result in an increased PCE by 11.40% for CsPbI3 based PSCs by suppressing the thermal/moisture-induced agglomeration.331 Zhou et al. used polyethylenimine modified cross-stacked super aligned carbon nanotube film to enhance the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.332 As a result, the modified PSCs exhibit an optimized PCE of ∼11% with negligible hysteresis. Moreover, PSCs based cross-stacked super aligned carbon nanotube show superior durability in comparison to the standard Ag-based devices. Above all, it can be found that that the carbon materials with higher quantum yield could offer a pronounced possibility in achieving highly photo-stable PSCs under full spectral illumination.
 Fig. 11  (a) Normalized absorption and emission spectra of graphene quantum dots-EDA and graphene quantum dots-G and the IPCE curves of a bare PSC. (b) Calculated IPCE for PSCs without and with graphene quantum dots-G. (c) Calculated total IPCE spectra for PSCs without and with graphene quantum dots-EDA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) and (e) stand for the schematic illustration of the energy levels and cross-sectional view in PSCs. (f) J–V curves based on different concentrations of carbon dots. (g) Stability of PSCs with various concentrations of carbon dots under light exposure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 326, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society; (h) UV-vis absorption spectrum of carbon dots. The inset image is the TEM micrograph and the photograph of the water solution of carbon dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 327, copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i) photographs under visible light and 365 nm UV light of different numbers of layers on FTO glass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 328, copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
From the above research, we can conclude that the DC materials play a decisive role in efficient PSCs by effectively utilizing the UV light for reduced energy loss. In contrast to the UC process, the effect of the DC process in PSCs is more prominent. In order to maximize the spectrum utilization of PSCs through DC, the bandgap of perovskite and device structures of PSCs must be considered in the selection of DC materials. In addition to the luminescence properties of DC materials, the reliability, including light stability and environmental stability, must be taken into account for future commercial applications in PSCs. DC material is a more beneficial strategy for improving the light stability of PSCs. At the same time, the introduction of a new DC layer inside or outside the PSCs means an increase in the total cost, which depends on the type of material and the deposition method. Most importantly, in order to evaluate the best DC materials, it is necessary to measure the fluorescence efficiency of DC materials and the PCE enhancement of PSCs accurately. Most of the studied DC materials are based on RE doping because of the unique fluorescence characteristics, and this requires the host material to have high transmittance and low scattering. Defects in the surface and crystal structure of the host material have an important influence on the fluorescence characteristics, which will cause the energy to be absorbed directly in the host rather than transferred to the activated ions. Also, the host material also needs to have good chemical stability in terms of humidity and temperature. If placed inside of the PSCs, the DC materials cannot react with the light-absorbing material or electrode. In recent years, semiconductor nanoparticles, especially perovskite nanocrystals, have also been used as potential DC materials, which could exhibit nearly 100% fluorescence efficiency. However, when placing the semiconductor nanoparticles inside of the PSCs, there will be an ineluctable problem of fluorescence efficiency reduction caused by aggregation. There is another issue of poor humidity stability of the water-sensitive DC materials, which could be accompanied by packaging technology. The fluorescence intensity has a great relationship with the thickness, while the efficient PSCs are very demanding in thickness. Above all, taking the DC mechanism as the goal to reduce energy loss and further improve the PCE of PSCs, then more research attention should be paid to developing new DC materials possessing a compromise between optical characteristics (fluorescence efficiency, transmittance, absorption wavelength) and electrical performance (Table 2).
Table 2 Summary of DC host materials with their photovoltaic parameters investigated in the literature






Sample
Size
Ref.
Position
Method
Emission peaks
Perovskite
Function
Device configuration
Initial PCE
Optimized PCE
Enhanced factor
Dominant factor




1
NaYF4:Eu3+
24 nm

265

Outside
Solvothermal method
615 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
DC
Planar
16.99%
19.89%
17.1%

J
SC



2
YVO4:Eu3+
5–8 nm

266

Inside
Chemical co-precipitation
615 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Mesoporous
7.53%
8.11%
7.7%

J
SC



3
CeO2:Eu3+
70 nm

267

Inside
Hydrothermal process
590 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Mesoporous
10.1%
10.8%
6.9%

J
SC/VOC


4
YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+
20 nm

268

Inside
Hydrothermal method
621 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
16.3%
17.9%
9.8%

J
SC/VOC/FF


5
SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+
200 nm

62

Inside
Pulsed laser deposition
520 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
DC + electricity
Planar
16.7%
17.8%
6.6%

J
SC/VOC


6
Sr2CeO4:Eu3+
150 nm

269

Inside
Solid-state reaction method
610 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
DC + electricity
Planar
16.6
18.95%
14.2%

J
SC/FF


7
Sr2CeO4:Sm3+
150 nm

270

Inside
Solid-state reaction
608 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
DC + electricity
Planar
15.4%
17.9%
16.2%

J
SC



8
Au@Y2O3:Eu3+
100 nm

271

Inside
Urea precipitation method
611 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
DC + LSPR
Mesoporous
15.2%
16.1%
5.9%

J
SC



9
Y3Al5O12:Ce3+
50 nm

272

Inside
Combustion method
518 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
11.05%
13.34%
20.72%

V
OC/FF


10
ZnGa2O4:Eu3+
5 nm

273

Inside
Hydrothermal method
613 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
10.67%
14.34%
34.4%

J
SC/FF


11
ZnB2O4:Mn2+/Ba9Sc2Si6O24:Eu2+
—

274

—
Solid-state reaction
538 nm
—
DC
—
—
—
—
—


12
Y2O2S:Eu3+,Ti4+,Mg2+
185 nm

278

Inside
Pulsed laser deposition
625 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
DC + electricity
Planar
19.47%
20.90%
7.3%

J
SC/VOC


13
Sr4Al14O25:Mn4+,Mg2+
1.2 mg mL−1

279

Outside
Commercial + embedded in PMMA
650 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Planar (R)
12.6%
14.0%
7.7%

J
SC



14
Lu3Al5O12:Ce3+ and SiAlON:Eu2+
18 μm

280

Outside
Commercial + tape casting method
560 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Mesoporous
N (21.33 mA cm−2)
N (17.29 mA cm−2)
−18.9%

J
SC



15
TiO2:Eu3+
20 nm

239

Inside
Solution annealing
614 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
12.22%
15.79%
29.2%

J
SC/VOC/FF


16
TiO2:Sm3+,Eu3+
40 nm

281

Inside
Pulsed laser deposition
615 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Planar
17.56%
19.01%
8.2%

J
SC/VOC


17
TiO2:Eu3+
15–20 nm

282

Inside
Chemical-bath deposition
615 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3
DC + electricity
Planar
19.22%
21.40%
11.3%

J
SC/VOC


18
SnO2:Ga2+
57 ± 12 nm

284

Inside
Precursor annealing
—
(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
12.7%
16.4%
29.1%

J
SC/FF/VOC


19
ZnGa2O4 + TiO2
30 nm

285

Inside
Solution
420 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
14.58%
15.06%
3.3%

V
OC



20
CdS + TiO2
2 nm

286

Inside
SILAR
UV region
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
11.9%
11.5%
−3.3%
FF/VOC


21
Sb2S3
1–2 nm

288

Inside
Chemical bath deposition
—
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
4.82%
5.03%
4.3%

J
SC/FF


22
2D-TiS2
0.57 nm

289

Inside
Chemical vapor transport
—
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Planar
17.07%
17.37%
1.7%

V
OC



23
BaSnO3:La3+
—

290

Inside
Sol–gel process
—
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
19.7%
21.2%
7.6%
FF/VOC


24
Fe2O3
100 nm

291

Inside
Solution-processed micelles
—
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
14.8%
18.2%
22.3%
FF/VOC


25
V570
∼5 μm

293

Outside
Spin-coating
420 nm
(FAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC
Mesoporous
17.31%
18.67%
7.8%

J
SC



26
V570, Y083 and R300
∼2 μm

294

Outside
Inkjet printing
—
(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC
Planar
11.5%
9.4%
−18.3%

J
SC



27
Bphen
40 nm

111

Inside
Spin-coating
—
(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC + electricity
Planar
16.80%
19.69%
17.2%

V
OC/FF


28
Sinapoyl malate
—

295

Inside
Immersion method
435 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
19.6%
20.0%
2.0%
FF


29
Conjugated side-chain groups
30 nm

296

Inside
Spin-coating
—
(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC + electricity
Planar
16.92%
18.34%
8.4%

V
OC



30

S-Tetrazine molecule
1.2 mm

297

Outside
Spin-coating
580 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
DC
Mesoporous
—
—
—
—


31
Kremer fluorescent blue
300 nm

298

Outside
Spin-coating
450 nm
MAPbI3−xClx
DC
Planar (R)
9.5%
8.3%
−12.6%

J
SC



32
Pt–F
46 nm

254

Outside
Ultrasonic spray deposition
575 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC
Planar
21.4%
22.0%
2.8%

J
SC



33
Eu–4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline
1.5 wt%

68

Outside
Spin-coating
652 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Mesoporous
13.14%
15.44%
17.5%

J
SC



34
2,2′-Methylenebis(4-tert-octyl-6-benzotriazole phenol)
1.0 mg mL−1

299

Inside
Spin-coating
530 nm
CsPbBr3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
6.44%
9.61%
19.2%

J
SC/FF/VOC


35
Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA
1.0 mg mL−1

300

Inside
Spin-coating
618 nm
(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
17.00%
19.07%
12.2%

J
SC



36
Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA
—

234

Outside
Spin-coating
618 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Planar
16.0%
16.7%
4.4%
—


37
CsPbBr3
8 nm

237

Inside
Spin-coating
520 nm
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Planar
14.7%
16.4%
11.6%

J
SC/FF


38
CsPbBr3
8 nm

237

Outside
Spin-coating
520 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Planar
19.7%
20.8%
5.6%

J
SC



39
CsPbCl3:Mn2+
8 nm

308

Outside
Spin-coating
590 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Planar
17.97%
18.57%
3.3%

J
SC



40
ZnSe
3 nm

314

Outside
Spin-coating
400 nm
MAPbI3
DC
—
16.6%
17.3%
4.3%

J
SC/FF


41
Si QDs
4–7.5 nm

262

Inside
Spin-coating
380–775 nm
MAPbI3
DC
Planar
17.5%
19.3%
10.3%

J
SC



42
CdSe/CdS QDs
—

301

Outside
Spin-coating
620 nm
(CsFA)PbI3
DC
Planar (R)
20.08%
20.7%
3.08%

J
SC



43
GQDs
1.8–3.5 nm

325

Outside
—
∼440 nm
—
DC
Planar
—
—
414% (300–400 nm)

J
SC



44
CNDs
15–20 nm

327

Inside
Spin-coating
525, 550 and 650 nm
(FAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3
DC + electricity
Planar
18.54%
20.03%
8.0%

J
SC/VOC/FF


45
N-GQDs
3.8 nm

328

Outside
Spin-coating
585 nm
γ-CsPbI3
DC
Planar
15.53%
16.02%
3.2%

J
SC



46
GD quantum dots
3–5 nm

112

Inside
Spin-coating
—
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Planar
17.17%
19.89%
15.8%

J
SC/VOC/FF


47
CQDs
1–3 nm

329

Inside
Spin-coating
—
MAPbI3Cl3−x
DC + electricity
Planar
15.15%
18.89%
24.7%

J
SC/VOC


48
C60 + PFN
40 nm

330

Inside
Spin-coating
—
MAPbI3
DC + electricity
Planar (R)
14.57%
19.31%
32.53%

J
SC/VOC/FF


49
μGR
1.1 nm

331

Inside
Dispersing method
—
CsPbI3
DC + electricity
Planar
10.41%
11.64%
11.8%

J
SC/VOC/FF


50
CDs
4.8 nm

326

Inside
Spin-coating
442 nm
MAPbI3Cl3−x
DC + electricity
Mesoporous
14.6%
16.4%
12.3%

J
SC/FF




4. Tandem or graded structures for optical complementarity
As is discussed in the previous section, tandem solar cells composed of two or more independent solar cells connected in series or parallel can broaden the spectral response range of solar cells and maximize the conversion of light energy into electrical energy.333–337 The solar light spectrum will be divided into several continuous bands, and the devices are made of semiconductors with the best matching bandwidth.12,28,35,117 Generally, there are two main types of tandem solar cells. First is the 4T structured device, two subcells are independent and are not electrically connected (Fig. 12a). The only requirement for the 4T is that the top cells should be semi-transparent to ensure that the light needed for the bottom subcells can be sufficiently transmitted. The sum of the output PCE of the 4T device is obtained by simple manual calculation from the top subcell and bottom subcell under the same light conditions. The other is the 2T structured device, which needs to be completed in the whole process of complex device preparation (Fig. 12b). In order to deliver optimum performance in a 2T structured device, specific requirements, including bandgap matching and solvent dissolution, need to be considered. What is needed to be noticed is that the subcells are necessary to be connected with an ideal carrier transporting layer with high transparency and high conductivity.132 Above all, compared to the 2T tandem device, the 4T configuration is much easier to fabricate for the unnecessary precise current matching while exhibiting relatively higher tolerance of bandgap matching.338,339 Nevertheless, the 2T configuration is preferred over 4T because it has minimized parasitic absorption and higher practical efficiency.340Fig. 12c and d depicts plots of theoretical PCEs of the double-junction tandem solar cell versus bottom and top cell bandgaps in both 2T and 4T configurations along with the bandgap combinations.117 The black dotted line represents the ∼1.1 eV c-Si and the best performing CIGS solar cells. These could be ideally paired with PSCs in the 1.6–1.75 eV range to yield a PCE of ∼44%.47 From recent results, the perovskite/Si tandem solar cell has been the focus of a great deal of research and has recently reached a PCE of 29.5% in 2T configurations, exceeding the record PCE of 26.7% for single-junction Si-based solar cells.24
 Fig. 12  Schematic pictures of tandem solar cells in (a) 4T and (b) 2T tandem structures; (c) the theoretical PCE provided for 4T tandems. The photocurrent density was calculated by integrating the AM 1.5G spectrum, assuming 100% EQE above the bandgap. (d) Theoretical efficiency limit for 2T solar cells, calculated with different subcell thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117, copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (e) and (f) efficiency limits for 4T and 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 340, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Traditional tandem solar cells based on the dye, quantum dots, or inorganic thin films (CuInSeS) usually are treated to be fabricated at low-costs,341,342 but their PCEs are still much inferior to the perovskite-based tandem solar cells,39 which exhibits bandgap tenability and low-cost processing ability. Adjustable bandgaps making perovskites an ideal candidate for preparing all-perovskite tandem solar cells with a maximum prediction PCE.343,344 All-perovskite tandem solar cells have a substantial potential to outperform the Shockley Queisser limit of single-junction solar cells,345,346 which is an alternative approach with some inherent advantages, such as cost-effective and low-temperature monolithic fabrication processes.164,339,347 Selecting perovskite photoactive materials with complementary bandgaps is essential to enhance the efficiency of all-perovskite tandem solar cells.348,349 Hossain et al. recently investigated the optical and electrical properties for planar all-perovskite tandem solar cells and conducted a systematic investigation for selecting absorber materials, where CsyFA1−yPb(IxBr1−x)3 with a wide bandgap of 1.72 eV acts as a top cell, while MASnxPb1−xI3 with a low bandgap of 1.16 eV acts as a bottom cell, to obtain a maximum theoretical PCE of more than 35%.350 Regardless of the existing developed perovskite materials, Fig. 12e presents the efficiency map of all-perovskite tandem solar cells containing two ideal perovskite-based subcells with different bandgaps in 2T configuration, while Fig. 12f stands for the 4T configuration. We can learn that all-perovskite tandems could also offer a route to high efficiency exceeding 38% with optimized bandgaps for top cells and bottom subcells.340
To realize an efficient all-perovskite based tandem solar cell, fabricating semi-transparent top-cells and highly efficient perovskite subcells is critical. Currently, wide bandgap can be accomplished with CsyFA1−yPb(IxBr1−x)3 or MASnBr3 based perovskite. The most studied Sn–Pb binary mixed perovskites were usually utilized for the bottom cell due to the feasibility of bandgap tunability from 1.6 eV to 1.2 eV, making them suitable candidate photoactive absorber as the low-bandgap subcells in tandem devices. Replacing Pb with Sn can shift the bandgap down to ∼1.3 eV for MASnI3,47,351 while the optical bandgap could further lower down to 1.17 eV for MAPb0.5Sn0.5I3. Even though there some breakthroughs in mixed Sn/Pb perovskite for all-perovskite tandem solar cells in the current time, it is still far from being optimum since the suitable low-bandgap mixed Sn–Pb top cells are not air-stable enough.47,351–354 From previous studies, we believe that a perovskite/Si tandem solar cell is the first step in the commercialization for future efficient devices, while the all-perovskite tandem may be the ultimate goal for its attractive opportunities in the thin-film photovoltaic industry, including wide-band response, low cost and the use of flexible and lightweight substrates. What needs to be clarified is that the review paper mainly discusses the strategies of spectral broadening of PSCs; we will not review the strategies of perovskite/Si and perovskite/CIGS, in which the perovskite films are used as an auxiliary means to improve the spectral range of other devices.338,355,356 Readers can learn more by reading the recent literature on tandem solar cells.171 We conclude with a complete summary of perovskite/perovskite, perovskite/organic, perovskite/quantum dots, or perovskite/dyes based tandem solar cells in the following, in which the wide-bandgap perovskite, organic materials, quantum dots, and dyes were used to complement the spectral response range of perovskite in the UV and NIR regions.
4.1 All-perovskite tandem solar cell
As we mentioned before, mechanical stacking of a wide bandgap PSC as the top-cell on a low bandgap subcell for a 4T tandem device allows processing diversity.357–359 Since the top-cell and the subcell are fabricated independently, each subcell can be fabricated using their optimized processes without any additional processing restrictions.359–361 Early all-perovskite tandem solar cells mainly focused on the optimization of the composition of perovskite materials (and thus changing the optical bandgap), specifically including wide bandgap perovskite materials and low bandgap perovskite materials.358,362–365 In 2016, Li et al. demonstrated a PCE of ∼9.5% with VOC of 2.24 V by combining the MAPbBr3 based PSCs as top cell and MAPbI3 as the bottom cell in 4T configuration.366 Zhao et al. used stacked a semi-transparent wide-bandgap FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3 top cells (1.75 eV) and a low-bandgap (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 subcells (1.25 eV) (Fig. 13a) to obtain a 4T all-perovskite tandem solar cells with a PCE of 23.1% (Fig. 13b).367 By employing a combined compositional process and interfacial engineering, Yang et al. demonstrated a 4T all-perovskite tandem solar cell with a high PCE of 19.08% by combining a MAPbI3 based top cell (1.55 eV) and a MA0.5FA0.5Pb0.75Sn0.25I3 based bottom cell (1.33 eV). The transmittance spectrum of the semi-transparent MAPbI3 based PSCs and the EQE for MAPb1−xSnxI3 (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.00) based PSCs are shown in Fig. 13c and d, respectively.355 Rajagopal et al. utilized an indene-C60 bis-adduct to achieve optimized interfacial contact for improving the VOC to 1.98 V in all-perovskite tandem solar cells.340 This strategy also unlocks opportunities for solar water splitting using hybrid perovskites with solar-to-hydrogen efficiencies beyond 15%. Eperon et al. obtain a PCE of 20.3% by combining FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 (1.2 eV) with a wide bandgap FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(I0.5Br0.5)3 for 4T tandem application.353 Zhao et al. developed a low-bandgap perovskite (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 (∼1.25 eV) based PSC with over 70% EQE in the range of 700–900 nm to deliver a PCE of 21.0% when mechanically stacked with a MA0.7FA0.3PbI3 (∼1.58 eV) bandgap perovskite top cell to form the 4T tandem solar cell.368
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the device structure of the 4-T tandem perovskite by using a low-Eg 1.25 eV and a wide-Eg 1.75 eV subcells. (b) J–V curves of the 1.75 eV perovskite-based top cell illuminated from the glass/FTO side and the 1.25 eV perovskite-based bottom cell with and without the semi-transparent 1.75 eV top cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 367, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (c) the transmittance spectrum and image of the semi-transparent MAPbI3 based PSCs with sputtered top ITO electrode. (d) EQE spectra of the MAPb1−xSnxI3 based PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 355, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (e) SEM images of perovskite films prepared with 7% GuaSCN additive. Inset shows the HRTEM image of the grain boundary region with 7% GuaSCN as additive. (f) MPP tracking of the semi-transparent front PSC, filtered bottom PSC, and the 4-T tandem device under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 369, copyright 2019, AAAS. (g) Schematic illustration of the vacuum-assisted growth control method for processing high-quality low-bandgap Sn–Pb perovskite. (h) Stabilized PCE of the best performing solar cell under maximum-power-point tracking conditions. In the inset, a top surface SEM image of the Sn–Pb perovskite thin film. (i) J–V curves of the two kinds of single-junction solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 371, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the optimization of the components of the perovskite materials, the optimization of crystallinity and carrier transporting characteristics can also promote the photovoltaic characteristic of the low-bandgap perovskite and the PCE of the corresponding PSCs. Tong et al. found that introducing 7% GuaSCN additives could reduce the densities of small grains and pinholes in low-bandgap (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 films (∼1.25 eV) (Fig. 13e), resulting in carrier lifetimes of greater than 1 μs and diffusion lengths of 2.5 μm.369 When combined the GuaSCN modified (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 based PSCs with Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 based PSCs to a 4T tandem PSCs, they obtained an efficient PCE of 25% with higher stability than that of the control cells over time (Fig. 13f). Above all, we can conclude that the NIR absorbing Sn–Pb mixed perovskite materials will enable all-perovskite tandem solar cells to reach the highest efficiencies at the lowest costs. Moghadamzadeh et al. demonstrated that introducing Cs+ into the FA0.8MA0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 perovskite could improve the photo-stability of the PSCs by reducing the aggregation of residual nanosized SnyPb(1−y)I2.370 The preparation method will also have an important impact on the crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of the perovskite. Nejand et al. reported a vacuum-assisted growth control (Fig. 13g) of solution-processed low-bandgap Sn–Pb perovskite with large columnar crystals.371 In comparison with the well-established processing of Sn–Pb perovskite via traditional antisolvent deposition, the vacuum-assisted growth control approach produced Sn–Pb perovskite could exhibit a significantly enhanced charge-carrier lifetime. The resulting low-bandgap PSCs showed a remarkable PCE of 18.2% and stable PCE of 17.1% (Fig. 13h), and helped a 4T all-perovskite tandem solar cell achieve a PCE of 23% (Fig. 13i). Optimizing the carrier transport layer is also a pivotal breakthrough to achieve high-efficiency tandem solar cells. Yao et al. found that using diluted PEDOT:PSS as HTL in Sn–Pb based PSCs can decrease the energy loss at the interface and inhibit charge recombination.372 Then, they constructed a 4T all-perovskite tandem solar cell using an optical splitting system with the diluted PEDOT:PSS modified Sn–Pb based PSCs as the bottom cell and a wide bandgap PSC as the top cell to achieve an optimized PCE of 23.26%.
For 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells, the most critical component is the interlayer that not only connects two subcells but also protects the bottom subcell from any damages caused by the solution-process of the top cell.373 Palmstrom et al. developed a strategy for optimized interconnection layers for 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells by incorporating a nucleation surface by atomic layer deposition (Fig. 14a), with the normalized EQEs for the subcells plotted to calibrate the efficiency measurements in Fig. 14b.175 As a result, they obtained PCE of 23.1% on rigid substrates and 21.3% on flexible plastic substrates (Fig. 14c). Jiang et al. demonstrate a bottom-up solution-processed 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cell with a PCE of 7% via developing a novel interlayer, Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/PEI/PCBM:PEI, to bridge two perovskite subcells and protect the bottom perovskite film during the top perovskite film deposition.374 Heo et al. fabricated all-perovskite tandem solar cells with VOC of 2.25 V and PCE of 10.4% by physically sandwiching two separated MAPbBr3 and MAPbI3 cells together.375 However, due to the relatively large bandgap of the MAPbI3 (1.55 V) and the physically connecting interface, they obtained a smaller JSC value of only 8.3 mA cm−2. This work revealed that the ohmic contact for the interconnecting layer is essential to improve the performance of the device. Forgács et al. used doped organic semiconductors as carrier transporting layers to combine the Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.3Br0.7)3 as the top cell and MAPbI3 as the bottom cells for 2T tandem solar cell applications.132 As a result, the all-perovskite tandem cells delivered a PCE of 18%, which benefited from the reduced carrier recombination at the perovskite interfaces. Fundamentally, thermionic emission plays a critical role in the electron transport process in the interconnecting layer. Li et al. demonstrated a new thermionic emission-based interconnecting layer by introducing a fluoride silane-incorporated polyethylenimine ethoxylated hybrid system to passivate the surface defects to reduce electrical loss, leading to the PCE of 17.9%.376 The interconnection layers control carrier collection and recombination from subcells. Yu et al. reported an interconnection layer in all-perovskite tandem cells consisting merely of a I− doped C60 layer and a SnO1.76 layer (Fig. 14d).377 Energy diagrams before and after the Fermi level alignment reveal that there is nearly no band bending at the interface of the SnO1.76 and the low bandgap perovskite owing to their very similar work function (Fig. 14e). The C60/SnO1.76 based interconnection layer boosts the PCE of small-area tandem PSCs (5.9 mm2) and large-area tandem PSCs (1.15 cm2) to 24.4% and 22.2% (Fig. 14f), respectively. Chang et al. demonstrated a solution-processed interlayer consisting of cross-linked p-doped PTAA by introducing (TPE-MN3) and Mo(tfdCOCF3)3 for all-perovskite tandem solar cells, as is depicted in Fig. 14g.347 Owing to the excellent carrier conductivity of the interfacial layers, the tandem solar cells could exhibit a promising PCE up to 16.20%.
 Fig. 14  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of the prepared all-perovskite tandem solar cells. (b) Normalized EQE for the subcells of the same tandem solar cells. (c) Photo of flexible tandem device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (d) cross-sectional SEM images of a tandem device with C60/SnO1.76. (e) Energy diagram for the C60/SnO1.76/perovskite/C60 layers in all-perovskite tandem solar cells. (f) J–V curves with scanning in reverse and forward directions for a large-area (1.15 cm2) tandem solar cell. The inset photo shows the front side (left) and backside (right) of the large-area tandem device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 377, copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (g) (g-1) schematic illustration of the device architecture and the molecular structures of materials, (g-2) the equivalent circuit model of the proposed tandem device, and (g-3) the schematic of cross-linking of PTAA by TPE-MN3 via C–H insertion of nitrene radicals under UV illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 347, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (h) J–V characteristics and (i) EQE for a FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3/MAPbI3/FA0.6MA0.4Pb0.4Sn0.6I3 triple-junction architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 378, copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
McMeekin et al. employ an acetonitrile/methylamine composite solvent to enable the sequential processing of perovskite layers upon bottom perovskite-based subcells.378 Furthermore, they showed that the SnF2 modified MAPb0.75Sn0.25I3 perovskite could be processed via the acetonitrile/methylamine solvent system, and extend the light absorption of the multi-junction cell to 925 nm. More importantly, they established a model of triple-junction PSCs by using 1.94/1.57/1.24 eV perovskite materials, presenting a VOC of 2.83 V. Fig. 14h and i reveal the J–V performance and optimized response curves of the triple-junction tandem all-PSCs with optimized total thicknesses of 1382 nm, indicating the possibility of achieving a PCE of 26.7% with corresponding VOC of 3.16 V. By optimizing the perovskite photoactive layer with the help of methylammonium chloride vapor, Leijtens et al. used micron-sized FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3 to fabricate an all-perovskite tandem solar cell with a stabilized PCE of 19.1%.343 Moreover, the unencapsulated Sn–Pb based PSCs could maintain their full performance after 150 hours at 85 °C in air. Tong et al. found that combining GuaSCN modified (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 with Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45 as 2T tandem PSCs could achieve a PCE of 25%.369 By using an additive vacuum-deposition protocol, Ávila et al. report an optimized MAPbI3–MAPbI3 tandem solar cell with VOC of 2.30 V.379 Zhao et al. report a bulk-passivation strategy via incorporating chlorine to enlarge the grains and reduce electronic disorder of the (FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4 layers.380 As a result, they fabricated efficient low-bandgap PSCs using thick absorber layers of ∼750nm, enabling a champion PCE of 21% and steady-state efficiency of 20.7% for the 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells. Approaches to mixed Pb–Sn perovskites must overcome the drawbacks of Sn2+ oxidation. Very recently, Tan's group reported simultaneous enhancements in the efficiency, uniformity, and stability of narrow-bandgap subcells using strongly reductive surface-anchoring zwitterionic molecules.381 Then, they obtained a best PCE of 25.6% and a certified PCE of 24.2% for all-perovskite tandem solar cells with an active area of 0.049cm2 and 1cm2, respectively.
In addition to the widely studied all-perovskite tandem solar cells stacked with two junctions, all-perovskite triple-junction solar cells can feasibly provide even higher efficiency than that available by tandem solar cells.339,382–384 Hörantner et al. evaluated that an all-perovskite triple-junction solar cell could achieve PCE up to ∼37% using perovskites with ideal bandgaps.384 McMeekin et al. first reported the fabrication of the proof-of-concept all-perovskite triple-junction solar cell with a PCE of only 6.7%.378 Recently, by optimizing the interconnection layers of C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS, Wang et al. demonstrated efficient and reproducible all-perovskite triple-junction solar cells with a very promising PCE of 16.8% by combining 1.73eV, 1.57eV, and 1.23eV photoactive layers.385 Xiao et al. demonstrated the solution processing of efficient all-perovskite triple-junction solar cells using an optimal-bandgap of 1.99, 1.60, and 1.22 eV for the front, middle, and back subcells, respectively. By introducing the NiO/PTAA bilayer as the HTL for the middle subcell, they obtained monolithic all-perovskite triple-junction solar cells with a champion PCE of 20.1%, together with a high FF of 81.1% and a VOC of 2.8 V.339 Above, the high-performance 2T structured two-junction and triple-junction all-perovskite tandem solar cells have the universality of preparation methods, and can be manufactured by common solution processing techniques or vacuum vapor deposition methods. Most importantly, the interconnection layer control for effective transport of carriers will always be the research focus of the 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells.
Another way to realize all PSCs and enhance solar spectrum utilization of PSCs is through the compositional grading strategy, which has been widely exploited in efficient Cu(In,Ga)Se2, CdTe, GaAs, and quantum dot based solar cells.386 In contrast to traditional tandem solar cells, complex interconnections and current coupling in the graded configuration are unnecessary, while the electron–hole collection efficiency can be enhanced considerably, resulting in an acceptable output voltage and a considerable output current. However, realizing and maintaining compositionally graded perovskite photoactive from solution processing is still challenging. In 2016, Ergen et al. firstly demonstrated a graded bandgap PSC based on MASnI3 and MAPbI3−xBrx by incorporating GaN, monolayer hexagonal boron nitride, and graphene aerogel inside of devices to achieve an optimized PCE of 21.7%387 (Fig. 15a). The EQE data indicate that the hexagonal boron nitride and graphene aerogel modified PSCs could exhibit improved spectral response at long wavelengths (Fig. 15b). After that, Bian et al. designed a graded bandgap CsPbI2+xBr1−x based PSC (Fig. 15c) by using multi-graded heterojunction inorganic CsPbBrI2 and CsPbI3 quantum dots as component cells for covering most of the visible solar spectrum from 300 nm to 700 nm.388 From the well-matched energy-level diagram as well as the proposed carrier generation and transport mechanism for the graded device shown in Fig. 15d, we can conclude that the interface could induce favorable band bending at the valence-/conduction-band edge for improved carrier transport. Under the optimization of extended-spectrum response, high carrier mobility, and well-matched energy levels. Li et al. designed a PSC architecture by introducing CsPbBrxI3−x layers as HTLs for the grade adjustment to reach an optimal energy alignment (Fig. 15e) of the valence and conduction band between MAPbI3 and CsPbBrxI3−x.389 For further increasing the grade to 2, 3, and 4graded, the multi-grade type heterojunction could provide more energy barriers that prevent the generation of reverse photocurrent (Fig. 15f). As a result, the CsPbBrxI3−x modified PSCs (Fig. 15g) could exhibit an improved PCE by nearly 40% to that of control devices. To further enhance PCE of graded PSCs, Cho et al. developed a “more graded” PSCs by constructing an additional FAPbBr3−xIx layer to improve carrier collection and reduce carrier recombination at the rear interface between the perovskite layer and the HTL for boosting the PSC efficiency.390
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic figure of a graded bandgap PSC; the GaN, monolayer hexagonal boron nitride, and graphene aerogel are vital components of an efficient cell architecture. (b) EQE spectra for typical graded bandgap PSCs with and without h-BN and graphene aerogel components. The cells without graphene aerogel exhibit compositional fluctuation due to ionic motion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 387, copyright 2016, Springer Nature; (c) schematic structure and (d) bandgap diagram to exhibit the collection process of photogenerated charge carriers in graded PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 388, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (e) schematic energy level at the interface for MAPbI3/CsPbBrxI3−x films. (f) Schematic figures of carrier transport mechanism in (f-1) the neat HTL-free PSCs, (f-2) the HTL-free PSCs for 1-grade, and (f-3) the HTL-free device for multigrade. (g) Cross-section SEM image of graded CsPbBrxI3−x films based PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 389, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
4.2 Perovskite/organic tandem solar cell
In addition to the all-perovskite based tandem solar cells, organic materials, and semiconductor quantum dots with an excellent light response in the NIR region can also broaden the spectrum response of PSCs.391 From another point of view, the photovoltaic performance of all-perovskite tandem solar cells is susceptible to the solution fabrication process of the subcells, where the wide-bandgap perovskite layer should be cautiously deposited to prevent the solvent erosion (DMF, DMSO, NMP etc.) of the top perovskite layer.380 Although researchers have developed dense transparent conductive film (such as SnO2/Au, SnO1.76/C60) as an interconnection layer, it is still a huge problem for the stability and reproducibility of all-perovskite tandem solar cells.377,381 The merits of the intrinsic orthogonal solvents adopted to dissolve the organic–inorganic perovskite and organic materials make the fabrication of perovskite/organic tandem devices more attractive.392,393 More importantly, the organic solar cells exhibit higher stability and bandgap tunability compared with the Sn-based perovskite counterparts, making them be potential candidates as the bottom cell of the tandem solar cells. For example, Liu demonstrates a 2T tandem perovskite/polymer bulk-heterojunction solar cell (Fig. 16a) that combining a ∼90 nm thick perovskite top cell with a ∼100 nm thick polymer: fullerene blend back subcell by a zwitterionic fullerene, Ag, and MoO3 as a recombination layer.394 The energy band diagram in Fig. 16b highlights the ability of both C60-SB and C60-N to generate large negative interfacial dipoles on silver, resulting in a PCE of 16.0%, which is 75% greater than that of ∼90 nm perovskite-based single-junction PSCs and 65% greater than that of a polymer device. This strategy can broaden the spectral response range of PSCs and significantly reduce the lead content in devices. Chen et al. present a 2-D perovskite/polymer tandem solar cell by utilizing a new IR-sensitive block copolymer, PBSeDTEG8, with photosensitivity up to 950 nm.395 The optimized thickness is adjusted to be around 90–105 nm for the polymer as the bottom subcell and 180–190 nm for the perovskite as the top subcell, achieving the highest PCE of 10.2% (Fig. 16c). To broaden the photoresponse of PSCs, our group integrated a novel PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl organic layer on the PSCs to extend the photoresponse of the device to 950 nm.396 A maximum IPCE response of 60% at 810 nm revealed that the PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl can provide high current output in the range beyond the absorption edge of perovskite. Furthermore, the PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl layer could extract holes efficiently from the perovskite film due to the suitable energy level matching and then transport holes to the Au electrode. Liu et al. present a tandem solar cell with a nanostructured perovskite and PBDTT-DPP:PC70BM layer as the photoactive layer and a PFN/doped MoO3/MoO3 structure as the interconnecting carrier transporting layer.397 The optical constants measured by fitting ellipsometry data (Fig. 16d) revealed that the perovskite film exhibits a strong extinction capability in the short wavelength range while the PBDTT-DPP:PC70BM layer is sensitive to long-wavelength photons. The 3D mesh plot of the simulated photocurrent versus the thickness (Fig. 16e) revealed that the maximum photocurrent of tandem solar cells is usually achieved when the thickness of the organic subcell is at its interference peaks (100 nm, 200 nm, and 360 nm) while the thickness of the perovskite layer is limited to the range of 90 to 150 nm. Guo et al. demonstrate an efficient perovskite/organic tandem solar cell by integrating a low bandgap PBDTTT-E-T:IEICO on MAPbI3 layer to achieve a maximum wavelength of 930 nm for light-harvesting.123 The corresponding EQE curves and integrated JSC values (Fig. 16f) illustrated that the EQE of the tandem device could exceed 50% in the NIR range, resulting in an enhanced JSC of over 24 mA cm−2. Li et al. developed efficient perovskite/organic tandem solar cells by integrating the PMABr passivated perovskite (1.74 eV) and low bandgap organic PBDB-T:SN6IC-4F (1.30 eV) as photoactive layers (Fig. 16g).398 The resulting perovskite–organic tandem solar cells could exhibit a remarkable PCE of 15.13% and 13.61% with high VOC exceeding 1.8 V on a rigid substrate and flexible substrate, respectively. To make use of the obtained high VOC, they assembled the tandem solar cells into a solar-to-hydrogen system combining with dual electrocatalysis to achieve a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency of 12.30% (Fig. 16h). Lang et al. constructed a tandem solar cell with inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite and organic conjugated molecules PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F bulk-heterojunction, exhibiting a remarkably PCE of 17.24% compared to that of 12.09% and 10.89% for the single junction CsPbI2Br based PSCs and PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F based organic solar cells.399 Wu et al. developed a perovskite/organic with PCE of 18.06% by integrating tandem solar cells with inorganic CsPbI2.1Br0.9 and a narrow bandgap organic PM6:Y6 serving as top and bottom cells, respectively.400 Xie et al. reported a perovskite/organic tandem solar cell with PCE exceeding 18% by integrating CsPbI2Br inorganic perovskite as top cell and organic PM6:Y6 or PTB7-Th:O6T-4F (the complementary absorption spectra is exhibited Fig. 16i) as bottom solar cells.401 Very recently, Chen et al. developed perovskite/organic tandem solar cells with a landmark PCE of 20.6% (certified as 19.54%), benefiting from the complementary bandgaps and orthogonal processing solvents.402 They used the orthogonal solvents for processing front and rear subcells and Ag nanoparticle-based interconnecting layers to reduce optical loss. The obtained efficiency is among the best performing PCE with the device structure of perovskite/organic tandem. Above all, the recent studies reveal that a perovskite/organic tandem structure is a promising strategy to extend and enhance sunlight utilization for PSCs. These studies provided a critical starting point for future advances in solution-processed perovskite tandem solar cells with complementary absorption.
 Fig. 16  (a) Device structure and cross-sectional SEM image of perovskite/polymer tandem solar cells. (b) Energy level diagram of the tandem device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 394, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (c) photon absorption rate profile for each subcell inside the hybrid tandem solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 395, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) the optical constants (n and k) of the perovskite layer (blue) and the PBDTT-DPP:PC70BM layer (red), (e) the 3-D mesh plot of simulated photocurrents of hybrid tandem solar cells as a function of the thickness combination of the perovskite layer and the organic layer. (f) EQE and Jint curves of the PBDTTT-E-T:IEICO and MAPbI3based tandem solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) energy level diagram of the PMABr passivated perovskite and organic PBDB-T:SN6IC-4F based 2T perovskite/organic tandem solar cell. (h) The J–V curves of tandem solar cell and NiFe LDH electrodes in a two-electrode system used for water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 398, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (i) Absorption spectra of the different materials used in the tandem cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 401, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
So far, the best PCE obtained by the perovskite/organic tandem solar cells is ∼21%,402–404 which is much lower than the PCE value obtained from all-perovskite tandem devices. Since the only difference between these two tandem devices is the composition of the bottom subcell, the low PCE of the perovskite/organic tandem device is mainly due to the relatively low photovoltaic performance of the organic solar cells. At this stage, the highest PCE of a single-junction organic solar cell is 18%.405 Therefore, future research can start from the following aspects: (1) study the working principle of perovskite/organic tandem devices in detail, especially the photoelectric loss mechanism of the interface, and develop an interconnection layer with high conductivity and high stability. (2) Develop organic photovoltaic sub-devices with excellent light response only in the UV and NIR regions to realize complementary absorption with perovskite. (3) Develop organic/perovskite heterostructure devices, such as using Sn–Pb binary perovskite nanocrystals to be dissolved in a solvent of organic materials to achieve one-step forming and crystallization.
4.3 Perovskite/quantum dots or dyes tandem solar cell
Except for the organic materials that respond in the NIR, quantum dots or dyes with low-bandgaps can provide more complementary absorption in the NIR region and reduce the energy loss (Fig. 17a).406,407 Among the most studied NIR quantum dots, PbS quantum dots appear as an attractive alternative for silicon and perovskite due to the ease of fabrication, low-cost processing, and bandgap tunability, and excellent air-stability.408–410 More importantly, controlling the size of PbS quantum dots could effectively tune the bandgap for complementary absorption. Thus, extensive efforts over time are required to achieve such high PCE for perovskite/PbS quantum dots tandem solar cells. Since the fabrication process of 2T tandem devices is challenging, researchers prefer to fabricate 4T tandem solar cells by mechanical attachment of both subcells. Manekkathodi et al. reported 4T perovskite/PbS quantum dots tandem device with a best PCE of 20.55% and stabilized PCE of 20.2% by fabricating the semi-transparent PSCs with MoO3/Au/Ag/MoO3 as a top electrode.411 Later, Chen et al. improved the design of perovskite/PbS quantum dots 4T tandem solar cells and obtained a PCE of 24%.122 Very recently, 2T integrated devices have also been thoroughly studied for simplified preparation processes and large-scale production. Karani et al. designed a 2T perovskite/quantum dots tandem solar cells (Fig. 17b) based on a PSC as the top subcell and chalcogenide colloidal quantum dots as the bottom subcell.406 Combining the tandem model with experimental data, they expected that the postulated PCE of 29.7% could be achieved for the tandem device based on a PSC (1.55 eV) as the top cell and PbS quantum dot solar cells as the bottom cell (1 eV) in Fig. 17c. Zhang et al. also introduced PbS colloidal quantum dots (Fig. 17d and e) to extend the response range of PSCs and simultaneously deliver excellent device performance with an optimal PCE of 11.03% (Fig. 17f and g).412 Besides, the introduction of a PbS subcell can effectively eliminate the hysteresis and result in high stability. Similarly, Tavakoli et al. reported a highly efficient and stable 2T and 4T perovskite/PbS tandem solar cell with stabilized PCEs of 17.1% and 21.1%, respectively, by CdCl2 surface passivation.413 Very recently, our group developed a novel Cu2CdZn1−xSnS4 to complement the absorption of the typical MAPbI3 based PSCs.414 The IPCE spectra (750–900 nm) of various PSCs revealed that the Cu2CdZn1−xSnS4 layer could broaden the IPCE response to 900 nm, with a remarkably increased band around 830 nm. Furthermore, the well-matched bandgap alignment between Cu2CdZn1−xSnS4 and MAPbI3 can extract holes from the perovskite film, demonstrating a remarkably increased PCE from 19.30% to 21.11% and suggesting that a perovskite/inorganic-integrated structure is a promising strategy to broaden and boost the NIR response of the PSCs.
 Fig. 17  (a) AM 1.5G solar spectrum shows the limit of photocurrent generation by a typical PSC with a 1.55 eV bandgap and the lower-energy photons that could be captured by low-bandgap quantum dots (Eg ≥ 0.65 eV). (b) Layer-by-layer device architecture of a monolithic perovskite/quantum dots tandem solar cell. (c) J–V curves and projected tandem cell performance based on the state-of-the-art experimental results. Reprinted with permission from ref. 406, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (d) device structure of PbS quantum dots/perovskite tandem solar cells, (e) cross-sectional SEM images of tandem devices, (f) EQE spectrum of subcells and tandem solar cells. (g) J–V characteristics of single-junction solar cells and PbS quantum dots/perovskite tandem solar. Reprinted with permission from ref. 412, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (h) chemical structure of DX3, (i) device structure of the hybridized cell using a dichroic spectrum splitter, (j) IPCE, and integrated current spectra of DSSCs made of DX3 and PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 416, copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
Breaking the traditional tandem structure design in a straight direction, the spectral splitting system constructed using dichroic mirrors at an angle of 45° (Fig. 17h) proved to be a new type of light complementary structure. This is not a typical tandem solar cell with compositional grading within one material, as in the case of PSCs.415 Kinoshita et al. employed panchromatic ruthenium complexes-DX3 (Fig. 17i) in a PSC/DSSC tandem solar cell.416 The DX3-sensitized solar cell could exhibit wide-ranging light absorption to 1100 nm with high JSC exceeding 30 mA cm−2. As a result, the hybridized mesoscopic photovoltaic could achieve an optimized PCE of 21.5% (Fig. 17j), which is almost twice as much as that of individual DSSC, and also higher than that of PSCs. This spectral splitting system structure does not need to consider the transmissivity of the two subcells, but pay attention to the spectral response of different subcells. More importantly, it is applicable to almost all combinations of photovoltaic devices.
Above all, the recent studies reveal that the tandem solar cells of perovskite/perovskite, perovskite/organic, perovskite/quantum dots, and perovskite/dye are promising strategies to extend and enhance sunlight utilization for wide bandgap or low bandgap based single-junction PSCs. These published studies provided a critical starting point for future advances in solution-processed perovskite tandem solar cells with complementary absorption. Currently, the PCE of perovskite-based tandem solar cells has been dramatically improved. Compared with the widely studied perovskite/Si tandem solar cells at this stage, the advantages are that these tandem solar cells borrow the characteristics of flexibility, tunability, and low-cost solution processing of perovskite and organic materials. However, what should be particularly mentioned is that the absorption coefficient of the commonly used organic materials, quantum dots, and dye is much smaller than that of the perovskite. Researchers need to weigh specific complementary absorbers and their optimized thickness (Table 3).
Table 3 Summary of tandem structures and materials with their photovoltaic parameters investigated in the literature; here, the “P + P” stands for perovskite + perovskite, “P + O” stands for perovskite + organic, and G stands for graded PSCs






Structure
Ref.


Device structure

E
g (eV)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE
Output
Feature




1
P + P(4T)

353

Top
ITO/NiOx/FA0.83Cs0.17PbI0.83Br0.17/PCBM/SnO2/ZTO/ITO
1.5
0.74
7.9
73
4.4%
20.1%




Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.2
0.97
20.3
79
15.7%


2
P + P(4T)

340

Top
ITO/NiOx/MA0.9Cs0.1Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/C60/bis-C60/ITO


1.22
12.1
69
10.1%
16.7%




Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn0.5Pb0.5I3/IC60BA/bis-C60/Ag
1.25
0.82
11.6
69
6.6%


3
P + P(4T)

366

Top
FTO/TIO2/MAPbBr3/CNTs + PMMA
2.31
1.24
5.75
61
4.33%
9.46%




Bottom
FTO/TIO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au
1.55
1.02
7.02
72
5.13%


4
P + P(4T)

367

Top
FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/ITO
1.75
1.204
17.6
74.6
15.7%
23.1%




Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.25
0.810
12.1
75.3
7.4%


5
P + P(4T)

355

Top
ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/bis-C60/ITO
1.55
1.08
16.69
75
13.52%
19.08%




Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MA0.5FA0.5Sn0.25Pb0.75I3/PCBM/bis-C60/Ag
1.33
0.76
9.14
80
5.56%


6
P + P(4T)

369

Top
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/BCP/Ag
—
1.113
20.6
78.5
18.0% (18.2%)
24.7% (25.0%)




Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag
1.25
0.806
10.5
79.5
6.7% (6.8%)


GuaSCN additive


7
P + P(4T)

368

Top
FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Au/MoOx
1.58
1.141
20.1
80.0
18.3%
21.2%




Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/PCBM/BCP/Ag
1.25
0.808
4.8
74.4
2.9%


8
P + P(4T)

371

Top
FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Au/MoOx
1.63






18.5%
23%




Bottom
ITO/SnO2/FA0.8MA0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/ITO/MgF2
1.26


8.5


4.5%


Vacuum-assisted growth control


9
P + P(4T)

370

Top
ITO/PTAA/Csx(FA0.8MA0.2)(1−x)Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Ag
1.65
1.16
19.7
78.7
18.0%
23.6%




Bottom
ITO/SnO2/Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.76Br0.24)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/ITO/MgF2
1.26
0.76
10.2
72.2
5.6%


Cs+ doping


10
P + P(4T)

372

Top
ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3−xClx/C60/BCP/Ag
1.6
1.111
16.10
83.65
14.96%
23.26%
Diluted PEDOT:PSS


Bottom
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag
1.2
0.812
12.93
79.03
8.3%


11
P + P(2T)

343



ITO/PTAA/FA0.6Cs0.4Pb(Br0.3I0.7)3/C60/SnO2/ZnO/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/C60/BCP/Ag
1.76
1.81
14.8
70
18.75%






12
P + P(2T)

369



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag + ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/SnO2/ZTO/ITO


1.942
15.01
80.31
23.4%


GuaSCN additive


13
P + P(2T)

353



ITO/NiOx/FA0.83Cs0.17PbI0.83Br0.17/PCBM/SnO2/ZTO/ITO PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/BCP/Ag


1.66
14.5
70
16.9%






14
P + P(2T)

374



FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/PEI/PCBM:PEI/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS


1.89
6.61
56
7.0%






15
P + P(2T)

375



FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbBr3/PTAA/PCBM/MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO


2.25
8.3
56
10.4%


PTAA


16
P + P(2T)

375



FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbBr3/P3HT/PCBM/MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO


1.95
8.4
66
10.8%


P3HT


17
P + P(2T)

375



FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbBr3/PTAA/PCBM/MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO


2.25
8.3
56
10.4%


PTAA


18
P + P(2T)

377



ITO/PTAA/Cs0.4FA0.6PbI1.95Br1.05/C60/SnO1.76/Cs0.05MA0.45FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Cu


2.03
15.2
79.7
24.6%


C60/SnO1.76


19
P + P(2T)




ITO/NiOx/MA0.9Cs0.1Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/C60/bis-C60/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn0.5Pb0.5I3/IC60BA/bis-C60/Ag


1.98
12.7
73
18.4%






20
P + P(2T)

132



ITO/TiO2/IPH/Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.3Br0.7)3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/C60:Pblm/C60/MAPbI3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/Au


2.294
9.83
80.3
18.1%






21
P + P(2T)

347



ITO/TiOx/PC61BM/MAPbI3/doped cross-linked PTAA/MASn0.25Pb0.75I3/HTL/Ag


1.79
13.36
78.18
18.69%


Carrier transporting layers


22
P + P(2T)

378



FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PC61BM/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag


2.18
11.5
63
15.2%


Acetonitrile/methylamine solvent


23
P + P + P(2T)

378



FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PC61BM/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PC61BM/MAPb0.75Sn0.25I3/Spiro-(TFSI)2/Ag
1.94/1.57/1.34
2.7
8.3
43
6.7%


Acetonitrile/methylamine solvent


24
P + P + P(2T)

385



ITO/PTAA/Cs0.1(FA0.66MA0.34)0.9PbI2Br/C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA/FA0.66MA0.34PbI2.85 Br0.15/C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.66MA0.34Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Ag
1.73/1.57/1.23
2.78
7.4
81
16.8%


C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS


25
P + P + P(2T)

339



ITO/PTAA/Cs0.2FA0.8PbI0.9Br2.1/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/NiO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/MA0.3FA0.7Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Cu
1.99/1.60/1.22
2.802
8.8
81.1
20.1%


NiO/PTAA


26
P + P(2T)

379



ITO/TiO2/C60/MAPbI3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/C60:Pblm/C60/MAPbI3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/Au


2.230
9.84
79.58
18.02%






27
P + P(2T)

380



ITO/PTAA/FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3/C60/BCP/Ag/MoOx/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/PCBM/BCP/Ag


1.922
14
78.1
21.0%






28
P + P(2T)

381



ITO/NiO/Cs0.2FA0.8PbI1.8Br1.2/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.7MA0.3Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/ALD-SnO2/Cu


2.013
16
79.8
25.6%


Zwitterionic antioxidant


29
P + P(2T)

376



ITO/NiOx/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.5I0.5)3/FSIP/C60/BCP/Cu/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.5MA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/polystyrene/C60/BCP/Ag


1.72
12.80
73
16.07%


Interconnecting layer


30
P + P(2T)

175



(Glass)ITO/poly-TPD/PFN/DMA0.1FA0.6Cs0.3PbI2.4Br0.6/LiF/C60/PEIE/AZP/IZO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/C60/BCP/Au


1.88
16.0
77
23.1%






(PET)ITO/poly-TPD/PFN/DMA0.1FA0.6Cs0.3PbI2.4Br0.6/LiF/C60/PEIE/AZP/IZO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/C60/BCP/Au
1.82
15.6
75
21.3%


31
G(2T)

387



(Au/Ni/Al/Ti)GaN/MASnI3/monolayer h-BN/MAPbI3−xBrx/HTL/GA/Au


0.688
42.1
75
21.7%


GaN substrate and h-BN interlayer


32
G(2T)

388



FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3 quantum dots/PTAA/Au


1.204
15.25
78.7
14.45%






33
G(2T)

389



FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/CsPbBrxI3−x/MoO3/Ag


0.95
19.21
62.1
11.33%


Graded CsPbBrxI3−x


34
G(2T)

390



FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/FAPbBr(3−x)Ix/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au


1.16
23.18
79
21.31%


Surface passivation


35
P + O(2T)

394



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC60BM/C60-SB/Ag/MoO3/PC71BM/PCE-10/C60-N/Ag


1.62
12.9
76.1
15.9%


Graded recombination layer


36
P + O(2T)

394



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/C60-N/Ag/MoO3/PC71BM/PCE-10/C60-N/Ag


1.63
13.1
75.1
16.0%






37
P + O(2T)

395



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBSeDTEG8:PCBM/PFN/TiO2/PH500/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/PFN/Al


1.52
10.05
67
10.23%


Solvent wash method


38
P + O(2T)

398



ITO/PTAA/CsFAMA/PCBM/BCP/Ag/M-PEDOT/PBDB-T/SN61C-4F/bis-C60/BCP/Ag


1.85
11.52
70.95
15.13%


PMABr passivation


39
P + O(2T)

401



ITO/ZnO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/PDCBT/MoO3/Ag/ZnO/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag


1.953
12.46
75.59
18.38%






40
P + O(2T)

401



ITO/ZnO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/PDCBT/MoO3/Ag/ZnO/PTB7-Th:O6T-4F/MoO3/Ag


1.859
12.92
75.22
18.06%






41
P + O(2T)

399



ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/P3HT/MoO3/Ag/PFN-Br/PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F/MoO3/Ag


1.82
13.20
71.68
17.24%






42
P + O(2T)

400



ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2.1Br0.9/PMACl/PBDB-T/MoO3/Ag/ZnO/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag


1.89
12.77
74.81
18.06


PMACl passivation


43
P + O(2T)

396



FTO/SnO2/Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl/Au nanorods/MoO3/Au


1.09
25.02
79.0
21.55%






44
P + O(2T)

402



ITO/NiOx/FA0.8MA0.02Cs0.18PbI1.8Br1.2/C60/BCP/Ag/MoOx/PBDBT-2F:Y6:PC71BM/TPBi/Ag


1.902
13.05
83.1
20.6%






45
P + O(2T)

397



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbCl3−xIx /PCBM/PFN/MoO3/Ag/MoO3/PBDTT-DPP/PC70BM/Ca/Al


1.58
8.02
58
8.62%


PFN/doped-MoO3/MoO3


46
P + O(2T)

123



FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/PBDTTT-E-T/MoO3/Ag


0.993
24.07
60.97
14.57%


Integrated structure


47
P + Q(2T)

406



ITO/TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA/MoOx/Au/ZnO/CQDs/MoOx/Au


1.51
24
82
29.7%






48
P + Q(2T)

413



ITO/ZnO/ZnO NWs/SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/CuPC/Au/MoO3/ITO/ZnOs/PbS QDs/Au


1.55
16.3
69
17.43%


CdCl2 passivation


49
P + Q(4T)

411

Top
ITO/SnO2/Cs0.05MA0.10FA0.85PbI0.85Br0.15/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Au/Ag/MoO3
1.63
1.07
21.03
79.56
17.90%
20.55%
MoO3/Au/Ag/MoO3


Bottom
ITO/ZnO/CQDs/PbS QDs/Au
1.15
0.58
7.13
65.2
2.65%




50
P + Q(4T)

122

Top
IZrO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/IZO/MgF2
1.63
1.12
22.3
77.7
19.4%
24.4%
Boosted solvent extraction


Bottom
ITO/ZnO/CQDs/NFA/MoO3/Ag
0.62
12.2
66
5.0%






51
P + Q(2T)

412



ITO/ZnO nanoparticles/PbS quantum dots/n-PEDOT/SnO2 nanoparticles/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag


1.66
8.91
74.6
11.03%






52
P + D(4T)

416

Top
FTO/TiO2/DX3/electrolyte/Pt


0.544
29.6
59.1
9.53%






Bottom
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/poly-triarylamine/Au
1.12
20.7
79.4
18.4%




5. Surface plasmon resonance for light-harvesting
5.1 Basic mechanisms in surface plasmon resonance
Plasmonic nanostructures may be particularly applicable for PSCs, as they can be fabricated using solution processing methods with wide photoactive layer thickness adjustment properties.417,418 Multiple reports have used simulations to assess the viability of using plasmonic light-trapping schemes for PSCs.142,419,420 Before concluding this section about the effect of plasmonic nanostructures on the performance of PSCs, we first look back on the theoretical fundamentals of SPR and primary enhancement mechanisms in solar cells. As displayed in Fig. 18a, the most representative examples of LSPRs are metal nanoparticles. Accordingly, metal nanoparticles are strong light scatterers at wavelengths near the plasmon resonance due to a collective oscillation of the conduction electrons. The particle plasmons are excited when the frequency of the incident photons matches the resonance frequency of the nanoparticles. From the quasistatic approximation, the polarizability (α) of a spherical particle can be expressed as: (1)where a is the diameter of the nanoparticles, εp is the dielectric function of the nanoparticle, and εm is the dielectric function of the embedding medium, respectively. We can conclude that the value of particle polarizability α reaches its maximum when εm = −2εp, then producing a resonance condition. Because the excited plasmons are localized and cannot propagate within the nanostructure, this process is known as LSPR. For the particles with diameters below the wavelength of light, that is a ≪ λ, the point dipole model can accurately and vividly describe the absorption and scattering of light. The scattering and absorption cross-sections are given by:421 (2) (3)where k (k = 2π/λ) is the wavenumber of the light, λ is the wavelength of the incident photon, and V is the particle volume. Furthermore, the scattering efficiency (Qscat) can be defined as: (4)Three main basic mechanisms have been proposed to explain device performance enhancement by SPRs, and the schemes are summarized as a function of time in Fig. 18b. In particular, the SPR process includes (1) far-field light scattering (Fig. 18c), (2) near-field enhancement (Fig. 18d), and (3) plasmon-induced carrier separation (Fig. 18e).143 The far-field light scattering and near-field enhancement are induced until the LSPRs are dephased (several to 20 fs). Plasmon-induced carrier separation is a relatively long process compared to light scattering and near-field enhancement because of the subsequent electron–hole pair generation process.37 These effects have been widely used for increased absorption in the optical absorber layer of PSCs. To make these enhancements effective, the contribution of each mechanism depended mostly on the nature, size, shape, localization of the nanostructures and the dielectric parameters of the surrounding environment in the devices should be strictly controlled.137,147,148,421
 Fig. 18  (a) LSPR confined in metal spheres. The metal spheres are excited by the electric field of the incident light of a wavelength in metal spherical. (b) Different time domains in which LSPRs and each mechanism in a plasmonic solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 426, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c)–(e) show the schematic illustration of the influence of the size of a nanostructure on the corresponding plasmonic enhancement mechanism. (c) A light scattering of a ∼120 nm Au nanoparticle. (e) The near-field plasmonic effect from a ∼45 nm Au nanoparticle, (d) the photo-charging effect from a ∼5 nm Au nanoparticle, referenced from the result of Rizia Bardhan et al.,37 and we redraw it. (f)–(h) Structure designs of plasmonic-enhanced PSCs based on (c)–(e). (f) Nanostructures act as scattering centers, and the incident photons are scattered mostly into the material having a higher dielectric constant at the thin film surface. (g) Embedded nanoparticles are positioned in perovskite to enhance the near-field in PSCs. (h) Electrical effects from SPRs. 

5.1.1 Far-field scattering effect. 
As mentioned above, the SPR process includes three aspects. For the first far-field scattering effect (Fig. 18f), Erwin et al. have calculated absorption and scattering cross-sections of spherical Au nanoparticles to demonstrate the size effect.37 Their result revealed that the amount of light scattered from nanoparticles monotonically increases with size while the amount of light absorption decreases. At the crossover size of ∼90 nm for spherical Au nanoparticles, the amount of light absorbed and scattered is equivalent, indicating that the nanoparticle size can be tuned to achieve desired photoactive and scattering properties for maximum light-harvesting. The red-shift and broadening of the resonance with increased particle size would be advantageous to photovoltaics applications.422 Since σscat scales with a6, metal nanoparticles with sizes larger than 30 nm are ideal for coupling far-field scattered light into the perovskite photoactive layer.423 Beyond the size of metal nanostructures, the shape also controls the far-field scattered light attributed to the enhanced polarizability of incoming light.424–426 The effect of polarizability is particularly dominant for non-spherical nanostructures with sharp edges, corner including cubes and layered concentric nanostructures, such as pyramids and octahedrons.148,427,428 The disk-like shaped metal structure that have a large fraction of their volume can lead to a high fraction of light scattered into the substrate.148,427–429 Furthermore, far-field scattering characteristics are affected by the composition of metal nanostructures, where Ag has more robust radiative properties due to less ohmic losses than Au. The material characteristics can also affect the resonance frequency. For example, for a particle size corresponding to the same deposited mass thickness of Au and Ag, Au nanoparticles have a lower frequency resonance than Ag nanoparticles.430 The resonance can also be adjusted by using nanoshells that have a dielectric as the core and metal as the shell.431 The red-shifting of resonance at longer wavelengths would be beneficial for increasing the response of solar cells. Finally, far-field effects in PSCs may be tuned as a function of the permittivity of the medium (εm) surrounding the metal nanostructures. A higher εm could red-shift the LSPR frequency, enabling the capture of photons where the perovskite photoactive layer poorly absorbs.37,432 The resonance frequency also gets red-shifted when the dielectric function of the surrounding medium increases. For example, overcoating the metal particles on a substrate can change the resonance.147,433,434 From a theoretical point of view, Liang et al. introduced a SiO2 nanophotonic structure in PSCs by electromagnetic theory to increase the light absorption.435 The geometrical parameters of SiO2 nanophotonic structure were optimized by an FDTD method combined with the particle swarm optimization algorithm to obtain the light absorption enhancement. With the introduction of SiO2, a 200 nm perovskite layer-based PSC can generate the common photocurrent as the 300 nm perovskite layer-based planar PSC, which has the ability to reduce the toxic lead elements in PSCs.


5.1.2 Near-field enhancement. 
The interaction between the plasmonic nanostructures and incident light will cause the electromagnetic field in the vicinity of the nanostructures to increase locally, which is usually called the “near field” (Fig. 18g).426,436 Metal nanostructures integrated into PSCs act as concentrators to focus the incident light on the metal surface in a small mode volume.437 The intensity of the gathered light field is several orders of magnitude higher than that of the incident light. Therefore, we can compare the nanostructure inside of the device structure to the incident, so as to increase the photon flux. The perovskite photoactive layer near the nanostructure will be coupled with the strong near-field, and the resulting plasmon molecular coupling will increase the generation of electron–hole pairs. Then, higher density carriers can be used to transfer from the conduction band of the photosensitive material to the conduction band of ETL, thus improving the overall photocurrent density of PSCs. The FDTD simulation reveals that the morphology and composition of nanostructures affect the local electromagnetic field intensity during plasmon resonance.438,439 Due to the different dielectric functions of metal materials, the near-field effect is also different for Ag relative to Au. Generally, light scattering and near-field enhancement belong to radiation effects. In this process, the metal nanostructures with the LSPR effect will produce scattering effects and then re-radiate the light into the perovskite photoactive layer, or the metal nanostructure will be used as an auxiliary light source to enhance the local electric field. These effects can be useful for increasing the absorption of PSCs. To make these enhancements useful, it is crucial to choose the nature, size, shape, and localization of the nanostructures properly applied in PSCs.83


5.1.3 Plasmon resonant energy transfer. 
In addition to the radiation effects above-mentioned, plasmonic nanostructures can also positively affect the photoelectric properties of PSCs through non-radiation effects. The plasma can transfer its energy non-radiatively to the surrounding medium, which is the so-called “plasma resonance energy transfer” process (Fig. 18h). Moreover, after the femtosecond plasmons decay into electron–hole pairs, the so-called “hot electrons” can be extracted into the surrounding semiconductor medium. Plasma-induced carrier separation is part of LSPR, and energy is then transferred to nearby semiconductors, thereby enhancing the photocurrent.83 In the plasma non-radiation process, the metal nanostructure essentially acts as the direct photoactive materials.37
In addition to the metal nanoparticles, employing periodic corrugated structures, such as gratings, at the interface will boost the light-trapping effect, which is the most common approach used in organic solar cells and Si-based solar cells. In the next section, we will discuss some typical periodic nanostructures that have successfully improved the performance of PSCs in detail. In this section, we will focus on the plasmonic effect of nanoparticles to enhance light absorption in the PSCs devices. Based on our survey of the literature with regard to plasmonic PSCs, there are many device configurations in which metallic nanostructured electrodes can be placed, such as within the HTL, ETL, or is blended in the perovskite photoactive layer. In these configurations, each mechanism has different preparation requirements for devices, and the absorption efficiency, spectral response range and the PCE of PSCs can be improved with different control strategies.440 Plasmonic nanostructures with different nature, size, shape, and concentration have been incorporated into the different layers of PSCs, we will give a detailed summary in the following sections. In order to distinguish different kinds of SPR materials, we take the type of materials as the basis, rather than the position in the device structure, to summarize the SPR effect of different materials on PSCs. We will focus on the SPR effect of metal particles and dielectric particles to improve the light utilization of PSCs, including single metal nanoparticles, metal alloys, nanoparticles combined with dielectric composite structure, and some typical dielectric nanoparticles.

5.2 Metals nanostructures
Metal nanoparticles with subwavelength dimensions can couple incident photons with conduction electrons and give rise to LSPRs.441–443 Ag, Au, Cu, and Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles or nanostructures with different sizes and morphology could exhibit an LSPR and have been the most commonly used in PSCs to enhance the device performance.444–455 Xu et al. demonstrate the electron transfer between Au nanoparticles and perovskite MAPbI3 at a single nanoparticle level by plasmon resonance Rayleigh scattering spectroscopy.456 The most typical and widely used is that embedding plasmonic materials into the ETL of PSCs.457 Zhang et al. incorporated Au nanoparticles into m-TiO2 films and demonstrated a 34.2% improvement in PCE than that of control PSCs, which is associated with effective photon management as a result of the Au nanoparticles.458 Very recently, Cui et al. report on the scrutiny of carrier dynamics of PSC via sandwiching monodisperse TiO2/Au nanoparticles/TiO2 based plasmonic/dielectric core/shell nanoparticles in the ETL of PSCs.442 Then, they obtained a modified PSC with enhanced JSC and VOC, achieving maximum PCEs of 18.81% and 19.42% in planar and mesostructured PSCs, respectively.
Ag is a promising alternative for plasmonic applications because of its high-quality factor over a broad spectral range, outperforming most metals. Moreover, Ag nanoparticles synthesized through wet chemical steps have the advantages of low cost and large-scale preparation. Many possible shapes and sizes are available, such as triangles, cubes, stars, and rods, due to self-assembly characteristics. The obtained Ag nanostructures can be deposited on the substrate quickly so that the optical properties can be thoroughly studied and utilized.420 As is the schematic display in Fig. 19a, Nourolahi et al. embedded Ag nanoparticles with plasmonic effects at 427 nm into a c-TiO2 layer.459 The calculated normalized electric field intensity for a single Ag nanosphere normal to the incident illumination is exhibited in Fig. 19b. The PCEs of Ag nanoparticle modified PSCs can be improved from 4.57 to 6.15%, which is attributed to the enhanced light-harvesting by plasmonic nanoparticles and decreased electron-transporting lifetime. Another work revealed that the absorption intensity and PCE of PSCs decreased with the increased size of Ag nanoparticles, which is related to the LSPR effect on the absorbance of PSCs.460 The enhanced PCE can be mainly ascribed to the accelerated carrier transfer and enhanced light absorption in the visible region. Hao et al. embedded Ag nanoparticles in TiO2 and show a PCE of 12.23%.461 Further introducing a textured FTO substrate, the modified PSCs could achieve a PCE of 14.01%. They attributed the enhanced PCE to the extended optical pathway in the photoactive layer caused by the textured FTO and the incorporated Ag nanoparticles. In addition to the ETL, the metal nanoparticles with SPR can also be incorporated in HTL for PSCs applications. Ghosh et al. studied plasmonic Ag nanoparticles in PEDOT:PSS-based inverted PSCs with enhanced PCE of 5.58%.462 Similarly, Liu et al. report the incorporated 25/40 nm Ag nanoparticles on transparent polyimide (Fig. 19c) to promote light-harvesting in flexible PSCs with an enhanced PCE of 10.41%.140 In particular, a 61% improvement existed in the JSC compared to that based on the control polyimide substrates. Above all, we can conclude that plasmonic-electrical effects play a significant role in averaged performance improvement.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic figure for integrating the Ag nanoparticles into PSCs. (b) The calculated normalized electric field intensity for a single Ag nanosphere normal to the incident light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 459, copyright 2016, Elsevier; (c) the SEM image of PI with the various sizes of Ag nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140, copyright 2019, MPDI. (d) The schematic device structure of ultra-thin PSCs. (e) SEM images of FTO coated glass substrates with Ag nanoparticles on top. Reprinted with permission from ref. 463, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) structure of the PSCs with the electrode-coupled Ag nanocubes. (g) The experimentally measured absorption spectrum of 240 nm thick perovskite layer, scattering spectra of Ag nanocubes (70 nm) on a PCBM (10 nm) coated glass plate and glass/PCBM (10 nm)/Ag nanocubes (70 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm). (h) J–V curves of the PSCs with different coverages of Ag nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 464, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society; (i) extinction spectra of Ag nanoplates. Inset is the TEM image of the prepared triangular Ag nanoplates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 468, copyright 2015, Elsevier. (j) TEM image of Ag-nanoparticles. (k) Schematic device structure, energy level diagram, and average thickness values for each layer of the PSC. (l) J–V curves of the Ag nanoparticles modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 470, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society. 
Introducing the LSPR of metal nanoparticles can also improve the light-harvesting efficiency of thinner PSCs. Reducing the thickness of the perovskite absorber layer while improving light-harvesting efficiency can not only increase the PCE of PSCs but also improve the transparency of the semi-transparent PSCs and increases the mechanical stability of the flexible PSCs. Our group revealed that embedding Au nanostars with SnO2 surface modification by low-temperature electron beam method into the ultra-thin PSCs with 250 nm perovskite layer could exhibit an improved PCE from 15.34 to 18.50%, while the PSCs with 400 nm perovskite layer could exhibit a PCE of 20.06%.450 We also obtained flexible, large area and semi-transparent PSCs based on Au nanostar modification. The flexible PSCs exhibited a high PCE of 15.33% and more than 90% of their initial PCE values after 100 bending cycles. Liu et al. incorporated plasmonic 11 nm Ag nanoparticles into ultra-thin PSCs (Fig. 19d) through the spray chemical vapor deposition method, as is illustrated from the SEM images in Fig. 19e.463 Their results revealed that Ag nanoparticles could lead to an enhanced JSC and PCE by 22.2% and 22.5%, respectively. Kim et al. developed planar PSCs with plasmonic Ag nanocubes coupled electromagnetically with an Ag back electrode (Fig. 19f).464 The far-field scattering and near optical field from the nanocubes face closest to the perovskite layer are also enhanced extensively by the coupling (Fig. 19g), with an enhanced JSC and PCE (Fig. 19h). More importantly, the absorption enhancements were more remarkable when applying a thinner perovskite layer. Recently, Carretero-Palacios et al. also assessed the possibility of using various plasmonic nanostructures to minimize the thickness of perovskite film.465–467 Hsu et al. systematically investigated the plasmonic effects of Ag nanoplates embedded in PSCs by varying the sizes and shapes (Fig. 19i).468 After embedding Ag nanoplates into the PEDOT:PSS, the increased EQE proved the increased plasmonic scattering effect. Moreover, Lee et al. revealed that embedding 20 nm Au nanoparticles into the Spiro-OMeTAD would simultaneously produce positive and negative effects on the device performance.469 On the one hand, Au nanoparticles produce a near-field optical absorption increase and a reduced resistance of Spiro-OMeTAD for increasing EQE and JSC.469 On the other hand, the Au nanoparticles would locate near the perovskite film to slightly decrease the VOC of PSCs. Above all, these studies revealed that the scattering effect from the incorporated Ag nanoparticles in HTL or substrate could extend the optical pathway of incident light and increase the photon absorption in PSCs. Meanwhile, many studies have emphasized the electrical properties of a metal material and proved the significant inhibition of carrier recombination and promotion for carrier transfer.
Although most of the work also emphasizes the scattering effect and electrical properties of metal nanoparticles, there are still some studies about Ag nanoparticles playing a negative role as trap sites for the free carrier. For example, Yang et al. systematically investigated the effect of Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 19j) on the PCE by integrating the nanoparticles into the TiO2 photoanode layer.470 They found that the plasmonic effect of Ag nanoparticles could enhance the incident light absorption over a wide range. Nevertheless, they also revealed that the low conduction energy level of the Ag nanoparticles could provide some additional trap sites for free carriers (Fig. 19k). This result draws attention to the balance between increased absorbance by the LSPR and the decreased carrier trapping as well as the decreased surface roughness of the TiO2 layer with the Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 19l). Inconsistent with other previous results, some research studies did not focus on the scattering effect of Ag nanoparticles but the influence of electrical properties on device performance. Abate et al. integrated Ag nanoparticles between two c-TiO2 layers and proved that the incorporated Ag nanoparticles in the ETL of the planar PSC device could facilitate the electron–hole separation and promote carrier extraction from the perovskite to the ETL.471 Higgins et al. demonstrate the small amounts of Ag nanoparticles modified PCBM could improve the JSC, VOC, and FF of PSCs for better coverage and improved carrier collection.472 The larger VOC for PSCs with a low concentration of Ag nanoparticles are attributed to the favorable alignment of LUMO levels between MAPbI3 with either Ag nanoparticles or PCBM layer. The author suggests that the enhanced light scattering is negligible due to the small Ag nanoparticle volume and concentrations employed from plasmonic simulations.
In addition to the traditional 0-dimension metal nanoparticles in space, metal nanostructures with different aspect ratios or shapes have multiple and strong plasmonic absorption properties from the visible to the NIR, exhibiting high plasmonic-induced probability.37,473,474 Also, generated “hot spots” around metal nanostructures could provide more robust EM field enhancements than conventional 0-dimension metal nanoparticles, hence improving light-harvesting and interfacial carrier dynamic processes simultaneously. Making the plasmonic nanostructures aspherical could shift their LSPR from wavelengths below 600 nm to the NIR region or achieve a distribution of plasmonic modes across the visible. Such morphology control strategies are highly essential to enhance the optical absorption in the NIR region where the perovskite material has a low response.475 Based on the above light-harvesting mechanism, Batmunkh et al. revealed that integrating the plasmonic Au nanostars (Fig. 20a) in m-TiO2 could exhibit a definite improvement in the EQE value from around 440 to 750 nm, with an enhanced PCE of 17.72% than that of 15.19% for control devices.476 They attributed the increased device performance to enhanced light absorption and suppressed carrier recombination. Ghahremanirad et al. found that the 60 nm Au nanoparticles could help to increase the absorption by 20%.477 Cai et al. demonstrated significant LSPR coupling effects in the self-organized Au nanostructure/MAPbI3−xClx heterostructures (Fig. 20b) using a thermal deposition and annealing process.478 They observed enhanced PL emission and strange PL spectrum splitting (Fig. 20c), which can be attributed to the hot electron energy transfer effect induced by the LSPR coupling (Fig. 20d). From the phenomenology model, the harvested energy can be extracted into the Au nanostructure. This energy transfer process is much faster than the diffusion and relaxation process and provides a new method to increase device performance for all photovoltaic applications. Recently, Ma et al. exploited a bioinspired nanostructure of Au nanorod-nanoparticle dimers (Fig. 20e) with structural darkness to enhance the light-harvesting and performance of PSCs.479 The Au dimer could exhibit a broadband optical absorption with two broad peaks located at 560 nm and 912 nm for the plasmonic resonance480 and the scattering effect (Fig. 20f).481 Ginting et al. incorporated 35 nm Au nanostars with distributed uniformity (Fig. 20g) into the PSCs to enhance the light absorption.176 Further modification with mPEG–thiol, the Au nanostars exhibited a pronounced SPR peak at 630 nm (Fig. 20h). From the simulation, the electric field distribution of Au nanostars positioned at the perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface exhibited much stronger at specific excitation wavelengths of 740 nm (Fig. 20i), which will prolong the optical pathway and provide more photogeneration in perovskite. Differing from conventional metallic nanoparticles, biometric nanoparticles and Au nanostars would produce a geometric singularity and provide a broadband response for light harvesting. The plasmonic contributions and accelerated carrier transfer are believed to improve the JSC, VOC, and FF values. Xu et al. observed more than six-fold enhancement of luminescence from MAPbI3 films by coupling MAPbI3 and Au nanoparticles.482
 Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of Au nanostars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 476, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (b) (1) and (2) are the surface topography of the deposited Au film, and a 150 °C annealed Au film, respectively, (3) and (4) are the surface topography of the solution-processed MAPbI3−xClx film. (c) PL spectra of a bare perovskite film, an Au nanostructure/perovskite sample, and a 150 °C annealed Au nanostructure/perovskite heterostructure sample. (d) Schematic of an electron energy extraction path in the surface plasmon coupling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 478, copyright 2016, The Optical Society; (e) TEM image of Au dimers. Inset is a schematic illustration of the Au nanorod–nanoparticle dimer. (f) Extinction UV-vis spectra for Au dimers in water, in comparison with the absorption data of control perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 479, copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (g) TEM image of Au nanostars dispersed in chlorobenzene; (h) absorption curves of Au nanostars with and without mPEG-SH modification. (i) Simulated local electric field distribution around 35 nm Au nanostars concerning the incident light electric field in Spiro-OMeTAD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. 
Currently, the enhanced photovoltaic performance of PSCs by plasmonic strategies is limited to the short wavelength range corresponding to the extinction wavelength of metal nanoparticles. Thus, developing novel plasmonic nanostructures with predesigned sizes and shapes is urgent. Dong et al. explored the “bipyramid-like” Au nanobipyramid structures (Fig. 21a) with sharp tips and applied them in the HTL of PSCs.483 Considering the electrical property, hot hole injection induced by plasmonic Au nanobipyramids could fill in the interfacial traps and then boost the improvement of the VOC, offering great potential to expand the performance limitation and operation tolerance of the PSCs. Shalan et al. demonstrated that the Au nanoislands (Fig. 21b) on the 10 nm-thick NiO film could increase the PCE of PSCs to 5.1%, which is double that of control devices.484Fig. 21c shows the SEM image of the Au nanoislands and their corresponding model for FDTD numerical simulations. One peak at 830 nm is off-resonance from the absorption of perovskite, while the other peak at 675 nm will help to enhance the EQE. The author verified that the enhanced EQE response at shorter wavelengths is derived from the plasmon electric potential effect. Metal nanorods could exhibit two spectrally separated LSPR bands due to coherent oscillations of conduction band electrons along transverse and longitudinal axes, and these LSPR bands, in particular, the longitudinal mode, can be effectively tuned by varying the aspect ratio.143 Guo et al. demonstrate that the Au nanorods (Fig. 21d) could offer strong light absorption over almost the whole visible-light range for PSC applications.485 It is found that the brightness of the PL mapping image (Fig. 21e and f) of Au nanorods on the ZnO film is much lower than that of the bare Au nanorods, indicating the effective carrier transfer from Au nanorods to the ZnO film. Thus, the plasmon-induced hot electrons could result in reduced carrier recombination for suppressed photocurrent hysteresis.
 Fig. 21  (a) TEM images of the Au nanobipyramids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 483, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (b) bandgap alignment of each layer in the presence of Au nanoislands based on the device structure of ITO/NiO/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. (c-1) SEM image of Au nanoislands on the 10 nm NiO film and (c-2) its FDTD simulation process. (c-3) The 1-T-R spectrum and the action spectrum of near-field intensity calculated by the FDTD simulations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 484, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) SEM and EDS mapping image of (d-1 and d-2) the ZnO layer and (d-3 and d-4) the ZnO/Au nanorods layer. PL mapping images of Au nanorods coated on (e) glass and (f) the glass/ZnO film at around 635 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 485, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) EQE spectra of PSCs modified with Au, Ag, and Al nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 487, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (h) dark J–V curves of electron-only devices with different concentrations of Ge nanoparticles. (i) The calculated scattering cross-sections of Au and Ge nanospheres with a radius of 50 nm. Inset is the simulated field |E| enhancement distribution of Ge nanosphere embedded between TiO2 and MAPbI3 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 488, copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
In addition to single metal nanoparticles, Roopak et al. analyzed the surface plasmon effect of various metal (Au, Ag, and Al) nanostructures embedded in PSCs for better light coupling by discrete dipole approximation to evaluate the extinction spectra and plasmon mode induced field intensity.486 Their results revealed that Al nano-oblates have the potentiality of broadband light-trapping into perovskite and give an insight into the improved photovoltaic performance of PSCs due to the plasmon-induced light coupling to the host medium near the band edge. From an experimental point of view, Kakavelakis et al. tried to integrate Au, Ag, and Al nanoparticles in the PEDOT:PSS and observed the highest increase in IPCE (Fig. 21g) for the Ag nanoparticle modified PSCs.487 Zhang et al. disclose that incorporation of an appropriate ratio of Ge nanoparticles onto the m-TiO2 can improve the crystallinity of the MAPbI3 and promote the interfacial properties of perovskite/m-TiO2.488 The space carrier limited current test (Fig. 21h) reveals that the perovskite layer exhibits increased electron mobility by over 5 times with an optimized PCE of 19.6%. Simulated results in Fig. 21i reveal that the Ge nanoparticles have more vital scattering properties than the conventional Au nanoparticles at the shorter wavelength. Above all, although the nanostructure with a smaller size than 100 nm remained low concentration for PSCs applications, the incorporation of the plasmonic nanostructures could efficiently improve the PCE of PSCs, with obviously increased JSC. However, in most cases, there is no clear correlation between the LSPR spectrum of the individual nanostructures and the optical absorption of PSCs. The enhanced PCE has thus been ascribed to the combination of enhanced EQE and improved photocarrier collection, which are both related to the presence of the plasmonic nanostructures.151,152
5.3 Metal@dielectric composites
Although exhibiting single or multiple LSPR due to the collective oscillation of free electrons driven by visible or NIR light, these noble metal nanoparticles can react with halogens in perovskite materials. Generally, a coating of dielectric composites on these metal nanoparticles is necessary to eliminate these negative chemical reaction processes. Besides, encapsulating the metal into a dielectric shell has been considered an effective method to avoid parasitic recombination of the photogenerated carriers at the interface of metal/perovskite.489–491 The dielectric materials for plasmonic metal nanoparticles usually include SiO2, TiO2, ZnO, NiO, PbS, etc.492–494 According to the previous calculations in Section 5.1, it can be concluded that the plasmonic resonant frequency strongly depends on the dielectric environment. The resonant frequency of plasmonic metal nanoparticles will redshift as εm increases. Thus, encapsulating the metal nanoparticles into a dielectric shell has been considered as an effective strategy for SPR enhancement in PSCs. Zhang et al. previously explored that incorporating Au@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles into PSCs to enhance the radiative decay of excitons and increase the reabsorption of the emitted radiation.419 The 80 nm Au nanoparticles coated by an approximate 8 nm SiO2 shell could exhibit an absorption peak at ∼550 nm, as is shown in Fig. 22a. The slightly red-shifted extinction spectrum is expected from the change in the local refractive index, which slightly shifts to longer wavelength upon addition of the SiO2 shell. As a result, the Au@SiO2 embedded PSCs (Fig. 22b) exhibited enhanced JSC and PCE. Cui et al. reported that the Au/SiO2 core/shell nanospheres and nanorods could lead to an inverted MAPbI2.85Br0.15 based PSC (Fig. 22c) with an optimized PCE of 13.7%.495 Ma et al. revealed that incorporating Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanocubes with sharp corners into the PSCs could achieve an optimized PCE of 17.22%, ascribed to both the enhanced local electromagnetic field (Fig. 22d) and the inhibition of carrier recombination induced by the Ag@SiO2 nanocubes.213 Similarly, Wang et al. revealed that Ag@SiO2 modified PSCs could exhibit an increased PCE from 12.23% to 14.61%, originated from the enhanced JSC from 20.23 to 23.04 mA cm−2.496 Wang et al. designed core-ultrathin shell Ag@SiO2 nanowires (Fig. 22e) in PSCs to avoid pinholes between grains and improved surface coverage, achieving enhanced PCE of 18.03% with negligible photocurrent hysteresis.497 These concluded that the structural advantage and LSPR effect of Ag@SiO2 nanowires could improve light-harvesting, accelerate electron transmission, promote electron–hole separation, and suppress carrier–carrier recombination. Aeineh et al. enhanced the PCE of PSCs by depositing Au@SiO2 nanoparticles between the c-TiO2 and the m-TiO2, achieving a higher EQE response in the whole wavelength range.498
 Fig. 22  (a) UV-vis spectra in the water of parent Au as well as Au@SiO2 nanoparticles. Inset is the TEM image of Au@SiO2 nanoparticles. (b) Device structure of the Au@SiO2 modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 419, copyright 2013, American Chemistry Society; (c) light-harvesting efficiency of MAPbI3−xBrx deposited on the same thickness of the compact-NiO/m-Al2O3 layer and UV-vis spectroscopy in ethanol for Au@SiO2 nanorods. The light-harvesting efficiency of the MAPbI3−xBrx coated compact-NiO/m-Al2O3 layer with Au@SiO2 nanorods is also presented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 495, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (d) the EDX mapping of an Ag@SiO2 nanocube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (e) MAPbI3 films with Ag@SiO2 nanowires. Inset is the TEM morphologies of the Ag@SiO2 nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 497, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (f) TEM image of core–shell structured Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 420, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH; (g) illustration of stepwise changes from a TiO2 nanoparticle based scaffold layer to an OC-TiO2 NW-based one and finally to an Ag/OC-TiO2 NW-based scaffold layer. The inset images are TEM images of OC-TiO2 NWs and SiO2@Ag@OC-TiO2 NWs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 507, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) TEM and HRTEM images of Ag@TiO2 decorated with Pa. The chemical structure of the Pa molecule is presented. (i) J–V curves of PSCs based on MAPbI3 with or without Ag@TiO2@Pa nanoparticles. Inset shows the device architecture. (j) Energy diagrams of the mechanisms for carrier collection in Ag@TiO2@Pb-based plasmonic solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 510, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society. 
Embedding the core–shell nanoparticles in the HTL will also promote photovoltaic performance.499 Chandrasekhar et al. improved the PCE using plasmonic Au@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles between the PEDOT:PSS-based HTL and the perovskite layer.500 Tang et al. demonstrated that Au@SiO2 core–shell nanorods are beneficial for the enhanced light absorption and EQE across a broad range of wavelengths, which is related to the increased cross-sectional scattering and spectrally absorbing energy density.501 A quasi-static model is used to study the SPRs of Au@SiO2 core–shell nanospheres by varying shell thickness and core radius in the perovskite layer.502 Theoretical modeling indicates that a core@shell with a thickness of 20 nm@1 nm could provide enhanced absorption in the orange-red region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Then they demonstrated ∼20 nm-sized Au@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles with plasmonic effects could help to achieve an improved PCE of over 18%. Usually, the large concentration of Au nanoparticles would cause worse device performance. The key feature of this approach is taking advantage of the SPR at a lower concentration. Zhang et al. found that the SPR of high aspect ratio Au nanorods@SiO2 integrated into perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface could lead to an overall enhancement of light absorption and carrier separation, resulting in an optimized PCE of 17.39%.503 This work further supports that Au nanorods have an effective SPR effect. Similarly, Wu et al. prepared planar PSCs by employing Au@SiO2 nanorods at the interface between the PEDOT:PSS and MAPbI3.504 Both experiment and simulation results proved that the efficiency enhancement came from the LSPR of Au@SiO2 nanorods, which synchronously improved the incident light-trapping as well as improved the carrier transport and collection characteristics.
Embedded inside of the PSCs, the insulating property of SiO2 will adversely affect the carrier transport. Developing semiconductor materials with high electron mobility as the shell layer has far-reaching significance for improving the LSPR application of metal nanoparticles and enhancing the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. In 2015, Snaith and co-authors incorporated temperature-sensitive core–shell Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 22f) into PSCs to achieve a best PCE of 16.3%.420 Fan et al. reported that the Au@TiO2 nanorod modified PSCs could deliver an optimized PCE of 20.10%.505 The mechanism regarding the plasmonic enhancement effect indicates better carrier separation/transfer as well as facilitated carrier transport in the presence of plasmonic particles. The above works proved that the plasmonic enhancement mechanism of the Au@oxide composite is associated with improved exciton generation rate and enhanced exciton dissociation probability induced by the LSPR effect.506 In addition to the cladding of metal core–shell structure, Yu et al. designed a unique ETL using Ag nanoparticles and three-dimensional orchid-like TiO2 nanowires (OC-TiO2 NWs) to increase the carrier extraction efficiency of PSCs.507Fig. 22g represents the transition of the scaffold structure from a TiO2 nanoparticle-based scaffold to an OC-TiO2 NW-based one and finally to the case of SiO2@Ag@OC-TiO2 NWs. UV-visible absorption spectroscopy indicates the higher absorption of light from the introduction of the plasmonic nanoparticles. Consequently, the SiO2@Ag@OC-TiO2 NW modified PSCs exhibited a high PCE of 15.09%.
In addition to Au@oxide, Li et al. introduced 1.5% Ag to the nano-TiO2 composites into the compact layer of PSCs to strengthen the optical absorption in the visible light region and enhance the electron injection efficiency in the PSCs.508 Luo et al. reported a plasmonic PSC by integrating Au@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles into porous TiO2 and perovskite photoactive layers.509 Yao et al. developed the metal–inorganic semiconductor–organic semiconductor nanostructure of Ag@TiO2@Pa nanoparticles (Fig. 22h) for PSCs applications to achieve an optimized PCE of 20.2% (Fig. 22i).510 The modification mechanism (Fig. 22j) revealed that electrons transfer from both the photoactive layer and plasmonic excitation to the Pa shell, upon which the electrons are then collected through the fullerene channel. They conclude that the Ag@TiO2@Pa nanoparticles can help to activate efficient plasmon–exciton coupling and eliminate the carrier accumulation, thus facilitating exciton dissociation and reducing the monomolecular recombination in PSCs. Hao et al. synthesized Au@PSS core–shell tetrahedra nanostructures by a seed-mediated growth method and incorporated them into PSCs to improve light absorption of the perovskite photoactive layer via the SPR effect.511 Their results indicate that both the use of a Au tetrahedra core and the ultrathin PSS shell is beneficial for generating a strong local field and thus inhibiting exciton quenching. Qin et al. proved that core–shell Au@CdS nanoparticles could trigger nucleation of the perovskite precursor for high-quality perovskite films with preferred orientation through producing the Au@CdS–PbI2 intermediate for PSC applications.493 Moreover, the light-induced holes could cross barriers at the perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD interface with the help of the LSPR of Au@CdS, resulting in an enhanced PCE exceeding 20%.
5.4 Metal alloys
Compared to conventional single metal nanostructures with a narrow plasmon resonance band, the metal alloys could exhibit multiple broader and stronger plasmon resonances that can be tuned by adjusting structural dimensions to match the absorption band of the perovskite layer.512 Fu et al. used rationally-designed Au@Ag core–shell nanocuboids (Fig. 23a) with four LSPR peaks (Fig. 23b) as plasmonic inclusions to achieve panchromatic thin PSCs.513 The IPCE results (Fig. 23c) demonstrated that the inclusion of the plasmonic Au@Ag core–shell nanocuboids could be a promising strategy to increase the utilization of low-energy photons and enhance the light-harvesting of PSCs. Lu et al. improved the light absorption and electron transfer in PSCs by incorporating plasmonic Au–Ag alloy popcorn-shaped nanoparticles with broadband optical absorption enhancement around the band edge between 720 and 820 nm.475 Sun et al. applied AuAg@AuAg core–shell alloy nanocrystals (Fig. 23d) into the PEDOT:PSS layer for PSC applications with a champion PCE of 16.76% (Fig. 23e).514 Detailed characterization suggested that the significant increase of device performance is mainly attributed to better light-harvesting by the scattering effect of AuAg@AuAg core–shell alloy nanocrystals and better carrier transport of the modified PEDOT:PSS layer. Chen et al. utilized Cu–Ag alloy nanoparticles with light scattering capabilities and electrical conductivities to achieve PSCs with a remarkable PCE of 18.89%.515 Moreover, the alloy nanoparticle in PSCs could induce 80% and 200% improvements in long-term stability and photostability, respectively. The absorption spectra of AgAl (3 nm)/Au (2 nm) composite nanoparticles reveal an enhanced light absorption by the plasmon resonance and reduced contact barrier at the metal electrode (Fig. 23f).516
 Fig. 23  (a) Optical image of the Au@Ag core–shell nanocuboids. (b) Extinction spectra of the Au@Ag nanocuboids with varied thickness in aqueous solution. (c) Wavelength dependent IPCE and relative IPCE enhancement ratio of the PSCs in different configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 513, copyright 2017, Elsevier; (d) TEM image of Au/Ag alloy nanocrystals. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 514, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (f) schematic energy levels of each layer in PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 516, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (g) TEM image of the 5 nm SiO2 coated bimetallic nanostructures. (h) The normalized absorption curves of MAPbBr3 sensitized TiO2 films and the Au@Ag nanostructures. (i) Decay kinetics at 530 nm for the reference and Au@Ag nanostructures incorporated samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 517, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) The deposition process for embedding metallic nanostructures in a TiO2 electron layer. (k) A schematic figure of the light trapped PSC via the light scattering effect. (l) The UV-vis curves were obtained for the different metallic nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 444, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Using the same strategy with dielectric coating, Zarick et al. incorporated SiO2 coated Au/Ag bimetallic nanostructures (Fig. 23g) with distinct plasmon resonances centered at 540 nm and 615 nm (Fig. 23h) into the m-TiO2 layer to enhance the PCE of PSCs.517 Lifetimes obtained from photobleaching (Fig. 23i) suggested that the nanostructures promoted efficient electron injection into TiO2. As a result, the Au@Ag nanostructure modified PSCs demonstrated improved light-harvesting and increased PCE by 26%. Deng et al. revealed that the introduction of Au@Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanocuboids could dramatically increase the JSC from 20.87 mA cm−2 to 23.76 mA cm−2, ascribed to the enhanced light absorption and carrier separation ability of Au@Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanocuboids added in perovskite film.518 Han et al. showed that the photovoltaic performance of the quasi-2D PSCs can be improved dramatically by introducing a layer of SiO2 coated Au/Ag-alloyed nanoprisms.519 To take full advantage of alloy materials, our group synthesized Au, Ag, and Au–Ag nanoalloy with different sizes and embedded them into TiO2 nanostructures (Fig. 23j and k) by the low-temperature radio frequency magnetron sputtering method for PSC applications.444Fig. 23l revealed that the absorption spectra of the different metallic nanostructures exhibited multiple broader and stronger plasmon resonances. Above all, comprehensive studies indicate that metal alloys and their combination with dielectric coating can further reduce the series resistance, enhance light absorption, and boost exciton dissociation at the interface.446
5.5 Other nanostructures
The all-dielectric approach in nano-photonics could also provide enhanced photoluminescence and light-harvesting in PSCs. Recently, Tiguntseva et al. showed that the direct laser deposition of Si nanoparticles on the perovskite film (Fig. 24a) is preferable for PL and absorption enhancement.520 They observed that the photoluminescence intensity was enhanced by 50% from a perovskite layer with Si nanoparticles and by 200% for a nanoimprinted metasurface with Si nanoparticles. Furasova et al. improve the performance of PSCs by the incorporation of resonant Si nanoparticles at an interface of MAPbI3 and m-TiO2 (Fig. 24b and c).521 They concluded that the increased JSC is originated from light absorption around Si nanoparticles (Fig. 24d), while the improved FF and the VOC related to improved crystallinity of the perovskite layer in the presence of Si nanoparticles. Aeineh et al. revealed that integrating SiO2 nanoparticles of 50 and 100 nm sizes into the m-TiO2 layer could affect the ion accumulation at the perovskite interface and provide an additional beneficial effect, leading to enhanced photocurrent and reduced J–V hysteresis.522 The increment is in agreement with the theoretical predictions based on light scattering induced by dielectric SiO2 nanoparticles. Hwang et al. also reported the use of size-controlled SiO2 nanoparticles with an optimized diameter of 50 nm as a scaffold layer in PSCs, as shown in Fig. 24e.523 It appears that the pore size formed between the SiO2 nanoparticles with diameters of 15 and 30 nm was too small for the perovskite to infiltrate into the scaffold layer. The optimized PSCs based on 50 nm diameter SiO2 nanoparticles could exhibit a PCE of 11.45%, higher than that of 10.29% for control PSCs (Fig. 24f). Yin et al. utilized submicron TiO2 to improve light absorption by optimizing the proportion of submicron scattering TiO2 in the mesoporous layer.524 With the help of investigating the corresponding light-trapping mechanisms through the absorption spectra and FDTD simulation, they obtained an improved PCE by over 5% through compromising the carrier transportation loss and scattering-based light absorption enhancement. Mali et al. demonstrated that Au decorated TiO2 plasmonic nanofiber-based PSCs could achieve a PCE of 14.92%, which is significantly higher than conventional m-TiO2 as well as TiO2 nanofiber based PSCs. The time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy and solid-state impedance spectroscopy results revealed that the Au decorated TiO2 nanofiber-based PSCs exhibited a lower carrier recombination rate. They predicted that the resonant Si nanoparticles could be applied not only in PSCs but also in other optoelectronic devices, owing to the overall enhancement of light localization and optical field induced by Si nanoparticles. These works elucidate the subtle interactions between light and matter in plasmonic photovoltaic composites.
 Fig. 24  (a) Colored SEM image of a perovskite film with Si nanoparticles on the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 520, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) band alignment and (c) cross-sectional bright-field STEM image of a complete PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 521, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (d) experimental extinction (1-T) spectrum of the PSCs with and without Si nanoparticles. (e) UV-vis spectra of the perovskite layer containing various diameter SiO2 nanoparticles, inset is the magnified cross-sectional SEM images of scaffold layers containing SiO2 nanoparticles. (f) J–V characteristics of the PSCs with scaffold layers formed of TiO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 523, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In summary, the influence of the SPR effect of metal and its composite nanoparticles on the performance of PSCs has been explored from both experimental and theoretical perspectives. The above studies illustrate the complex and delicate interactions between light and matter in plasmonic PSCs. These results clearly show that the effect of nanoparticles with different morphology and concentration on the performance of the device is not the same, but the mechanism is to use the plasma resonance effect to improve the light absorption of the perovskite layer in different wavelengths and promote the exciton dissociation and carrier transfer, so as to improve the performance of the device.439,525 The incorporation of plasmonic nanostructures can affect not only the light absorption but also impact positively or negatively the electrical properties of PSCs. Despite that, there is still no clear correlation between the LSPR effect of the incorporated nanostructures and optical absorption in the perovskite layer in most cases. The improved PCE has thus been ascribed to the combination of enhanced EQE response and better carrier collection, which are both related to the presence of the plasmonic nanostructures. Based on the systematic and hierarchical analysis, we believe that there is more space for increasing the light absorption and efficiency of PSCs by a series of LSPR controlled by the metal and its alloy, semiconductor material, structure, and nanoparticle geometry, which is mainly due to the unique advantages, such as ultra-thin, device structure diversity and wide accommodation of dielectric and metal materials in the device structure (Table 4).
Table 4 Summary of SPR materials with their photovoltaic parameters in PSCs investigated from the literature






Materials
Time
Ref.
Size
Location
Concentration
Control PCE (%)
Optimized PCE (%)
Enhanced factor (%)
Factor
Function




Metal nanostructures


1
Ag nanoparticles
2018

472

10.6 ± 1.8 nm
ETL
5 wt%
7.34
11.9
62.1

J
SC/VOC/FF
Electrical effects + scattering


2
Ag nanoparticles
2016

459

30 nm
—
20 wt%
4.57
6.15
34.6

J
SC/VOC
Scattering + electrical effect


3
Ag nanoparticles
2018

460

10 nm
—
1.5 mol%
11.72
13.26
13.1

J
SC

Electrical effect + scattering


4
Ag nanoparticles
2018

461

30 nm
ETL (c-TiO2)
10 wt%
9.29
12.23
31.6

J
SC/FF
Scattering + carrier collection


5
Ag nanoparticles
2018

471

—
—
4 mM
15.17
17.25
13.7

J
SC/FF
Electrical effect


6
Ag nanoparticles
2019

462

10–20 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
20 vol%
4.17
5.58
33.8

J
SC/FF
Enhanced absorption + carrier separation


7
Ag nanoparticles
2019

140

5/40 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
—
—
5.41
10.41
—
SPR effect + scattering and carrier + carrier extraction


8
Ag nanoparticles
2017

463

11 nm
ETLs
—
5.78
7.08
22.5

J
SC/FF
Plasmonic effect + carrier separation


9
Ag nanocubes
2017

464

70 nm
ETL (PCBM)
2%
11.86
13.3
12.1

J
SC

Scattering


10
Ag nanoplates
2015

468

70–80 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
—
8.5
9.6
12.9

J
SC/VOC
Scattering


11
Ag nanoparticles
2016

470

25 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.5 wt%
10.96
11.96
9.1

J
SC

LSPR


12
Au nanostars
2017

476

20–30 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
—
15.19
17.72
16.4

J
SC/VOC
Enhanced absorption + carrier transportation


13
Au nanoparticles
2019

477

60 nm
Perovskite
—
—
—
—
—
Scattering


14
Au nanostructure
2016

478

—
Perovskite
—
—
—
—
—
SPR coupling


15
Au nanoparticles
2017

458

40 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.19 mg mL−1
12.0
16.1
34.2

J
SC/VOC
Scattering + reduced carrier recombination


16
Au biometric dimers
2019

479

75 nm + 30 nm
Perovskite layer
5.6%
14.45
16.78
16.1

J
SC/VOC
LSPR


17
Au nanostars
2017

176

35 nm
HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD)
0.02 wt%
12.49
13.97
11.8

J
SC/FF
SPR + scattering effects + suppressed recombination


18
Au nanobipyramids
2018

483

45–50 nm (15–18 nm)
HTL (VOx)
1.2 wt%
16.02
18.84
17.6

J
SC/FF/VOC
Light harvesting + electrical effects


19
Au nanoislands
2016

484

40.1 ± 28.8 nm
HTL (NiO)
—
2.6
5.1
96.2

J
SC/FF
Plasmoelectric potential effect


20
Au nanorods
2018

485

50 nm
ETLs (ZnO)
—
14.47
16.51
14.1

J
SC

Plasmonic near-field coupling + electron injection


21
Au nanoparticles
2017

487

—
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
—
11.33
12.18
7.5

J
SC/FF
Carrier extraction + parasitic reflection


22
Ag nanoparticles
2017

487

—
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
—
11.33
12.68
11.9

J
SC/FF
Carrier extraction + parasitic reflection


23
Al nanoparticles
2017

487

—
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
—
11.33
11.58
2.2

J
SC

Carrier extraction + parasitic reflection


24
Au nanoparticles
2016

469

15 nm
HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD)
0.01 wt%
12.66
12.74
0.6

J
SC

Near-field absorption enhancement + reduced resistance


25
Ge nanoparticles
2019

488

100 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.2 mg mL−1
16.24
18.59
14.5

J
SC/FF
Reduced carrier recombination


26
Ag nanoparticles
2017

499

50 nm
HTLs (PEDOT:PSS)
4.73 mg mL−1
13.4
13.8
3.0

J
SC

Enhanced carrier collection


27
Au nanoparticle
2020

443

28 nm
HTLs (PEDOT:PSS)
0.2 mg mL−1
12.17
14.64
20.3

J
SC

Plasmonic effects


28
Au nanooctahedrons
2021

445

115 nm
ETL (c-TiO2)
1 vol%
16.95
19.05
12.4

J
SC

LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation


29
Ag nanorods
2020

447

20 nm (200 nm)
Perovskite
2 vol%
18.5
20.29
9.7

J
SC/FF
LSPR + enhanced crystallization


30
Au nanorods
2021

448

17 nm (93 nm)
Perovskite
—
20.12
21.73
8

J
SC/FF
LSPR + grain boundary creeping


31
Ag nanoparticles
2020

526

79 ± 6 nm
Between HTL and perovskite
—
11.63
13.46
15.7

J
SC

Plasmonic scattering


32
Al nanoparticles
2020

454

20–70 nm.
Between ETL (PCBM) and electrode
—
10.54
11.74
11.4

J
SC

Plasmonic effect + conductivity






Metal@dielectric composites


33
Au@SiO2 spheres
2013

419

80 nm
ETL (Al2O3 scaffold)
0.9 wt%
10.7
11.4
6.0

J
SC/FF
Reduced exciton binding energy


34
Ag@TiO2 spheres
2015

420

40 nm
ETL (Al2O3 scaffold)
2.2 wt%
11.4
13.7
20.2

J
SC/FF
Enhanced radiative decay of excitons reabsorption


35
Au@SiO2 rods
2016

495

40 nm
ETL (Al2O3 scaffold)
2.0 wt%
10.7
13.7
28.0

J
SC

Enhanced absorption + carrier transportation


36
Ag@SiO2
2019

213

50 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
3 vol%
14.58
17.22
18.1

J
SC/VOC
LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation


37
Ag@SiO2
2018

496

40 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.3 wt%
13.23
14.61
19.5

J
SC

Scattering


38
Au@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles
2018

506

25 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.3 wt%
13.85
12.01
15.3

J
SC

SPR effect


39
Ag@SiO2 nanowires
2017

497

80 nm (5–10 μm)
MAPbI3
0.06 wt%
14.32
18.03
25.9

J
SC/FF
Plasmonic antenna + carrier transportation


40
Au@TiO2
2017

505

8 nm (32 nm)
ETL (c-TiO2)
1 wt%
18.18
20.1
10.6

J
SC

LSPR effect


41
Au@SiO2
2021

492

∼25 nm
HTL (NiO)
5 wt%
18.21
18.5
1.6

J
SC

LSPR effect


42
Au@NiO
2021

492

∼25 nm
HTL (NiO)
5 wt%
18.21
20.6
13.1

J
SC/VOC
LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation


43
Au@SiO2 nanoparticles
2017

498

14 nm
ETL (between c-TiO2 and m-TiO2)
200 μL mL−1
16.18
17.55
8.5

J
SC

Electrostatic potential


44
SiO2@Ag@OC-TiO2 NW
2016

507

400 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.75 wt%
12.54
15.09
20.3

J
SC/VOC
Enhanced light absorption + increased recombination resistance


45
Ag/TiO2 composite
2017

508

10 nm
ETL (c-TiO2)
1.5%
6.88
8.96
30.2

J
SC

SPR effect + carrier transfer


46
Au@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles
2017

509

80 nm
Between porous TiO2 and MAPbI3
30 mmol L−1
12.59
18.24
44.9

J
SC

Carrier collection


47
Ag@TiO2@Pa
2019

510

28 nm
MAPbI3
0.40 mg mL−1
18.37
20.24
10.2

J
SC

Scattering


48
Au@SiO2
2018

500

42 nm
Between HTL and perovskite
1.2 wt%
11.44
14.57
27.3

J
SC

Light trapping + carrier recombination


49
Au@PSS core–shell tetrahedra nanoparticles
2018

511

54 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
4 vol%
13.91
16.53
18.8

J
SC

SPR + accelerated hole transfer


50
Au@SiO2 core–shell nanorods
2016

501

43 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
4 wt%
12.4
14.4
16.1

J
SC

SPR effect


51
Au@SiO2
2016

502

20 nm
MAPbI3
1 wt%
3.78
4.49
18.8

J
SC

Plasmonic absorption enhancement


52
Au nanorods@SiO2
2017

503

40–80 nm
Between perovskite and HTL
0.09 wt%
14.39
17.39
20.8

J
SC/VOC
Enhanced carrier separation + scattering


53
Au@SiO2 nanorods
2016

504

—
—
0.047 pM
13.5
17.6
30.4

J
SC/FF
Increased light-trapping + carrier collection


54
Au@TiO2 nanofibers
2016

527

60 nm
ETL
Particles
10.3
14.4
39.8

J
SC/VOC/FF
Enhanced absorption + Carrier transportation


55
Au nanorods@MgO
2020

449

12 nm (40 nm)
ETL (c-TiO2)
0.20 mg mL−1
14.7
17.4
18.4

J
SC/FF/VOC
LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation


56
Au@CdS nanoparticles
2020

493

35 nm
Between perovskite and HTL
1 mg mL−1
17.71
21.38
20.72

J
SC/FF/VOC
LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation


57
AgOx@Ag
2020

494

40 nm
ETL (c-TiO2)
—
17.87
20.33
13.76

J
SC /VOC
Hot-carrier injection






Metal alloys


58
Au@Ag core–shell nanocuboids
2017

513

15 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
3.5 wt%
15.16
18.31
20.8

J
SC

Scattering


59
Au–Ag popcorns
2015

475

150 ± 50 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
—
8.9
10.3
15.7

J
SC/VOC/FF
Enhanced absorption + carrier transportation


60
AuAg@AuAg core–shell alloy nanocrystals
2017

514

46 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
0.8 × 10−2 wt%
13.14
16.76
27.5

J
SC/VOC/FF
Scattering + carrier transportation


61
Cu–Ag alloy nanoparticles
2019

515

200 nm
Between perovskite and electrode
10% coverage
13.68
18.89
38.1

J
SC/FF
Scattering + carrier transportation


62
AgAl–Au
2018

516

20–50 nm
Between ETL and electrode
3 wt%
15.32
17.02
11.10

J
SC

Enhanced light absorption + electron transportation


63
Au/Ag NSs
2017

517

∼60 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
1.0 wt%
3.9
4.9
25.6

J
SC/VOC/FF
Improved light-harvesting + carrier transfer


64
Au@Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanocuboids
2019

518

50 nm
Perovskite layer
1.5 vol%
15.47
17.78
14.9

J
SC

Enhanced light absorption + carrier separation


65
AuAg NPrisms@SiO2
2019

519

∼40 nm
Between perovskite and HTL
0.7 mM mL−1
3.43
4.60
34.1

J
SC

Enhanced light absorption + exciton dissociation


66
Au–Ag nanoalloy
2017

444

40 nm
ETLs (c-TiO2)
20 wt%
12.6
14.5
15.1

J
SC/FF
Light scattering


67
Au-nanoparticles
2015

446

40 ± 2 nm
ETLs (c-TiO2)
4.0 mg mL−1
13.2
16.2
22.7

J
SC/VOC/FF
Enhanced conductivity + decreased surface potential






Other nanostructures


68
Si nanoparticles
2018

521

140 nm
Between perovskite and ETL
3 × 10−9 mol L−1
17.7
18.8
6.2

J
SC/VOC/FF
Enhanced light absorption + improved crystallinity


69
SiO2 nanoparticles.
2018

522

100 nm
ETL (m-TiO2)
0.04 mg mL−1
14.63
16.71
14.2

J
SC/VOC
Scattering + lower ion accumulation


70
SiO2 nanoparticles
2014

523

50 nm
Scaffold layers
—
10.29
11.45
11.3

V
OC/FF
Enhanced light absorption + slower carrier recombination


71
SiO2 nanoparticles
2017

499

50 nm
HTL (PEDOT:PSS)
10.4 mg mL−1
13.4
14.2
6.0

J
SC/VOC
Enhanced carrier collection


72
Submicron TiO2 nanoparticles
2016

524

100 to 200 nm
ETLs (scattering TiO2)
1:8 dilution ratio
16.31
16.72
2.5

J
SC

Reduced carrier transportation + scattering


73
Hemisphere TiO2 photonic crystal
2019

528

1600 nm
ETL (scaffold TiO2)
—
10.5
15.2
44.8

J
SC

Light scattering


74
TiO2 nanobeads
2015

529

300 ± 100 nm
ETL (scaffold TiO2)
—
7.7
9.0
16.9

J
SC/VOC
Scattering + reduced recombination




6. Texturing of the interior for light-trapping
Although preparing nanoparticles for LSPR applications has been applied as a practical modification effect for reducing energy loss, it is hard and challenging to control the sizes, shapes, and monodispersity with excellent distribution in the PSCs. By tuning the geometrical factors of periodic microstructures or nanostructures, the resonance wavelength of the surface plasmon polariton modes can be tuned readily within the visible to the NIR spectral range.530–534 These periodic structures are also easier to model, facilitating researchers to study from the point of view of the simulation.535,536 That is to say, one promising strategy for enhancing the performance of PSCs is to use periodic nanostructures, also called texturing, which can usually fulfill the momentum mismatch conditions and can interact with light in unusual ways that can serve as a new platform for improving the light-trapping and current density of PSCs.83,426,537,538 Additionally, some typical textured substrates, for example, the textured c-Si substrate, not only enhance the light absorption of the device but also induce the growth of perovskite films with large crystal grain size, which are beneficial for the efficiency improvement.12,426,539 In 1974, Redfield reported that normal incident light could be reflected from an angled back reflector and then undergo a total internal reflection at the surface to excite the waveguide mode.540 The light trapping could be achieved by the micro texturing of the front surface of the waveguide layer.
From a theoretical point of view, Haque et al. introduced TiO2 semispheroidal geometries with honeycomb periodicity in PSCs.541 The geometry of the photonic structures is a hexagonal array of the semi-spheroidal dome (Fig. 25a) or void (Fig. 25b) elements. Their results indicate that the optimized void structure could enable a PSC with a perovskite thickness of 250 nm to supply a JSC of 28.62 mA cm−2, which is 10.3% higher than that of 25.95 mA cm−2 for conventional PSCs with a perovskite thickness of 500 nm (Fig. 25c–f). When patterned on the front side of PSCs, the wave-optical micro-features yield up to 21% and 27% photocurrent enhancement in PSCs with perovskite thickness of 500 nm and 250 nm, respectively, which are close to those predicted results by Lambertian limits. Also, such features show the potential of the encapsulation role in preventing UV-induced degradation. Recently, Tockhorn et al. investigated the effect of different shallow nanotextures on the optical and electrical properties of PSCs from the perspective of experiment and theory simulation.542 They established two hexagonal sinusoidal nanotextures with a period of 750 nm, which have a negative (cos−) and a positive (cos+) directed cosine lattice and feature heights of 220 and 380 nm, respectively. They also fabricated an inverted pyramidal structure arranged in a square lattice with a period of 1250 nm and a structure depth of about 600 nm and hexagonal pillar-like nanotextures with a structural period of 750 nm and a feature height of around 350 nm (Fig. 25g). They revealed that the EQE-integrated photocurrent values of the planar device (22.1 mA cm−2) could be increased by 0.6–1.0 mA cm−2 by different nanotexture modification. Specifically, the devices with sinusoidal nanotextures reached 23.1 mA cm−2 (cos−) and 22.9 mA cm−2 (cos+), while the inverted pyramids reach 23.1 mA cm−2 and the pillar-like nanotextures reach 22.7 mA cm−2. The simulated optical absorption and reflectance spectra they conducted for the planar and cos− layer stacks are exhibited in Fig. 25h and i, proving an excellent qualitative agreement between the simulated and measured data. For the planar solar cells (Fig. 25h), the measurements show less intense interference fringes than the simulations, which could be related to the roughness at the back of the perovskite layer. For the cos− based nanotexture (Fig. 25i), they observed a qualitative agreement between simulation and experiments. The reflection losses are reduced both for experiments and simulations over a wide range of wavelengths from 300 to 730 nm. The reflection remains low and almost constant, from 400 to 730 nm. Due to these low reflection losses, a high absorption level from 400 to 730 nm can be reached in the perovskite films. The summarized current densities for all PSCs (Fig. 25j) and the simulated parasitic absorption and reflection losses prove that the JSC can increase for all nanotextures. In this section, we introduced various fabrication methodologies of periodic nanostructures from the points of anti-reflection and scattering properties in the interior of the PSC for reducing the energy loss and achieving sufficient light-trapping. In particular, the “interior” indicates the internal part of PSCs, usually including the transparent conductive substrate, the ETL, the perovskite photoactive layer, the HTL, and the electrode. It is contrary to the exterior of PSCs, which is usually placed on the outside of the device.
 Fig. 25  Sketch of both types of light-trapping structures. The parameters including R, RZ, p, tTCO and tETM for the structure (a) and the structure (b) for optimization are indicated by the arrows. (c and d) Absorption spectra attained with the two kinds of optimized light-trapping structures, composed of half-spheroidal domes (green lines), and with the reference cases of a cell with an optimized anti-reflection coating (blue lines), for perovskite absorber layers with distinct thickness: (c) 250 nm and (d) 500 nm. (e and f) Absorption spectra attained with the optimized light-trapping structures (green lines), and with the planar reference anti-reflection coating cases (blue lines), for perovskite layers with a thickness of (e) 250 nm and (f) 500 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 541, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (g) schematic figure of the PSCs with different nanotextured substrates. Measured 1-R and EQE spectra and simulated absorption and reflection profiles for planar substrate (h) and cos− nanotexture (i); (j) the bar diagram visualizes the integrated current densities in the different layers of the simulated layer stack for planar interfaces and the different nanotextures in their respective colors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 542, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society. 
Texturing the glass or transparent conductive oxide substrates has been considered an effective strategy for changing the surface morphology to improve light trapping.543–546 Shi et al. used textured FTO substrates to enhance the efficiency of thin PSCs by 22%.547 Wang et al. constructed crater-like architecture substrates for ultra-thin PSCs that synergize the merits, including good broad-band, enhanced light-trapping, and excellent separation/collection of photo-generated carriers (Fig. 26a and b).548 The crater-like architecture-based sample with darker color indicates stronger absorption than the traditional sample (Fig. 26c). In particular, they also performed the angles of incidence-dependent maximum power density measurement from −90° to 90° to express the light-harvesting capability of the crater-like architecture (Fig. 26d and e). Compared to the PSCs with a planar surface, crater-like architecture based PSCs could exhibit an increased Pmax as the angles of incidence increases from 0° to ±75°, indicating the pronounced light-harvesting capability particularly at high angles of incidence (Fig. 26e), which is suitable for harvesting sunlight during a day without applying additional solar tracking systems. Kim et al. used a wet chemical etched FTO substrate to improve the photocurrent density by up to 24.4% for PSCs.549 Oh et al. incorporated hexagonal array micro-convex nanostructure-patterned glass substrates (Fig. 26f) with an intense light scattering in PSCs to increase the current density from 19.45 to 20.92 mA cm−2.550
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of the PSCs. (b) The cross-section SEM of the PSCs. (c) The photo of the perovskite films grown on a planar substrate and cratered substrate, respectively. (d) Schematic of incident angle-dependent power generation over a day. (e) Incident angle dependence of generated maximum power of planar and cratered substrate-based PSCs (MAPbI3: ∼200 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 548, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (f) PSCs on HAMC-patterned glass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 550, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (g) schematic diagram of nanosphere lithography for 2D TiO2 nanodisk array and assembly of PSCs. (h) SEM images of 2D nanodisk array with p = 500 nm; the inset images are cross-sectional, tilted views of the samples. (the scale bar = 1 μm). (i) Electromagnetic energy density distributions of electromagnetic wave diffracted by the TiO2 layer with flat and 2D nanodisk array morphologies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 555, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (j) schematic illustrations of preparing silicon master and patterning m-TiO2 layer with conical shaped moth-eye structures. (k) Top-view and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM images of TiO2 nanobowl array. (l) SEM image of 3-D nanopatterned m-TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 560, copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
The inorganic ETL with periodic nanostructures can also be integrated for better light-harvesting.551 Except for TiO2 nanoparticles for the mesoporous structured devices, TiO2 nanostructures with a 3D morphology also attract extensive attention.552,553 Usually, the conventional PSCs employ the compact/TiO2 nanoparticle composite layer as the ETL. However, the nanoparticles with small size could induce a poor light scattering ability, and the incident light almost passes through the ETL without changing the direction. Kim et al. report on the nanostructure and dynamics of electron transport characteristics in PSCs by incorporating oriented hemisphere TiO2 arrays with a size of 300 nm, 700 nm, 1100 nm, and 1400 nm.528 By adjusting the size of the polystyrene bead in the imprinting process, they obtained an improved PCE from 10.5 to 15.2%. Jun Hyuk Moon's group studied the effect of the inverse opal TiO2 structure on the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs.554 As a result, they found that a 600 nm thick inverse opal TiO2 structure could help to exhibit a maximum PCE of 17.1%. They also introduce TiO2 ETLs with a thin-film 2D photonic crystal structure in PSCs by using a polystyrene sphere monolayer as the physical mask during the ion etching to pattern the TiO2 scaffold (Fig. 26g and h).555 The field distribution indicates a higher confinement of light in the TiO2 photonic crystal nanodisk region and higher forward scattering (Fig. 26i). Furthermore, they find that the mixed cavities of sizes within 100 and 200 nm between FTO and mesoporous TiO2 enables complete absorption of short-wavelength photons (λ < 500 nm) to long-wavelength photons (500 nm < λ < 780 nm), leading to broadband absorption of short- and long-wave-length photons in visible light.556 The bio-inspired moth-eye nanostructure is expected to reduce the reflection in PSCs. Kang et al. proposed the nanopatterned m-TiO2 layers with 500 nm moth-eye pattern with well-ordered periodic 2D hexagonal symmetry for enhancing the light-harvesting by using soft nanoimprinting lithography and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamping methods in Fig. 26j.557 The results indicate that light absorption in the 2-D photonic-structured PSCs is more favorable for PSCs having a perovskite thickness of less than 300 nm. Chen et al. observed that the integrated absorption efficiency reaches 65.7% over the wavelength range from 350 to 800 nm at normal incidence in TiO2 nanobowl based PSCs with a 100 nm thick perovskite layer,558 indicating that the significantly enhanced light absorption in the long-wavelength region for the collective impact of the different photon and plasmonic modes and their mutual coupling. Zheng et al. proved that 220 nm TiO2 nanobowl (Fig. 26k) could enhance light absorption, improve pore-filling of perovskite crystals, and increase interface contact for rapid electron extraction in PSCs.559 Jang et al. illustrated that the incorporation of 3-D flower-shaped nanostructures into m-TiO2 ETLs (Fig. 26l) could lead to PSCs with a 10.3% improvement of average PCE owing to increased light-harvesting and carrier collection.560
In the texting structure applied in PSCs, zinc oxide (ZnO) is another typical n-type semiconductor due to its higher carrier mobility and electrical conductivity and capable electrons transporting the collecting effect. Significantly, it can be easily changed into a nanorod array by solution processing techniques such as chemical bath deposition. The researchers found that ZnO nanorod arrays have distinct light scattering characteristics for light-trapping in PSCs. For example, Amassian et al. reported hydrothermal growth of nitrogen-doped ZnO nanorods in hysteresis-free PSCs.561 Zheng et al. reported that a compact and even ZnO:I nanopillar could exhibit fast electron extraction and improved light-trapping effect.562 Tan and co-workers revealed that the optical reflection could be dramatically reduced by using a cascaded SnO2/TiO2–Cl as an ETL and an additional anti-reflective coating on the front glass side in PSCs, obtaining a record-high JSC of 26.1 mA cm−2.552 In the above, we can conclude that the microstructure of the ETLs can act as light scattering centers giving higher current density and reduced recombination effects.529 Considering the low cost, high thermal, and chemical stability of semiconductor oxide-based nanomaterials (TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, etc.), the textured approach paves the way toward an efficient and cheap method for improvement of PSCs.
Designing textured perovskite films rather than using planar-architecture can indeed optimize the photovoltaic performance of PSCs.563,564 Recently, researchers proved that textured perovskite film could exhibit enhanced light-trapping effect with the extended optical pathway from the perspective of experiment and theory simulation.11,12,461,565–571 For the textured perovskite, some are periodic, and some are randomly arranged. Researchers have developed a variety of methods to pattern the randomly arranged perovskite films.572–574 The earliest strategy is to use a laser to etch the substrate and then coat the substrate with a perovskite film.570,573,574 Another approach is to use a laser or focused ion beam to directly process the surface of the perovskite to prepare a perovskite film with a specific pattern or texture. In recent years, nanoimprint technology has been usually applied to texture the perovskite films.575 By heating and pressurizing, researchers can make the perovskite film come into close contact with a substrate with a specific pattern (such as PDMS), and in situ prepare a perovskite film with specific rules and shapes. PDMS, etc. can uniformly print its texture structure on the surface of the receptor (such as perovskite film) to produce a large-area array of specific microstructures.576 As for the periodic ones, Song's group constructed mimicking whispering-gallery structure on the perovskite photoactive layer for anti-reflection and light-harvesting in PSCs, achieving an improved PCE of 19.80%, which is 29.4% higher than that of 15.30% for control PSCs.81 The schematic fabrication process of imprinted PSCs and the morphology of whispering-gallery structured perovskite film by AFM are depicted in Fig. 27a and b. Brittman et al. imprinted nanophotonic patterns into halide perovskite films by using soft lithography for perovskite films. They revealed that the choice of solvent (DMF and DMSO) would strongly influence the resulting morphology of the patterned perovskite (Fig. 27c and d).576 They also imprinted other nanoscale structures, including inverted pyramids (Fig. 27e) and hole arrays (Fig. 27f). Their results revealed that controlling the crystallization dynamics of the film could tune the morphology of these structures and be used to extend to other solution-processable halide perovskites. Schmager et al. obtained enhanced absorption by coupling incident light to quasi-guided modes by texturing the perovskite layer with a period of P = 480 nm (Fig. 27g) using thermal nanoimprint lithography.563 Compared to the control film, the photo-luminescence intensity of the nanoimprinted perovskite layers could be enhanced by 80%, leading to a relative increase in PCE by 2% with increased JSC from 19.1 mA cm−2 to 19.4 mA cm−2. The PCE improvement originates from the enhanced EQE of the nanophotonic PSC in the weakly absorbing spectral region of the perovskite absorber (>680 nm). Recently, Song's group developed a facile and straightforward strategy to introduce a large area grating structure into the perovskite layer by utilizing commercial optical discs (CD-R and DVD-R).577Fig. 27h and i show the AFM images of the perovskite film imprinted by optical discs with a grating structure of ≈1.5 and ≈0.75 μm in the period, ≈1.0 and ≈0.5 μm in line width, and ≈0.1 μm in height. The constructed diffraction grating on the perovskite photoactive layer realizes nanophotonic light-trapping by diffraction and effectively suppresses carrier recombination, leading to higher PCE and JSC of 19.71% and 23.11 mA cm−2. Incident light angle versus JSC curves (Fig. 27j) show that the diffraction-grating perovskite devices would obtain high JSC at incident light angle ≈15° and ≈25°, respectively. These patterned nanophotonic structures tailor the optical properties of the perovskite film and can be effectively used to enhance the photovoltaic performance and reduce the energy loss in PSCs.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of whispering-gallery structured perovskite film and light-trapping setup with whispering-gallery structure. (b) AFM image and line profile of whispering-gallery structured perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2018, Elsevier; SEM (c) and AFM (d) of MAPbBr3 films prepared from a mixture of DMF and DMSO as the solvents. The nanophotonic structures of (e) inverted pyramids, (f) array of square holes imprinted into MAPbBr3. (g) AFM image of a nanoimprinted perovskite layer with a period of P = 480 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 563, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (h) and (i) are AFM images of perovskite films with different diffraction grating imprinted by a commercial CD and DVD. (j) Incident light angle versus JSC of PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 577, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (k) SEM images of the cross-sectional SEM image of CsPbBr3 based inverse opal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 579, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (l) UV-vis absorption spectra of pristine perovskite and coral perovskite films, the inset shows the top views of the two films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 580 copyright 2019, Elsevier; (m) SEM images of the textured perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 581, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
A template-assisted method is another effective method for preparing regularly periodic perovskite films. Hörantner et al. guide the growth of perovskite crystals through a predominantly transparent and highly ordered metal oxide honeycomb structure.578 As a result, they achieved an average visible transmittance through the active layer of around 37%. Zhou et al. demonstrated a rational strategy for fabricating all-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite inverse opal films via a template-assisted, spin-coating method.579 As is demonstrated in Fig. 27k, CsPbBr3 inverse opal inherits the highly ordered macroporous inverse opal structure with a clear hexagon structural unit, indicating that the infiltration and template removal method applied here does not destroy the ordered structure arising from the template. Tunable optical response performances visible to the naked eye coming from the novel optical properties of photonic bandgaps of CsPbBr3 inverse opal are witnessed, which can be effectively regulated through adjusting the composition and the irradiation angles. Lu et al. also grew a novel coral-like perovskite nanostructured layer by the facile surface modification with dimethylformamide/isopropanol as a co-solvent to enhance the light-harvesting efficiency and thus augment the photocurrent density (Fig. 27l).580 As a result, they obtained optimized PSCs with an impressive PCE of 19.47%, higher than that of 17.19% for the control device. These works report on a facile route to fabricate nanophotonic PSCs with enhanced current generation by employing thermal nanoimprint lithography.
As for the randomly arranged textures, Cheng's group formed a randomly dispersed perovskite morphology (Fig. 27m) through a thin mesoporous TiO2 seeding layer and a gas-assisted crystallization method.581 The textured morphology allows for significant improvements in the light-harvesting and charge extraction performance of the PSCs. The performance gains concomitant with this textured MAPbI3 morphology provide insights into the perovskite microstructure for photovoltaic performance enhancement. Wang's group fabricated an intriguing maze-like MAPbI3 film featuring a bilayer structure with a gas-assisted method.570,582 The maze-like MAPbI3 film enables the construction of ETL-free PSCs with a PCE of 18.5% and negligible hysteresis, which is related to the higher crystallinity and superior light-harvesting capability of the textured perovskite film. Wang et al. prepared perovskite films with ultrawide annealing windows and spontaneous growth of the surface texture by using tetramethylene sulfoxide as a Lewis base ligand in the perovskite precursor solution.537 The stable intermediate state formed by N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone could change the crystallization process and promote the formation of a surface texture. The valleys within 650–800 nm of the EQE spectrum were eliminated due to the spontaneously formed surface texture, which enhanced the photocurrent density and impressive PCE of 21.14%. The above work based on randomly arranged textures could provide concepts for designing perovskite absorbers and lays a foundation for further realization of higher photovoltaic performance and efficient light-harvesting in PSCs.
Besides the above-mentioned functional layer, the interface between the HTL and the metal back electrodes can also be patterned or textured in nanoscale for enhancing the optical absorption and reducing the energy loss in PSCs.440 Such approaches have been widely studied in DSSCs, yielding increased absorption due to the plasmonic near-field enhancement and scattering-induced guided cavity modes.141,422 Considering to apply texture in PSCs, Ginting et al. recently presented a straightforward fabrication process of an inverse micro-cone array structure textured on flexible transparent conductive electrodes via a micro-imprinting process.177 The flexible inverse micro-cone array films could exhibit a high total transmittance of about 93% and a haze of about 95%, demonstrating the promising strategy for improving the light-harvesting efficiency in PSCs in low/high-latitude locations. Long et al. found that a molecule/polymer composite HTL with a periodic microstructure for morphology replication of a corrugated Au electrode could enhance light harvesting in perovskite film.583 They identified that the cavity was the combined function of a Fabry–Pérot interferometer and LSPR for light-trapping. Wei et al. incorporated bioinspired moth-eye nanostructures into the metal back electrode via a soft imprinting technique.584 The experimental and theoretical characterization verified the broadband polarization-insensitive light scattering and surface plasmonic effects due to the patterned metal back electrode.83
In the section summary, texturing structures with dimensions comparable to the wavelengths of sunlight are considered preferential light-trapping approaches to reduce energy loss in PSCs. From the current studies, we have noticed that high refractive index materials have a better effect on the front-end light-trapping structure and large-scale methods are available for manufacturing large areas of metal patterns using template and photolithography methods. However, we should notice that directly texturing the surface of the thin semiconductor layer may degrade the material quality and increase the surface area, resulting in increased recombination losses. The minimum thickness of the cell is also limited due to the surface textures. Using this technique, it is needed to tailor the thickness of the semiconductor layer down to one hundred nanometers. Moreover, exploring the texturing technology of non-perovskite absorption layers (such as SnO2 based ETL and NiO based HTL) will simultaneously maintain effective carrier transmission and achieve sufficient optical absorption characteristics (Table 5).
Table 5 Summary of textured structure and materials with their photovoltaic parameters investigated in the literature






Materials
Time
Location
Ref.
Control PCE (%)
Optimized PCE (%)
Enhanced factor (%)
Factor
Function




1
Textured FTO
2017
Transparent conductive substrate

547

10.9
13.3
22.0

J
SC/FF
Enhanced light absorption and crystal growth


2
Textured FTO
2016
Transparent conductive substrate

549

12.6
15.2
20.6

J
SC

Light scattering


3
Textured ITO
2019
Transparent conductive substrate

548

14.8
18.6
25.7

J
SC/VOC/FF
Light-harvesting


4
Mimicking whispering-gallery structure
2018
Perovskite

81

15.3
19.8
29.4

J
SC/VOC
Enhanced light-harvesting + improved film quality + carrier extraction


5
Textured inverse micro-cone array
2018
Transparent conductive substrate

177

13.62
14.83
8.9

J
SC

Enhanced light absorption


6
Metal oxide honeycomb
2015
Scaffold layer (ETL)

578

7.2
9.5
31.9

J
SC/VOC/FF
Lower shunt resistance + enhanced transmission


7
Periodic microstructure composite
2015
HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD/P3HT)

583

14.83
17.7
19.4

J
SC

Enhanced light-harvesting + increased hole conductivity


8
Bioinspired nanostructured back electrode
2017
ETL (PCBM)

584

14.27
16.31
14.3

J
SC

Scattering


9
Hexagonal array micro-convex nanostructures
2018
Transparent substrate (glass)

550

13.67
14.86
8.7

J
SC

Scattering


10
Coral-like perovskite nanostructures
2019
Perovskite layer

580

17.19
19.47
13.3

J
SC

Scattering + accelerated hole extraction


11
Diffraction-grated perovskite
2018
Perovskite layer

577

16.71
19.71
18.0

J
SC/VOC
Increased light-harvesting


12
Nanocone array
2015
Transparent substrate (PDMS, outside)

585

12.06
13.14
9.0

J
SC

Improved optical transmittance


13
Nanocone plastic substrates
2016
Transparent substrate (PDMS, inside)

586

8.25
11.29
36.8

J
SC

Light trapping effect


14
TiO2 meso-IO scaffold
2017
ETL (TiO2)

554

15.7
17.1
8.9

J
SC/FF
Minimal defects


15
2D photonic crystal nanodisk array
2019
ETL (TiO2)

555

15.51
18.70
20.6

J
SC/VOC/FF
Photon confinement + light scattering + improved electron extraction


16
Polystyrene nanospheres
2017
ETL (TiO2)

556

12.2
13.5
10.8

J
SC/FF
Enhanced light absorption + carrier extraction


17
Moth-eye TiO2
2016
ETL (TiO2)

557

15.74
17.48
11.1

J
SC

Improved light-harvesting


18
2-D photonic-structured TiO2 nanobowl
2017
ETL (TiO2)

558

—
—
—
—
Enhanced light absorption


19
TiO2 nanobowl array
2016
ETL (TiO2)

559

8.76
12.02
37.2

J
SC

Reduced reflection loss


20
3-D flower-shaped m-TiO2
2016
ETL (TiO2)

560

14.33
15.96
11.4

J
SC

Enhanced light-harvesting + carrier collection


21
PDMS layer
2017
Transparent substrate (PDMS)

587

15.1
16.7
10.6

J
SC

Reduced reflection loss




7. Anti-reflection coating for photon recycling
Currently, applying anti-reflection coating outside the PSCs has been considered as the most efficient strategy for increasing the optical path length and thus enhancing light absorption in the perovskite layer.588,589 Additionally, the anti-reflection layer can be utilized to protect the PSCs from external damage, such as heat, UV irradiation, and acid in harsh outdoor environments.590–592 As is carefully calculated by Wang et al.,593 for a 350 nm MAPbI3 perovskite layer, with the HTL and ETL being PEDOT:PSS and PC61BM, respectively, only 65% of the incident solar light can be utilized by the perovskite layer. The remaining 35% loss is shared by transmission loss in the ITO and the reflection loss at the air/glass interface. For perovskite/Si tandem configurations, the most considerable optical loss is caused by total reflection (more than 17%), based on the optical simulation by Jiang et al.130 As for PSCs, the anti-reflection layer should have excellent transmittance and negligible absorption at 300–800 nm to maximize the transmittance. To obtain an ideal anti-reflection layer, we should develop an anti-reflection layer exhibiting useful broadband and omnidirectional efficiency, low polarization sensitivity, and protection ability in the entire wavelength region absorbed by the perovskite.594 Until now, there are only a few materials with lower reflection index (n) and high optical transparency that can be fabricated as the anti-reflection layer, such as MgF2 (n = 1.39) and PDMS (n = 1.40).595 For example, periodic nanostructures consisting of PDMS nanocone arrays have been widely used as an anti-reflection layer at the air/glass interface of both perovskite single-junction,585 and tandem solar cells,596 in which the PDMS layer could exhibit a strong light-scattering effect from the synergistic effect of the appropriate pyramid size and the uneven random pyramid distribution. Usually, the anti-reflection layer made of many different structures exhibiting higher anti-reflection can be realized using various technologies, including electron-beam, nanoimprint, soft lithography, and 3D printing technologies.597,598 Anti-reflective coatings made of disordered assemblies of microscale transparent structures imprinted at the air/glass interface of solar cells have been studied far and wide.157,599 There are some different types of anti-reflective coating, including (a) textured structure in the scale of the micrometer, in which the light follows ray optics; (b) textured structure in the scale of a nanometer, in which light follows wave optics; (c) the random texture; (d) the periodic texture. Some biomimetic ones like leaf, and flower epidermis usually exhibit complex structures.161,591
In terms of textured structure in the scale of the micrometer, photonic microstructures placed at the glass side of PSCs are currently one of the practical solutions to achieve PCE enhancement.600 Recently, Min-cheol Kim et al. proved that 300 nm moth-eye structured PDMS films could reduce light reflection and therefore enhanced the PCE of ∼21%.601 The schematic illustrations and comparison of the anti-reflective effect for the 300 nm moth-eye PDMS film and bare glass are exhibited in Fig. 28a–c. Detailed measurements of the light absorption, EQE, and J–V curves revealed that the structured coatings provide broadband improvements in the generated current due to the suppression of reflected light at short wavelengths and the increment of the optical path length at longer wavelengths. Jae Su Yu's group prepared multifunctional inverted micro-pyramidal structured PDMS anti-reflection layers (Fig. 28d) via facile soft lithography for PSC applications.178 The anti-reflection layer could exhibit a higher solar weighted transmittance and a lower solar weighted reflectance than those of the bare glass. Additionally, it showed a much higher average haze ratio value of ∼93.1% (Fig. 28e), leading to the improved JSC and PCE values of 21.25 mA cm−2 and 17.74%. Furthermore, the modified device has a slower degradation rate under light irradiation and a superhydrophobic behavior in environmental conditions. Similarly, Manzoor et al. demonstrated that the application of a PDMS layer could induce the increase of JSC by 1.9 mA cm−2.587 Akshit Peer et al. demonstrated that a periodically structured microlens array could show absorption enhancement (Fig. 28f) at all wavelengths, with noticeable enhancements at 440–480 nm, 550–650 nm, and beyond ∼780 nm for the PSCs.602 Simultaneously, an external microlens array on the air–glass side of the OLED could also induce enhanced emission intensity >100% by outcoupling trapped modes in the glass substrate. Except for the PDMS layer, Bacal revealed that a ∼30% average relative increase in the stabilized power output could be achieved by the optimal poly(methyl methacrylate) as an anti-reflective coating.
 Fig. 28  Schematic refractive index profiles of the (a) ITO/glass substrate and (b) moth-eye PDMS film/ITO/glass substrate. (c) Photos demonstrate the anti-reflective effect of the 300 nm moth-eye PDMS film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 601, copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (d) 30°-tilted SEM images of the IMPS-PDMS. (e) Measured total transmittance spectra of bare glass, flat-PDMS/glass, and IMPS-PDMS/glass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) cross-section SEM image of a free-standing h-CPP. The inset represents a closer view of the h-CPP; the scale bar in the inset corresponds to 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (g) absorption as a function of wavelength for PSCs with μLA of a ∼700 nm and h ∼ 800 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 602, copyright 2017, The Optical Society; (h) SEM image of the replica on glass, and etched Si wafer was used as a master, (i) absorption and reflection in the 200 nm perovskite layer, (j) absolute value of the electric field with super-positioned energy flow flux and absorption profiles at a wavelength of 609 nm, (k) corresponding integrated electric field of the p-ARFE cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 604, copyright 2016, IOP Publishing. 
As for the textured structure in the scale of a nanometer, in which light follows wave optics, Martínez-Denegri et al. previously combined the periodically corrugated surface (Fig. 28g) from the photonic fibre plate with a planar interface on the opposite side of the PSCs.157 The top interface of the layered medium is formed by a periodic array of half-cylinders, which they named a half-cylinder photonic plate. It can be estimated that 97% of the incident light rays that fall on a given cylinder are directed to another cylinder upon the first bounce on the bottom of the optical medium. Compare to the traditional method where angular randomization leading to an ergodic optical geometry was not confirmed, they confirmed that the enhanced JSC was accurately predicted by a ray optic model, which established ergodicity in the light propagation in the half-cylinder photonic plate structure. Marko Još et al. obtained 1 mA cm−2 increase in the JSC by applying a foil created by UV nanoimprint lithography (Fig. 28h) on the glass side of PSCs.603 The optical simulation results revealed that the improved performance is mainly due to the reduction of total reflection. Mohammad Mahdi Tavakoli et al. reported a PDMS-based nanocone array anti-reflection layer duplicated from the anodized Al foil on the front side of the glass substrate to improve the light transmittance.585 Truong Khang Nguyen et al. proposed PSCs with a top anti-reflection front electrode to generate lensing/anti-reflecting effects and thus resulting in improved absorption.604 By theoretical and experimental analysis, they demonstrated that the optimized PSCs with a 200 nm perovskite layer could exhibit a JSC of 20.2 mA cm−2, with broadband absorption characteristic at multiple visible frequencies (Fig. 28j). Additionally, there is a broad absorption within the ITO/TiO2 layer and zero reflection at a longer wavelength of 609 nm (Fig. 28k), which is associated with the whispering galley mode corresponding to low reflection. Above all, it is theoretically and experimentally demonstrated that the enhanced light absorption factor measured is close to the maximum possible for light-trapping schemes.605
Considering the random texture structure, Huang's group developed a strategy to reduce the refractive index of the silica by adjusting the refractive indices of silica coatings by introducing core–shell PS@SiO2 nanoparticles or PS nanoparticle fillers.599 Thermal decomposition of PS templates enabled the formation of hollow or mesoporous structured silica films to enhance the porosity and hence reduce the refractive indices. The application of structured silica anti-reflective coating in PSCs can effectively reduce specular light reflection in the broad wavelength range, leading to reduced specular Fresnel reflection in the broad wavelength range of 400–800 nm and thereby enhanced PCE of 20.3%, respectively. Furthermore, the high hydrophobicity and chemical inertness of the silica render the substrate a self-protection property against dust and water uptake and excellent long-term stability under outdoor operational conditions.
Except for the typical texture and random structures, approaches to enhance the photovoltaic performance of solar cells by employing the highly transparent biomimetic architectures as anti-reflective or haze surfaces have been widely studied.606–612 Liang et al. optimized the biomimetic leaf-type hierarchical nanostructure for ultra-thin PSC application from a theoretical perspective by the FDTD method combined with the particle swarm optimization algorithm. They proved that the biomimetic leaf-type hierarchical nanostructure could enhance the light absorption by a maximum of 39% at the long wavelength, with an increased photocurrent by 8.4% than that of control devices.161 From the view of the experiment, Kim et al. adopted a fast soft-imprint lithography patterning method (Fig. 29a) to create a transparent anti-reflection layer with microarchitectures of inverted hemispherical architectured-PDMS and hemispherical architectured-PDMS layers.613 The measured total transmittance and reflectance spectra of the biomimetic architectures (Fig. 29b) laminated on bare glass indicate that the inverted hemispherical architecture could exhibit superior transmittance and average reflectance value of 89.2% and 6.4%, respectively. Also, the inverted hemispherical architectured-PDMS/glass also exhibited a relatively strong light-scattering property with a higher average haze ratio of ∼38%, which is favorable to the enhanced PCE from 16.21 to 19.00%, with a significantly enhanced JSC from 19.91 to 23.29 mA cm−2. Yoo et al. developed a newly nanopatterned MgF2/SiO2 anti-reflection structure (Fig. 29c) by combining the single-layer MgF2 with a two-dimensional moth-eye structure.612 Because the anti-reflective film can be attached to the glass surface of PSCs and predominantly reduce the surface reflection losses over a broad range of incident wavelengths and angles, the improved light absorption and PCE were easily achieved. Li et al. reported the biomimetic haze film to reduce the reflection loss in PSCs by one-step replication of the surface texture of rose petals with low-cost PDMS (Fig. 29d), which exhibits a high transmission haze of 75% and ultra-high diffusion transmittance of 97%.159 At small incidence angles, biomimetic haze films could significantly enhance the light absorption of PSCs by as much as 2.7 times, leading to a significant photon recycling effect, especially for those photovoltaic devices installed in high latitude areas. Dudem et al. adopted a facile soft-imprint lithography technique to create an anti-reflective film for PSC applications.614 In particular, they applied sandpaper as a master mold to produce sandpaper-aided haze film (Fig. 29e). These microgroove architectures on the surface of sandpaper-aided haze film can help to achieve an optimized PCE of 20.34% for PSCs on account of their linear-gradient refractive-index profile. Furthermore, sandpaper-aided haze film effectively lowered the surface temperature of the device under continuous light soaking, which promises an important role of sandpaper-aided haze film as a heat resistant layer for solar cells. Silver ants with hairs could play a crucial role in reducing the body temperature via enhanced optical reflection and radiative heat dissipation as a passive daytime radiative cooler. Inspired by the hierarchical feature structure of the hairs, Lin et al. fabricated the flexible photonic architectures on PDMS in both PSCs and commercial c-Si solar cells for enhancing the light-harvesting, with increased PCE by 6.75% and 3.23%, respectively (Fig. 29f).615 The above studies demonstrate a facile way to enhance the performance of PSCs with a planar front surface.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure for the inverted hemispherical architectured-PDMS and hemispherical architectured-PDMS layers. (b) Measured total transmittance spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 613, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (c) cross-sectional SEM images of the MgF2/SiO2 anti-reflection structure with a low refractive index layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 612, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society; (d) (d-1) schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the biomimetic haze film, (d-2) digital image of a rose petal mould and the biomimetic haze film replicated from the mould, (d-3) SEM image of the top surface of the rose petal, (d-4) SEM image of the top and the tilted surface of the biomimetic haze film, the scale bar is 30 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) photographic image demonstrating the easy lamination and detachable ability of sandpaper-aided haze film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 614, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (f) J–V curves of the PSCs with and without the FPA-PDMS. The insets are the photographs of the control and FPA-PDMS modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 615, copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
In the above, Fresnel reflection at the air–substrate interface of a PSC inevitably occurs because of the contrast of refractive index between air and transparent substrates, and it has been one of the essential optical losses for the photovoltaic performance of PSCs. Depositing a cost-effective anti-reflection coating with a quarter-wavelength thickness on the transparent substrate has been considered as one of the most feasible methods to reduce Fresnel reflection-induced energy loss. What needs to be the key consideration for the future is the long-term stability of anti-reflection coatings at a realistic condition, including light irradiation, rainfall, climate change, sandstorm, surface cleaning, etc.
In addition to single solar cells, using PSCs as the top cell of tandem devices is a future application direction of high-efficiency photovoltaic.616 The optics of the interconnection layers is essential for single-junction solar cells and even more critical for multijunction solar cells like perovskite/Si tandem solar cells.617,618 The front contact is part of the junction of the solar cell and must provide lateral charge transport to the terminals for an efficient light coupling while having low optical losses. The interconnection layer of a PSC usually needs to have four functions. First, the interconnection layer must have good conductivity so that the carrier can be transferred efficiently. Second, the interconnection layer must be able to effectively couple the incident light in the solar cell. It can be combined with the diffraction or refraction of incident light to increase the optical path length of the light in the solar cell, thereby improving the quantum efficiency. Usually, this can be achieved by texturing the interconnection layer. Third, the absorption loss of the interconnection layer should be as low as possible, that is, the interconnection layer cannot block the incident light.619 From the result in Fig. 30a and b, a 150 nm thick perovskite top cell usually suffers from reflection loss at short wavelengths (λ < 500 nm) and weak absorption at wavelengths 500 < λ < 730 nm, while the Si-based bottom cell suffers significant reflection losses at wavelengths λ > 800 nm. The integrated reflection loss will induce JSC loss estimated to be 4.1 mA cm−2 for a planar solar cell.620 For overcoming the current loss, Bennett W. Schneider et al. showed that conformal deposition of thin PSCs directly onto the textured front surface of an efficient Si-based solar cell could yield lower reflection losses and induce an improved PCE by 2–4%.620 Using FDTD simulations, Stephen Foster et al. demonstrated that the ideal light-trapping and absorption could be achieved over the 300–1100nm wavelength range by using a photonic crystal in perovskite/Si tandem solar cells.333 Recently, Zhang's group designed anti-reflective foils for perovskite/Si tandem solar cell applications (Fig. 30c) by carrying random-pyramidal textures with three different pyramid size ranges.160 Consequently, laminating the PDMS-based anti-reflection coating onto the front surface of tandem solar cells could induce an increased PCE from 19.38% to 21.93% (Fig. 30d and e). Based on the previous works, they also systematically reviewed the strategies of the reflective layer in the perovskite/Si solar cells in series, aiming to guide further improvement of the tandem devices.66,621 Readers can refer to this section in detail.
 Fig. 30  (a) Absorption curves in front and bottom subcells, (b) front-surface reflectance and the corresponding equivalent reflected JSC values. Reprinted with permission from ref. 620, copyright 2014, The Optical Society; (c) the structure of a tandem solar cell, (d) EQE of the front and bottom cells for the tandem device with and without PDMS anti-reflection coating; (e) J–V curves of the tandem solar cell with and without PMDS coatings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (f) schematic structure of the PSC devices with PDMS film attached to the top. (g) Photograph of PSCs based on flexible willow glass integrated with a PDMS layer. (h) J–V curves of PSCs with and without PDMS film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 585, copyright 2015, American Chemistry Society. 
The outdoor applications are particularly important for PSCs because the accumulation of water on the front surface would induce decreased performance degradation. Therefore, making the arc hydrophobic helps protect equipment from contamination and degradation. Tavakoli applied a nanocone array on the front side of the glass substrate to improve the optical transmittance and to achieve a water-repelling effect of PSCs (Fig. 30f).585Fig. 30g shows the photograph of a nanocone film attached on the PSC. The J–V curves in Fig. 30h revealed that the JSC was increased from 17.7 mA cm−2 to 19.3 mA cm−2 after attaching the nanocone anti-reflection film on the top side of the solar cell. The fabricated solar cells have reasonable bendability, with 96% of the initial value remaining after 200 bending cycles, demonstrating excellent superhydrophobicity. Tavakoli et al. also showed that the PCE of inverted nanocone substrate-based PSCs could be improved by 37%.586 More interestingly, the PCE of an inverted device could remain more than 90% of its initial value after 200 mechanical bending cycles. In conclusion, the antireflection layer can improve the hydrophobicity and bending resistance of PSCs.
Considering the effect of reflection in practice, one of the most important directions is utilized for building-integrated photovoltaics, for which the colors of building exteriors demonstrate the traditional, cultural, and religious features of cities.622–632 Recently, strategies reported for the color tuning of photovoltaics, such as composition and crystallization tuning,633 photonic crystal,634 plasmonics,635–637 dielectric multilayer films,638–640 and structure design strategies,641,642 have been developed for power-generating windows. For example, Huang's group reported colorful PSCs by preparing the perovskite layer having a combination of a hundred-micrometre size large domain structure and a concentric ring photonics structure in each domain which could generate the vivid color.633 Recently, our group present a study of integrating CsPbBr3 nanocrystals inside of PSCs to induce specific colorful devices under UV illumination.237 We observed green and red fluorescence can be observed for the MAPbI3 based PSCs, which is related to the I−/Br− ions exchange in MAPbI3 layer and CsPbBr3 nanocrystals. Zhang et al. integrated a porous photonic crystal scaffold within the perovskite photoactive layer by employing scalable liquid processing techniques,634 as is illustrated from the schematic structure and cross-sectional SEM image of the PSC in Fig. 31a and b. Tuning the reflectance peak of the photonic crystal by modifying the thickness of the individual layers could exhibit intense colors variable across the visible spectrum. Wang et al. demonstrated efficient bifacial colorful PCSs using inorganic CuSCN as the HTL and ITO electrode with different thicknesses.643
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic diagram of a photonic crystal-based PSC. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a photonic-crystal-based device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 634, copyright 2015, American Chemistry Society; (c) scheme of the structure of narrow-bandwidth reflective filters formed by nonperiodic stacking of alternatively high-refractive-index and low-refractive-index layers. (d) The gradual change of the reflected color of the narrow-bandwidth reflective filters with an angular variation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 641, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (e) device structure of the PSCs with conducting polymer as the top electrode. (f) Photographic image of colorful PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 646, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (g) spectral transmittance curves of the PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 647, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society. 
The use of a multi-nanolayered reflective color-generated filter by periodically or nonperiodically alternating depositing the low-refractive-index and high-refractive-index is another strategy to tune the color of solar cells without modifying the photoactive layers.641,644,645 Yoo et al. fabricated narrow-bandwidth reflective filters by multilayering high-index TiO2/low-index SiO2 in a nonperiodic manner.641Fig. 31c shows a schematic figure of narrow-bandwidth reflective filters with two different structures (periodic and nonperiodic stacking) of multiple nanolayers. These narrow-bandwidth reflective filters are composed of low-refractive-index SiO2 (1.45) layers and high-refractive-index TiO2 (2.31) layers. Various peak wavelengths and full-width at half-maximum values of narrow-bandwidth reflective filters are demonstrated by manipulating optical interference effects between the high- and low-index layers. The photostability of the PSCs can be substantially improved by the UV blocking effect. Fig. 31d shows the gradual change of the reflected color of the narrow-bandwidth reflective filters with an angular variation. According to the reflectance spectra of the narrow-bandwidth reflective filters, all spectra are blue-shifted when the viewing angle increases. This pearl-like color formation concerning viewing angle was beneficial for use in building-integrated PSCs. Except for the above method, localized resonances in ultrathin metal nano-strip optical resonators consisting of an array of metallic subwavelength nanowires on a transparent substrate could also lead to a sharp peak in a reflection spectrum for a distinctive color generation with angle-insensitive properties up to 60°.635 By using the PEDOT:PSS instead of conventional Au as a top electrode and spectrally selective anti-reflection coating (Fig. 31e), Jiang et al. found that thickness optimization of the PEDOT:PSS allowed tuning the reflectance spectra to obtain colorful PSCs.646 The PCE of these colorful PSCs can reach up to 15% and 13% when illuminated from the FTO side and the polymer side, respectively (Fig. 31f). Lu et al. obtained colorful PSCs exhibiting strong coloration: reddish-orange, orange, yellow, yellow-green, yellowish-green, bluish-green, and blue by embedding precisely controllable Ag/ITO/Ag nanostructures (Fig. 31g).647 These results indicate that crystallization tuning, photonic crystals, plasmonics, and multilayer design could be used as promising strategies for building-integrated photovoltaics.
In the section summary, using a broadband anti-reflective coating to cover the entire spectrum wavelength range acceptable to solar cells can reduce the reflection by more than 70%, thereby improving the PCE and reducing light pollution of PSCs. High refractive index materials have a better effect on the front-end light-trapping structure. Also, an anti-reflection layer can protect PSCs from external impact, heat, ultraviolet radiation, and corrosive acid rain in a harsh outdoor environment. Anti-reflection structure or coatings in PSCs has been widely studied in recent years, especially the biomimetic anti-reflection layer composed of nano and microstructures. However, the production of such biomimetic nanostructures and microstructures now involves complicated and expensive manufacturing processes, such as lithography/patterning and etching processes, as well as sophisticated stripping techniques. In future research, it is necessary to develop industrial means, including laser micro–nano processing and electron-beam lithography, to produce an anti-reflection layer in a large area, which requires more innovation in theory and technology (Table 6).
Table 6 Summary of anti-reflection materials and structure with their photovoltaic parameters investigated in the literature






Materials
Control PCE (%)
Optimized PCE (%)
Enhanced factor (%)
Factor
Function
Ref.




1
Nanocone array films
12.06
13.14
9.0

J
SC

Anti-reflection

585



2
PDMS antireflective foils
19.38
21.93
13.2

J
SC

Anti-reflection

160



3
Moth-eye structured PDMS
19.66
20.93
6.5

J
SC

Anti-reflection

601



4
Inverted micro-pyramidal structured polydimethyl-siloxane
17.17
17.74
3.3

J
SC

Anti-reflection + scattering

178



5
Periodically structured microlens array.
—
—
∼6.3

J
SC

Scatting

602



6
Textured nanoimprinted layers
16.3
17.1
4.9

J
SC

Reduced reflection

603



7
Biomimetic haze film
16.6
19.2
15.6

J
SC

Anti-reflection

159



8
Fiber arrays
—
—
6.3

J
SC

Anti-reflection

604



9
Inverted hemispherical architectured-poly-dimethylsiloxane
16.21
19.00
17.21

J
SC

Anti-reflection

613



10
MgF2/SiO2 anti-reflection nanostructure
18.21
20.48
12.50

J
SC

Anti-reflection

612



11
Sandpaper-aided haze film
17.07
20.34
19.2

J
SC

Anti-reflection

614



12
Silver ants-inspired flexible photonic architectures
16.01
17.09
6.75

J
SC

Anti-reflection

615





8. Luminescent solar concentrators for light concentration
Solar concentration technology has been considered as a practical approach to reducing the cost of traditional photovoltaics by decreasing their active area used for generating the same amount of electrical power.648 The representative LSCs possess the superiority for providing adaptability (colors, shapes, transparencies, lightweight, and flexibility) to semi-transparent building-integrated photovoltaics.321,649 Basically, the LSC is a device that embeds a transparent matrix of fluorescent material.165,168 When exposed to sunlight, the fluorescent material absorbs incident radiation, re-emitted at a specific wavelength, and transferred to the solar cell at the edge of the matrix by total internal reflection. A portion of the emitted signal is lost on the surface, while the remaining signal is captured by total internal reflection into the edge attached photovoltaic cell, as shown in Fig. 32a. If the photon input/photon output efficiency is high enough, the electricity cost generated by the LSC may be competitive. The most widely used fluorescent materials in the LSC emission layer are dyes, polymers, quantum dots, transition metals, and RE doped phosphors.650–655 Quantum dots have broadband absorption and efficient emission in the visible region or NIR emission, which match narrow-bandgap photovoltaics in the spectrum.656 To obtain an efficient LSC, researchers need to make efforts to reduce the reabsorption of emitted light in the absorbing medium while maintaining the high photoluminescence quantum yield.
 Fig. 32  (a) Working mechanism of LSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) picture of perovskite nanocrystal based LSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (c) design principles of LSCs based on ultrafast narrowband exciton routing; (d) photograph of a 10 cm × 10 cm quasi-two-dimensional perovskite nanoplatelet-based LSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172, copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (e) absorption and luminescence spectra of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals (4% doping level). Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. (f) Left is absorption, PL spectra of the undoped and Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. Insets: Schematics of the perovskite crystal structures and photographs of the samples under UV illumination (365 nm). Right is the TEM images of undoped and Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 654, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (g) photograph of dual LSCs coupled with PSCs; (h) J–V curves for the PSCs coupled with different types of LSCs measured under 1 sun illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 660, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Compared with the typical PSCs, the advantage of perovskite quantum dot-based LSC is the reduction of the active area of solar cells, which can decrease the utilization of expensive hole transport materials and transparent conductive oxide materials as much as possible, thereby reducing the costs associated with energy conversion.173 The overall physical drawing of perovskite-based LSCs is illustrated in Fig. 32b,179 giving the photovoltaic modules the ability to concentrate the maximum amount of light energy at their edges for power generation.657 Perovskite quantum dot-based LSC configurations can be used in the traditional Si-based solar cells or the PSCs attached at the device edges.174,658,659 Wei et al. used quasi-two-dimensional perovskite nanoplatelets with a large Stokes shift and a high photoluminescence quantum yield (Fig. 32c) to provide optical quantum efficiency of 26% and internal concentration factors of 3.3 for 10 cm × 10 cm LSC panels (Fig. 32d).172 Meinardi et al. demonstrated the suitability of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals as reabsorption-free emitters for large-area LSC applications. By Monte Carlo ray-tracing simulations of light propagation using the experimental absorption and photoluminescence spectra, they revealed that the dopant photoluminescence is attributed to the resonance with the vibrational modes of the ligand molecules (Fig. 32e). As a result, the Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals combined with the polymer-based LSCs could result in high optical quality waveguides, in which scattering losses are less than the weak reabsorption by the matrix material.
Current studies focus mainly on undoped or single ions doped into the host perovskite nanocrystals, while few research efforts have been made on simultaneously doping more than one type of metal ion into the same perovskite host and intra-particle energy transfer processes for higher f photoluminescence quantum yield and wider spectral range.654 Cai et al. report a Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 nanocrystal with a unique triple-wavelength emission profile simultaneously covering UV/blue, visible, and NIR spectral regions (Fig. 32f) owing to the separated energy relaxation channels among the intrinsic bandgap, Mn2+, and Yb3+ dopant emissions.654 Both the experimental and simulation results indicate that the internal optical efficiency and external optical efficiency of the codoped nanocrystals increased dramatically compared to the undoped or single Mn2+ doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. From the early research work, we can find that most of the LSCs are based on commercial Si-based solar cells. The previous study indicates that the PSCs could exhibit an absorption coefficient of about ten times higher than Si-based solar cells in the visible light wavelength band. Kim et al. prepared a dual LSC panel (Fig. 32g) consisting of a perylene-based DC layer that absorbs violet light and a meso-tetraphenyl-tetrabenzoporphine palladium complex and perylene based UC layer to upconvert the NIR light into higher energy blue light, resulting in both dual panels exhibiting blue light emission.660 The dual LSCs combined with a PSC could exhibit a high average-visible-transmittance of 82%, long-term stability, and a maximum PCE of 7.53% (Fig. 32h).
Above all, as nearly zero reabsorption emitters, the perovskite nanocrystal-based LSCs could reduce the energy loss using smaller photovoltaic modules and enhance the PCE by increasing the scattered light collection. Considering the current status and challenges associated with the rapid developments in the field of building and car integrated photovoltaics, perovskite nanocrystal-based LSCs could provide adaptability to the needs of the architect in that they can be made in a variety of colors, shapes, and transparencies, leading to flexible and lighter weight photovoltaic devices. Although perovskite nanocrystals have the potential to generate low-cost solar energy, LSCs based on perovskite nanocrystals face various challenges, most of which are related to the materials used in the design. Doping trivalent lanthanide ions (such as Yb3+, Y3+, Ce3+, Eu3+) into perovskite nanocrystals is a promising strategy to improve the fluorescence intensity and expand the luminescence spectrum, aiming to improve the collection efficiency and photoelectric conversion of solar energy.
9. Conclusions and perspectives
In summary, we have reviewed the progress on various photon managements and the corresponding mechanisms for reducing energy loss in PSCs, which is an attractive branch, and has achieved fruitful and exciting results. The relationship between the optical management structure and photovoltaic performance of PSCs has received particular attention. The integrated hot topics of photo conversion, tandem, plasma, texturing, anti-reflection, and LSC promise to open up new prospects for finding feasible solutions to reach and go beyond the efficiency limitation of PSCs. After a brief overview of the theoretical basis on photon management, we systematically introduce some studies that have successfully applied PSC devices to harvest more photons and realize photovoltaic transformation. The views summarized and the topics discussed here are expected to deepen the current understanding and technical status of spectral regulation in PSCs. Owing to the limited bandgap of perovskite, photon management will be the key throughout the development of PSCs, and they will soon reach the research outbreak period. This review will be useful to researchers from the fields of chemistry, physics, optoelectronics, biology, and even energy storage.
We identify the following critical issues for future research principles to reduce the energy loss in PSCs.
(1) Evidence reflects that the reduced energy loss achieved from UC drives increased photocurrent, but further study is required to confirm the deep mechanism to distinguish and determine whether the main factor is UC, light scattering, or enhanced perovskite crystallinity. In future research, researchers can think in three ways. Firstly, from the view of the device structure, the UC single-crystal outside of the PSCs, or as a transparent substrate (in situ growth of a transparent conductive film on the surface single-crystal) is the top way to achieve UC applications because it can maintain the high fluorescence efficiency of the bulk material and avoid the negative effects of dielectric properties on photovoltaic performance. Secondly, considering the UC matrix, most reported REs were mainly doped into insulating materials (such as NaYF4, LiYF4, etc.), unable to realize direct photoelectric conversion. For future research, RE doped semiconductor-based UC materials, especially for the perovskite UC nanocrystals, have great potential in achieving effective UC luminescence for reducing energy loss in PSCs. Thirdly, the use of new sensitizers, such as dye sensitization or a new type of quantum dot sensitization, is possible to achieve efficient UC luminescence. Researchers can develop more efficient NIR absorption dyes to achieve effective energy transfer (it should have an emission that overlaps with the UC ion absorption band). Research on quantum dot sensitization and enhanced UC luminescence has not been carried out, and it can be used as a new research field to carry out related research. Fourthly, the UC fluorescence intensity of RE doped UC nanomaterials needs to be further enhanced by combining the precious metal nanostructures with the UC nanomaterials to modulate the incident light synergistically. At least, another entry point is the concentrator, such as at 100 times sunlight, for UC-based PSC applications. The fluorescence of UC materials is excited by high-energy and high-intensity light, which is then utilized by the perovskite. These means for UC enhancement are of great significance for future applications in PSCs.
(2) As for the DC effect, future research can be carried out in the following aspects. Firstly, in order to solve the issues of narrow excitation band, weak absorption, and Yb3+ concentration quenching of DC materials, ions with f–d transition or charge transport state absorption should be selected as co-sensitized ions (such as Tb3+, etc.) to achieve broadband absorption. The co-sensitized ions can efficiently transfer the absorbed energy to the DC ion combination. Secondly, using RE doped perovskite quantum dots (CsPbCl3:Yb3+,CsPb(Cl0.35Br0.65)3:Yb3+) can achieve higher quantum cutting than 100% (193% for the highest now), which can significantly improve the utilization in UV and the PCE of PSCs in future research. Thirdly, aiming at the problems of stability and fluorescence efficiency drop caused by aggregation, the SiO2 coating on the surface of semiconductor nanocrystals can effectively maintain the high fluorescence intensity while improving the environmental moisture stability and fluorescence efficiency. This is of considerable significance to realize the internal integration and external coating of quantum dot materials, not only in PSCs but also in Si-based and thin-film solar cells. Finally, moisture and oxygen exposure can be mostly prevented via suitable encapsulation, leaving high-energy UV exposure as the most crucial susceptibility to overcome in PSCs. The UV-induced degradation is primarily attributed to photocatalytic effects caused by the most commonly used TiO2 in the ETL. Compared with the most commonly used UV filters, using perovskite nanocrystals with high fluorescence quantum efficiency, especially inorganic highly durable perovskite (Cs2AgBiBr6, AgBi2I7, Cs3Bi2I9, Cs3Sb2I9, etc.) nanocrystals, could simultaneously enhance the UV stability by protecting the perovskite from harmful UV radiation, promote the nucleation and crystallization process of the perovskite through good lattice matching, and improve the carrier transport characteristics at the interface between the perovskite and the carrier transport layer.
(3) Considering the research on perovskite-based tandem solar cells, the NIR dyes exhibit narrow absorption spectra and retain serious air stability issues. Recently, the development of organic polymer photovoltaic materials has been rapid. The combination of perovskite and durable organic materials to prepare a “perovskite/organic” hybrid or tandem solar cell can compensate for the absorption of the perovskite in the NIR region. At the same time, organic materials have the advantages of tunable energy band and controllable semiconductor properties, which can be used as an effective carrier transport layer to achieve more efficient electron transport and ultimately improve the photovoltaic performance of the PSCs. This is an auspicious research direction, and researchers from the subject of chemical synthesis and materials engineering can carry out more in-depth exploration from the perspective of molecular chemistry, designing NIR organic materials with high absorption at 800–1100 nm. Also, researchers in physics and electronics can optimize the device structure and internal electrical impedance to achieve the minimum charge loss and improve the optical response of perovskite to the NIR region. The tandem strategy may be the most direct pathway and the fastest route to realizing a practical enhancement in PCE for commercially available PSCs. For all perovskite tandem solar cells, the segregation of halogen ions (I/Br) in wide bandgap-based PSCs is the primary cause of VOC loss, which is an insurmountable gap to cross. Developing and introducing pseudohalogen ions (SCN−, COOH−, PF6−, BF4−) with similar ion radius and excellent chemical stability to dope or substitute the halogen anions (Cl−, Br−, I−) could be a feasible strategy to induce the uniform distribution of elements and reduce the phase separation, and further control the crystallinity and carrier transport characteristics (carrier lifetime, carrier diffusion length). Researchers can focus on exploring the regulatory effects some new pseudohalogen ion doping in wide-bandgap perovskites, which is the key to improve PCE further and reduce energy loss by tandem configuration. In the next research step, with the variety of low-bandgap based optoelectronic materials and the continuous growth of PCE, researchers should pay more attention to commercial-related issues, such as how to realize the flexibility of stacked devices and large-area module manufacturing by screen printing, blade-coating, and vacuum integrated evaporation.
(4) As for the SPR effect, although theoretical studies indicated an effective way to take advantage of the plasmonic nanostructures in photon management strategies, most of the reports showed relatively low or moderate efficiency improvements in PSC. It is essential to intelligently design and implement controlled plasmonic metal nanostructures with the required size, shape, and morphology. Just as importantly, the method of integrating plasmonic metal nanostructures into these PSCs is another major factor to consider. Researchers can further explore the interaction mechanism of metal nanostructures and their surface plasmon effects with excitons and carriers in the active layer to understand better the enhancement mechanism, including electrical and optical properties and their respective ratios. A comprehensive scientific study by associating experimental results with simulation results is crucial for revealing the basic knowledge of the plasmonic effect in PSCs. An unavoidable problem of direct contact of metal nanoparticles in the perovskite photoactive layer makes them act as the carrier recombination centers, limiting the improvement of device efficiency. In future research, coating ultrathin oxide shells (ZnO, SnO2, Nb2O5) on the surface of plasmonic metal nanostructures can effectively avoid the recombination of holes and electrons and expand the application range of metal nanoparticles in the device from far away from the active layer to the inside. Meanwhile, the device structure and film thickness should be optimized by adjusting the resonance absorption spectrum of the nanoparticles and the dielectric properties of the shell layer, aiming to maximize the surface plasmon resonance effect of the metal nanoparticles significantly. There are still many scientific and technical issues related to photonic regulation, interface modification, and optical characterization techniques that distinguish PSCs from traditional photovoltaic devices. Sometimes, researchers need to find a compromise between optical and electrical aspects if we aim at using photon management in PSCs with already high efficiency.
(5) Considering the unique structure-based texturing and anti-reflection effect, we have noticed that large-scale methods are available for manufacturing using template and photolithography methods. In the future, it is necessary to develop low-cost soft lithography methods to manufacture pyramid microstructures based on semiconductor oxides, which involves coating or attaching a material to the external surface of a transparent substrate. The advantages of texturing structures include the realization of PSCs with different colors, which improve the aesthetic appeal of PSCs. Using a broadband anti-reflective coating to cover the entire spectrum wavelength range acceptable to PSCs can reduce the reflection by more than 70%, thereby improving the efficiency of PSCs and reducing light pollution of photovoltaics. In future research, anti-reflection coatings should be cost-effective, thin, and easy to manufacture. Using inexpensive MgF2 and other anti-reflective materials as a high-quality layer on FTO by the physical deposition method will contribute to reducing the optical loss of PSCs. As for the material design for anti-reflection, Reststrahlen materials could exhibit Reststrahlen frequency when they are exposed to radiation close to the wavelength that causes lattice vibration. This change causes the extinction coefficient and Fresnel reflection coefficient of the material to rise, causing a sharp increase in reflectivity, which could, in turn, improve the utilization of photons in PSCs.
(6) Finally, recent results demonstrate the potential of perovskite nanocrystals for LSC-based integrated photovoltaic technologies as well as for other photon management applications relying on low-attenuation long-range optical waveguiding. It is proved that the perovskite nanocrystals cannot be affected by the spectral overlap between the absorption spectrum and the emission spectrum, exhibiting an excellent regulatory effect in traditional photovoltaics. The excellent light intensity tolerance makes PSCs an ideal choice for edge photovoltaics and effectively utilize the light energy concentrated through the LSC. In air conditions, however, perovskite nanocrystals and PSCs are still humidity sensitive. As a result, their luminescence properties will quickly degrade over a couple of days or weeks. Therefore, researchers should consider encapsulating the perovskite nanocrystals with a protecting layer and using them inside a double glass window.
Each photon management strategy reviewed above has its exclusive advantages for reducing energy loss. For example, UC is aimed at NIR light; DC is aimed at high-energy UV light and light stability; scattering and texturing are aimed at visible light that is not fully utilized and ultra-thin semi-transparent PSCs; anti-reflection can minimize the reflection and refraction loss of incident light (widely used in crystalline silicon cells); LSC can help to achieve building integrated photovoltaics and the miniaturization of solar cell modules. We expect researchers to consider the synergistic effect of multiple photon management mechanisms as much as possible, to achieve more efficient optoelectronic applications, including tandem, colorful, flexible, semi-transparent PSCs (Fig. 33), as well as in the field of photodetectors, phototransistors, photoelectrochemical sensors, photocatalysis, and especially light-emitting diodes.
 Fig. 33  Photon management strategies (UC, DC, tandem, SPR, texturing, antireflection) to reduce energy loss for PSCs (tandem, colorful, flexible, semi-transparent) and future multi-field applications (photoelectrochemical sensor, photocatalysis, and light-emitting diodes). The tandem image of a PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120 copyright 2020, Springer Nature; the image of a colorful PSC: Reprinted with permission from ref. 626, copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH; the image of a flexible PSC: Reprinted with permission from ref. 661 copyright 2020, Springer Nature; the image of a semi-transparent PSC: Reprinted with permission from ref. 574, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; the photoelectrochemical sensor application by photon management: Reprinted with permission from ref. 662, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. The photocatalysis application by photon management: Reprinted with permission from ref. 663, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. The Light-emitting diodes application by photon management: Reprinted with permission from ref. 664, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society. 
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62004058, 21701041, and 61674067), the Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province (F2020202022), the Open Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Optoelectronics (IOSKL2020KF09), the State Key Laboratory of Reliability and Intelligence of Electrical Equipment (No. EERI_PI20200005), and Hebei University of Technology, the National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFC0207101).
References
J.-F. Liao, W.-Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, J.-X. Zhong, L. Wang and D.-B. Kuang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 354–381 RSC .
H. Kim, K.-G. Lim and T.-W. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 12–30 RSC .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
L. Chouhan, S. Ghimire, C. Subrahmanyam, T. Miyasaka and V. Biju, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2869–2885 RSC .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. Fakharuddin, A. G. Coutsolelos, P. Falaras, P. Argitis, A. R. B. M. Yusoff and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4496–4526 RSC .

          H. Crane, E. Kinderman and R. Malhotra, A cubic mile of oil: realities and options for averting the looming global energy crisis, Oxford University Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
L. Zhu, X. Zhang, M. Li, X. Shang, K. Lei, B. Zhang, C. Chen, S. Zheng, H. Song and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2100529 CrossRef CAS .
F. Creutzig, P. Agoston, J. C. Goldschmidt, G. Luderer, G. Nemet and R. C. Pietzcker, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17140 CrossRef .

          A. Goetzberger, J. Knobloch and B. Voss, Crystalline silicon solar cells, New York,  1998, pp. 114–118 Search PubMed .
T. G. Allen, J. Bullock, X. Yang, A. Javey and S. De Wolf, Nat. Energy, 2019, 1–15 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, Z. J. Yu, S. Manzoor, S. Wang, W. Weigand, Z. Yu, G. Yang, Z. Ni, X. Dai, Z. C. Holman and J. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 850–864 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, C. Xiao, F. H. Isikgor, D.-J. Xue, B. Chen, H. Chen, B. Bahrami and A. H. Chowdhury, Science, 2020, 367, 1135–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, X. Niu, Q. Chen and H. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 8235–8286 RSC .
A. Kausar, A. Sattar, C. Xu, S. Zhang, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2696–2736 RSC .
C.-H. Lu, G. V. Biesold-McGee, Y. Liu, Z. Kang and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4953–5007 RSC .
G. Long, R. Sabatini, M. I. Saidaminov, G. Lakhwani, A. Rasmita, X. Liu, E. H. Sargent and W. Gao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 1–17 Search PubMed .
Z.-K. Wang, M. Li, Y.-G. Yang, Y. Hu, H. Ma, X.-Y. Gao and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6695–6703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M.-H. Shang, P. Wang, X. Huang, J. Xu, Z. Hu, Y. Zhu and L. Han, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 535–541 CrossRef CAS .
P.-K. Kung, M.-H. Li, P.-Y. Lin, J.-Y. Jhang, M. Pantaler, D. C. Lupascu, G. Grancini and P. Chen, Sol. RRL, 2019, 1900306 Search PubMed .
C. Wu, Q. Zhang, G. Liu, Z. Zhang, D. Wang, B. Qu, Z. Chen and L. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1902496 Search PubMed .
R. Nie, R. R. Sumukam, S. H. Reddy, M. Banavoth and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2363–2385 RSC .
R. Nie, K. S. Lee, M. Hu, M. J. Paik and S. I. Seok, Matter, 2020, 1701–1713 CrossRef .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and A. W. Ho-Baillie, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2019, 28, 3–15 CrossRef .
NREL efficiency chart. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed May 07, 2021.
J. Jeong, M. Kim, J. Seo, H. Lu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, Y. Yang, M. A. Hope, F. T. Eickemeyer, M. Kim, Y. J. Yoon, I. W. Choi, B. P. Darwich, S. J. Choi, Y. Jo, J. H. Lee, B. Walker, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, A. Hagfeldt, D. S. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Y. Kim, Nature, 2021, 592, 381–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, D. Walter, Y. Ren, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Wu, T. Duong, Q. Lin, J. Li, T. Lu, M. A. Mahmud, O. L. C. Lem, S. Zhao, W. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Shen, L. Li, F. Kremer, H. T. Nguyen, D.-Y. Choi, K. J. Weber, K. R. Catchpole and T. P. White, Science, 2021, 371, 390–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Ashouri, E. Köhnen, B. Li, A. Magomedov, H. Hempel, P. Caprioglio, J. A. Márquez, A. B. Morales Vilches, E. Kasparavicius, J. A. Smith, N. Phung, D. Menzel, M. Grischek, L. Kegelmann, D. Skroblin, C. Gollwitzer, T. Malinauskas, M. Jošt, G. Matič, B. Rech, R. Schlatmann, M. Topič, L. Korte, A. Abate, B. Stannowski, D. Neher, M. Stolterfoht, T. Unold, V. Getautis and S. Albrecht, Science, 2020, 370, 1300–1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, P. Ahlawat, A. Mishra, W. R. Tress, F. T. Eickemeyer, Y. Yang, F. Fu, Z. Wang, C. E. Avalos, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, X. Zhang, X. Li, Y. Zhan, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley, U. Rothlisberger, L. Zheng, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2020, 370, eabb8985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, J. Y. Zhengshan, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey and E. J. Wolf, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yoo, G. Seo, M. R. Chua, T. G. Park, Y. Lu, F. Rotermund, Y.-K. Kim, C. S. Moon, N. J. Jeon, J.-P. Correa-Baena, V. Bulović, S. S. Shin, M. G. Bawendi and J. Seo, Nature, 2021, 590, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Luo, Y. Xiang, L. Zhao, M. Anaya, Y. Shen, J. Wu, W. Yang, Y. H. Chiang, Y. Tu, R. Su, Q. Hu, H. Yu, G. Shao, W. Huang, T. P. Russell, Q. Gong, S. D. Stranks, W. Zhang and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2006435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Almansouri, A. Ho-Baillie and M. A. Green, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 08KD04 CrossRef .
C. R. Dong, Y. Wang, K. Zhang and H. Zeng, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100026 CrossRef .
B. Chen, Z. Yu, K. Liu, X. Zheng, Y. Liu, J. Shi, D. Spronk, P. N. Rudd, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Joule, 2019, 3, 177–190 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chou and F.-C. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8444–8458 RSC .
W. R. Erwin, H. F. Zarick, E. M. Talbert and R. Bardhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1577–1601 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Song, Y. Yan, S. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1801704 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. Song, C. Li, D. Zhao and Y. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808801 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. J. Barnham and G. Duggan, J. Appl. Phys., 1990, 67, 3490–3493 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1608–1634 RSC .
F. J. Haug and C. Ballif, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 824–837 RSC .
P. Li, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Liang, G. Chen, F. Li, M. Su, G. Xing, X. Tao and Y. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2–8 CrossRef .
M. H. Kumar, S. Dharani, W. L. Leong, P. P. Boix, R. R. Prabhakar, T. Baikie, C. Shi, H. Ding, R. Ramesh and M. Asta, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7122–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, C. C. Chueh, N. Li, C. Mao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703800 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. J. Wang, Y. Ren, C. Yu and K. Shum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 093901 CrossRef .
M. Konstantakou and T. Stergiopoulos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11518–11549 RSC .
W.-F. Yang, F. Igbari, Y.-H. Lou, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902584 CrossRef .
M. Chen, M.-G. Ju, M. Hu, Z. Dai, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, H. Han, X. C. Zeng, Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 276–277 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nasti and A. Abate, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902467 CrossRef .
D. Cui, X. Liu, T. Wu, X. Lin, X. Luo, Y. Wu, H. Segawa, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang and L. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2100931,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202100931 .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, I. Spanopoulos, M. Chen, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1470–1476 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Zarick, N. Soetan, W. R. Erwin and R. Bardhan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5507–5537 RSC .
W. Ke, C. C. Stoumpos, M. Zhu, L. Mao, I. Spanopoulos, J. Liu, O. Y. Kontsevoi, M. Chen, D. Sarma, Y. Zhang, M. R. Wasielewski and M. G. Kanatzidis, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701293 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Cai, D. Yang, D. Song, J. Wang, J. Jiang, A. Ma, S. Lv, M. Z. Hu and C. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2017, 355, 98–133 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mehmood, A. Al-Ahmed, M. Afzaal, F. A. Al-Sulaiman and M. Daud, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 78, 1–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deng and L. Li, Small Methods, 2019, 4, 1900150 CrossRef .
P. Bermel, K. Yazawa, J. L. Gray, X. Xu and A. Shakouri, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2776–2788 RSC .
J. Day, S. Senthilarasu and T. K. Mallick, Renewable Energy, 2019, 132, 186–205 CrossRef .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424 CrossRef PubMed .
J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4835–4848 RSC .
C. Chen, H. Li, J. Jin, X. Chen, Y. Cheng, Y. Zheng, D. Liu, L. Xu, H. Song and Q. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700758 CrossRef .
X. Deng, C. Zhang, J. Zheng, X. Zhou, M. Yu, X. Chen and S. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 485, 332–341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Da, Y. Xuan and Q. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 206–213 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Xiao, F. Qi, P. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Li, C. Wang, G. Fang and X. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8236–8244 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 1900206 Search PubMed .
H.-Q. Wang, M. Batentschuk, A. Osvet, L. Pinna and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2675–2680 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, W. Chen, J. Zheng, L. Zhu, L. E. Mo, Z. Li, L. Hu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, C. Zhang and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26958–26964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hao, C. C. Stoumpos, R. P. H. Chang and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8094–8099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zeng, X. Zhang, X. Feng, S. Lu, Z. Chen, X. Yong, A. T. Redfern Simon, H. Wei, H. Wang, H. Shen, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, H. Zhang, S. Tse John and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705393 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Tavakoli Mohammad, M. Zakeeruddin Shaik, M. Grätzel and Z. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705998 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhu, C. C. Chueh, N. Li, C. Mao and K. Y. Jen Alex, Adv. Mater., 2017, 30, 1703800 CrossRef .
Z. Guo, Y. Wan, M. Yang, J. Snaider, K. Zhu and L. Huang, Science, 2017, 356, 59–62 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Melianas, F. Etzold, T. J. Savenije, F. Laquai, O. Inganäs and M. Kemerink, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, J. Fu, Q. Xu and T. C. Sum, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost, L. D. Whalley and A. Walsh, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2647–2652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Andersson and M. Kemerink, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000400 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Jia, S. Liu, B. Zhang, K. Lin, J. Zhang and G. Conibeer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 225, 111073 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Lane, P. D. Cunningham, J. S. Melinger, O. Esenturk and E. J. Heilweil, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Li, X. Zhou, P. Li, X. Hu and Y. Song, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 556–562 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chang, P. Cheng, G. Li and Y. Yang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1039–1054 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang and J. Toudert, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19, 411–424 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. I. Sha, H. Zhang, Z. S. Wang, H. L. Zhu, X. Ren, F. Lin, A. K. Y. Jen and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701586 CrossRef .
M. Que, W. Que, X. Yin, P. Chen, Y. Yang, J. Hu, B. Yu and Y. Du, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14432–14437 RSC .
G. Pan, X. Bai, D. Yang, X. Chen, P. Jing, S. Qu, L. Zhang, D. Zhou, J. Zhu, W. Xu, B. Dong and H. Song, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 8005–8011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, H. Li, W. Xu, S. Cui, D. Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Qin and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2518–2525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Goldschmidt and S. Fischer, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 510–535 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, D. Liu, W. Xu, Z. Yin, X. Chen, P. Zhou, S. Cui, Z. Chen and H. Song, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5169–5179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Chen and H. Song, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 54–78 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, G. Chen, P. N. Prasad, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Z. Ning, H. Tian, L. Sun and H. Ågren, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16709 RSC .
H. Fu, Y. Ma, Y. Liu and M. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 2970–2981 RSC .
W. Yu, W. Xu, H. Song and S. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6139–6147 RSC .
Z. Yin, Y. Zhu, W. Xu, J. Wang, S. Xu, B. Dong, L. Xu, S. Zhang and H. Song, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3781–3783 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Song, W. Xu, B. Dong, S. Xu, B. Chen, W. Yu and S. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3412–3420 RSC .
V. Saxena, Indian J. Pure Appl. Phys., 1983, 21, 306–307 CAS .
T. Trupke, M. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117–4122 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Karunakaran, G. M. Arumugam, W. Yang, S. Ge, S. N. Khan, X. Lin and G. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 1035–1060 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khare, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 821, 153214 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajeswari, N. Islavath, M. Raghavender and L. Giribabu, Chem. Rec., 2020, 20, 65–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. de la Mora, O. Amelines-Sarria, B. M. Monroy, C. D. Hernández-Pérez and J. E. Lugo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 165, 59–71 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. de la Mora, O. Amelines-Sarria, B. M. Monroy, C. D. Hernández-Pérez and J. E. Lugo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 165, 59–71 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hafez, M. Saif and M. S. A. Abdel-Mottaleb, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5792–5796 CrossRef CAS .
T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1668–1674 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Han, W. Huang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 173–201 RSC .

          A. Ivaturi and H. Upadhyaya, in A Comprehensive Guide to Solar Energy Systems, ed. T. M. Letcher and V. M. Fthenakis, Academic Press,  2018, pp. 279–298 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-811479-7.00013-0 .
B. S. Richards, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1189–1207 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rothemund, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 616–621 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lipovšek, A. Solodovnyk, K. Forberich, E. Stern, J. Krč, C. J. Brabec and M. Topič, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, A882–A895 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Lipovšek, A. Solodovnyk, K. Forberich, E. Stern, C. J. Brabec, J. Krč and M. Topič, Energy Procedia, 2015, 84, 3–7 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, R. Dettori and L. E. K. Achenie, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 709–715 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Chen, H. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Li and S. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701117 CrossRef .

          M. D. F. Alexandre, Universidade NOVA de Lisboa,  2018.
N. N. Lal, Y. Dkhissi, W. Li, Q. Hou, Y. B. Cheng and U. Bach, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602761 CrossRef .
L. Kranz, A. Abate, T. Feurer, F. Fu, E. Avancini, J. Löckinger, P. Reinhard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2676–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Bailie and M. D. McGehee, MRS Bull., 2015, 40, 681–686 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 828–838 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Bowman, F. Lang, Y.-H. Chiang, A. Jiménez-Solano, K. Frohna, G. E. Eperon, E. Ruggeri, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Anaya, B. V. Lotsch and S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 612–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lang, M. Jošt, K. Frohna, E. Köhnen, A. Al-Ashouri, A. R. Bowman, T. Bertram, A. B. Morales-Vilches, D. Koushik, E. M. Tennyson, K. Galkowski, G. Landi, M. Creatore, B. Stannowski, C. A. Kaufmann, J. Bundesmann, J. Rappich, B. Rech, A. Denker, S. Albrecht, H.-C. Neitzert, N. H. Nickel and S. D. Stranks, Joule, 2020, 4, 1054–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Aydin, T. G. Allen, M. De Bastiani, L. Xu, J. Ávila, M. Salvador, E. Van Kerschaver and S. De Wolf, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 851–859 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wolf, Proc. IRE, 1960, 48, 1246–1263 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, S.-W. Baek, Y. Hou, E. Aydin, M. De Bastiani, B. Scheffel, A. Proppe, Z. Huang, M. Wei, Y.-K. Wang, E.-H. Jung, T. G. Allen, E. Van Kerschaver, F. P. García de Arquer, M. I. Saidaminov, S. Hoogland, S. De Wolf and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guo, H. Liu, Z. Shi, F. Wang, E. Zhou, X. Bian, B. Zhang, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and Z. A. Tan, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3245–3253 RSC .
O. Voznyy, B. R. Sutherland, A. H. Ip, D. Zhitomirsky and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17026 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, C. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Ke, Z. Xiao, L. Ding, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, Y. Cao and Y. Chen, Science, 2018, 361, 1094–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Choi, R. Nicolaescu, S. Paek, J. Ko and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9238–9245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Y. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W. G. Diau, C. Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, K. Chen, Q. Hu, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600457 CrossRef .
M. L. Petrus, J. Schlipf, C. Li, T. P. Gujar, N. Giesbrecht, P. Müller-Buschbaum, M. Thelakkat, T. Bein, S. Hüttner and P. Docampo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700264 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, I. Almansouri, S. Huang, T. Young, Y. Li, Y. Peng, Q. Hou, L. Spiccia, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng, M. A. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5679–5689 RSC .
J. Werner, B. Niesen and C. Ballif, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1700731 CrossRef .
D. Forgács, L. Gil-Escrig, D. Pérez-Del-Rey, C. Momblona, J. Werner, B. Niesen, C. Ballif, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602121 CrossRef .
T. D. Siegler, T. M. Shimpi, W. S. Sampath and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 199, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lamanna, F. Matteocci, E. Calabrò, L. Serenelli, E. Salza, L. Martini, F. Menchini, M. Izzi, A. Agresti, S. Pescetelli, S. Bellani, A. E. Del Río Castillo, F. Bonaccorso, M. Tucci and A. Di Carlo, Joule, 2020, 4, 865–881 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Y. Rho, H.-Y. Yang, H.-S. Kim, B. S. Son, J. S. Suh and B.-H. Jun, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 258, 271–282 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, W. Xu, D. Li, D. Zhou, X. Chen, N. Ding, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Bai and H. Song, Nano
Energy, 2019, 61, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 21793–21800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, L. Hu, R. Wang, J. Li, H. Gu, S. Liu, Y. Zhou and G. Tu, Polymers, 2019, 11, 427 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Materials For Sustainable Energy: A Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles from Nature Publishing Group, World Scientific,  2011, pp. 1–11 Search PubMed .
K. Chan, M. Wright, N. Elumalai, A. Uddin and S. Pillai, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600698 CrossRef .
D. T. Gangadharan, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Izquierdo and D. Ma, Nanophotonics, 2017, 6, 153–175 Search PubMed .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Lee and P. Peumans, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 10078–10087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schaadt, B. Feng and E. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063106 CrossRef .
S. Pillai, K. Catchpole, T. Trupke and M. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 093105 CrossRef .
K. R. Catchpole and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 191113 CrossRef .
M. Westphalen, U. Kreibig, J. Rostalski, H. Lüth and D. Meissner, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 61, 97–105 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Rand, P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 7519–7526 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yoon, K.-Y. Jung, J. Liu, T. Duraisamy, R. Revur, F. L. Teixeira, S. Sengupta and P. R. Berger, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Macdonald, F. Ambroz, M. Batmunkh, Y. Li, D. Kim, C. Contini, R. Poduval, H. Liu, J. G. Shapter, I. Papakonstantinou and I. P. Parkin, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 9, 254–263 CrossRef .
X. Huang, H. Li, C. Zhang, S. Tan, Z. Chen, L. Chen, Z. Lu, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1163 CrossRef .
X. Chen, W. Xu, L. Zhang, X. Bai, S. Cui, D. Zhou, Z. Yin, H. Song and D. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5462–5471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, A. Wang, M. A. Green and F. Ferrazza, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991–1993 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, Z. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Weng, M. Ouyang, Y. Fu, J. Wang, D. Li and Z. Wang, Appl. Opt., 2019, 58, 6706–6712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Martínez-Denegri, S. Colodrero, Q. Liu, J. Toudert, G. Kozyreff and J. Martorell, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900018 CrossRef .
S. Sun, Z. Xie, G. Qin and L. Xiao, Org. Electron., 2019, 75, 105385 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Zhen, H. Wang, S. Liu, F. Yan and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 969–974 RSC .
F. Hou, C. Han, O. Isabella, L. Yan, B. Shi, J. Chen, S. An, Z. Zhou, W. Huang, H. Ren, Q. Huang, G. Hou, X. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Ding, G. Wang, C. Wei, D. Zhang, M. Zeman, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, X. Zhang, B. Lin, F. Wang, Z. Cheng, X. Shi and B. G. Lougou, ES Energy Environ., 2020, 10, 22–33 CAS .
M. Majid and A. Morteza Khalaji, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 187–205 Search PubMed .
H. K. Raut, V. A. Ganesh, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3779–3804 RSC .
Q. Wali, N. K. Elumalai, Y. Iqbal, A. Uddin and R. Jose, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 84, 89–110 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meinardi, F. Bruni and S. Brovelli, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17072 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Currie, J. K. Mapel, T. D. Heidel, S. Goffri and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2008, 321, 226–228 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meinardi, Q. A. Akkerman, F. Bruni, S. Park, M. Mauri, Z. Dang, L. Manna and S. Brovelli, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2368–2377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, H. Zhao, D. Ma and F. Rosei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5866–5890 RSC .
J. Batchelder, A. Zewai and T. Cole, Appl. Opt., 1979, 18, 3090–3110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Weber and J. Lambe, Appl. Opt., 1976, 15, 2299–2300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Debije and P. P. Verbunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 12–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wei, F. P. G. de Arquer, G. Walters, Z. Yang, L. N. Quan, Y. Kim, R. Sabatini, R. Quintero-Bermudez, L. Gao and J. Z. Fan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 197–205 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. H. Correia, V. de Zea Bermudez, S. J. L. Ribeiro, P. S. André, R. A. S. Ferreira and L. D. Carlos, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5580–5596 RSC .
K. Nikolaidou, S. Sarang, C. Hoffman, B. Mendewala, H. Ishihara, J. Q. Lu, B. Ilan, V. Tung and S. Ghosh, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 2126–2132 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese, S. Nanayakkara, T. Moot, J. Werner, J. Liu, B. To, S. T. Christensen, M. D. McGehee, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry and D. T. Moore, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Ginting, S. Kaur, D.-K. Lim, J.-M. Kim, J. H. Lee, S. H. Lee and J.-W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36111–36118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Ginting, E.-B. Jeon, J.-M. Kim, W.-Y. Jin and J.-W. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31291–31299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dudem, J. H. Heo, J. W. Leem, J. S. Yu and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7573–7579 RSC .
E. Bagherzadeh-Khajehmarjan, A. Nikniazi, B. Olyaeefar, S. Ahmadi-Kandjani and J.-M. Nunzi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 192, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fückel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. G. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski and K. Lips, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953–6959 RSC .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Li, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 395–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fu, T. Feurer, T. Jäger, E. Avancini, B. Bissig, S. Yoon, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, F. Bianchi, A. Bianchi, M. Mauri, R. Simonutti, R. Ruffo, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 680–686 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Hill, T. Dilbeck, E. Baduell and K. Hanson, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 3–8 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deutsch, L. Neeman and D. Oron, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 649 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, R. K. Kankala, C.-G. Liu, S.-B. Wang, A.-Z. Chen and Y. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 438, 213870 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asahi, H. Teranishi, K. Kusaki, T. Kaizu and T. Kita, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef .
L. Liang, Y. Liu and X.-Z. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3958–3960 RSC .
J. Roh, H. Yu and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19847–19852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, D. Xu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 979–981 RSC .
P. Gibart, F. Auzel, J.-C. Guillaume and K. Zahraman, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 35, 4401 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, D. Liu, J. Jin, X. Chen, W. Xu, Z. Yin, G. Pan, D. Li and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16559–16567 RSC .

          G. Blasse and B. Grabmaier, Luminescent materials, Springer,  1994, pp. 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. N. Singh-Rachford and F. N. Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2560–2573 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 356–359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Mahmoudi, H.-Y. Yang, K. S. Bhat, J.-Y. Yoo and Y.-B. Hahn, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Li, L. Wang, G. Niu, R. Gao and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11735–11740 RSC .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, X. Pang, X. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. He, H. Snaith and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 4352–4356 CrossRef .
J. Liang, H. Gao, M. Yi, W. Shi, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang and Y. Mao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 261, 14–22 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, J. Wu, Y. Yang, X. Liu, J. Jia, J. Dong, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang and Y. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 178–187 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Zhao, M. Xiao, Y. Huang, B. Dong, Z. Xu, L. Wan, W. Li and S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22003–22011 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Wu, F. Juan, Y. Li, B. Shi, F. Xu, J. Jia, H. Wei and B. Cao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2021, 763, 138253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Qiao, Y. Yang, L. Zhao, W. Liu, S. Li, P. Liu and M. Chen, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2018, 8, 132–136 Search PubMed .
F. Qi, Y. Xiao, Z. Yu, P. Liu, S. Kong, F. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Wang and X.-Z. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2019, 73, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Lv, C. Yang, H. Chen and X. Zhou, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 106, 346–352 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Qin, W. Shi, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Gao and Y. Mao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 147 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, D. Li, W. Shi, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Gao and Y. Mao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 262 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Qin, W. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Gao and Y. Mao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 839–845 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schoenauer Sebag, Z. Hu, K. de Oliveira Lima, H. Xiang, P. Gredin, M. Mortier, L. Billot, L. Aigouy and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3537–3543 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, M. Liu, Z. Jin, Q. Wang, H. Wang, H. Bian, F. Shi and S. Liu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1796–1804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, B. Ma, T. Yu, X. Xu, L. Zhang, W. Wang, K. Cao, L. Deng, S. Chen and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 3605–3613 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Hao, X. Li, S. Chen, L. Wang, X. Li and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9303–9310 RSC .
S. Chen, B. Peng, F. Lu, Y. Mei, F. Cheng, L. Deng, Q. Xiong, L. Wang, X. Sun and W. Huang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 442–449 CrossRef CAS .
F.-L. Meng, J.-J. Wu, E.-F. Zhao, Y.-Z. Zheng, M.-L. Huang, L.-M. Dai, X. Tao and J.-F. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18535–18545 RSC .
H. Lakhotiya, S. P. Madsen, S. Roesgaard, J. Vester-Petersen, B. B. Iversen, P. Balling and B. Julsgaard, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 22357–22365 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kakavelakis, K. Petridis and E. Kymakis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21604–21624 RSC .
F. Xu, Y. Sun, H. Gao, S. Jin, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. Pan, M. Kang, X. Ma and Y. Mao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 2674–2684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Estebanez, A. Cortés-Villena, J. Ferrera-González, M. González-Béjar, R. E. Galian, S. González-Carrero and J. Pérez-Prieto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003766 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xue, D. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Zuo, Y. Chang, L. Tu, X. Liu, Z. Yuan, H. Zhao, J. Song, J. Qu and X. Kong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 8607–8615 RSC .
X. Wang, R. R. Valiev, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, H. Ågren, C. Yang and G. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4150–4167 RSC .
X. Lai, X. Li, X. Lv, Y.-Z. Zheng, F. Meng and X. Tao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 372, 125–133 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bi, Y. Wu, C. Chen, D. Zhou, Z. Song, D. Li, G. Chen, Q. Dai, Y. Zhu and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 24737–24746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Marin and D. Jaque, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 1425–1462 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, C. Wang, Z. Hu, J. Du, J. Yang, Z. Zhang, T. Shi, W. Liu, X. Tang and Y. Leng, Photonics Res., 2020, 8, A31–A38 CrossRef .
L. Ruan and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ding, W. Xu, D. Zhou, G. Pan, D. Li, Y. Ji, X. Chen, D. Yang, X. Bai, C.-G. Ma and H. Song, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, D. Li, G. Pan, D. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Zhu, H. Wang, C. Chen and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10505–10513 RSC .
A. Shalav, B. Richards and M. Green, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 829–842 CrossRef CAS .

          R. B. Wehrspohn, U. Rau and A. Gombert, Photon management in solar cells, John Wiley & Sons,  2015 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, W. Xu, H. Song, C. Chen, H. Xia, Y. Zhu, D. Zhou, S. Cui, Q. Dai and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9071–9079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, Y. Zhang, G. Zheng, J. Gou and F. Wu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2018, 101, 1923–1928 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Chen, J. Jin, W. Bi, B. Zhang, X. Chen, L. Xu, D. Liu, Q. Dai and H. Song, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 699–709 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kinoshita, Y. Sasaki, S. Amemori, N. Harada, Z. Hu, Z. Liu, L. K. Ono, Y. Qi, N. Yanai and N. Kimizuka, ChemPhotoChem, 2020, 4, 5271–5278 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, X. Ding, X. Shi, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, Y. Ding, L.-E. Mo and S. Dai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14004–14009 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Wu, L. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Chen, W. Bi, X. Chen, D. Liu, Q. Dai and H. Song, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802046 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shen, Z. Li, R. Cheng, Q. Luo, Y. Luo, Y. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Sun and S. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17454–17462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, J. Zheng, W. Chen, Y. Huang, L. Hu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, C. Zhang and S. Dai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Teng, J. Zhou, X. Liu, S. Ye and J. Qiu, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 9671–9676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Van Der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3073–3077 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Y. Wang and M. Hong, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 73–90 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and J. Qiu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8714–8746 RSC .
H. J. Hovel, R. T. Hodgson and J. M. Woodall, Sol. Energy Mater., 1979, 2, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qin, X. Liu, W. Huang, M. Bettinelli and X. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 4488–4527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. van der Ende, L. Aarts and A. Meijerink, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 11081–11095 RSC .
K. Li and R. Van Deun, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 162, 990–997 CrossRef CAS .
D. Alonso-Álvarez, D. Ross, E. Klampaftis, K. R. McIntosh, S. Jia, P. Storiz, T. Stolz and B. S. Richards, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 479–497 CrossRef .
S. Kalytchuk, S. Gupta, O. Zhovtiuk, A. Vaneski, S. V. Kershaw, H. Fu, Z. Fan, E. C. H. Kwok, C.-F. Wang, W. Y. Teoh and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16393–16400 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Alonso-Álvarez, D. Ross and B. S. Richards, 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 2012, pp. 000009–000014, DOI: 10.1109/PVSC.2012.6317557.
K. Bouras, G. Schmerber, G. Ferblantier, D. Aureau, H. Park, W. K. Kim, H. Rinnert, A. Dinia, A. Slaoui and S. Colis, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5094–5102 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Fernandes, N. Bristow, V. Stoichkov, H. S. Anizelli, J. L. Duarte, E. Laureto and J. Kettle, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 025103 CrossRef .
R. Rajeswari, N. Islavath, M. Raghavender and L. Giribabu, Chem. Rec., 2019, 20, 65–88 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Hwang, H. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Seo, H. T. Kim, C. Lee, S. Y. Jang, K. Seo and T. H. Kwon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, T. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Liu and K. Wu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 338–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Kroupa, J. Y. Roh, T. J. Milstein, S. E. Creutz and D. R. Gamelin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2390–2395 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Mir, T. Sheikh, H. Arfin, Z. Xia and A. Nag, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 9 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Milstein, K. T. Kluherz, D. M. Kroupa, C. S. Erickson, J. J. De Yoreo and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1931–1937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. D. Roh, M. D. Smith, M. J. Crane, D. Biner, T. J. Milstein, K. W. Krämer and D. R. Gamelin, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2020, 4, 105405 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Ferro, M. Wobben and B. Ehrler, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 1072–1083 RSC .
M. Ran, N. Liu, H. Yang, R. Meng, M. Chen, H. Lu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 113503 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Wang, S.-K. Huang, T. Nakamura, Y.-T. Kao, C.-H. Chiang, D.-Y. Wang, Y. J. Chang, N. Koshida, T. Shimada, S. Liu, C.-W. Chen and K. Tsukagoshi, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 54 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, H. Mehrvarz, C. Liao, J. Bing, X. Cui, Y. Li, V. R. Gonçales, C. F. J. Lau, D. S. Lee, Y. Li, M. Zhang, J. Kim, Y. Cho, L. G. Caro, S. Tang, C. Chen, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2623–2631 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yao and Q. Tang, Sol. Energy, 2020, 211, 446–452 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, J. Dong, J. Lin, Z. Lan, L. Fan and J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 937–942 RSC .
N. Chander, A. F. Khan, P. S. Chandrasekhar, E. Thouti, S. K. Swami, V. Dutta and V. K. Komarala, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 033904 CrossRef .
W. Chen, Q. Luo, C. Zhang, J. Shi, X. Deng, L. Yue, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28, 11346–11357 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, H. Li, C. Chen, B. Zhang, W. Bi, Z. Song, L. Xu, B. Dong, H. Song and Q. Dai, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2096–2102 CrossRef CAS .
N. U. Rahman, W. U. Khan, S. Khan, X. Chen, J. Khan, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, M. Wu and Z. Chi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6467–6474 RSC .
N. U. Rahman, W. U. Khan, W. Li, S. Khan, J. Khan, S. Zheng, T. Su, J. Zhao, M. P. Aldred and Z. Chi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 322–329 RSC .
C. W. Kim, T. Y. Eom, I. S. Yang, B. S. Kim, W. I. Lee, Y. S. Kang and Y. S. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6849 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Ma, C. W. Bark and H. W. Choi, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 1615–1619 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, T. Xuan, H. Sun, X. Chen, H. Li and L. Pan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Tawalare, P. P. Lohe and S. V. Moharil, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2100, 020036 CrossRef .
P. D. Nsimama, O. M. Ntwaeaborwa, E. Coetsee and H. C. Swart, Phys. B, 2009, 404, 4489–4492 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, T. S. Atabaev, H. K. Kim and Y.-H. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17894–17900 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, L. Pan, X. Piao and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6388–6392 RSC .
X. Zhuang, Y. Wu, S. Liu, W. Bi, X. Chen, L. Liu, C. Chen, D. Liu, Q. Dai and H. Song, J. Power Sources, 2020, 477, 228757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, P. Li, Z. Chen, K. Cao, D. Li, J. Han, Y. Shen, M. Peng, Y. Q. Fu and M. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 171103 CrossRef .
H.-S. Roh, G. S. Han, S. Lee, S. Kim, S. Choi, C. Yoon and J.-K. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 135–139 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Z. Song, J. Jin, W. Bi, H. Li, C. Chen, Q. Dai, L. Xu and H. Song, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 553, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Wang, M. Lyu, M. Hao, M. Ghasemi, M. Xiao, J.-H. Yun, Y. Bai and L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104392 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, H. Zhang, H. Tong, L. Wang, L. Tao, K. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. Zhou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 5677–5688 CrossRef CAS .
B. Roose, C. M. Johansen, K. Dupraz, T. Jaouen, P. Aebi, U. Steiner and A. Abate, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1850–1857 RSC .
H. Lee, C. W. Bark and H. W. Choi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 58, SDDE15 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hwang, M. Baek and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27863–27870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hwang and K. Yong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4226–4232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, S. Tanaka, K. Manabe and H. Nishino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16995–17000 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yin, H. Zhao, J. Feng, J. Sun, J. Yan, Z. Liu, S. Lin and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9132–9138 RSC .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, H. Chen, Y. Lin, H. Du, Q. Hou, F. Hao, N. Wang, Z. Guo and J. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702090 CrossRef .
S. R. Pathipati, M. N. Shah and X. Pan, Sol. Energy, 2020, 197, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bella, G. Griffini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, G. Saracco, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, S. Turri and C. Gerbaldi, Science, 2016, 354, 203–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schlisske, F. Mathies, D. Busko, N. Strobel, T. Rödlmeier, B. S. Richards, U. Lemmer, U. W. Paetzold, G. Hernandez-Sosa and E. Klampaftis, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 764–769 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jing, L. Xudong, Z. Peng, T. T. Chuong, W. Binghui, F. Xiaoxia, S. Changfu, L. Jiacheng and T. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800568 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Tsai, N. Li, C.-C. Lee, H.-C. Wu, Z. Zhu, L. Wang, W.-C. Chen, H. Yan and C.-C. Chueh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12999–13004 RSC .
A. Gheno, T. Trigaud, J. Bouclé, P. Audebert, B. Ratier and S. Vedraine, Opt. Mater., 2018, 75, 781–786 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Anizelli, V. Stoichkov, R. V. Fernandes, J. L. Duarte, E. Laureto, J. Kettle, I. Visoly-Fisher and E. A. Katz, Org. Electron., 2017, 49, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, M. Tang, B. He, K. Shen, W. Zhang, X. Sun, M. Sun, H. Chen, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126548 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bi, Y. Wu, B. Zhang, J. Jin, H. Li, L. Liu, L. Xu, Q. Dai, C. Chen and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11481–11487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. T. Dastjerdi, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav, R. Tavakoli, M. Saliba and Z. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14753–14760 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav and R. Tavakoli, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2020, 14, 2000062 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Kim, H.-J. Jeong, S.-T. Kim, Y. H. Song, B. Y. Kim, J. P. Kim, B. K. Kang, J.-H. Yun and J.-H. Jang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 558–562 RSC .
F. Sui, M. Pan, Z. Wang, M. Chen, W. Li, Y. Shao, W. Li and C. Yang, Sol. Energy, 2020, 206, 473–478 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, D. Wu, P. Zhu, D. Shan, X. Zeng and J. Xu, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 775 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Abdelbar, M. El-Kemary and N. Fukata, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105163 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, Z. Li, H. Chen, Q. Wang, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104757 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Gao, Y. Li and S. F. Liu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1479–1486 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zou, X. Liu, R. Qiu, Y. Wang, S. Huang, C. Liu, Q. Dai and H. Zhou, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801812 CrossRef .
G. Tong, H. Li, Z. Zhu, Y. Zhang, L. Yu, J. Xu and Y. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1592–1599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng, S. B. Lowe, P. J. Reece and J. J. Gooding, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2680–2700 RSC .
J.-W. Luo, P. Stradins and A. Zunger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2546 RSC .
X. Pi, Q. Li, D. Li and D. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2941–2945 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, B. Li, T. Shen, M. Li and J. Tian, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 736–741 CrossRef .
M. Yavari, M. Mazloum-Ardakani, S. Gholipour, N. Marinova, J. L. Delgado, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, K. Domanski, N. Taghavinia, M. Saliba, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and W. Tress, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702719 CrossRef .
X. Fu, L. Xu, J. Li, X. Sun and H. Peng, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, S. Zhu, T. Feng, M. Yang and B. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ebrahimi, A. Kermanpur, M. Atapour, S. Adhami, R. H. Heidari, E. Khorshidi, N. Irannejad and B. Rezaie, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 208, 110407 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Litvin, X. Zhang, E. V. Ushakova and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2010768,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202010768 .
D. Ghosh, K. Sarkar, P. Devi, K.-H. Kim and P. Kumar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 135, 110391 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, G. Liu, S. You, F. V. A. Camargo, M. Zavelani-Rossi, X. Wang, C. Sun, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Han, A. Vomiero and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 396–406 RSC .
R. Hu, L. Chu, J. Zhang, X. A. Li and W. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 361, 259–275 CrossRef CAS .
T. Feng, S. Tao, D. Yue, Q. Zeng, W. Chen and B. Yang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hadadian, J.-H. Smått and J.-P. Correa-Baena, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1377–1407 RSC .
Z. Hosseini and T. Ghanbari, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 31502–31509 RSC .
J. Jin, C. Chen, H. Li, Y. Cheng, L. Xu, B. Dong, H. Song and Q. Dai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14518–14524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Zhu, B. Liu, C. Wang and R. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5353–5362 RSC .
H. Bian, Q. Wang, S. Yang, C. Yan, H. Wang, L. Liang, Z. Jin, G. Wang and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5740–5747 RSC .
H. Li, W. Shi, W. Huang, E.-P. Yao, J. Han, Z. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Shen, M. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2328–2335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, V. Arivazhagan, K. Xiao, K. Yan, Z. Yang, Y. Qiang, P. Hang, G. Li, C. Cui, X. Yu and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 5566–5573 RSC .
Q. Wang, Z. Jin, D. Chen, D. Bai, H. Bian, J. Sun, G. Zhu, G. Wang and S. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800007 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, X. Yin, Q. Luo, X. Zhao, D. Zhou, J. Han, F. Hao, M. Tai, J. Li and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31384–31393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Foster and S. John, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 103103 CrossRef .
S. Albrecht, M. Saliba, J. P. Correa Baena, F. Lang, L. Kegelmann, M. Mews, L. Steier, A. Abate, J. Rappich, L. Korte, R. Schlatmann, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and B. Rech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 81–88 RSC .
Y. Yang, Q. Chen, Y.-T. Hsieh, T.-B. Song, N. D. Marco, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7714–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Bai, N. P. Padture and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602400 CrossRef .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 RSC .
M. Jošt, L. Kegelmann, L. Korte and S. Albrecht, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904102 CrossRef .
K. Xiao, J. Wen, Q. Han, R. Lin, Y. Gao, S. Gu, Y. Zang, Y. Nie, J. Zhu, J. Xu and H. Tan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2819–2826 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, Z. Yang, S. B. Jo, I. L. Braly, P.-W. Liang, H. W. Hillhouse and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702140 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yun, Y. Qin, A. R. Uhl, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Yin, D. Li, X. Han and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 476–526 RSC .
T. Kim, E. Palmiano, R.-Z. Liang, H. Hu, B. Murali, A. R. Kirmani, Y. Firdaus, Y. Gao, A. Sheikh and M. Yuan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 223903 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, K. A. Bush, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Raiford, A. Gold-Parker, E. J. Wolf, S. A. Swifter, C. C. Boyd, H.-P. Wang, M. F. Toney, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2450–2459 RSC .
S. Zhu, X. Yao, Q. Ren, C. Zheng, S. Li, Y. Tong, B. Shi, S. Guo, L. Fan, H. Ren, C. Wei, B. Li, Y. Ding, Q. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 280–286 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, L. Song, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900080 CrossRef .
T. Moot, J. Werner, G. E. Eperon, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry, M. D. McGehee and J. M. Luther, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2003312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chang, B.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Hsiao, M.-Z. Lin and H.-F. Meng, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 354–367 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Tan, X. Zhao, E. Birgersson, F. Lin and H. Xue, Sol. Energy, 2021, 216, 589–600 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Islam, M. R. Jani, S. Rahman, K. M. Shorowordi, S. S. Nishat, D. Hodges, S. Banerjee, H. Efstathiadis, J. Carbonara and S. Ahmed, SN Appl. Sci., 2021, 3, 504 CrossRef .
M. I. Hossain, A. M. Saleque, S. Ahmed, I. Saidjafarzoda, M. Shahiduzzaman, W. Qarony, N. Biyikli and Y. H. Tsang, Nano Energy, 2020, 79, 105400 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, M. Abdi-Jalebi, M. Tabachnyk, H. Glass, V. S. Kamboj, W. Nie, A. J. Pearson, Y. Puttisong, K. C. Gödel and H. E. Beere, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604744 CrossRef PubMed .
K. A. Bush, C. D. Bailie, Y. Chen, A. R. Bowring, W. Wang, W. Ma, T. Leijtens, F. Moghadam and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3937–3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, K. A. Bush, R. Prasanna, T. Green, J. T.-W. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, G. Volonakis, R. L. Milot and R. May, Science, 2016, 354, 861–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, Y.-T. Hsieh, L. Meng, J.-L. Wu, P. Sun, E.-P. Yao, S.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Bae, T. Kato, V. Bermudez and Y. Yang, Science, 2018, 361, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, A. Rajagopal, C. C. Chueh, S. B. Jo, B. Liu, T. Zhao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8990–8997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, Joule, 2020, 4, 722–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and W. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 9835–9950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Moot, J. Werner, G. E. Eperon, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry, M. D. McGehee and J. M. Luther, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Li, L. Meng, S. Y. Lien and P. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tong, Q. Jiang, F. Zhang, S. B. Kang, D. H. Kim and K. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 232–248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Zhang, K. Xiao, R. Lin, X. Luo, Q. Han and H. Tan, J. Semicond., 2020, 41, 051201 CrossRef CAS .
J. Werner, C. C. Boyd, T. Moot, E. J. Wolf, R. M. France, S. A. Johnson, M. F. A. M. Van Hest, J. M. Luther, K. Zhu, J. J. Berry and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3393–3403 RSC .
X. Luo, T. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Lin, H. Su, Q. Han and L. Han, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 218–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gu, R. Lin, Q. Han, Y. Gao, H. Tan and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 1907392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, A. Y. Alsalloum, Y. Hou, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Acc. Mater. Res., 2020, 1, 63–76 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, P. P. Boix, G. Xing, K. Fu, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, W. Xu, A. Cao, T. C. Sum, N. Mathews and L. H. Wong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6352–6360 RSC .
D. Zhao, C. Wang, Z. Song, Y. Yu, C. Chen, X. Zhao, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 305–306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Yu, C. Wang, W. Liao, N. Shrestha, C. R. Grice, A. J. Cimaroli, L. Guan, R. J. Ellingson, K. Zhu, X. Zhao, R.-G. Xiong and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17018 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tong, Z. Song, D. H. Kim, X. Chen, C. Chen, A. F. Palmstrom, P. F. Ndione, M. O. Reese, S. P. Dunfield and O. G. Reid, Science, 2019, 364, 475–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Moghadamzadeh, I. M. Hossain, T. Duong, S. Gharibzadeh, T. Abzieher, H. Pham, H. Hu, P. Fassl, U. Lemmer, B. A. Nejand and U. W. Paetzold, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24608–24619 RSC .
B. Abdollahi Nejand, I. M. Hossain, M. Jakoby, S. Moghadamzadeh, T. Abzieher, S. Gharibzadeh, J. A. Schwenzer, P. Nazari, F. Schackmar, D. Hauschild, L. Weinhardt, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, I. A. Howard and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, F. Lv, L. Luo, L. Liao, G. Wang, D. Liu, C. Xu, G. Zhou, X. Zhao and Q. Song, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900396 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, C. Wu, D. Yang, K. Wang, T. Ye, L. Brownlie, K. Wang and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105133 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, T. Liu, B. Luo, J. Tong, F. Qin, S. Xiong, Z. Li and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1208–1213 RSC .
J. H. Heo and S. H. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5121–5125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. S. Wang, H. L. Zhu, D. Zhang, J. Cheng, H. Lin, D. Ouyang and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801954 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, Z. Yang, Z. Ni, Y. Shao, B. Chen, Y. Lin, H. Wei, Z. J. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 657–665 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, S. Mahesh, N. K. Noel, M. T. Klug, J. Lim, J. H. Warby, J. M. Ball, L. M. Herz, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Joule, 2019, 3, 387–401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ávila, C. Momblona, P. Boix, M. Sessolo, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, K. Vandewal, H. Míguez and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3292–3297 RSC .
D. Zhao, C. Chen, C. Wang, M. M. Junda, Z. Song, C. R. Grice, Y. Yu, C. Li, B. Subedi, N. J. Podraza, X. Zhao, G. Fang, R.-G. Xiong, K. Zhu and Y. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1093–1100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, R. Lin, Q. Han, Y. Hou, Z. Qin, H. T. Nguyen, J. Wen, M. Wei, V. Yeddu, M. I. Saidaminov, Y. Gao, X. Luo, Y. Wang, H. Gao, C. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Zhu, E. H. Sargent and H. Tan, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 870–880 CrossRef CAS .
M. Meusel, C. Baur, G. Létay, A. W. Bett, W. Warta and E. Fernandez, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2003, 11, 499–514 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. B. M. Yusoff, D. Kim, H. P. Kim, F. K. Shneider, W. J. Da Silva and J. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 303–316 RSC .
M. T. Hörantner, T. Leijtens, M. E. Ziffer, G. E. Eperon, M. G. Christoforo, M. D. McGehee and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2506–2513 CrossRef .
J. Wang, V. Zardetto, K. Datta, D. Zhang, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fu, S. Pisoni, T. P. Weiss, T. Feurer, A. Wäckerlin, P. Fuchs, S. Nishiwaki, L. Zortea, A. N. Tiwari and S. Buecheler, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700675 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Ergen, S. M. Gilbert, T. Pham, S. J. Turner, M. T. Z. Tan, M. A. Worsley and A. Zettl, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 522 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Bian, D. Bai, Z. Jin, K. Wang, L. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and S. Liu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1500–1510 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701221 CrossRef PubMed .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 RSC .
P. Wang, Y. Zhao and T. Wang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 031303 CAS .
Y. M. Xie, Q. Xue, Q. Yao, S. Xie, T. Niu and H. L. Yip, Nano Select, 2021 DOI:10.1002/nano.202000287 .
T. Zhu, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, R. Lopez-Hallman, Z. Ma, L. Liu and X. Gong, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. A. Renna, M. Bag, Z. A. Page, P. Kim, J. Choi, T. Emrick, D. Venkataraman and T. P. Russell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7070–7076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chen, S.-H. Bae, W.-H. Chang, Z. Hong, G. Li, Q. Chen, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 203–211 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Gao, X. Zhuang, Z. Shi, W. Bi, S. Liu, Z. Song, C. Chen, X. Bai, L. Xu, Q. Dai and H. Song, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105181 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Lu, L. Zhu, X. Li and W. C. H. Choy, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3638–3646 RSC .
Z. Li, S. Wu, J. Zhang, K. C. Lee, H. Lei, F. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000361 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lang, Q. Guo, Z. He, Y. Bai, J. Yao, M. Wakeel, M. S. Alhodaly, T. Hayat and Z. A. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 9596–9604 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Liu, F. Qi, F. Lin, H. Fu, K. Jiang, S. Wu, L. Bi, D. Wang, F. Xu, A. K. Y. Jen and Z. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021 10.1039/d0ta12286f .
S. Xie, R. Xia, Z. Chen, J. Tian, L. Yan, M. Ren, Z. Li, G. Zhang, Q. Xue, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Jia, Z. Chen, T. Jiang, L. Bai, F. Tao, J. Chen, X. Chen, T. Liu, X. Xu, C. Yang, W. Shen, W. E. I. Sha, H. Zhu and Y. Yang, Joule, 2020, 4, 1594–1606 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Xiao, C. Zuo and L. Ding, J. Semicond., 2021, 42, 020501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, T. Li, J. Yu, G. Lu, H. Zhou and X. Zhan, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000140 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chai, Y. Chang, J. Zhang, X. Xu, L. Yu, X. Zou, X. Li, Y. Chen, S. Luo, B. Liu, F. Bai, Z. Luo, H. Yu, J. Liang, T. Liu, K. S. Wong, H. Zhou, Q. Peng and H. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021 10.1039/d0ee03506h .
A. Karani, L. Yang, S. Bai, M. H. Futscher, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, N. C. Greenham and D. Di, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 869–874 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pascal, S. David, C. Andraud and O. Maury, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021 10.1039/D0CS01221A .
A. Andruszkiewicz, X. Zhang, M. B. Johansson, L. Yuan and E. M. J. Johansson, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 6234–6240 RSC .
Y. Xia, S. Liu, K. Wang, X. Yang, L. Lian, Z. Zhang, J. He, G. Liang, S. Wang, M. Tan, H. Song, D. Zhang, J. Gao, J. Tang, M. C. Beard and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907379 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manekkathodi, B. Chen, J. Kim, S.-W. Baek, B. Scheffel, Y. Hou, O. Ouellette, M. I. Saidaminov, O. Voznyy, V. E. Madhavan, A. Belaidi, S. Ashhab and E. Sargent, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26020–26028 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. Gu, N. Li, Y. Xu, X. Ling, Y. Wang, S. Zhou, F. Li, F. Yang, K. Ji, J. Yuan and W. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24693–24701 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. T. Dastjerdi, P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, H. Si and R. Tavakoli, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2010623,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202010623 .
Y. Wu, W. Bi, Z. Shi, X. Zhuang, Z. Song, S. Liu, C. Chen, L. Xu, Q. Dai and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 17509–17518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Yang, D.-H. Son, S.-J. Sung, J.-H. Sim, Y.-I. Kim, S.-N. Park, D.-H. Jeon, J. Kim, D.-K. Hwang and C.-W. Jeon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10151–10158 RSC .
T. Kinoshita, K. Nonomura, N. J. Jeon, F. Giordano, A. Abate, S. Uchida, T. Kubo, S. I. Seok, M. K. Nazeeruddin and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Heidarzadeh and A. Tavousi, J. Electron. Mater., 2021, 50, 1817–1826 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. La, J. Kang, J. Y. Byun, I. S. Kim, G. Kang and H. Ko, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 538, 148007 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, X. Shi, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4505–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, S. D. Stranks, Y. Sun, J. M. Ball, M. B. Johnston, A. Goriely, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5038–5046 CrossRef CAS .

          C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles, John Wiley & Sons,  2008 Search PubMed .
I. K. Ding, J. Zhu, W. Cai, S.-J. Moon, N. Cai, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 52–57 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sönnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. V. Plessen and J. Feldmann, New J. Phys., 2002, 4, 93 CrossRef .
S.-W. Hsu, A. L. Rodarte, M. Som, G. Arya and A. R. Tao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3100–3120 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rai, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 63–91 RSC .
K. Ueno, T. Oshikiri, Q. Sun, X. Shi and H. Misawa, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2955–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hägglund, M. Zäch, G. Petersson and B. Kasemo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053110 CrossRef .
I. Zorić, M. Zäch, B. Kasemo and C. Langhammer, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2535–2546 CrossRef PubMed .
S. P. Sundararajan, N. K. Grady, N. Mirin and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 624–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Baba, T. Okuno and M. Miyagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 437–439 CrossRef CAS .
S. Oldenburg, R. Averitt, S. Westcott and N. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Jensen, M. L. Duval, K. L. Kelly, A. A. Lazarides, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 9846–9853 CrossRef CAS .
P. Royer, J. P. Goudonnet, R. J. Warmack and T. L. Ferrell, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 35, 3753–3759 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, M. Tazawa, P. Jin, S. Nakao and K. Yoshimura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3811–3813 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huaxu, W. Fuqiang, C. Ziming, S. Xuhang and H. Han, Optik, 2020, 165624 CrossRef .
A. Bouhelier, M. Beversluis, A. Hartschuh and L. Novotny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 013903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shen, S. Siontas and D. Pacifici, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 23691–23697 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Egeland-Eriksen, Master thesis, The University of Bergen,  2018 .
E. S. Arinze, B. Qiu, G. Nyirjesy and S. M. Thon, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 158–173 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Petoukhoff, Z. Shen, M. Jain, A. Chang and D. M. O’Carroll, J. Photonics Energy, 2015, 5, 057002 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zada, P. Muhammad, W. Ahmad, Z. Hussain, S. Ali, M. Khan, Q. Khan and M. Maqbool, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906744 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, Y. Chen, M. Zhang, Y.-W. Harn, J. Qi, L. Gao, Z. L. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Yang and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1743–1752 RSC .
Y.-T. Lin, G. Kumar and F.-C. Chen, Sol. Energy, 2020, 211, 822–830 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, C. Chen, X. Chen, J. Jin, H. Li, H. Song and Q. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6515 RSC .
F. Juan, Y. Wu, B. Shi, M. Wang, M. Wang, F. Xu, J. Jia, H. Wei, T. Yang and B. Cao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3201–3209 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, Z. Wu, S. Bai, Z. Xia, W. Xu, T. Song, H. Wu, L. Xu, J. Si, Y. Jin and B. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500038 CrossRef .
S. Liu, L. Liang, L. Meng, X. Tian, Z. Zhang, Y. Yu, Z. Lan, J. Wu, J. Zhang and P. Gao, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, Q. Xiong, L. Deng, Q. Zhou, L. Meng, Y. Du, T. Zuo, Y. Yu, Z. Lan and P. Gao, ChemPlusChem, 2021, 86, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xia, C. Zhang, Z. Feng, Z. Wu, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Chen, H. Wang, W. Bi, Z. Song, X. Chen, J. Jin, X. Chen, L. Xu, Q. Dai and H. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 110297,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2019.110297 .
M. Laska, Z. Krzemińska, K. Kluczyk-Korch, D. Schaadt, E. Popko, W. A. Jacak and J. E. Jacak, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104751 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahai and A. Varshney, Opt. Quantum Electron., 2021, 53, 111 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Zhao, M.-Y. Yu, L.-L. Zheng, M. Li, S.-J. Dai, D.-C. Chen, T.-C. Lee and D.-Q. Yun, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9568–9575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kesavan, A. D. Rao and P. C. Ramamurthy, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 621–627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Q. Hu, M. Li, H. Shan, Y. Feng and Z.-X. Xu, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000109 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, D. Liu, T. Xie, Y. Cao, J.-G. Wang, Z.-J. Ning, Y.-T. Long and H. Tian, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9933–9936 RSC .
L. Gu, K. Wen, Q. Peng, W. Huang and J. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Q. Luo, J. Shi, L. Yue, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2852–2864 RSC .
H. Nourolahi, A. Behjat, S. M. M. Hosseini Zarch and M. A. Bolorizadeh, Sol. Energy, 2016, 139, 475–483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, X. Zhu, B. Wang, Y. Qiao, W. Liu, H. Yang, N. Liu, M. Chen, H. Lu and Y. Yang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 210 CrossRef .
J. Hao, H. Hao, J. Li, L. Shi, T. Zhong, C. Zhang, J. Dong, J. Xing, H. Liu and Z. Zhang, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 815 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, AIP Conf. Proc., 2019, 2082, 050004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, F. Lang, T. Dittrich, A. Steigert, C.-H. Fischer, T. Köhler, P. Plate, J. Rappich, M. C. Lux-Steiner and M. Schmid, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 1206–1214 RSC .
G. M. Kim and T. Tatsuma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11693–11699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Carretero-Palacios, M. E. Calvo and H. Míguez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18635–18640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Carretero-Palacios, A. Jiménez-Solano and H. Míguez, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 323–331 CrossRef CAS .
N. Espinosa, L. Serrano-Lujan, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 137, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Hsu, T.-Y. Juang, C.-P. Chen, C.-M. Hsieh, C.-C. Yang, C.-L. Huang and R.-J. Jeng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 140, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, W. Kim, B. G. Cha, J. Kwon, S. J. Kim, M. Kim, J. Kim, D. H. Wang and J. H. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 449–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, J. G. Jang, J. Lim, J.-K. Lee, S. H. Kim and J.-I. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21522–21530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Abate, W.-T. Wu, S. Pola and Y.-T. Tao, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 7847–7854 RSC .
M. Higgins, F. Ely, R. C. Nome, R. A. Nome, D. P. dos Santos, H. Choi, S. Nam and M. Quevedo-Lopez, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 065306 CrossRef .
K. Zilberberg and T. Riedl, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14481–14508 RSC .
M. T. Sheldon, J. Van De Groep, A. M. Brown, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, Science, 2014, 346, 828–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, X. Pan, Y. Ma, Y. Li, L. Zheng, D. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu, F. Liu, Y. Huang, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11175–11179 RSC .
M. Batmunkh, T. J. Macdonald, W. J. Peveler, A. S. R. Bati, C. J. Carmalt, I. P. Parkin and J. G. Shapter, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3750–3753 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ghahremanirad, S. Olyaee and M. Hedayati, Photonics, 2019, 6, 37 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cai, J. Zhai, G. Bi and H. Wu, Opt. Lett., 2016, 41, 4297–4300 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, C. Liu, J. Huang, Y. Ma, Z. Liu, L.-J. Li, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, A. Fratalocchi and T. Wu, Sol. RRL, 2019, 1900138 CrossRef .
L. Lu, Z. Luo, T. Xu and L. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 59–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Zhao, L. Zhou, A. E. Schlather, L. Dong, M. J. McClain, D. F. Swearer, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6677–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Y. Qiang, K. Xiao, Y. Zhang, J. Xie, C. Cui, P. Lin, P. Wang, X. Yu and F. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 233113 CrossRef .
H. Dong, T. Lei, F. Yuan, J. Xu, Y. Niu, B. Jiao, Z. Zhang, D. Ding, X. Hou and Z. Wu, Org. Electron., 2018, 60, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Shalan, T. Oshikiri, H. Sawayanagi, K. Nakamura, K. Ueno, Q. Sun, H.-P. Wu, E. W.-G. Diau and H. Misawa, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1229–1236 RSC .
Y. Guo, X. He, X. Liu, X. Li and L. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24036–24044 RSC .
S. Roopak, A. Ji, P. K. Parashar and R. P. Sharma, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 335105 CrossRef .
G. Kakavelakis, K. Alexaki, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 12998–13002 RSC .
C. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Deng, B. Yan, Z. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Sun and S. Huang, Sol. Energy, 2019, 188, 839–848 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, Y. Zhang, C. Ruan, C. Yin, X. Wang, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10088–10094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, W. Chen, Z. Liu, J. Du, Z. Yao, Y. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Yang, T. Shi, W. Hu, Z. Zang, Y. Chen and Y. Leng, Small, 2019, 15, 1900484 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wei, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 310–350 RSC .
Z. Liu, Q. Li, K. Chen, Y. Cui, J. J. Intemann, S. Leng, M. Cui, C. Qin, L. Fei, K. Yao and H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2394–2403 RSC .
P. Qin, T. Wu, Z. Wang, L. Xiao, L. Ma, F. Ye, L. Xiong, X. Chen, H. Li, X. Yu and G. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908408 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Y. Zhang, M. Yang, D. Han, L. Fan, Y. Sui, J. Yang, L. Yang and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 41446–41453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, C. Chen, J. Han, K. Cao, W. Zhang, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500312 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Zhu, S. Li, M. Chen, H. Lu and Y. Yang, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 701 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Zhou, C. Liang, P. Li, X. Hu, Q. Cai, Y. Zhang, F. Li, M. Li and Y. Song, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700169 CrossRef .
N. Aeineh, E. M. Barea, A. Behjat, N. Sharifi and I. N. Mora-Sero, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13181–13187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, K. H. Chan, N. K. Elumalai, M. A. Mahmud, M. B. Upama, A. Uddin and S. Pillai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 25016–25024 RSC .
P. S. Chandrasekhar, A. Dubey, K. M. Reza, M. D. N. Hasan, B. Bahrami, V. K. Komarala, J. D. Hoefelmeyer, Q. He, F. Wu, H. Qiao, W.-H. Zhang and Q. Qiao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2260–2267 RSC .
M. Tang, L. Zhou, S. Gu, W. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Xu, Z. Deng, T. Yu, Z. Lu and J. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 183901 CrossRef .
N. K. Pathak, N. Chander, V. K. Komarala and R. Sharma, Plasmonics, 2017, 12, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Liu, D. Kou, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, Q. Tian, Y. Meng, S. Wu, A. Cao and C. Ouyang, Sol. RRL, 2017, 1, 1700151 CrossRef .
R. Wu, B. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, P. Liu, C. Zhou, Y. Hao, Y. Gao and J. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6996–7004 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, L. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Zheng, L. Li, Z. Li and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12034–12042 RSC .
F. Qi, C. Wang, N. Cheng, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, F. Li, X. Sun, W. Liu, S. Guo and X.-Z. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 282, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, J. Roh, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7322–7329 RSC .
S. Li, J. Hu, Y. Yang, L. Zhao, Y. Qiao, W. Liu, P. Liu and M. Chen, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2017, 123, 628 CrossRef .
Q. Luo, C. Zhang, X. Deng, H. Zhu, Z. Li, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34821–34832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yao, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, M. Xiong, S. Leng, J. Zhang, Y.-X. Xu, W. Wang, L. Zhou, H. Huang and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5397–5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hao, L. Wang, X. Ma, K. Cao, H. Yu, M. Wang, W. Gu, R. Zhu, M. S. Anwar, S. Chen and W. Huang, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800061 CrossRef .
T. Ji, H. Zhang, N. Han, W. Wang, B. Wu, G. Li, M. Fan, Z. Li, Y. Hao, F. Zhu, Y. Wu and Y. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1110–1117 RSC .
N. Fu, Z. Y. Bao, Y.-L. Zhang, G. Zhang, S. Ke, P. Lin, J. Dai, H. Huang and D. Y. Lei, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 654–664 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, Y. Xiahou, T. Cao, K. Zhang, Z. Wang, P. Huang, K. Zhu, L. Yuan, Y. Zhou, B. Song, H. Xia and N. Chen, Org. Electron., 2018, 52, 309–316 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and M. Gu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2094–2103 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, J. Zhou, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang, W. Xie, Z. Sun and X. Chen, Org. Electron., 2018, 59, 272–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Zarick, A. Boulesbaa, A. A. Puretzky, E. M. Talbert, Z. R. DeBra, N. Soetan, D. B. Geohegan and R. Bardhan, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1475–1483 RSC .
W. Deng, Z. Yuan, S. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Li, E. Wang, X. Wang and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2019, 432, 112–118 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, T. Ji, W. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, Y. Hao, Y. Wu and Y. Cui, Org. Electron., 2019, 74, 190–196 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tiguntseva, A. Chebykin, A. Ishteev, R. Haroldson, B. Balachandran, E. Ushakova, F. Komissarenko, H. Wang, V. Milichko, A. Tsypkin, D. Zuev, W. Hu, S. Makarov and A. Zakhidov, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12486–12493 RSC .
A. Furasova, E. Calabró, E. Lamanna, E. Tiguntseva, E. Ushakova, E. Ubyivovk, V. Mikhailovskii, A. Zakhidov, S. Makarov and A. Di Carlo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800576 CrossRef .
N. Aeineh, A.-F. Castro-Méndez, P. J. Rodriguez-Cantó, R. Abargues, E. Hassanabadi, I. Suarez, A. Behjat, P. Ortiz, J. P. Martínez-Pastor and I. Mora-Seró, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 9798–9804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hwang, J. Roh, J. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16429 RSC .
J. Yin, H. Qu, J. Cao, H. Tai, J. Li and N. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24596–24602 RSC .
S. Makarov, A. Furasova, E. Tiguntseva, A. Hemmetter, A. Berestennikov, A. Pushkarev, A. Zakhidov and Y. Kivshar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1800784 CrossRef .
A. Ali, J. H. Kang, J. H. Seo and B. Walker, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1900976 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Mali, C. S. Shim, H. Kim, P. S. Patil and C. K. Hong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2664–2677 RSC .
D. I. Kim, J. W. Lee, R. H. Jeong, J.-H. Yu, J. W. Yang, S.-H. Nam and J.-H. Boo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 409–415 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Tathavadekar, S. A. Agarkar, O. S. Game, U. P. Bansode, S. A. Kulkarni, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. B. Ogale, Sol. Energy, 2015, 112, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Ruan, D. Li, T. Zhang and H. Zhen, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A1004–A1013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Qarony, M. I. Hossain, R. Dewan, S. Fischer, V. B. Meyer-Rochow, A. Salleo, D. Knipp and Y. H. Tsang, Adv. Theory Simul., 2018, 1, 1800030 CrossRef .
B. Wang, Y. Zou, H. Lu, W. Kong, S. C. Singh, C. Zhao, C. Yao, J. Xing, X. Zheng, Z. Yu, C. Tong, W. Xin, W. Yu, B. Zhao and C. Guo, Small, 2020, 16, 2001417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haque, M. Alexandre, M. J. Mendes, H. Águas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100720 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Kim, Y.-J. Heo, S. K. Lee, Y.-S. Jung, H.-J. Jeong, S.-T. Kim, J.-S. Yoo, D.-Y. Kim and J.-H. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 226, 111077 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, S. Sun, W. Wang, L. Qin, Y. Yan, R. Hou and G. G. Qin, Opt. Commun., 2018, 410, 117–122 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, K. Xing, Y. Zhang, D. M. A. S. Dissanayake, Z. Lu, H. Zhao, Z. Zeng, J.-H. Yun, D.-C. Qi and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021 10.1039/D0CS01146K .
L. Fan, P. Wang, S. Yang, L. Yang, F. Wang, X. Liu, M. Wei, H. Liu, Y. Sui, F. Rosei and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124091 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soldera, Q. Wang, F. Soldera, V. Lang, A. Abate and A. F. Lasagni, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1901217 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Subbiah, F. H. Isikgor, C. T. Howells, M. De Bastiani, J. Liu, E. Aydin, F. Furlan, T. G. Allen, F. Xu, S. Zhumagali, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent, I. McCulloch and S. De Wolf, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3034–3040 CrossRef .
D. Redfield, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1974, 25, 647–648 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haque, M. J. Mendes, O. Sanchez-Sobrado, H. Águas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 91–101 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tockhorn, J. Sutter, R. Colom, L. Kegelmann, A. Al-Ashouri, M. Roß, K. Jäger, T. Unold, S. Burger, S. Albrecht and C. Becker, ACS Photonics, 2020, 7, 2589–2600 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, R. Jin, Z. Xiong, S. Wu, K. Cheng and W. Chen, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6159–6167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bian, Q. Wang, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900602 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, H. Y. Hao, J. B. Hao, L. Shi, J. J. Dong, H. Liu and J. Xing, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 479, 012046 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hüpkes, G. C. Jost, T. Merdzhanova, J. I. Owen and T. Zimmermann, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 4648 CrossRef .
B. Shi, B. Liu, J. Luo, Y. Li, C. Zheng, X. Yao, L. Fan, J. Liang, Y. Ding, C. Wei, D. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 168, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Yang, L. Fan, L. Yang, Y. Sui, J. Yang and X. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 198–204 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, S.-H. Nam, K.-H. Hwang, Y.-M. Lee and J.-H. Boo, Chem. Eng. Trans., 2016, 52, 367–372 Search PubMed .
K. S. Oh, M. Byun, M. Kim, Y. D. Kim, K. Kim, D. Huh, D. S. Kim and H. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 660, 682–687 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, J. M. García-Martín, Y. Li, L. Billot, B. Sun, F. Fresno, A. García-Martín, M. U. González, L. Aigouy and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 5979–5989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, Y. Gao, P. Zhu, Q. Han, R. Lin, H. Gao, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, S. Li and H. Tan, Sol. RRL, 2020, 2000169 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. Wang and Y. Zhang, J. Photonics Energy, 2019, 9, 1–9 Search PubMed .
S.-J. Ha, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and J. H. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1972–1977 RSC .
D. H. Choi, S. K. Nam, K. Jung and J. H. Moon, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 365–372 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Moon, J. H. Park, D. K. Lee, N. Tsvetkov, I. Ock, K. M. Choi and J. K. Kang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700418 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Kang, S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, J. Yoon, D.-E. Yoo, J.-W. Lee, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, Small, 2016, 12, 2443–2449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Cui, F. Zhang, W. Qin, F. Zhu and Y. Hao, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2017, 7, 1324–1328 Search PubMed .
X. Zheng, Z. Wei, H. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. He, S. Xiao, Z. Fan, K. S. Wong and S. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6393–6402 RSC .
S. Jang, J. Yoon, K. Ha, M.-C. Kim, D. H. Kim, S. M. Kim, S. M. Kang, S. J. Park, H. S. Jung and M. Choi, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 499–506 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain and A. Amassian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500568 CrossRef .
Y.-Z. Zheng, E.-F. Zhao, F.-L. Meng, X.-S. Lai, X.-M. Dong, J.-J. Wu and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12416–12425 RSC .
R. Schmager, I. M. Hossain, F. Schackmar, B. S. Richards, G. Gomard and U. W. Paetzold, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 201, 110080 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. B. Kuang and W. Q. Wu, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900662 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, K. Roh, J. Lee, W. K. Chong, Y. Lu, N. Mathews, T. C. Sum and A. Nurmikko, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3959–3967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, R. A. Kerner, A. J. Grede, A. N. Brigeman, B. P. Rand and N. C. Giebink, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4624–4629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schmager, G. Gomard, B. S. Richards and U. W. Paetzold, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 192, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gil-Escrig, M. Roß, J. Sutter, A. Al-Ashouri, C. Becker and S. Albrecht, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000553 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Lee, S. Bae, J.-K. Hwang, W. Lee, S. Lee, J. Y. Hyun, K. Cho, S. Kim, F. D. Heinz and S. B. Choi, Commun. Chem., 2020, 3, 1–11 CrossRef .
J.-X. Zhong, W.-Q. Wu, J.-F. Liao, W. Feng, Y. Jiang, L. Wang and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902256 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. C. Schulze, K. Wienands, A. J. Bett, S. Rafizadeh, L. E. Mundt, L. Cojocaru, M. Hermle, S. W. Glunz, H. Hillebrecht and J. C. Goldschmidt, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 704, 137970 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Grishko, A. A. Petrov, E. A. Goodilin and A. B. Tarasov, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 37079–37081 RSC .
S. Sansoni, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, E. Ugur, F. H. Isikgor, A. Al-Zahrani, F. Lamberti, F. Laquai, M. Meneghetti and S. De Wolf, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 1901009 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Kwon, S. Ma, S.-C. Yun, G. Jang, H. Yang and J. Moon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1457–1468 RSC .

          R. Schmager, I. M. Hossain, Y. J. Donie, F. Schackmar, G. Gomard, B. S. Richards and U. W. Paetzold, OSA Advanced Photonics Congress (AP),  2019, PM4C.3.
S. Brittman, S. Z. Oener, K. Guo, H. Āboliņš, A. F. Koenderink and E. C. Garnett, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8301–8307 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. Wang, X. Zhou, C. Li, H. Li, X. Hu, F. Li, X. Liu, M. Li and Y. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702960 CrossRef .
M. T. Hörantner, W. Zhang, M. Saliba, K. Wojciechowski and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2041–2047 RSC .
S. Zhou, R. Tang and L. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703682 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-A. Lu, T.-H. Chang, S.-H. Wu, C.-C. Liu, K.-W. Lai, Y.-C. Chang, Y.-C. Chang, H.-C. Lu, C.-W. Chu and K.-C. Ho, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Pascoe, S. Meyer, W. Huang, W. Li, I. Benesperi, N. W. Duffy, L. Spiccia, U. Bach and Y.-B. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1278–1285 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Liao, W. Q. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. B. Kuang and L. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800268 CrossRef .
M. Long, Z. Chen, T. Zhang, Y. Xiao, X. Zeng, J. Chen, K. Yan and J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6290–6299 RSC .
J. Wei, R. P. Xu, Y. Q. Li, C. Li, J. D. Chen, X. D. Zhao, Z. Z. Xie, C. S. Lee, W. J. Zhang and J. X. Tang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700492 CrossRef .
M. M. Tavakoli, K.-H. Tsui, Q. Zhang, J. He, Y. Yao, D. Li and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10287–10295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, Q. Lin, S.-F. Leung, G. C. Lui, H. Lu, L. Li, B. Xiang and Z. Fan, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4276–4283 RSC .
S. Manzoor, Z. J. Yu, A. Ali, W. Ali, K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, S. F. Bent, M. D. McGehee and Z. C. Holman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 173, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Z. Yang, C. Shou, J. Sheng, B. Yan and J. Ye, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 84–91 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1616–1619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Sarkın, N. Ekren and Ş. Sağlam, Sol. Energy, 2020, 199, 63–73 CrossRef .
D. I. Kim, J. W. Lee, R. H. Jeong, J. W. Yang, S. Park and J.-H. Boo, Energy, 2020, 210, 118582 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yan, P. Heng, X. Yuzeng, H. Minna, H. Qian, D. Yi, H. Guofu, Z. Ying and X. Zhang, J. Phys.: Energy, 2021 DOI:10.1088/2515-7655/abf29a .
D.-L. Wang, H.-J. Cui, G.-J. Hou, Z.-G. Zhu, Q.-B. Yan and G. Su, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Kaminski, G. Womack and J. Walls, IEEE 40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC),  2014, pp. 2778–2783.
S. Md, M. I. Hossain, V. Sem, K. Tetsuya, Q. Wayesh, U. Shinjiro, T. Koji, I. Satoru, K. Dietmar and Y. H. Tsang, Nano–Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Cai and X. Yuan, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2017, 844, 012004 CrossRef .
H. K. Raut, S. S. Dinachali, K. K. Ansah-Antwi, V. A. Ganesh and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 505201 CrossRef PubMed .
X. A. Zhang, A. Bagal, E. C. Dandley, J. Zhao, C. J. Oldham, B. I. Wu, G. N. Parsons and C. H. Chang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6644–6649 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Yang, L. Cang, X. Liu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4484–4491 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sanchez-Sobrado, M. J. Mendes, S. Haque, T. Mateus, H. Aguas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6456–6464 RSC .
M.-c. Kim, S. Jang, J. Choi, S. M. Kang and M. Choi, Nano–Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 53 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Peer, R. Biswas, J.-M. Park, R. Shinar and J. Shinar, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 10704–10709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jošt, S. Albrecht, L. Kegelmann, C. M. Wolff, F. Lang, B. Lipovšek, J. Krc, L. Korte, D. Neher and B. Rech, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 1232–1239 CrossRef .
T. K. Nguyen, P. T. Dang and K. Q. Le, J. Opt., 2016, 18, 125901 CrossRef .
M. I. Hossain, N. Yumnam, W. Qarony, A. Salleo, V. Wagner, D. Knipp and Y. H. Tsang, Sol. Energy, 2020, 198, 570–577 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, Q. Zheng, X. Chen, H. Wang, H. Guo, L. Miao, J. Wan, C. Xu, S. Cheng and H. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 213902 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, T. Gou, C. Feng, J. Li, Y. Li, J. Huang, R. Li, Z. Zhang and X. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 127101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Sim, M. J. Yun, S. I. Cha and D. Y. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2020, 12, 14 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, M. Wang, H. Sun, W. Tian and L. Li, Eng. Rep., 2020, e12319 CAS .
C. Fang, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhuang, S. Liu, X. He and Y. Zhang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 206, 110305 CrossRef CAS .
N. Soudi, S. Nanayakkara, N. M. S. Jahed and S. Naahidi, Sol. Energy, 2020, 208, 31–45 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Yoo, N. Nurrosyid, S. Lee, Y. Jeong, I. Yoon, C. Kim, W. Kim, S.-Y. Jang and Y. R. Do, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10626–10636 CrossRef .
D. H. Kim, B. Dudem, J. W. Jung and J. S. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13113–13123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dudem, I. S. Jin, A. R. Mule, J. W. Jung and J. S. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 12981–12989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, L. Ai, J. Zhang, T. Bu, H. Li, F. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Lu and W. Song, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 203, 110135 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Hossain, Y. J. Donie, R. Schmager, M. S. Abdelkhalik, M. Rienäcker, T. F. Wietler, R. Peibst, A. Karabanov, J. A. Schwenzer and S. Moghadamzadeh, Opt. Express, 2020, 28, 8878–8897 CrossRef PubMed .
F. E. Subhan, A. D. Khan, A. D. Khan, N. Ullah, M. Imran and M. Noman, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 26631–26638 RSC .
A. Martins, B.-H. V. Borges, J. Li, T. F. Krauss and E. R. Martins, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2017, 7, 1190–1196 Search PubMed .
M. I. Hossain, A. Hongsingthong, W. Qarony, P. Sichanugrist, M. Konagai, A. Salleo, D. Knipp and Y. H. Tsang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14693–14701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Schneider, N. N. Lal, S. Baker-Finch and T. P. White, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1422–A1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Yan, C. Han, B. Shi, Y. Zhao and X. D. Zhang, Mater. Today Nano, 2019, 7, 100045 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, L. Shu and Z. Fan, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 366–376 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batmunkh, Y. L. Zhong and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rahmany and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1519–1531 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Li, H. A. Dewi, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and A. Bruno, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Lan, Q. Song, F. Vogelbacher, T. Xu, Y. Zhan, M. Li, W. E. I. Sha and Y. Song, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2008091,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202008091 .
J.-H. Lee, Y. Song, K. Jung and M.-J. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2021, 282, 128828 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, Y. An, D. Wu, C. Wang, C. Zhu, X. Li and D. Ma, Opt. Lett., 2020, 45, 6326–6329 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batmunkh, Y. L. Zhong and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-M. Yu, J.-X. Man, T. Chen, D. Luo, J. Wang, H. Yang, Y.-B. Zhao, H. Wang, Y. Yang and Z.-H. Lu, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105937 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mujahid, C. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Li and Y. Duan, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 101–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, T. Ma, H. Yang, L. Lu and R. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000614 CrossRef .
Y. Deng, Q. Wang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 578–583 RSC .
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Míguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-T. Lee, J.-Y. Jang, J. Zhang, S.-M. Yang, S. Park and H. J. Park, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 10640 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. He and L. Qi, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 35–46 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Chen, D. Hu, Y. Xu, S. Wang, F. Qin, Y. Cao, B.-O. Guan, A. Miroshnichenko, M. Gu and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 682–690 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jo, J. Y. Woo, J. H. Oh, H. C. Shim, S. Seo, E.-S. Jeon, M. Kim and C.-S. Han, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29979–29985 CAS .
B. Shi, L. Duan, Y. Zhao, J. Luo and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, R. Xia, K. Yan, J. Ren, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3115–3123 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Yoo, R. Azmi, C. Kim, W. Kim, B. K. Min, S.-Y. Jang and Y. R. Do, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10129–10139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, L. Wang, Q. Cui and L. J. Guo, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800836 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. A. Dewi, T. M. Koh, A. Bruno, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 484–493 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Yoo, J.-S. Jeong, S. Lee, Y. Lee, H. C. Yoon, V. B. Chu, G. S. Park, Y. J. Hwang, W. Kim and B. K. Min, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14817–14826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. O. Ramírez Quiroz, C. Bronnbauer, I. Levchuk, Y. Hou, C. J. Brabec and K. Forberich, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5104–5112 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, B. Luo, F. Jiang, F. Jiang, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, T. Liu, L. Mao, S. Xiong, Z. Li and T. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7829–7835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lu, Y.-L. Yu, S.-R. Chuang, C.-H. Yeh and C.-P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4233–4239 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Sun and Y. Zhang, Renewable Energy, 2020, 160, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .
I. Papakonstantinou, M. Portnoi and M. G. Debije, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002883 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Yuan, H. Zhu, T. Cai, Y. Fang and O. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104217 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Huang, K. Jakubowski, S. Ulrich, S. Yakunin, M. Clerc, C. Toncelli, R. M. Rossi, M. V. Kovalenko and L. F. Boesel, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105039 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, G. Liu, S. You, F. V. A. Camargo, M. Zavelani-Rossi, X. Wang, C. Sun, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, G. Han, A. Vomiero and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 396–406 RSC .
J. Wu, J. Tong, Y. Gao, A. Wang, T. Zhang, H. Tan, S. Nie and Z. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7738–7742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cai, J. Wang, W. Li, K. Hills-Kimball, H. Yang, Y. Nagaoka, Y. Yuan, R. Zia and O. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Portnoi, T. J. Macdonald, C. Sol, T. S. Robbins, T. Li, J. Schläfer, S. Guldin, I. P. Parkin and I. Papakonstantinou, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104507 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, A. Johnston, M. Wei, M. I. Saidaminov, J. Martins De Pina, X. Zheng, J. Liu, Y. Liu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2020, 4, 631–643 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carrascosa, S. Unamuno and F. Agullo-Lopez, Appl. Opt., 1983, 22, 3236–3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, R. Sun, Z. Wang, K. Fu, X. Hu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902262 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, Y. Zhou, D. Benetti, D. Ma and F. Rosei, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 214–223 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim, S. K. Nam, J. Cho and J. H. Moon, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12426–12431 RSC .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Głowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwödiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, L. Zhang, R. Zeng, L. Su and D. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 9568–9575 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, R.-S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2013, 76, 046401 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Sun, P. Lu, D. Zhou, W. Xu, N. Ding, H. Shao, Y. Zhang, D. Li, N. Wang, X. Zhuang, B. Dong, X. Bai and H. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 2131–2139,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c00931 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Cong Chen
	Cong Chen received his PhD degree from Jilin University in June 2019. Previously, he studied and did scientific research at Jilin University focused on perovskites, and quantum dots sensitized solar cells under the supervision of Prof. Hongwei Song. In July 2019, he joined Hebei University of technology as an associate professor. He is the youngest special-term “Yuanguang scholar” in Hebei University of Technology. His main topic of interest is the design of solar cells having high efficiency.

Hongwei Song
	Hongwei Song received his PhD degree in Condensed Material Physics from Changchun Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Science (CAS) in 1996. From 1996 to 2000, he worked as a postdoctoral researcher in the Institute of Physics, CAS, Nagoya Institute of Technology, and University of California at Berkeley in turn. Since 2007 he has worked at Jilin University as a full professor. He is currently an editorial advisory board member of Scientific Reports. He has published over 300 scientific papers and two book chapters. His research interests have been focused on the spectral physics of rare-earth ions and their optoelectronic applications.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The crystalline structure of the (a-1) typical ABX3 and (a-2) double A2BB′X6 perovskite; (b) potential A-site cations, metals, and halides for perovskite structure, and (c) bandgaps (left) and best PCEs (right) of variously studied perovskites; suitable materials for solar cells should have direct bandgaps of around 1.1 to 2.0 eV. (d) Record PCEs for single-junction solar cells plotted as a function of perovskite bandgap and compared to the Shockley–Queisser limit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60, copyright 2016, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 2  The overall distribution of this review, including UC, DC, tandem, SPR, texturing, anti-reflection, and LSC effect. Specifically, we will summarize the photon management strategies from the perspective of working mechanism, device structure, high-resolution characterization, theoretical simulation, preparation method, manufacturing technique, and their future application. Up-conversion mechanism: Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; down-conversion structure: Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; tandem characterization: Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, copyright 2019, Elsevier; plasmon simulation: Reprinted with permission from ref. 176, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society; texturing method: Reprinted with permission from ref. 177, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; anti-reflection manufacturing: Reprinted with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; LSC application: Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The UC fluorescence spectrum of NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles under a 980 nm laser excitation. The corresponding energy transitions are shown as an inset. (b) Scheme of the energy transfer process in MAPbI3 based PSCs using the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles as electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 200, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) IPCE spectra and integrated JSC with NaYbF4:Ho3+ nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image of Y3+ doped LiGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UC nanocrystals. (e) PL spectra of LiGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ nanoparticles. The inset shows luminescent LiGdF4:Yb3+,Er3+ solution (∼0.1 wt%) under the irradiation of 980 nm diode laser. (f) The photocurrent density as a function of time curves measured at 0.8 V under AM 1.5G and 980 nm laser. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (g) schematic of the LBIC/fluorescence mapping experimental setups. The NIR laser is focused on the perovskite/HTL interface from the FTO side. (h and i) The red and green fluorescence mapping was recorded simultaneously during LBIC mapping. Each pixel in (e) and (f) represents the fluorescence signal integrated for red fluorescence in the range of 630–680 nm and green fluorescence in the range of 517–560 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 211, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (g) photos showing the phenomena of solution (j-1 an j-2), glass/PTAA films (j-3 and j-4) and glass/γ-CsPbI3/PTAA films (j-5 and j-6) without and with NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4 nanoparticles under the irradiation of a 980 nm laser. (k) The reflectance spectra of the PTAA films with different concentrations of NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4 nanoparticles on γ-CsPbI3 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 212, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society. (l) Scheme of the energy transfer process in PSCs by using the NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ mesoporous electrodes. (m) The JSC measured at 0.94 V under AM 1.5G with 980 nm NIR laser irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of the enhanced factors of UC fluorescence. (b) Schematic illustration for the UC fluorescence enhancement at high excitation power and low excitation power in the Cu2−xS–MoO3–NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ composites. (c) Schematic illustration of the electron injection process for Cu2−xS–MoO3–NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (d) fabrication process of the nanocomposites and their application in PSCs. (e) Schematic of the mechanism of UC broadband emission in the nanocomposites. (f) IPCE curves of the best-performing PSC. (g) J–V curves of the best-performing PSC with different light intensities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (h) broadband NIR sunlight-harvesting for PSCs, (i) the absorption spectra of the perovskite, IR806, and UC nanoparticles, and the emission spectrum of IR806. (j) PL spectra of UC nanoparticles in DMF excited by a laser, inset is the photographs of the UC nanoparticles before and after ligand exchange treatment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 223, copyright 2017, Elsevier; (j) AM 1.5G spectrum shows the fraction absorbed by PSCs and the spectral regions that can be utilized through the UC process. (k) Schematic of UC populating for the UC nanoparticles/IR-783 dye/Au nanorods composite film at simulated sunlight excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the J–V curves of the PSCs under simulated sunlight excitation. (b) Enhanced PCE of the PSCs and Si-based solar cells with LiYF4:2% Yb3+,1% Er3+ crystals dependent on the excitation power density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (c) the J–V curves of MAPbI3−xClx-based PSCs using TACN-1.0 glass under 980 nm laser irradiation with different power supply. Reprinted with permission from ref. 233, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (d) cross-sectional SEM image of the complete UC modified PSCs. (e) J–V curves of four optimized cells with and without the UC layer under 1.5 W cm−2. The inset figure shows the emission images of the corresponding UC layer. (f) PCEs are changing as a function of power density. (g) AM 1.5G spectrum shows the fraction response by PSCs through the UC and DC process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

1	NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@SiO2	1.4 μm (150 nm)	
65
	ETLs (scaffold)	450, 477 and 650 nm	MAPbI3	UC + scatter + electricity	12.46	14.47	16.1	
J
SC/FF	
J
SC = 4.54 μA	0.05 W, 980 nm
2	NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+/NaYF4	45–50 nm	
85
	ETLs	452, 476, and 648 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	14.1	16.9	19.8	
J
SC/VOC/FF	PCE = 0.083%	500 mW, 980 nm
3	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	550–600 nm	
190
	ETLs	408, 523, 543 and 655 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	15.98	14.05	13.74	
J
SC/FF	
J
SC = 0.027 mA cm−2	1 W, 980 nm
4	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	16.3 nm	
200
	ETLs	408, 523, 542 and 655 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	16.8	17.8	6.0	
J
SC/FF	PCE = 0.3%	980 nm
5	NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+@TiO2	50 nm	
201
	ETLs	345, 362, 450, 477, 650 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity + scatter	13.98	16.27	16.4	
J
SC/FF	—	—
6	NaYbF4:Ho3+	70–100 nm	
203
	ETLs (scaffold)	540, 644 and 750 nm	FA0.4MA0.6PbI3	Electricity + UC	11.12	14.32	28.8	
J
SC/VOC/FF	—	—
7	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	30 nm	
236
	ETLs	520, 545 and 660 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	15.19	17.23	13.4	
J
SC
	—	—
8	β-NaYF4:Nd3+,Yb3+,Er3+	22.1 nm	
204
	ETLs	523, 541 and 659 nm	Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	UC	17.95	19.23	7.13	
J
SC
	—	—
9	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2	316 nm	
205
	ETLs (mesoporous)	408, 523, 542, and 655 nm	MAPbI3	UC + scatter + electricity	8.19	9.92	21.1	
J
SC
	—	—
10	SiO2/NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@SiO2	1300 nm (120 nm)	
206
	ETLs (scaffold)	522, 540 and 654 nm	MAPbI3	Electricity	14.21	14.52	2.2	
J
SC
	PCE = 0.12%	300 mW, 980 nm
11	TiO2:Er3+	1 μm (100 nm)	
207
	ETLs	522, 540 and 654 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	UC + electricity	9.1	10.6	16.5	
J
SC/VOC/FF	—	—
12	TiO2:Er3+,Yb3+,Li+	30 nm	
208
	ETLs	525, 545, 658 nm	Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	UC + electricity	14.0	16.5	17.9	
J
SC/VOC	—	—
13	TiO2:Ho3+,Yb3+,Mg2+	30 nm	
209
	ETLs	547 and 663nm	Cs0.05(MA0.17FA0.83)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	UC + electricity	15.2	16.3	7.2	
J
SC/VOC	—	—
14	TiO2:Er3+,Yb3+	400 nm (50 nm)	
210
	ETLs	525, 545 and 658 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	Electricity + UC	10.9	13.4	22.9	
J
SC/VOC/FF	—	—
15	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Nd3+	50 nm	
224
	ETLs	414, 526, 546 and 660 nm	MAPbI3	UC + scattering + electricity	19.4	21.1	8.8	
J
SC/FF	—	1 W cm−2, sun
16	Li(Gd,Y)F4:Yb3+,Er3+	45 nm	
63
	HTLs	520, 540 and 650 nm	MAPbI3	Electricity + UC	14.69	18.34	24.8	
J
SC/VOC/FF	—	—
17	KY7F22:Yb3+,Er3+	183 nm	
211
	HTLs	408, 525, 543 and 655 nm	Cs0.05FA0.79MA0.16PbI2.5Br0.5	UC	16.0	16.5 (front side)	3.1	
J
SC
	—	—
18	KY7F22:Yb3+,Er3+	183 nm	
211
	HTLs	408, 525, 543 and 655 nm	Cs0.05FA0.79MA0.16PbI2.5Br0.5	UC	16.0	16.8 (rear side)	5.0	
J
SC
	—	—
19	NaLuF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaLuF4	∼37 nm	
212
	HTLs	408 and 540 nm	CsPbI3	Electricity + scattering + reflection	15.51	15.86	2.3	
J
SC
	—	—
20	NaCsWO3@NaYF4@NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	44.5 nm	
219
	HTLs	521, 540, and 654 nm	(FAPbI3)1−x(MAPbBr3)x	UC + electricity	16.01	18.28	17.99	
J
SC/VOC/FF	—	—
21	β-NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	12 nm	
216
	Perovskite	522, 542 and 655 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	13.46	19.70	46.4	
J
SC/FF	PCE = 0.37%	980 nm
22	mCu2−xS@SiO2@Er2O3	45 nm	
193
	Perovskite	650 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	16.2	17.8 (15 sun)	9.9	
J
SC/VOC	PCE = 18.8%	

23	IR806	17 nm	
223
	Perovskite	522, 542, 655 nm	MAPbI3	UC + electricity	13.52	17.49	29.4	
J
SC/FF	PCE = 0.382%	780 nm filter
24	LiYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	Crystals	
232
	Front	547, 556, 674 nm	MAPbI3	UC	11.87	11 (∼7 sun)	7.9	
J
SC
	
	

25	Fluorotellurite glass:Yb3+,Er3+	Crystals	
233
	Front	510–565 nm and 635–690 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	UC	—	—	—	
J
SC
	
J
SC = 0.32 mA cm−2	10 W cm−2
26	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+	480 nm	
234
	Rear	527 and 548 nm	MAPbI3	UC	16.1	17.2 (15 sun)	6.8	
J
SC
	—	—
27	NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+	480 nm	
234
	Rear	368, 383, 457, 480 nm	MAPbI3	UC	16.1	16.8 (15 sun)	4.3	
J
SC
	—	—
28	NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+@NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+	480 nm	
234
	Rear	368, 383, 457, 480, 527, 548 nm	MAPbI3	UC	16.1	18.0 (15 sun)	11.8	
J
SC
	—	—

 	Fig. 6  (a) Energy diagram shows different behaviors schematically among a DC and a downshifting material used to harvest the photo in a solar cell. (b) Optical processes and losses for a downshifting layer placed on top of a solar cell. Absorbed and downshifted photons hit the underlying solar cell directly via total reflection or re-absorption and re-emission. Non-absorbed photons are transmitted without a change of wavelength into the solar cell. Optical losses are due to reflection at the front side and interfaces. Due to isotropic emission, individual fractions of down-shifted photons escape through the front side escape cone and the side of the downshifting layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108, copyright 2014, Elsevier; (c) simulated absorbance in the typical organic solar cell without (dashed line) and with (full line) the downshifting layer applied to the front side of the cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110, copyright 2015, Elsevier; (d) downshifting for CIGS-based solar cells with a mixture of two organic dyes: (d) the violet organic dye absorbs strongly in the low-wavelength region, the yellow organic dye between 400 nm and 500 nm. (e) Fitting the EQE spectrum with a constant LDS efficiency results in small errors because of a change of ηPL for the short-λ two-step absorption and re-emission process. A wavelength-depended LDS efficiency perfectly fits the experimental data. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108, copyright 2014, Elsevier; (f) schematic of the solar cell structures considered in the simulations DC enhanced UV utilization. (g) and (h) Stand for the results for the structure of the solar cell with nBackground of 1.5. Panels (g) and (h) are the absorption profiles calculated for the PSCs with thicknesses of 250 nm and 500 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113, copyright 2018, Run.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photoluminescence emission spectra of the NaYF4:Eu3+ powder excited at 375 nm. (b) The IPCE spectra of l PSCs with or without NaYF4:Eu3+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265, copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c) the device structure of the doped YVO4 based PSCs. (d) The excitation and emission spectrum of YVO4:Eu3+ and YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+ (λem = 343 nm, λex = 621 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 268, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (e) schematic configuration of SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ based PSCs. (f) Representative J–V curves of PSCs with and without SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ under darkness, and AM 1.5G illumination. (g) The IPCE curves of PSCs with and without SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+. The inset shows the excitation and emission spectra of the SAED film. (h) UV stability for control, inside and outside of the SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ based PSCs under 365 nm UV-light irradiation. (i) Optical energy storage effect for the devices with and without SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+ after simulated light was turned off. Reprinted with permission from ref. 62, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) PL spectra of TiO2:Sm3+,Eu3+, and TiO2:Eu3+ films excited by 405 nm and 395 nm, respectively. (b) The schematic diagram of energy transfer pathway from Sm3+ to Eu3+ ions in TiO2 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (c) schematic illustrations of the device configuration of n–i–p planar PSCs employing Eu3+ doped TiO2 as ETLs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282, copyright 2020, Elsevier; (d) IPCE curves of PSCs with different TiO2:Eu3+. Reprinted with permission from ref. 239, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (e) absorbance curves of TiO2/ZnGa2O4 composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285, copyright 2019, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics; (f) variation of PCE with the time of PSCs during light exposure without encapsulation in the air for 12 h. The inset pictures are the photographs of PSCs after the light exposure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 288, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Digital photograph of a V570 coated PSC when exposed to UV light. (b) IPCE curves of the coated and uncoated devices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 293, copyright 2016, AAAS; (c) graph of the EQE (normalized to 700 nm) of a PSC coated with up to four red down-shifting layers. Left inset is the photograph of a bare inkjet-printed PSCs with no LDS layer present, and right is a photograph of inkjet-printed LDS layers with different thicknesses placed on top of PSCs while illuminated by a solar simulator. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (d) structure of sinapoyl malate. (e) Schematic illustration of Sinapoyl malate assembled at the interface between TiO2 and perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 295, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (f) chemical structures of the studied polymeric HTLs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) S-tetrazine molecule and associated photophysical steps. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (h) the chemical formula of a water-repellent platinum(II) complex, Pt–F, with DC effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (i) stability of the control and ETPM modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 300, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of the synthesized CsPbBr3 nanocrystals under the illumination of 365 nm light source. (b) Schematic of CsPbBr3 modified PSC devices by vapor deposition technology with organic MAI and inorganic PbI2 source. (c) J–V characteristics of the control and CsPbBr3 coated PSCs. (d) The luminescence of the CsPbBr3 nanocrystal modified devices varies as a function of time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237, copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (e) energy bandgap alignment diagram of CsPbCl3:Mn2+ quantum dot. (f) EQE spectra of PSCs with different thickness CsPbCl3:Mn2+. Inset is the schematic structure of total devices coated with CsPbCl3:Mn2+ layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. (g) The device structure of the silicon quantum dot modified PSCs. (h) Schematic illustration of quantum-assisted sunlight reabsorption processes at perovskite/silicon quantum dot interfaces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Normalized absorption and emission spectra of graphene quantum dots-EDA and graphene quantum dots-G and the IPCE curves of a bare PSC. (b) Calculated IPCE for PSCs without and with graphene quantum dots-G. (c) Calculated total IPCE spectra for PSCs without and with graphene quantum dots-EDA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) and (e) stand for the schematic illustration of the energy levels and cross-sectional view in PSCs. (f) J–V curves based on different concentrations of carbon dots. (g) Stability of PSCs with various concentrations of carbon dots under light exposure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 326, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society; (h) UV-vis absorption spectrum of carbon dots. The inset image is the TEM micrograph and the photograph of the water solution of carbon dots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 327, copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (i) photographs under visible light and 365 nm UV light of different numbers of layers on FTO glass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 328, copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

1	NaYF4:Eu3+	24 nm	
265
	Outside	Solvothermal method	615 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	DC	Planar	16.99%	19.89%	17.1%	
J
SC

2	YVO4:Eu3+	5–8 nm	
266
	Inside	Chemical co-precipitation	615 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Mesoporous	7.53%	8.11%	7.7%	
J
SC

3	CeO2:Eu3+	70 nm	
267
	Inside	Hydrothermal process	590 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Mesoporous	10.1%	10.8%	6.9%	
J
SC/VOC
4	YVO4:Eu3+,Bi3+	20 nm	
268
	Inside	Hydrothermal method	621 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	16.3%	17.9%	9.8%	
J
SC/VOC/FF
5	SrAl2O4:Eu2+,Dy3+	200 nm	
62
	Inside	Pulsed laser deposition	520 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	DC + electricity	Planar	16.7%	17.8%	6.6%	
J
SC/VOC
6	Sr2CeO4:Eu3+	150 nm	
269
	Inside	Solid-state reaction method	610 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	DC + electricity	Planar	16.6	18.95%	14.2%	
J
SC/FF
7	Sr2CeO4:Sm3+	150 nm	
270
	Inside	Solid-state reaction	608 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	DC + electricity	Planar	15.4%	17.9%	16.2%	
J
SC

8	Au@Y2O3:Eu3+	100 nm	
271
	Inside	Urea precipitation method	611 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	DC + LSPR	Mesoporous	15.2%	16.1%	5.9%	
J
SC

9	Y3Al5O12:Ce3+	50 nm	
272
	Inside	Combustion method	518 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	11.05%	13.34%	20.72%	
V
OC/FF
10	ZnGa2O4:Eu3+	5 nm	
273
	Inside	Hydrothermal method	613 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	10.67%	14.34%	34.4%	
J
SC/FF
11	ZnB2O4:Mn2+/Ba9Sc2Si6O24:Eu2+	—	
274
	—	Solid-state reaction	538 nm	—	DC	—	—	—	—	—
12	Y2O2S:Eu3+,Ti4+,Mg2+	185 nm	
278
	Inside	Pulsed laser deposition	625 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	DC + electricity	Planar	19.47%	20.90%	7.3%	
J
SC/VOC
13	Sr4Al14O25:Mn4+,Mg2+	1.2 mg mL−1	
279
	Outside	Commercial + embedded in PMMA	650 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Planar (R)	12.6%	14.0%	7.7%	
J
SC

14	Lu3Al5O12:Ce3+ and SiAlON:Eu2+	18 μm	
280
	Outside	Commercial + tape casting method	560 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Mesoporous	N (21.33 mA cm−2)	N (17.29 mA cm−2)	−18.9%	
J
SC

15	TiO2:Eu3+	20 nm	
239
	Inside	Solution annealing	614 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	12.22%	15.79%	29.2%	
J
SC/VOC/FF
16	TiO2:Sm3+,Eu3+	40 nm	
281
	Inside	Pulsed laser deposition	615 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Planar	17.56%	19.01%	8.2%	
J
SC/VOC
17	TiO2:Eu3+	15–20 nm	
282
	Inside	Chemical-bath deposition	615 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.85Br0.15)3	DC + electricity	Planar	19.22%	21.40%	11.3%	
J
SC/VOC
18	SnO2:Ga2+	57 ± 12 nm	
284
	Inside	Precursor annealing	—	(CsFAMA)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	12.7%	16.4%	29.1%	
J
SC/FF/VOC
19	ZnGa2O4 + TiO2	30 nm	
285
	Inside	Solution	420 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	14.58%	15.06%	3.3%	
V
OC

20	CdS + TiO2	2 nm	
286
	Inside	SILAR	UV region	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	11.9%	11.5%	−3.3%	FF/VOC
21	Sb2S3	1–2 nm	
288
	Inside	Chemical bath deposition	—	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	4.82%	5.03%	4.3%	
J
SC/FF
22	2D-TiS2	0.57 nm	
289
	Inside	Chemical vapor transport	—	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Planar	17.07%	17.37%	1.7%	
V
OC

23	BaSnO3:La3+	—	
290
	Inside	Sol–gel process	—	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	19.7%	21.2%	7.6%	FF/VOC
24	Fe2O3	100 nm	
291
	Inside	Solution-processed micelles	—	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	14.8%	18.2%	22.3%	FF/VOC
25	V570	∼5 μm	
293
	Outside	Spin-coating	420 nm	(FAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC	Mesoporous	17.31%	18.67%	7.8%	
J
SC

26	V570, Y083 and R300	∼2 μm	
294
	Outside	Inkjet printing	—	(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC	Planar	11.5%	9.4%	−18.3%	
J
SC

27	Bphen	40 nm	
111
	Inside	Spin-coating	—	(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC + electricity	Planar	16.80%	19.69%	17.2%	
V
OC/FF
28	Sinapoyl malate	—	
295
	Inside	Immersion method	435 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	19.6%	20.0%	2.0%	FF
29	Conjugated side-chain groups	30 nm	
296
	Inside	Spin-coating	—	(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC + electricity	Planar	16.92%	18.34%	8.4%	
V
OC

30	
S-Tetrazine molecule	1.2 mm	
297
	Outside	Spin-coating	580 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	DC	Mesoporous	—	—	—	—
31	Kremer fluorescent blue	300 nm	
298
	Outside	Spin-coating	450 nm	MAPbI3−xClx	DC	Planar (R)	9.5%	8.3%	−12.6%	
J
SC

32	Pt–F	46 nm	
254
	Outside	Ultrasonic spray deposition	575 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC	Planar	21.4%	22.0%	2.8%	
J
SC

33	Eu–4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline	1.5 wt%	
68
	Outside	Spin-coating	652 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Mesoporous	13.14%	15.44%	17.5%	
J
SC

34	2,2′-Methylenebis(4-tert-octyl-6-benzotriazole phenol)	1.0 mg mL−1	
299
	Inside	Spin-coating	530 nm	CsPbBr3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	6.44%	9.61%	19.2%	
J
SC/FF/VOC
35	Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA	1.0 mg mL−1	
300
	Inside	Spin-coating	618 nm	(CsFAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	17.00%	19.07%	12.2%	
J
SC

36	Eu(TTA)2(Phen)MAA	—	
234
	Outside	Spin-coating	618 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Planar	16.0%	16.7%	4.4%	—
37	CsPbBr3	8 nm	
237
	Inside	Spin-coating	520 nm	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Planar	14.7%	16.4%	11.6%	
J
SC/FF
38	CsPbBr3	8 nm	
237
	Outside	Spin-coating	520 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Planar	19.7%	20.8%	5.6%	
J
SC

39	CsPbCl3:Mn2+	8 nm	
308
	Outside	Spin-coating	590 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Planar	17.97%	18.57%	3.3%	
J
SC

40	ZnSe	3 nm	
314
	Outside	Spin-coating	400 nm	MAPbI3	DC	—	16.6%	17.3%	4.3%	
J
SC/FF
41	Si QDs	4–7.5 nm	
262
	Inside	Spin-coating	380–775 nm	MAPbI3	DC	Planar	17.5%	19.3%	10.3%	
J
SC

42	CdSe/CdS QDs	—	
301
	Outside	Spin-coating	620 nm	(CsFA)PbI3	DC	Planar (R)	20.08%	20.7%	3.08%	
J
SC

43	GQDs	1.8–3.5 nm	
325
	Outside	—	∼440 nm	—	DC	Planar	—	—	414% (300–400 nm)	
J
SC

44	CNDs	15–20 nm	
327
	Inside	Spin-coating	525, 550 and 650 nm	(FAMA)Pb(I1−xBrx)3	DC + electricity	Planar	18.54%	20.03%	8.0%	
J
SC/VOC/FF
45	N-GQDs	3.8 nm	
328
	Outside	Spin-coating	585 nm	γ-CsPbI3	DC	Planar	15.53%	16.02%	3.2%	
J
SC

46	GD quantum dots	3–5 nm	
112
	Inside	Spin-coating	—	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Planar	17.17%	19.89%	15.8%	
J
SC/VOC/FF
47	CQDs	1–3 nm	
329
	Inside	Spin-coating	—	MAPbI3Cl3−x	DC + electricity	Planar	15.15%	18.89%	24.7%	
J
SC/VOC
48	C60 + PFN	40 nm	
330
	Inside	Spin-coating	—	MAPbI3	DC + electricity	Planar (R)	14.57%	19.31%	32.53%	
J
SC/VOC/FF
49	μGR	1.1 nm	
331
	Inside	Dispersing method	—	CsPbI3	DC + electricity	Planar	10.41%	11.64%	11.8%	
J
SC/VOC/FF
50	CDs	4.8 nm	
326
	Inside	Spin-coating	442 nm	MAPbI3Cl3−x	DC + electricity	Mesoporous	14.6%	16.4%	12.3%	
J
SC/FF

 	Fig. 12  Schematic pictures of tandem solar cells in (a) 4T and (b) 2T tandem structures; (c) the theoretical PCE provided for 4T tandems. The photocurrent density was calculated by integrating the AM 1.5G spectrum, assuming 100% EQE above the bandgap. (d) Theoretical efficiency limit for 2T solar cells, calculated with different subcell thicknesses. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117, copyright 2018, Springer Nature; (e) and (f) efficiency limits for 4T and 2T all-perovskite tandem solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 340, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the device structure of the 4-T tandem perovskite by using a low-Eg 1.25 eV and a wide-Eg 1.75 eV subcells. (b) J–V curves of the 1.75 eV perovskite-based top cell illuminated from the glass/FTO side and the 1.25 eV perovskite-based bottom cell with and without the semi-transparent 1.75 eV top cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 367, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (c) the transmittance spectrum and image of the semi-transparent MAPbI3 based PSCs with sputtered top ITO electrode. (d) EQE spectra of the MAPb1−xSnxI3 based PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 355, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (e) SEM images of perovskite films prepared with 7% GuaSCN additive. Inset shows the HRTEM image of the grain boundary region with 7% GuaSCN as additive. (f) MPP tracking of the semi-transparent front PSC, filtered bottom PSC, and the 4-T tandem device under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 369, copyright 2019, AAAS. (g) Schematic illustration of the vacuum-assisted growth control method for processing high-quality low-bandgap Sn–Pb perovskite. (h) Stabilized PCE of the best performing solar cell under maximum-power-point tracking conditions. In the inset, a top surface SEM image of the Sn–Pb perovskite thin film. (i) J–V curves of the two kinds of single-junction solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 371, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Cross-sectional SEM image of the prepared all-perovskite tandem solar cells. (b) Normalized EQE for the subcells of the same tandem solar cells. (c) Photo of flexible tandem device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (d) cross-sectional SEM images of a tandem device with C60/SnO1.76. (e) Energy diagram for the C60/SnO1.76/perovskite/C60 layers in all-perovskite tandem solar cells. (f) J–V curves with scanning in reverse and forward directions for a large-area (1.15 cm2) tandem solar cell. The inset photo shows the front side (left) and backside (right) of the large-area tandem device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 377, copyright 2020, Springer Nature; (g) (g-1) schematic illustration of the device architecture and the molecular structures of materials, (g-2) the equivalent circuit model of the proposed tandem device, and (g-3) the schematic of cross-linking of PTAA by TPE-MN3 via C–H insertion of nitrene radicals under UV illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 347, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (h) J–V characteristics and (i) EQE for a FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3/MAPbI3/FA0.6MA0.4Pb0.4Sn0.6I3 triple-junction architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 378, copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic figure of a graded bandgap PSC; the GaN, monolayer hexagonal boron nitride, and graphene aerogel are vital components of an efficient cell architecture. (b) EQE spectra for typical graded bandgap PSCs with and without h-BN and graphene aerogel components. The cells without graphene aerogel exhibit compositional fluctuation due to ionic motion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 387, copyright 2016, Springer Nature; (c) schematic structure and (d) bandgap diagram to exhibit the collection process of photogenerated charge carriers in graded PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 388, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (e) schematic energy level at the interface for MAPbI3/CsPbBrxI3−x films. (f) Schematic figures of carrier transport mechanism in (f-1) the neat HTL-free PSCs, (f-2) the HTL-free PSCs for 1-grade, and (f-3) the HTL-free device for multigrade. (g) Cross-section SEM image of graded CsPbBrxI3−x films based PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 389, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Device structure and cross-sectional SEM image of perovskite/polymer tandem solar cells. (b) Energy level diagram of the tandem device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 394, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (c) photon absorption rate profile for each subcell inside the hybrid tandem solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 395, copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) the optical constants (n and k) of the perovskite layer (blue) and the PBDTT-DPP:PC70BM layer (red), (e) the 3-D mesh plot of simulated photocurrents of hybrid tandem solar cells as a function of the thickness combination of the perovskite layer and the organic layer. (f) EQE and Jint curves of the PBDTTT-E-T:IEICO and MAPbI3based tandem solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) energy level diagram of the PMABr passivated perovskite and organic PBDB-T:SN6IC-4F based 2T perovskite/organic tandem solar cell. (h) The J–V curves of tandem solar cell and NiFe LDH electrodes in a two-electrode system used for water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 398, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (i) Absorption spectra of the different materials used in the tandem cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 401, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) AM 1.5G solar spectrum shows the limit of photocurrent generation by a typical PSC with a 1.55 eV bandgap and the lower-energy photons that could be captured by low-bandgap quantum dots (Eg ≥ 0.65 eV). (b) Layer-by-layer device architecture of a monolithic perovskite/quantum dots tandem solar cell. (c) J–V curves and projected tandem cell performance based on the state-of-the-art experimental results. Reprinted with permission from ref. 406, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (d) device structure of PbS quantum dots/perovskite tandem solar cells, (e) cross-sectional SEM images of tandem devices, (f) EQE spectrum of subcells and tandem solar cells. (g) J–V characteristics of single-junction solar cells and PbS quantum dots/perovskite tandem solar. Reprinted with permission from ref. 412, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (h) chemical structure of DX3, (i) device structure of the hybridized cell using a dichroic spectrum splitter, (j) IPCE, and integrated current spectra of DSSCs made of DX3 and PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 416, copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

1	P + P(4T)	
353
	Top	ITO/NiOx/FA0.83Cs0.17PbI0.83Br0.17/PCBM/SnO2/ZTO/ITO	1.5	0.74	7.9	73	4.4%	20.1%	

Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	1.2	0.97	20.3	79	15.7%
2	P + P(4T)	
340
	Top	ITO/NiOx/MA0.9Cs0.1Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/C60/bis-C60/ITO	
	1.22	12.1	69	10.1%	16.7%	

Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn0.5Pb0.5I3/IC60BA/bis-C60/Ag	1.25	0.82	11.6	69	6.6%
3	P + P(4T)	
366
	Top	FTO/TIO2/MAPbBr3/CNTs + PMMA	2.31	1.24	5.75	61	4.33%	9.46%	

Bottom	FTO/TIO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	1.55	1.02	7.02	72	5.13%
4	P + P(4T)	
367
	Top	FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/ITO	1.75	1.204	17.6	74.6	15.7%	23.1%	

Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/PCBM/BCP/Ag	1.25	0.810	12.1	75.3	7.4%
5	P + P(4T)	
355
	Top	ITO/NiOx/MAPbI3/PCBM/bis-C60/ITO	1.55	1.08	16.69	75	13.52%	19.08%	

Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MA0.5FA0.5Sn0.25Pb0.75I3/PCBM/bis-C60/Ag	1.33	0.76	9.14	80	5.56%
6	P + P(4T)	
369
	Top	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/BCP/Ag	—	1.113	20.6	78.5	18.0% (18.2%)	24.7% (25.0%)	

Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag	1.25	0.806	10.5	79.5	6.7% (6.8%)	
	GuaSCN additive
7	P + P(4T)	
368
	Top	FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/MA0.7FA0.3PbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Au/MoOx	1.58	1.141	20.1	80.0	18.3%	21.2%	

Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/PCBM/BCP/Ag	1.25	0.808	4.8	74.4	2.9%
8	P + P(4T)	
371
	Top	FTO/SnO2/C60-SAM/Cs0.1(MA0.17FA0.83)0.9Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/Au/MoOx	1.63	
	
	
	18.5%	23%	

Bottom	ITO/SnO2/FA0.8MA0.2Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/ITO/MgF2	1.26	
	8.5	
	4.5%	
	Vacuum-assisted growth control
9	P + P(4T)	
370
	Top	ITO/PTAA/Csx(FA0.8MA0.2)(1−x)Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Ag	1.65	1.16	19.7	78.7	18.0%	23.6%	

Bottom	ITO/SnO2/Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.76Br0.24)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoOx/ITO/MgF2	1.26	0.76	10.2	72.2	5.6%	
	Cs+ doping
10	P + P(4T)	
372
	Top	ITO/PTAA/MAPbI3−xClx/C60/BCP/Ag	1.6	1.111	16.10	83.65	14.96%	23.26%	Diluted PEDOT:PSS
Bottom	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag	1.2	0.812	12.93	79.03	8.3%
11	P + P(2T)	
343
	
	ITO/PTAA/FA0.6Cs0.4Pb(Br0.3I0.7)3/C60/SnO2/ZnO/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/C60/BCP/Ag	1.76	1.81	14.8	70	18.75%	
	

12	P + P(2T)	
369
	
	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/C60/BCP/Ag + ITO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.8MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/SnO2/ZTO/ITO	
	1.942	15.01	80.31	23.4%	
	GuaSCN additive
13	P + P(2T)	
353
	
	ITO/NiOx/FA0.83Cs0.17PbI0.83Br0.17/PCBM/SnO2/ZTO/ITO PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/PCBM/BCP/Ag	
	1.66	14.5	70	16.9%	
	

14	P + P(2T)	
374
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/PEI/PCBM:PEI/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS	
	1.89	6.61	56	7.0%	
	

15	P + P(2T)	
375
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbBr3/PTAA/PCBM/MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO	
	2.25	8.3	56	10.4%	
	PTAA
16	P + P(2T)	
375
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbBr3/P3HT/PCBM/MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO	
	1.95	8.4	66	10.8%	
	P3HT
17	P + P(2T)	
375
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/MAPbBr3/PTAA/PCBM/MAPbI3/PEDOT:PSS/ITO	
	2.25	8.3	56	10.4%	
	PTAA
18	P + P(2T)	
377
	
	ITO/PTAA/Cs0.4FA0.6PbI1.95Br1.05/C60/SnO1.76/Cs0.05MA0.45FA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Cu	
	2.03	15.2	79.7	24.6%	
	C60/SnO1.76
19	P + P(2T)	
	
	ITO/NiOx/MA0.9Cs0.1Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3/C60/bis-C60/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MASn0.5Pb0.5I3/IC60BA/bis-C60/Ag	
	1.98	12.7	73	18.4%	
	

20	P + P(2T)	
132
	
	ITO/TiO2/IPH/Cs0.15FA0.85Pb(I0.3Br0.7)3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/C60:Pblm/C60/MAPbI3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/Au	
	2.294	9.83	80.3	18.1%	
	

21	P + P(2T)	
347
	
	ITO/TiOx/PC61BM/MAPbI3/doped cross-linked PTAA/MASn0.25Pb0.75I3/HTL/Ag	
	1.79	13.36	78.18	18.69%	
	Carrier transporting layers
22	P + P(2T)	
378
	
	FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PC61BM/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	
	2.18	11.5	63	15.2%	
	Acetonitrile/methylamine solvent
23	P + P + P(2T)	
378
	
	FTO/SnO2/PC61BM/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.7I0.3)3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PC61BM/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/ITO/PC61BM/MAPb0.75Sn0.25I3/Spiro-(TFSI)2/Ag	1.94/1.57/1.34	2.7	8.3	43	6.7%	
	Acetonitrile/methylamine solvent
24	P + P + P(2T)	
385
	
	ITO/PTAA/Cs0.1(FA0.66MA0.34)0.9PbI2Br/C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/PTAA/FA0.66MA0.34PbI2.85 Br0.15/C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.66MA0.34Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Ag	1.73/1.57/1.23	2.78	7.4	81	16.8%	
	C60/SALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS
25	P + P + P(2T)	
339
	
	ITO/PTAA/Cs0.2FA0.8PbI0.9Br2.1/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/NiO/PTAA/Cs0.05FA0.95PbI2.55Br0.45/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/MA0.3FA0.7Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/BCP/Cu	1.99/1.60/1.22	2.802	8.8	81.1	20.1%	
	NiO/PTAA
26	P + P(2T)	
379
	
	ITO/TiO2/C60/MAPbI3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/C60:Pblm/C60/MAPbI3/TaTm/TaTm:F6-TCNNQ/Au	
	2.230	9.84	79.58	18.02%	
	

27	P + P(2T)	
380
	
	ITO/PTAA/FA0.8Cs0.2Pb(I0.7Br0.3)3/C60/BCP/Ag/MoOx/ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(FASnI3)0.6(MAPbI3)0.4/PCBM/BCP/Ag	
	1.922	14	78.1	21.0%	
	

28	P + P(2T)	
381
	
	ITO/NiO/Cs0.2FA0.8PbI1.8Br1.2/C60/ALD-SnO2/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.7MA0.3Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/C60/ALD-SnO2/Cu	
	2.013	16	79.8	25.6%	
	Zwitterionic antioxidant
29	P + P(2T)	
376
	
	ITO/NiOx/FA0.83Cs0.17Pb(Br0.5I0.5)3/FSIP/C60/BCP/Cu/Au/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.5MA0.5Pb0.5Sn0.5I3/polystyrene/C60/BCP/Ag	
	1.72	12.80	73	16.07%	
	Interconnecting layer
30	P + P(2T)	
175
	
	(Glass)ITO/poly-TPD/PFN/DMA0.1FA0.6Cs0.3PbI2.4Br0.6/LiF/C60/PEIE/AZP/IZO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/C60/BCP/Au	
	1.88	16.0	77	23.1%	
	

(PET)ITO/poly-TPD/PFN/DMA0.1FA0.6Cs0.3PbI2.4Br0.6/LiF/C60/PEIE/AZP/IZO/PEDOT:PSS/FA0.75Cs0.25Sn0.5Pb0.5I3/C60/BCP/Au	1.82	15.6	75	21.3%
31	G(2T)	
387
	
	(Au/Ni/Al/Ti)GaN/MASnI3/monolayer h-BN/MAPbI3−xBrx/HTL/GA/Au	
	0.688	42.1	75	21.7%	
	GaN substrate and h-BN interlayer
32	G(2T)	
388
	
	FTO/TiO2/CsPbI2Br/CsPbI3 quantum dots/PTAA/Au	
	1.204	15.25	78.7	14.45%	
	

33	G(2T)	
389
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/CsPbBrxI3−x/MoO3/Ag	
	0.95	19.21	62.1	11.33%	
	Graded CsPbBrxI3−x
34	G(2T)	
390
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/FAPbBr(3−x)Ix/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au	
	1.16	23.18	79	21.31%	
	Surface passivation
35	P + O(2T)	
394
	
	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC60BM/C60-SB/Ag/MoO3/PC71BM/PCE-10/C60-N/Ag	
	1.62	12.9	76.1	15.9%	
	Graded recombination layer
36	P + O(2T)	
394
	
	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PC61BM/C60-N/Ag/MoO3/PC71BM/PCE-10/C60-N/Ag	
	1.63	13.1	75.1	16.0%	
	

37	P + O(2T)	
395
	
	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBSeDTEG8:PCBM/PFN/TiO2/PH500/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/PFN/Al	
	1.52	10.05	67	10.23%	
	Solvent wash method
38	P + O(2T)	
398
	
	ITO/PTAA/CsFAMA/PCBM/BCP/Ag/M-PEDOT/PBDB-T/SN61C-4F/bis-C60/BCP/Ag	
	1.85	11.52	70.95	15.13%	
	PMABr passivation
39	P + O(2T)	
401
	
	ITO/ZnO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/PDCBT/MoO3/Ag/ZnO/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag	
	1.953	12.46	75.59	18.38%	
	

40	P + O(2T)	
401
	
	ITO/ZnO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/PDCBT/MoO3/Ag/ZnO/PTB7-Th:O6T-4F/MoO3/Ag	
	1.859	12.92	75.22	18.06%	
	

41	P + O(2T)	
399
	
	ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2Br/P3HT/MoO3/Ag/PFN-Br/PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F/MoO3/Ag	
	1.82	13.20	71.68	17.24%	
	

42	P + O(2T)	
400
	
	ITO/SnO2/CsPbI2.1Br0.9/PMACl/PBDB-T/MoO3/Ag/ZnO/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag	
	1.89	12.77	74.81	18.06	
	PMACl passivation
43	P + O(2T)	
396
	
	FTO/SnO2/Cs0.05(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3/PBDB-TF:BTP-4Cl/Au nanorods/MoO3/Au	
	1.09	25.02	79.0	21.55%	
	

44	P + O(2T)	
402
	
	ITO/NiOx/FA0.8MA0.02Cs0.18PbI1.8Br1.2/C60/BCP/Ag/MoOx/PBDBT-2F:Y6:PC71BM/TPBi/Ag	
	1.902	13.05	83.1	20.6%	
	

45	P + O(2T)	
397
	
	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbCl3−xIx /PCBM/PFN/MoO3/Ag/MoO3/PBDTT-DPP/PC70BM/Ca/Al	
	1.58	8.02	58	8.62%	
	PFN/doped-MoO3/MoO3
46	P + O(2T)	
123
	
	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/PBDTTT-E-T/MoO3/Ag	
	0.993	24.07	60.97	14.57%	
	Integrated structure
47	P + Q(2T)	
406
	
	ITO/TiO2/m-TiO2/MAPbI3/PTAA/MoOx/Au/ZnO/CQDs/MoOx/Au	
	1.51	24	82	29.7%	
	

48	P + Q(2T)	
413
	
	ITO/ZnO/ZnO NWs/SnO2/(FAPbI3)0.92(MAPbBr3)0.08/CuPC/Au/MoO3/ITO/ZnOs/PbS QDs/Au	
	1.55	16.3	69	17.43%	
	CdCl2 passivation
49	P + Q(4T)	
411
	Top	ITO/SnO2/Cs0.05MA0.10FA0.85PbI0.85Br0.15/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Au/Ag/MoO3	1.63	1.07	21.03	79.56	17.90%	20.55%	MoO3/Au/Ag/MoO3
Bottom	ITO/ZnO/CQDs/PbS QDs/Au	1.15	0.58	7.13	65.2	2.65%	

50	P + Q(4T)	
122
	Top	IZrO/SnO2/perovskite/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/IZO/MgF2	1.63	1.12	22.3	77.7	19.4%	24.4%	Boosted solvent extraction
Bottom	ITO/ZnO/CQDs/NFA/MoO3/Ag	0.62	12.2	66	5.0%	
	

51	P + Q(2T)	
412
	
	ITO/ZnO nanoparticles/PbS quantum dots/n-PEDOT/SnO2 nanoparticles/MAPbI3/Spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag	
	1.66	8.91	74.6	11.03%	
	

52	P + D(4T)	
416
	Top	FTO/TiO2/DX3/electrolyte/Pt	
	0.544	29.6	59.1	9.53%	
	

Bottom	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15/poly-triarylamine/Au	1.12	20.7	79.4	18.4%
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 18  (a) LSPR confined in metal spheres. The metal spheres are excited by the electric field of the incident light of a wavelength in metal spherical. (b) Different time domains in which LSPRs and each mechanism in a plasmonic solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 426, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (c)–(e) show the schematic illustration of the influence of the size of a nanostructure on the corresponding plasmonic enhancement mechanism. (c) A light scattering of a ∼120 nm Au nanoparticle. (e) The near-field plasmonic effect from a ∼45 nm Au nanoparticle, (d) the photo-charging effect from a ∼5 nm Au nanoparticle, referenced from the result of Rizia Bardhan et al.,37 and we redraw it. (f)–(h) Structure designs of plasmonic-enhanced PSCs based on (c)–(e). (f) Nanostructures act as scattering centers, and the incident photons are scattered mostly into the material having a higher dielectric constant at the thin film surface. (g) Embedded nanoparticles are positioned in perovskite to enhance the near-field in PSCs. (h) Electrical effects from SPRs.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic figure for integrating the Ag nanoparticles into PSCs. (b) The calculated normalized electric field intensity for a single Ag nanosphere normal to the incident light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 459, copyright 2016, Elsevier; (c) the SEM image of PI with the various sizes of Ag nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140, copyright 2019, MPDI. (d) The schematic device structure of ultra-thin PSCs. (e) SEM images of FTO coated glass substrates with Ag nanoparticles on top. Reprinted with permission from ref. 463, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) structure of the PSCs with the electrode-coupled Ag nanocubes. (g) The experimentally measured absorption spectrum of 240 nm thick perovskite layer, scattering spectra of Ag nanocubes (70 nm) on a PCBM (10 nm) coated glass plate and glass/PCBM (10 nm)/Ag nanocubes (70 nm)/BCP (10 nm)/Ag (100 nm). (h) J–V curves of the PSCs with different coverages of Ag nanocubes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 464, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society; (i) extinction spectra of Ag nanoplates. Inset is the TEM image of the prepared triangular Ag nanoplates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 468, copyright 2015, Elsevier. (j) TEM image of Ag-nanoparticles. (k) Schematic device structure, energy level diagram, and average thickness values for each layer of the PSC. (l) J–V curves of the Ag nanoparticles modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 470, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of Au nanostars. Reprinted with permission from ref. 476, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (b) (1) and (2) are the surface topography of the deposited Au film, and a 150 °C annealed Au film, respectively, (3) and (4) are the surface topography of the solution-processed MAPbI3−xClx film. (c) PL spectra of a bare perovskite film, an Au nanostructure/perovskite sample, and a 150 °C annealed Au nanostructure/perovskite heterostructure sample. (d) Schematic of an electron energy extraction path in the surface plasmon coupling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 478, copyright 2016, The Optical Society; (e) TEM image of Au dimers. Inset is a schematic illustration of the Au nanorod–nanoparticle dimer. (f) Extinction UV-vis spectra for Au dimers in water, in comparison with the absorption data of control perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 479, copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (g) TEM image of Au nanostars dispersed in chlorobenzene; (h) absorption curves of Au nanostars with and without mPEG-SH modification. (i) Simulated local electric field distribution around 35 nm Au nanostars concerning the incident light electric field in Spiro-OMeTAD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) TEM images of the Au nanobipyramids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 483, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (b) bandgap alignment of each layer in the presence of Au nanoislands based on the device structure of ITO/NiO/perovskite/PCBM/Ag. (c-1) SEM image of Au nanoislands on the 10 nm NiO film and (c-2) its FDTD simulation process. (c-3) The 1-T-R spectrum and the action spectrum of near-field intensity calculated by the FDTD simulations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 484, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) SEM and EDS mapping image of (d-1 and d-2) the ZnO layer and (d-3 and d-4) the ZnO/Au nanorods layer. PL mapping images of Au nanorods coated on (e) glass and (f) the glass/ZnO film at around 635 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 485, copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) EQE spectra of PSCs modified with Au, Ag, and Al nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 487, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (h) dark J–V curves of electron-only devices with different concentrations of Ge nanoparticles. (i) The calculated scattering cross-sections of Au and Ge nanospheres with a radius of 50 nm. Inset is the simulated field |E| enhancement distribution of Ge nanosphere embedded between TiO2 and MAPbI3 film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 488, copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) UV-vis spectra in the water of parent Au as well as Au@SiO2 nanoparticles. Inset is the TEM image of Au@SiO2 nanoparticles. (b) Device structure of the Au@SiO2 modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 419, copyright 2013, American Chemistry Society; (c) light-harvesting efficiency of MAPbI3−xBrx deposited on the same thickness of the compact-NiO/m-Al2O3 layer and UV-vis spectroscopy in ethanol for Au@SiO2 nanorods. The light-harvesting efficiency of the MAPbI3−xBrx coated compact-NiO/m-Al2O3 layer with Au@SiO2 nanorods is also presented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 495, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH; (d) the EDX mapping of an Ag@SiO2 nanocube. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (e) MAPbI3 films with Ag@SiO2 nanowires. Inset is the TEM morphologies of the Ag@SiO2 nanowires. Reprinted with permission from ref. 497, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (f) TEM image of core–shell structured Ag@TiO2 nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 420, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH; (g) illustration of stepwise changes from a TiO2 nanoparticle based scaffold layer to an OC-TiO2 NW-based one and finally to an Ag/OC-TiO2 NW-based scaffold layer. The inset images are TEM images of OC-TiO2 NWs and SiO2@Ag@OC-TiO2 NWs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 507, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) TEM and HRTEM images of Ag@TiO2 decorated with Pa. The chemical structure of the Pa molecule is presented. (i) J–V curves of PSCs based on MAPbI3 with or without Ag@TiO2@Pa nanoparticles. Inset shows the device architecture. (j) Energy diagrams of the mechanisms for carrier collection in Ag@TiO2@Pb-based plasmonic solar cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 510, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Optical image of the Au@Ag core–shell nanocuboids. (b) Extinction spectra of the Au@Ag nanocuboids with varied thickness in aqueous solution. (c) Wavelength dependent IPCE and relative IPCE enhancement ratio of the PSCs in different configurations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 513, copyright 2017, Elsevier; (d) TEM image of Au/Ag alloy nanocrystals. (e) Cross-sectional SEM image of the device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 514, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (f) schematic energy levels of each layer in PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 516, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (g) TEM image of the 5 nm SiO2 coated bimetallic nanostructures. (h) The normalized absorption curves of MAPbBr3 sensitized TiO2 films and the Au@Ag nanostructures. (i) Decay kinetics at 530 nm for the reference and Au@Ag nanostructures incorporated samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 517, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (j) The deposition process for embedding metallic nanostructures in a TiO2 electron layer. (k) A schematic figure of the light trapped PSC via the light scattering effect. (l) The UV-vis curves were obtained for the different metallic nanostructures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 444, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Colored SEM image of a perovskite film with Si nanoparticles on the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 520, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) band alignment and (c) cross-sectional bright-field STEM image of a complete PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 521, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (d) experimental extinction (1-T) spectrum of the PSCs with and without Si nanoparticles. (e) UV-vis spectra of the perovskite layer containing various diameter SiO2 nanoparticles, inset is the magnified cross-sectional SEM images of scaffold layers containing SiO2 nanoparticles. (f) J–V characteristics of the PSCs with scaffold layers formed of TiO2 and SiO2 nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 523, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Metal nanostructures
1	Ag nanoparticles	2018	
472
	10.6 ± 1.8 nm	ETL	5 wt%	7.34	11.9	62.1	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Electrical effects + scattering
2	Ag nanoparticles	2016	
459
	30 nm	—	20 wt%	4.57	6.15	34.6	
J
SC/VOC	Scattering + electrical effect
3	Ag nanoparticles	2018	
460
	10 nm	—	1.5 mol%	11.72	13.26	13.1	
J
SC
	Electrical effect + scattering
4	Ag nanoparticles	2018	
461
	30 nm	ETL (c-TiO2)	10 wt%	9.29	12.23	31.6	
J
SC/FF	Scattering + carrier collection
5	Ag nanoparticles	2018	
471
	—	—	4 mM	15.17	17.25	13.7	
J
SC/FF	Electrical effect
6	Ag nanoparticles	2019	
462
	10–20 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	20 vol%	4.17	5.58	33.8	
J
SC/FF	Enhanced absorption + carrier separation
7	Ag nanoparticles	2019	
140
	5/40 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	—	—	5.41	10.41	—	SPR effect + scattering and carrier + carrier extraction
8	Ag nanoparticles	2017	
463
	11 nm	ETLs	—	5.78	7.08	22.5	
J
SC/FF	Plasmonic effect + carrier separation
9	Ag nanocubes	2017	
464
	70 nm	ETL (PCBM)	2%	11.86	13.3	12.1	
J
SC
	Scattering
10	Ag nanoplates	2015	
468
	70–80 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	—	8.5	9.6	12.9	
J
SC/VOC	Scattering
11	Ag nanoparticles	2016	
470
	25 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.5 wt%	10.96	11.96	9.1	
J
SC
	LSPR
12	Au nanostars	2017	
476
	20–30 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	—	15.19	17.72	16.4	
J
SC/VOC	Enhanced absorption + carrier transportation
13	Au nanoparticles	2019	
477
	60 nm	Perovskite	—	—	—	—	—	Scattering
14	Au nanostructure	2016	
478
	—	Perovskite	—	—	—	—	—	SPR coupling
15	Au nanoparticles	2017	
458
	40 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.19 mg mL−1	12.0	16.1	34.2	
J
SC/VOC	Scattering + reduced carrier recombination
16	Au biometric dimers	2019	
479
	75 nm + 30 nm	Perovskite layer	5.6%	14.45	16.78	16.1	
J
SC/VOC	LSPR
17	Au nanostars	2017	
176
	35 nm	HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD)	0.02 wt%	12.49	13.97	11.8	
J
SC/FF	SPR + scattering effects + suppressed recombination
18	Au nanobipyramids	2018	
483
	45–50 nm (15–18 nm)	HTL (VOx)	1.2 wt%	16.02	18.84	17.6	
J
SC/FF/VOC	Light harvesting + electrical effects
19	Au nanoislands	2016	
484
	40.1 ± 28.8 nm	HTL (NiO)	—	2.6	5.1	96.2	
J
SC/FF	Plasmoelectric potential effect
20	Au nanorods	2018	
485
	50 nm	ETLs (ZnO)	—	14.47	16.51	14.1	
J
SC
	Plasmonic near-field coupling + electron injection
21	Au nanoparticles	2017	
487
	—	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	—	11.33	12.18	7.5	
J
SC/FF	Carrier extraction + parasitic reflection
22	Ag nanoparticles	2017	
487
	—	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	—	11.33	12.68	11.9	
J
SC/FF	Carrier extraction + parasitic reflection
23	Al nanoparticles	2017	
487
	—	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	—	11.33	11.58	2.2	
J
SC
	Carrier extraction + parasitic reflection
24	Au nanoparticles	2016	
469
	15 nm	HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD)	0.01 wt%	12.66	12.74	0.6	
J
SC
	Near-field absorption enhancement + reduced resistance
25	Ge nanoparticles	2019	
488
	100 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.2 mg mL−1	16.24	18.59	14.5	
J
SC/FF	Reduced carrier recombination
26	Ag nanoparticles	2017	
499
	50 nm	HTLs (PEDOT:PSS)	4.73 mg mL−1	13.4	13.8	3.0	
J
SC
	Enhanced carrier collection
27	Au nanoparticle	2020	
443
	28 nm	HTLs (PEDOT:PSS)	0.2 mg mL−1	12.17	14.64	20.3	
J
SC
	Plasmonic effects
28	Au nanooctahedrons	2021	
445
	115 nm	ETL (c-TiO2)	1 vol%	16.95	19.05	12.4	
J
SC
	LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation
29	Ag nanorods	2020	
447
	20 nm (200 nm)	Perovskite	2 vol%	18.5	20.29	9.7	
J
SC/FF	LSPR + enhanced crystallization
30	Au nanorods	2021	
448
	17 nm (93 nm)	Perovskite	—	20.12	21.73	8	
J
SC/FF	LSPR + grain boundary creeping
31	Ag nanoparticles	2020	
526
	79 ± 6 nm	Between HTL and perovskite	—	11.63	13.46	15.7	
J
SC
	Plasmonic scattering
32	Al nanoparticles	2020	
454
	20–70 nm.	Between ETL (PCBM) and electrode	—	10.54	11.74	11.4	
J
SC
	Plasmonic effect + conductivity


Metal@dielectric composites
33	Au@SiO2 spheres	2013	
419
	80 nm	ETL (Al2O3 scaffold)	0.9 wt%	10.7	11.4	6.0	
J
SC/FF	Reduced exciton binding energy
34	Ag@TiO2 spheres	2015	
420
	40 nm	ETL (Al2O3 scaffold)	2.2 wt%	11.4	13.7	20.2	
J
SC/FF	Enhanced radiative decay of excitons reabsorption
35	Au@SiO2 rods	2016	
495
	40 nm	ETL (Al2O3 scaffold)	2.0 wt%	10.7	13.7	28.0	
J
SC
	Enhanced absorption + carrier transportation
36	Ag@SiO2	2019	
213
	50 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	3 vol%	14.58	17.22	18.1	
J
SC/VOC	LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation
37	Ag@SiO2	2018	
496
	40 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.3 wt%	13.23	14.61	19.5	
J
SC
	Scattering
38	Au@SiO2 core–shell nanoparticles	2018	
506
	25 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.3 wt%	13.85	12.01	15.3	
J
SC
	SPR effect
39	Ag@SiO2 nanowires	2017	
497
	80 nm (5–10 μm)	MAPbI3	0.06 wt%	14.32	18.03	25.9	
J
SC/FF	Plasmonic antenna + carrier transportation
40	Au@TiO2	2017	
505
	8 nm (32 nm)	ETL (c-TiO2)	1 wt%	18.18	20.1	10.6	
J
SC
	LSPR effect
41	Au@SiO2	2021	
492
	∼25 nm	HTL (NiO)	5 wt%	18.21	18.5	1.6	
J
SC
	LSPR effect
42	Au@NiO	2021	
492
	∼25 nm	HTL (NiO)	5 wt%	18.21	20.6	13.1	
J
SC/VOC	LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation
43	Au@SiO2 nanoparticles	2017	
498
	14 nm	ETL (between c-TiO2 and m-TiO2)	200 μL mL−1	16.18	17.55	8.5	
J
SC
	Electrostatic potential
44	SiO2@Ag@OC-TiO2 NW	2016	
507
	400 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.75 wt%	12.54	15.09	20.3	
J
SC/VOC	Enhanced light absorption + increased recombination resistance
45	Ag/TiO2 composite	2017	
508
	10 nm	ETL (c-TiO2)	1.5%	6.88	8.96	30.2	
J
SC
	SPR effect + carrier transfer
46	Au@TiO2 core–shell nanoparticles	2017	
509
	80 nm	Between porous TiO2 and MAPbI3	30 mmol L−1	12.59	18.24	44.9	
J
SC
	Carrier collection
47	Ag@TiO2@Pa	2019	
510
	28 nm	MAPbI3	0.40 mg mL−1	18.37	20.24	10.2	
J
SC
	Scattering
48	Au@SiO2	2018	
500
	42 nm	Between HTL and perovskite	1.2 wt%	11.44	14.57	27.3	
J
SC
	Light trapping + carrier recombination
49	Au@PSS core–shell tetrahedra nanoparticles	2018	
511
	54 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	4 vol%	13.91	16.53	18.8	
J
SC
	SPR + accelerated hole transfer
50	Au@SiO2 core–shell nanorods	2016	
501
	43 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	4 wt%	12.4	14.4	16.1	
J
SC
	SPR effect
51	Au@SiO2	2016	
502
	20 nm	MAPbI3	1 wt%	3.78	4.49	18.8	
J
SC
	Plasmonic absorption enhancement
52	Au nanorods@SiO2	2017	
503
	40–80 nm	Between perovskite and HTL	0.09 wt%	14.39	17.39	20.8	
J
SC/VOC	Enhanced carrier separation + scattering
53	Au@SiO2 nanorods	2016	
504
	—	—	0.047 pM	13.5	17.6	30.4	
J
SC/FF	Increased light-trapping + carrier collection
54	Au@TiO2 nanofibers	2016	
527
	60 nm	ETL	Particles	10.3	14.4	39.8	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Enhanced absorption + Carrier transportation
55	Au nanorods@MgO	2020	
449
	12 nm (40 nm)	ETL (c-TiO2)	0.20 mg mL−1	14.7	17.4	18.4	
J
SC/FF/VOC	LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation
56	Au@CdS nanoparticles	2020	
493
	35 nm	Between perovskite and HTL	1 mg mL−1	17.71	21.38	20.72	
J
SC/FF/VOC	LSPR + enhanced carrier transportation
57	AgOx@Ag	2020	
494
	40 nm	ETL (c-TiO2)	—	17.87	20.33	13.76	
J
SC /VOC	Hot-carrier injection


Metal alloys
58	Au@Ag core–shell nanocuboids	2017	
513
	15 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	3.5 wt%	15.16	18.31	20.8	
J
SC
	Scattering
59	Au–Ag popcorns	2015	
475
	150 ± 50 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	—	8.9	10.3	15.7	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Enhanced absorption + carrier transportation
60	AuAg@AuAg core–shell alloy nanocrystals	2017	
514
	46 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	0.8 × 10−2 wt%	13.14	16.76	27.5	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Scattering + carrier transportation
61	Cu–Ag alloy nanoparticles	2019	
515
	200 nm	Between perovskite and electrode	10% coverage	13.68	18.89	38.1	
J
SC/FF	Scattering + carrier transportation
62	AgAl–Au	2018	
516
	20–50 nm	Between ETL and electrode	3 wt%	15.32	17.02	11.10	
J
SC
	Enhanced light absorption + electron transportation
63	Au/Ag NSs	2017	
517
	∼60 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	1.0 wt%	3.9	4.9	25.6	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Improved light-harvesting + carrier transfer
64	Au@Ag@SiO2 core–shell nanocuboids	2019	
518
	50 nm	Perovskite layer	1.5 vol%	15.47	17.78	14.9	
J
SC
	Enhanced light absorption + carrier separation
65	AuAg NPrisms@SiO2	2019	
519
	∼40 nm	Between perovskite and HTL	0.7 mM mL−1	3.43	4.60	34.1	
J
SC
	Enhanced light absorption + exciton dissociation
66	Au–Ag nanoalloy	2017	
444
	40 nm	ETLs (c-TiO2)	20 wt%	12.6	14.5	15.1	
J
SC/FF	Light scattering
67	Au-nanoparticles	2015	
446
	40 ± 2 nm	ETLs (c-TiO2)	4.0 mg mL−1	13.2	16.2	22.7	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Enhanced conductivity + decreased surface potential


Other nanostructures
68	Si nanoparticles	2018	
521
	140 nm	Between perovskite and ETL	3 × 10−9 mol L−1	17.7	18.8	6.2	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Enhanced light absorption + improved crystallinity
69	SiO2 nanoparticles.	2018	
522
	100 nm	ETL (m-TiO2)	0.04 mg mL−1	14.63	16.71	14.2	
J
SC/VOC	Scattering + lower ion accumulation
70	SiO2 nanoparticles	2014	
523
	50 nm	Scaffold layers	—	10.29	11.45	11.3	
V
OC/FF	Enhanced light absorption + slower carrier recombination
71	SiO2 nanoparticles	2017	
499
	50 nm	HTL (PEDOT:PSS)	10.4 mg mL−1	13.4	14.2	6.0	
J
SC/VOC	Enhanced carrier collection
72	Submicron TiO2 nanoparticles	2016	
524
	100 to 200 nm	ETLs (scattering TiO2)	1:8 dilution ratio	16.31	16.72	2.5	
J
SC
	Reduced carrier transportation + scattering
73	Hemisphere TiO2 photonic crystal	2019	
528
	1600 nm	ETL (scaffold TiO2)	—	10.5	15.2	44.8	
J
SC
	Light scattering
74	TiO2 nanobeads	2015	
529
	300 ± 100 nm	ETL (scaffold TiO2)	—	7.7	9.0	16.9	
J
SC/VOC	Scattering + reduced recombination

 	Fig. 25  Sketch of both types of light-trapping structures. The parameters including R, RZ, p, tTCO and tETM for the structure (a) and the structure (b) for optimization are indicated by the arrows. (c and d) Absorption spectra attained with the two kinds of optimized light-trapping structures, composed of half-spheroidal domes (green lines), and with the reference cases of a cell with an optimized anti-reflection coating (blue lines), for perovskite absorber layers with distinct thickness: (c) 250 nm and (d) 500 nm. (e and f) Absorption spectra attained with the optimized light-trapping structures (green lines), and with the planar reference anti-reflection coating cases (blue lines), for perovskite layers with a thickness of (e) 250 nm and (f) 500 nm, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 541, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (g) schematic figure of the PSCs with different nanotextured substrates. Measured 1-R and EQE spectra and simulated absorption and reflection profiles for planar substrate (h) and cos− nanotexture (i); (j) the bar diagram visualizes the integrated current densities in the different layers of the simulated layer stack for planar interfaces and the different nanotextures in their respective colors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 542, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of the PSCs. (b) The cross-section SEM of the PSCs. (c) The photo of the perovskite films grown on a planar substrate and cratered substrate, respectively. (d) Schematic of incident angle-dependent power generation over a day. (e) Incident angle dependence of generated maximum power of planar and cratered substrate-based PSCs (MAPbI3: ∼200 nm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 548, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (f) PSCs on HAMC-patterned glass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 550, copyright 2018, Elsevier; (g) schematic diagram of nanosphere lithography for 2D TiO2 nanodisk array and assembly of PSCs. (h) SEM images of 2D nanodisk array with p = 500 nm; the inset images are cross-sectional, tilted views of the samples. (the scale bar = 1 μm). (i) Electromagnetic energy density distributions of electromagnetic wave diffracted by the TiO2 layer with flat and 2D nanodisk array morphologies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 555, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (j) schematic illustrations of preparing silicon master and patterning m-TiO2 layer with conical shaped moth-eye structures. (k) Top-view and the corresponding cross-sectional SEM images of TiO2 nanobowl array. (l) SEM image of 3-D nanopatterned m-TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 560, copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic of whispering-gallery structured perovskite film and light-trapping setup with whispering-gallery structure. (b) AFM image and line profile of whispering-gallery structured perovskite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81, copyright 2018, Elsevier; SEM (c) and AFM (d) of MAPbBr3 films prepared from a mixture of DMF and DMSO as the solvents. The nanophotonic structures of (e) inverted pyramids, (f) array of square holes imprinted into MAPbBr3. (g) AFM image of a nanoimprinted perovskite layer with a period of P = 480 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 563, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (h) and (i) are AFM images of perovskite films with different diffraction grating imprinted by a commercial CD and DVD. (j) Incident light angle versus JSC of PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 577, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (k) SEM images of the cross-sectional SEM image of CsPbBr3 based inverse opal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 579, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (l) UV-vis absorption spectra of pristine perovskite and coral perovskite films, the inset shows the top views of the two films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 580 copyright 2019, Elsevier; (m) SEM images of the textured perovskite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 581, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

1	Textured FTO	2017	Transparent conductive substrate	
547
	10.9	13.3	22.0	
J
SC/FF	Enhanced light absorption and crystal growth
2	Textured FTO	2016	Transparent conductive substrate	
549
	12.6	15.2	20.6	
J
SC
	Light scattering
3	Textured ITO	2019	Transparent conductive substrate	
548
	14.8	18.6	25.7	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Light-harvesting
4	Mimicking whispering-gallery structure	2018	Perovskite	
81
	15.3	19.8	29.4	
J
SC/VOC	Enhanced light-harvesting + improved film quality + carrier extraction
5	Textured inverse micro-cone array	2018	Transparent conductive substrate	
177
	13.62	14.83	8.9	
J
SC
	Enhanced light absorption
6	Metal oxide honeycomb	2015	Scaffold layer (ETL)	
578
	7.2	9.5	31.9	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Lower shunt resistance + enhanced transmission
7	Periodic microstructure composite	2015	HTL (Spiro-OMeTAD/P3HT)	
583
	14.83	17.7	19.4	
J
SC
	Enhanced light-harvesting + increased hole conductivity
8	Bioinspired nanostructured back electrode	2017	ETL (PCBM)	
584
	14.27	16.31	14.3	
J
SC
	Scattering
9	Hexagonal array micro-convex nanostructures	2018	Transparent substrate (glass)	
550
	13.67	14.86	8.7	
J
SC
	Scattering
10	Coral-like perovskite nanostructures	2019	Perovskite layer	
580
	17.19	19.47	13.3	
J
SC
	Scattering + accelerated hole extraction
11	Diffraction-grated perovskite	2018	Perovskite layer	
577
	16.71	19.71	18.0	
J
SC/VOC	Increased light-harvesting
12	Nanocone array	2015	Transparent substrate (PDMS, outside)	
585
	12.06	13.14	9.0	
J
SC
	Improved optical transmittance
13	Nanocone plastic substrates	2016	Transparent substrate (PDMS, inside)	
586
	8.25	11.29	36.8	
J
SC
	Light trapping effect
14	TiO2 meso-IO scaffold	2017	ETL (TiO2)	
554
	15.7	17.1	8.9	
J
SC/FF	Minimal defects
15	2D photonic crystal nanodisk array	2019	ETL (TiO2)	
555
	15.51	18.70	20.6	
J
SC/VOC/FF	Photon confinement + light scattering + improved electron extraction
16	Polystyrene nanospheres	2017	ETL (TiO2)	
556
	12.2	13.5	10.8	
J
SC/FF	Enhanced light absorption + carrier extraction
17	Moth-eye TiO2	2016	ETL (TiO2)	
557
	15.74	17.48	11.1	
J
SC
	Improved light-harvesting
18	2-D photonic-structured TiO2 nanobowl	2017	ETL (TiO2)	
558
	—	—	—	—	Enhanced light absorption
19	TiO2 nanobowl array	2016	ETL (TiO2)	
559
	8.76	12.02	37.2	
J
SC
	Reduced reflection loss
20	3-D flower-shaped m-TiO2	2016	ETL (TiO2)	
560
	14.33	15.96	11.4	
J
SC
	Enhanced light-harvesting + carrier collection
21	PDMS layer	2017	Transparent substrate (PDMS)	
587
	15.1	16.7	10.6	
J
SC
	Reduced reflection loss

 	Fig. 28  Schematic refractive index profiles of the (a) ITO/glass substrate and (b) moth-eye PDMS film/ITO/glass substrate. (c) Photos demonstrate the anti-reflective effect of the 300 nm moth-eye PDMS film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 601, copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (d) 30°-tilted SEM images of the IMPS-PDMS. (e) Measured total transmittance spectra of bare glass, flat-PDMS/glass, and IMPS-PDMS/glass. Reprinted with permission from ref. 178, copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry; (f) cross-section SEM image of a free-standing h-CPP. The inset represents a closer view of the h-CPP; the scale bar in the inset corresponds to 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157, copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH; (g) absorption as a function of wavelength for PSCs with μLA of a ∼700 nm and h ∼ 800 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 602, copyright 2017, The Optical Society; (h) SEM image of the replica on glass, and etched Si wafer was used as a master, (i) absorption and reflection in the 200 nm perovskite layer, (j) absolute value of the electric field with super-positioned energy flow flux and absorption profiles at a wavelength of 609 nm, (k) corresponding integrated electric field of the p-ARFE cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 604, copyright 2016, IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication procedure for the inverted hemispherical architectured-PDMS and hemispherical architectured-PDMS layers. (b) Measured total transmittance spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 613, copyright 2018, American Chemistry Society; (c) cross-sectional SEM images of the MgF2/SiO2 anti-reflection structure with a low refractive index layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 612, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society; (d) (d-1) schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the biomimetic haze film, (d-2) digital image of a rose petal mould and the biomimetic haze film replicated from the mould, (d-3) SEM image of the top surface of the rose petal, (d-4) SEM image of the top and the tilted surface of the biomimetic haze film, the scale bar is 30 mm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159, copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) photographic image demonstrating the easy lamination and detachable ability of sandpaper-aided haze film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 614, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (f) J–V curves of the PSCs with and without the FPA-PDMS. The insets are the photographs of the control and FPA-PDMS modified PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 615, copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Absorption curves in front and bottom subcells, (b) front-surface reflectance and the corresponding equivalent reflected JSC values. Reprinted with permission from ref. 620, copyright 2014, The Optical Society; (c) the structure of a tandem solar cell, (d) EQE of the front and bottom cells for the tandem device with and without PDMS anti-reflection coating; (e) J–V curves of the tandem solar cell with and without PMDS coatings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (f) schematic structure of the PSC devices with PDMS film attached to the top. (g) Photograph of PSCs based on flexible willow glass integrated with a PDMS layer. (h) J–V curves of PSCs with and without PDMS film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 585, copyright 2015, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic diagram of a photonic crystal-based PSC. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a photonic-crystal-based device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 634, copyright 2015, American Chemistry Society; (c) scheme of the structure of narrow-bandwidth reflective filters formed by nonperiodic stacking of alternatively high-refractive-index and low-refractive-index layers. (d) The gradual change of the reflected color of the narrow-bandwidth reflective filters with an angular variation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 641, copyright 2019, American Chemistry Society; (e) device structure of the PSCs with conducting polymer as the top electrode. (f) Photographic image of colorful PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 646, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society; (g) spectral transmittance curves of the PSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 647, copyright 2016, American Chemistry Society.	 

1	Nanocone array films	12.06	13.14	9.0	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
585

2	PDMS antireflective foils	19.38	21.93	13.2	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
160

3	Moth-eye structured PDMS	19.66	20.93	6.5	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
601

4	Inverted micro-pyramidal structured polydimethyl-siloxane	17.17	17.74	3.3	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection + scattering	
178

5	Periodically structured microlens array.	—	—	∼6.3	
J
SC
	Scatting	
602

6	Textured nanoimprinted layers	16.3	17.1	4.9	
J
SC
	Reduced reflection	
603

7	Biomimetic haze film	16.6	19.2	15.6	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
159

8	Fiber arrays	—	—	6.3	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
604

9	Inverted hemispherical architectured-poly-dimethylsiloxane	16.21	19.00	17.21	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
613

10	MgF2/SiO2 anti-reflection nanostructure	18.21	20.48	12.50	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
612

11	Sandpaper-aided haze film	17.07	20.34	19.2	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
614

12	Silver ants-inspired flexible photonic architectures	16.01	17.09	6.75	
J
SC
	Anti-reflection	
615


 	Fig. 32  (a) Working mechanism of LSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; (b) picture of perovskite nanocrystal based LSCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 179, copyright 2019, Elsevier; (c) design principles of LSCs based on ultrafast narrowband exciton routing; (d) photograph of a 10 cm × 10 cm quasi-two-dimensional perovskite nanoplatelet-based LSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 172, copyright 2019, Springer Nature; (e) absorption and luminescence spectra of Mn2+-doped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals (4% doping level). Reprinted with permission from ref. 167, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. (f) Left is absorption, PL spectra of the undoped and Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. Insets: Schematics of the perovskite crystal structures and photographs of the samples under UV illumination (365 nm). Right is the TEM images of undoped and Mn2+/Yb3+ codoped CsPbCl3 nanocrystals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 654, copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH; (g) photograph of dual LSCs coupled with PSCs; (h) J–V curves for the PSCs coupled with different types of LSCs measured under 1 sun illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 660, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  Photon management strategies (UC, DC, tandem, SPR, texturing, antireflection) to reduce energy loss for PSCs (tandem, colorful, flexible, semi-transparent) and future multi-field applications (photoelectrochemical sensor, photocatalysis, and light-emitting diodes). The tandem image of a PSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120 copyright 2020, Springer Nature; the image of a colorful PSC: Reprinted with permission from ref. 626, copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH; the image of a flexible PSC: Reprinted with permission from ref. 661 copyright 2020, Springer Nature; the image of a semi-transparent PSC: Reprinted with permission from ref. 574, copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry; the photoelectrochemical sensor application by photon management: Reprinted with permission from ref. 662, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. The photocatalysis application by photon management: Reprinted with permission from ref. 663, copyright 2017, American Chemistry Society. The Light-emitting diodes application by photon management: Reprinted with permission from ref. 664, copyright 2020, American Chemistry Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
