Bio-inspired strategies for next-generation perovskite solar mobile power sources  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01493A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01493A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 12915-12984Bio-inspired strategies for next-generation perovskite solar mobile power sources

        
          
            Jungjin 
            Yoon†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yuchen 
            Hou†
a, 
      
        
          
            Abbey Marie 
            Knoepfel
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Ye
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luyao 
            Zheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Neela 
            Yennawar
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mohan 
            Sanghadasa
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shashank 
            Priya
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Kai 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science & Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 16802, PA, USA. E-mail: sup103@psu.edu; kaiwang@psu.edu
bHuck Institute of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 16802, PA, USA
cU.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Aviation & Missile Center, Redstone Arsenal, Alabama 35898, USA
Received 
      28th April 2021
    First published on 8th October 2021AbstractSmart electronic devices are becoming ubiquitous due to many appealing attributes including portability, long operational time, rechargeability and compatibility with the user-desired form factor. Integration of mobile power sources (MPS) based on photovoltaic technologies with smart electronics will continue to drive improved sustainability and independence. With high efficiency, low cost, flexibility and lightweight features, halide perovskite photovoltaics have become promising candidates for MPS. Realization of these photovoltaic MPS (PV-MPS) with unconventionally extraordinary attributes requires new ‘out-of-box’ designs. Natural materials have provided promising designing solutions to engineer properties under a broad range of boundary conditions, ranging from molecules, proteins, cells, tissues, apparatus to systems in animals, plants, and humans optimized through billions of years of evolution. Applying bio-inspired strategies in PV-MPS could be biomolecular modification on crystallization at the atomic/meso-scale, bio-structural duplication at the device/system level and bio-mimicking at the functional level to render efficient charge delivery, energy transport/utilization, as well as stronger resistance against environmental stimuli (e.g., self-healing and self-cleaning). In this review, we discuss the bio-inspired/-mimetic structures, experimental models, and working principles, with the goal of revealing physics and bio-microstructures relevant for PV-MPS. Here the emphasis is on identifying the strategies and material designs towards improvement of the performance of emerging halide perovskite PVs and strategizing their bridge to future MPS.
Jungjin Yoon
Dr Jungjin Yoon is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Pennsylvania State University, United States. He obtained his PhD degree in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering in 2018 from Seoul National University, Republic of Korea. His current research interest focuses on the scale-up manufacturing of perovskite-based solar modules and their application as portable power sources.
Yuchen Hou
Yuchen Hou is currently a PhD student of Prof. Priya in Materials Science and Engineering at The Pennsylvania State University. He obtained his BE in Metallic Material Engineering at Qingdao University of Science & Technology in 2016 and his MS in Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel University in 2018. His current research interests include bio-photovoltaics, artificial retinas, perovskite solar cells and photodetectors, with a specific focus on integration of naturally derived biomaterials with hybrid perovskites for novel bio-optoelectronic systems and application of up-conversion materials in optoelectronics.
Neela Yennawar
Prof. Neela Yennawar is currently the director of X-ray Crystallography and Automated Biological Calorimetry Core Facilities, Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Penn State. Neela received her PhD degree in Physics from the Indian Institute of Science and has been working as an Associate Research Professor in Penn State since the year of 2018. Her research interests include biological calorimetry, protein characterization, molecular modeling, X-ray crystallography, and small-angle X-ray scattering.
Mohan Sanghadasa
Dr Mohan Sanghadasa currently leads applied research programs to develop energy storage systems, nanotechnology enhanced sensors, and photonic technologies at the U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command (DEVCOM) Aviation & Missile Center (AvMC). His previous research activities at DEVCOM AvMC focused on developing polymer-based photonic devices for IFOGs in inertial measurement units. He joined the U.S. Army serving 12 years on the faculty of the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). His research activities at UAH were primarily in the area of nonlinear optics. Dr Sanghadasa has also directed research on optical limiting, optical switching, and optical pattern recognition during his academic career.
Shashank Priya
Dr Shashank Priya is currently Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Penn State University. He is also serving as Associate Vice President for Research and Director of Strategic Initiatives in the Office of the Senior Vice President for Research (OSVPR). He is the founder and chair of the Annual Energy Harvesting Society Meeting (previously Energy Harvesting Workshop). He is also serving as the member of the Honorary Chair Committee for the International Workshop on Piezoelectric Materials and Applications (IWPMA). His research group focuses in the areas related to multifunctional materials, energy harvesting and bio-inspired systems.
Kai Wang
Dr Kai Wang is currently Research Assistant Professor in the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University. Kai received his PhD in Polymer Engineering from The University of Akron in 2017 and joined the Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS), Virginia Tech as a Post-doctoral Associate in the same year. His research interests include halide perovskite photovoltaics, photodetectors and photothermal applications, 2D MQW physics, and biological materials-based electronics. His current research focus is on micro-electronic sensor arrays, wireless energy transfer and innovations in manufacturing for next-generation semiconductors.
1. Introduction
For over 4.6 billion years, sunlight has been the largest natural energy source for our planet and has played a critical role in life existence.1–3 Early on, solar radiation provided the energy required for biomolecular transformations that drove various biophysical processes, such as metabolism, to create survival of lifeforms autotrophically, chemotropically, or heterotrophically.4 Later, photosynthetic processes emerged in microbes utilizing sunlight, water and carbon dioxide to synthesize oxygen and glucose, changing the atmospheric composition of ancient Earth and providing the foundation for the birth of aerobic multicellular life. Over time, these organisms have developed a variety of efficient ways to use solar energy. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, photosynthesis in green plants and cyanobacteria demonstrates high efficiencies reaching up to 5–10%.5 Birds are known to use photo-sensitive molecules in their retina to guide their navigation with the help of sunlight and geomagnetic field (by tuning the ratio between photoexcited singlet and triplet states under a magnetic field).6 Insects and hornets are known to exhibit a photoconductive phenomenon at the ‘yellow strips’ of their cuticle,7 which is believed to correlate with their daytime flight as solar radiation speeds up restoration of the ionic channel activity and the synaptic transmission in shoving motion.8 For poikilotherms or cold blooded animals such as frogs, absorption of heat from solar radiation is an important way to regulate their body temperature after hibernation, which is related to the solar-thermal effect of bio-dye molecules.9
 Fig. 1  Examples of utilization of solar energy by natural creatures on Earth and the man-made solar cell developed for harvesting solar energy. Adapted with permission from multiple online resources.6,10–15 Other picture credit: K. W., Y. H., and J. Y. 
Today, rising electrification in developing countries and the rapid development of electronic devices in developed countries has created a huge electricity demand. In order to meet this growing demand, solar energy is being considered as one of the important renewable energy solutions. The COVID-19 pandemic and the post-COVID-19 era, when mobility restrictions limit activities of traditional power sectors, have demonstrated that renewable energy such as that obtained using solar photovoltaic techniques exhibit higher resilience than conventional energy sources.16 Projecting to the future, solar energy could play an important role in enabling longer operating times for mobile electronic devices such as smart phones, smart watches, various health monitoring sensors, mini-androids, drones, etc. For these ubiquitous devices, photovoltaic mobile power sources (PV-MPS), with an ‘off-the-grid’ design, can independently and sustainably provide energy for recharging batteries and are attractive solutions for future devices.
PV-MPS are attractive for use in mobile electronic devices due to their properties including portability, light-weight, flexibility, foldability, high power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) and long lifetimes. Recently, halide perovskites have demonstrated attractive physical properties such as micrometer-scale long exciton diffusion lengths, large optical absorption coefficients of up to 105 cm−1, direct bandgaps with great tunability down to the ideal 1.5 eV and great mechanical properties such as high folding, bending, and stretching tolerance, thanks to the ‘soft’ nature of the crystallographic lattice.17–21 These properties make them good photoactive layer candidates for photovoltaic applications. Compared to traditional first generation (1G) PVs of crystalline gallium arsenide (GaAs) and silicon (Si) (rigid and inflexible), and second generation (2G) PVs of multicrystalline or thin film inorganics, perovskite PVs exhibit high efficiency, high flexibility and low cost simultaneously, representing a promising technique for third generation (3G) PVs, particularly fitting well with the niche market of MPS. So far, perovskite PVs displayed an ultrahigh PCE of over twenty-five percent, exceeding those of state-of-the-art commercial multicrystalline silicon PVs,22,23 as well as other 3G PVs, including dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), organic photovoltaics (OPVs), and quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs).22,23 As shown in Fig. 2a, the low manufacturing cost and the mechanical merits of the material make perovskite PVs good candidates for MPS applications. Another key figure-of-merit for MPS applications is the power-to-weight ratio (specific power or mass power density) defined by the overall output power over a specific device weight. In comparison to other flexible PV techniques based on thin film CdTe, amorphous silicon, organics, and QD light absorbers,24–29 perovskite PVs exhibit the highest value of 29.4 W g−1 (Fig. 2b), which could give the MPS a bonus attribute of ultra-light-weight. Similar to the power-to-weight ratio, power generation per unit area could be another key figure-of-merit, which can be represented from the PCE value. In principle, PCE is defined as the ratio of electric power output to light power input (i.e., one-sun illumination of 100 mW cm−2) which has taken the area into consideration. For example, silicon PVs with a module efficiency of 20% indicate a maximum electric power output of 20 mW over a 1 cm2 area under one-sun illumination. In comparison, the OPV module displays a much smaller power of 5–7 mW cm−2 but the perovskite module could offer 16 mW cm−2 or an even higher output, comparable to that of Si-PV.
 Fig. 2  (a) ‘Product volume’ of different PV techniques. A 3D Cartesian coordinate system is used here to quantify the market potential of different PV techniques: Efficiency, Flexibility and 1/LCOE (cost effectiveness defined by how much electricity can be used per unit cost) are the three indexes. A larger volume indicates a higher competitiveness and thus a higher market potential. (b) Power-per-weight ratios of various types of solar cells, adapted with permission from ref. 24 and 29, Copyright 2015 Springer Nature and 2019 The Royal Chemistry of Society. (c) The technique basis of perovskite PVs including high efficiency and low cost, as well as other attributes of light weight and sufficient flexibility, coupled by the potential market opportunity with a total market volume of $70 billion. Pictures are adapted with permission from ref. 29 and 30, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Taking these into consideration and aiming at different levels of hierarchies, markets, and networks, as illustrated in Fig. 2c, the perovskite PV-MPS could have applications in small wearable electronics,31–34 such as smart electronics, epidermal electronics, e-textiles for entertainment, gaming and fashion (e.g., CuteCircuit35 by the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, USA and Project Jacquard36 by Google), medium size appliances such as vehicles, drones37 (e.g., Titan Aerospace's Solara 50 project38), and robotics, and large architectural power sources (building and construction integrated power plants). Evolving from rigid devices to flexible electronic fabrics, many different types of products have been added into the market. With continuously growing demand from various applicational goals, market size is expected to reach up to 70 billion dollars by 2025 (Harrop, 2014).33 Various fields within this market include outdoor entertainment, healthcare, academic research and education, agriculture, cellular and mobile devices, consumer electronics and appliances, military, finance, athletics, and retail. Traditional 1G and 2G PV techniques may not meet all these implementations due to their intrinsic brittle nature and lower power-to-weight ratios. Although there have been attempts to incorporate demo samples of silicon or GaAs PV cells39 into automobiles and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), there are still many barriers to overcome, such as cost, weight, and mechanical durability/endurance before these are feasible options. In the meantime, the perovskite PV technology could provide conformal and better performance solutions as long as issues such as manufacturing, performance, stability, and toxicity are addressed. Bio-inspired materials could be a viable option to address the gap in the current research. Biological materials and processes have been optimized through millions of years of evolution in the 8 million species on Earth. Delicate biomolecules and systems could lead to low-energy-cost synthesis, efficient mass transfer and energy usage, as well as intelligent functionalities such as self-healing and self-cleaning. Implementing templates from various biosystems has accelerated our advancements within disciplines such as engineering,40 architecture,41 medicine,42 neuromorphic computations,43etc.
In this review, we will comprehensively discuss the bio-inspired strategies to address existing issues in perovskite PVs by reviewing (1) various biological molecules such as DNA, bacteriorhodopsin, and porphyrins to optimize the perovskite lattice and crystallization at the atomic/meso-scale, (2) biological structures to guide an optimized device structure with enhanced light harvesting and with robust resistivity against environmental stimuli at the device level, and (3) biological systems to inspire designs of perovskite PV-MPS with attributes such as increased-efficiency charge transfer, improved energy usage, and self-healing and self-cleaning functionalities at the system level. The marriage between biological systems and perovskite photovoltaics for next-generation solar-based mobile power could potentially provide a roadmap to revolutionary techniques in the future. We anticipate that this review could provide new insights and enable collaborations between these two fields.
2. Bio-inspired design for perovskite MPS
The earliest bio-inspired attempt in PVs could be traced back to the 1970s and was based on the photosynthesis in green plants (mimicking basic electrochemical processes) which lead to the early development of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). It was based on a photoelectrochemical system consisting of a natural dye (mimicking pigment chlorophyll) as the light absorber, a photo-sensitized anode (with TiO2 offering the suitable conduction band to accept the excited electrons from the dye) and an electrolyte (to provide a redox bath to regenerate the dye). In early DSSCs, the liquidous electrolyte and low absorption coefficient of the dye significantly limited the efficiency and practical usage. Later, the fast development of solid electrolytes such as 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenyl)amino]-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD),44 as well as the replacement of the natural dye by halide perovskite materials, eventually led to the prototype of perovskite solar cells (PSCs).45 Using prior knowledge from OPVs, DSSCs and even G1 and G2 PVs, many efforts have been made in the research and development of PSCs. This included interfacial engineering, compositional engineering, process development, and structural stability17 to advance the field to a milestone performance with a PCE of 25.7% and a T80 lifetime of >103 hours under accelerated testing (working temperature of 70 to 75 °C for solar cells under AM 1.5 one-sun illumination, without cooling systems).46 However, issues of defects at the lattice scale (nm), grain boundaries (GBs) at the mesoscale (μm) and their joint effects on Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination losses, interface-level charge extraction/transport/collection insufficiencies, device-level instability, manufacturing-oriented problems, and system-level non-intelligence need to be addressed with well-evolved and delicate solutions to move towards commercialization of PV-MPS. Fig. 3 provides an overview of the bio-inspired approaches for optimizing the performance of perovskite PV-MPS on using strategies focused on materials. Various biomolecules with specific functional groups that interact with either lattice defects, GBs or interface-level insufficiencies could be incorporated to enhance the properties for a given application. Bio-structural mimetic design could enable devices with functionalities under different environmental conditions, such as lotus-like hydrophobicity for rain/dust self-cleaning. From the PSC structural perspective, there are three main types of functional layers: electrodes (transparent front electrode and back contact), perovskite light absorbers, and functional charge transfer layers (CTLs including the hole transporting layer (HTL) and the electron transporting layer (ETL)). In the following text, we will specify various bio-derived additives/systems and prior attempts at incorporation, as well as hypothetical applications, in electrodes, charge transfer layers, and perovskite photo-absorber layers in PV cells.
 Fig. 3  Graphical overview of bio-inspired strategies for perovskite-based MPS (material's perspective). The bio-inspired approaches can be divided into two parts: the engineering of perovskite and charge transporting layers using biomolecules as additives and the structural designs that emulate natural structures. Adapted with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 
3. Electrodes
At the user level, a mobile energy source (MPS) requires the device to be as easy to carry as possible. Considering the planar geometry of PV products, a foldable/flexible feature (such as a poster-like PV module product) can significantly reduce the storage space. This flexibility requirement is highly compatible with the ‘soft’ nature30,48,49 of halide perovskite materials. The perovskite exhibits a low Young's modulus of ∼5–20 GPa49–51 compared to the value of over 70 GPa for CIGS and Si-based inorganic semiconductors,52,53 and a higher defect tolerance due to the polaron nature that the electron–phonon coupling induced localized lattice deformation in the perovskite which could allow the charge carriers to travel long distances regardless of the presence of defects. The CTL including the HTL and ETL could also have good compliance in mechanical deformation, which could be realized using thin organic layers, polymeric materials (e.g., poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) and poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA)), and thin films of nanocrystals. In order to make the whole device highly foldable/flexible, both the back contact (top electrode) and front transparent conductive electrode (bottom electrode) need to be optimized as well. Particularly in the application of perovskite solar cells, compatibility to this type of PV technique also has certain requirements such as nonreactivity to the perovskite, a good semiconductor–metal interface in perovskite solar cells, and a protective role against moisture as well as multiple conventional concerns such as energy level matchup and good charge collection/conductivity attributes.
3.1 Top electrode
Assuming the light incidents from the bottom, the top electrode (back-contact electrode) is the uppermost layer in a PSC, generally composed of conductive metals such as silver (Ag), gold (Au), aluminum (Al), cupper (Cu) or carbon (C). The top electrode layer commonly serves to collect charges from the adjacent CTL and also to reflect the unabsorbed incident light backwards to the perovskite absorber to recycle the light. Ag and Au are commonly used electrode materials and in PSCs they exhibit good device efficiency. However, several chemical/mechanical stability issues have been raised recently. Particularly in the case of Ag, the movable I− ions from the perovskite layer can chemically react with Ag to produce a more stable phase of AgI. This will induce an I-vacancy in the crystallographic lattice which leads to the self-doping of the perovskite to an n-type semiconductor and thereby a poor contact at the semiconductor/metal interface. In addition, formation of the I− vacancy could also trigger a quick lattice collapse and eventually the degradation of device performance.54 This effect can also be present when a HTL is inserted between the perovskite and the top Ag electrode, where the HTL such as spiro-MeOTAD exhibits unavoidable pin-holes and voids providing highways for the migration of Ag atoms from the top electrode and I-ions from the bottom perovskite and further triggers the subsequent chemical reaction. In order to mitigate this problem, additional interfacial engineering strategies such as passivation of perovskite grain boundaries55 and insertion of interlayers56–58 could help. Nevertheless, Ag might not be the ideal choice for perovskite PVs. Similar to Ag, in Au electrode-based devices, Au atoms can also penetrate underlying CTLs and perovskite layers exposed to temperature conditions above 75 °C. According to Domanski et al.,59 the migration of Au atoms can be reduced by the insertion of a thin Cr film below the Au electrode. This is a typical strategy in making transparent electrodes consisting of ultrathin Cr and Au, where the ultrathin Cr layer could sufficiently inhibit the accumulation of Au into aggerates and consequently uniformize the Au into a continuous film. From the cost and manufacturing perspective, both Au and Ag are not ideal candidates for commercial devices, although they have the highest reported PCEs and most of the ongoing research is based on Au and Ag. Alternatively, Al could be a more cost-effective solution (1 kg per 2 USD vs. 1 kg per 60000 USD of Au). So far, Al has been introduced as the top electrode for the p–i–n (inverted) architecture due to its higher Fermi level that can match well with the conduction band (CB) of n-type buffer layers for selective electron collection. Nevertheless, the Al electrode still has the issue of Al infiltration into the underlying organic layers and an additional oxidation issue that superficial Al atoms could be oxidized to Al2O3 when exposed to ambient air.60 In order to overcome these instability issues, particularly the metal atom infiltration problem, Cu, or another inert metal, could be a good electrode candidate. For example, Zhao et al. demonstrated that the Cu top electrode in a p–i–n (inverted) PSCs displayed good stability.61 By tracking the hypothetical formation of CuI at the interface between Cu and CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) at an elevated temperature of 80 °C for 100 hours, the authors confirmed that no diffusion of Cu into the perovskite occurred. This indicates that Cu could be a feasible candidate for a top electrode for stable, cost-effective, and high-performance PSCs. Apart from these bulk metal electrodes, various innovative electrodes including carbon black,62,63 silver nanowires (NWs) (AgNWs),64,65 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),66–68 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS),69–71 and dielectric/metal/dielectric structures72,73 have been attempted as top electrodes with good stability and cost-effectiveness. Beyond the basic requirements such as manufacturing cost, operational stability and a high PCE, for specific applications in MPS, the electrode should also have suitable mechanical properties.74 These properties include not only the mechanical flexibility of the electrode under bending conditions, but also the adhesion characteristics with its adjacent layer (i.e. underlaying CTLs) to ensure mechanical integrity of the device, which otherwise will lead to mechanical delamination of the top electrode from the bottom device during harsh or repeated bending conditions, leading to product failure. From the manufacturing perspective, simpler manufacturing processes of the top electrode would be more favorable.68–70 Conventional metal thin-film electrodes are generally based on the vacuum thermal evaporation process which requires high energy consumption and tedious processing steps. Alternative top electrodes need to be compatible with simpler and less energy-consuming processes such as mechanical transfer or solution processes.
Recently, biomimetic electrodes have been proposed in the energy sector. For example, a “biomimetic ant-nest electrode structure” has been proposed in lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries.75 The “ant-nest-like” electrode can be fabricated using three easy processing methods, including ball-milling (for slurry mixing), doctor-blading (for laminate casting), and a sacrificial method (for porous structure creation), with CNT being the conductive additive to ease electron transportation and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester) (PFM) being the conductive binder (Fig. 4b). Such a design is inspired by the naturally superefficient ant-nest network, which is well known for its high spatial usage capable of abundant storage, and the multi-interconnected channels allowing efficient and fast food transportation.76 Following this scenario, shortening the travel time for charge carriers in PV devices by means of delicately designed nanostructures could secure a more efficient charge transport and thus minimize scattering losses during transport. Design of such a nanostructure for efficient transport is not easy, but could be modeled from existing bio-prototypes. The ‘foraging trail networks’ established by ants could be a good example. As shown in Fig. 4a, wood ants can build the foraging trail networks that provide a shorter travel time for the foraging ants to deliver the information of the food source. Foraging ants use attractive trail pheromones to guide their nestmates to food or water, use a repellent pheromone to mark unrewarding paths, and concentrate the signal at trail bifurcations (or decision points), thereby forming an information delivery network. Such a network is built with low construction costs and low maintenance efforts but displays high message transport efficiency.77 Similar to this foraging trail network, many other efficient biological transport systems have been discovered and investigated in different species, such as ants and bees. For example, in ant colonies, an individual ant can only do simple tasks, but millions of ants can collectively build an intelligent network with higher level intelligence complex behaviors like foraging for food, raising aphid “livestock,” building nests, waging war with other colonies and burying their dead. This interaction of individual components with simple behaviors to produce a whole network with complex behaviors is a new research field called ‘emergent propriety’ in the neuroscience branch of biology. The ‘emergent propriety’ has been found in many bio-prototypes such as cells (as components of vascular networks), mycelia (as components of fungal networks) or individual insects (as components of social insect foraging networks).76 Specifically, fungal mycelial networks can realize efficient transportation and robustness against damage,78 slime molds can create networks that balance transport efficiency and robustness,79 and these natural ‘smart’ networks at different biological levels point to the impressive ability of self-organized intelligent systems that satisfy specific goals. Mimicking this ‘emergent propriety’ has been proposed to develop the next-generation of non-von Neumann computation80,81 and artificial intelligence's (AI's) life 2.0.82 For smart transport and collection of charge carriers in the electrode, another well-known example is the natural leaf, exhibiting high mass transport efficiency, which has been widely used in biomimetic electrodes. In a natural leaf, the “hierarchy” vein structures embedded in spongy leaf cells can efficiently deliver water and minerals to every single leaf cell (will be specifically discussed in Section 3.2 – Bottom electrode). In parallel, the leaf can also manage the light usage efficiently. Fig. 4c illustrates the leaf body composed of palisade cells, spongy cells, and veins. It should be noted that palisade and spongy cells can scatter the sunlight by the refractive index mismatch between the cells and intercellular air spaces, leading to high light usage. The palisade cells also guide the incident light towards the deeper layer for effective light capture as well as an enhanced interfacial reflection. The spongy cells with large numbers of cell–air interfaces give rise to an internal light scattering effect that elongates the light path. Such a natural “optical meta-structure” can further tune the fractions between forward- and backward-scattered light by designing the population and geometry of the cells. Fig. 4d demonstrates the utilization of this natural leaf vein structure as a transparent network-electrode. Specifically, a leaf is etched to eliminate the organic material and cells and maintain the vein scaffold network, which is then coated by metals to form a mesh network electrode. Overall, natural structural design of the top electrode (back contact) enabling optimized optical management for enhancing light usage in PSCs will benefit the device efficiency. Following this, “optical meta-structure” could be a promising route for high performance PSCs.
 Fig. 4  Biological network and its electrical mimicker. (a) Ants’ cooperative transport network. Snapshot from a tracked movie of trajectories of different ants, adapted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (b) Porous ant-nest structured Li–S electrode (CNT-nest-S), adapted with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph of a leaf and schematic of its internal anatomy, adapted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Morphology and extraction of the leaf vein network, with the corresponding optical and SEM images of the leaf and the fabrication method, adapted with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 
3.2 Bottom electrode
In contrast to the reflection role of the top electrode (back contact), the bottom electrode (front contact) of PSCs is responsible for transmitting incident solar light to the inner perovskite light absorber as well as collecting free charge carriers from the perovskite. Therefore, it should not only possess suitable electrical properties, including sufficiently high electrical conductivity and suitable energy level to match with that of the photoactive layer, but also high-level light-transparency allowing sufficient light to pass through. In conjunction with the PV-MPS, an additional attribute of the bottom electrode should be a qualified flexibility, allowing a large degree of mechanical deformation of PV-MPS devices. This flexibility requirement can be achieved by using ultrathin polymer layers of high light transmittance. Table 1 summarizes the polymeric candidate with physical and chemical properties for optical use.86 Clearly, conventional polymers such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET, Tg ∼ 78 °C) or polyethylene naphthalate (PEN, Tg ∼ 123 °C) have excellent optical transparency >87%, but are limited by the working temperatures, while the aromatic polyimide (PI) displays excellent thermal stability up to 300 °C but suffers from poor optical transmittance. Balancing the light transmittance and thermal stability remains one of the most challenging projects for their typical optoelectronic applications. In the case of PSC manufacturing, both charge transfer layers and photoactive perovskite layers can be processed at low temperatures. For example, MAPbI3 film can be processed at low-temperatures (<100 °C).87–89 Kim et al.90 carried out early studies replacing a high-temperature sintering processed TiO2 layer with a low-temperature atomic layer deposition (ALD)-processed TiOx layer for the ETL, displaying a 12.2% PCE and good bending test results on a PEN/ITO substrate. Directly assembling PSCs from the aforementioned polymeric bottom electrode substrates (via the “bottom-up” method) can lead to the MPS-oriented products. Using traditional commercial flexible plastic transparent electrode substrates such as indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated PET and PEN,91,92 many researchers have made early attempts since 2014. Albeit the initial success in achieving higher performance, the intrinsic drawbacks of these ITO coated PET and PEN include limited material inventory, high price, low optical transmittance, and severe mechanical fragility, which have significantly limited their application range. For example, ITO usually shows a significant sheet resistance increase (by over 500% in Fig. 5a) due to the presence of linear cracks after 1000 bending cycles (with a bending radius of 4 mm).93 Therefore, in the MPS-oriented portable PSCs, since the major mechanical limitation comes from the fragility of transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), engineering the mechanical properties of the TCOs and developing alternative flexible transparent electrodes has become the most straightforward strategy.
Table 1 Summary of the physical and chemical properties of common optical polymers. This table is adapted from ref. 86




Polymer
Thickness (mm)
Total light transmittance (%)
Retardation (nm)
Refractive index
Glass transition temperature (°C)
Thermal expansion coefficient (ppm °C−1)
Water absorption ratio (%)
H2O barrier (g m−2 day−1)




PI
0.1
30–60
Large
NA
<300
8–20
2.0–3.0
NA


COC
0.1
94.5
7
1.51
164
70
<0.2
NA


PES
0.1
89
<10
1.6
223
54
1.4
80


PC
0.1
92
20
1.59
145
75
<0.2
NA


PET
0.1
90.4
Large
1.66
80
33
0.5
9


PEN
0.1
87
Large
1.75
150
20
0.4
2




 Fig. 5  Transparent electrode substrates in flexible PSCs. (a) Plot of the sheet resistance of an ITO/PEN substrate with various bending cycles (left), and cross-sectional SEM image showing the presence of linear cracks after 1000 bending cycles (right), adapted with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic of the ultra-flexible solar cell based on a PEDOT:PSS/NOA63 transparent substrate (left), and normalized solar cell parameters (JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE) of the device after repeated bending at r = 1 mm for 1000 bending cycles (right), adapted with permission from ref. 49, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image showing the device architecture of a flexible solar cell based on a WO3/Ag/WO3 transparent substrate (left), and changes of the device parameters of JSC, FF, and PCE under various strains (right), adapted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In order to replace the fragile TCOs, candidates including highly conductive polymers, ultra-thin metal films, and metal-NW- or CNT-based grids or networks have been explored. PEDOT:PSS is composed of conductive PEDOT and water-dispersible PSS, which has been widely used in the larger scope of electronics such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and solar cells.94 PSS has the dual functionality of electrical doping and desolating the PEDOT in water.95,96 Tuning the doping level through additional dopants such as H2SO4 can further improve the overall electrical conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film, increasing from 1 S cm−1 (Clevios PH1000) to > 4000 S cm−1.97 Recently, Park et al.49 utilized PEDOT:PSS to replace the TCO as the bottom electrode substrate for PSCs. By employing the structure of NOA63/highly-conductive PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM)/EGaIn (Fig. 5b), the resultant PSC exhibited over 10% PCE with excellent flexibility (i.e., a recovered PSC from bending under a bending radius of 1 mm maintained a 96.4% efficiency). Alternatively, ultra-thin metal films have also been employed as transparent electrode substrates for a long period. Such an ultra-thin metal film can be either a single continuous film or sandwiched between two dielectric layers.98 As noble metals such as Ag and Au have low electrical resistance (1.6–2.4 mΩ cm−1), they are the most frequently used ultra-thin metal electrodes. It should be noted that such a transparent ultra-thin metal electrode can also be used as a top electrode in either single junction PSCs or tandem PSCs. For example, Lee et al. employed Cu (1 nm)/Au (7 nm) as the top transparent electrode for a single-junction PSC built upon a Ti foil substrate, achieving a 14.9% PCE.99 The major challenge in an ultra-thin metal electrode is the trade-off between the electrical conductivity and the optical transmittance. Flexible PSCs using ultra-thin metal electrodes, such as a sandwiched structure of “aluminium zinc oxide (AZO)/Ag/AZO”, a single ultrathin layer of bare Ag and an ITO coated Ag film, usually exhibit lower PCEs in the range of 6–10%,100–103 which might be due to the poor perovskite crystals in these early studies. Recently, Liu et al.104 constructed microstructured WO3/Ag/WO3 (WAW) multilayer transparent electrodes through a glancing angle deposition (GLAD) method. Fig. 5c shows the device configuration and mechanical stability. The resultant flexible device displays a PCE of 13.79% and retainment of 90.97% of the initial PCE after 1000 bending cycles under a maximal strain of 1.3%.
Metal-NW- or CNT-based grids or networks have also been utilized as transparent electrodes. These grids or networks exhibit excellent electrical conductivity, broad spectral transmittance, and super mechanical flexibility, which are widely applied as transparent conductive electrodes (TCEs) in various optoelectronic devices. More importantly, their grids or networks are composed of fibrous conductive polymers,89,105,106 metal NWs29,107,108 and CNTs,74,109–111 making them good candidates to form a “leaf vein” network architecture.112 The natural designed “leaf vein network” system consists of a two-dimensional network composed of branches having different diameters at different scales. Such leaf vein networks113,114 play an important role in photosynthesis by supplying nutrients and water to the leaf cells and transport the photosynthesized carbohydrates to other parts of the plants. Meanwhile, these networks also serve as a flexible backbone for ensuring the mechanical stability of the leaf.115,116Fig. 6a displays an example of a Magnolia liliiflora leaf vein network. The natural vein network has been designed into a highly efficient style to simultaneously ensure bidirectional transport and provide sufficient mechanical stability. Such a transport function of the “leaf vein networks”115 shares many characteristics with the electrodes applied in photochemical cells, solar cells, LEDs, Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors,117 where electrical current can be collected or distributed more efficiently. The high-efficiency transport in “leaf vein networks” can be ascribed to the hierarchical structures, consisting of the petiole, midrib, and secondary and lower-order veins (Fig. 6a). A gradual thickening from secondary veins towards the midrib and the petiole reflects the variation in the amount of resources being transported along the network. The supply of water and nutrients (yellow arrows in Fig. 6a(i)) attenuates from the petiole towards the midrib and subsequently to the leaf blade; the photosynthetic product carbohydrates are collected in the opposite direction but with increasing amounts (red arrow in Fig. 6a(i)). These lower-order veins connect the secondary veins to the midrib, rendering an interconnected network, which ideally provides a bidirectional transport between leaf cells and other parts of the plant, playing an important role in collecting and distributing the organic material to the plant. For electronics, the bottom electrode substrate (front electrode) can also be designed in a similar way, where metal fingers collect the local currents and transport them towards the metal bus bars and subsequently to the strings. As shown in Fig. 6a(ii), such a design has been well applied in Si-PV panels where the photo-generated current is first collected by the fingers (grid line) and then be converged to the bus bars. Li et al.118 reported large-area flexible transparent electrodes based on such “leaf vein-like” silver hierarchical-metal-grids (HMGs) consisting of the mesoscale first-order vein (“trunk”) and microscale secondary vein (“branches”) (Fig. 6b(i)). As can be seen in Fig. 6b(ii), the branched grids uniformly distribute the conductive pathways and the laser-etched trunk grids can converge the current from the branch. Meanwhile the grid structure also provides a reasonably high optical transmittance (∼81%) with a low sheet resistance (1.36 Ω sq−1) through the optimal geometrical design of the grid widths and spaces, and the sizes of the colloidal crackle patterns in the branch. Although such an HMG is aimed for the application of electrochromic smart windows, directly using this flexible and transparent HMG as the bottom (front) electrode in PSCs is promising. Jia et al.119 also reported a vein-like TCE based on copper electroless deposition120 on a leaf vein scaffold. They first chemically etched the tissues and cells on a real leaf and then dried and flattened the vein network as a scaffold template for copper electroless deposition.120Fig. 6c(i) and (ii) compare the micrographs of a real Magnolia liliiflora leaf vein (MLLV) with a Cu-plated MLLV network prepared via electroless deposition for thirty minutes.119 As a result, these vein-like transparent conducting electrodes display an ultralow sheet resistance of <0.1 Ω sq−1 (much lower than the value of ∼7 Ω sq−1 in PET/ITO), broadband optical transparency >80%, and high current density transport capability >6000 A cm−2. It should be noted that various methods have been developed to construct a metal wire network/grid mimicking this leaf vein like TCE. According to the metal material classification, Cu nanowire networks,121 solution-processed Ag nanowire networks,121–132 lithographically fabricated metal meshes,133 cracked polymers,134 cracked TiO2135 and cracked silica nanoparticle thin layers obtained through novel approaches,136 lithography assisted In2O3 grain boundary,137 and metal nanotrough-like networks138 have been proposed for TCEs. Fig. 6d lists the published results of TCEs with Rsh < 10 Ω sq−1 combined with a transmittance (T) of approximately 80%, in which the ‘black symbols’ denote the TCEs obtained with interconnected metal networks, the ‘red’ ones denote the solution-processed Ag NW films, and the ‘blue’ ones denote the leaf vein involved frameworks. The state-of-the-art ITO has benchmark Rsh of 7 Ω sq−1 and T of 85%. In most of the prior TCE studies, Rsh was in the range of 1–10 Ω sq−1 with a T of ∼80%. It should be noted that leaf vein derived frameworks can exhibit lower Rsh than commercial ITO. For example, Han et al.125 obtained metallized veins through Ag sputtering and achieved a Rsh less than 10 Ω sq−1, which is twice as small as that of ITO while exhibiting a high transmittance of 85% compared to 80% for PET/ITO. In their work, metallization was performed by Ag sputtering in vacuum, and Ag was only coated on one side of the vein. The sputtered Ag has an amorphous nature. These factors jointly lead to a relatively high Rsh, even though this resistance is still smaller than that of ITO. Yu et al.139 employed a polymer-assisted metal deposition to metallize the leaf veins, which enhanced the copper wrapping effect on the veins and thus produced a lower Rsh of 0.25 Ω sq−1. However, the poor copper adhesion on carbon-based veins usually leads to copper delamination and low material stability. Recently, Jia et al.119 utilized electroless copper plating through the Pd seed layer which can be strongly anchored on the vein surface. With this enhanced Pd binding effect, the copper coating has a stronger material stability able to be stored for over one year.
 Fig. 6  Leaf vein design of TCE. (a) (i) Architecture of a leaf vein network, adapted with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2020 Springer. (ii) Image of a typical three-busbar solar cell, adapted with permission from online sources.140 (b) (i) The photograph of a flexible WO3/Ag hierarchical metal grid (HMG) film. (ii) SEM image of the flexible WO3/Ag HMG film. (iii) The photograph showing the hierarchical structure of a leaf, adapted from ref. 118, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) An optical microscopic image of (i) Magnolia liliiflora leaf vein, (ii) Cu-plated leaf vein, adapted with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2019 Springer, and (d) a literature survey for the leaf vein-like transparent electrodes summarizing different materials with respect to optical transmission and sheet resistance. 
So far, these metallized vein network TCEs are not widely used in PSCs and have only been attempted in several seminal works in OPVs. Properly engineering the geometric and topological layout of the vein network remains the major challenge due to the trade-off between optical transparency and electrical conductance. Recently, Wang et al.141 designed Cu nanowires with different diameters to construct the hierarchical network for OPVs (Fig. 7a). They used both large-diameter-long (LDL) Cu NWs (with an average diameter of 120 nm and an average length of 150 μm) and small-diameter-short (SDS) Cu NWs (with an average diameter of 25 nm and an average length of 30 μm) as well as an LDL and SDS mixture with different weight ratios to optimize the geometric layout of the vein network. As a result, a hybrid nanowire network composed of 25 wt% LDL and 75 wt% SDS nanowires exhibits the best performance due to the highest transparency and conductance at this ratio (Fig. 7b). For OPVs, the devices employing different types of Cu NWs were fabricated. In accordance with the transparency and conductance trend, the device with 25 wt% LDL and 75 wt% SDS showed the highest values of both FF and JSC, which can be attributed to the efficient light harvesting and charge collection features of this bottom electrode (Fig. 7c). In terms of the geometric optimization of the vein network, Han et al.85 engineered the quasi-fractal (or hierarchical) structure using a natural leaf template. Fractal in mathematics is a subset of Euclidean space with a complex dimension exceeding its topological dimension, and has many embodiments in nature such as trees, vertebrate lungs, and circulatory or neuron systems (will be detailed in Section 4.2 – Fractal neurons). For leaf vein-like electrode usage in solar cells, the key justification is based on an assumption that the electrical current flow in this structure is analogous to the fluid flow, as both the current flow and inviscid fluid flow can be mathematically described by the Laplace equation, fundamentally supporting its electrode application.142 Compared to a uniform network, such a quasi-fractal (or hierarchical bar-finger) structure derived from the design of natural leaf vein will display a better performance for charge carrier transport and collection. As shown in Fig. 6, the network mainly consists of secondary veins with emanated smaller veins, forming an angular network (reticulate veins). The smallest veins have a diameter of ∼50–110 μm, being split into shorter branches at each node. Such a network pattern is usually termed as ‘umbrella trees’, belonging to non-uniform fractals with fractal properties pertaining to the ‘canopy’ which refers to a structure that is formed by the branch tips rather than the whole pattern.143 Fractal analysis has been used as a powerful tool to characterize the complexity of plant structures. In fractals, the branch ordering taxonomy-based method is usually used for fractal dimension determination.144,145 However, the irregular nature of the venation network in natural leaf vein usually leads to large uncertainties in fractal characterization. Alternatively, angle determination between sub-veins at the bifurcation level is an easier way. Umbrella canopies typically display a particular branching angle at a given magnification ratio, which is usually named the smallest angle compatible with self-avoidance (in two-dimension).143 In fractal geometry of mathematics, a fractal dimension is usually characterized as a measure of the space-filling capacity of a pattern that tells how a fractal scales differently from the space where it is embedded. By determining the branching angle in a leaf vein, a fractal dimension (Ds) of 1.4 ± 0.2 can be determined, falling within the range of 1.4–1.8, which confirms that such a network is an approximate non-uniform fractal.146 In addition, Han et al.125 also developed a theoretical fractal model of a leaf vein-like electrode network subjected to three optimization conditions: (i) maximal surface coverage; (ii) uniform current density; and (iii) minimal overall resistance at fixed shading (Fig. 7d). To maximize the surface coverage, Ds needs to be approximately two. A minimal overall resistance is theoretically incompatible with the requirement of either maximal surface coverage or uniform current density. With topological extension, the network in the third direction can satisfy the requirements of both maximal surface coverage and uniform current density. As a result, this leaf vein-like quasi-fractal structure (hierarchical) displays a smaller contact resistance of 2.6 Ω, compared to the values of 14.8 Ω from the uniform (non-hierarchical) network and 28.4 Ω from ITO as shown in Fig. 7e. Furthermore, the quasi-fractal-based PV cell could exhibit a slightly higher efficiency of 5.46% than the value of 5.37% from the non-hierarchical network electrodes (Fig. 7f).
 Fig. 7  Geometric and topological engineering of a conducting transparent electrode (CTE). (a) SEM image of a hybrid nanowire network consisting of 25% long nanowires (marked by red colour) and 75% short nanowires (marked by green colour). (b) Comparison of the transmittance and sheet resistance of electrodes composed of nanowires with different geometrical parameters. (c) J–V curves of solar cells based on hybrid Cu nanowire electrodes. Inset: Schematic illustration of the solar cell architecture, adapted with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Multiple-order and quasi-fractal QF network design of the CTE. (e) Comparison of the sheet resistance and resistance of C, QF and ITO films. (f) J–V characteristics of the PV cells based on QF, C, and ITO electrodes under AM1.5 illumination. Inset: Cross-sectional SEM image of the device architecture, adapted with permission from ref. 125, Copyright 2016 Springer Nature. 

3.2.1 Metal foil electrode. 
Above we have discussed PSCs obtained with a conventional fabrication procedure starting from a transparent flexible bottom electrode, followed by deposition of multiple layers, and ending with a top electrode (Fig. 8a), where the transparent bottom substrate can be either polymeric (plastic) glasses (mentioned above), willow glass (a PCE of 13.14% to 18.1% has been demonstrated),147,148 mica (layered framework of aluminosilicate; a mica/ITO based device displays a PCE of 9.67%),149 and even paper (a PCE of 9.67% has been demonstrated).150 PSC manufacturing from a metal foil electrode presents an unconventional but promising strategy. Fig. 8b shows the device assembly procedure, where multiple layers are deposited directly on the foil substrate, followed by the addition of the top transparent electrode. As the metal foil substrates are often opaque, the counter (top) electrodes need to be transparent. Table 2 summarizes the performances of representative flexible PSCs built on the metal foil substrates.99–102,151–154 Titanium foil (Ti-foil) is the most frequently used foil substrate, as it would be convenient to obtain a TiO2 layer on top of Ti-foil which is known as an efficient ETL in PSCs. A record PCE of 14.9% has been obtained by Han et al.99 using the device structure of Au/Cu/HTL/MAPbI3/TiO2/Ti-foil. This relatively high PCE comes from the high crystalline quality and low number of oxygen vacancies of the TiO2 layer. The oxygen vacancies on the oxidized Ti-foil surface determine the effectiveness of the TiO2 ETL. Minimizing the number of oxygen vacancies of the TiO2 ETL benefits the electron collection efficiency and thus improves the PCE. Furthermore, such Ti-foil-based PSCs exhibit higher fatigue resistance than those using the conventional ITO/PET substrate, by showing 100% initial PCE maintenance after 1000 times bending at a bending radius of 4 mm. In addition to Ti-foil, copper foil (Cu-foil) has also been used in flexible PSCs. Ahmadi et al.154 prepared cuprous iodide on a Cu-foil by exposing the precleaned Cu-foil in iodide vapor, which serves as the hole transport layer (HTL) for the device. After being coated with the perovskite, the device is then coated by a ZnO ETL, followed by spray coating of Ag NWs as the top electrode, which exhibited a PCE of 12.80%. These foil-based solar cells show good feasibility of perovskite PV-MPS but present challenges in top transparent electrode manufacturing and limited mechanical stretchability of the bottom metal foils.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of two different fabrication procedures of perovskite solar cells. (a) Manufacturing of perovskite solar cells using a transparent conducting substrate (e.g. ITO/glass) as the bottom electrode. (b) Manufacturing of perovskite solar cells using metal foil as the bottom electrode. 
Table 2 Summary of the performances of flexible perovskite solar cells based on metal foil substrates




Device structure
Active area (cm2)

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.




Ti foil/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag
0.135
9.5
0.899
0.73
6.15

101



Ti foil/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag NWs
0.135
16.48
0.918
0.49
7.45

151



Ti foil/SiO2/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag/ITO
0.135
18.5
0.998
0.61
11.01

100



Ti foil/TiO2/Al2O3/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/(transparent conductive adhesive)/(PET film with embedded Ni mesh)
NA
17
0.983
0.61
10.3

102



Ti foil/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Cu/Au
0.14
17.9
1.09
0.74
14.9

99



Ti foil/TiO2 nanotube/MAPbI3/carbon nanotube (CNT) network composite with spiro-OMeTAD
0.16
14.36
0.99
0.68
8.31

152



Cu foil/CuI/MAPbI3/ZnO/Ag
0.1
22.5
0.958
0.594
12.8

154







3.2.2 Fiber electrode for fabrics. 
Fiber-structured energy devices, including fiber-based triboelectric nanogenerators, batteries, supercapacitors, sensors, chromic devices, solar cells, etc., have recently received enormous attention due to their high potential for integration into wearable textiles.155–170 By weaving these fiber devices into clothes with proper fibrous structural design, clothing integrated MPS can be easily obtained. As shown in Fig. 9a(i), this will provide access to multiple built-in sensors, small electronics and applications integrated within the MPS clothing. Fig. 9a(ii) and (iii) show the concept that a PSC fiber device can be incorporated into the smart fabrics to power multiple functional electronics. Research and development of these MPS fabric power plants may be further stimulated by the fast-growing need for near-body/on-body electronics.171,172 From a technical point of view, compared to the common thin film-based PSCs, many technical challenges, such as the complication of fiber axial perovskite synthesis, curvature interface manipulation, and nonuniform light exposure on PSCs with adoption of a 1D-fiber (cylinder-type) geometry, need to be considered. In any case, the device fabrication starts with the fiber electrode. In 2014, Qiu et al.173 utilized a stainless-steel fiber as the backbone cathode for a fiber PSC device. Fig. 9b shows the device structure. The steel fiber was sequentially dip-coated by an n-type TiO2 compact layer and a mesoporous layer, followed by the perovskite being infiltrated into the mesopores. The HTL was encrusted through dip coating and the device was finalized by the dry-drawing from a spinnable CNT array of transparent multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) with an average diameter of 10 nm. The fiber-shaped PSCs delivered a PCE of 3.3%, with an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.664 V, a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 10.2 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.487, demonstrating the earliest attempts for PSC fabrics. In contrast, Li et al.174 employed a multi-twisted CNT as the backbone core (Fig. 9c). They chose the highly flexible CNT fiber that is directly spun-twisted from a spinnable CNT array as the anode and sequentially coated thin layers of compact n-TiO2, meso-TiO2, CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, poly(3-hexylthiophene)/single-walled carbon nanotube (P3HT/SWNT), and silver (Ag) nanowire network from the inside out, and used a Ag nanowire network as the outside effective contact bridging the neighbouring CNT fiber electrodes. The device exhibits a champion PCE of 3.03%, with VOC = 0.615 V, JSC = 8.75 mA cm−2, and FF = 56.4% and could withstand 1000 bending cycles with no significant efficiency loss. Besides the CNT and steel fiber, Ti wire is another candidate for the backbone electrode. Hu et al.175 utilized the Ti wire as the core backbone for the fiber PSC. As shown in Fig. 9d, an integrated device structure of Ti/c-TiO2/meso-TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/Au has been assembled in a fiber format, where a thin layer of Au nanoparticles (NPs) was employed as the top semi-transparent electrode. The device exhibits a 5.3% PCE under AM 1.5 illumination and an apparent 8.4% efficiency in a diffuse model. Qiu et al.176 further modified the Ti wire (core backbone of the fiber cell device) and used the transparent aligned CNT sheet as the counter electrode (Fig. 9e). With an anodization process, an array of TiO2 nanotubes were radially grown on the Ti-wire, showing a mesoporous configuration. Then a porous, sponge-like PbO layer was coated on the TiO2 array using cathodic deposition, followed by addition of hydroiodic acid to form the PbI2 precursor of the perovskite. After conversion into the perovskite by dipping into methylammonium iodide (MAI) solution and being coated with the HTL and top electrode (wrapped by a transparent CNT tape with 80% transmittance in the 400–800 nm spectrum range and 500 S cm−1 electrical conductivity), the device shows a PCE of 6.8%, with a VOC of 0.852 V and a JSC of 16.1 mA cm−2. Further covering a 5 nm Ag outside the CNT led to a PCE increase to 7.1%. Table 3 summarizes the device performance parameters of the fabric PSCs. Overall, the novel fabric structure and high performance of PSCs could help pave the way for future self-powering e-textiles. Composing the above fiber-based solar cells into wearable textiles requires properly weaving them in accordance with an appropriate fibrous structural design. Examples of fibrous structures are observed in many processes in nature, with one well-known example being the spider web.177 Different fibrous structures will have different weights, energy densities, and mechanical properties in the final MPS products. In nature, in order to confer certain mechanical properties, the fibers are usually arranged in a specific pattern. For example, in the palm trunk of coconut palm, there are three types of fibers with different patterns located in different regions in the trunk (the cortex, the peripheral zone and the central zone): the outer surface cortex is composed of numerous longitudinal fibrous strands; the periphery contains a narrow layer of parenchyma cells and high density vascular bundles forming a hardened support for the tree; the central cylinder consists of ground parenchymatous tissues scattered with vascular bundles with a higher moisture density and responsible for longitudinal matter transport.178,179 Weaving the fiber into different patterns with involvement of other types of fiber components could diversify the functionalities. Similar to the palm trunk, in wood there are parallel tubular cells which are reinforced with cellulose fibrils in a spiral wound, embedded in a matrix of hemicellulose and lignin. The winding angle of fibrils leads to different mechanical properties (such as stiffness and strength180–183) for the wood. Fig. 10a shows the wood fibril bundles at different scales. Bamboo is another example and is one of the strongest natural fiber composites. Fig. 10b shows the hierarchical structure of bamboo, where the vascular bundles in the parenchyma matrix are surrounded by supporting fibers. Cellulose microfibrils reinforce the intertwined hemicellulose–lignin matrix.
 Fig. 9  The design of a PSC fibrous device. (a) (i) Illustration of a smart clothing integrated with electronic devices, picture credits to an online resource.187 (ii) Photograph of a fibrous perovskite solar cell. (iii) Schematic illustration of the structure of the fibrous perovskite solar cell, adapted with permission from ref. 188, Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–e) The schematic illustration and SEM image showing the structure of (b) a wearable double-twisted fibrous perovskite solar cell based on stainless steel, adapted with permission from ref. 173, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) A design of a fibrous perovskite solar cell based on CNT fibers, adapted with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) A design of a fibrous perovskite solar cell based on Ti wire, adapted with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Another design of a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell based on a modified Ti wire and a CNT sheet, adapted with permission from ref. 176, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Table 3 Summary of the PV parameters of state-of-the-art fiber-shaped PSCs




Device structure

J
SC (mA cm−2)

V
OC (V)
FF
PCE (%)
Ref.




Stainless steel/compact layer/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT sheet
10.2
0.667
0.487
3.3

173



CNT fiber/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/P3HT-SWNT/CNT
8.75
0.615
0.564
3.03

174



Ti wire/TiO2 nanotube/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT
3.5
0.63
—
5.22

188



Ti wire/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
12.32
0.714
0.609
5.35

175



Ti nanowire/compact TiO2/TiO2 nanotube/MAPbI3/transparent CNT
14.2
0.85
0.56
7.1

176



Ti wire/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au
14.18
0.96
0.66
7.53

189





 Fig. 10  Microscopic structures in natural plants. (a) Schematic illustration of the structure of wood fibril bundles at different scales, adapted with permission from an online resource.190 (b) Schematic illustration of the hierarchical structure of bamboo, adapted with permission from an online resource,191 and ref. 192–196, Copyright 2011, 2015, and 2018 Springer Nature, 2016 Cabi, and 2019 Frontiers. 
Overall, in terms of some specific requirements regarding the mechanical properties for the MPS products, these wood and bamboo structure inspired innovations are promising. For example, Sun et al.184 proposed a bamboo-like graphitic carbon nanofiber for energy storage applications. The design was inspired by the bamboo structure where there is a periodic distribution of interior holes along with the length and graded pore structure at the cross-section, which would not only enhance the stability with different mechanical deformations but also provide a higher surface area for the access of electrolyte and lower ion-transport resistance. The final device exhibits excellent performance, even when operated under conditions of bending at 90° and twisting at 180°. Recently, Zhu et al.185 reported a bamboo derived biodegradable and biocompatible transparent conductive electrode for PSCs, which exhibits extreme flexibility and light-weight. The bamboo-based bioelectrode PSCs display a PCE of 11.68%, the highest among all biomass-based PSCs. Meanwhile, the flexible device has a highly bendable mechanical stability, maintaining over 70% of its original PCE after 1000 bending cycles at a 4 mm curvature radius. Cai et al.186 developed an efficient HTL consisting of P3HT and bamboo-structured CNTs for PSCs. The addition of bamboo-structured CNTs (1–2 wt%) led to over one-order-of-magnitude higher conductivity and two-order faster interfacial charge transport. These attempts are good examples of how the structured bio-inspired materials could lead to higher mechanical performance of solar cells. Nevertheless, weaving the fiber-like solar cells into fabric patterns by means of bio-inspired pathways (e.g., spider web) or some art forms (e.g., kirigami and origami) might lead to a fabric PV-MPS with unexpected mechanical performance.


3.3.3 Paper-electrode substrate. 
To extend the applied potential in MPS, PSCs with extreme mechanical stretchability are of great interest. This will require the PSCs to have recoverable device performance after various mechanical deformations including stretching, twisting, bending, and delamination. Many prior efforts have mainly focused on bending durability only, leaving stretchability vastly unexplored. Although the aforementioned fiber-structured device and textile-type devices24,29,30 have shown great robustness against various mechanical deformations,175,176,188,197,198 balancing the mechanical performance with PCE is still a technical challenge. The layer-by-layer coating on a metal-fiber backbone needs to be uniform and should have minimized defect density; otherwise, the PCE will drop significantly. The connection of individual fiber-devices into a whole fabric needs to be carefully designed to reduce the longitudinal series resistance for charge transport. For the textile-type device where manufacturing of multiple layers is deposited on a textile, the rough and curved surface of the textile could induce many unwanted interface issues for the whole device. Alternatively, another design could be the “island-bridge” structure (consisting of “device islands” and “wire bridges” connecting these islands, derived from silicon-based stretchable electronics199 and frequently utilized for stretchable systems200), which have already been applied in PSCs. The “island-bridge” design first fabricates the device on a paper-electrode substrate, followed by a papercraft with proper post-cutting (kirigami) or post-folding (origami).201 This enables the PSCs to preserve their initial PCEs under large mechanical deformations such as stretching, bending, and twisting. Jo et al.202 reported that the PSCs based on the kirigami- and origami-strategies demonstrated 400% stretchability and a high areal coverage. The main drawback of the “island-bridge” design is the trade-off between the coverage-area and stretchability. The higher ratio of the “bridge” area will produce a better stretchability, but will lower the total output power due to the smaller area of the “device island” (geometrical fill factor). Fig. 11a(i) shows a solution to this trade-off dilemma. By adopting the origami folding, the bridge can be folded up and stacked in the device region (“island”). This strategy allows an efficient spatial usage (or geometric fill factor) close to 100% (Fig. 11a(ii)). Meanwhile, the stretchability could be maximized by employing different kirigami designs. Li et al.203 also adopted the kirigami-based cutting strategy for a stretchable PSC. Fig. 11b(i) and (ii) show this cutting design, with the out-of-plane deformation possibly being able to sufficiently disperse the stress load, thus increasing the stretchability. The kirigami-based PSCs with an optimal geometric design exhibited high stretchability with a strain of 200%, high twistability with an angle of up to 450°, and high bendability with a radius down to 0.5 mm. Furthermore, the kirigami-based PSCs displayed good mechanical endurance with an invariant PCE after 1000 repetitive stretching, twisting, and bending cycles. Fig. 11b(iii) and (iv) show the photograph of kirigami-based PSCs mounted on a human wrist with accommodation to the stretching deformation. Qi et al.204 also reported kirigami structured PSCs with serpentine interconnects. Fig. 11c shows the schematic diagram and photograph of the stretchable PSCs. The yellow area in Fig. 11c(i) is the gold electrode from which the sub-cells are arranged in arrays. A packaging layer of Eco-flex is further used at both sides of the cell to protect the device. As a result, the obtained devices exhibited a high and stable PCE of 17.68% with a robust mechanical cycling performance of 87% of the initial PCE after 300 cycles of continuous stretching under a large stretching ratio of 80%. The optimized PSC also shows stable efficiency in a harsh environment (80% relative humidity) for 10 days. Overall, research on stretchable device platforms for PSCs is still at the development stage. In addition to the “island-bridge” structure,204 pre-strained wrinkle structure24 and papercraft-inspired approaches202–205 have also been investigated to realize the PSC based portable MPS. This will rely on various state-of-the-art fabrication technologies including photolithography, laser processing, and 3D printing for engineering, optimizing and innovating new device architectures.
 Fig. 11  Adaptation of ‘kirigami’ and ‘origami’ strategies in designing flexible perovskite solar cells. (a) (i) Schematic diagrams of the kirigami/origami approach to achieve a stretchable flexible PSC with high coverage. (ii) Photographs of the stretchable PSC module connected to a fan under sunlight, adapted with permission from ref. 202, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) (i) and (ii) Schematic illustration of the structure using the kirigami-based cutting strategy at (i) the initial state and (ii) the stretching state. (iii) Photograph showing the kirigami-based PSC device in the stretching state. (iv) Photograph of kirigami-based PSCs mounted on a human wrist accommodating the stretching deformation, adapted with permission from ref. 203, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Schematic illustration showing the architecture of the kirigami-structured PSC with serpentine interconnect design. (ii) Zoom-in view showing the details of the serpentine interconnect substrate design. (iii) Photograph of the kirigami-structured PSC device with serpentine interconnects, adapted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4. Charge transport layer
PSCs are layer-by-layer stacking-structured devices with the core perovskite layer absorbing the light and generating excited electrons and holes, which need to be transferred across multiple interfaces before being collected by the electrodes. Charge transfer layers (CTLs) are responsible for minimizing the charge losses during the interfacial transfer process. In the case of PSCs, multiple HTL and ETL materials have been applied following several selection rules of (i) excellent thermal/photochemical stability; (ii) suitable highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)/lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level aligning with those of the perovskite; (iii) optimal charge carrier mobility for efficient transport; (iv) good processing ability; (v) good operational phase stability; (vi) low cost and easy attainability; and (vii) proper optical transparency. So far, multiple artificial CTL materials including spiro-OMeTAD,206–210 spiro-like-based derivatives,211–221 carbocyclic small molecules,221–225 nitrogen-, sulfur-, oxygen-, or silicon-containing organics,226–235 metallomacrocycle-based materials,236–238 π-conjugated oligomers, and other inorganic semiconductors239 have been utilized as the HTL for PSCs. Meanwhile, metal oxides (e.g., TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, WO3),240–242 organic n-type materials (PCBM, ICBA243–251), core–shell nanoparticles,252 plasmonic nanoparticles,253–255etc. have been employed as the ETL for PSCs. Optimal CTL materials satisfying all the aforementioned requirements might lead to a new route towards minimized energy losses during interfacial transport in PSCs. Hence, material expansion from these commonly used artificial materials to some novel functional materials that have not been well recognized yet could be a promising research direction, especially if they are cheaper, more abundant and more easily obtainable.
Natural/bio-materials offer such an opportunity. Incorporation of natural bio-semiconductors into electronic, information processing and storage devices, and bio-/artificial-semiconductor interfacing, are growing research areas. New fields at the intersection of synthetic biology and semiconductor technology–semiconductor synthetic biology (SemiSynBio) has been rapidly developing to take advantage of significant efficiency and information processing capabilities from biological systems compared to the best equivalent silicon-based systems. Specifically, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and small cell integrated functional devices, biological/artificial electronics, and biological/artificial coupling systems with high-level automation have been attempted.256 Using natural/bio-semiconducting materials not only broadens the material inventory for seeking a suitable CTL material for ultrahigh-efficiency PSCs, but also offers great opportunities to redefine the architecture and manufacturing of PSCs in a more efficient or intelligent way towards MPS-oriented products.
4.1 DNA

4.1.1 DNA charge transport (CT) mechanism. 
Among those biomaterials of interest, charge transport and relevant charge transfer processes in double helical DNA have attracted huge interest over decades due to their close relevance to the oxidative damage in DNA, which is believed to be related to aging and senility of all living creatures.257,258 In recent decades, research of DNA has discovered long-range charge transport phenomena in DNA and has shown the adaptability in defined nanostructures259 by proper design and synthesis, further stimulating the research interest in DNA serving as a building block for nanoelectronic applications. As shown in Fig. 12a, DNA has four chemical bases: adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and thymine (T), where A pairs up with T, while C pairs with G to form the ‘base pair’ units. Each base is also attached to a phosphate molecule and a sugar molecule, forming a cluster called a ‘nucleotide’. Nucleotides are arranged in two long-strands with a spiral form, called a ‘double helix’. The double helix DNA is analogous to a spiral staircase, with the base pairs being the individual steps, while the sugar and phosphate molecules are the vertical railings. Sequencing the base pairs and tuning the pair numbers (coding) of DNA allows a high degree of variability. Each organism has a unique DNA sequence, which details their genetic information. Human DNA consists of about 3 billion base pairs, with 96% similarity to the DNA sequence of great ape species. With the base pair complexity, the charge transfer (CT) behaviour in the DNA double helix can be different. Using different DNA models, multiple mechanisms have been proposed for interpreting the CT along the DNA chains. Fig. 12b summarizes these mechanisms including (i) ballistic (wire-like) transport, (ii) super-exchange, (iii) A-hopping, (iv) G-hopping, and (v) polaronic hopping. The ballistic (wire-like) CT mechanism260 assumes a delocalized π-bond (created by the stacked nucleobases of DNA) through which the injected charge can propagate. Such a ballistic mechanism was proposed by Barton et al.260 to rationalize the observations of a picosecond transfer photoinduced CT between rhodium and ruthenium metallo-complexes intercalated in a DNA stack (Fig. 12b(i)). Super-exchange CT261–263 assumes a well localized donor and acceptor, which occurs when there are large energy gaps between the donor/acceptor and bridge energies. In this way, quantum tunnelling via the states of the intervening bridge dominates the transport, which has been verified by the theoretical prediction of CT in short DNA sequences (Fig. 12b(ii)). Such a CT mechanism is similar to those in proteins, with an exponential decay constant of ∼1 Å−1.263–265 The A-hopping mechanism266 is a multi-step transport which subdivides the transport into two mechanisms: (i) transport between AT pairs and (ii) transport between AT and CG pairs. Charge transport follows an incoherent hopping mechanism among the transport between AT nucleobases but changes into a thermally activated injection when transporting from AT to CG pairs (Fig. 12b(iii)). In G-hopping,267,268 a hole moves between CG nucleobases, mediated by an intervening AT (Fig. 12b(iv)). This model has been verified by multiple atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) experiments showing that the electrical resistance of DNA fragments decreases with an increase in the G-content.269–271 Polaronic hopping (Fig. 12b(v)) is related to the electron/hole cloud polarization that is likely delocalized over several base pairs. This polarization arises due to the redistribution of electron density in the DNA themselves272 and/or due to the interaction with the solvent molecules273 and/or the thermally activated polaronic motion. The polaron model is used to rationalize experimental data272 that there is little change in the radical cation migration efficiency through long distances (10–55 base pair) within the DNA. This will lead to a large electron/hole cloud delocalization over several bases, thereby an overall increased conductivity of the DNA.272
 Fig. 12  DNA and related transport mechanisms. (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical structures of DNA and nucleobases, picture credits to an online resource.274 (b) Charge conduction mechanisms in DNA molecules, adapted with permission from ref. 275, Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (c) Energy level diagram of four basic units, two pairs, DNA macromolecules, and various perovskites. 


4.1.2 DNA buffering solar cells. 
DNA and its derivatives have been applied in organic electronics including organic LEDs,276 organic field-effect transistors (OFETs)277 and OPVs,278,279 by optimizing the interfacial electrical contact between the photoactive layers and the electrodes and/or modifying the micromorphology of the complex organics. Recently, Thomas's group280 found a significant exciton disassociation effect upon interfacing the organic photovoltaic system with the DNA molecules. Several DNA-modified ETLs have been applied in organic solar cells with the device structure of ITO/ETL/P3HT:PC70BM/HTL/Ag (Fig. 13a(i)). By using an ETL of DNA, ZnO-NPs, or ZnO-NPs/DNA, the photocarrier behaviour exhibited different dynamics at the interface, thereby showing different PCEs. Fig. 13a(ii) compares the false color NIR transient absorption (TA) maps for the ITO/ETL/P3HT:PC70BM/MoO3/Ag using an empty ETL or a DNA ETL. Incorporation of the DNA ETL led to an obvious change in the photobleaching at different characteristic wavelengths labelled as PB1, PB2, and PB3 of P3HT (Fig. 13a(iii) and (iv)). Spectral cuts at a probe delay of 800 fs of the TA map in Fig. 13a(iv) show significant variations in PB2 and PB3 features, including a strong blue shift of PB2 from the cell using the ZnO-NPs/DNA ETL. This observation suggests that the ZnO-NPs/DNA has a great photo-optical effect on the conjugation length and intrachain coupling of photocarriers in the P3HT. Overall, insertion of this ultrathin DNA layer between the photoactive layer and electrode leads to a more efficient carrier extraction as evidenced by a lower population of trapped excited exciton states and faster extraction at intermediate timescale decays (5 and 100 ps). It should be noted that, in the above work, DNA can also be chemically doped into a p-type HTL with preferable energy levels better matching those of the photoactive layers. For example, via a redox reaction with hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (CTMA), the HOMO can be shifted towards −5.4 eV, perfectly aligning with the valence band maximum (VBM) of the MAPbI3 perovskite, while the LUMO of DNA–CTMA can be maintained as high as −1.1 eV. Such a band structure will efficiently block the electron transfer between DNA–CTMA and the MAPbI3 perovskite due to a large Schottky barrier for the electron, but will secure an efficient hole transfer due to the formation of an Ohmic contact. Yusoff et al.281 recently utilized such a DNA–CTMA as the HTL for perovskite solar cells. The well-aligned energy level of the VBM of MAPbI3 with the HOMO of DNA–CTMA minimizes the energy loss for hole transfer and optimizes the magnitude of VOC from 0.90 V to 1.04 V. The LUMO coefficients are located on the thymine and cytosine units of DNA. By tuning the ratio and thus the LUMO to a higher level, the DNA–CTMA HTL could efficiently block electrons, reducing the recombination loss and enhancing both the JSC and PCE from 19.20 to 20.85 mA cm−2 and from 12.49% to 15.86%, respectively. More recently, our group282 also incorporated the hole-extraction facilitated DNA into the grain boundaries (GBs) of a perovskite film (Fig. 13b(i)). A 3 nm-thick DNA layer bridging the neighbouring perovskite crystal grain can facilitate the charge transfer across the GBs, increasing the charge carrier mobility two times from 1.18 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 2.43 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. As a result, hole extraction throughout the DNA modified device shows a more efficient process with a faster photoluminescence (PL) quenching (Fig. 13b(ii)–(iv)). Consequently, a DNA-modified PSC shows a PCE of 20.63% compared to the value of 18.43% from a reference cell, and the hydrophobic nature of CTMA modified DNA further extends the device's lifetime from the day-scale towards the month-scale.
 Fig. 13  Employment of DNA in organic and perovskite photovoltaics. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of an organic solar cell using DNA as a CTL. (ii) Spectral cuts at a probe delay of 800 fs of the transient absorption of the DNA-incorporated solar cell. (iii) and (iv) Pseudocolor UV-vis transient absorption maps of a solar cell device (iii) with and (iv) without DNA, adapted with permission from ref. 280, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) (i) Schematic illustration of the DNA-integrated perovskite solar cell; (ii) PL emission mapping, (iii) steady state PL spectra, and (iv) time-resolved PL spectra of DNA-integrated MAPbI3 and pristine MAPbI3/hole-transport-layer structures, adapted with permission from ref. 282, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Summary of different types of solar cells being incorporated with DNA: (i) Toschi et al. (ref. 280), (ii) Dagar et al. (ref. 278), (iii) Dagar et al. (ref. 279), (iv) Yusoff et al. (ref. 281), (v) Peng et al. (ref. 283), and (vi) Hou et al. (ref. 282). 
By exploiting its intrinsic molecular conductive nature, DNA can be an excellent integrant in electrically optimizing the properties of functional layers and enhancing the performance of the solar cell device. Fig. 13c summarizes different types of solar cells being incorporated with DNA. It should be noted that PSCs have shown higher PCEs compared to OPVs and represent the optimal platform of applying DNA engineering. Nevertheless, as DNA itself displays complex and multi-hypothetical charge transfer mechanisms, incorporation of DNA into the perovskite system requires an in-depth understanding from the molecular scale to the macroscale for successful device design and operation. More investigations and theoretical models are required to elucidate DNA/perovskite interfacial charge dynamics.

4.2 Fractal neurons

4.2.1 Fractal neurons’ information transport mechanism. 
Fractals are prevalent in nature, in part because of their ability to generate a large surface area within a given volume.143 The fractal leaf vein hierarchy structure, mentioned in the previous section (3.2 Bottom electrode), can efficiently deliver water from the petiole towards the leaf blade. In a broader scale, such a natural fractal design of tree branches allows trees to absorb more sunlight, allows bronchial trees in animals to efficiently transfer oxygen to the bloodstream, and allows the coastlines to sufficiently disperse wave energy from the ocean.284 The nervous system (comprising ∼1011 neurons) in the human brain is another example of fractal geometry as well, with ∼1014 synapses or connections among these brain cells. This indicates an average of 103 connections for each cell through axons reaching out to make the synaptic connections with the dendrites of other neurons. As shown in Fig. 14a, the nervous system is designed in a fractal branching pattern, connecting thousands of neuron's axons and dendrites which allows them to communicate with a large number of neighbouring cells. If the nervous system were designed using a Euclidean geometry, for example in cube-like shapes neatly packed into the brain, each neuron would only connect with at most six other cells, which would not allow the necessary synaptic communication. Overall, the fractal neurons exhibit advantages in delivering, processing and storing information in a more spatially efficient way, which aligns with the fractal geometry structural design. That is, by connecting structural patterns with each other over variable size scales, one can obtain a large surface area and excellent transportability. Accordingly, fractal structural design can efficiently disperse or collect entropy (information), energy, and mass over large temporal and spatial dimensions. Therefore, artificial fractal structures inspired from natural designs (e.g., clouds, coastlines,285 trees, neurons, bronchial trees, blood vessels286) have been widely researched for applied mathematics/physics (e.g., antennas287) and could have great significance when applying them in designing optimized electrodes for solar cells.
 Fig. 14  Fractal design. (a) Photograph showing the neural network, adapted with permission from an online resource.309 (b) (i) Schematic illustration of an idealized morphology of a fractal bulk heterojunction (BHJ) device. (ii) Energy level diagram in the fractal BHJ device, adapted with permission from ref. 291, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) Photograph of moth eye, adapted with permission from an online resource.310 (ii) and (iii) SEM image showing the moth eye nanostructure, adapted with permission from ref. 311, Copyright 2012 Springer Science and Business Media B.V. (d) (i) SEM image of a moth-eye patterned mesoporous-TiO2 layer (Moth-eye TiO2). (ii) Photograph of normal TiO2 and moth-eye TiO2 on glass substrates. (iii) Comparison of the spatial profiles of the optical absorption per unit volume in the vertical direction of perovskite/flat TiO2 and perovskite/Moth-eye TiO2 at a wavelength of 550 nm, adapted with permission from ref. 300, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) (i) Schematic illustration of a photonic-crystal (PC)-based perovskite solar cell. (ii) Cross-sectional SEM image showing the structure of the PC-based perovskite solar cell. (iii) Experimental (solid lines) and theoretical (dashed lines) reflectance of the PC-based orange (orange lines) and blue-green (dark cyan lines) perovskite solar cells. (iv) CIE 1931 chromaticity space showing the color hues of the PC-based (R) red, (O) orange, (G) green, (BG) blue-green, and (B) blue cells, adapted with permission from ref. 305, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (f) (i) Cross-sectional SEM image showing the structure of a solar cell device based on 2D ‘inverse-opal’ perovskite (IOP) photonic films. (ii) AFM topographic image of IOP photonic films. (iii) The variable-angle reflection spectra of IOP films with different micro-geometries, adapted with permission from ref. 306, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 


4.2.2 Fractal vs. Euclidean design in solar cells. 
The fractal neuron concept is predicted to enhance the charge transport efficiency for solar cells. For example, a branched network is responsible for more efficient light manipulation through sublayer scattering. Meanwhile, interfacial charge transfer at a heterojunction with a proper fractal design could further assist the dissociation of the excitonic state into free charges, which aligns with the “bulk heterojunction (BHJ)” idea in OPVs.288 The structured electrodes are also able to collect the photogenerated charge carriers in a more efficient way. For example, Kay et al.289 constructed Fe2O3 electrodes displaying improved transport properties due to a fractal (‘cauliflower’) structure. Meier et al.290 developed a micro-structured PEDOT:PSS HTL on an Al electrode which enhanced the charge flow and improved the PCE for the solar cell. Recently, Chamousis et al.291 also used fractal electrodes to promote charge separation and extraction from the illuminated photoactive layer. Fig. 14b(i) shows a fractal silver layer with a dendritic topography, coated by a thin PEDOT:PSS HTL used as the photoelectrode. The fractal silver layer on the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate was prepared via electrochemical deposition of silver sulfate (Ag2SO4) under diffusion-limited conditions.292–296 Such a spatial stretching structure benefits the charge flow from the photoactive layer towards the photoelectrode, as illustrated in the energy level diagram in Fig. 14b(ii).


4.2.3 Fractal structure for light manipulation. 
Fractal structures inspired and/or mimicked from examples in nature have been employed in designing high-performance functional structures for various applications.297–299 In solar cell research, these fractal structure designs have been made to manipulate the light for (i) optical reinforcement for higher photocurrent through multiple effects (e.g., anti-reflection effect) and/or (ii) specific coloration for devices through the introduction of ‘artificially colored’ meta-structures. Light manipulation using the anti-reflective function of the structures has been a highlighted part of their applications. For solar cells, optical loss by light reflection at surfaces is responsible for 14% of the total losses. Thus, it is critical to reduce the reflection losses to improve the PCE. Optical reflection occurs at the interface between two media having different optical refractive indices and can be explained by Fresnel's equations.300–302 When light passes through two media of refractive indices n1 and n2, respectively, the reflection (R) at the interface can be predicted using the equation of R = [(n2 − n1)/(n2 + n1)2]. A smaller difference between the refractive indices of the two media will result in less reflection. For 3D structures having subwavelength periods or lengths, the effective refractive index of the system is determined by the volume fraction.303 The eyes of certain species of moths, butterflies, and flies have such a fractal microscopic design with arrays of protuberances which have dimensions smaller than the wavelength of the incident light upon them. Fig. 14c(i) shows a picture of a moth's eye (Cephonodes hylas) with a microscopic view showing the arrays of protuberances (Fig. 14c(ii) and (iii)). Such a feature forms a region with a graded refractive index at an interface (between two media), which can substantially reduce the amount of light that is reflected by the interface. As a result, the reflectance reduction is thought to increase the sensitivity of the visual system of the species. This fractal microstructure also leads to the transparent sections of an insect's wing, giving them a camouflaging effect. On the basis of this fractal moth-eye anti-reflection strategy, an improvement in transparency at the front contact of solar cells has been attempted.
One example in PSCs is the structural modification of the TiO2 ETL in an n–i–p device architecture.304 Kang et al.300 reported utilizing the nanopatterned mp-TiO2 layers with a conical shaped ‘moth-eye’ structure (of a 500 nm-dorm feature) for improving the light harvesting efficiency (LHE). This bio-inspired fractal nanostructure can reduce the reflection at the interface between the mp-TiO2 ETL and the MAPbI3 photoactive layer as the fractal pattern induced optical manipulation which resulted in an antireflective property. Using soft nanoimprinting lithography and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamping methods, a moth-eye patterned mp-TiO2 layer was successfully obtained, showing a well-ordered periodic 2D hexagonal symmetry (Fig. 14d(i)). The optical enhancement from the moth-eye patterned mp-TiO2 layer was also observed from the photograph of a real film, as can be seen from the colorful surface (light scattered) of the patterned mp-TiO2 film in Fig. 14d(ii). In addition, the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method also predicts the optimized optical field distribution in the fractally patterned mp-TiO2 film (Fig. 14d(iii)). As a result, in comparison with the flat layer, PSCs incorporating the moth-eye TiO2 exhibit a 5.3% enhancement of photocurrent and improve the PCE from 15.74% to 17.48%.
The fractal structure in the eye or wings of insects also leads to the strong coloration. This structural color, in contrast to dyes or pigments, originates from the interference of ordered coherent scattering of light waves, which provides the coloration for species. For example, the fractal structure, and the resultant color, in the wings of butterflies is important for camouflage, mating, and warning. Similarly, from the art perspective for the MPS products, PVs with aesthetical versatility, appealing appearance and colorfully vivid features are becoming more and more important in modern life. Beyond the basic power supplier function, multiple products such as building integrated PV and PV built-in clothing also must consider the aesthetics of the end product. In regards to this, Zhang et al.305 developed a multilayered scaffold that can provide optical reflection at certain visible wavelengths and provide the PSC device with structural colors. Fig. 14e(i) and (ii) show the device architecture incorporating a porous photonic crystal (PC) based scaffold with dual functionalities of optical reflection and charge transport. By precisely tuning the reflectance peak of the PC and the absorption from the infiltrated perovskite, vivid iridescences with variable colors ranging across the visible spectrum can be obtained. For example, Fig. 14e(iii) shows the reflectance spectra of an orange (orange lines) and blue-green (dark cyan lines) PSC using the PC scaffold. On further tuning the PC and perovskite nanostructures, colors ranging from red (0.41, 0.34) to orange (0.41, 0.40), green (0.33, 0.41), blue-green (0.29, 0.35), and blue (0.29, 0.30) in the chromaticity space have been obtained for the PSC devices (Fig. 14e(iv)). These PSCs with a wide range of iridescence also exhibit efficient performance with PCEs of up to 8.8% with a blue hue. The use of natural fractal inspired structural colors, rather than utilizing pigments or dyes, as meta-optical materials provides a promising outlook for development of PSCs and their MPS products.
Meng et al.306 also reported vivid colored PSCs using 2D ‘inverse-opal’ perovskite (IOP) photonic films. Typically, the inverse-opal (IO) structured films (film replicas containing colloidal crystals (artificial opals)) are composed of patterns with ordered void arrays surrounded by solid materials in continuous alternations of high and low refractive indices.307 Such a structure affects the light wave propagation and alters the optical properties of the film.308 The 2D IOP film can be fabricated via template-assisted spin-coating processing. Fig. 14f(i) and (ii) show the microscopic structure. Additionally, the IOP film makes the angular dependency of color variation possible, which originated from the optical reflection of the nanostructures (Fig. 14f(iii)). This feature can allow PSCs to be utilized for various applications that require aesthetic functions. Briefly, specifically tuning the IOP micro-geometry and the optical properties of the perovskite (by changing the material composition at the crystallographic A, B and X-sites of the ABX3 halide perovskite), colorful devices with good PCEs (6.7% to 11.2%) have been obtained.

4.3 Bacteriorhodopsin (bR)

4.3.1 Natural role of bR. 
Bacteriorhodopsin (bR) protein extracted from Halobacterium salinarum has been broadly utilized in multiple biohybrid electronics known as “bioelectronics” that merges current electronic techniques with biology.312 The bR (playing the role of a light-driven proton pump in the purple membrane (PM) of the archaea Halobacterium salinarum) consists of seven-transmembrane (7TM) helices and a retinal chromophore covalently bound in the central region through a protonated Schiff base to a lysine residue (Fig. 15a(i)). The PM (Fig. 15a(ii) and (iii)) is composed of a 2D hexagonal crystal with an ∼6.2 nm unit cell (containing the bR trimer and lipid molecules as the intertrimer medium). The photocycle in bR can be initiated by the photon absorption at the covalently bound chromophore retinal which leads to a series of conformational changes within the protein and ultimately to the proton transport across the cell membrane. Such a photon-activated mechanism, along with the ability of bR to regenerate, makes it possible to develop bR-based nano-optoelectronics.313 For example, the aligned bR PM film on ITO has shown an efficient and stable photocurrent response.314 Early attempts of utilization of bR as a light-activated component in PV cells exhibited 9.73 mV cm−2 and 41.7 mV cm−2 in dry and aqueous systems, respectively.315 Although there have been many successful cases of bR-based biohybrid electronics (which have been well reviewed elsewhere312), practical utilization of these biomolecular-based components in electronics requires a detailed understanding of the coupling of these individual bR molecules to the macroscopic surfaces of electrodes, as well as the evolutions in the electronic environment under dynamic (nonequilibrium) conditions.316 Prior research has revealed that bR can be fully functional over a wide range of temperatures and pH, while the conductivity of bR could be separated into two regimes, determined by various charge transport mechanisms.317–319 At lower temperatures (T < 250 K), the electrical conductance is dominated by the electron tunneling mechanism which switches to the electron hopping mechanism as the temperature increases.317 The electron hopping mechanism will be affected by the removal of the retinal chromophore within the bR. The interaction intensity between the bR protein and the electrode substrate can also affect the transport mechanism.318
 Fig. 15  Bacteriorhodopsin (bR) related CTL application in PVs. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the bacteriorhodopsin (bR) in archaea Halobacterium salinarum, adapted with permission from an online resource.338 (ii) Unit cell structure and (iii) top view of multiple unit cells of the purple membrane (PM) containing bR trimer and lipid molecules, adapted with permission from online resources.339,340 (b) (i) Energy level diagram of charge carrier injection in the bR/TiO2 photoanode cell. (ii) SEM image of the TiO2 nanotube arrays with the inset showing the cross-sectional view, adapted with permission from ref. 313, Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) The equivalent energy level diagram of the photochemical reaction in a bR-integrated photovoltaic stacking system. (ii) Schematic illustration showing the structure of the bR/AuNPs heterogeneous multilayers, adapted with permission from ref. 320, Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) (i) Energy level diagram of a bR-integrated perovskite solar cell (BPSC). (ii) Schematic illustration of the architecture of the BPSC, adapted with permission from ref. 328, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 


4.3.2 Applied role of bR. 
As the bR is responsible for a series of photochemical reactions ultimately leading to the protons pumping across the membrane, PVs can utilize each individual reaction to promote either efficient photon absorption or charge transport. Hence, different operating mechanisms in regards to bR being applied in PVs have been reported. Table 4 summarizes the studies that used bR to promote charge transport in related optoelectronics. For example, Allam et al.313 reported on the assembly and utilization of a bR/TiO2 nanotube array as the photoelectrode in photoelectrochemical applications. The ∼7 μm thick nanotube array of TiO2 films was fabricated by room-temperature anodization of Ti-foil in formamide electrolytes containing NH4F, followed by sensitization with bR. This nanotube array of TiO2 enables sufficient attachment of bR at the surface (Fig. 15b(ii)). By using the bR/TiO2 hybrid photoelectrodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting, the hybrid electrodes obtained an increased photocurrent density of 0.65 mA cm−2 (under AM 1.5 illumination), about 50% improvement compared to the pure TiO2 nanotubes (0.43 mA cm−2) fabricated under the same conditions. The improvement is due to the efficient bR-assisted electron transfer from the electrolyte to the photoanode of TiO2. Fig. 15b(i) shows the energy level diagram and the mechanism of electron injection to the bR/TiO2 photoanode in the presence of a redox I3−/I− electrolyte solution. The bR has a LUMO and a HOMO energy level of −3.8 and −5.4 eV (based on surface photovoltage spectroscopy (SPS314)), respectively. TiO2 has a conduction band maximum (CBM) of −4.2 eV, which allows an efficient electron injection from bR to TiO2 (Fig. 15b(i)). In the presence of the redox electrolyte (0.02 M I3−/I−), an electron can be captured by bR and excited from the HOMO to the LUMO upon illumination, which is then expected to travel to the TiO2 photoanode. Guo et al.320 also proposed a bR/metal heterogeneous structure for efficient charge transfer, which also leads to a novel PV stack system. On the optical side, using delicate, well-patterned structures to maximize the light absorption is one of the most widely used strategies in nature. For example, in the leaf cell, as the core organ for photosynthesis, Granum321 consists of a stack of 10–100 thylakoids containing pigments and electron-acceptors. When the light stimulates the antenna pigment in the thylakoids, electrons can be excited and transferred via the photoelectric conversion process. The stacking design of thylakoids provides a large surface area which allows highly efficient solar radiation capture. It has been reported that, by mimicking this stacking design through construction of TiO2 nanosheets templated by graphene, the photoelectric response can be enhanced ∼20 times.322 The bR and its surrounding purple membrane also have a 2D crystalline feature (Fig. 15a(iii)), making it possible to stack with a metal to form a laminar electrode capable of more efficient radiation capture. This has been achieved by constructing bR/Au NPs heterogeneous multilayers for a photovoltaic stacking system (Fig. 15c(ii)), where the bR layers are inserted between AuNP layers. The bR layers serve as the photon acceptor and the Au NP layers can further enhance the photocurrent because of their native surface plasmon field effect. Fig. 15c(i) illustrates the equivalent energy level diagram of the photochemical reaction in these stacks. When a continuous incident light (350–800 nm) is shed on the device, the excited state can be pumped by AuNPs leading to the emission of ∼520 nm light. The 520 nm light is then absorbed by bR, giving rise to a photocycle starting from the B570-state to the J600-state, and then passes to the M412-state in bR. It should be noted that the blue light is also contained in the stimulated light source, which can directly affect the bR's ability to accelerate the decay of the immediately formed M412-state in bR.323 This provides a shorter time pathway II (light activates the M412 to an excited state Me,324 which can facilitate a quicker decay to the B state) to complete the typical photocycle, leading to a ‘bypass photocycle model’ in bR. With the stacking of Au NP layers, the photocycle pathway of the partial bR molecule will take this (‘bypass’ short-cut) pathway II, which represents a more efficient and accelerated photocycle for bR. For PV applications, bR has been employed as a photosensitizer in bio-sensitized solar cells (BSSCs), where the bR proteins are attached on a TiO2 film. These proteins can be photo-excited and transfer the excited states to the TiO2 photoanode, and also refill the electrons from the redox reaction with the electrolyte. Thavasi et al.325 built the first BSSC using bR as a light harvester, being adsorbed at the TiO2 electrode, exhibiting a VOC of 0.35 V and a JSC of 0.09 mA cm−2 under an illumination of 40 mW cm−2. Following this, Mohammadpour et al.326 and Jeganathan et al.327 fabricated BSSCs based on the TiO2/bR electrode and the devices displayed PCEs of 0.35% and 0.49% under AM 1.5, respectively. More recently, Das et al.328 reported a bR assisted photocycle in PSCs. The bR can be inserted between the TiO2 ETL and the perovskite photoactive layer, which implements the energy transfer step involving photon absorption and the Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) process. Fig. 15d shows the energy level diagram (Fig. 15d(i)) and the schematic illustration of the corresponding PSC device (Fig. 15d(ii)). The light energy conversion can be achieved through the transfer of the photogenerated electrons from the perovskite to the bR molecules through a FRET process.329–331 The photogenerated electrons can be subsequently transferred to the TiO2 ETL, driven by the energy level difference between bR and TiO2.332,333 This bR bridge between the perovskite and TiO2 is further verified by the observation of reduced interfacial charge recombination. As a result, the bR modified PSC exhibits a higher PCE of 17.02% compared to that of 14.59% from a reference blank device.
Table 4 Summary of the operational mechanisms of previously reported bR-based photovoltaics




Composite materials
Operational mechanisms
Ref.




bR/TiO2
Electron transfer effect

313



bR/Au
Coupled proton transportation

320



bR/kpw
3D proton transfer

341



bR/AAO
Proton transportation

342



bR/Nafion
Plasmonic enhancement

343



bR/QDs
Förster resonance energy transfer

344



bR/CNTs
Electron–ion interaction

345





Overall, the bR photocycle effect on photocurrent enhancement provides an additional mechanism for tuning the interface between the photoactive layer and the photoelectrode. Considering the control role of a proton ‘gate’ (bR's original role in creatures, as shown in Fig. 15a) and the photocycle process of bR, there could be two ways to export the optical signals of bR. One is to design and construct a photocell system joined by two half-cells, which can produce the proton gradient difference between the two half-cells, i.e., a proton ‘gate’. The other one is to couple the proton with electronic carriers, inducing the displacement and recombination of the charged carriers during the bR photocycle, resulting in the generation of a differential photovoltage. The ongoing research using bR incorporated hybrid structures for enhancing the photocurrent or frequency response is expected to be applied in the field of biological electronics with potential applications in medical electronics such as bR-based immunosensors334 and bR-based artificial retinal prostheses.335 Nevertheless, in solar cells, bR incorporation taking advantage of its ‘gate’ and photocycle role in complex with perovskite crystals still remains an untapped research area, with the energy/mass transfer mechanism at the bR/perovskite interface being a particularly interesting research topic. In fact, many other dyes besides bR have shown unusual energy transfer mechanisms, which has led to several interesting subtopics such as triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) upconversion336 and singlet fission (SF)337 that can bring new insights for reducing the thermodynamic losses in PSCs and hypothetical foundations for exceeding the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit of solar cells.

4.4 Other natural materials
Natural materials including biological molecules with conjugated structures or radical features can be good charge transport materials for electronic applications. Particularly, for the π-conjugated natural pigments such as chlorins (a specific type of porphyrin which is in the form of Mg2+ complexes found as the green photosynthetic pigments in plants (chlorophylls)), the energies of frontier molecular orbitals (i.e., HOMO and LUMO) and the distribution of the orbitals (i.e., DOS) in these molecules play crucial roles in intra- and inter-molecular charge transport and are also relevant to the light absorption/emission, charge injection/extraction/trapping and electron pushing/pulling or donating/accepting effects. These π-conjugated features in those artificially synthesized semiconducting polymers/small organic molecules enable their optoelectronic properties and make them widely applied in fields such as OPVs and OLEDs. Natural pigments also have such a conjugated structure, which makes them good candidates for CTL materials in PSCs.

4.4.1 Porphyrins. 
Porphyrins, derived from the Greek word ‘porphyros’ meaning ‘purple’, are compounds of cyclic tetrapyrroles with intense colors. In nature, porphyrins are the parent members of pigments in various species and serve key roles in various vital processes such as metabolism and photosynthesis. For example, the heme has a porphyrin ring (Fig. 16a), where the iron center (Fe2+) in the porphyrin ring can coordinate with the oxygen (O2) serving as the oxygen carrier. Hence the blood cell containing heme can carry oxygen from the lungs to various tissues. In fact, 70% of the body's iron is present in red blood cells as hemoglobin, composed of iron-porphyrin heme groups, resulting in the red color of human blood (color of Fe2+; this is different from the blue color of the blood of spiders and octopuses which contains Cu2+). Hemes are also crucial in enzymes (e.g., liver enzymes metabolizing drugs), catalases (protecting cells from oxidative damage), or electron transfer proteins.346 Another example of a natural porphyrin complex is found in the chloroplasts of algae and plants, i.e., the chlorophyll, a green pigment critical in photon absorption, resonance energy transfer and photoexcited charge separation in photosynthesis. Chlorophyll molecules are embedded in the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts in photosystems (Fig. 16b) and are well arranged so that light harvesting and transportation (>95% transfer efficiency) could maximize the efficiency in such a small system. The high energy transfer efficiency is realized by the unique property of chlorophyll (incorporated with Mg2+ in the porphyrin ring) that the absorption and emission spectra overlap exceptionally well, so the energy transfer to nearby molecules can favorably follow the Förster (resonance) mechanism. Following this, the photon energy can be harvested by chlorophyll and then transferred among ∼100 chlorophyll molecules through this resonance mechanism. As a result, the overall energy transfer process, from photon absorption to arrival at the reaction center, is less than 10 ps, which is significantly faster than the chlorophyll fluorescence lifetime of 5 ns (in this way the fluorescence loss is negligible). Replacing Mg2+ with other metals will not only change the absorption and emission spectra, inducing less efficient resonance energy transfer, but also competitively quench the chlorophyll's excited state (through a spin–orbit coupling or ‘heavy atom effect’) and reform the ground state. Therefore, the Mg2+ chlorophyll is designed by nature to maximize the efficiency of photosynthesis. Additionally, other porphyrin-derived natural pigments are found in cobalamin (vitamin B12 source as shown in Fig. 16c, which is typically involved in the metabolism of every cell in the human body, affecting DNA synthesis and regulation as well as fatty acid and amino acid metabolism), biliverdin and protoporphyrin (Fig. 16d, found in thin regions of eggshells and proposed to strengthen the egg shell347). Overall, the porphyrin-based materials with relatively high chemical stability have shown an enormous application range, including chemical usage (oxidation, atom transfer, and electron transfer catalysts), advanced functional devices (CO2 reduction, light harvesting, information storage, and chemosensors), medical applications (photochemotherapy for cancer treatment), and imaging techniques as well (used as fluorescent/photoacoustic imaging dyes in the biomedical field).
 Fig. 16  Porphyrins and their derivatives. (a) Schematic illustration of a (i) blood cell, (ii) molecular structure of hemoglobin and (iii) chemical structure of the heme group. Adapted with permission from online resources.348,349 (b) (i) Microscopic image of Plagiomnium affine laminazellen showing the (ii) chlorophyll in the cell, schematic illustration of the chloroplast structure, and (iii) chemical structure of chlorophyll. Adapted with permission from an online resource.350 (c) Images of foods rich in vitamin B12 (left) and chemical structure of cobalamin (right), adapted with permission from an online resource.351 (d) Image of eggshells of different avian lineages showing varying color and pigment patterns (left), and chemical structures of biliverdin and protoporphyrin XI (right), adapted with permission from ref. 352, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Considering their low oxidation potential and high charge transport capabilities, porphyrins are considered to be efficient CTLs in PVs. Because of the large structural tuning capacity, porphyrin materials could have high versatility in terms of electrochemical, photophysical and charge-transport properties, making them good CTL candidates for perovskite materials of highly tunable energy levels. In addition, porphyrins have excellent thermal stability and high hole mobility due to the strong π–π stacking and intermolecular charge transfer of the porphyrin film (in fact the porphyrin materials have been applied as electron donors in BHJ OPVs353). These jointly secure their initial success in PSCs. Table 5 summarizes prior examples of using porphyrin materials as HTLs in PSCs. In 2016, Chou et al.354 reported the first porphyrin based HTL (zinc porphyrins: Y2 and Y2A2) for PSCs. As shown in Fig. 17a, Y2 and Y2A2 consist of a meso-5,15-bis(ethynylaniline)porphyrin backbone bearing butyl (Y2) or dodecyl (Y2A2) chains, with two facing alkoxyphenyl groups in the other two opposite meso positions. The design benefits the electronic communication between the porphyrin core and the donor amine group. As a result, the Y2 and Y2A2 films exhibit a well-matched HOMO of −5.22 eV (close to the CBM of −5.4 eV of MAPbI3) and a high hole mobility of 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, resulting in a PCE of 16.60% (comparable to that of 18.03% from a reference cell using spiro-OMeTAD). Chen et al.355 reported the 5,10,15,20-tetrakis{4-[N,N-di(4-methoxylphenyl)amino-phenyl]}-porphyrin with Zn(II) and Cu(II) being centered in the porphyrin ring (abbreviated as ‘ZnP’ and ‘CuP’ in Fig. 17b). Density functional theory (DFT) results show that the four meso-substituted triarylamines surrounding the porphyrin ring are nearly perpendicular to the porphyrin due to steric hindrance, giving a twisted spatial structure. Both the porphyrin core and the triarylamine contribute to the HOMO DOS distribution of ZnP and CuP, while the LUMO is only determined by the porphyrin ring. Compared to ZnP (−5.29 eV), CuP has a lower HOMO of −5.37 eV. The corresponding film exhibits a similar hole mobility of about 3 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, nearly two-fold higher than that of spiro-OMeTAD (1.58 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1). A ZnP based PSC exhibits a PCE of 17.78% compared to the spiro-OMeTAD reference (18.59%). For the HTL application in solar cells, the morphological features of the film, such as pin-hole, uniformity, surface roughness, and porous density, as well as their effects on mobility, electrical conductivity and slight energy-level shifting, are crucial to the final device performance. Re-engineering the molecular structure of porphyrins to optimize the intermolecular interaction and their stacking in the final film can be a shortcut. Chiang et al.356 extended the coplanarity of porphyrins by using the dimeric porphyrin conjugate structure.357–359 The resultant porphyrin dimers WT3 and YR3 were composed of ethynylaniline electron-donating moieties attached at the lateral meso-positions of the porphyrin (Fig. 17c). The enhanced coplanarity enables a better intermolecular interaction and a higher PCE of 19.44% from the WT3 based device (compared to that of 18.62% from the spiro-OMeTAD reference device). Kang et al.360 employed three different substituted electron-donating triarylamine (TAA) groups to extend the π-conjugation of the molecule (coded as SGT-061, SGT-062, and SGT-063 with their structures being shown in Fig. 17d). These molecules consist of a coplanar porphyrin core and different TAA bulky donor groups which possess a larger dihedral angle between the alkoxy-substituted phenyl ring and the donor TAA. This spatial effect gives rise to a strong interference for the dense molecular arrangement and a modulation on the π–π intermolecular stacking. Consequently, the SGT-061 with a less bulky donor group and a tighter molecular stacking exhibits a higher hole mobility of 2.60 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1 than those of SGT-062 (1.28 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and SGT-063 (8.01 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1). Although the device exhibits a relatively lower PCE of 9.0–12.6% (compared to the value of 16.6% from the spiro-OMeTAD-based reference cell) due to the low hole mobility, the rule of “the less bulky, the easier molecular stacking” is verified in practice. Overall the molecular stacking of the porphyrin materials plays the most important role in their HTL films for PSCs. Besides the modulation on such a coplanarity, the intermolecular stacking and the consequent film morphologies can also be influenced by the functional moieties surrounding the core porphyrin ring. For example, Lee et al.361 designed a series of novel zinc porphyrins (PZn) with different diphenyl-2-pyridylamine (DPPA) moieties surrounding the porphyrin cores. These DPPA moieties had electron deficient pyridine bridging the core porphyrin (Fig. 17e), so the energy level and spatial interaction of adjacent molecules could be adjusted in certain levels. The DPPA group also contributes to the oriented stacking of the molecules, as the 2D grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (2D-GIXD) revealed that the PZn–DPPA film showed enhanced face-on π–π stacking compared to the PZn–TPA film (with the (010) out-of-plane (Qz) peak at around 1.70 Å−1 corresponding to an intermolecular π–π distance of ca. 3.70 Å). This improved face-on π–π stacking might be the reason for the promoted vertical charge transport, as observed in the mobility results. Consequently, the PZn–DPPA has the lowest HOMO of −5.36 eV and a decent hole mobility of 4.10 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, delivering a PCE of 14.11%, comparable to the value of 14.61% from the spiro-OMeTAD-based reference device. Moreover, the modulation of the porphyrin based HTL can also be electronically changed through the adjustment of the functional groups. This will change the HOMO, for example, and affect the hole extraction at the perovskite/HTL interface. It has been well documented in OPVs that the incorporation of strong electron-withdrawing elements such as fluorine (F) can mitigate the π-electron cloud and downshift the energy level to a certain degree. Azmi et al.362 employed this strategy to further decrease the HOMO energy level of the porphyrin HTL to make an Ohmic contact between the perovskite and HTL. Specifically, Zn porphyrin (PZn)-based materials with four fluorinated triphenylamine (FTPA) substituents (PZn–2FTPA and PZn–3FTPA in Fig. 17f) have been synthesized. As expected, the PZn–2FTPA displayed a lower HOMO of −5.37 eV compared to −5.14 eV from the non-fluorinated PZn–TPA. The PZn–3FTPA displayed a comparable hole mobility of 3.91 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a higher PCE of 18.85% compared to the values of 3.37 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 16.37%, respectively, for the non-fluorinated PZn–TPA device. Additional studies on engineering of the molecular structure of porphyrin-based HTLs have also been reported with the corresponding molecular structures being shown in Fig. 17g and h and the device performance parameters listed in Table 5. Beyond the scope of structural engineering of the porphyrin material, the oxidation state of the porphyrin HTL can tune the carrier concentration and consequently the electrical conductivity. For example, Cao et al.363 developed dual valent Co(II)/(III) mixed incorporation into the porphyrin film. The Co(II)/Co(III) pair is typically known as one of the best combinations for redox processes, which has been used as an electrolyte in DSSCs.364–366 A mixture of Co(II)P and Co(III)P363 (Fig. 17i) has been used as the HTL for PSCs as well. Normally the methoxy-substituted triphenylamine group in most above-mentioned porphyrin HTLs is responsible for the high solubilities in common organic solvents and the extended π-conjugation is responsible for efficient charge transport. The additional methoxy-substituted oxyalkyl chain attached at the triphenylamine group can further tune the solubility of the whole porphyrin molecule.
In addition, the centered Co(II) and Co(III) serve as a redox couple to tune the oxidation level of the HTL. Consequently, both Co(II)P and Co(III)P HTLs exhibit similar hole mobilities to that of spiro-OMeTAD but slightly lower HOMO levels of −5.30 and −5.28 eV, respectively. The Co(II)P/Co(III)P mixed HTL displayed a PCE of 20.5% compared to that of ∼19% from the spiro-OMeTAD based reference cell. In addition to the role of charge transfer in PSCs, the porphyrin materials can also serve as a dual functional layer that simultaneously harvests photons, excites the charges and transports these excited charges. Gao et al.367 reported a hybrid PV cell composed of a NIR-absorbing BHJ layer on top of the perovskite. The BHJ layer containing a mixture of DPPEZnP-TSEH and PCBM not only displayed a broad photoresponse to over 800 nm but also possessed suitable energy levels and a high mobility to afford a high PCE of 19.02%. The NIR photon usage for PV conversion by the top BHJ layer is verified by the extended EQE as well as the transient absorption study. Above all, various examples referring to the changes in the meso-substitution of tetraaryl-porphyrin (such as variations of the substituents and metal centers) have been demonstrated and discussed, which can have different impacts on the energy levels, absorption features, intermolecular interaction/stacking and its effect on the final film morphology as well as electrical properties. Additional versatility of porphyrin derivatives by reforming the cyclic tetrapyrrolic ring, such as other tetrapyrrole-based molecules (e.g., chlorins (Chl),368 bacteriochlorins (BChl),369 Zn(II)chlorophyll derivatives with BChl, Chl, and Por macrocycles,370 and other core-modified porphyrins371), has been studied to use them as potential HTLs for PSCs. Fig. 18 compares their molecular structures and relative performance as the HTL in PSCs. Although there have been a wide range of artificial porphyrin derivatives synthesized and employed in PV cells, the principle motif of using these porphyrin HTLs is to transfer the charge carriers through their π-conjugated electronic structure. This is relatively superficial in comparison to their delicate role in nature. For example, the chlorophyll in leaf cells is constructed in such a design that the energy transfer strictly follows the highly efficient Förster resonance mechanism. Instead of directly utilizing certain biomaterials as a disordered film in devices, delicately arranging the biomaterials into a subsystem (having an ordered structure or a delicately designed structure to evoke a highly efficient working mechanism) with maximal abilities of charge transfer might be a better solution.
Table 5 Summary of the electronic properties and photovoltaic performance of the porphyrin-based HTL in perovskite solar cells




Porphyrin
Work function (eV)
Hole mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Perovskite composition
Device architecture
PCE (%)
Ref.





a Abbreviations: BHJ: bulk heterojunction; c-TiO2: compact TiO2; m-TiO2: mesoporous TiO2; m-TiO2-SM: mesoporous TiO2 modified with sinapoyl malate; ZnO-s: sulfur-passivated ZnO; PVK: perovskite; Por: porphyrin.
b LiTFSI and 4-tert-butylpyridine additives were incorporated into the precursor solution for the preparation of the hole transport layer.





Y2b
−5.25
2.04 × 10−4
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2a/m-TiO2a/PVKa/Pora/Au
16.6

354



Y2A2b
−5.1
1.53 × 10−5
10.55


WT3b
−5.2
4.2 × 10−4
Cs0.05[(FA0.83MA0.17)PbI0.83Br0.17]0.95
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/Por/Au
19.44

356



YR3b
−5.1
9.3 × 10−5
17.84


Y2b
−5.22
3.2 × 10−5
17.93


Zn-22b
−5.29
2.89 × 10−4
(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/Por/Au
17.78

355



Cu-22b
−5.37
3.06 × 10−4
15.36




PZn-TPA-Ob
−5.31
3.51 × 10−4
MAPbI3
ITO/ZnO/PVK/Por/Au
12.4

361



PZn-TPAb
−5.2
3.38 × 10−5
11.96


PZn-DPPA-Ob
−5.23
3.85 × 10−5
13.52


PZn-DPPAb
−5.36
4.1 × 10−4
14.11


PZn-TPAb
−5.2
3.3 × 10−5
MAPbI3
ITO/ZnO-sa/PVK/Por/Au
16.37

362



PZn-2FTPAb
−5.4
3.9 × 10−5
18.85


PZn-3FTPAb
−5.29
3.5 × 10−5
17.71


Zn-Py
−5.35
NA
MAPbI3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/Por/Au
17.82

372



Co(II)-23/Co(III)-23
−5.3
NA
Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(1−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2-SMa/PVK/Por/Au
20.02

363



DPPEZnP-TSEH
−5.2
2.60 × 10−5
MAPbI3
ITO/SnO2/C60/PVK/BHJa (Por + PCBM)/MoO3/Ag
19.02

367





 Fig. 17  Chemical structure of some reported porphyrin-based hole transport materials. (a) (i) Y2 and (ii) Y2A2, adapted with permission from ref. 354, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) ZnP and CuP, adapted with permission from ref. 355, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) WT3 and YR3, adapted with permission from ref. 356, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) SGT-061, (ii) SGT-062 and (iii) SGT-063, adapted with permission from ref. 360, Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (e) PZn-TPA-O, PZn-TPA, PZn-DPPA-O and PZn-DPPA, adapted with permission from ref. 361, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) PZn-TPA, PZn-2FTPA and PZn-3FTPA, adapted with permission from ref. 362, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) RC-FB-Por and RC-Zn-Por, adapted with permission from ref. 373, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (h) ZnPy, adapted with permission from ref. 372, Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (i) Co(II)P and (ii) Co(III)P, adapted with permission from ref. 363, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 18  Molecular structures of some reported tetrapyrrole-based molecules, their hole mobility and the performance of PSCs. (a) (i) Chl-1 and (ii) Chl-2, adapted with permission from ref. 368, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) BChls, adapted with permission from ref. 369, Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) (i) ZnBChl, (ii) ZnChl and (iii) ZnPor, adapted with permission from ref. 370, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) SM01, (ii) SM09 and (iii) SM13, adapted with permission from ref. 371, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


4.4.2 Other natural conjugates. 
The porphyrins and analogous derivatives discussed above represent the most widely used materials in PVs. Particularly, their optical response featuring two absorbance bands in visible and NIR regions also enables their applications as photoactive materials (dyes) in DSSCs. The high hole mobility also benefits their ‘electron donor’ role in the BHJ blend in OPVs. Apart from these porphyrins and their analogous derivatives, natural pigments with aromatic fused π-conjugated structures can also be potential CTL materials in PSCs. Similar to porphyrin derivatives, most of them have been applied as photoactive dyes in DSSCs. Table 6 summarizes some of the natural conjugates, their corresponding properties and roles in nature. Anthocyanins, a type of flavonoid (a class of compounds with antioxidant effects), are the pigments that give different shades of red, purple, and blue to plants. Anthocyanins have higher chemical reactivity than other flavonoid classes, due to their specific pyrylium nucleus (C-ring) (Fig. 19a). To exemplify, anthocyanins are also ubiquitous water-soluble pigments having important roles in the physiology of plants (repelling herbivores and parasites,374 attracting pollinators and seed dispersers,375 and protecting plants against biotic and abiotic stresses376) and humans (antioxidant,377 anti-inflammatory,378 neuroprotective,379 and anti-diabetic properties380). Chemically, anthocyanins are weak diacids, nucleophiles, and hard and soft electrophiles, with a high tendency to develop π–π stacking interactions and binding with hard metal ions.381 The π–π stacking can facilitate the film to have higher intermolecular charge transfer, and the binding ability to metal ions can potentially passivate lattice defects in perovskites. They also exhibit the typical chemical properties of polyphenols, including an electron donor property and affinity with proteins. Their biological role in terms of transformation and catabolism in humans and effects on health is well-reviewed elsewhere.381 Carotenoids, the tetraterpene pigments with yellow, orange, and red colors (Fig. 19b), are widely distributed in photosynthetic bacteria, certain species of fungi and archaea, algae, plants, and animals, giving the characteristic color to pumpkins, carrots, corn, tomatoes, canaries, flamingos, salmon, lobster, shrimp, and daffodils.382 Carotenoids are conjugated double bond compounds with recurring isoprene units, which are responsible for the π-electron delocalization along the backbone and thereby a certain level of electrical conductance. All carotenoids are highly lipophilic and exhibit low solubility in water, making them potential materials for introducing hydrophobicity to the moisture-sensitive perovskite materials in PSCs. Their conjugated nature also makes them antioxidants (inactivate the reactive oxygen species and oxidative damage, which is essential to the immune system), attractants, and UV attenuators.383 Recently, carotenoids have received growing attention because of their therapeutic values and health benefits, as well as their applications in the perfume and food industries.384,385 Mangostin386 is the major xanthone from Garcinia mangostana (whose fruits are referred to as the ‘queen of fruits’ in Thailand387,388) and has been utilized as the starting material for semisynthetic preparation of multiple biologically active derivatives. Its structure is shown in Fig. 19c, with the presence of multiple instances of including two prenyl chains, three phenolic hydroxyl groups and two unsubstituted aromatic carbons. Mangostin displays chemopreventive properties in medical applications. In PV applications, mangostin is used as the dye in DSSCs (exhibiting a relatively low PCE of 2.63%).389 Rutin (3,3′,4′,5,7-pentahydroxyflavone-3-rhamnoglucoside, shown in Fig. 19d) is a flavonoid pigment in medicinal plants (usually found in sources such as buckwheat, Japanese pagoda tree, Eucalyptus, hawthorn, lime tree flowers, elder flowers, etc.) and is used to make medicines (responsible for various pharmacological qualities including antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, cytoprotective, vasoprotective, neuroprotective and cardioprotective properties). As the natural antioxidant, rutin has been reported as the reducing agent in synthesis of Ag NPs.390,391 The rutin-modified Ag NPs can be used as a chromogenic probe for metal ions in aqueous environments.392 Elseman et al.393 reported the strategy of silver chelation on rutin as an additive for increasing the hole conductivity in the HTL. The rutin-modified Ag NP blended PHPT-py HTL led to a PCE of 21.1% for the PSC, while the reference cell using the typical spiro-OMeTAD HTL has a PCE of only 20.8%. This is due to the re-oxidation effect by rutin–Ag NPs on the PHPT-py HTL, enhancing the electrical conductance of the HTL. The deoxidized rutin can be easily oxidized by oxygen and these oxidized states of rutin can be further reduced by the PHPT-py HTL. Hence, the catalytic role of rutin–Ag NPs improves the properties of the PHPT-py HTL. Meanwhile the chelation-like rutin–Ag NP complex restricts the migration of the halide group in the perovskite and consequently improves the operational stability of the PSC device. Overall, the rutin–Ag NPs could be a promising additive to the existing HTL materials in PSCs. Anthocyanins (a type of flavonoid with antioxidant effects; the structure is shown in Fig. 19e) are found in vibrantly colored fruits, leaves, and flowers capable of attaching to transition metal oxides (TMOs) such as TiO2 surface which has been reported as the photo-sensitizer in DSSCs.394,395 Although anthocyanin pigments are abundant in nature, isolated anthocyanins are highly degradable,396 depending on several factors such as pH, storage temperature, and sunlight exposure.397Betalains (Fig. 19f) are a class of yellow and red tyrosine-derived pigments found in the cactus Mammillaria flower petals, red beets, Swiss chard, Amaranthus caudatus, etc. Betalains exhibit many attractive properties including antioxidant, anti-cancer, anti-lipidemic and antimicrobial properties.398 Betalains are water soluble with functional –OH and –COOH groups which can make it easy to attach TMOs. Other commonly used natural dyes as photon absorbers in DSSCs include the chain-like molecules such as β-carotene (non-polar compound and highly lipophilic, shown in Fig. 19g(i)), lutein (lipophilic and generally insoluble in water, shown in Fig. 19g(ii)), violaxanthin (a natural xanthophyll pigment, shown in Fig. 19g(iii)), and neoxanthin (a carotenoid and xanthophyll, shown in Fig. 19g(iv)).399 There are a wide range of natural pigment materials where the large π-electron conjugation enables visible light absorption and hence the coloring properties of these materials. The π-electron conjugation and delocalization also make it possible for charge transport in a certain range. Considering their application as CTLs in PSCs, an intermolecular hopping mechanism must be feasible, requiring close intermolecular packing of these natural pigments within the thin film. Additionally, intentional doping to increase the charge carrier density or improve other mechanisms such as radical assisted transport and/or organic transport can be possible routes towards highly efficient CTLs applied in PSCs. Although the application of these natural conjugates as CTLs in PSCs remains unexplored, their potentially high charge carrier mobility, tunable energy level, good solution-processability and benefits compared to artificial materials (e.g., low-cost, abundance in supply, and reliable stability) may trigger new protocols for more efficient CTLs for PSCs.
Table 6 Summary of natural dyes and their performance in DSSCs




Plant source
Dye structure class
PCE (%)
Ref.




Black rice
Anthocyanin
NA

400



Kelp
Chlorophyll
NA


Capsicum
Carotenoid
NA


Mangosteen pericarp
α-Mangostin
0.92

401



Mangosteen pericarp
Rutin
1.12



Hibiscus sabdariffa L.
Cyanidin-3-glycosides
0.37

394




Beta vulgaris rubra

Betalains
1.7

402




Bixa orellana L.
Bixin
0.37

403



Spinach
Neoxanthin
3.9

404



Spinach
Violaxanthin
3.7


Spinach
Lutein
4


NA
β-Carotene
4.2


Calafate fruit
Delphinidin
NA

405



Jaboticaba skin
Peonidin
NA


Gardenia fruit
Crocetin
0.56

406



Red Sicilian orange “Moro”
Cyanin
0.66

407



Eggplant skin
Nasunin
0.48




 Fig. 19  Other natural conjugates. Molecular structures of (a) anthocyanins, adapted with permission from ref. 408, Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (b) Carotenoids, adapted with permission from an online resource.409 (c) Mangostin, adapted with permission from ref. 389, Copyright 2015 Springer. (d) Rutin, adapted with permission from ref. 392, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Anthocyanins, adapted with permission from ref. 395, Copyright 2013 Springer. (f) Betalains, adapted with permission from ref. 398, Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (g) (i) β-carotene, (ii) lutein, (iii) violaxanthin and (iv) Neoxanthin, adapted with permission from ref. 399, Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 


4.4.3 Carbonized natural materials. 
Carbonized materials can be directly obtained from natural sources through high-temperature sintering and are advantageous due to their low-cost, versatile microstructures and high chemical/thermal stabilities. Mei et al.410 reported the pioneering work of using a porous carbon film as an efficient and stable hole collection layer in PSCs. Carbon-based hole collection materials also exhibit good air/water stability411–413 and high compatibility for easy manufacturing such as doctor-blading,414 screen printing,415 and electrospray416 printing. These attributes make them promising materials for anodes in PSC devices and their extended applications in MPS. Particularly from the cost perspective, carbon-based PSCs could significantly reduce the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) of the PV MPS in contrast to those using metal electrodes.417
Compared with the synthesis of existing state-of-the-art charge collection materials which requires tedious and complex processing and expensive precursors, carbonized natural organics with a delicate microstructure are good alternatives. For example, activated carbon with microstructures (e.g., hierarchical porous structure) for supercapacitor applications can be synthesized from natural corncob418 and lignin of wood.419 For applications in Li-ion batteries, hierarchically porous nitrogen-rich carbon as an anode material has been derived from wheat straw.420 Similarly in PSCs, using an ancient Indian method, Mali et al.421 designed an ecofriendly route to extract cross-linked carbon nanoparticles from Aloe vera as the HTL and electrode to achieve printable PSCs, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 20a. The authors extracted Aloe vera gel from leaves and dried it in sunlight to obtain the intermediate carbon powder. After being washed with acid, the product was annealed at a high temperature (1000 °C). The final product was crosslinked carbon nanoparticles with uniform size (denoted as AV-C) (Fig. 20a(i)). The screen-printed carbon film from the AV-C carbon paste showed outstanding conductivity (∼7 Ω cm2) compared to one made from a commercial colloidal carbon paste (∼80 Ω cm2). With the AV-C carbon, a fully printable triple-layered mesoporous scaffold consisting of a TiO2/ZrO2/AV-C based PSC showed a PCE of 12.75% (Fig. 20a(ii)), higher than that of the device using commercial carbon ink (10.53%). In addition, an unencapsulated device based on AV-C showed a small PCE decrease after 900 hours in ambient air with a relative humidity of 35% (while the reference PSC fails after 100 hours of operation) (Fig. 20a(iii)). Gao et al.422 also synthesized various bio-carbon materials through pyrolysis of common plant waste including corn stalk (CS), peanut shell (PS), Phragmites australis (PA) and bamboo chopsticks (BC) (Fig. 20b). Results demonstrated that all of the aforementioned carbon materials could serve as the HTL/electrode layer for PSCs (Fig. 20b(i) and (ii)). The cell based on biocarbon extracted from BC exhibited the best performance compared to the others with a PCE of 10.30%. It should also be noted that the cell based on the biocarbon exhibited exceptional stability compared with the conventional PSC, and the BC-based cell exhibited nearly 90% of the PCE retained after 2000 hours in ambient conditions with a 30% relative humidity (RH) (while the reference device failed after 300 hours) (Fig. 20b(iii)).
 Fig. 20  Carbonized natural materials for charge transportation in perovskite solar cells. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of Aloe vera (AV) cross-linked carbon nanoparticles via an ancient Indian method. (ii) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell device based on the AV-carbon electrode. (iii) Comparison of the air stability of unencapsulated conventional spiro-MeOTAD and AV-carbon PSCs at a 35% relative humidity, adapted with permission from ref. 421, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) (i) HOMO level diagram of various bio-carbon electrodes. (ii) Stability tests of perovskite solar cells with various bio-carbon electrodes at a 30% relative humidity. (iii) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell with the bio-carbon electrode, adapted with permission from ref. 422, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Overall, the carbon-based hole collector layer in the PSC enables the exemption of the expensive HTL and could further reduce the cost because of the replacement of noble Au with carbon. In addition, carbon and its derivatives as highly conductive charge collectors are abundant in nature as most organics are carbon-based materials able to be carbonized through various established techniques. Employment of these natural carbonized materials still needs to follow the principles of (i) excellent electrical conductivity and charge carrier mobility, (ii) uniform microstructures with minimized pores, traps and defects, (iii) small and uniform particle size as well as good and dense film morphology, (iv) high purity and stability, and (v) good compatibility to up-scaling manufacturing, in addition to their unique (vi) ability to inherit microstructures from their original natural carbonate sources. In particular, application in perovskite solar cells, carbon electrodes or carbonized CTL with an extremely low manufacturing cost is one of the biggest thrusts for their commercialization. Utilization of already carbonized or direct use of carbon electrodes has been reported. The use of carbonate sources in vitro, followed by post-carbonization, in order to further simplify the manufacturing may offer additional potential for innovative device fabrication.

5. Perovskite photoactive layer
The perovskite photoactive layer in PSCs is responsible for photon absorption and a subsequent quick conversion into a free electron and a hole, thanks to its low exciton binding energy, so room-temperature thermal heat can separate the excitonic electron–hole pair into free charges. To maximize the photovoltaic efficiency in these photoactive layers, properties including (i) efficient photon absorption (e.g., broad spectral response, high light-distinction coefficient, long lifetime of excited states, clean band structure with minimized density of shallow trap-states or in-band traps) and (ii) efficient excited charge transport towards corresponding electrodes (e.g., high electron and hole mobilities to ensure less potential energy loss and charge density loss during transit, ambipolar transport ability that enables opposite drifting of excess photon-excited electrons and holes under external electric fields). These requirements are exactly met by perovskite materials, which have a good band structure (direct bandgap and a high optical absorption coefficient of 105 cm−1), tunable energy level (bandgap ranges from 1.15 to 3.06 eV), a long exciton diffusion length (1 μm in polycrystalline films and 100s μm in single crystals), sharp DOS at the VBM and CBM and low effective masses, and high electron and hole mobilities.17–21 This makes the perovskite the current optimal platform for PV applications. In addition to this, PSCs with a specific type of production will need additional attributes. For example, for PV-MPS applications, PSCs may require high mechanical properties (e.g., flexibility for curved UAV wings, fabrics and other wearable implementations), higher stability and efficiencies for outdoor applications (e.g., PV-tile roof under extreme weather conditions), and some other specific features (e.g., transparency for the PV-window; high vacuum/pressure endurance for spatial application). Under these considerations, bio-inspired strategies (including delicate structures, chemically functional biomolecules and their hybrids with the target materials)423 can be helpful in adding new functionalities to the current baseline PSC platforms. For more specific examples in terms of mechanical properties, natural materials with sophisticated microstructures (such as columns of circular layers in wood or bone, or the complex helicoidal chitin fibers in the stomatopod club) can be simultaneously light-weight, strong, flexible and tough; some of them can be porous with a hierarchical design to provide paths for efficient mass transport and/or to reduce weight; many natural materials are also able to self-repair repeatedly without any external interference; such natural materials can also be built with a relatively limited number of components and a simple structure under minimized energy supply in a highly efficient manner. Finding the common design themes among them and developing a novel bio-inspired paradigm is hence reliable, some of which have already been successfully applied in different fields.424 In terms of PVs, these bio-inspired strategies for enhancing the original properties or adding new attributes to current perovskite photoactive layers are expected to expand the horizon of the development of PSC-based MPS.
5.1 Biomimetic architecture

5.1.1 Nacre. 
Enhancing the mechanical properties (toughness, bendability, etc.) of PSCs is important, particularly with consideration of portable, foldable and mobile power applications. Natural hybrid materials such as nacre and bone exhibit remarkable toughness and strength. Fig. 21a and b summarize and compare the mechanical properties between natural and artificial materials. In fact, most natural materials are composites of certain forms, including polymeric (e.g., polysaccharides, proteins) and ceramic (e.g., silica, calcium salts) components or composite building blocks.425–429 From this toolbox, a wide range of hybrid materials (such as wood, bamboo and palm, comprising cellulose fibers within a lignin–hemicellulose matrix; insect cuticle, comprising chitin in a protein matrix) are assembled materials. Similarly for nacre, its hybrid composite design gives the primary strengthening and toughening mechanisms.430 More specifically, nacre has a ‘brick and mortar’ micro-composite structure (Fig. 21c). The bricks are crystalline aragonite (CaCO3) platelets with a dimension of 0.5 μm thickness and 8–10 μm width, providing strength, while the mortar (20–50 nm thick) is a biomolecular adhesive composed of proteins and chitin, providing toughness and ductility.431 This alternative laminar multilayer structure has multiple toughening mechanisms including crack bridging, pulling/sliding of aragonite platelets, crack propagation deflection and energy dissipation by the organic layer,432,433 which are well discussed in prior reviews.424,434 Such a hierarchical structure from nacre has inspired the development of engineered materials in PSCs with remarkable toughness and mechanical strength. In PSCs, one of the major challenges is the brittle nature of the halide perovskite film. It is difficult for the perovskite material to meet the stretchability, twistability and bendability requirements of the PSC device and the final MPS products able to accommodate the complex human body movements.105,435,436 Inspired by the promising results for the biomimicry study of nacre in other electronically applied materials (e.g., interface-reinforced graphene-based fibers,437 reduced graphene oxide–poly(acrylic acid) nanocomposites71), researchers attempt to adopt the nacre concept to enhance the reliability of mechanically flexible PSCs. Hu et al.106 mimicked the natural mineralization process of nacre by introducing two polymers of poly(styrene-co-butadiene) (SBS) and polyurethane (PU) into the perovskite (Fig. 21d) to modulate the mechanical features of the perovskite photoactive layer. The SBS serves as a scaffold that reduces the nucleation energy barrier and induces heterogeneous nucleation of the perovskite. Meanwhile, PU undergoes chemical interactions with the perovskite precursors which suppress the nucleation rate. Mediated by the synergistic effect of SBS and PU, the resultant photoactive film exhibits oriented grains. Owing to the stress release effect by the elastic polymeric matrix, the PSC exhibits outstanding bendability and stretchability (Fig. 21e). The SBS–PU based PSC module shows no clear PCE decrease after bending in 2 mm curvature for 5000 cycles compared to an 80% PCE loss in a reference device.
 Fig. 21  Biomimetic architecture of the perovskite layer. (a) Ashby plot of the specific values of strength and stiffness (or Young's modulus) for various natural and synthetic materials. (b) Young's modulus and fracture toughness of various biomaterials as well as synthetic materials. (c) The hierarchical structure of nacre, adapted with permission from ref. 424, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (d) Scheme showing the nacre-inspired wearable solar module and microstructure for the perovskite layer consisting of soluble PU (blue) and insoluble SBS (orange) matrices. (e) Photo image and measured I–V curve of the wearable solar module constructed with the nacre-inspired perovskite layer, adapted with permission from ref. 106, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.1.2 Other promising structures. 
There are a wide range of potential natural examples for mimetic implementation in PSCs. These delicate structures can be applied in designing mechanically qualified PSCs and their terminal MPS products. Mechanically, beyond the aforementioned specific strength, stiffness, and Young's modulus in Fig. 21b, another important figure-of-merit is the specific energy absorption (SEA), which defines the absorbed energy by a structure per unit mass. The SEA can be calculated from the force–displacement (F–D) characteristic (exemplified in Fig. 22a) of the target material using the equation of SEA(d) = (EA(d))/m, where d is the displacement, EA is the energy absorbed by the material as represented by the shaded area under the F–D curve, and m is the mass of the target material. Similarly, SEA per unit volume (SEAV) defining the energy absorbed per unit volume can also be calculated using the equation of SEAV(d) = (EA(d))/V, where V is the volume of the energy absorber. Fig. 22b shows the SEAV of various biostructures with respect to conventional (simple artificial) structures. Among them, the honeycomb-like sandwich architecture has been widely observed in nature, such as turtle shells and beetle forewings (Fig. 22c) and has been utilized to design strengthened carbon fiber reinforced plastic (CFRP) panels438 with greater energy absorption and a lower peak load for construction applications. Similarly, the elson (tail plate) of Stomatopoda (mantis shrimp)439 (Fig. 22d) exhibits excellent mechanical impact resistance because of its special structure, which has been mimicked for designing corrugated panels. The augmentation of the impact resistance comes from the significantly improved crashworthiness and reduced initial peak force in these bio-inspired sandwich panels.440 Another candidate for designing the bio-inspired structures for mechanical energy absorption is the head of a woodpecker.441–443 Several studies in mechanical engineering have been done to mimic the woodpecker's head structure to improve the low-velocity impact behavior of a sandwich beam structure (which is superior to the conventional beams, with a lower developed stress, a smaller damage area and less deformation while sustaining a higher maximum impact force).441 Unlike the conventional honeycomb structure, the walls of the woodpecker's beak-inspired honeycomb structure are wavy (Fig. 22e).443 This structure enables a superior absorption capability of mechanical energy compared with 125% enlarged SEA. Besides those high SEA structures inspired by animals, structures from plants are also of interest. For example, by mimicking the composite structure of palmetto wood, bio-inspired ‘sandwich’ composite structures using carbon fiber reinforced plastic sheets and the polymeric foam core have been developed and well-investigated.444 Similar examples can be found in leaf structures,445,446 where the core is designed by filling the honeycomb into a proper ortho-grid, with improved specific strength and energy absorption. In addition, the hierarchical structures inspired by the leaf can further improve the loading capacity.447 Another hierarchical design to enhance mechanical strength could be found in hard shell animals. For example, the hierarchically structured mussel shell is typically strong and tough. As can be seen from Fig. 22f, the shell consists of micro-byssal threads. The byssal threads are in a sandwich structure at the micro-scale, made of a matrix and granules which vary in cross-linking density. The granules contain a higher cross-linking density than the matrix and this controls the difference in local mechanical properties and allows good stress dissipation and mechanical energy absorption when the shell is stressed. Inspired by this design, researchers developed a hierarchical steel composed of a hard layer and a coarse-grained layer to deliver vastly superior mechanical properties.448 This hetero-composite design may also be applied in a perovskite solar cell device. For example, a polymeric matrix is used to blend with the perovskite to form a BHJ composite, so that the polymer could (i) allow sufficient stress-energy dissipation, store the strain and consequently lead to good mechanical toughness of the composite, or (ii) allow a ‘healing process’ after damage by re-bonding the neighboring broken grains to heal the crack. Either way, from the electrical perspective, a conjugated polymer with certain electrical conductivity is of paramount importance to ensure a good PCE. Stress-tolerance for PV-MPS also includes the dynamic endurance, which means that the device needs to have a high lifetime able to handle many cycles of folding–opening–refolding. This will require a good inner friction tolerance to avoid any serious fractures of the multiple layers in the device under the condition of a large bending angle. A natural example bearing both good hardness and flexibility or mobility is the bone and joint.449 These could be attributed to the remarkable hierarchical architecture of bone, constituted by both the soft collagen protein and stiffer apatite mineral (Fig. 22g). Bone's universal elementary building block is the mineralized fibrils, which are assembled from collagen molecules and mineralized by apatite crystals. In the body, the bone tissue functionality is related to stiffness which is determined by the collagen/mineral ratio. For instance, ear bone has over 80% of mineral content so that it is sensitive and vibratile with applied acoustics. In contrast, long bone with 20% mineral content, which is light-weight to enable mobility, could absorb the mechanical energy.
 Fig. 22  Other promising structures. (a) The force–displacement relationship of various energy absorbers. The shaded area under the curve represents the energy absorbed. (b) The specific energy absorption (SEA) of bio-inspired sandwich structures, adapted with permission from ref. 450, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Honeycomb sandwich structures in turtle shell and beetle forewings, adapted with permission from online resources451–453 and ref. 438, Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (d) Bio-inspired sandwich structure mimicking the shrimp, adapted with permission from ref. 450, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) Photo of a woodpecker, TEM image of the rhamphotheca of a woodpecker's beak showing its nanostructure, and schematic illustration of the structure, adapted with permission from ref. 454 and 443, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society and 2019 Springer. (f) A mussel inspired hierarchical shell, adapted with permission from ref. 448, Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (g) Hierarchical structure of bone ranging from the microscale skeleton to nanoscale collagen and hydroxyapatite, adapted with permission from ref. 455 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. 
Overall, there are various promising structures formed at ambient temperature in creatures that have specific high mechanical properties. Nevertheless, there is limited success in mimicking such functional structures for applications to improve mechanical properties for PSCs. The challenges mainly include the lack of reliable approaches for translating these ‘design motifs’ found in natural materials to a specific utilization in solar cell applications, as well as the technical challenges of making these bioinspired structures using perovskite materials that can be installed within a PV device. Nevertheless, there is exciting potential within the vast inventory of natural examples with delicate structures that may lead to inspiring design principles/rules and highly efficient functionalities implemented to minimize energy consumption. For example, preparing a nanostructured perovskite layer using the precursor ink of the perovskite and a micro-mold (e.g., PDMS mold) could be a good way to manufacture a mechanically stable and optically multifunctional film, and the mold pattern could be mimicked from the nanostructures from shrimp shell, woodpecker's beak or beetle forewings. Learning and understanding these natural designs, and eventually manufacturing and implementing them in products requires the development of advanced nanomanufacturing techniques, which can be a long-term, costly project, but may have a ground-breaking impact to the broader community outside of the PV field. Overall, nature provides a huge library of ‘design manuscripts’; how to utilize them to optimize existing models and even make innovations, and the challenges in developing more advanced tools are the two prior problems to be addressed now.

5.2 Self-cleaning
For real applications of PV-MPS, weather conditions such as rain, snow, wind, and dust need to be taken into consideration. A device with a self-cleaning feature could ensure a stable power output and extend its lifetime. In the following section, several natural prototypes for self-cleaning and corresponding self-cleaning solar cells will be discussed.

5.2.1 Lotus effect. 
Lotus leaves possess special water repellency and surface non-wettability where water droplets cannot stably adhere to the surface of leaves (or petals in some cases) but spontaneously roll away or bounce off. In this way, dirt particles and dust can be routinely removed from the leaves or petals, which is usually called the ‘lotus effect’ or ‘self-cleaning lotus’ (Fig. 23a).456,457 This non-wetting property originates from the nano- and microscale hierarchical cilium-like structures superimposed on top of micro-papillae, as well as an epicuticular covering of low surface energy wax on these papillae (Fig. 23a(ii) and (iii)). This structural topography at the surface with a significantly large surface area could generate a higher energy barrier at the interface between the liquid and solid, but also trap the air below the water droplets forcing them to partially sit on a membrane of air. These effects jointly give rise to a superhydrophobic property at the surface (contact angle >150° and a sliding angle <5°).456,458 The super-hydrophobicity of these solid surfaces is crucial for self-cleaning of glasses, anti-icing and prevention of snow adhesion to glass surfaces, and anti-corrosion/anti-biofouling.459
 Fig. 23  Lotus-inspired structures for self-cleaning. (a) (i) Image of a water droplet on a lotus leaf, adapted from an online resource.464 (ii) and (iii) SEM image of the lotus leaf surface, adapted with permission from ref. 456, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) (i) Schematic illustration and SEM images of the PDMS hierarchical pyramid arrays. (ii) Schematic illustration of the self-cleaning effect on the hierarchical pyramid PDMS surface. (iii) Static contact angles (green line) and roll-off angles (blue line) of water on three different surfaces, adapted with permission from ref. 458, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the nanocone PDMS film attached on the top of a perovskite solar cell. (ii) Self-cleaning experiment of the perovskite solar cell devices with and without the nanocone PDMS film. (iii) Contact angles of a water droplet on the structured PDMS layer with different aspect ratios, adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) SEM image of the inverted micro-pyramidal structured PDMS layer (IMPS-PDMS). (ii) Sequential photographs of the water droplet cleaning behaviour of the IMPS-PDMS film with fluoro-octyltrichlorosilane (FOTS) treatment. (iii) Photographs of a water droplet on the surface of IMPS-PDMS samples before and after the FOTS surface modification, adapted with permission from ref. 462. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


5.2.2 Lotus-inspired PSCs. 
This self-cleaning property is an important attribute for practical usage of solar cells, particularly for applications in remote desert areas (e.g., Africa, the Middle East, four-season countries460), some industrial areas (e.g., with accumulation of dust, snowfall and airborne dirt from factories) and solar-driven robotic spatial exploration (e.g., The Mars 2020 Perseverance Rover mission of NASA's Mars Exploration Program461). The accumulation of particles from the surrounding environment on the surface will block the light and compromise the output power of PV cells/panels/modules. Currently, cleaning methods to remove these particles include the electrostatic method, mechanical method, and coating method for PV product surface cleaning.460 Considering the energy for the cleaning process, the coating method with a specific surface microstructure design is of great interest. In the case of PSCs, Kang et al.458 reported on the water-repellent PSCs based on PDMS films with lotus leaf-inspired hierarchical arrays well-equipped with a self-cleaning capability. The structured PDMS film is additionally attached (due to the strong van der Waals interaction between PDMS and glass) to the glass side of a PSC which can enhance the light incidence by an anti-reflection effect while having a self-cleaning functionality. Fig. 23b(i) shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the PDMS layer with hierarchical pyramid arrays (having a 45° angle at the bottom edge side). This hierarchically structured PDMS layer creates super-hydrophobicity on the surfaces leading to a self-cleaning effect (Fig. 23b(ii)), where the dust particles could be removed easily by water droplets rolling off the surface due to the large contact angle of 157° (Fig. 23b(iii)). This additional lotus-inspired PDMS thin sticker layer thus exhibits an easy but effective way of making self-cleaning PSCs. Similarly, Tavakoli et al.147 also reported a nano-cone array of an antireflection film attached onto the front electrode of the substrate in order to improve the water-repellence as well as the optical transmittance. The PDMS film (thickness of 0.2 mm) with a nanocone array pattern (1 μm pitch and 1 μm depth, as shown in Fig. 23c(i)) was fabricated by molding from an imprinted Al foil template which was first prepared via a multistep anodization coupled with a wet etching process. Fig. 23c(ii) shows the ‘dust self-cleaning experiments’, where the dust/small particles can be easily removed from the device by rolling water droplets across the surface sufficiently cleaning the dusty surface. Furthermore, the aspect ratios (defined by the height of nanocones over periodicity) of the PDMS nanocones can be tuned through the molding process. Besides the inverted micro-pyramidal structured (IMPS) PDMS coating film, incorporation of an additional hydrophobic layer can further enhance the self-cleaning effect for the device. Dudem et al.462 reported the fluoro-octyltrichlorosilane (FOTS)-coating on the surface of micro-pyramidal PDMS (Fig. 23d(i)) and obtained a superhydrophobic behavior with a very large water contact angle of 150° (Fig. 23d(iii)). The micro-pyramidal structured PDMS was prepared by peeling from a Si-mold after curing at 75 °C for 2 hours, followed by a treatment (rinse) of a mixture of trichloro(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl) silane and n-hexane for several minutes and drying in an oven at 30 °C for 12 hours. The self-cleaning behavior of a FOTS-treated IMPS–PDMS film was tested by dropping water on the dust covered film. Fig. 23d(ii) shows the efficient self-cleaning process. In real outdoor conditions, these nano/micro-structured PDMS films with a super-hydrophobic surface have exhibited an efficient self-cleaning ability when exposed to raindrops, and the PSCs integrated with the PDMS layer showed good device stability for 32 days.463

5.3 Self-healing

5.3.1 Self-healing in nature. 
‘Healing’ is defined as the act or process of curing or of restoring to health.465 In nature, healing is an intrinsic ability in the biological world, encompassing from plants to animal kingdoms, roughly classified into eight prevalent mechanisms: (i) reversible muscle control, (ii) clotting, (iii) cellular response, (iv) layering, (v) protective surfaces, (vi) vascular networks or capsules, (vii) exposure, and (viii) replenishable functional coatings466 by the biological community. Table 7 summarizes the healing in nature (flora and fauna) through an organizational approach. Flora includes herbaceous plants that die down to ground and regrow each year (i.e., annuals, biennials, and perennials) and woody plants referring to trees that maintain a persistent woody stem above ground year-round; fauna includes vertebrates (animals with a spinal cord) and invertebrates (without a spinal cord). Due to the huge variability of species, their specific self-healing mechanisms differ significantly. For example, Fig. 24a shows the wound healing in a tree limb, where the cells at the wound (cut) are hardening to seal off the wound to prevent the exposure to harmful microbes. Some plants also have special secretion cells (or the vascularized networks throughout their tissues), which could release latex, gum or volatile oils at the cut to heal injuries and/or to repel predators.467,468Fig. 24b shows a latex producing tree as an example, which has inspired the application of ‘self-healing elastomers for dampers’.469–473 In vertebrates, bone remodeling via a complex series of cellular and humoral activities is important to the species.474Fig. 24c shows this process, which begins with the debris cleaning at the existing bone fracture by the osteoclasts (cells that break down bone tissue), followed by remodeling by pre-osteoblasts to wound the site, reproduction of the extracellular matrix and mineralization to produce new bone. During this process, continuous ‘precursor’ supply of hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cells is crucial to this ‘synthetic reaction’. This concept has inspired ‘self-sealing and self-healing concrete’.475 As a broad overview, Table 8 lists a chronological overview of some self-healing/repair materials/applications inspired by nature according to prior literature.
Table 7 Self-healing/defense mechanisms found in living nature (partially referred from multiple references466)




Flora & fauna
Healing activities (physical change)
Healing/defence description
Mechanism(s)
Ref.




Plants
Herbaceous plants
Wound closure
Seal-off and grow (production and maturation of callus parenchyma)
Cells swell, divide, and harden at the surface

483



Secretions after injury
Latex, gum, or volatile oils are released to aid healing upon breach
Punctured cell induces a localized response

467 and 468



Innate immune response
Pattern-recognition of microbe attack
Cellular response for specific cell response

484



Woody plants
Bark (epidermis) and roots (rhizodermis) growth
Continual production of thick outer layers (tree bark and root bark) protecting inner layers
Continual replenishment of the hard, protective layers

485–487



Animals
Vertebrates
Central nervous system (CNS) injury response
Glial cells in the extracellular matrix quickly form scar tissue to maintain homeostasis
Clearing of debris and rapid system stabilization

488 and 489



Peripheral nervous system (PNS) injury
Schwann cells clear the area around the axons and allow repair
Clearing of debris and rapid system stabilization

488 and 489



Vertebrate (hard tissue)
Bone break
Cellular response: inflammation, cartilage callus formation, lamellar bone generation and remodelling
A series of cellular activities (bone side stabilization, remodelling, mineralization, etc.)

474



Vertebrate (soft tissue)
Wound
Cellular clotting, inflammation, proliferation, and remodelling
Cellular signalling from short-term clotting to long-term cell remodelling

490



Stem cell response
Stem cells replicate and differentiate into target cells for new tissue growth
Adapted healing by tissue regrowth

491 and 492



Molting (shedding) and replenishment
Replacing old and dead tissue to accommodate new growth (reptiles) or seasonally (birds)
Shedding of the outermost layer (skin, feathers, hair)

493 and 494



Invertebrate (hard tissue)
Wound
(Insect's) endocuticle secretion from the cellular epidermis
Continual growth of the exoskeleton from the soft inner layer

495



Exoskeleton growth and ecdysis
The organism outgrows its current exoskeleton
Periodic replacement of the newly grown exoskeleton

496



Invertebrate (soft tissue)
Wound
Clotting (plasma protein reactions, blood cell aggregation, or cell population increase) and cellular healing
Clotting through the dense hemocyte network, hemocyte/plasma coagulation, cell reproduction

497





 Fig. 24  Natural examples of self-healing. (a and b) Several self-healing and defence mechanisms in herbaceous and woody plants: (a) wound closure and growth and (b) secretion cells, adapted with permission from ref. 466 and 498–500, Copyright 2005 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic illustration showing the healing process in vertebrate hard tissue, adapted with permission from ref. 501, Copyright 2011 Springer Nature. (d) (i) Photograph showing the ecdysis/molting behavior of various animals, credits to multiple online sources.502–504 (e) SEM image showing the poor and defective surface of a MAPbI3 crystal. Mechanical exfoliation of top layers for obtaining a fresh surface is a commonly used method in materials research. (f) Schematic illustration showing the protection mechanism in species at different length scales: the cell wall protects the cell of the plant, skin epidermis protects the inner tissues, the outer skeleton of insects provides protection against harsh environmental stimuli, and marine collagens protect the marine creatures. In comparison, in the research of perovskite solar cells, different protection strategies have been proposed: a core–shell structure protects the core lattice, an ultrathin organic coating layer on the grain protects the core crystal of the perovskite, and a 2D capping layer can protect the 3D bulk layer underneath. Pictures are adapted with permission from online resources503,505 and from ref. 481, 506 and 507, Copyright 2020 Elsevier, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2021 American Chemical Society. 
Table 8 Chronological overview of some self-healing/repair materials/applications inspired by nature




First published in year
Inspired by
Self-repair in biological role models
Self-repair mechanism
Bioinspired or biomimetic materials learned from nature
Bioinspiration or biomimetic approach
Key references




2010
Plants
Waxy surfaces of plants (lotus)
Super-hydrophobicity by regenerating the epicuticular wax layer
Self-healing superhydrophobic coatings
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

508



2010
Latex-bearing plants
Latex discharge and latex coagulation
Self-healing elastomers for dampers
Top-down approach

469–471, 473 and 509



2011

Nepenthes pitcher plants
Liquid-repellent microtextured surfaces with a stable air–liquid interface
Self-healing, slippery, liquid-infused porous surface(s)
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

475



2011
Stems of twining liana
Sealing cells squeezing into tissue fissures
Self-healing closed cell polyurethane foam coating for pneumatic systems
Top-down approach

510–515



2016
Surface of plant leaves (lotus) and Nepenthes pitcher plants
Wax repair of leaves and slippery surfaces of pitfall traps
Self-repair slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

516



2018
Follicles of the plant genus Banksia
Waxes at the suture of the two valves protecting the seed seal up microfissures
Wood platelets sealed by carnauba
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

517 and 518



2018
Leaves of D. cooperi
Release of stored elastic energy
Phase-separated polymers with a built-in shape-memory effect leading to self-healing
Bottom-up approach

519–522



2013
Animals
Byssal threads of marine mussels
Metal coordination-based cross-linking of proteins
Self-healing, multi-pH-responsive hydrogel
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

523–526



2014
Byssal threads of marine mussels
Self-assembly
Wet self-mending polymers, surface-functionalized with catechol
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

527



2015
Architecture of nacre
Self-assembly
Self-healing polymers with high dynamics
Bioinspiration

528



2016
Architecture of nacre
Sacrificial bonds in the organic layer
Autonomous self-healing layers of supramolecular polymers
Bioinspiration

529



2017
Architecture of nacre
Hierarchical structure
Heat-triggered composites releasing sealant
Bioinspiration

530



2005
Humans
Hemostasis and bone healing
Delivery and reaction of healing agents
“Bleeding composites” for aerospace applications
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

531–536



2013
Hemostasis of the spongious bone
Delivery and reaction of healing agents in a porous concrete core
Self-sealing and self-healing concrete
Top-down approach

537



2018
Epidermis of human skin
Hierarchically stratified structure of a soft inner and a hard-outer material layer
Hierarchical coating system of hybrid multilayers with synergetic self-healing function
Top-down approach or problem-driven BID

538



2015
Living creature in general
Living tissues with self-regulated release systems of liquid
Continuous, dynamic, liquid exchange between shell-less droplets, matrix and surface
Self-healing droplet-embedded gel material
Bioinspiration

539





In terms of perovskites, one challenge in this material is its high chemical activity with oxygen and moisture in air. Placing a halide perovskite thin film in the ambient atmosphere will introduce a gradual surface degradation (chemical impurities, surface traps, etc.) that is harmful for their use in PSCs.476,477 Removing this already degraded surface layer inspired by the ecdysis and moulting of animals (Fig. 24d) could be a potential solution. In fact, the concept of ‘surface layer removal to obtain a high-quality fresh layer’ has been widely used chemically and physically in manufacturing (e.g., surface cleaning of monocrystalline silicon wafers for chip manufacturing)478 and in research (e.g., mechanical exfoliation of 2D materials for obtaining a fresh surface479,480). For a perovskite crystal, the surface trap has significant harmful impacts on the interfacial contact. Fig. 24e shows a cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite crystal with poor surface morphology. Properly polishing the top surface with techniques such as laser polishing or other fine lapping may help to passivate those unwanted surface defects. To prevent surface degradation of halide perovskite films, an alternative pathway could be a quick surface passivation before reaction with air. Like the wound healing process at the epidermis in soft tissues of the invertebrates, covering the reactive surface with a clotting-like ultrathin layer may be helpful in inhibiting the reaction with ambient harmful agents. This spontaneous self-surface-protection could be conceptualized either by introducing specific additives in the perovskite that can spontaneously form a robust top protecting layer on the halide perovskite481 (will be discussed in Section 5.3 – Bio-additives) or by intentionally coating a capping layer on top of the wet halide perovskite film before its reaction with air.482 Protective skin and an outer shell are widely used strategies in nature. Fig. 24f shows the examples of cell walls of plants that can protect the cell, skin epidermis that can protect the inner tissues, the exoskeleton of insects that can provide protection against harsh environmental stimuli, and marine collagens that can protect marine organisms. In comparison, for the research of perovskite solar cells, different protection strategies have been proposed (Fig. 24f). For example, a core–shell structure could protect the core perovskite lattice, an ultrathin organic coating layer on the grain could protect the crystal grain of the perovskite, and a 2D capping layer could protect the 3D perovskite layer underneath. This is particularly important for perovskite solar cells, where the surface traps account for a significant loss. Particularly in single-crystalline perovskite solar cells, since the inner bulk region is having no boundaries, surface traps could lead to a serious issue in contact with the CTL or electrodes. Passivating these surface traps or delaminating the top-rough ‘skin’ to induce a smooth inner surface during device assembly is the next hurdle to overcome. This may require sophisticated manufacturing techniques such as laser-annealing, laser polishing and flashing lamp annealing techniques.


5.3.2 Self-healing in PSCs. 
PSCs targeted for MPS applications may have soft and deformable attributes. However, soft elastic materials typically used for PSCs and other electronics are susceptible to puncturing and tearing, leading to mechanical failures, performance losses, and even the lead leakage from the perovskite layer. This potential failure greatly limits the use of MPS in applications such as autonomous field robotics or remote mission (e.g., spatial mission) where repairs are challenging or even impossible. Hence, soft MPS which are self-healable and functionally repairable like natural skin or nervous tissue are of great interest. In a higher-level field view of artificial self-healing materials, many nature-inspired mechanisms and materials have been proposed. These include semiconducting polymeric networks,540–542 recoverable polymers,543 ionic hydrogels,544 liquid metal (LM) microfluidics,545,546 and LM microcapsules patterned on solid lines.547 These methods can also be transferred to be used in PSCs. At this point, self-healing in PSCs still is not fully developed. For specific consideration of halide perovskites, some aspects of this material are serious issues for industrial implementation, including the environmental impact from the lead548–550 as well as the materials’ photo- and chemical-stability.551–553 The material is intrinsically metastable with significant anharmonicity in the chemical bonds and consequent dynamic disordered states within the crystallographic lattice.554 Restoring the properties from a ‘damaged’ state of the halide perovskite to its original ‘healthy’ state to prevent device failure is of great importance. As an organic–inorganic hybrid material with a ‘soft’ attribute (a much smaller Young's modulus than those of typical inorganic semiconductors such as Si and GaAs), it is possible to heal the perovskite using the aforementioned methods applied in other ‘soft’ materials such as polymers. For example, using chemical/physical treatments (e.g., exposure to degrading chemical, thermal, or light treatments) on halide perovskites,555,556 cracks and pin-holes can be merged well. Early studies have revealed that the incorporation of polyethylene glycol (PEG) additives into the MAPbI3 perovskite can revert the degraded crystal (yellow δ-phase) back to the black β-phase.557 Specifically as shown in Fig. 25a(i), by infiltrating the perovskite into a PEG scaffold, the composite film exhibits a recovery behavior after degradation upon water spray, which otherwise would display an irreversible degradation if no PEG was involved. By constructing the PEG scaffold-based PSC (Fig. 25a(ii)), a self-healing device performance has also been obtained. The PCE decays with reduced VOC and JSC upon exposure to water vapour but then returns to its original value in less than one minute (Fig. 25a(iii)). This self-healing phenomenon might originate from the excellent hygroscopicity of the PEG coupled by its strong interaction with perovskite lattice terminals. PEG has stronger interactions with water molecules than those of the perovskite and water, so the water can be retained in the PEG phase instead of diffusing into the perovskite phase; PEG can also keep the MAI (through hydrogen interactions) from escaping away through a higher volume of water spray. By putting back into a dry atmosphere, as long as the retained water molecules evaporate, the non-perovskite yellowish phase turned back to the black β-phase. Similar to polymers, small organics with proper interactions with the perovskite lattice can also assist the self-healing of the PSC. Recently, Ran et al. reported the incorporation of large-volume amines (LVAs) in the Sn-based PSC with a self-healing property. After heating or exposing to air (the Sn-based PSC is highly sensitive to heat and oxygen due to the quick oxidation of Sn2+ in FASnI3), the LVA-based device could partially restore its PCE from 60% of its initial value to 80% after being placed in a N2 atmosphere for a specific time. This self-healing effect might be due to the steric hindrance effect of the LVAs.558
 Fig. 25  Self-healing perovskite solar cell against environmental degradation. (a) (i) Photographs of perovskite films with and without PEG showing color change evolution after water-spraying. (ii) Schematic illustration of the PEG scaffold structured perovskite solar cell (PPSC). (iii) J–V curves of the PPSC before and after water spray showing the self-healing feature, adapted with permission from ref. 557, Copyright 2016 Springer. (b) (i) Schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image showing an inverted-structure perovskite solar cell. (ii) Normalized solar-cell parameters (VOC, JSC, FF) as a function of the proton dose, ϕ. (iii) Time dependence of the normalized solar-cell parameters after termination of the proton irradiation for a proton-irradiated device (red circles) and for a reference solar cell (black dot), adapted with permission from ref. 564, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the biasing experiment. (ii) Schematic diagrams of the evolution of the ion distribution within the perovskite layer under solar cell working conditions, adapted wither permission from ref. 567, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) (i) Schematic illustration of the planar structured perovskite solar cell device. (ii) Time evolution of JSC under constant illumination and after resting the device in the dark. (iii) Schematic diagrams of the proposed photocurrent degradation and self-healing mechanism, adapted with permission from ref. 564, Copyright 2016 Springer. 
Similar ‘self-healing’ effects in PSCs upon exposure and termination of proton radiation have also been observed.559 This might be more important for outer space and space ship mission applications. The proton (p) radiation, together with helium (He) (resulting from galactic cosmic radiation or solar flares, with a particle flux of 103 to 108 cm−2 s−1 depending on the distance from Earth),560–562 is the major cosmic radiation source for the solar cells and MPS used in spatial missions (e.g., spaceships and satellites in the outer space). Protons with high energies (close to 1 MeV) can induce ionization and lattice displacement, and result in device damage to solar cells.563 Lang et al.559 found that the PSC exhibited compromised PCE upon proton irradiation but displayed a self-healing effect by returning the PCE to its original value after terminating the radiation (Fig. 25b(i)). This can be understood from the proton irradiation-induced displacement of hydrogen. The proton irradiation typically results in the chemical bond breakage of C–H and N–H, rendering localized in-band states (further leading to Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination) (Fig. 25b(ii)). After termination of the proton irradiation, the displaced hydrogen atoms migrate back towards the lattice and passivate the localized defects, recovering to their original state. This self-healing process is verified in the recovery of the photocurrent (Fig. 25b(iii)).
Besides the above moisture and proton radiation stimulated self-healing, another type of healing is via illumination.564 Several groups have reported such photo-induced degradation and recovery of the device PV parameters under constant solar irradiation, applied external bias and storage in the dark. In early 2015, Bag et al.565 reported the first observation of photoinduced quasi-reversibility of the performance of PSCs (MAxFA1−xPbI3). The PSC degradation under sunlight contains both thermally activated fast ion transport and lattice-expansion triggered by IR light in the solar spectrum. Interestingly, they also observed that, after keeping a previously illuminated MAPbI3 PSC in the dark for 15 min, the lost PCE of the device can be recovered when re-illuminated. Similarly, Yadav et al.566 also found that, under conditions of illumination and bias, the JSC of the PSC decreased in a reversible pathway and recovered to its initial number after being kept in the dark for a short time. The ion movement and accumulation, and the resultant interfacial change at selective contacts is concluded to be a possible mechanism restricting the PV performance recovery.566 These ion-migration induced recoverable PCE changes in PSCs have been further supported by the work of Domanski et al.567 (Fig. 25c). By in situ cooling the working PSCs and exemption of thermally induced non-reversible PCE loss, the device exhibits a significant PCE loss under continuous operation (in light) and then shows PCE recovery to its initial value after resting in the dark. As shown in Fig. 25c(ii), in the initial condition, the ionic pairs (stoichiometric anion and cation) are randomly distributed in the perovskite layer; in the non-stabilized condition (devices are exposed to light and biased to MPP) anions (vacancies) migrate to the HTL side and form a Debye layer at the interface, leaving the relatively immobile cation behind; at longer timescales over 103 s (i.e., the stabilized condition), cations migrate and form another Debye layer at the ETL side. Both Debye layers at the HTL and ETL sides are harmful for photocarrier extraction and hence lead to PCE degradation, but it is recoverable. Particularly when the PSC device is given several hours of ‘resting’ in the dark, the ionic distribution can thermodynamically return to its initial random state and thereby the device appears to be ‘fresh’ again and thus the PCE is restored. Supported by modelling and elemental depth profiling results, the slow ionic migration (timescale >103 s) induced reversible PCE losses are further verified. Based on this timescale of >103 s, the natural day/night cycles (timescale of 104 s) can provide enough time for self-healing of the device performance spontaneously. A similar recoverable behaviour of the PSC was also observed by Lee et al.568 After being exposed to 365 nm UV light for >1000 hours under inert gas (<0.5 ppm H2O), followed by one-sun soaking (allowing dispatch of stacked charges and neutralization of defects), the PSC showed PCE recovery. In parallel, a claim of ‘light-activated metastable trap-states’564 to explain the recovery behaviour of PSCs has also been documented. Nie et al.564 demonstrated that PSC degradation under constant solar illumination is due to the photocurrent loss, which can quickly self-heal within 1 min in the dark to its original value (Fig. 25d(ii)). PSC capacitance measurements and film time-resolved (TR) PL spectroscopy attribute the observed photocurrent loss to the ‘light-activated metastable trap-states’564 (Fig. 25(iii)), which further leads to the space charges at the interface (resulting in non-homogeneous electric fields interfering with charge transport in the device) as supported by both experimental data and DFT analysis. Overall, in PSCs there have been several interesting phenomena observed for ‘self-healing’: (i) two distinct time regimes of recovery: fast recovery (i.e., <1 min,564 retrieving ∼96% of its initial PCE), slower recovery (tens of minutes to an hour, i.e., 103 s,567 fully restoring the photocurrent); (ii) the photocurrent degradation can be attributed to the formation of light-activated, metastable and deep trap-states (>0.5 eV);564 (iii) both the degradation and self-healing of PSCs are highly sensitive to temperature and light,565 the former's dynamic (timescale of 103 s) being slower than that of the latter (timescale of 102 s); (iv) a VOC decrease by 40 mV has been observed and is due to the deep trap-states. To explain these behaviours, a more general and fundamental property of the perovskite material needs to be clarified, the ‘polaron’ model.569 The formation of small polarons is generally responsible for this experimental ‘self-healing’ behaviour in PSCs based on the following considerations: (i) localized polaronic states can be manifested as deep trap-states in the forbidden band, which further gives rise to the space charge accumulation and a ≤40% photocurrent reduction; (ii) the formation time of small polarons is faster than the time scales of PSC degradation; (iii) the slow degradation of the photocurrent can be attributed to the accumulation of small polarons. Considering these, Nan et al.570 provided a first-principles calculation on the light-induced photocurrent degradation and self-healing in MAPbI3 PSCs. It is demonstrated that, under photoexcitation, changes of the crystallographic lattice (due to photo-activation of site vacancies, followed by geometric relaxation) lead to the formation of partially localized excitons being trapped at the defects. In the meantime, the other excitons can be dissociated into free charges at the femtosecond scale due to their very small exciton binding energy.571,572 Hence there is the coexistence of trapped excitons and free charges. The trapped excitons can be released (to yield a recovery effect) with an activation energy of 26 meV for the I-site vacancy and 38 meV for the Pb-site vacancy in MAPbI3. Overall, the photocurrent degradation and recovery in PSCs can be determined by the competition between the trapping and release of excitons. This mechanism is more general and can be applied for similar perovskites such as FAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and FAPbBr3, but with a faster recovery dynamic.569 The optical ‘damage’ to the perovskite film has also been investigated and found in the recovery of the PL of multiple perovskite films.569,573 These observations indicate that illumination induced ‘damage’ of the perovskite can be repaired continuously.
Outside the self-healing of the perovskite crystals, another consideration can be the quarantine of leakage of the toxic lead by some self-healing encapsulation materials when the PSC is mechanically damaged. Recently, Jiang et al.574 reported a self-healing polymer-based encapsulation to reduce the lead leakage from damage. Three encapsulation methods (Fig. 26a) have been investigated coupled with realistic simulated mechanical damage (to simulate the real hail impact) as well as Pb leakage rate. The crucial factor to minimize the Pb leakage is the self-repair ability of encapsulating polymers. Fig. 26b and c compare the different encapsulation methods in terms of their effectiveness in limiting the lead leakage. Fig. 26b shows the photographs of PSC modules with different encapsulation methods before impact and Fig. 26c shows the photographs of these PSC modules after mechanical impacts (followed by two water dripping tests, the first by heating at 45 °C and a second water dripping test). Different encapsulation methods yield various degrees of perovskite decomposition. Particularly, an epoxy resin (ER)-based polymer with a Tg of ∼42 °C, when sandwiched between a PSC module and a top capping glass, can effectively reduce the rate of Pb leakage from 30 to 0.08 mg h−1 m−2 under various simulated weather conditions. Taking advantage of such ‘self-healing’ attributes from the polymeric encapsulation materials to protect the device, quarantine the lead, and even recover the partial performance loss is a promising pathway to extend the lifecycle of PSC based MPS products. On a broader scale beyond the epoxy resin, self-healing polymers involving various chemical processes (including incorporation of covalent,575–577 free-radical,578,579 and supramolecular580–582 dynamic bonds) and physical events (such as employing enhanced van der Waals interactions,583 interdigitated copolymeric morphologies – embedded, reactive, encapsulated fluids that can infiltrate into a wound and trigger sequential chemical reactions for damage repair584 and cardiovascular networks585) are providing new insights. Although artificial self-healing in versatile systems may contain complex mechanisms, self-healing in living systems involves complex cascade reaction series, the exact chemistries of some of which are far from being understood. Resembling these natural self-healing processes from learning and mimicking the reactions at the molecular scale is the major ongoing task in the community of artificial self-healing materials. Learning, transferring, and applying these techniques into the more specialized PSC field may create a big leap to self-healable MPS products.
 Fig. 26  Self-quarantine strategies in PSCs. (a) Schematic illustration showing the different encapsulation methods (left) and the experimental procedure to assess the quantity of the toxic Pb leaked from a perovskite solar module that is damaged due to an external impact (for example, hail) (right). (b) and (c) Perovskite solar modules using different encapsulation methods (b) before and (c) after impact and water dripping test, adapted with permission from ref. 574, Copyright 2019 Springer. 

5.4 Bio-additives
Incorporation of processing additives into the photoactive layer is a universally effective methodology to boost PV cell performance. In OPVs, small molecule additives can tune the micromorphology of the BHJ blend and hence tune multiple electronic properties;288 in PSCs, additives have been reported to have multiple effects on the device performance. There are various types of additives including salts, molecules, polymers, and even nanoparticles,46,586–588 with varied effects, including modulating crystalline features, stabilizing the perovskite phase, adjusting energy-level alignment, enhancing operational stability, eliminating hysteresis, suppressing nonradiative recombination, etc.589,590 In contrast to those inorganic additives, biomolecular additives may have additional functionalities through molecular interactions with the perovskite lattice by their specific functional chemical groups. A good example is in caffeine,591 which is the active substance in coffee. A recent study has revealed the effectiveness of incorporation of caffeine in boosting the stability of PSCs. The caffeine molecule has two CO groups (Fig. 27a(i)) with lone pair electrons that could interact with the Pb2+ from the perovskite lattice through strong Coulombic coordination, serving as a ‘molecular interlock’ between adjacent perovskite grains. Meanwhile, these molecules can serve as Lewis bases passivating the Lewis acid-type defects like undercoordinated Pb2+ in perovskites, thus reducing the trap density. This molecular interlock effect also suppresses the ion migration, yielding a superior stability for a PSC based on the n–i–p structure (Fig. 27a(ii)) to retain 90% of the initial PCE after 1700 hours when annealed at 85 °C (in contrast to 60% of the initial performance remaining from the reference blank device after 175 hours of annealing, as shown in Fig. 27a(iii)). Similarly, Zhang et al.592 introduced N719 (a dye derived from chlorophyll) into the MAPbI3 perovskite crystal. The –COOH groups from N719 were found to form complexes with the MA+ (MA+ = CH3NH3+) in the perovskite lattice (Fig. 27b(i)), which modifies the diffusion of water molecules in the materials. Theoretical calculations show a much higher migration barrier of water molecules in the N719-based perovskite. As a result, the water penetration into the perovskite layer can be greatly inhibited (Fig. 27b(ii)), and the moisture stability of the device is significantly improved. Nearly 70% of the PCE can be retained at a high RH of 60% for 400 hours (Fig. 27b(iii)). Our group also revealed that the incorporation of hydrophobic DNA–CTMA into the perovskite crystal can sufficiently improve the device stability282 by nanoscopically wrapping the perovskite nanocrystals (Fig. 27c(i)). The strong hydrophobicity of DNA–CTMA also enhances the non-wettability upon contact with water (Fig. 27c(ii)) and thereby improves the device lifetime (Fig. 27c(iii)). Recently, our group reported a ‘perovskite/perovskite’ bilayer structure. The bottom perovskite layer is a bulk layer with a typical grain size of hundreds of nanometers, while the top perovskite layer consists of perovskite–artemisinin core–shell nanocrystals. This bilayer structure is spontaneously formed by adding the artemisinin molecules (Fig. 27d(i)), which have been known as medicine molecules against malaria.581,593 Artemisinin has a unique endoperoxide ring that produces free radicals to damage the proteins of parasites and thereby cure the disease.594,595 The sesquiterpene lactone structure and alkyls make artemisinin insoluble in water, showing a hydrophobic behavior.591 As a result, the hydrophobicity from the artemisinin-incorporated MAPbI3 top layer (Fig. 27d(ii)) improves the device stability with a retained efficiency >18% which corresponds to ∼95% of the initial PCE after one-month exposure to ambient environment (Fig. 27d(iii)). Overall, by providing functional groups to anchor the terminal partially bonded atoms in the perovskite lattice, the biomolecular additives are effective in improving the stability of the crystal. In addition, the PCEs of the resultant PSCs can be improved to certain degrees mostly due to the enhanced crystalline quality. Fig. 28 summarizes the PCEs of the PSCs incorporated with multiple bio-molecular additives. The highest PCE of 20.63% comes from the device structure of FTO/TiO2/perovskite/spiro-MeOTAD/Au with the addition of DNA–CTMA into the perovskite layer. Nevertheless, biomolecules are naturally more complex than typically used artificial additives and their role in the cascade reaction series in a species can be even more complicated and delicate. Harnessing their specific chemical group as a functional agent to couple with those active terminal atoms/crystallographic sites in the perovskite lattice might be a good way to improve performance, but it remains technically inefficient and scientifically unclear when using such complex molecules to execute simple redox chemical reactions between biomolecules and the perovskite lattice. Instead, simplifying the biomolecule structures, designing an optimal structure using the knowledgebase and knowhow from aforementioned successes, and utilizing a more functional-oriented bio-additives for PSCs might be a better alternative.
 Fig. 27  Bio-additives in perovskite solar cells. (a) (i) Molecular structure of caffeine. (ii) Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite solar cell. (iii) Thermal stability test under 85 °C continuous annealing and photovoltaic performance of the caffeine-incorporated solar cell, adapted with permission from ref. 591, Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) (i) Schematic illustration showing the interaction between MA+ and N-719. (ii) Photograph showing the degradation transformation process of the perovskite film with and without the N-719 additive. (iii) Stability test of the perovskite solar cell at a 60% relative humidity, adapted with permission from ref. 592, Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) (i) Schematic illustration showing the interaction between DNA and the perovskite. (ii) Contact angle of a water droplet on the pristine and DNA-modified perovskites. (iii) Stability test of the perovskite solar cell with and without DNA modification at a relative humidity of 75%, adapted with permission from ref. 282, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Molecular structure of artemisinin (ART). (ii) Schematic and cross-sectional SEM image showing the bilayer-structured perovskite solar cell induced by ART. (iii) Stability test of pristine and ART-modified perovskite solar cells at a relative humidity of 50%, adapted with permission from ref. 481, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 28  Summary of bio-additives in different classes of photovoltaic devices: (1&2) Hou et al. ref. 282, (3) Wang et al., ref. 591, (4) Das et al., ref. 328, (5) Yusoff et al., ref. 281, (6) Deng et al., ref. 596, (7) Dajar et al., ref. 279, (8) Nie et al., ref. 597, (9) Toschi et al., ref. 597, (10 & 11) Wang et al., ref. 404, (12) Henning et al., ref. 598, (13) Calogero et al., ref. 402, and (14) Kumara et al., ref. 599. 
5.5 Bio-hybrids
Extending from the scope of the abovementioned nanoscale or molecular-scale mixing of biomolecules and semiconductors, blending organisms with semiconductors at the meso-scale is another research interest. Classic examples such as dye-sensitized solar cells where natural dyes are adsorbed at the surface of TiO2 to execute the light-triggered biological processes across their interface, or photo-bioelectrochemical cells and photobiofuel cells with biomolecules, cells or bacteria immobilized on the metal electrodes have been extensively studied for applications in energy harvesting, sensing and storage.600–602 Particularly, similar to the photoactive layer of perovskite in a perovskite solar cell, the photosynthetic proteins (e.g., Reaction Centre – Light Harvesting 1 (RC-LH1)) from natural organisms such as Rhodobacter sphaeroides603 play the key role in natural photosynthesis reactions because of not only their similar role in photoexcitation of electrons to that of the semiconductor but also their unique attributes such as ultrahigh quantum efficiency for energy transfer and charge separation as well as the maintenance of this high efficiency at low temperatures such as 4 K.604,605 Recently, Tan et al.604 took advantage of the wide response window of photosynthetic proteins to light, temperature, pressure, etc., and developed self-powered all-weather sensory systems. By incorporating RC-LH1 into an electrolyte medium of a triblock copolymer (thermoreversible gel (TRG)), the photoelectrochemical cell even exhibited a self-healing behavior. This successful demonstration of photosynthetic proteins in solar-driven sensor applications revealed the underlying potential of natural photosynthetic proteins in innovating multifunctional solar devices.
Similarly, bacteriorhodopsin (bR) is another well-known photoactive protein usually found in the purple membrane of Halobacterium salinarum. In Section 4.3, we have discussed their role in the charge transport layer in solar cells. Beyond charge transport, in light of the enhanced potential for light-induced proton pumping and color switching, bR has also been adopted as a platform for various applications such as fuel cells, photodetectors, biosensors, artificial retinas, nanosensors, storage devices, holographic memory, security inks, and bio-defense or camouflage, which have been well documented in another review paper.606
Although not well studied so far, interfacing these relatively larger-size proteins with perovskite photoactive layer materials to render new composites could potentially extend the application domains of solar cells. For example, the low-temperature environment workable RC-LH1 could extend the solar cells’ application range to meet a critical environmental condition of extremely cold weather. Technically, employing these larger-size proteins in vitro in a perovskite polycrystalline layer still needs to be properly strategized, where prior learnings from effective immobilization of proteins on the electrode of a photoelectrochemical device may be helpful. In parallel, fundamental research on the natural function of inter- and intra-proteins and full understanding of the efficient transfer of photoinduced electrons across the interface are also necessary and important to guide us as to how to mimic it in real devices.
6. From the device to system level
In the above text, we have discussed the bio-inspired strategy for each individual component in the PSC device, including the electrode, the charge transfer layer and the perovskite photoactive layer. Zooming out from these individual components towards the perspective at the device or system level, more intriguing and creative designs of the whole device system and their corresponding manufacturing inspired by the natural bio-systems are of great interest. In the following section, bio-inspired design with successful reported demonstrations at the whole device level and unconventional manufacturing techniques replicating the sophisticated nano/microstructures from biology will be discussed.
6.1 Bio-inspired design

6.1.1 Solar tracker. 
Many living creatures can track light adaptively to maximize their exposure to the light. This light-tracking phenomenon is known as phototropism, which can be found in the example of a sunflower that can self-orient itself to face the sun throughout the day. In this tropic movement, organisms not only spatially ‘sense’ the light stimuli, but also spontaneously and continuously adjust their movements to strictly follow the incident light directions. This presents intelligence in self-regulation through the natural feedback control inherent in dynamic interactions between the stimulus and the organisms. As the natural sunlight is dynamic (Earth rotation), there is an inevitable oblique-incidence energy-density loss (OEL, sunlight density reduction when the emissive energy projects on a surface obliquely, as shown in Fig. 29a). The loss could be enormous if the incident angle is large (e.g., 75% loss at 75° incidence). In order to maintain the high-level light-reception, many plants developed such phototropism behavior. This phototropism could provide an efficient solution to address the universal OEL issue and huge energy loss in existing solar panel farms, although solar trackers have been invented to reduce the OEL but mostly need additional power to supply their rotation (will be discussed later). Harnessing such phototrophic behavior autonomously, without external control or power supply, is of great significance in achieving highly efficient and intelligent PV systematic platforms with smart autonomous adaption to complex ambient environments (such as clouds and sunset). Although many reversibly photoresponsive soft materials such as hydrogels,611–616 liquid crystal elastomers617–619 and azobenzene/spiropyran-based polymers620,621 have been proposed as good candidates for achieving this artificial phototropism behavior,607 their applications in solar trackers of PVs remain fully unexplored.
 Fig. 29  Solar tracking. (a) Schematic illustration showing concept of the artificial phototropism and the sunflower-like biomimetic omnidirectional tracker, adapted with permission from ref. 607, Copyright 2019 Springer. (b) Schematic illustration of the solar hour angle which is controlled by the daily rotation of the Earth, adapted from an online resource.608 (c) Photograph of a sunflower (left), adapted from an online resource,609 and a sunflower-shaped solar panel (right), adapted from an online resource.610 
In the case of PVs, the output electrical power is heavily dependent on the solar irradiation that reaches the PV cell surface.622,623 The more orthogonal the sunlight reaching the cell surface, the higher the output power that can be achieved. The Earth is constantly spinning and the incident angle of the Sun's rays on the cell surface is dynamically changing, causing significant power loss of the PV cell. In addition to the Earth's daily rotation, the annual rotation of the tilted Earth (Fig. 29b), the latitude of the surface, and the local weather conditions will also affect the light absorption of the PV cell. In order to expand the overall solar harvesting, the solar tracking technology inspired by phototropism is a good solution. The state-of-the-art solar tracking techniques (Fig. 29c) include the passive tracker (e.g., liquid- or gas-based thermal expansion mechanism by the company Zomewords,624 and researchers like Clifford et al.625 and Castañeda et al.626) and the active tracker (e.g., control logic and algorithm based mechanism, first presented by McFee,627 a control system with a microprocessor and an electro-optical sensor628–633). The former is advantageous as it has less energy/cost consumption of the tracking system, but it lacks intelligent reaction to the weather (as it is mostly thermally driven, hot weather will significantly interfere with the tracking motion). The latter is advantageous in dynamically adapting the complex environmental conditions, but requires additional power supply to maintain its response to environmental stimuli, an algorithm to respond to the temporal weather change and responding motion.
The ultimate way of harvesting solar energy is to construct a sphere surrounding the light source. In a more cosmoscopic level, efficiently utilizing the solar energy in the Solar System by future PV technology beyond the ongoing state-of-the-art technology might be more exciting although unrealistic. For example, it could be a megastructure or the so-called ‘Dyson sphere’634 conceived of as a gigantic shell of solar cells enclosing the sun and harvest 400 septillion watts of energy per second (a trillion times our current worldwide energy usage).


6.1.2 Scaffolds for individual micro-cells. 
In real applications, the failure tolerance (the property that enables a system to continue operating properly in the event of the failure of (or one or more faults within) some of its components) is an important index for the product. Particularly for PSCs, the perovskite is highly sensitive to the ambient environment, making it easily degrade during normal outdoor operation. When one ‘strip’ cell in the PV module fails (e.g., may be due to small mechanical fracture, a small hole or even a microscale contact issue), the whole module may not work. In nature, such an issue can be avoided through design of features like an insect's compound eye (Fig. 30a). The compound eyes are composed of many thousands (30 thousands in larger Anisoptera dragonflies) of facets (or ommatidium, hexagonal in cross-section and a large aspect ratio with ten times longer than wide) (Fig. 30a(i)). Each ommatidium works as an individual photon sensor (as there is a cluster of photoreceptor cells at the inner wall of an ommatidium which can convert the light signal into a nerve pulse for reception by optical nerves). Hence, each ommatidium is innervated by one axon and thus providing the brain with one picture element. The brain forms an image from these independent picture elements. Such a design enables the independent work of an ommatidium with exemption of the interference from a neighboring ommatidium. In other words, the failure of an ommatidium will not affect the normal function of neighboring ommatidia. Using this concept, a ‘compound eye’ PSC has been developed recently,435 which contains individual cells being partitioned by a scaffold and arranged into a vast array of microcells with characteristics including a smaller size, encapsulation, and mechanical and chemical isolation. Fig. 30b shows the design. The (gray) partitioning scaffold shields the individual perovskite microcells. The microcells (in the array) are connected in parallel by both the top and bottom electrodes. The array has a pitch of 500 μm, which can be further modulated by adjusting the design of the scaffold substrates. As a result, thanks to the mechanical stress de-concentration, this ‘compound’ PSC displays a significantly enhanced fracture energy of ∼13 J m−2 (30-fold increase over a prior reported planar PSC with a value of ∼0.4 J m−2) with over 15% PCE. This design could also improve the failure tolerance; since all the microcells are electrically connected in parallel, failure of any device is expected to not cause the failure of the whole device.
 Fig. 30  Scaffold for individual micro-cell. (a) (i) Structure of a compound eye, adapted from an online resource ref. 637. (ii) Photograph of the compound eye of a fly, adapted with permission from ref. 435. (iii) Image of an object formed in the compound eye, adapted from an online resource ref. 638. (b) Schematic illustration of the “compound” perovskite solar cell design inspired by the compound eye concept, adapted with permission from ref. 435, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the human eye structure. (ii) Confocal microscope image of rod and cone photoreceptors in a human retina, adapted from an online resource ref. 639. (iii) Illustration of the structure of cone and rod photoreceptors in the human retina, adapted with permission from ref. 640, Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration and microstructure of the artificial retina based on the perovskite nanowire, which is mounted on a concavely hemispherical artificial eye, adapted with permission from ref. 636, Copyright 2020 Springer. 
This individual array design for the vision system prevails in nature, although the detailed mechanism in photon-sensing can be versatile. An analogous example is the retina's neurons that can recognize the light and convert it into neural signals. The retina is composed of three different layers: (i) outer nuclear layer (ONL, where the well-known cone and rod cells can sense the light and convert it into neural signals), (ii) inner nuclear layer (INL, where the horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells can transmit the neural signals from the ONL to the GCL), and (iii) ganglion cell layer (GCL, where the retinal ganglion cells can receive the neural signals from the INL and further transmit the action ionic potentials to the visual cortex through optic nerves) (Fig. 30c(i)).635Fig. 30c(ii) shows the picture of real cone cells (typically 40–50 μm long and 0.5 to 4.0 μm wide) and rod cells (typically 100 μm long and 2 μm wide). The most important part composing the rod and cone cells are the numerous membrane disks (Fig. 30c(iii)) containing large numbers of photoreceptor proteins, rhodopsin. It is the rhodopsin that acts as the visual pigment to convert the light into biochemical signals. As the rhodopsin photoreceptor protein is inserted in the membrane, the disk-like packing of the membrane can enhance the population of photoreceptor proteins and improve the light sensitivity. Such an individually arrayed rod and cone layout perpendicularly inserted at the retina layer enables an efficient integration of a large quantity of individual cells, leading to a high visual resolution. Designing a retina-like photoactive array layer for PSCs on a hemisphere substrate (Fig. 30d) to panoramically harvest light might be an alternative design to the dynamic solar tracker-system. One recent study on artificial retina conceptualized the perovskite nanorod (NR) array on a concavely hemispherical artificial eye (field of view (FOV) of 150°–160°).636 A hemispherical porous aluminum oxide membrane (PAM) was used as the template with numerous microchannels where the perovskite single crystalline NR can grow (Fig. 30d).
Overall, many examples exist with a large potential for the use of nature-inspired designs into novel structured PSCs. Shifting our attention from the focus on individual components such as each functional layer or material towards the whole device level design, system level implementation, temporal life-cycle and recycling, network overall planning with those power consumers and other power plants could bring new insights to upgrade the device to the next level, which definitely will still need more knowledge and intelligence. These knowledgebases may have already been stored in the library of nature.

6.2 Bio-inspired manufacturing
Natural micro/nanostructures (including the above-discussed nacre, bone, Lotus leaves, insect eyes and wings, etc.) have provided enormous inspiration to many important applications. In addition to those research efforts devoted to further understanding the underlying mechanisms, there is a growing effort to manufacture artificial materials with those unprecedented properties by mimicking those found in nature. Focusing on superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity in nature as examples, Jiang et al. proposed the general procedure of designing and synthesizing related artificial materials:641 (i) unique property selection from the biological system (bio-target), (ii) an in-depth understanding of the correlation between the natural structure and their macroscopic properties, (iii) selection of the target artificial material, and (iv) construction of the architecture to realize the aimed function. Nevertheless, the major challenge lies in techniques chosen to assemble the molecules at both nano- and microscales. So far, various strategies to synthesize functional materials that resemble natural species’ architecture and function have been developed, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),642–645 self-assembly,646–651 lithography,652–658 and other 3D printing techniques.659 Particularly, additive manufacturing (3D printing, exemplified in Fig. 31a) has opened new opportunities for mimicking and manufacturing the intrinsic multi-scale, multi-material, and multi-functional structures found in nature.660 Nevertheless, in contrast to most man-made materials, natural materials are built in much milder inner environments within the species’ body which has ambient temperatures and an aqueous environment. The ‘manufacturing’ of natural materials is more delicate and involves bottom-up strategies in a tiny system, making them difficult to duplicate in large-scale artificial manufacturing.661 Importantly, natural materials combining the desirable properties of their components usually perform significantly better than the sum of their parts (similar to the emergent properties)—a natural coupling effect that has inspired much of the ongoing interest in the design of bioinspired materials. Many natural systems simply follow basic mathematical rules but turned out to be sophisticated functionalities (e.g., ant's route selection of emergency logistics algorithm).662 Exploring and learning the secrets from natural materials and systems offer a pathway towards solving manufacturing challenges that exist in the current PSC-based MPS. By using bio-inspiration, innovations may exist either in the individual manufacturing of the PSCs or in their integration with the MPS in a higher-level network incorporating both energy supplier and energy consumer for advanced internet of energy (IoE) systems. Stream-line manufacturing with a continuous producing attribute could allow the PSC fabrication in a highly efficient way, which will need to balance the conflicts between each individual component in the device and eventually unite them into a whole device with consistent functionality. Since the PSC consists of multiple components including the bottom electrode (front contact), ETL, perovskite light absorber, HTL, and top electrode (back contact) as well as interfacial modification layers sometimes, each component will need a specific individual manufacturing process to obtain its optimal performance, and this diversification in manufacturing processes will make it costly and time-consuming for the whole device fabrication. In comparison, streamlined manufacturing in conjunction with a joint consideration on both cost and performance of the whole device will need to minimize the conflict behaviors and maximize the reciprocal behaviors between each individual component. A natural prototype of this strategy could be the human gut microbial ecosystem (HGME) that consists of hundreds to thousands of species of bacteria, archaea, and eukarya as well as viruses.663 In order to maintain a eubiotic state that promotes homeostasis of the whole bodily function, individual species in the HGME (individual component in the system) could sacrifice in a certain level to reduce conflicts and enhance the reciprocals to keep this mutualism as well as their own sustainability. Regulating the individual components with the aim of achieving the optimization of the whole system is thus an important scenario in nature species. Smart regulation and intelligent and timely communication between components could thus lead to a more efficient resource/information/energy usage, which has been recognized as the internet of things (IoT) technology. Similarly, distributed energy systems could also optimize the efficiency of energy infrastructure and reduce the waste (Fig. 31b). Focusing on energy efficiency, this system-level design mainly includes the insertion, implementation, installation, and coordination of the MPS in a higher-level system. For example, MPS can be used as the power plant for a ‘MotorHome’, supplying powers to all the appliances used in the recreational vehicle (RV), where an intelligent mini-IoE system can more efficiently manage the supply–consumption correlation between the MPS and the consumer streams. This MPS-incorporated smart IoE concept can be further used in those ‘smart home’ and ‘smart city’ projects, where multiple types of MPS such as solar windows, solar tiles, solar roofs and solar farms can be incorporated as a node in the energy cyber network analogous to nature's “ant's nest” where the delivery of electricity follows a highly efficient traffic way that is free from any jam or shortage.
 Fig. 31  Bio-inspired manufacturing and system level management. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the electrically assisted 3D-printing equipment. (ii) Illustration of the bottom-up projection-based stereolithography process, adapted with permission from ref. 664, Copyright 2019 AAAS. (b) Illustration of the concept internet of energy (IoE). 
7. Conclusion
High-performance natural materials and systems have been well developed over millions of years’ evolution and present valuable sources for inspiration in engineering both (i) the individual material components in a subsystem and (ii) the whole integrated system. PSCs incorporating the biomimicry by learning from nature's concepts and designs are expected to be a new route towards next-generation PV-MPS technologies like their prior success in driving a paradigm shift in the development of other modern science and technology communities. In terms of individual material components in a PSC subsystem, there have been successes in demonstrating highly efficient bio-inspired strategies to improve the performance and properties of electrodes (e.g., ‘biomimetic ant-nest electrode structure’, ‘leaf vein electrode network’, other nature's fractural design inspired hierarchy electrode), the CTL (e.g., DNA, fractal neuron network, bR-inspired composite charge transfer materials, and other natural molecules such as porphyrins, natural conjugates and carbonized material incorporated CTL), and the perovskite photoactive layer (e.g., specific micro-composite inspired by nacre, bamboo, and wood, functional microscopic design aiming at self-cleaning and self-healing inspired by many natural examples, and many bio-molecular additives to improve the specific property of the perovskite crystal) of the PSC. In the case of system and overall device design, potential bio-inspiration for MPS applications includes solar trackers (inspired by sunflower and phototropism of plants), micro-cell arrays composed of sub-cells separated by a scaffold (inspired by insect compound eye arrays), and various bio-related manufacturing that have been or are being developed (although perfectly mimicking the manufacturing of natural species remains an open question in the whole field of biomimicry, 3D printing and other state-of-the-art techniques are helping to achieve a closer step).
7.1 Prospects
In the specific case of PSC-based MPS, the future bio-inspiration may focus on the downsides of current PSCs. Compared with incumbent PV techniques such as Si, CIGS, CdTe PVs and OPVs, PSCs are more advantageous in terms of the relatively high PCE (due to the superior optoelectronic properties of halide perovskite materials), low cost (solution-processability of the core perovskite photoactive layer and other charge transfer layers), high degree of flexibility and large power density (lightweight device for a high output power due to the large light extinction coefficient of the perovskite so that a thin layer can harvest a high intensity of light), which make them potential candidates for the next-generation PV-MPS. Nevertheless, the drawbacks of PSCs include the (i) mechanical fragility and brittleness, (ii) environmental impact, (iii) life-time and life-cycle issue, and (iv) limitations in scale-up manufacturing, which might be the specific focus where the bio-inspiration can pop in. In addition to these, (v) the system-level design to intelligently coordinate MPS with other electricity consumers could be another dimension to consider the bio-inspiration. Fig. 32a shows the ‘Cannikin Law’ (Wooden Bucket Theory) of PV-MPS, where the bio-inspiration can serve to fill the gap from the shortest staves (five drawbacks of PSCs mentioned above). In particular, for each issue, potential solutions to the shortage of current PSC-based MPS inspired by nature are shown as follows:
 Fig. 32  Challenge and promise. (a) Schematic showing the drawbacks of PSCs hindering its application as MPS. (b) Schematic showing the adoption of a bio-inspired strategy to realize perovskite solar cell MPS. 
(i) Mechanical robustness: at the material level, for each component in a PSC, the trade-off between mechanical and optical (electrical) properties remains a challenge, particularly for the MPS aimed at portable, foldable and stretchable applications. For example, the front transparent electrode of a PSC for wearable MPS requires certain levels of flexibility with qualified optical transmittance and electrical conductivity, while most commonly used flexible TCO-based transparent electrodes (e.g., ITO) coated on plastic substrates (e.g., PET and PEN) usually exhibit electrical conductance failure after long-term mechanical bending. Designing a flexible metal NW network inspired by nature's fractal hierarchy structure (e.g., leaf veins, neural networks) could help boost the charge transport efficiency while maintaining the mechanical endurance; employing the nacre laminar composite structure could further assist in enhancing the mechanical strength. In the case of the CTL, design of an insect's compound eye and/or butterfly wing inspired periodic nanostructure could uniformly disperse the stress to avoid the concentrated stress induced fracture. Moreover, engineering the micromorphology of the perovskite layer by introducing either ordered micro-composite structures inspired by nature's micro-patterns found in various plants or molecular dyes that can simultaneously boost the mechanical strength and electronic properties (through molecular bonding) is of great promise. At the device level, designing and innovating the device architecture inspired by the hemispheric retina to not only redistribute external stress but also enlarge the light harvesting could be another pathway. Such hemispheric design with the PSC sticking outside can further be utilized in those curved roofs, UAV wings, etc. Overall, there have been various strategies in enhancing the mechanical properties of PSCs through versatile bio-inspired designs and materials. As the learning and investigation of nature's secret goes by, there will be growing ingenious strategies inspired and applied for PSC based MPS.
(ii) Environmental impact: the major safety concern of PSCs is the heavy metal pollution of the B-site atom (Pb, Sn, etc.) in the halide perovskite material. Mostly Pb poisoning will increase oxidative stress and consequently cause various deleterious effects on hematopoietic, reproductive, renal, and central nervous systems.665 The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC)666,667 has set the upper limit of the blood lead level at 10 μg dL−1 (10 μg/100 g) and at 5 μg dL−1 for adults and children, respectively. Additionally, elevated Pb levels in the environment can result in decreased growth and reproductive rates of plants and animals, as well as neurological effects in vertebrates. Hence, there is an urgent need to prevent Pb leakage and contamination. So far, the best practical policy is to screen the Pb within the PSCs to prevent the leakage, which however is a heavily under-researched field that needs attention. Some ‘self-healing’ strategies have been introduced recently to sufficiently quarantine the Pb from a broken device.574 The encapsulation of the perovskite within protective shells or alternatively adding reactive agents to bind and quarantine Pb to avoid leakage can also be a possible solution.668 Pharmacologically, the removal of lead is usually performed using ‘chelation therapy’669 (a medical procedure involving the administration of chelating agents to react with and remove heavy metals from the body). For the specific case of Pb, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is used as the agent which can bind and hold onto (chelate) Pb. Using such chelating agents in PSCs may also help to ‘hold’ the Pb in the case of PSCs broken under rain (otherwise rain will wash the leaked lead into the environment). In nature, Pb also binds to a variety of different biomolecules ranging from enzymes and proteins through interactions of Pb in thiolate-rich sites found in metalloregulatory proteins (e.g., Pbr, Znt, and CadC) and in enzymes (e.g., δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD)).670 Incorporating certain biomolecules into PSCs may further anchor the Pb within the device in the case of device breakage and bad weather that would otherwise accelerate the Pb leakage. In addition to these, as water is the major agent that can accelerate the escape of Pb from the PSC, sufficiently preventing the water from infiltrating the device can be effective to prevent the Pb leakage. Following this, some self-cleaning strategies resembling lotus leaves (non-wettability) can help.
(iii) Life-time and life-cycle issue: life-time, life-cycle analysis, investment, pay-back time, levelized cost of energy (LCOE), etc. are important indices to establish a benchmark for pre-industrial and laboratory-scale processes as well as individual MPS applications. As the life-time of PSCs is notoriously shorter (ranging from the month to the year scale, state-of-the-art lifetime ∼10−1 to 100 years) than that of their commercial counterparts (>101 years), the first priority of the PSC industry should be the stability issue. In the case of real applications, critical weather (rain, hail, and snow), hot temperatures, day–night cycling induced light intensity change, and other environmental activities will further establish the baseline requirement of the device lifetime. On the other hand, recycling of the used device at the end of the life-cycle is also important but lacks sufficient research efforts. These fields require highly efficient and intelligent strategies to push the PSC based MPS closer towards the market. Prior bio-inspiration has resulted in early attempts at enhancing the stability of PSCs (e.g., bio-molecular doping to anchor the crystal lattice, introducing hydrophobic bio-molecules in each layer of the device and designing a lotus-like surface structure to repel the water), adaptation to the light change, and other functionalities to adapt the dynamic changes in the environment for elongating the practical lifetime (e.g., self-healing, self-cleaning). More attention may be needed at the life-cycle end. In fact, the arrival of the end-of-lifecycle of a PV is unavoidable in any case. International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) estimates that the recyclable materials in retired solar modules will be worth $15 billion in recoverable assets by the year 2050.671 At that specific end point, how to deal with the retired perovskite PVs should be an important topic. The conventional way to deal with PV waste is a disposal process, either by landfill or by incineration. However, both of these disposal methods need capital investment, energy/labor consumption and even consideration of the environmental impact (lead leakage). Alternatively, regenerating the retired PVs by recycling the raw materials and re-collecting them from the PV waste could circumvent these issues. From this scenario, development of a simple but efficient method to regenerate perovskite PVs and extend their lifecycle is of importance.
(iv) Limitations in scale-up manufacturing: the efficient manufacturing capable of continuously producing PSC-based MPS is important. As perovskite-based MPS can be developed for numerous portable uses, their form or design cannot be limited to certain types. For this, suitable manufacturing techniques are required to properly upscale the lab-level PSC device toward MPS-oriented production. For example, MPS products with a ‘wallpaper-like’ feature that can be attached and detached anywhere anytime could be of great interest. Realization of such MPS will need a mature up-scaling manufacturing that can print a large-area PSC device on flexible substrates. Bio-inspired additive manufacturing (e.g., 3D printing bio-photovoltaics) might be a good starting point. While considering the (a) materials’ uniqueness (crystal, instability in ambient environment, critical crystallization requirement), (b) device's complexity (multiple nanometer-scale layer-by-layer structure), (c) high optical and electrical requirements (transmittance, electrical conductance, contact between each layer), and (d) tradeoff between cost and payback, PSC manufacturing will need more delicate design and intensive efforts. Ingeniously designing and innovating a PSC-customized processing by incorporating newly-conceptualized bio-inspired strategies will be a big leap. In parallel, the energy consumption in PSC manufacturing is an important factor affecting its potential in the market. Instead of energy-intensive and cumbersome processing, the biological system can synthesize high property materials (robust mechanical properties in woods and bamboo, magnetic single crystals in jelly fish) through multiple biochemical reactions (e.g., biomineralization672) in a room-temperature, aqueous environment (in contrast, TiO2 in PSCs requires high temperature sintering and perovskite crystallization needs over 100 °C annealing). Simplifying those bio-synthetic methods into an artificial synthetic paradigm that can have a bunch of advantages in the application of PSC manufacturing would be intriguing.
(v) System-level design: by bringing the bio-inspired strategies into the nano-/micro-scale design and the manufacturing techniques, the functionality of PSCs can be strengthened. For example, a solar tracking technology inspired by sunflower has been introduced to solar cell technologies. By dynamically tracking the direction of sunlight, the loss of electricity generation of PSCs from the tilted incident light will be complemented. The angle of incident light is influenced by the various spatial states of Earth (the daily and the annual rotation) and the local environment of the system. The state-of-the-art solar tracking technology should be able to dynamically react to the change of direction of sunlight in energy-efficient and cost-effective ways. Additionally, a scaffold to separate a single device into multiple devices can be a solution. By adopting the scaffold design, inspired by ommatidia (units of the compound eyes of arthropods like insects, crustaceans and millipedes), and rhodopsin of retina, for PSCs, their stability against various stimuli from temperature changes and humidity can be improved. Since each partitioned device can generate electricity individually, the whole device failure can be avoided if the system is partially broken or damaged by external factors. Such a spatial design of the scaffold was inspired by nature to have an efficient arrangement of sub-cells so that each component device can be densely positioned inside. The scaffold also allows the system to have mechanical resilience against fracture, which is enabled by the stress-deconcentrating feature of the scaffold. Synchronization and coordination at the system level can also be found at manufacturing and synthesis sides. A natural ‘organ factory’ could efficiently synthesize multi-functional structures and/or materials. The mimicry of the natural synthetic ways to manufacture artificial materials and a system production of certain functional proteins can bring new opportunities to boost the manufacturing of both perovskite materials and the PSC devices.
7.2 Challenges
Bio-inspiration for next-generation MPS is a multidisciplinary topic that requires expertise related to biology, materials science, engineering, electrics, chemistry and physics. This will require researchers from different backgrounds to team up into a more comprehensive group to have a higher-level overview of the whole field and then come up with targeted strategies to fill up the ‘shortest staves’ of the ‘Wooden Bucket’ in Fig. 32a. Bio-inspiration can provide the shortcut solution to those targeted strategies but remains to be a more general and abstractive concept. Most prior built bio-inspirations are focusing on mechanical and structural engineering, as provided in several well-documented review papers.423,424,660,673–675 For the specific application in PSC, PV-MPS remains not fully explored. This will require more efforts to interface between the parallelly developing PSC and bio-inspiration, as conceptualized in Fig. 32b. Nevertheless, several challenges remain to be addressed:
(i) The synthesis mechanisms found in nature need further investigation and the transformation of the bio-manufacturing to the artificial needs more studies. For application purposes, bio-inspired manufacturing needs to be developed to reveal the mechanisms underlying the intriguing properties. For example, nature grows organisms in a mild environment but takes a long time (bones need years to grow), while artificial manufacturing of PSCs requires a high time efficiency from the minute to the hour scale. Understanding nature's mechanism of material formation (growth) and identifying the origin of the long-time necessity may inspire the creation of a substitutive way to mimic the natural process in a much shorter time. For example, the crystal growth in natural mild conditions (e.g., biomineralization, biological investigation on produced materials, such as shells, teeth and bone, as well as the processes that lead to the formation of these hierarchically structured organic–inorganic composites) may provide implications of designing new synthetic routes. The chemical reaction route and new mechanism found in those bio-prototypes could provide opportunities for growing perovskites in a milder ambient environment instead of the current critical requirements of high temperature and low moisture. This, however, will require an improved understanding and knowledgebase of nature's synthesis.
(ii) Materials in nature are structured and usually a mixture of various kinds of sub-components (e.g., polysaccharides, proteins, and collagen fibers) instead of a single component. They usually have a synergistic ‘1 + 1 > 2’ effect as the property of each component is meager but the whole hybrid is of high-performance. In PSCs, for each functional layer material it requires very high purity and any impurities will significantly compromise the overall device performance. In addition, there is a limited material inventory from which the specific layer could be chosen. Making composite materials and using them as functional layers in PSCs could not only possibly reduce the cost of synthesizing high purity materials but also expand the material inventory for PSCs. However, before truly understanding the synergistic mechanisms of a composite, it will be trial and error for downselecting ‘the’ composite material.
(iii) The periodic microstructure found in nature (e.g., nanostructures on butterfly wings providing the camouflage colors and superhydrophobicity for self-cleaning; nanostructures on gecko feet providing striking attachment and detachment on walls and also giving self-cleaning, self-repair, and wear-resistant properties) is abundant. In most state-of-the-art PSCs, each layer is a simple planar layer and it is difficult to design a self-assembly process to manufacture the functional layer with a designed microstructure. Duplicating these natural microstructures with impressive performance in optical and mechanical functions is still beyond the ongoing PSC manufacturing techniques.
(iv) Nature utilizes the energy and space in a highly efficient and elegant way. PSCs still have a huge energy loss limiting their efficiency below the Shockley–Queisser (SQ) limit. The SQ limit refers to the maximum theoretical efficiency of 33.7% for a single-junction solar cell, mostly due to the spectral mismatch between the wide spectrum of sunlight and the single-bandgap of a solar cell. Thermalization (short wavelength light generated hot carrier and a fast cooling of hot carriers to release energy to heat) and in-band transparency (no absorption of long wavelength light below the bandgap) are the major losses and sum up to over 50% efficiency losses for a solar cell. In the retinas of vertebrate animals, there are different types of optical-responsive proteins in different cells that are reactive to light of different wavelengths. These individual cells are responsive to the light independently and parallelly aligned in the array to detect the monochromatic light individually from the white sunlight. In solar cells, tandem solar cells could mitigate the thermalization loss by incorporating multiple individual light absorbers in tandem stacking. As most tandem PSCs vertically stack the short-wavelength responsive cell and long-wavelength responsive cell, a parallel design of individual cells coupled by a prism to split the light might be another design for the tandem solar cell. On the other hand, coherence phenomena prevail in the biophysical system, which could lead to nontrivial optoelectronic behaviors.676 For example, the fluorescence interference pattern obtained from polydiacetylene (PDA) indicates an extraordinary microscopic coherence length for a single exciton.677 In the field of solar cells, utilizing nontrivial behaviors such as multi-excitation generation (MEG) could make it possible to break the SQ limit. One example is the singlet fission in certain organic chromophores (e.g., pentacene, rubrene, perylene) where one excited singlet state transforms into two triplet states upon close interaction with a ground-state molecule of the same kind. In this way, doubling of the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device in short wavelength regions to 200% is possible. By incorporating SF chromophores into solar cells, the improvement of the total exciton yield to 133%, EQE to 130%, and IQE (internal quantum efficiency) to 170% has been observed in tetracene sensitized silicon solar cells,678 pentacene incorporated organic solar cells,679 and TIPS–pentacene/PbSe QD solar cells,680 respectively. Yet these prior conceptualizations are not likely to break the Shockley–Queisser limit in the near future because of the low starting PCE point (even the tetracene sensitized silicon solar cell exhibits a low PCE of 5.1% due to the lateral structure and many technological challenges such as overall thickness control, stoichiometry and trap density678). Hybridizing the perovskite with the chromophores to trigger MEG with the aim of exceeding the SQ limit could be one promising solution, while many other issues such as interface, disordered states in organic chromophores and delicate design of an energy/electrical transduction in the system remain to be addressed.
Nomenclature

Spiro-MeOTAD2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene]
AAdenine
AMAir mass
AZOAluminum zinc oxide
AIArtificial intelligence
ALDAtomic layer deposition
bRBacteriorhodopsin
BSSCBio-sensitized solar cell
BHJBulk heterojunction
CFRPCarbon fibre reinforced plastic
CNTCarbon nanotube
MAPbI3CH3NH3PbI3
CTLCharge transfer layer
CTCharge transport
CVDChemical vapor deposition
CBMConduction band minimum
CCytosine
DFTDensity functional theory
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
DPPADiphenyl-2-pyridylamine
DSSCDye-sensitized solar cell
ETLElectron transporting layer
FOVField of view
FFFill factor
FTPAFluorinated triphenylamine
FTOFluorine-doped tin oxide
FOTSFluoro-octyltrichlorosilane
F–DForce–displacement
FRETFörster resonance energy transfer
DsFractal dimension
GCLGanglion cell layer
GLADGlancing angle deposition

T
g
Glass transition temperature
GBsGrain boundaries
GGuanine
CTMAHexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
HMGHierarchical-metal-grids
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
HTLHole transporting layer
ITOIndium tin oxide
INLInner nuclear layer
IoEInternet of energy
IoTInternet of things
IOInverse-opal
IOPInverse-opal perovskite
IMPSInverted micro-pyramidal structured
LDLLarge-diameter-long
LVAsLarge-volume amines
LCOELevelized cost of energy
LEDLight-emitting diode
LMLiquid metal
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MLLV
Magnolia liliiflora leaf vein
MAIMethylammonium iodide
MPSMobile power source
MWCNTMulti-walled CNT
NPNanoparticle
NRNanorod
NWNanowire
OELOblique-incidence energy-density loss
VOCOpen-circuit voltage
OPVOrganic photovoltaic
ONLOuter nuclear layer
PSCPerovskite solar cell
PCBMPhenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
PLPhotoluminescence
PCPhotonic crystal
PVPhotovoltaic
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate)
P3HTPoly(3-hexylthiophene)
PFMPoly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester)
SBSPoly(styrene-co-butadiene)
PDMSPolydimethylsiloxane
PEGPolyethylene glycol
PENPolyethylene naphthalate
PETPolyethylene terephthalate
PIPolyimide
PUPolyurethane
PAMPorous aluminium oxide membrane
PCEPower conversion efficiency
PMPurple membrane
QDSCQuantum dot solar cell
QFQuasi-fractal
SEMScanning electron microscopy

J
SC
Short-circuit current density

R
sh
Shunt resistance
SWNTSingle-walled carbon nanotube
SDSSmall-diameter-short
SEASpecific energy absorption
TThymine
TATransient absorption
TMOTransition metal oxide
TCETransparent conductive electrode
TCOTransparent conductive oxide
UAVUnmanned aerial vehicle
VBMValance band maximum
WAWWO3/Ag/WO3

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Disclaimer
This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.
Acknowledgements
K. W. and Y. H. acknowledge the support from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under award number FA9550-20-1-0157. S. P. acknowledges the financial support from USDA NIFA grant number 2019-67021-28991. D. Y. acknowledges the support from Norfolk State University through NSF-CREST grant number HRD 1547771. T. Y. and J. Y. acknowledge the support from the U.S. Department of Energy Award No. DE-SC0019844, under the STTR program (Prime – NanoSonic Inc.).
References
S. L. Miller and H. C. Urey, Science, 1959, 130, 245–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deamer and A. L. Weber, Cold Spring Harbor Perspect. Biol., 2010, 2, a004929 Search PubMed .
G. W. Crabtree and N. S. Lewis, Phys. Today, 2007, 60, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Rapf and V. Vaida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20067–20084 RSC .
H. Kirst, C. Formighieri and A. Melis, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2014, 1837, 1653–1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Rodgers and P. J. Hore, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 353–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ishay, B. Perna, Y. Hochberg and M. Goldstein, Bull. Math. Biol., 1980, 42, 681–689 Search PubMed .
J. S. Ishay, Microscopy, 2004, 53, 623–633 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. L. Behler and D. A. Behler, Frogs: A Chorus of Colors, Sterling Publishing Company, Inc.,  2008 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Hou, B. Poudel, D. Yang, Y. Jiang, M.-G. Kang, K. Wang, C. Wu and S. Priya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901753 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Niu, Z. Wang, S. Zuo, S. Priya, S. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801418 CrossRef PubMed .
K. E. Shopsowitz, H. Qi, W. Y. Hamad and M. J. MacLachlan, Nature, 2010, 468, 422–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. J. R. | S. Writer, Spring snow goose migration in gear; plan your Middle Creek visit soon, https://lancasteronline.com/news/local/spring-snow-goose-migration-in-gear-plan-your-middle-creek-visit-soon/article_480d7138-c8bb-11e4-9eb8-cbde3b8a9aa4.html, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Wikipedia “Carcinus maenas”, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carcinus_maenas (accessed 30 August 2020).
Zoologger: The solar-powered electric hornet | New Scientist, https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn19709-zoologger-the-solar-powered-electric-hornet/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
R. Madurai Elavarasan, G. Shafiullah, K. Raju, V. Mudgal, M. T. Arif, T. Jamal, S. Subramanian, V. S. Sriraja Balaguru, K. S. Reddy and U. Subramaniam, Appl. Energy, 2020, 279, 115739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 2582–2598 CrossRef .
H. S. Jung and N.-G. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 10–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
NREL, Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, (accessed May 11, 2020).
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Głowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwödiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, M. S. White, E. D. Głowacki, T. Sekitani, T. Someya, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 770 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, V. A. Öberg, J. Du, J. Liu and E. M. J. Johansson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 354–364 RSC .
X. Zhang, C. Zhang, D. Li, S. Cao, M. Yin, P. Wang, G. Ding, L. Yang, J. Cheng and L. Lu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2019, 14, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Romeo, G. Khrypunov, F. Kurdesau, M. Arnold, D. L. Bätzner, H. Zogg and A. N. Tiwari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3407–3415 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kang, J. Jeong, S. Cho, Y. J. Yoon, S. Park, S. Lim, J. Y. Kim and H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1107–1114 RSC .
G. Lee, M. Kim, Y. W. Choi, N. Ahn, J. Jang, J. Yoon, S. M. Kim, J.-G. Lee, D. Kang and H. S. Jung, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3182–3191 RSC .

          R. Genz and F. Rosella, https://www.msichicago.org/explore/whats-here/exhibits/fast-forward/previously-featured/ryan-genz-francesca-rosella/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
Meet Project Jacquard, Google's Plan To Turn Your Clothes Into A Touch, https://www.fastcompany.com/3046864/meet-project-jacquard-googles-plan-to-turn-all-your-clothes-into-a-touchscreen, (accessed March 19, 2021).
Andrew Carp, Wearable Electronics | Electrical and Computer Engineering Design Handbook, https://sites.tufts.edu/eeseniordesignhandbook/2015/wearable-electronics/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
Wikipedia “E-textiles”, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=E-textiles, (accessed 1 September 2020).

          R. Genz and F. Rosella, Museum of Science and Industry, https://www.msichicago.org/explore/whats-here/exhibits/fast-forward/previously-featured/ryan-genz-francesca-rosella/, (accessed July 25, 2020).
Meet Project Jacquard, Google's Plan To Turn Your Clothes Into A Touch, https://www.fastcompany.com/3046864/meet-project-jacquard-googles-plan-to-turn-all-your-clothes-into-a-touchscreen, (accessed July 25, 2020).
Solar-Powered Drone Could Fly Nonstop For Five Years, https://www.iflscience.com/technology/solar-powered-drone-could-fly-nonstop-five-years/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
Solar-Powered Drone Could Fly Nonstop For Five Years | IFLScience, https://www.iflscience.com/technology/solar-powered-drone-could-fly-nonstop-five-years/, (accessed July 25, 2020).
W. W. Zhang, L. G. Zhang, Z. W. Yan and L. Wang, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 608, 012016 CrossRef CAS .

          C. H. M. Jenkins, Bio-Inspired Engineering, Momentum Press,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. L. Ripley and B. Bhushan, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2016, 374, 20160192 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Yoo, D. J. Irvine, D. E. Discher and S. Mitragotri, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2011, 10, 521–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Diamond, T. Nowotny and M. Schmuker, Front. Neurosci., 2016, 9, 491 Search PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Graetzel, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol, 2010, 21, 298–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, P. Da, C. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, F. Fu, M. Kawecki, X. Liu, N. Sakai, J. T.-W. Wang, S. Huettner, S. Buecheler, M. Fahlman, F. Gao and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2019, 571, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 081801 CrossRef .
M. Park, H. J. Kim, I. Jeong, J. Lee, H. Lee, H. J. Son, D.-E. Kim and M. J. Ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501406 CrossRef .
S. Ahn, E. D. Jung, S.-H. Kim, H. Kim, S. Lee, M. H. Song and J.-Y. Kim, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3707–3715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, Y. Fang, G. Kieslich, T. J. White and A. K. Cheetham, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18450–18455 RSC .
Y.-C. Lin, X.-Y. Peng, L.-C. Wang, Y.-L. Lin, C.-H. Wu and S.-C. Liang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 461–465 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pander, S. Dietrich, S.-H. Schulze, U. Eitner and M. Ebert, in 2011 12th Intl. Conf. on Thermal, Mechanical Multi-Physics Simulation and Experiments in Microelectronics and Microsystems,  2011, p. 1/6–6/6 Search PubMed .
Y. Kato, L. K. Ono, M. V. Lee, S. Wang, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1500195 CrossRef .
J. Chen, D. Lee and N.-G. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36338–36349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, C. Sun, R. Wang, W. Huang, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, T. Huang, J. Xue, J.-W. Lee, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 17255–17262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Sanehira, B. J. Tremolet de Villers, P. Schulz, M. O. Reese, S. Ferrere, K. Zhu, L. Y. Lin, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. Back, G. Kim, J. Kim, J. Kong, T. K. Kim, H. Kang, H. Kim, J. Lee, S. Lee and K. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1258–1263 RSC .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, T. Li, Y. Shao, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3650–3656 RSC .
H. Zhang, J. Xiao, J. Shi, H. Su, Y. Luo, D. Li, H. Wu, Y.-B. Cheng and Q. Meng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802985 CrossRef .
S. He, L. Qiu, D.-Y. Son, Z. Liu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, C. Stecker and Y. Qi, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2032–2039 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Bailie, M. G. Christoforo, J. P. Mailoa, A. R. Bowring, E. L. Unger, W. H. Nguyen, J. Burschka, N. Pellet, J. Z. Lee, M. Grätzel, R. Noufi, T. Buonassisi, A. Salleo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 956–963 RSC .
F. Guo, H. Azimi, Y. Hou, T. Przybilla, M. Hu, C. Bronnbauer, S. Langner, E. Spiecker, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1642–1649 RSC .
N. Ahn, I. Jeon, J. Yoon, E. I. Kauppinen, Y. Matsuo, S. Maruyama and M. Choi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1382–1389 RSC .
Z. Wei, H. Chen, K. Yan, X. Zheng and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24226–24231 RSC .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Shi, A. Cao, K. Fu, S. K. Batabyal, J. Zhang, Q. Xiong, L. H. Wong, N. Mathews and S. G. Mhaisalkar, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6797–6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Kim, S. Ahn, W. Jang, S. Park, O. O. Park and D. H. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 176, 435–440 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and O. O. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10527–10534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, H. Hu, J. Peng, Y. Li, Y. Fan, L. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 5649–5656 RSC .
X.-L. Ou, J. Feng, M. Xu and H.-B. Sun, Opt. Lett., 2017, 42, 1958–1961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Ou, M. Xu, J. Feng and H.-B. Sun, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 660–665 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jeon, R. Xiang, A. Shawky, Y. Matsuo and S. Maruyama, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1801312 CrossRef .
G. Ai, Y. Dai, W. Mao, H. Zhao, Y. Fu, X. Song, Y. En, V. S. Battaglia, V. Srinivasan and G. Liu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5365–5372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Latty, K. Ramsch, K. Ito, T. Nakagaki, D. J. T. Sumpter, M. Middendorf and M. Beekman, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2011, 8, 1298–1306 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Buhl, K. Hicks, E. R. Miller, S. Persey, O. Alinvi and D. J. T. Sumpter, Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol., 2009, 63, 451–460 CrossRef .
D. P. Bebber, J. Hynes, P. R. Darrah, L. Boddy and M. D. Fricker, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2007, 274, 2307–2315 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Nakagaki, R. Kobayashi, Y. Nishiura and T. Ueda, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2004, 271, 2305–2310 Search PubMed .

          D. Miner, M. Pickett and M. Des Jardins, Understanding the Brain's Emergent Properties, Atlantis Press,  2009, pp. 18–19 Search PubMed .
H.-T. Zhang, P. Panda, J. Lin, Y. Kalcheim, K. Wang, J. W. Freeland, D. D. Fong, S. Priya, I. K. Schuller and S. K. Sankaranarayanan, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 011309 CAS .

          M. Tegmark, Life 3.0: Being human in the age of artificial intelligence, Knopf,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. Gelblum, I. Pinkoviezky, E. Fonio, A. Ghosh, N. Gov and O. Feinerman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T.-Y. Qu, L.-J. Zuo, J.-D. Chen, X. Shi, T. Zhang, L. Li, K.-C. Shen, H. Ren, S. Wang, F.-M. Xie, Y.-Q. Li, A. K.-Y. Jen and J.-X. Tang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 2000669 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, Y. Huang, R. Li, Q. Peng, J. Luo, K. Pei, A. Herczynski, K. Kempa, Z. Ren and J. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Ito, W. Oka, H. Goto and H. Umeda, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45, 4325 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
B. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y.-Y. Lee, H.-W. Shin, G. S. Han, J. S. Hong, K. Mahmood, T. K. Ahn, Y.-C. Joo and K. S. Hong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 916–921 RSC .
D. Yang, R. Yang, S. Priya and S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4466–4483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung, G. S. Han, N.-G. Park and M. J. Ko, Joule, 2019, 3, 1850–1880 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoon, H. Sung, G. Lee, W. Cho, N. Ahn, H. S. Jung and M. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 337–345 RSC .
X. Fan, W. Nie, H. Tsai, N. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Cheng, R. Wen, L. Ma, F. Yan and Y. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Louwet, L. Groenendaal, J. Dhaen, J. Manca, J. Van Luppen, E. Verdonck and L. Leenders, Synth. Met., 2003, 135–136, 115–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, P. F. Miller, J. C. de Mello, A. J. de Mello and D. D. C. Bradley, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 569–572 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kim, H. Kang, J.-H. Lee, S. Kee, S. H. Lee and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2317–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606641 CrossRef .
G. S. Han, S. Lee, M. L. Duff, F. Qin and J.-K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4697–4704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, Y. Jo, D. S. Kim, H. Y. Jeong and Y. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14592–14597 RSC .
M. Lee, Y. Jo, D. S. Kim and Y. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4129–4133 RSC .
J. Troughton, D. Bryant, K. Wojciechowski, M. J. Carnie, H. Snaith, D. A. Worsley and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9141–9145 RSC .
C. Roldán-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Soriano, G. M. Espallargas, A. Garcia, P. Reinecke, T. Kroyer, M. I. Dar, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 994–997 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Guo, Y. Lv, Y. Hu, J. Lin, Y. Fan, N. Zhang and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18141–18148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, X. Zhou, P. Li, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, M. Su, W. Ren, F. Li and M. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703236 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Huang, F. Li, M. Su, Z. Huang, Z. Zhao, Z. Cai, X. Yang, X. Meng, P. Li, Y. Wang, M. Li, Y. Chen and Y. Song, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 979–987 RSC .
J. Han, S. Yuan, L. Liu, X. Qiu, H. Gong, X. Yang, C. Li, Y. Hao and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5375–5384 RSC .
Y. Jin, Y. Sun, K. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Liang, Y. Xu and F. Xiao, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1998–2011 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jeon, J. Yoon, U. Kim, C. Lee, R. Xiang, A. Shawky, J. Xi, J. Byeon, H. M. Lee and M. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901204 CrossRef .
I. Jeon, J. Yoon, N. Ahn, M. Atwa, C. Delacou, A. Anisimov, E. I. Kauppinen, M. Choi, S. Maruyama and Y. Matsuo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5395–5401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Jeon, T. Chiba, C. Delacou, Y. Guo, A. Kaskela, O. Reynaud, E. I. Kauppinen, S. Maruyama and Y. Matsuo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6665–6671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 155–175 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lakes, Nature, 1993, 361, 511–515 CrossRef .
P. Fratzl and R. Weinkamer, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1263–1334 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roth-Nebelsick, D. Uhl, V. Mosbrugger and H. Kerp, Ann. Bot., 2001, 87, 553–566 CrossRef .
L. Sack and C. Scoffoni, New Phytol., 2013, 198, 983–1000 CrossRef PubMed .
L. V. Thekkekara and M. Gu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, S. Li, X. Li, Z. Xu, J. Zhao, Y. Shi, Y. Wang, R. Yu, X. Liu, Q. Xu and W. Guo, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 225–232 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, J. Plentz, A. Dellith, C. Schmidt, J. Dellith, G. Schmidl and G. Andrä, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Silvain, J. Chazelas and S. Trombert, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2000, 153, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, M. Karakawa, J. Jiu, T. T. Nge, Y. Aso and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, P. Lee, H. Lee, D. Lee, S. S. Lee and S. H. Ko, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6408–6414 RSC .
E. C. Garnett, W. Cai, J. J. Cha, F. Mahmood, S. T. Connor, M. Greyson Christoforo, Y. Cui, M. D. McGehee and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 241–249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Han, Q. Peng, R. Li, Q. Rong, Y. Ding, E. M. Akinoglu, X. Wu, X. Wang, X. Lu, Q. Wang, G. Zhou, J.-M. Liu, Z. Ren, M. Giersig, A. Herczynski, K. Kempa and J. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jia, C. Chen, D. Jia, S. Li, S. Ji and C. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9865–9871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lagrange, D. P. Langley, G. Giusti, C. Jiménez, Y. Bréchet and D. Bellet, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17410–17423 RSC .
T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, J. Jiu, T. Sugahara and K. Suganuma, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9298–9302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Du, T. Wan, B. Qu, F. Cao, Q. Lin, N. Chen, X. Lin and D. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 20762–20770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Layani, M. Gruchko, O. Milo, I. Balberg, D. Azulay and S. Magdassi, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3537–3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Gao, B. Hu, J. Li, J. Su, Z. Fan and J. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 335202 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sannicolo, M. Lagrange, A. Cabos, C. Celle, J.-P. Simonato and D. Bellet, Small, 2016, 12, 6052–6075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ghosh, T. L. Chen and V. Pruneri, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 041109 CrossRef .
K. D. M. Rao, C. Hunger, R. Gupta, G. U. Kulkarni and M. Thelakkat, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 15107–15110 RSC .
B. Han, K. Pei, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, Q. Rong, Q. Lin, Y. Guo, T. Sun, C. Guo, D. Carnahan, M. Giersig, Y. Wang, J. Gao, Z. Ren and K. Kempa, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 873–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kiruthika, R. Gupta, A. Anand, A. Kumar and G. U. Kulkarni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27215–27222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Guo, T. Sun, Q. Liu, Z. Suo and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3121 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wu, D. Kong, Z. Ruan, P.-C. Hsu, S. Wang, Z. Yu, T. J. Carney, L. Hu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Y. Zhang, K. Li, C. Yan and Z. Zheng, Small, 2015, 11, 3444–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Why such rapid industrial shifts with busbar? https://www.waaree.com/why-such-rapid-industrial-shifts-with-busbar, (accessed August 30, 2020).
X. Wang, R. Wang, H. Zhai, L. Shi and J. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5738–5745 RSC .
P. Moon and D. E. Spencer, Am. J. Phys., 1961, 29, 717 CrossRef .
B. B. Mandelbrot and J. A. Wheeler, Am. J. Phys., 1983, 51, 286–287 CrossRef .
R. E. Horton, Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 1945, 56, 275–370 CrossRef .
A. N. Strahler, Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 1952, 63, 1117–1142 CrossRef .
J. E. de Arujo Mariath, R. P. dos Santos and R. P. dos Santos, R. bras. Bioci., Porto Alegre, 2010, 8, 30–33 Search PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, K.-H. Tsui, Q. Zhang, J. He, Y. Yao, D. Li and Z. Fan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10287–10295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dou, E. M. Miller, J. A. Christians, E. M. Sanehira, T. R. Klein, F. S. Barnes, S. E. Shaheen, S. M. Garner, S. Ghosh, A. Mallick, D. Basak and M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4960–4966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ke, C. Chen, N. Fu, H. Zhou, M. Ye, P. Lin, W. Yuan, X. Zeng, L. Chen and H. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28406–28411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Castro-Hermosa, J. Dagar, A. Marsella and T. M. Brown, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2017, 38, 1278–1281 CAS .
M. Lee, Y. Ko, B. K. Min and Y. Jun, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, W. Xu, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, S. Zhang, A. Cao and L. H. Wong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 728–735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, G. Han, H. Zhou and J. Wu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 2778–2784 RSC .
B. A. Nejand, P. Nazari, S. Gharibzadeh, V. Ahmadi and A. Moshaii, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 747–750 RSC .
X. Pu, W. Song, M. Liu, C. Sun, C. Du, C. Jiang, X. Huang, D. Zou, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601048 CrossRef .
I. Marriam, X. Wang, M. Tebyetekerwa, G. Chen, F. Zabihi, J. Pionteck, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 13633–13643 RSC .
W. Shao, M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, W. Li, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tebyetekerwa, Z. Xu, W. Li, X. Wang, I. Marriam, S. Peng, S. Ramkrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 377–386 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, T. Chen, K. Hou, W. Ma, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Cheng, W. Weng and M. Zhu, Carbon, 2018, 127, 218–227 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Meng, M. Tebyetekerwa, Y. Li, J. Pionteck, B. Sun, Z. Qin and M. Zhu, Composites, Part A, 2018, 105, 291–299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Meng, M. Tebyetekerwa, W. Weng, J. Pionteck, B. Sun, Z. Qin and M. Zhu, Synth. Met., 2017, 233, 86–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, X. Wang, H. Xiang, M. Tebyetekerwa and M. Zhu, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 995–1004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Ren, W. Weng and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4524–4531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Li, C. Yang, Y. Li, K. Guo, J. Cheng, D. Yuan, C. Song, J. Lu and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804439 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liao, L. Ye, Y. Zhang, T. Chen and H. Peng, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800456 CrossRef .
Z. Wen, M.-H. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Hu, L. Zhu, X. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xie, X. Chen, Z. Wen, Y. Yang, J. Shi, C. Chen, M. Peng, Y. Liu and X. Sun, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702817 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ren, Q. Xu and Y.-G. Li, Flexible Printed Electron., 2018, 3, 013001 CrossRef .
X. Hu, F. Li and Y. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1065–1072 CrossRef CAS .
Smart Clothing Market Analysis, https://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/Smart-Clothing-Market-Analysis-Report.pdf, (accessed July 16 2020).
H. Yang, J. Yu, H. Zo and M. Choi, Telemat. Inform., 2016, 33, 256–269 CrossRef .
L. Qiu, J. Deng, X. Lu, Z. Yang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10425–10428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, X. Xiang, X. Tong, J. Zou and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3831–3835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, K. Yan, M. Peng, X. Yu, S. Chen, B. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3901–3906 RSC .
L. Qiu, S. He, J. Yang, J. Deng and H. Peng, Small, 2016, 12, 2419–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Teodorescu, J. Text., 2014, 2014, 1–9 CrossRef .
K. G. Satyanarayana, C. K. S. Pillai, K. Sukumaran, S. G. K. Pillai, P. K. Rohatgi and K. Vijayan, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 2453–2462 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Fathi, PhD thesis, Universität Hamburg,  2014 .
I. Burgert, K. Frühmann, J. Keckes, P. Fratzl and S. Stanzl-Tschegg, Trees, 2004, 18, 480–485 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Deshpande, I. Burgert and O. Paris, Small, 2006, 2, 994–998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Gordon, G. Jeronimidis, W. Watt, B. Harris and A. C. Ham, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1980, 294, 545–550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Keckes, I. Burgert, K. Frühmann, M. Müller, K. Kölln, M. Hamilton, M. Burghammer, S. V. Roth, S. Stanzl-Tschegg and P. Fratzl, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 810–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, R. B. Sills, X. Hu, Z. W. Seh, X. Xiao, H. Xu, W. Luo, H. Jin, Y. Xin, T. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou, W. Cai, Y. Huang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3899–3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, Z. Lu, S. Cong, G. Cheng, P. Ma, Y. Lou, J. Ding, N. Yuan, M. H. Rümmeli and G. Zou, Small, 2019, 15, 1902878 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cai, V. T. Tiong, T. Hreid, J. Bell and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2784–2793 RSC .
How smart clothing is changing the face of wearable technology, https://www.whatmobile.net/Opinion/article/smart-clothing-changing-face-wearable-technology, (accessed August 30, 2020).
J. Deng, L. Qiu, X. Lu, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21070–21076 RSC .
H. Hu, B. Dong, B. Chen, X. Gao and D. Zou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 79–84 RSC .

          N. Peneder, What is microfibrillated cellulose (MFC)? https://weidmannfibertechnology.com/what-is-mfc/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Bamboo canes grown in Oregon, http://bamboogarden.com/Bamboo%20Canes.htm, (accessed March 19, 2021).
S. Youssefian and N. Rahbar, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11116 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhao, G. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 2553–2565 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Monteiro, F. P. D. Lopes, A. P. Barbosa, A. B. Bevitori, I. L. A. D. Silva and L. L. D. Costa, Metall. Mater. Trans. A, 2011, 42, 2963 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rongpipi, D. Ye, E. D. Gomez and E. W. Gomez, Front. Plant Sci., 2019, 9, 1894 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hong, T. GenLin, W. ZhiHui and F. BenHua, Wood Fiber Sci., 2016, 48, 104–116 Search PubMed .
B. Dong, J. Hu, X. Xiao, S. Tang, X. Gao, Z. Peng and D. Zou, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900131 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, L. Qiu, X. Fang, G. Guan, P. Chen, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9406–9410 RSC .
D.-Y. Khang, H. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2006, 311, 208–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2015, 19, 160–170 CrossRef .
J. J. Park, P. Won and S. H. Ko, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf.-Green Technol., 2019, 6, 147–161 CrossRef .
M. Jo, S. Bae, I. Oh, J. Jeong, B. Kang, S. J. Hwang, S. S. Lee, H. J. Son, B.-M. Moon, M. J. Ko and P. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12500–12510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, W. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, P. Li, J. Huang, J. Li, Y. Lu, Z. Li, Z. Wang, B. Fan, J. Fang and W. Song, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1560–1568 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qi, H. Xiong, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3646–3656 RSC .
T. H. Yang, H. Hida, D. Ichige, J. Mizuno, C. R. Kao and J. Shintake, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2020, 217, 1900891 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Xie, J. Liang, J. Song, C.-R. Yin and W. Huang, Curr. Org. Chem., 2010, 14, 2169–2195 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Saragi, T. Spehr, A. Siebert, T. Fuhrmann-Lieker and J. Salbeck, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1011–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yi, Y. Wang, Q. Luo, Y. Lin, H. Tan, H. Wang and C.-Q. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1649–1652 RSC .
X.-F. Wu, W.-F. Fu, Z. Xu, M. Shi, F. Liu, H.-Z. Chen, J.-H. Wan and T. P. Russell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5954–5966 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Clarkson and M. Gomberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1930, 52, 2881–2891 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bischoff and H. Adkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1923, 45, 1030–1033 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Xie, F. Liu, C. Tang, X.-Y. Hou, Y.-R. Hua, Q.-L. Fan and W. Huang, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 2787–2790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, D. Bi, Y. Hua, P. Liu, M. Cheng, M. Grätzel, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 873–877 RSC .
D. Bi, B. Xu, P. Gao, L. Sun, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 138–144 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Y. Yao, J. Wang, L. Zhu, M. Sun, B. Ren, L. Xie, Y. Luo, Q. Meng and X. Zhan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 100–110 RSC .
M. Saliba, S. Orlandi, T. Matsui, S. Aghazada, M. Cavazzini, J.-P. Correa-Baena, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Mosconi and K.-H. Dahmen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 CrossRef .
G. Pozzi, S. Orlandi, M. Cavazzini, D. Minudri, L. Macor, L. Otero and F. Fungo, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 4642–4645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Torres and L. G. Rego, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26947–26954 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Hua, P. Liu, L. Wang, C. Ruan, Y. Li, G. Boschloo, E. M. Johansson and L. Kloo, Chem, 2017, 2, 676–687 CAS .
Y. Wang, T.-S. Su, H.-Y. Tsai, T.-C. Wei and Y. Chi, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, A. K.-Y. Jen and Y. Chi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700823 CrossRef .
S. Kazim, F. J. Ramos, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Ahmad, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1816–1823 RSC .
J. E. Anthony, J. S. Brooks, D. L. Eaton and S. R. Parkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9482–9483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giri, E. Verploegen, S. C. Mannsfeld, S. Atahan-Evrenk, D. H. Kim, S. Y. Lee, H. A. Becerril, A. Aspuru-Guzik, M. F. Toney and Z. Bao, Nature, 2011, 480, 504–508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Sheraw, T. N. Jackson, D. L. Eaton and J. E. Anthony, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 2009–2011 CrossRef CAS .
S. Paek, P. Qin, Y. Lee, K. T. Cho, P. Gao, G. Grancini, E. Oveisi, P. Gratia, K. Rakstys and S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606555 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Mishra and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bronstein, Z. Chen, R. S. Ashraf, W. Zhang, J. Du, J. R. Durrant, P. Shakya Tuladhar, K. Song, S. E. Watkins and Y. Geerts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3272–3275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Wu, H. Pan, Y. Li, S. Gardner, B. S. Ong and S. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2727–2732 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Seo, E. B. Namdas, A. Gutacker, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3667–3672 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, K. Fu, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 4169–4172 CrossRef .
J. Roncali, P. Blanchard and P. Frère, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1589–1610 RSC .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Pielartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481–494 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Petrus, T. Bein, T. J. Dingemans and P. Docampo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12159–12162 RSC .
A. Krishna, D. Sabba, J. Yin, A. Bruno, L. J. Antila, C. Soci, S. Mhaisalkar and A. C. Grimsdale, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8750–8754 RSC .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yella, C.-L. Mai, S. M. Zakeeruddin, S.-N. Chang, C.-H. Hsieh, C.-Y. Yeh and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 3017–3021 CrossRef .
M.-E. Ragoussi, M. Ince and T. Torres, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2013, 6475–6489 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Li, J.-H. Yum, S.-J. Moon and P. Chen, Energies, 2016, 9, 331 CrossRef .
S. H. Hwang, J. Roh, J. Lee, J. Ryu, J. Yun and J. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16429–16433 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, S. H. Lee, H.-S. Ko, J. Kwon, J. H. Park, S. M. Kang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, J. K. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9179–9186 RSC .
J. Song, E. Zheng, J. Bian, X.-F. Wang, W. Tian, Y. Sanehira and T. Miyasaka, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10837–10844 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Q. Dong, Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2359–2365 RSC .
C.-H. Chiang, Z.-L. Tseng and C.-G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15897–15903 RSC .
O. Malinkiewicz, A. Yella, Y. H. Lee, G. M. Espallargas, M. Graetzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, Z. Hong, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, M. Cai, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, S. Lu, Y. Liu and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1674–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seo, S. Park, Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, S. C. Yoon and S. I. Seok, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2642–2646 RSC .
L.-C. Chen, J.-C. Chen, C.-C. Chen and C.-G. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 312 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-Y. Jeng, K.-C. Chen, T.-Y. Chiang, P.-Y. Lin, T.-D. Tsai, Y.-C. Chang, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen, T.-C. Wen and Y.-J. Hsu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4107–4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, M. Lei, Y. Zhou, B. Song and Y. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 063901 CrossRef .
A. T. Barrows, A. J. Pearson, C. K. Kwak, A. D. Dunbar, A. R. Buckley and D. G. Lidzey, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2944–2950 RSC .
K. Mahmood, B. S. Swain, A. R. Kirmani and A. Amassian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9051–9057 RSC .
S. Carretero-Palacios, A. Jiménez-Solano and H. Míguez, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 323–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yao, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, M. Xiong, S. Leng, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, W. Wang, L. Zhou, H. Huang and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5397–5409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luo, C. Zhang, X. Deng, H. Zhu, Z. Li, Z. Wang, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34821–34832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Zhirnov, Semiconductor Synthetic Biology Roadmap, Semiconductor Research Corporation Durham,  2018 Search PubMed .
S. Kawanishi, Y. Hiraku and S. Oikawa, Mutat. Res., Rev. Mutat. Res., 2001, 488, 65–76 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Wallace, Free Radicals Biol. Med., 2002, 33, 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Seeman, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2010, 79, 65–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, M. R. Arkin, Y. Jenkins, N. D. Ghatlia, S. H. Bossmann, N. J. Turro and J. K. Barton, Science, 1993, 262, 1025–1029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Larsson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 4034–4040 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. McConnell, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 35, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Priyadarshy, S. M. Risser and D. N. Beratan, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17678–17682 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Beratan, S. Priyadarshy and S. M. Risser, Chem. Biol., 1997, 4, 3–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Tong, I. V. Kurnikov and D. N. Beratan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2381–2392 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jortner, M. Bixon, T. Langenbacher and M. E. Michel-Beyerle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1998, 95, 12759–12765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Giese, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 612–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Meggers and B. Giese, Nucleosides Nucleotides, 1999, 18, 1317–1318 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Iqbal, G. Balasundaram, S. Ghosh, D. E. Bergstrom and R. Bashir, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 153901 CrossRef .
C. Nogues, S. R. Cohen, S. Daube, N. Apter and R. Naaman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8910–8913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, P. Zhang, X. Li and N. Tao, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1105–1108 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Henderson, D. Jones, G. Hampikian, Y. Kan and G. B. Schuster, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 8353–8358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Conwell, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 8795–8799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
The Chemical Structure of DNA, https://www.compoundchem.com/2015/03/24/dna/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
R. Venkatramani, S. Keinan, A. Balaeff and D. N. Beratan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 635–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zalar, D. Kamkar, R. Naik, F. Ouchen, J. G. Grote, G. C. Bazan and T.-Q. Nguyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11010–11013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Wang, S. D. Collins, H. Zhou, H. Phan, C. Proctor, A. Mikhailovsky, F. Wudl and T.-Q. Nguyen, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 248–253 CrossRef .
J. Dagar, M. Scarselli, M. De Crescenzi and T. M. Brown, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 510–515 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dagar, G. Scavia, M. Scarselli, S. Destri, M. De Crescenzi and T. M. Brown, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19031–19038 RSC .
F. Toschi, D. Catone, P. O’Keeffe, A. Paladini, S. Turchini, J. Dagar and T. M. Brown, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707126 CrossRef .
A. Rashid bin Mohd Yusoff, J. Kim, J. Jang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1736–1742 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hou, K. Wang, D. Yang, Y. Jiang, N. Yennawar, K. Wang, M. Sanghadasa, C. Wu and S. Priya, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2646–2655 CrossRef CAS .
X. Peng, H. Lu, J. Zhuang, X. Liu, Z. Ma, H. Wang, Z. Guo, Q. Wang, H. Zhang and S. Zhao, Sol. Energy, 2020, 206, 855–863 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Watterson, R. D. Montgomery and R. P. Taylor, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mandelbrot, Science, 1967, 156, 636–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Bassingthwaighte, L. Liebovitch and B. West, Fractal Physiology, Oxford University Press,  1994 Search PubMed .
R. G. Hohlfeld and N. Cohen, Fractals, 1999, 7, 79–84 CrossRef .
K. Wang, C. Liu, T. Meng, C. Yi and X. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2937–2975 RSC .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Meier, C. Birkenstock, C. M. Palumbiny and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15088–15098 RSC .
R. L. Chamousis, L. Chang, W. J. Watterson, R. D. Montgomery, R. P. Taylor, A. J. Moule, S. E. Shaheen, B. Ilan, J. van de Lagemaat and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16608–16616 RSC .
X. Qin, Z. Miao, Y. Fang, D. Zhang, J. Ma, L. Zhang, Q. Chen and X. Shao, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5218–5226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kaniyankandy, J. Nuwad, C. Thinaharan, G. K. Dey and C. G. S. Pillai, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 125610 CrossRef .
E. Ben-Jacob and P. Garik, Nature, 1990, 343, 523–530 CrossRef .
Q. Zhou, S. Wang, N. Jia, L. Liu, J. Yang and Z. Jiang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3789–3792 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2000, 289, 736–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893–12941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17036 CrossRef CAS .
R. Senthil and S. Yuvaraj, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 1068–1081 CrossRef .
S. M. Kang, S. Jang, J.-K. Lee, J. Yoon, D.-E. Yoo, J.-W. Lee, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, Small, 2016, 12, 2443–2449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, S. Jang, J. Choi, S. M. Kang and M. Choi, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 53 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-Y. Chuang, H.-L. Chen, J. Shieh, C.-H. Lin, C.-C. Cheng, H.-W. Liu and C.-C. Yu, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 799–805 RSC .
Y. M. Song, H. J. Choi, J. S. Yu and Y. T. Lee, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 13063–13071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Deng, Z. Liu, M. Wang and L. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900830 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, M. Anaya, G. Lozano, M. E. Calvo, M. B. Johnston, H. Míguez and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Meng, S. Gao, L. Wu, G. Wang, X. Liu, G. Chen, Z. Liu and G. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4166–4173 CrossRef PubMed .
P. V. Braun and P. Wiltzius, Nature, 1999, 402, 603–604 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Schroden, M. Al-Daous, C. F. Blanford and A. Stein, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3305–3315 CrossRef CAS .
How to Code a Neural Network with Backpropagation In Python (from scratch), https://machinelearningmastery.com/implement-backpropagation-algorithm-scratch-python/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Moth eyes inspire more efficient solar cell, https://physicsworld.com/a/moth-eyes-inspire-more-efficient-solar-cell/, (accessed August 30, 2020).

          B. Bhushan, Encyclopedia of nanotechnology, Springer, Dordrecht, Netherlands,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y.-T. Li, Y. Tian, H. Tian, T. Tu, G.-Y. Gou, Q. Wang, Y.-C. Qiao, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, Sensors, 2018, 18, 1368 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Allam, C.-W. Yen, R. D. Near and M. A. El-Sayed, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2909–2914 RSC .
L. S. Li, T. Xu, Y. J. Zhang, J. Jin, T. J. Li, B. Zou and J.-P. Wang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2001, 19, 1037–1041 CrossRef CAS .

          K. M. Al-Aribe, G. K. Knopf and A. S. Bassi, in Microfluidics, BioMEMS, and Medical Microsystems XI, International Society for Optics and Photonics,  2013, vol. 8615, p. 86150Q Search PubMed .
A. Nitzan and M. A. Ratner, Science, 2003, 300, 1384–1389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sepunaru, N. Friedman, I. Pecht, M. Sheves and D. Cahen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4169–4176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mukhopadhyay, S. R. Cohen, D. Marchak, N. Friedman, I. Pecht, M. Sheves and D. Cahen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7714–7722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Berthoumieu, A. V. Patil, W. Xi, L. Aslimovska, J. J. Davis and A. Watts, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 899–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, D. Liang, S. Rao and Y. Xiang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 654–661 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mustárdy, K. Buttle, G. Steinbach and G. Garab, Plant Cell, 2008, 20, 2552–2557 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Yang, Y. Zhang, J. E. Halpert, J. Zhai, D. Wang and L. Jiang, Small, 2012, 8, 1762–1770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dancsházy and Z. Tokaji, FEBS Lett., 2000, 476, 171–173 CrossRef .
R. Li, C. M. Li, H. Bao, Q. Bao and V. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 223901 CrossRef .
V. Thavasi, T. Lazarova, S. Filipek, M. Kolinski, E. Querol, A. Kumar, S. Ramakrishna, E. Padrós and V. Renugopalakrishnan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 1679–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mohammadpour and S. Janfaza, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 809–813 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chellamuthu, P. Nagaraj, S. G. Chidambaram, A. Sambandam and A. Muthupandian, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2016, 162, 208–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, C. Wu, Z. Song, Y. Hou, R. Koch, P. Somasundaran, S. Priya, B. Barbiellini and R. Venkatesan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30728–30734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rakovich, A. Sukhanova, N. Bouchonville, E. Lukashev, V. Oleinikov, M. Artemyev, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, M. Molinari and M. Troyon, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2640–2648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Griep, K. A. Walczak, E. M. Winder, D. R. Lueking and C. R. Friedrich, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1493–1497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zoonens, F. Giusti, F. Zito and J.-L. Popot, Biochemistry, 2007, 46, 10392–10404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Renugopalakrishnan, B. Barbiellini, C. King, M. Molinari, K. Mochalov, A. Sukhanova, I. Nabiev, P. Fojan, H. L. Tuller and M. Chin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16710–16717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. King, B. Barbiellini, D. Moser and V. Renugopalakrishnan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 125106 CrossRef .
H.-M. Chen, K.-R. Jheng and A.-D. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 91, 24–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Frydrych, P. Silfsten, S. Parkkinen, J. Parkkinen and T. Jaaskelainen, BioSystems, 2000, 54, 131–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Prashanthan, B. Naydenov, K. Lips, E. Unger and R. W. MacQueen, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 164711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, X. Chen, J. E. Anthony, J. C. Johnson and M. C. Beard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4919–4927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ATP synthesis is driven by H+ gradient H+ gradient formation H+ H+ H+ – ppt download, https://slideplayer.com/slide/5162978/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Bacteriorhodopsin and the Purple Membrane, https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/newbr/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Purple membrane, https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/newbr/heptamer_fig.html, (accessed August 30, 2020).
S. Rao, Z. Guo, D. Liang, D. Chen, Y. Li and Y. Xiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2668–2673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, Z. Guo, Y. Xiang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9851–9856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Yen, S. C. Hayden, E. C. Dreaden, P. Szymanski and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3821–3826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rakovich, I. Nabiev, A. Sukhanova, V. Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, Y. P. Rakovich and J. F. Donegan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2154–2160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Li, H. Tian, H.-M. Zhao, M.-Q. Jian, Y.-J. Lv, Y. Tian, Q. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Xiang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 526–532 RSC .

          H. Brueckner, Porphyrins and Chlorins | The Brückner Research Group, https://bruckner.research.uconn.edu/porphyrinoid-synthesis/, (accessed July 30, 2020).
S. Samiullah and J. R. Roberts, Poult. Sci., 2013, 92, 2783–2788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Abnormal Hemoglobins, https://askhematologist.com/abnormal-hemoglobins/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Structure and function of hemoglobin - ppt video online download, https://slideplayer.com/slide/7671664/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Chlorophyll | National Geographic Society, https://www.nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/chlorophyll/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Why is B12 Difficult to Absorb and Do Oral B12 Sprays Work? https://www.news-medical.net/health/Why-is-B12-Difficult-to-Absorb-and-Do-Oral-B12-Sprays-Work.aspx, (accessed August 30, 2020).
K. Brulez, I. Mikšík, C. R. Cooney, M. E. Hauber, P. G. Lovell, G. Maurer, S. J. Portugal, D. Russell, S. J. Reynolds and P. Cassey, Ecol. Evol., 2016, 6, 1637–1645 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Liu, P. Du, J. Zheng and X. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1245–1255 RSC .
H.-H. Chou, Y.-H. Chiang, M.-H. Li, P.-S. Shen, H.-J. Wei, C.-L. Mai, P. Chen and C.-Y. Yeh, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 956–962 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, P. Liu, Y. Hua, Y. Li, L. Kloo, X. Wang, B. Ong, W.-K. Wong and X. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13231–13239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chiang, H.-H. Chou, W.-T. Cheng, Y.-R. Li, C.-Y. Yeh and P. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1620–1626 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Mai, Y.-L. Huang, G.-H. Lee, S.-M. Peng and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5120–5124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Kuo, L.-A. Li, W.-N. Yen, S.-S. Lo, C.-W. Lee and C.-Y. Yeh, Dalton Trans., 2007, 1433–1439 RSC .
T.-H. Huang, Y.-J. Chen, S.-S. Lo, W.-N. Yen, C.-L. Mai, M.-C. Kuo and C.-Y. Yeh, Dalton Trans., 2006, 2207–2213 RSC .
S. H. Kang, C. Lu, H. Zhou, S. Choi, J. Kim and H. K. Kim, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 163, 734–739 CrossRef CAS .
U.-H. Lee, R. Azmi, S. Sinaga, S. Hwang, S. H. Eom, T.-W. Kim, S. C. Yoon, S.-Y. Jang and I. H. Jung, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3780–3787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Azmi, U.-H. Lee, F. T. A. Wibowo, S. H. Eom, S. C. Yoon, S.-Y. Jang and I. H. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35404–35410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, X. Lv, P. Zhang, T. T. Chuong, B. Wu, X. Feng, C. Shan, J. Liu and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800568 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, F. Kessler, T. Moehl, S. Ahmad, T. Bessho, A. Marchioro, E. Ghadiri, J.-E. Moser and C. Yi, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. Luo, M. Xu, R. Li, K.-W. Huang, C. Jiang, Q. Qi, W. Zeng, J. Zhang, C. Chi and P. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 265–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gao, Z. Zhu, B. Xu, S. B. Jo, Y. Kan, X. Peng and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703980 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, Y. Li, S. Sasaki, J. Song, C. Wang, H. Tamiaki, W. Tian, G. Chen, T. Miyasaka and X.-F. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 2862–2869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, S. Sasaki, Y. Sanehira, T. Miyasaka, H. Tamiaki, T. Ikeuchi, G. Chen and X.-F. Wang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 353, 639–644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, N. Li, W. Hu, G. Chen, S. Sasaki, K. Sakai, T. Ikeuchi, T. Miyasaka, H. Tamiaki and X.-F. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Mane, A. A. Sutanto, C.-F. Cheng, M.-Y. Xie, C.-I. Chen, M. Leonardus, S.-C. Yeh, B. B. Beyene, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31950–31958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, G. Xiao, X. Feng, J. Cao, X. Yao and J. Liu, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 160, 957–961 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pudi, C. Rodríguez-Seco, A. Vidal-Ferran, P. Ballester and E. Palomares, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2018, 2064–2070 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Johnson, M. A. Berhow and P. F. Dowd, J. Chem. Ecol., 2008, 34, 757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Saito and J. B. Harborne, Phytochemistry, 1992, 31, 3009–3015 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Gould, J. McKelvie and K. R. Markham, Plant, Cell Environ., 2002, 25, 1261–1269 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. Mertens-Talcott, J. Rios, P. Jilma-Stohlawetz, L. A. Pacheco-Palencia, B. Meibohm, S. T. Talcott and H. Derendorf, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 7796–7802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Pereira, R. Pereira, I. Figueiredo, V. Freitas, T. C. Dinis and L. M. Almeida, PLoS One, 2017, 12, e0174116 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Shah, F. U. Amin, M. Khan, M. N. Abid, S. U. Rehman, T. H. Kim, M. W. Kim and M. O. Kim, J. Neuroinflammation, 2016, 13, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Takikawa, S. Inoue, F. Horio and T. Tsuda, J. Nutr., 2010, 140, 527–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Dangles and J.-A. Fenger, Molecules, 2018, 23, 1970 CrossRef PubMed .
Carotenoids, https://lpi.oregonstate.edu/mic/dietary-factors/phytochemicals/carotenoids, (accessed July 17, 2020).
H. Tapiero, D. M. Townsend and K. D. Tew, Biomed. Pharmacother., 2004, 58, 100–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Mezzomo and S. R. S. Ferreira, Carotenoids Functionality, Sources, and Processing by Supercritical Technology, https://www.hindawi.com/journals/jchem/2016/3164312/, (accessed July 17, 2020).
T. Maoka, J. Nat. Med., 2020, 74, 1–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Morelli, M. Biagiotti, V. M. Pappalardo, M. Rabuffetti and G. Speranza, Nat. Prod. Res., 2015, 29, 750–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. R. Farnsworth and N. Bunapraphatsara, Thai medicinal plants recommended for primary health care system, Medicinal Plant Information Center,  1992 Search PubMed .
P. Moongkarndi, N. Kosem, S. Kaslungka, O. Luanratana, N. Pongpan and N. Neungton, J. Ethnopharmacol., 2004, 90, 161–166 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Maiaugree, S. Lowpa, M. Towannang, P. Rutphonsan, A. Tangtrakarn, S. Pimanpang, P. Maiaugree, N. Ratchapolthavisin, W. Sang-Aroon and W. Jarernboon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-R. Im, L. Han, E. R. Kim, J. Kim, Y. S. Kim and Y. Park, Phytother. Res., 2012, 26, 1249–1255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jain and M. S. Mehata, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Coutinho, E. Latocheski, J. M. Neri, A. C. Neves, J. B. Domingos, L. N. Cavalcanti, L. H. Gasparotto, E. P. Moraes and F. G. Menezes, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 30007–30011 RSC .
A. M. Elseman, W. Sharmoukh, S. Sajid, P. Cui, J. Ji, S. Dou, D. Wei, H. Huang, W. Xi, L. Chu, Y. Li, B. Jiang and M. Li, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800568 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wongcharee, V. Meeyoo and S. Chavadej, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gokilamani, N. Muthukumarasamy, M. Thambidurai, A. Ranjitha and D. Velauthapillai, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2013, 66, 212–219 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Giusti and R. E. Wrolstad, Curr. Protoc. Food Anal. Chem., 2001, F1–2 Search PubMed .
A. Castañeda-Ovando, M. de Lourdes Pacheco-Hernández, M. E. Páez-Hernández, J. A. Rodríguez and C. A. Galán-Vidal, Food Chem., 2009, 113, 859–871 CrossRef .
A. Gengatharan, G. A. Dykes and W. S. Choo, LWT–Food Sci. Technol., 2015, 64, 645–649 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hug, M. Bader, P. Mair and T. Glatzel, Appl. Energy, 2014, 115, 216–225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hao, J. Wu, Y. Huang and J. Lin, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 209–214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, L. Wu, Y. Gao and T. Ma, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 219, 188–194 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero, G. Di Marco, S. Cazzanti, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, A. Di Carlo and C. A. Bignozzi, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2010, 11, 254–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Gómez-Ortíz, I. A. Vázquez-Maldonado, A. R. Pérez-Espadas, G. J. Mena-Rejón, J. A. Azamar-Barrios and G. Oskam, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 40–44 CrossRef .
X.-F. Wang, A. Matsuda, Y. Koyama, H. Nagae, S. Sasaki, H. Tamiaki and Y. Wada, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 423, 470–475 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Polo and N. Y. Murakami Iha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1936–1944 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yamazaki, M. Murayama, N. Nishikawa, N. Hashimoto, M. Shoyama and O. Kurita, Sol. Energy, 2007, 81, 512–516 CrossRef CAS .
G. Calogero and G. D. Marco, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1341–1346 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Valavanidis and T. Vlachogianni, in Studies in Natural Products Chemistry, Elsevier,  2013, vol. 39, pp. 269–295 Search PubMed .
Wikipedia “Cryptoxanthin”, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cryptoxanthin, (accessed 30 August 2020).
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Res., 2017, 32, 3011–3020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, S. Ji, S. Li, W. He, K. Wang, H. Hu and C. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14902–14909 RSC .
C.-Y. Chan, Y. Wang, G.-W. Wu and E. W.-G. Diau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3872–3878 RSC .
H. Chen and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603994 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Cao, Z. Zuo, J. Cui, Y. Shen, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, C. Wu, L. Li, K. Wang, Z. Tao, F. Gao, W. Cheng, J. Cheng, X.-Y. Zhao and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 440–448 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, K. Wang, Y. Jiang, D. Yang, Y. Hou, T. Ye, C. S. Han, B. Chi, L. Zhao, S. Wang, W. Deng and S. Priya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006803 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, F. Dai, Q. Xiao, L. Yang, J. Shen, C. Zhang and M. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 102–106 RSC .
W. Zhang, H. Lin, Z. Lin, J. Yin, H. Lu, D. Liu and M. Zhao, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2114–2122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Lin, W. Yang, Y. Meng, Y. Guo, M. Li and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9684–9690 RSC .
S. S. Mali, H. Kim, J. V. Patil and C. K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31280–31290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao, Y. Zhou, F. Meng, Y. Li, A. Liu, Y. Li, C. Zhang, M. Fan, G. Wei and T. Ma, Carbon, 2020, 162, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, D. A. Mcadams and J. C. Grunlan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6292–6321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. G. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 23–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. J. Prescott, N. Lepora and P. F. M. J. Verschure, Living machines: A handbook of research in biomimetics and biohybrid systems, Oxford University Press,  2018 Search PubMed .
U. G. K. Wegst and M. F. Ashby, Philos. Mag., 2004, 84, 2167–2186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aizenberg and P. Fratzl, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 387–388 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Dunlop and P. Fratzl, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2010, 40, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li and C. Ortiz, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 501–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song, A. K. Soh and Y. L. Bai, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 3623–3631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Meyers, P.-Y. Chen, A. Y.-M. Lin and Y. Seki, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2008, 53, 1–206 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Evans, Z. Suo, R. Z. Wang, I. A. Aksay, M. Y. He and J. W. Hutchinson, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 2475–2484 CrossRef CAS .
R. Z. Wang, Z. Suo, A. G. Evans, N. Yao and I. A. Aksay, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 2485–2493 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z.-H. Xu and R. Wang, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2301–2304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Watson, N. Rolston, A. D. Printz and R. H. Dauskardt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2500–2508 RSC .
F. Di Giacomo, A. Fakharuddin, R. Jose and T. M. Brown, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3007–3035 RSC .
T. Ma, H.-L. Gao, H.-P. Cong, H.-B. Yao, L. Wu, Z.-Y. Yu, S.-M. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706435 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, Q. Liu, J. Fu, Q. Li and D. Hui, Composites, Part B, 2017, 121, 122–133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Gu, K. Lin, Y. Yang and C. Ma, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., 2019, 91, 59–67 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Ma, Y. Shi, Y. Sun and J. Yang, Mater. Des., 2017, 135, 275–290 CrossRef .
S. A. Sabah, A. B. H. Kueh and M. Y. Al-Fasih, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2017, 149, 64–74 CrossRef .
S. A. Sabah, A. B. H. Kueh and M. Y. Al-Fasih, Constr. Build. Mater., 2018, 169, 193–204 CrossRef .
N. San, Ha, G. Lu and X. Xiang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 6286–6300 CrossRef .
S. Haldar and H. A. Bruck, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 95, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, Z. Sun, X. Hu and H. Chen, Thin Wall Struct., 2014, 84, 416–422 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, S. Shi, X. Guo, X. Hu and H. Chen, Composites, Part B, 2016, 94, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, A. Thomas, J. L. Glancey and A. M. Karlsson, Composites, Part A, 2011, 42, 211–220 CrossRef .
S. C. Cao, J. Liu, L. Zhu, L. Li, M. Dao, J. Lu and R. O. Ritchie, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 5088 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. P. Bilezikian, L. G. Raisz and T. J. Martin, Principles of Bone Biology, Academic press,  2008 Search PubMed .
N. San Ha and G. Lu, Composites, Part B, 2020, 181, 107496 CrossRef .
South Carolina Bill Aims to Protect the State's Turtles, other Reptiles & Amphibians, https://turtlesurvival.org/south-carolina-bill-aims-to-protect-the-states-turtles-other-reptiles-amphibians/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
This highly iridescent beetle's carapace, https://www.reddit.com/r/mildlyinteresting/comments/b3pyz6/this_highly_iridescent_beetles_carapace/, (accessed 19 March 2021).
A. H. P. LIBRARY, Green tiger beetle carapace, SEM – Stock Image – C021/5820, https://www.sciencephoto.com/media/609291/view/green-tiger-beetle-carapace-sem, (accessed March 19, 2021).
N. Lee, M. F. Horstemeyer, H. Rhee, B. Nabors, J. Liao and L. N. Williams, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2014, 11, 20140274 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Nair, A. Gautieri, S.-W. Chang and M. J. Buehler, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
V. Zorba, E. Stratakis, M. Barberoglou, E. Spanakis, P. Tzanetakis, S. H. Anastasiadis and C. Fotakis, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4049–4054 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, W. Zhang, C. Dong, T. S. Sreeprasad and Z. Xia, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2016, 13, 20160300 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Kang, N. Ahn, J.-W. Lee, M. Choi and N.-G. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20017–20021 RSC .
J. Jeevahan, M. Chandrasekaran, G. Britto Joseph, R. B. Durairaj and G. Mageshwaran, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2018, 15, 231–250 CrossRef CAS .
A. Syafiq, A. K. Pandey, N. N. Adzman and N. Abd Rahim, Sol. Energy, 2018, 162, 597–619 CrossRef .
mars.nasa.gov, Mars 2020 Perseverance Rover | Missions, https://mars.nasa.gov/mars-exploration/missions/mars2020, (accessed July 17, 2020).
B. Dudem, J. H. Heo, J. W. Leem, J. S. Yu and S. H. Im, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7573–7579 RSC .
J. Woo Leem and J. Su Yu, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60804–60813 RSC .
The lotus leaf, https://www.jeremyjordan.me/lotus-leaf-how-nature-makes-water-repellant-materials/, (accessed August 30, 2020).
Definition of HEALING, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/healing, (accessed July 17, 2020).
J. C. Cremaldi and B. Bhushan, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 907–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Metcalfe, Econ. Bot., 1967, 21, 115–127 CrossRef .
J. Parkin, Ann. Bot., 1900, os-14, 193–214 CrossRef .
G. Bauer, A. Nellesen and T. Speck, WIT Trans. Ecol. Environ, 2010, 138, 453–459 Search PubMed .
G. Bauer, S. N. Gorb, M.-C. Klein, A. Nellesen, M. von Tapavicza and T. Speck, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e113336 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Bauer and T. Speck, Ann. Bot., 2012, 109, 807–811 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nellesen, M. Von Tapavicza, J. Bertling, A. M. Schmidt, G. Bauer and T. Speck, Polym. Renewable Resour., 2011, 2, 149–156 CAS .
A. C. Schüssele, F. Nübling, Y. Thomann, O. Carstensen, G. Bauer, T. Speck and R. Mülhaupt, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 411–419 CrossRef .
Bone remodelling at a glance | Journal of Cell Science, https://jcs.biologists.org/content/124/7/991.short, (accessed August 31, 2020).
T.-S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, D. Yang, C. Wu, J. Shapter and S. Priya, Joule, 2019, 3, 311–316 CrossRef .
K. Wang, D. Yang, C. Wu, M. Sanghadasa and S. Priya, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 100580 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Hou, D. Yang and S. Priya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24661–24690 RSC .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. Yang, K. Wang and S. Priya, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau3241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, C. Wu, D. Yang, K. Wang, T. Ye, L. Brownlie, K. Wang and S. Priya, Nano Energy, 2020, 105133 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and J. You, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902650 CrossRef CAS .

          H. T. Hartmann and D. E. Kester, Plant propagation: principles and practices, Prentice-Hall,  1975 Search PubMed .
J. D. G. Jones and J. L. Dangl, Nature, 2006, 444, 323–329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bloch, Bot. Rev., 1952, 18, 655 CrossRef .
D. Neely, J. Arboric., 1979, 5, 135–140 Search PubMed .

          J. A. Romberger, Z. Hejnowicz and J. F. Hill, Plant structure: function and development. A treatise on anatomy and vegetative development with special reference to woody plants, Springer-Verlag GmbH & Co. KG,  1993 Search PubMed .

          C. Gillott, Entomology, Springer Science & Business Media,  2005 Search PubMed .

          W. M. Reichert, ed., Indwelling Neural Implants: Strategies for Contending with the In Vivo Environment, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. S. Adam and F. C. Richarada, N. Engl. J. Med., 1999, 341, 738–746 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Robinton and G. Q. Daley, Nature, 2012, 481, 295–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Caplan, J. Orthop. Res., 1991, 9, 641–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. A. Maderson, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1965, 146, 98–113 CrossRef .
A. M. A. Aguinaldo, J. M. Turbeville, L. S. Linford, M. C. Rivera, J. R. Garey, R. A. Raff and J. A. Lake, Nature, 1997, 387, 489–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Parle, J.-H. Dirks and D. Taylor, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2016, 13, 20150984 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Na and R. Af, Dev. Comp. Immunol., 1979, 3, 189–221 CrossRef .

          W. E. Müller, Invertebrate immunology, Springer Verlag,  1996, vol. 15 Search PubMed .
D. J. Cosgrove, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2005, 6, 850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Eastern Region State and Private Forestry, https://www.fs.usda.gov/naspf/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
O. Speck and T. Speck, Biomimetics, 2019, 4, 26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kapinas and A. M. Delany, Arthritis Res. Ther., 2011, 13, 220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ODFW Life of a Dungeness Crab, https://www.dfw.state.or.us/mrp/shellfish/crab/lifehistory.asp, (accessed March 19, 2021).
Ultimate Exotics | Snake Shedding 101 – Why Snakes Shed Their Skin by Brandon Cornett, https://ultimateexotics.co.za/snake-shedding-101-why-snakes-shed-their-skin-by-brandon-cornett/, (accessed March 19, 2021).
I Ching Hexagram 49 – Ko (Molting/Revolution) | Cafe au Soul, https://cafeausoul.com/iching/ko-moltingrevolution, (accessed March 19, 2021).
Cell Wall – Assignment Point, https://www.assignmentpoint.com/science/biology/cell-wall.html, (accessed March 19, 2021).
S. Bhaumik, S. A. Veldhuis, Y. F. Ng, M. Li, S. K. Muduli, T. C. Sum, B. Damodaran, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7118–7121 RSC .
T. Ye, K. Wang, Y. Hou, D. Yang, N. Smith, B. Magill, J. Yoon, R. R. H. H. Mudiyanselage, G. A. Khodaparast, K. Wang and S. Priya, J. Am. Chem. Soc. DOI:10.1021/jacs.0c13069 .
Y. Li, L. Li and J. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 6265–6269 CrossRef .
A. Nellesen, M. Von Tapavicza, J. Bertling, A. M. Schmidt, G. Bauer and T. Speck, Gummi, Fasern, Kunstst., 2011, 64, 472 CAS .
S. Busch, R. Seidel, O. Speck and T. Speck, Proc. R. Soc. B, 2010, 277, 2113–2120 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Speck and T. Speck, Biol. Unserer Zeit, 2015, 45, 44–51 CrossRef .
M. Rampf, O. Speck, T. Speck and R. H. Luchsinger, Int. J. Eng. Sci., 2013, 63, 61–70 CrossRef CAS .
Design and Nature III, https://www.witpress.com/books/978-1-84564-166-5, (accessed September 1, 2020).
M. Rampf, O. Speck, T. Speck and R. H. Luchsinger, J. Cell. Plast., 2012, 48, 53–69 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rampf, O. Speck, T. Speck and R. H. Luchsinger, J. Bionic Eng., 2011, 8, 242–250 CrossRef .
J. Wang, K. Kato, A. P. Blois and T.-S. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8265–8271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Huss, V. Schoeppler, D. J. Merritt, C. Best, E. Maire, J. Adrien, O. Spaeker, N. Janssen, J. Gladisch and N. Gierlinger, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700572 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Huss, O. Spaeker, N. Gierlinger, D. J. Merritt, B. P. Miller, C. Neinhuis, P. Fratzl and M. Eder, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2018, 15, 20180190 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Speck, M. Schlechtendahl, F. Borm, T. Kampowski and T. Speck, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 175–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, D. Davydovich, C. C. Hornat, X. Liu and M. W. Urban, Chem, 2018, 4, 1928–1936 CAS .
W. Konrad, F. Flues, F. Schmich, T. Speck and O. Speck, J. Theor. Biol., 2013, 336, 96–109 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Klein, L. Hesse, M. Boljen, T. Kampowski, I. Butschek, T. Speck and O. Speck, J. Theor. Biol., 2018, 458, 184–206 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Harrington, F. Jehle and T. Priemel, Biotechnol. J., 2018, 13, 1800133 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Krauss, T. H. Metzger, P. Fratzl and M. J. Harrington, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 1520–1528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Schmitt, Y. Politi, A. Reinecke and M. J. Harrington, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2852–2861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krogsgaard, M. A. Behrens, J. S. Pedersen and H. Birkedal, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 297–301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Ahn, D. W. Lee, J. N. Israelachvili and J. H. Waite, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 867–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, N. Jasinski, A. Benitez, M. Noack, D. Park, A. S. Goldmann, C. Barner-Kowollik and A. Walther, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8653–8657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D’elia, S. Eslava, M. Miranda, T. K. Georgiou and E. Saiz, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25059 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Hwang, J. B. Miller and R. Shahsavari, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37055–37063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cohades, C. Branfoot, S. Rae, I. Bond and V. Michaud, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1870084 CrossRef .
J. W. C. Pang and I. P. Bond, Composites, Part A, 2005, 36, 183–188 CrossRef .
R. Luterbacher, T. S. Coope, R. S. Trask and I. P. Bond, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 136, 67–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Pang and I. P. Bond, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2005, 65, 1791–1799 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Trask and I. P. Bond, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, 704 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Norris, G. J. Meadway, M. J. O’Sullivan, I. P. Bond and R. S. Trask, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3624–3633 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sangadji and E. Schlangen, Procedia Eng., 2013, 54, 315–326 CrossRef .
X. Qi, D. Zhang, Z. Ma, W. Cao, Y. Hou, J. Zhu, Y. Gan and M. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1062–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cui, D. Daniel, A. Grinthal, K. Lin and J. Aizenberg, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 790–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 825–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Williams, A. J. Boydston and C. W. Bielawski, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2007, 4, 359–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang and F. Cicoira, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703098 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Oh, S. Rondeau-Gagné, Y.-C. Chiu, A. Chortos, F. Lissel, G.-J. N. Wang, B. C. Schroeder, T. Kurosawa, J. Lopez and T. Katsumata, Nature, 2016, 539, 411–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, T. G. Morrissey, E. Acome, S. I. Allec, B. M. Wong, C. Keplinger and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605099 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Palleau, S. Reece, S. C. Desai, M. E. Smith and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1589–1592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, X. Wu and D.-W. Lee, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 1366–1373 RSC .
B. J. Blaiszik, S. L. Kramer, M. E. Grady, D. A. McIlroy, J. S. Moore, N. R. Sottos and S. R. White, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 398–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Babayigit, A. Ethirajan, M. Muller and B. Conings, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Fabini, Quantifying the potential for lead pollution from halide perovskite photovoltaics, ACS Publications,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. Babayigit, D. D. Thanh, A. Ethirajan, J. Manca, M. Muller, H.-G. Boyen and B. Conings, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Abdelmageed, L. Jewell, K. Hellier, L. Seymour, B. Luo, F. Bridges, J. Z. Zhang and S. Carter, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 233905 CrossRef .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
A. H. Slavney, R. W. Smaha, I. C. Smith, A. Jaffe, D. Umeyama and H. I. Karunadasa, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 46–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Poglitsch and D. Weber, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87, 6373–6378 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cahen and I. Lubomirsky, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 573–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Ceratti, Y. Rakita, L. Cremonesi, R. Tenne, V. Kalchenko, M. Elbaum, D. Oron, M. A. C. Potenza, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706273 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Wei, H. Li, Y. Yan, W. Zhou, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Ran, W. Gao, J. Li, J. Xi, L. Li, J. Dai, Y. Yang, X. Gao, H. Dong and B. Jiao, Joule, 2019, 3, 3072–3087 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lang, N. H. Nickel, J. Bundesmann, S. Seidel, A. Denker, S. Albrecht, V. V. Brus, J. Rappich, B. Rech and G. Landi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8726–8731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Markvart, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 1990, 1, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mottl and R. Nymmik, Adv. Space Res., 2003, 32, 2349–2353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schwenn, Encycl. Astron. Astrophys., 2001, 785998, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H.-C. Neitzert, P. Spinillo, S. Bellone, G.-D. Licciardi, M. Tucci, F. Roca, L. Gialanella and M. Romano, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 435–446 CrossRef CAS .
W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan and J. Even, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Bag, L. A. Renna, R. Y. Adhikari, S. Karak, F. Liu, P. M. Lahti, T. P. Russell, M. T. Tuominen and D. Venkataraman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13130–13137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, E. A. Alharbi, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7799–7805 RSC .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, J.-P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
S.-W. Lee, S. Kim, S. Bae, K. Cho, T. Chung, L. E. Mundt, S. Lee, S. Park, H. Park and M. C. Schubert, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gottesman, L. Gouda, B. S. Kalanoor, E. Haltzi, S. Tirosh, E. Rosh-Hodesh, Y. Tischler, A. Zaban, C. Quarti and E. Mosconi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2332–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nan, X. Zhang and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 7774–7780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 Search PubMed .
A. Jha, H.-G. Duan, V. Tiwari, P. K. Nayak, H. J. Snaith, M. Thorwart and R. D. Miller, ACS Photonics, 2017, 5, 852–860 Search PubMed .
Y. Tian, M. Peter, E. Unger, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits, A. Yartsev, V. Sundström and I. G. Scheblykin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24978–24987 RSC .
Y. Jiang, L. Qiu, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, Z. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang and Y. Qi, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 585–593 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang and M. W. Urban, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 12338–12343 CrossRef .
H. Ying, Y. Zhang and J. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, M. A. Dam, K. Ono, A. Mal, H. Shen, S. R. Nutt, K. Sheran and F. Wudl, Science, 2002, 295, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ghosh and M. W. Urban, Science, 2009, 323, 1458–1460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imato, M. Nishihara, T. Kanehara, Y. Amamoto, A. Takahara and H. Otsuka, Angew. Chem., 2012, 124, 1164–1168 CrossRef .
P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulié-Ziakovic and L. Leibler, Nature, 2008, 451, 977–980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Burnworth, L. Tang, J. R. Kumpfer, A. J. Duncan, F. L. Beyer, G. L. Fiore, S. J. Rowan and C. Weder, Nature, 2011, 472, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nakahata, Y. Takashima, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. W. Urban, D. Davydovich, Y. Yang, T. Demir, Y. Zhang and L. Casabianca, Science, 2018, 362, 220–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. White, N. R. Sottos, P. H. Geubelle, J. S. Moore, M. R. Kessler, S. R. Sriram, E. N. Brown and S. Viswanathan, Nature, 2001, 409, 794–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Kessler, N. R. Sottos and S. R. White, Composites, Part A, 2003, 34, 743–753 CrossRef .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J.-D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Han, S. Luo, X. Yin, Y. Zhou, H. Nan, J. Li, X. Li, D. Oron, H. Shen and H. Lin, Small, 2018, 14, 1801016 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Guan, Y. Sheng, Y. Hu, Y. Rong, A. Mei and H. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902492 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahapatra, D. Prochowicz, M. M. Tavakoli, S. Trivedi, P. Kumar and P. Yadav, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 27–54 RSC .
R. Wang, J. Xue, L. Meng, J.-W. Lee, Z. Zhao, P. Sun, L. Cai, T. Huang, Z. Wang, Z.-K. Wang, Y. Duan, J. L. Yang, S. Tan, Y. Yuan, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1464–1477 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, M. Tai, X. Li, X. Zhao, H. Chen, X. Yin, Y. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. Han and N. Wang, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900345 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2016, 6, 115–124 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cravo, H. Napolitano and R. Culleton, Acta Trop., 2015, 148, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Winzeler and M. J. Manary, Genome Biol., 2014, 15, 544 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Deng, R. Nie, A. Li, H. Wei, S. Zheng, W. Huang, Y. Mo, Y. Su, Q. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400215 CrossRef .
R. Nie, A. Li and X. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6734–6739 RSC .
A. Henning, G. Günzburger, R. Jöhr, Y. Rosenwaks, B. Bozic-Weber, C. E. Housecroft, E. C. Constable, E. Meyer and T. Glatzel, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2013, 4, 418–428 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Kumara, P. Ekanayake, A. Lim, L. Y. C. Liew, M. Iskandar, L. C. Ming and G. K. R. Senadeera, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 581, 186–191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Antonacci and V. Scognamiglio, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 115, 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, X. Liu and I. Willner, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 349–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kishore Ravi, N. Paul, L. Suresh, A. Tjitra Salim, T. Wu, Z. Wu, M. R. Jones and S. Ching Tan, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 866–876 RSC .
S. K. Ravi, P. Rawding, A. M. Elshahawy, K. Huang, W. Sun, F. Zhao, J. Wang, M. R. Jones and S. C. Tan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 902 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Paul, L. Suresh, J. V. Vaghasiya, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, D. K. Nandakumar, M. R. Jones and S. C. Tan, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 165, 112423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, S. Lin, E. Katilius, C. Laser, J. P. Allen, J. C. Williams and N. W. Woodbury, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 818–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Singh, S. Singh, N. Jaggi, K.-H. Kim and P. Devi, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105482 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, Y. Zhao, Y. Alsaid, X. Wang, M. Hua, T. Galy, H. Gopalakrishna, Y. Yang, J. Cui, N. Liu, M. Marszewski, L. Pilon, H. Jiang and X. He, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1048–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Solar Spectrum, http://www.greenrhinoenergy.com/solar/radiation/print/print_05.php, (accessed September 1, 2020).
Professor develops natural solar tracker inspired by sunflowers | Cleanenergyauthority.com, https://www.cleanenergyauthority.com/solar-energy-news/professor-develops-solar-tracker-082112, (accessed September 1, 2020).

          M. Barber, Flower-shaped solar panel now sold in the U.S., https://www.curbed.com/2018/9/11/17845638/solar-panel-power-smartflower-united-states, (accessed September 1, 2020).
X. He, M. Aizenberg, O. Kuksenok, L. D. Zarzar, A. Shastri, A. C. Balazs and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2012, 487, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wang, M. S. Desai and S.-W. Lee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2826–2830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shastri, L. M. McGregor, Y. Liu, V. Harris, H. Nan, M. Mujica, Y. Vasquez, A. Bhattacharya, Y. Ma, M. Aizenberg, O. Kuksenok, A. C. Balazs, J. Aizenberg and X. He, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 447–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qin, M. Sun, M. Hua and X. He, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2019, 23, 13–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qin, M. Sun, R. Bai, Y. Mao, X. Qian, D. Sikka, Y. Zhao, H. J. Qi, Z. Suo and X. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800468 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sun, R. Bai, X. Yang, J. Song, M. Qin, Z. Suo and X. He, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804916 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. White and D. J. Broer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1087–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Gelebart, D. Jan Mulder, M. Varga, A. Konya, G. Vantomme, E. W. Meijer, R. L. B. Selinger and D. J. Broer, Nature, 2017, 546, 632–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Wani, H. Zeng and A. Priimagi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Zhao and J. F. Stoddart, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8442–8446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Klajn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 148–184 RSC .

          G. Prinsloo and R. Dobson, Sun Tracker, Automatic Solar-Tracking, Sun-Tracking Systems, Solar Trackers and Automatic Sun Tracker Systems Solar tracking: High precision solar position algorithms, programs, software and source-code for computing the solar vector, solar coordinates & sun angles in Microprocessor, PLC, Arduino, PIC and PC-based sun tracking devices or dynamic sun following hardware, Gerro Prinsloo,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. Seme, G. Štumberger and J. Voršič, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2011, 26, 1280–1290 Search PubMed .
Track Racks – Solar Trackers – Photovoltaic Racks | Zomeworks Corporation, http://www.zomeworks.com/photovoltaic-tracking-racks/, (accessed July 17, 2020).
M. J. Clifford and D. Eastwood, Sol. Energy, 2004, 77, 269–280 CrossRef CAS .

          C. E. F. Castañeda, Master thesis, Universidade Federal do Paraná,  2011 .
R. H. McFee, Appl. Opt., 1975, 14, 1493–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Rubio, M. G. Ortega, F. Gordillo and M. López-Martínez, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 2174–2184 CrossRef .
C.-Y. J. Lee, P.-C. Chou, Y.-C. Chen, C.-M. Chiang and C.-F. Lin, Open Constr. Build. Technol. J., 2009, 3, 90–95 CrossRef .
B. J. Huang, W. L. Ding and Y. C. Huang, Sol. Energy, 2011, 85, 1935–1944 CrossRef .

          B.-H. Jeong, J.-H. Park, S.-D. Kim and J.-H. Kang, in 2013 International Conference on Electrical Machines and Systems (ICEMS),  2013, pp. 414–417 Search PubMed .
V. P. More and V. K. Kulkarni, Int. J. Curr. Eng. Technol., 2014, 2, 230–234 Search PubMed .
S. M. Çinar, F. O. Hocaoğlu and M. Orhun, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2014, 6, 033143 CrossRef .
F. J. Dyson, Science, 1960, 131, 1667–1668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Lee, C. Choi, D.-H. Kim and Y. M. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705202 CrossRef .
L. Gu, S. Poddar, Y. Lin, Z. Long, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, L. Shu, X. Qiu, M. Kam, A. Javey and Z. Fan, Nature, 2020, 581, 278–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Darling, compound eye, http://www.daviddarling.info/encyclopedia/C/compound_eye.html, (accessed September 1, 2020).
My Insect Vision Simulation!, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KcLV1_J2-n4, (accessed 1 September 2020).
Rods and Cones in the Human Eye, https://www.eurekalert.org/multimedia/pub/118055.php, (accessed September 1, 2020).
Signal Transduction – 3rd Edition, https://www.elsevier.com/books/signal-transduction/kramer/978-0-12-394803-8, (accessed September 1, 2020).
F. Xia and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2842–2858 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ge, S. Sethi, L. Ci, P. M. Ajayan and A. Dhinojwala, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10792–10795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 503–564 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nicolas, F. Guittard and S. Géribaldi, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 2309–2312 CrossRef .
X. Yao, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 719–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin, X. Men, H. Sun, P. She, W. Zhang, C. Wu, W. Qin and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12016–12022 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Qiao, J. Wang, Y. Zhu and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9281–9286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Galloway, J. P. Bramble and S. S. Staniland, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 8710–8725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-B. Yao, H.-Y. Fang, Z.-H. Tan, L.-H. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 2186–2191 CrossRef .
A. Walther, I. Bjurhager, J.-M. Malho, J. Pere, J. Ruokolainen, L. A. Berglund and O. Ikkala, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2742–2748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Li, T. Yu, T.-Y. Yang, L.-X. Zheng and K. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3426–3431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. B. Burgess, J. Aizenberg and M. Lončar, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2013, 8, 045004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, J. Ford, C. Ruengruglikit, Q. Huang and J. Aizenberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4200–4202 RSC .
B. Pokroy, A. K. Epstein, M. C. Persson-Gulda and J. Aizenberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Dong, F. Jia, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, L. Zhang, S. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9842–9847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Tay, Y.-L. Wu, P. Cai, N. S. Tan, S. S. Venkatraman, X. Chen and L. P. Tan, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e199–e199 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xie, H. Gu, C. Zhu and Z. Gu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3297–3317 RSC .
A. del Campo and E. Arzt, Macromol. Biosci., 2007, 7, 118–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Villar, A. D. Graham and H. Bayley, Science, 2013, 340, 48–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Song, X. Li, Z. Chen, C. Zhou, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706539 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Mann, Biomineralization: principles and concepts in bioinorganic materials chemistry, Oxford University Press on Demand,  2001, vol. 5 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Wei and Y. Deng, Saf. Sci., 2013, 54, 87–91 CrossRef .
J. A. Jiménez-Avalos, G. Arrevillaga-Boni, L. González-López, Z. Y. García-Carvajal and M. González-Avila, Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 2021, 61, 234–258 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Li, M. Chu, H. Sun, J. Jin, K. Yu, Q. Wang, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau9490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Flora, D. Gupta and A. Tiwari, Interdiscip. Toxicol., 2012, 5, 47–58 CAS .
N. C. for E. Health, CDC – Lead - CDC's Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program, https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/about/program.htm, (accessed July 17, 2020).
The Code of Federal Regulations of the United States of America, U.S. Government Printing Office, 2005.
R. F. Service, Science, 2016, 354, 1214–1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Flomenbaum, L. Goldfrank, R. Hoffman, M. A. Howland, N. Lewin and L. Nelson, Goldfrank Toxicology Emergency, McGrawHill Professional,  2006 Search PubMed .
V. Cangelosi, L. Ruckthong and V. L. Pecoraro, Met. Ions Life Sci., 2017, 17, 271–317 CAS .
End-of-life management, /publications/2016/Jun/End-of-life-management-Solar-Photovoltaic-Panels, (accessed March 19, 2021).
L. A. Estroff, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 4329–4331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. du Plessis, C. Broeckhoven, I. Yadroitsava, I. Yadroitsev, C. H. Hands, R. Kunju and D. Bhate, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 27, 408–427 CAS .
D. Bhate, C. A. Penick, L. A. Ferry and C. Lee, Designs, 2019, 3, 19 CrossRef .
S. Li, H. Bai, R. F. Shepherd and H. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11182–11204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, L. X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, A. Buchleitner, D. F. Coker, G. S. Engel, R. van Grondelle, A. Ishizaki, D. M. Jonas, J. S. Lundeen, J. K. McCusker, S. Mukamel, J. P. Ogilvie, A. Olaya-Castro, M. A. Ratner, F. C. Spano, K. B. Whaley and X. Zhu, Nature, 2017, 543, 647–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dubin, R. Melet, T. Barisien, R. Grousson, L. Legrand, M. Schott and V. Voliotis, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 32–35 Search PubMed .
M. Einzinger, T. Wu, J. F. Kompalla, H. L. Smith, C. F. Perkinson, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, D. N. Congreve, A. Kahn, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nature, 2019, 571, 90–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, D. Goldberg, V. M. Menon and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 263302 CrossRef .
L. Yang, M. Tabachnyk, S. L. Bayliss, M. L. Böhm, K. Broch, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and B. Ehrler, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 354–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Jungjin Yoon
	Dr Jungjin Yoon is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Pennsylvania State University, United States. He obtained his PhD degree in Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering in 2018 from Seoul National University, Republic of Korea. His current research interest focuses on the scale-up manufacturing of perovskite-based solar modules and their application as portable power sources.

Yuchen Hou
	Yuchen Hou is currently a PhD student of Prof. Priya in Materials Science and Engineering at The Pennsylvania State University. He obtained his BE in Metallic Material Engineering at Qingdao University of Science & Technology in 2016 and his MS in Materials Science and Engineering at Drexel University in 2018. His current research interests include bio-photovoltaics, artificial retinas, perovskite solar cells and photodetectors, with a specific focus on integration of naturally derived biomaterials with hybrid perovskites for novel bio-optoelectronic systems and application of up-conversion materials in optoelectronics.

Neela Yennawar
	Prof. Neela Yennawar is currently the director of X-ray Crystallography and Automated Biological Calorimetry Core Facilities, Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Penn State. Neela received her PhD degree in Physics from the Indian Institute of Science and has been working as an Associate Research Professor in Penn State since the year of 2018. Her research interests include biological calorimetry, protein characterization, molecular modeling, X-ray crystallography, and small-angle X-ray scattering.

Mohan Sanghadasa
	Dr Mohan Sanghadasa currently leads applied research programs to develop energy storage systems, nanotechnology enhanced sensors, and photonic technologies at the U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command (DEVCOM) Aviation & Missile Center (AvMC). His previous research activities at DEVCOM AvMC focused on developing polymer-based photonic devices for IFOGs in inertial measurement units. He joined the U.S. Army serving 12 years on the faculty of the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). His research activities at UAH were primarily in the area of nonlinear optics. Dr Sanghadasa has also directed research on optical limiting, optical switching, and optical pattern recognition during his academic career.

Shashank Priya
	Dr Shashank Priya is currently Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Penn State University. He is also serving as Associate Vice President for Research and Director of Strategic Initiatives in the Office of the Senior Vice President for Research (OSVPR). He is the founder and chair of the Annual Energy Harvesting Society Meeting (previously Energy Harvesting Workshop). He is also serving as the member of the Honorary Chair Committee for the International Workshop on Piezoelectric Materials and Applications (IWPMA). His research group focuses in the areas related to multifunctional materials, energy harvesting and bio-inspired systems.

Kai Wang
	Dr Kai Wang is currently Research Assistant Professor in the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University. Kai received his PhD in Polymer Engineering from The University of Akron in 2017 and joined the Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS), Virginia Tech as a Post-doctoral Associate in the same year. His research interests include halide perovskite photovoltaics, photodetectors and photothermal applications, 2D MQW physics, and biological materials-based electronics. His current research focus is on micro-electronic sensor arrays, wireless energy transfer and innovations in manufacturing for next-generation semiconductors.

 	Fig. 1  Examples of utilization of solar energy by natural creatures on Earth and the man-made solar cell developed for harvesting solar energy. Adapted with permission from multiple online resources.6,10–15 Other picture credit: K. W., Y. H., and J. Y.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) ‘Product volume’ of different PV techniques. A 3D Cartesian coordinate system is used here to quantify the market potential of different PV techniques: Efficiency, Flexibility and 1/LCOE (cost effectiveness defined by how much electricity can be used per unit cost) are the three indexes. A larger volume indicates a higher competitiveness and thus a higher market potential. (b) Power-per-weight ratios of various types of solar cells, adapted with permission from ref. 24 and 29, Copyright 2015 Springer Nature and 2019 The Royal Chemistry of Society. (c) The technique basis of perovskite PVs including high efficiency and low cost, as well as other attributes of light weight and sufficient flexibility, coupled by the potential market opportunity with a total market volume of $70 billion. Pictures are adapted with permission from ref. 29 and 30, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Graphical overview of bio-inspired strategies for perovskite-based MPS (material's perspective). The bio-inspired approaches can be divided into two parts: the engineering of perovskite and charge transporting layers using biomolecules as additives and the structural designs that emulate natural structures. Adapted with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Biological network and its electrical mimicker. (a) Ants’ cooperative transport network. Snapshot from a tracked movie of trajectories of different ants, adapted with permission from ref. 83, Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (b) Porous ant-nest structured Li–S electrode (CNT-nest-S), adapted with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph of a leaf and schematic of its internal anatomy, adapted with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Morphology and extraction of the leaf vein network, with the corresponding optical and SEM images of the leaf and the fabrication method, adapted with permission from ref. 85, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 

PI	0.1	30–60	Large	NA	<300	8–20	2.0–3.0	NA
COC	0.1	94.5	7	1.51	164	70	<0.2	NA
PES	0.1	89	<10	1.6	223	54	1.4	80
PC	0.1	92	20	1.59	145	75	<0.2	NA
PET	0.1	90.4	Large	1.66	80	33	0.5	9
PEN	0.1	87	Large	1.75	150	20	0.4	2

 	Fig. 5  Transparent electrode substrates in flexible PSCs. (a) Plot of the sheet resistance of an ITO/PEN substrate with various bending cycles (left), and cross-sectional SEM image showing the presence of linear cracks after 1000 bending cycles (right), adapted with permission from ref. 93, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic of the ultra-flexible solar cell based on a PEDOT:PSS/NOA63 transparent substrate (left), and normalized solar cell parameters (JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE) of the device after repeated bending at r = 1 mm for 1000 bending cycles (right), adapted with permission from ref. 49, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image showing the device architecture of a flexible solar cell based on a WO3/Ag/WO3 transparent substrate (left), and changes of the device parameters of JSC, FF, and PCE under various strains (right), adapted with permission from ref. 104, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Leaf vein design of TCE. (a) (i) Architecture of a leaf vein network, adapted with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2020 Springer. (ii) Image of a typical three-busbar solar cell, adapted with permission from online sources.140 (b) (i) The photograph of a flexible WO3/Ag hierarchical metal grid (HMG) film. (ii) SEM image of the flexible WO3/Ag HMG film. (iii) The photograph showing the hierarchical structure of a leaf, adapted from ref. 118, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) An optical microscopic image of (i) Magnolia liliiflora leaf vein, (ii) Cu-plated leaf vein, adapted with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2019 Springer, and (d) a literature survey for the leaf vein-like transparent electrodes summarizing different materials with respect to optical transmission and sheet resistance.	 

 	Fig. 7  Geometric and topological engineering of a conducting transparent electrode (CTE). (a) SEM image of a hybrid nanowire network consisting of 25% long nanowires (marked by red colour) and 75% short nanowires (marked by green colour). (b) Comparison of the transmittance and sheet resistance of electrodes composed of nanowires with different geometrical parameters. (c) J–V curves of solar cells based on hybrid Cu nanowire electrodes. Inset: Schematic illustration of the solar cell architecture, adapted with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Multiple-order and quasi-fractal QF network design of the CTE. (e) Comparison of the sheet resistance and resistance of C, QF and ITO films. (f) J–V characteristics of the PV cells based on QF, C, and ITO electrodes under AM1.5 illumination. Inset: Cross-sectional SEM image of the device architecture, adapted with permission from ref. 125, Copyright 2016 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of two different fabrication procedures of perovskite solar cells. (a) Manufacturing of perovskite solar cells using a transparent conducting substrate (e.g. ITO/glass) as the bottom electrode. (b) Manufacturing of perovskite solar cells using metal foil as the bottom electrode.	 

Ti foil/compact-TiO2/mesoporous-TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag	0.135	9.5	0.899	0.73	6.15	
101

Ti foil/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag NWs	0.135	16.48	0.918	0.49	7.45	
151

Ti foil/SiO2/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Ag/ITO	0.135	18.5	0.998	0.61	11.01	
100

Ti foil/TiO2/Al2O3/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/PEDOT:PSS/(transparent conductive adhesive)/(PET film with embedded Ni mesh)	NA	17	0.983	0.61	10.3	
102

Ti foil/TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Cu/Au	0.14	17.9	1.09	0.74	14.9	
99

Ti foil/TiO2 nanotube/MAPbI3/carbon nanotube (CNT) network composite with spiro-OMeTAD	0.16	14.36	0.99	0.68	8.31	
152

Cu foil/CuI/MAPbI3/ZnO/Ag	0.1	22.5	0.958	0.594	12.8	
154


 	Fig. 9  The design of a PSC fibrous device. (a) (i) Illustration of a smart clothing integrated with electronic devices, picture credits to an online resource.187 (ii) Photograph of a fibrous perovskite solar cell. (iii) Schematic illustration of the structure of the fibrous perovskite solar cell, adapted with permission from ref. 188, Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–e) The schematic illustration and SEM image showing the structure of (b) a wearable double-twisted fibrous perovskite solar cell based on stainless steel, adapted with permission from ref. 173, Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) A design of a fibrous perovskite solar cell based on CNT fibers, adapted with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) A design of a fibrous perovskite solar cell based on Ti wire, adapted with permission from ref. 175, Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Another design of a fiber-shaped perovskite solar cell based on a modified Ti wire and a CNT sheet, adapted with permission from ref. 176, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Stainless steel/compact layer/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT sheet	10.2	0.667	0.487	3.3	
173

CNT fiber/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/P3HT-SWNT/CNT	8.75	0.615	0.564	3.03	
174

Ti wire/TiO2 nanotube/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/CNT	3.5	0.63	—	5.22	
188

Ti wire/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3−xClx/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	12.32	0.714	0.609	5.35	
175

Ti nanowire/compact TiO2/TiO2 nanotube/MAPbI3/transparent CNT	14.2	0.85	0.56	7.1	
176

Ti wire/compact TiO2/mesoporous TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/Au	14.18	0.96	0.66	7.53	
189


 	Fig. 10  Microscopic structures in natural plants. (a) Schematic illustration of the structure of wood fibril bundles at different scales, adapted with permission from an online resource.190 (b) Schematic illustration of the hierarchical structure of bamboo, adapted with permission from an online resource,191 and ref. 192–196, Copyright 2011, 2015, and 2018 Springer Nature, 2016 Cabi, and 2019 Frontiers.	 

 	Fig. 11  Adaptation of ‘kirigami’ and ‘origami’ strategies in designing flexible perovskite solar cells. (a) (i) Schematic diagrams of the kirigami/origami approach to achieve a stretchable flexible PSC with high coverage. (ii) Photographs of the stretchable PSC module connected to a fan under sunlight, adapted with permission from ref. 202, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (b) (i) and (ii) Schematic illustration of the structure using the kirigami-based cutting strategy at (i) the initial state and (ii) the stretching state. (iii) Photograph showing the kirigami-based PSC device in the stretching state. (iv) Photograph of kirigami-based PSCs mounted on a human wrist accommodating the stretching deformation, adapted with permission from ref. 203, Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (c) (i) Schematic illustration showing the architecture of the kirigami-structured PSC with serpentine interconnect design. (ii) Zoom-in view showing the details of the serpentine interconnect substrate design. (iii) Photograph of the kirigami-structured PSC device with serpentine interconnects, adapted with permission from ref. 204, Copyright 2020 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  DNA and related transport mechanisms. (a) Schematic illustration of the chemical structures of DNA and nucleobases, picture credits to an online resource.274 (b) Charge conduction mechanisms in DNA molecules, adapted with permission from ref. 275, Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (c) Energy level diagram of four basic units, two pairs, DNA macromolecules, and various perovskites.	 

 	Fig. 13  Employment of DNA in organic and perovskite photovoltaics. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of an organic solar cell using DNA as a CTL. (ii) Spectral cuts at a probe delay of 800 fs of the transient absorption of the DNA-incorporated solar cell. (iii) and (iv) Pseudocolor UV-vis transient absorption maps of a solar cell device (iii) with and (iv) without DNA, adapted with permission from ref. 280, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) (i) Schematic illustration of the DNA-integrated perovskite solar cell; (ii) PL emission mapping, (iii) steady state PL spectra, and (iv) time-resolved PL spectra of DNA-integrated MAPbI3 and pristine MAPbI3/hole-transport-layer structures, adapted with permission from ref. 282, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Summary of different types of solar cells being incorporated with DNA: (i) Toschi et al. (ref. 280), (ii) Dagar et al. (ref. 278), (iii) Dagar et al. (ref. 279), (iv) Yusoff et al. (ref. 281), (v) Peng et al. (ref. 283), and (vi) Hou et al. (ref. 282).	 

 	Fig. 14  Fractal design. (a) Photograph showing the neural network, adapted with permission from an online resource.309 (b) (i) Schematic illustration of an idealized morphology of a fractal bulk heterojunction (BHJ) device. (ii) Energy level diagram in the fractal BHJ device, adapted with permission from ref. 291, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) Photograph of moth eye, adapted with permission from an online resource.310 (ii) and (iii) SEM image showing the moth eye nanostructure, adapted with permission from ref. 311, Copyright 2012 Springer Science and Business Media B.V. (d) (i) SEM image of a moth-eye patterned mesoporous-TiO2 layer (Moth-eye TiO2). (ii) Photograph of normal TiO2 and moth-eye TiO2 on glass substrates. (iii) Comparison of the spatial profiles of the optical absorption per unit volume in the vertical direction of perovskite/flat TiO2 and perovskite/Moth-eye TiO2 at a wavelength of 550 nm, adapted with permission from ref. 300, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) (i) Schematic illustration of a photonic-crystal (PC)-based perovskite solar cell. (ii) Cross-sectional SEM image showing the structure of the PC-based perovskite solar cell. (iii) Experimental (solid lines) and theoretical (dashed lines) reflectance of the PC-based orange (orange lines) and blue-green (dark cyan lines) perovskite solar cells. (iv) CIE 1931 chromaticity space showing the color hues of the PC-based (R) red, (O) orange, (G) green, (BG) blue-green, and (B) blue cells, adapted with permission from ref. 305, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (f) (i) Cross-sectional SEM image showing the structure of a solar cell device based on 2D ‘inverse-opal’ perovskite (IOP) photonic films. (ii) AFM topographic image of IOP photonic films. (iii) The variable-angle reflection spectra of IOP films with different micro-geometries, adapted with permission from ref. 306, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Bacteriorhodopsin (bR) related CTL application in PVs. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the bacteriorhodopsin (bR) in archaea Halobacterium salinarum, adapted with permission from an online resource.338 (ii) Unit cell structure and (iii) top view of multiple unit cells of the purple membrane (PM) containing bR trimer and lipid molecules, adapted with permission from online resources.339,340 (b) (i) Energy level diagram of charge carrier injection in the bR/TiO2 photoanode cell. (ii) SEM image of the TiO2 nanotube arrays with the inset showing the cross-sectional view, adapted with permission from ref. 313, Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) The equivalent energy level diagram of the photochemical reaction in a bR-integrated photovoltaic stacking system. (ii) Schematic illustration showing the structure of the bR/AuNPs heterogeneous multilayers, adapted with permission from ref. 320, Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (d) (i) Energy level diagram of a bR-integrated perovskite solar cell (BPSC). (ii) Schematic illustration of the architecture of the BPSC, adapted with permission from ref. 328, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

bR/TiO2	Electron transfer effect	
313

bR/Au	Coupled proton transportation	
320

bR/kpw	3D proton transfer	
341

bR/AAO	Proton transportation	
342

bR/Nafion	Plasmonic enhancement	
343

bR/QDs	Förster resonance energy transfer	
344

bR/CNTs	Electron–ion interaction	
345


 	Fig. 16  Porphyrins and their derivatives. (a) Schematic illustration of a (i) blood cell, (ii) molecular structure of hemoglobin and (iii) chemical structure of the heme group. Adapted with permission from online resources.348,349 (b) (i) Microscopic image of Plagiomnium affine laminazellen showing the (ii) chlorophyll in the cell, schematic illustration of the chloroplast structure, and (iii) chemical structure of chlorophyll. Adapted with permission from an online resource.350 (c) Images of foods rich in vitamin B12 (left) and chemical structure of cobalamin (right), adapted with permission from an online resource.351 (d) Image of eggshells of different avian lineages showing varying color and pigment patterns (left), and chemical structures of biliverdin and protoporphyrin XI (right), adapted with permission from ref. 352, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


Y2b	−5.25	2.04 × 10−4	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2a/m-TiO2a/PVKa/Pora/Au	16.6	
354

Y2A2b	−5.1	1.53 × 10−5	10.55
WT3b	−5.2	4.2 × 10−4	Cs0.05[(FA0.83MA0.17)PbI0.83Br0.17]0.95	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/Por/Au	19.44	
356

YR3b	−5.1	9.3 × 10−5	17.84
Y2b	−5.22	3.2 × 10−5	17.93
Zn-22b	−5.29	2.89 × 10−4	(FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/Por/Au	17.78	
355

Cu-22b	−5.37	3.06 × 10−4	15.36	

PZn-TPA-Ob	−5.31	3.51 × 10−4	MAPbI3	ITO/ZnO/PVK/Por/Au	12.4	
361

PZn-TPAb	−5.2	3.38 × 10−5	11.96
PZn-DPPA-Ob	−5.23	3.85 × 10−5	13.52
PZn-DPPAb	−5.36	4.1 × 10−4	14.11
PZn-TPAb	−5.2	3.3 × 10−5	MAPbI3	ITO/ZnO-sa/PVK/Por/Au	16.37	
362

PZn-2FTPAb	−5.4	3.9 × 10−5	18.85
PZn-3FTPAb	−5.29	3.5 × 10−5	17.71
Zn-Py	−5.35	NA	MAPbI3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2/PVK/Por/Au	17.82	
372

Co(II)-23/Co(III)-23	−5.3	NA	Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)(1−x)Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	FTO/c-TiO2/m-TiO2-SMa/PVK/Por/Au	20.02	
363

DPPEZnP-TSEH	−5.2	2.60 × 10−5	MAPbI3	ITO/SnO2/C60/PVK/BHJa (Por + PCBM)/MoO3/Ag	19.02	
367


 	Fig. 17  Chemical structure of some reported porphyrin-based hole transport materials. (a) (i) Y2 and (ii) Y2A2, adapted with permission from ref. 354, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) ZnP and CuP, adapted with permission from ref. 355, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (c) WT3 and YR3, adapted with permission from ref. 356, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) SGT-061, (ii) SGT-062 and (iii) SGT-063, adapted with permission from ref. 360, Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (e) PZn-TPA-O, PZn-TPA, PZn-DPPA-O and PZn-DPPA, adapted with permission from ref. 361, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) PZn-TPA, PZn-2FTPA and PZn-3FTPA, adapted with permission from ref. 362, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (g) RC-FB-Por and RC-Zn-Por, adapted with permission from ref. 373, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (h) ZnPy, adapted with permission from ref. 372, Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (i) Co(II)P and (ii) Co(III)P, adapted with permission from ref. 363, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  Molecular structures of some reported tetrapyrrole-based molecules, their hole mobility and the performance of PSCs. (a) (i) Chl-1 and (ii) Chl-2, adapted with permission from ref. 368, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) BChls, adapted with permission from ref. 369, Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) (i) ZnBChl, (ii) ZnChl and (iii) ZnPor, adapted with permission from ref. 370, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) SM01, (ii) SM09 and (iii) SM13, adapted with permission from ref. 371, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

Black rice	Anthocyanin	NA	
400

Kelp	Chlorophyll	NA
Capsicum	Carotenoid	NA
Mangosteen pericarp	α-Mangostin	0.92	
401

Mangosteen pericarp	Rutin	1.12

Hibiscus sabdariffa L.	Cyanidin-3-glycosides	0.37	
394


Beta vulgaris rubra
	Betalains	1.7	
402


Bixa orellana L.	Bixin	0.37	
403

Spinach	Neoxanthin	3.9	
404

Spinach	Violaxanthin	3.7
Spinach	Lutein	4
NA	β-Carotene	4.2
Calafate fruit	Delphinidin	NA	
405

Jaboticaba skin	Peonidin	NA
Gardenia fruit	Crocetin	0.56	
406

Red Sicilian orange “Moro”	Cyanin	0.66	
407

Eggplant skin	Nasunin	0.48

 	Fig. 19  Other natural conjugates. Molecular structures of (a) anthocyanins, adapted with permission from ref. 408, Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (b) Carotenoids, adapted with permission from an online resource.409 (c) Mangostin, adapted with permission from ref. 389, Copyright 2015 Springer. (d) Rutin, adapted with permission from ref. 392, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Anthocyanins, adapted with permission from ref. 395, Copyright 2013 Springer. (f) Betalains, adapted with permission from ref. 398, Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (g) (i) β-carotene, (ii) lutein, (iii) violaxanthin and (iv) Neoxanthin, adapted with permission from ref. 399, Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 20  Carbonized natural materials for charge transportation in perovskite solar cells. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of Aloe vera (AV) cross-linked carbon nanoparticles via an ancient Indian method. (ii) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell device based on the AV-carbon electrode. (iii) Comparison of the air stability of unencapsulated conventional spiro-MeOTAD and AV-carbon PSCs at a 35% relative humidity, adapted with permission from ref. 421, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) (i) HOMO level diagram of various bio-carbon electrodes. (ii) Stability tests of perovskite solar cells with various bio-carbon electrodes at a 30% relative humidity. (iii) Cross-sectional SEM image of a perovskite solar cell with the bio-carbon electrode, adapted with permission from ref. 422, Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  Biomimetic architecture of the perovskite layer. (a) Ashby plot of the specific values of strength and stiffness (or Young's modulus) for various natural and synthetic materials. (b) Young's modulus and fracture toughness of various biomaterials as well as synthetic materials. (c) The hierarchical structure of nacre, adapted with permission from ref. 424, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (d) Scheme showing the nacre-inspired wearable solar module and microstructure for the perovskite layer consisting of soluble PU (blue) and insoluble SBS (orange) matrices. (e) Photo image and measured I–V curve of the wearable solar module constructed with the nacre-inspired perovskite layer, adapted with permission from ref. 106, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Other promising structures. (a) The force–displacement relationship of various energy absorbers. The shaded area under the curve represents the energy absorbed. (b) The specific energy absorption (SEA) of bio-inspired sandwich structures, adapted with permission from ref. 450, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Honeycomb sandwich structures in turtle shell and beetle forewings, adapted with permission from online resources451–453 and ref. 438, Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (d) Bio-inspired sandwich structure mimicking the shrimp, adapted with permission from ref. 450, Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (e) Photo of a woodpecker, TEM image of the rhamphotheca of a woodpecker's beak showing its nanostructure, and schematic illustration of the structure, adapted with permission from ref. 454 and 443, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society and 2019 Springer. (f) A mussel inspired hierarchical shell, adapted with permission from ref. 448, Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. (g) Hierarchical structure of bone ranging from the microscale skeleton to nanoscale collagen and hydroxyapatite, adapted with permission from ref. 455 Copyright 2013 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 23  Lotus-inspired structures for self-cleaning. (a) (i) Image of a water droplet on a lotus leaf, adapted from an online resource.464 (ii) and (iii) SEM image of the lotus leaf surface, adapted with permission from ref. 456, Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (b) (i) Schematic illustration and SEM images of the PDMS hierarchical pyramid arrays. (ii) Schematic illustration of the self-cleaning effect on the hierarchical pyramid PDMS surface. (iii) Static contact angles (green line) and roll-off angles (blue line) of water on three different surfaces, adapted with permission from ref. 458, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the nanocone PDMS film attached on the top of a perovskite solar cell. (ii) Self-cleaning experiment of the perovskite solar cell devices with and without the nanocone PDMS film. (iii) Contact angles of a water droplet on the structured PDMS layer with different aspect ratios, adapted with permission from ref. 147, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) SEM image of the inverted micro-pyramidal structured PDMS layer (IMPS-PDMS). (ii) Sequential photographs of the water droplet cleaning behaviour of the IMPS-PDMS film with fluoro-octyltrichlorosilane (FOTS) treatment. (iii) Photographs of a water droplet on the surface of IMPS-PDMS samples before and after the FOTS surface modification, adapted with permission from ref. 462. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

Plants	Herbaceous plants	Wound closure	Seal-off and grow (production and maturation of callus parenchyma)	Cells swell, divide, and harden at the surface	
483

Secretions after injury	Latex, gum, or volatile oils are released to aid healing upon breach	Punctured cell induces a localized response	
467 and 468

Innate immune response	Pattern-recognition of microbe attack	Cellular response for specific cell response	
484

Woody plants	Bark (epidermis) and roots (rhizodermis) growth	Continual production of thick outer layers (tree bark and root bark) protecting inner layers	Continual replenishment of the hard, protective layers	
485–487

Animals	Vertebrates	Central nervous system (CNS) injury response	Glial cells in the extracellular matrix quickly form scar tissue to maintain homeostasis	Clearing of debris and rapid system stabilization	
488 and 489

Peripheral nervous system (PNS) injury	Schwann cells clear the area around the axons and allow repair	Clearing of debris and rapid system stabilization	
488 and 489

Vertebrate (hard tissue)	Bone break	Cellular response: inflammation, cartilage callus formation, lamellar bone generation and remodelling	A series of cellular activities (bone side stabilization, remodelling, mineralization, etc.)	
474

Vertebrate (soft tissue)	Wound	Cellular clotting, inflammation, proliferation, and remodelling	Cellular signalling from short-term clotting to long-term cell remodelling	
490

Stem cell response	Stem cells replicate and differentiate into target cells for new tissue growth	Adapted healing by tissue regrowth	
491 and 492

Molting (shedding) and replenishment	Replacing old and dead tissue to accommodate new growth (reptiles) or seasonally (birds)	Shedding of the outermost layer (skin, feathers, hair)	
493 and 494

Invertebrate (hard tissue)	Wound	(Insect's) endocuticle secretion from the cellular epidermis	Continual growth of the exoskeleton from the soft inner layer	
495

Exoskeleton growth and ecdysis	The organism outgrows its current exoskeleton	Periodic replacement of the newly grown exoskeleton	
496

Invertebrate (soft tissue)	Wound	Clotting (plasma protein reactions, blood cell aggregation, or cell population increase) and cellular healing	Clotting through the dense hemocyte network, hemocyte/plasma coagulation, cell reproduction	
497


 	Fig. 24  Natural examples of self-healing. (a and b) Several self-healing and defence mechanisms in herbaceous and woody plants: (a) wound closure and growth and (b) secretion cells, adapted with permission from ref. 466 and 498–500, Copyright 2005 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic illustration showing the healing process in vertebrate hard tissue, adapted with permission from ref. 501, Copyright 2011 Springer Nature. (d) (i) Photograph showing the ecdysis/molting behavior of various animals, credits to multiple online sources.502–504 (e) SEM image showing the poor and defective surface of a MAPbI3 crystal. Mechanical exfoliation of top layers for obtaining a fresh surface is a commonly used method in materials research. (f) Schematic illustration showing the protection mechanism in species at different length scales: the cell wall protects the cell of the plant, skin epidermis protects the inner tissues, the outer skeleton of insects provides protection against harsh environmental stimuli, and marine collagens protect the marine creatures. In comparison, in the research of perovskite solar cells, different protection strategies have been proposed: a core–shell structure protects the core lattice, an ultrathin organic coating layer on the grain protects the core crystal of the perovskite, and a 2D capping layer can protect the 3D bulk layer underneath. Pictures are adapted with permission from online resources503,505 and from ref. 481, 506 and 507, Copyright 2020 Elsevier, 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

2010	Plants	Waxy surfaces of plants (lotus)	Super-hydrophobicity by regenerating the epicuticular wax layer	Self-healing superhydrophobic coatings	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
508

2010	Latex-bearing plants	Latex discharge and latex coagulation	Self-healing elastomers for dampers	Top-down approach	
469–471, 473 and 509

2011	
Nepenthes pitcher plants	Liquid-repellent microtextured surfaces with a stable air–liquid interface	Self-healing, slippery, liquid-infused porous surface(s)	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
475

2011	Stems of twining liana	Sealing cells squeezing into tissue fissures	Self-healing closed cell polyurethane foam coating for pneumatic systems	Top-down approach	
510–515

2016	Surface of plant leaves (lotus) and Nepenthes pitcher plants	Wax repair of leaves and slippery surfaces of pitfall traps	Self-repair slippery liquid-infused porous surfaces	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
516

2018	Follicles of the plant genus Banksia	Waxes at the suture of the two valves protecting the seed seal up microfissures	Wood platelets sealed by carnauba	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
517 and 518

2018	Leaves of D. cooperi	Release of stored elastic energy	Phase-separated polymers with a built-in shape-memory effect leading to self-healing	Bottom-up approach	
519–522

2013	Animals	Byssal threads of marine mussels	Metal coordination-based cross-linking of proteins	Self-healing, multi-pH-responsive hydrogel	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
523–526

2014	Byssal threads of marine mussels	Self-assembly	Wet self-mending polymers, surface-functionalized with catechol	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
527

2015	Architecture of nacre	Self-assembly	Self-healing polymers with high dynamics	Bioinspiration	
528

2016	Architecture of nacre	Sacrificial bonds in the organic layer	Autonomous self-healing layers of supramolecular polymers	Bioinspiration	
529

2017	Architecture of nacre	Hierarchical structure	Heat-triggered composites releasing sealant	Bioinspiration	
530

2005	Humans	Hemostasis and bone healing	Delivery and reaction of healing agents	“Bleeding composites” for aerospace applications	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
531–536

2013	Hemostasis of the spongious bone	Delivery and reaction of healing agents in a porous concrete core	Self-sealing and self-healing concrete	Top-down approach	
537

2018	Epidermis of human skin	Hierarchically stratified structure of a soft inner and a hard-outer material layer	Hierarchical coating system of hybrid multilayers with synergetic self-healing function	Top-down approach or problem-driven BID	
538

2015	Living creature in general	Living tissues with self-regulated release systems of liquid	Continuous, dynamic, liquid exchange between shell-less droplets, matrix and surface	Self-healing droplet-embedded gel material	Bioinspiration	
539


 	Fig. 25  Self-healing perovskite solar cell against environmental degradation. (a) (i) Photographs of perovskite films with and without PEG showing color change evolution after water-spraying. (ii) Schematic illustration of the PEG scaffold structured perovskite solar cell (PPSC). (iii) J–V curves of the PPSC before and after water spray showing the self-healing feature, adapted with permission from ref. 557, Copyright 2016 Springer. (b) (i) Schematic illustration and cross-sectional SEM image showing an inverted-structure perovskite solar cell. (ii) Normalized solar-cell parameters (VOC, JSC, FF) as a function of the proton dose, ϕ. (iii) Time dependence of the normalized solar-cell parameters after termination of the proton irradiation for a proton-irradiated device (red circles) and for a reference solar cell (black dot), adapted with permission from ref. 564, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the biasing experiment. (ii) Schematic diagrams of the evolution of the ion distribution within the perovskite layer under solar cell working conditions, adapted wither permission from ref. 567, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) (i) Schematic illustration of the planar structured perovskite solar cell device. (ii) Time evolution of JSC under constant illumination and after resting the device in the dark. (iii) Schematic diagrams of the proposed photocurrent degradation and self-healing mechanism, adapted with permission from ref. 564, Copyright 2016 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 26  Self-quarantine strategies in PSCs. (a) Schematic illustration showing the different encapsulation methods (left) and the experimental procedure to assess the quantity of the toxic Pb leaked from a perovskite solar module that is damaged due to an external impact (for example, hail) (right). (b) and (c) Perovskite solar modules using different encapsulation methods (b) before and (c) after impact and water dripping test, adapted with permission from ref. 574, Copyright 2019 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 27  Bio-additives in perovskite solar cells. (a) (i) Molecular structure of caffeine. (ii) Cross-sectional SEM image of the perovskite solar cell. (iii) Thermal stability test under 85 °C continuous annealing and photovoltaic performance of the caffeine-incorporated solar cell, adapted with permission from ref. 591, Copyright 2019 Elsevier. (b) (i) Schematic illustration showing the interaction between MA+ and N-719. (ii) Photograph showing the degradation transformation process of the perovskite film with and without the N-719 additive. (iii) Stability test of the perovskite solar cell at a 60% relative humidity, adapted with permission from ref. 592, Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) (i) Schematic illustration showing the interaction between DNA and the perovskite. (ii) Contact angle of a water droplet on the pristine and DNA-modified perovskites. (iii) Stability test of the perovskite solar cell with and without DNA modification at a relative humidity of 75%, adapted with permission from ref. 282, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (d) (i) Molecular structure of artemisinin (ART). (ii) Schematic and cross-sectional SEM image showing the bilayer-structured perovskite solar cell induced by ART. (iii) Stability test of pristine and ART-modified perovskite solar cells at a relative humidity of 50%, adapted with permission from ref. 481, Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 28  Summary of bio-additives in different classes of photovoltaic devices: (1&2) Hou et al. ref. 282, (3) Wang et al., ref. 591, (4) Das et al., ref. 328, (5) Yusoff et al., ref. 281, (6) Deng et al., ref. 596, (7) Dajar et al., ref. 279, (8) Nie et al., ref. 597, (9) Toschi et al., ref. 597, (10 & 11) Wang et al., ref. 404, (12) Henning et al., ref. 598, (13) Calogero et al., ref. 402, and (14) Kumara et al., ref. 599.	 

 	Fig. 29  Solar tracking. (a) Schematic illustration showing concept of the artificial phototropism and the sunflower-like biomimetic omnidirectional tracker, adapted with permission from ref. 607, Copyright 2019 Springer. (b) Schematic illustration of the solar hour angle which is controlled by the daily rotation of the Earth, adapted from an online resource.608 (c) Photograph of a sunflower (left), adapted from an online resource,609 and a sunflower-shaped solar panel (right), adapted from an online resource.610	 

 	Fig. 30  Scaffold for individual micro-cell. (a) (i) Structure of a compound eye, adapted from an online resource ref. 637. (ii) Photograph of the compound eye of a fly, adapted with permission from ref. 435. (iii) Image of an object formed in the compound eye, adapted from an online resource ref. 638. (b) Schematic illustration of the “compound” perovskite solar cell design inspired by the compound eye concept, adapted with permission from ref. 435, Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) (i) Schematic illustration of the human eye structure. (ii) Confocal microscope image of rod and cone photoreceptors in a human retina, adapted from an online resource ref. 639. (iii) Illustration of the structure of cone and rod photoreceptors in the human retina, adapted with permission from ref. 640, Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (d) Schematic illustration and microstructure of the artificial retina based on the perovskite nanowire, which is mounted on a concavely hemispherical artificial eye, adapted with permission from ref. 636, Copyright 2020 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 31  Bio-inspired manufacturing and system level management. (a) (i) Schematic illustration of the electrically assisted 3D-printing equipment. (ii) Illustration of the bottom-up projection-based stereolithography process, adapted with permission from ref. 664, Copyright 2019 AAAS. (b) Illustration of the concept internet of energy (IoE).	 

 	Fig. 32  Challenge and promise. (a) Schematic showing the drawbacks of PSCs hindering its application as MPS. (b) Schematic showing the adoption of a bio-inspired strategy to realize perovskite solar cell MPS.	 
Spiro-MeOTAD	2,2′,7,7′-Tetrakis[N,N-di(4-methoxyphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene]
A	Adenine
AM	Air mass
AZO	Aluminum zinc oxide
AI	Artificial intelligence
ALD	Atomic layer deposition
bR	Bacteriorhodopsin
BSSC	Bio-sensitized solar cell
BHJ	Bulk heterojunction
CFRP	Carbon fibre reinforced plastic
CNT	Carbon nanotube
MAPbI3	CH3NH3PbI3
CTL	Charge transfer layer
CT	Charge transport
CVD	Chemical vapor deposition
CBM	Conduction band minimum
C	Cytosine
DFT	Density functional theory
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
DPPA	Diphenyl-2-pyridylamine
DSSC	Dye-sensitized solar cell
ETL	Electron transporting layer
FOV	Field of view
FF	Fill factor
FTPA	Fluorinated triphenylamine
FTO	Fluorine-doped tin oxide
FOTS	Fluoro-octyltrichlorosilane
F–D	Force–displacement
FRET	Förster resonance energy transfer
Ds	Fractal dimension
GCL	Ganglion cell layer
GLAD	Glancing angle deposition

T
g
	Glass transition temperature
GBs	Grain boundaries
G	Guanine
CTMA	Hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride
HMG	Hierarchical-metal-grids
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
HTL	Hole transporting layer
ITO	Indium tin oxide
INL	Inner nuclear layer
IoE	Internet of energy
IoT	Internet of things
IO	Inverse-opal
IOP	Inverse-opal perovskite
IMPS	Inverted micro-pyramidal structured
LDL	Large-diameter-long
LVAs	Large-volume amines
LCOE	Levelized cost of energy
LED	Light-emitting diode
LM	Liquid metal
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
MLLV	
Magnolia liliiflora leaf vein
MAI	Methylammonium iodide
MPS	Mobile power source
MWCNT	Multi-walled CNT
NP	Nanoparticle
NR	Nanorod
NW	Nanowire
OEL	Oblique-incidence energy-density loss
VOC	Open-circuit voltage
OPV	Organic photovoltaic
ONL	Outer nuclear layer
PSC	Perovskite solar cell
PCBM	Phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester
PL	Photoluminescence
PC	Photonic crystal
PV	Photovoltaic
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene-sulfonate)
P3HT	Poly(3-hexylthiophene)
PFM	Poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester)
SBS	Poly(styrene-co-butadiene)
PDMS	Polydimethylsiloxane
PEG	Polyethylene glycol
PEN	Polyethylene naphthalate
PET	Polyethylene terephthalate
PI	Polyimide
PU	Polyurethane
PAM	Porous aluminium oxide membrane
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
PM	Purple membrane
QDSC	Quantum dot solar cell
QF	Quasi-fractal
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy

J
SC
	Short-circuit current density

R
sh
	Shunt resistance
SWNT	Single-walled carbon nanotube
SDS	Small-diameter-short
SEA	Specific energy absorption
T	Thymine
TA	Transient absorption
TMO	Transition metal oxide
TCE	Transparent conductive electrode
TCO	Transparent conductive oxide
UAV	Unmanned aerial vehicle
VBM	Valance band maximum
WAW	WO3/Ag/WO3
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
