Material and configuration design strategies towards flexible and wearable power supply devices: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11260G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11260G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8950-8965Material and configuration design strategies towards flexible and wearable power supply devices: a review

        
          
            Jiyuan 
            Gao
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kezheng 
            Shang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yichun 
            Ding
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Zhenhai 
            Wen
          
          
        
      *ab
aCAS Key Laboratory of Design and Assembly of Functional Nanostructures, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Nanomaterials, Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Fuzhou 350002, China. E-mail: ycding@fjirsm.ac.cn; wen@fjirsm.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      18th November 2020
    , Accepted 22nd February 2021First published on 2nd March 2021AbstractFlexible and wearable sensors have shown great potential in tremendous applications such as human health monitoring, smart robots, and human–machine interfaces, yet the lack of suitable flexible power supply devices remains a great challenge hindering their practical applications. To this end, it is essential to develop novel flexible power supply devices that are highly flexible, lightweight, miniaturized, stable, and adaptable for the integration of a self-powered wearable system. Synthesizing intrinsically flexible materials and providing rigid materials good flexibility by a rational architectural design represent the most straightforward approaches to prepare flexible electrode and electrolyte materials, which lay the foundation for the assembly of flexible power devices. Besides, device configuration design and system integration are also essential steps to pave the way for flexible power devices towards real wearable applications. Herein, the main fabrication strategies including material synthesis, architecture design, device configuration design, and system integration for fabricating flexible power devices are overviewed. In addition, the existing challenges and future directions for the development of flexible power supply devices towards self-powered wearable systems will be discussed.Jiyuan GaoJiyuan Gao received his B.S. degree (2019) in Applied Chemistry from Peking University. He is currently pursuing his masters degree at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interest focuses on flexible electrochemical devices.Yichun DingYichun Ding received his PhD degree in Biomedical Engineering from South Dakota School of Mines & Technology (USA) in 2018. He then joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences as an associate professor. His research mainly focuses on high-performance polymers, electrospinning and electrospun nanofibers, flexible and wearable electronics, and electrochemical devices (battery, electrolysis, etc.).Zhenhai WenZhenhai Wen received his M.Sc. from the Beijing University of Technology in 2004 and PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China in 2008. He then worked as a lecturer at Nanchang Hangkong University. In 2009, he worked at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Germany as a Humboldt postdoctoral research scholar and then moved to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee as a postdoctoral researcher in 2010. He joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2015. Research topics in his group mainly include the design and synthesis of functional nanostructures and exploration of their applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems. He has published around 180 peer-reviewed articles with over 14000 citations, and has been selected as Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researchers in 2018 and 2019 by Clarivate Analytics.
1. Introduction
Wearable sensors have attracted considerable attention due to their potential applications in human health monitoring, smart robots, human–machine interaction, etc.1–5 Among them, human health monitoring appears to be the most promising field since smart wearable sensors can provide timely, continuous, and non-invasive monitoring of human health conditions, for example, the detection of various physical and physiological signals such as pressure,6–8 motion,9–11 pulse,12 temperature,13,14 and biomarkers in sweat and blood related to diseases.15,16 Besides, nowadays, with the rapid development of artificial intelligence (AI) and “Internet of Things (IoTs)”, the information collected from wearable sensors can be transmitted to other devices such as mobile phones and hospital data systems in real-time, thus providing the feasibility to realize accurate personal health management, remote diagnosis, and precision medicine.17,18 However, an integrated wearable system requires not only wearable sensors, but also other components including power supply devices, data processing units, data transmission units, displays, etc.19 The power supply device is the key component that guarantees a continuous, uninterrupted, and long-term operation, which is required to have high flexibility, high energy density, long time durability, and high safety for wearable purpose. However, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) that are widely used in current consumer electronics cannot meet these demands due to their rigid package, suboptimal cycle stability, and possible safety issues.20,21 Therefore, great challenges have to be encountered in the development of flexible power supply devices to fulfil the demand for self-powered wearable sensors.
In recent years, researchers have made tremendous efforts towards the development of novel high-performance flexible power supply devices (e.g., batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, solar cells, and nanogenerators) and self-powered integrated systems.22–24 For instance, a textile-based power device by integrating solar cells and supercapacitors can simultaneously harvest and store solar energy for a self-powering system.25 However, despite the significant advances in flexible power supply devices, some challenges still remain in the implementation of these power devices for integrated wearable systems. First, the power supply devices need high flexibility and robust mechanical strength for wearable systems to adapt to the curved human body and tolerate severe deformations (e.g., bend, stretch, and twist) in daily life. Second, excellent and stable electrochemical performance is necessary in order to operate under different conditions and run for long-term situations. Third, the structure and configuration of power supply devices need to be highly compact, small, ultrathin, and light so that they can be readily integrated with other units in the limited space in a miniaturized device system. Finally, the manufacturing processes for flexible power supply devices should be simple, fast, and controllable in order to achieve large-scale and low-cost production.26–31 To address these challenges, various strategies have been proposed in terms of material preparation and device configuration design. In particular, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the material preparation strategy includes (1) synthesis of intrinsically flexible materials and (2) introduction of flexibility by structural design, while the device configuration strategy includes (3) device configuration design of power supply devices and (4) system integration layout.
 Fig. 1  An overview of the strategies for development of flexible power supply devices. (1) Material synthesis: conductive polymers. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH; carbon materials. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH; gel electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (2) Structural design: wavy structure. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry; winding or spring structure. Reproduced with permission.36,37 Copyright 2017, Elsevier and American Chemical Society; origami/kirigami-inspired structure. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (3) Device configuration: thin-film device. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, Elsevier; fiber-shaped device. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH; micro device. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (4) System integration: planar structure. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH; smart watch. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The scope of this review is to summarize the main strategies developed for making flexible power devices towards self-powered wearable devices. We first introduce material design strategies including the preparation of intrinsically flexible materials and endowing flexibility by structural design. Then, we highlight the configuration design strategies for making flexible power supply devices, focusing on the geometrical design to achieve high flexibility of power devices and some system integration methods to fabricate self-powered wearable devices. Finally, we summarize the existing challenges and future perspectives for the development of flexible power supply devices for self-powered integrated wearable systems.
2. Flexible material design strategies
The preparation of flexible materials is the most straightforward and effective way to develop flexible power devices. The main strategies usually employed to prepare flexible materials can be classified into two categories: (1) fabrication of intrinsically flexible materials (e.g., polymers, carbon-based materials, and gel materials) as the active components to assemble power supply devices; (2) construction of special architectures through rational structural design (e.g., waving, bulking, winding, spring, origami, and kirigami) to endow material flexibility.
2.1. Preparation of intrinsically flexible materials

2.1.1. Conducting polymer materials. 
Conducting polymers are inherently flexible, lightweight, and conductive, thereby they have been widely used to develop flexible energy storage and conversion devices. Polypyrrole (PPy), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and polyaniline (PANi) are representative conducting polymers,32,44–48 which not only possess high conductivity but also can be readily synthesized. Therefore, they are usually prepared as freestanding electrode materials for flexible power devices. For example, Li et al.49 synthesized a PANi-based electrode with an ordered nanotube array structure through a facile electrodeposition process to fabricate flexible supercapacitors (SCs) (Fig. 2a). The resulting supercapacitor exhibited an energy density of 24.31 mW h cm−3 due to the nanotube array structure, and demonstrated excellent mechanical stability with capacitance loss less than 10% when bending at 180°. Similarly, Liu et al.50 fabricated a flexible aqueous Zn-ion battery via electrodeposition of Zn metal and PANi on a filter paper (Fig. 2b). The paper substrate offers excellent flexibility to the battery thus it can be bent, twisted, and folded. Benefiting from the nanostructured PANi cathode that is conducive for charge transfer and ion diffusion, the battery showed a high energy density of 175 mW h g−1 and outstanding cycle stability with negligible capacitance loss after 1000 cycles at 8 A g−1. Besides, Qiu et al.51 fabricated a wearable triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) using a flexible PANi-coated conductive fabric electrode prepared by in situ polymerization of PANi on ordinary fabrics. The TENG showed high flexibility thus it can be twisted by 180° and crumpled without any breakage (Fig. 2c), and presented excellent electrical performance with the short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage reaching 200 μA and 1000 V, respectively. A TENG device with an effective area of 10 × 10 cm−2 can light up approximately 1000 LEDs. Moreover, the TENG can be used as a self-powered sensor for monitoring human respiration (Fig. 2d), demonstrating its potential applications in some hospital cases for assisting serious patients (Fig. 2e).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the PANi nanotube array and the flexible SCs. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Optical photograph of a flexible aqueous Zn-ion battery. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Photos demonstrating the flexibility of TENG; (d) the corresponding output current of respiratory monitoring; (e) illustration of a wearable TENG for intensive care application. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Schematic of the fabrication process of PANi/SWCNT free-standing film; (g) photographs of the flexible supercapacitor with the PANI/SWCNT film electrode and its compact configuration. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h) SEM images of PDMS/PPy/GF; (i) optical image of the bent supercapacitor and (j) the integrated sensor system on a deformable substrate; (k) strain–response curve of the self-powered sensor system. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 
The mechanical strength and electrochemical performance of conducting polymers can be further improved by incorporating other materials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene, metal oxides, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), and MXene.52–57 For example, Liu et al.58 prepared a composite film of polyaniline/single-walled carbon nanotubes (PANi/SWCNTs) by a facile solution deposition method (Fig. 2f). The freestanding PANi/SWCNT electrode showed a high capacitance of 446 F g−1 and outstanding cycling stability with capacitance retention of 98% over 13000 cycles, which could be attributed to the formation of efficient conductive networks between PANi molecular chains and SWCNTs, which are beneficial for ion diffusion and fast redox reaction. Besides, the freestanding PANi/SWCNT electrode endowed the final supercapacitor with a compact configuration with a small thickness of 145 μm, providing the supercapacitor good mechanical stability and flexibility that can be bent in an arbitrary direction while retaining over 94% of its original capacitance (Fig. 2g). Recently, Park and colleagues42 reported a multifunctional PPy/graphene composite by depositing PPy on a porous graphene foam (GF) (Fig. 2h). The porous structure not only provided good flexibility but also enabled better contact between electrodes and electrolytes for supercapacitors. A flexible supercapacitor based on the PPy/GF electrodes exhibited an areal capacitance of 89.6 mF cm−2, a high mechanical stability with less than 4.2% capacitance change under pressure, and good flexibility such that it can be bent at various radii (Fig. 2i). In addition, on the basis of change in resistance under deformation, a piezoresistive pressure sensor was also assembled by utilizing the PPy/GF foam. Finally, they fabricated a self-powered sensor by integrating the pressure sensors and supercapacitors on a deformable substrate, which was capable of real-time monitoring human hand movements (Fig. 2j and k).


2.1.2 Carbon-based materials. 
Carbon-based materials are considered to be promising flexible materials for development of flexible power supply devices because they can serve either as an active component or as a conductive substrate.33 Among various carbon-based materials, nano-carbon materials such as CNTs and graphene have been extensively studied in developing flexible electrochemical power devices due to their high electrical conductivity, good electrochemical stability, and large specific surface area.59–61 However, on the one hand, these nano-carbon materials are macroscopically discontinuous, which usually requires the use of polymer binders to prepare a freestanding film. On the other hand, the electrochemical performance of pristine carbon materials is relatively poor, thus greatly hindering their practical applications.62–64 Researchers have made great efforts to enhance the electrochemical performance of carbon nanomaterials, for example, by doping heteroatoms and/or making composites by introducing other components.65–69 For instance, Lu et al.70 prepared a continuous CNT-based nitrogen-doped graphitic carbon nitride polyhedron (GCNP) by direct pyrolysis of an in situ synthesized CNTs/ZIF-8 composite (Fig. 3a). Owing to the large specific surface area (920 m2 g−1) and high nitrogen-doping level (17.82%), the GCNP electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 426 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and excellent stability over 10000 cycles. Besides, a flexible supercapacitor prepared by using the GCNP delivered a high energy density of 59.40 W h kg−1, and excellent flexibility and stability with capacitance retention of 94.8% after 500 bending cycles (Fig. 3b). In another example, Ma et al.71 developed a flexible hierarchical three-dimensional (3D) electrode (MnO@C-rGO) through vacuum-assisted layer-by-layer assembly of 1D polydopamine coated MnO2 nanowires (MnO2@PDA NWs) and 2D graphene oxide nanosheets (GO NSs). As illustrated in Fig. 3c, the MnO2 NWs were embedded in reduced GO (rGO) nanosheets, which resulted in the formation of the hierarchical structure and meanwhile produced abundant voids. The hierarchical structure and voids can provide continuous networks and diffusion paths for electron and ion transport and buffer the volume change of the electrode during charge/discharge processes. The electrode demonstrated excellent flexibility and outstanding performance with a highly reversible capacity of 920 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and excellent rate capability of 396 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 (Fig. 3d). A flexible Li-ion battery using the MnO@C-rGO electrode delivered a high capacity of 2.6 mA h g−1 at 0.5 mA cm−2 and excellent mechanical stability with 90% capacitive retention after bending for 100 cycles.
 Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of GCNP-800; (b) capacitance retention of the supercapacitor after 500 bending cycles. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic of the preparation of the MnO@C-rGO electrode; (d) photographs of the flexible MnO@C-rGO electrode at different deformation statuses. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) SEM image of porous carbon; (f) CV curves for the flexible supercapacitor subjected to different bending degrees. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Photos of a flexible supercapacitor in different bending degrees and (h) cutting test. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, biomass-derived porous carbon has received widespread attention due to the advantages of low cost, eco-friendly nature, and easy accessibility.72–74 Moreover, biomass-derived carbons are usually intrinsically doped by heteroatoms originating from the complex nature. For example, Wang et al.75 fabricated a nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) co-doped porous carbon from the pyrolysis of silkworm cocoon (Fig. 3e). The porous carbon delivered a high areal capacitance of 2.44 F cm−2 due to the abundant active sites and large surface area provided by heteroatoms and the porous structure. A flexible electrode was prepared by casting the porous carbon onto a CNT cloth to assemble a flexible supercapacitor, which showed a high energy density of 19.6 W h kg−1. The supercapacitor displayed such high flexibility that the capacitance almost did not change when bending at arbitrary angles (Fig. 3f).
Carbon cloth is a promising substrate to prepare flexible electrodes due to its high electrical conductivity and excellent flexibility.76–79 Various materials such as MOFs,80 MXene,81 conducting polymers,82 transition metal oxides,83,84 chalcogenides,85 and hydroxides86,87 have been anchored on the surface of carbon cloth to develop flexible power supply devices. For instance, Ma et al.88 developed a freestanding 3D electrode by immobilizing Co3O4@PPy nanorod bundle arrays on carbon fiber cloth (CFC) and fabricated a flexible and tailorable solid-state supercapacitor based on the electrode. Since all components of the supercapacitor (i.e., the freestanding CFC electrode and the polymer gel electrolyte) are flexible (Fig. 3g), the supercapacitor can be easily bent into various angles and meanwhile it exhibited a high areal capacitance of 2.47 F cm−2 benefiting from the structure and synergetic contribution of Co3O4/PPy composites. More importantly, the supercapacitor exhibited outstanding tailorable characteristics and therefore could be cut into any shape while retaining the performance (Fig. 3h).


2.1.3 Gel materials. 
A flexible electrolyte is an essential part of flexible electrochemical power devices, and, currently, gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) are commonly used. GPEs are quasi-solid-state electrolytes consisting of polymer molecules and a liquid electrolyte, in which the polymer gives rise to the formation of 3D cross-linked networks while the liquid electrolytes are trapped in the networks.89 Compared with liquid and solid-state electrolytes, GPEs are stable and have higher ionic conductivity. More importantly, the 3D polymeric networks provide GPEs good flexibility and even high stretchability.90–94 Due to these advantages, GPEs have been prepared from various polymers such as PVA, PMMA, PAA, PAM, PVDF and polyionic liquid for flexible energy storage devices.34,95–101 For example, Li et al.102 synthesized a PAM hydrogel that can be stretched up to 3000% strain (Fig. 4a). A highly stretchable yarn zinc-ion battery (ZIB) was fabricated by using the PAM hydrogel as the electrolyte, which can be stretched up to 300% strain (Fig. 4b). Besides, the ZIB delivered a high specific capacity (302.1 mA h g−1) and outstanding stability that can withstand various harsh conditions such as bending, knotting, twisting, stretching and even immersing in water (Fig. 4b and c). The GPE can not only provide excellent flexibility and stretchability for flexible energy devices, but also can improve the safety of the device due to the quasi-solid-state characteristics of GPE that can prevent the leakage of liquid electrolytes, which is important for practical wearable application. In another research, Liu and co-workers developed a quasi-solid-state lithium-ion battery (LIB) based on carbon cloth based electrodes and a PVA–LiNO3 GPE (Fig. 4d).103 These flexible components enabled the LIB outstanding flexibility that can sustain various deformations including bending, squeezing, twisting, and folding. In addition, due to the solid-state design, the LIB can be cut into any desired shape or even punched penetrative holes, revealing excellent safety for wearable applications (Fig. 4e). In addition to good mechanical flexibility and safety, GPEs can also possess additional features such as self-healability, biocompatibility, and transparency, thus providing the feasibility to make smart flexible power supply devices.104–108 For instance, Jin et al.109 synthesized a cross-linked methacrylated graphene oxide (MGO)/PAA electrolyte, which not only exhibited a high ionic conductivity (7.16 S m−1) but also high stretchability (950% strain) and self-healing function. A self-healing supercapacitor was thus fabricated based on the MGO/PAA gel electrolyte, which showed a specific capacitance of 56 F g−1 at the initial state and retained 80% of it after three break/heal cycles.
 Fig. 4  (a) Relaxed and elongated state of a cross-linked PAM hydrogel; (b) dependence of capacity retention on cycle numbers with a strain of 300%; (c) capacity retention test of the yarn ZIB for 12 h underwater. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the flexible LIB; (e) drilling and cutting test of the flexible LIB. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the anisotropic PVA/PANi hydrogel and photograph of the hydrogel under stretching and compression. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (g) Photographs of the TENG under various deformations and sustainably lighting 15 LEDs. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, gel polymers have also developed as electrodes for flexible devices due to their good flexibility and 3D network structure that can offer better contact between electrodes and electrolytes.110–112 Gel-based electrodes can be synthesized by incorporating active materials and conductive materials into polymer gels.113–116 For example, Li et al.117 synthesized a PVA/PANi hybrid hydrogel as an electrode for flexible supercapacitors. As shown in Fig. 4f, the hybrid hydrogel consists of two cross-linked polymer networks, i.e., PVA and PANi networks, enabling high flexibility (300% elongation and 60% compression) of the electrode. A supercapacitor based on the PVA/PANi hydrogel electrodes showed high specific capacitance (650 mF cm−2), large energy density (27.5 W h kg−1), and excellent capacitance retention (over 85%) under various deformations (e.g., stretching, compressing, and bending). Recently, Guan and co-workers reported a hydrogel-based triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) consisting of silicone rubber and PVA/agarose hydrogel containing polydopamine (PDA) and CNTs.118 The TENG can be folded, stretched, and twisted, and can be attached to the elbow as a soft energy device to harvest human motion energies (Fig. 4g).
However, gel materials still suffer from some limitations. For example, the commonly used polymers (or monomers for the synthesis of polymers) for GPEs (e.g., PAM, PAA) are toxic or corrosive.119 Hence, nontoxic and biocompatible materials, such as cellulose and polysaccharides, should be explored in the design of novel gel electrolytes. Besides, the physical properties of GPEs might limit the electrochemical performance, for example, some problems of narrow working temperature range, variable conductivity caused by water evaporation, and water loss are inevitable.31,120 In addition, the interface interaction between GPEs and electrodes is usually weak, and structural recoverability under large deformation is poor, which could lead to the failure of the device. Therefore, the improvement of mechanical strength and enhancement in the interaction between GPEs and electrodes should also receive more attention.


2.1.4 Packing materials. 
Packing materials play an important role in protecting the integrity of devices.20 However, compared with other components, the packing material is the least-studied component of flexible devices.121 Usually, the flexible devices are packed with some polymer materials that have high mechanical flexibility/stretchability but low air and water permeability, such as aluminum–plastic films, thermo-shrinkable tubes, and silicon-based rubber (e.g., PDMS, Ecoflex).122–124 Although these packing materials can provide excellent mechanical performance for flexible devices, considering the integration with other devices, the packing materials should have other properties such as transparency, non-toxicity, biocompatibility and be tailorable to be compatible with other components. For example, Wang's group developed a multi-functional packing material by combining silicone rubber with Ag nanowires. The material not only acts as a packing material to protect the devices, but also as an electrode for the TENG.125 In addition, the delamination caused by repeated stretching and bending of devices encapsulated with tape or rubbles becomes a major concern under physical deformation. Therefore, robust, durable, and stable packaging materials and techniques are desired for reliable flexible devices. The emerging additive manufacture technology (3D printing) provides a good option to design flexible devices with good structural integrity.

2.2 Structural design of electrode materials
Intrinsically flexible polymeric materials provide sufficient options to prepare flexible devices, while the high-performance active materials for electrochemical devices are usually mechanically rigid inorganics such as metals, metal oxides, and nanomaterials. Coating these active materials on a flexible substrate may successfully yield a freestanding electrode, but they usually suffer from critical issues such as creaking, braking, and peeling off under deformations if they are directly coated on a flat and smooth substrate. To achieve robust flexibility and/or stretchability on these inorganic materials, appropriate geometrical design strategies have been reported, such as the creation of wavy, wrinkled, crumpled, and spring structures, as well as “origami” and “kirigami” inspired structures. These geometrically designed structures can withstand deformations due to the effective relaxation of external changes through geometrical transformation like a spiral spring.

2.2.1 Wave-shaped design. 
A wavy or wrinkled structure is a 2D configuration that can be generated from a buckling process involving the transfer of rigid materials onto a pre-stretched elastomeric substrate. In a typical fabrication process, a flexible elastic substrate is pre-stretched to a certain strain, then a solution/ink of active materials is deposited on the surface followed by strain release.36,126–128 The wavy structure has been widely utilized in designing stretchable electrodes due to its simplicity of fabrication and capability of achieving high stretchability.129,130Fig. 5a illustrates a representative process for the fabrication of stretchable conductive electrodes with a wavy structure.35 In particular, PEDOT and carbon nanotube sheets (CNS) were deposited on a biaxially pre-stretched rubber film substrate, and then a wrinkled structure was formed after releasing (Fig. 5b). A supercapacitor based on this stretchable electrode delivered a high stretchability with up to 600% biaxial strain and excellent cycle stability at the biaxial strain of 600% for 2000 cycles (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process and (b) SEM image of the PEDOT/CNS hybrid nanomembrane; (c) cycling stability of the stretchable supercapacitor at biaxial strain of 600%. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of a superelastic fiber-based supercapacitor; (e) photos of the extraordinary elasticity of the supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the double helix structure of the supercapacitor and photographs of the supercapacitor at different strains. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) and (h) Schematic of the fabrication of a stretchable battery and normalized capacities of the stretchable battery stretched 100 times at a strain of 100%. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 


2.2.2 Winding/spring shaped design. 
Highly stretchable electrodes can be achieved by constructing a winding or coil spring-like structure, which behaves like a spiral spring. The winding/spring structural design has been widely used in flexible fiber-shape supercapacitors to achieve high stretchability.37,129,131,132 By adopting a spring structural design, Wallace et al.133 fabricated a super-elastic CNT/graphene fiber-based supercapacitor (Fig. 5d), which showed extraordinary elasticity capable of stretching to 800% strain (Fig. 5e), and a high specific capacitance of 138 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. By combining the spring design and wavy shape, some rigid materials, such as metals, have been also used in stretchable energy devices. For instance, Zhao et al.134 developed a stretchable Au nanowires (AuNWs)/Au film/PANi fiber electrodes by pre-stretching and electrodeposition processes, and a fiber-shaped supercapacitor (SFSC) was fabricated with a double helix design. The SFSC delivered excellent stretchability over 300% strain (Fig. 5f) and high durability with 85% capacitance retention after 2000 stretching/releasing cycles due to the electrode and device structure stretchable design. Similar designs have also been applied in flexible batteries.135,136 For example, Wang and co-workers fabricated a stretchable LIB by wrapping fiber electrodes on the pre-stretched elastic fibers (Fig. 5g). The assembled LIB delivered a high specific capacitance of 1176 mA h g−1 even under 100% strain and an excellent capacitance retention of 90.3% at a strain of 100% for 100 stretching cycles (Fig. 5h).137


2.2.3 Origami and kirigami inspired design. 
Origami and kirigami are two traditional Japanese craft techniques; the former one refers to folding of paper while the latter one refers to the combination of paper folding and paper cutting. Numerous micro-/nano-structured patterns have been inspired by the concept of origami and kirigami in designing stretchable electrodes for energy devices.129,138–141 The origami and kirigami-inspired 2D or 3D designs enable overall high electrode stretchability, while the electrode materials themselves experience low strain under deformation.142 For example, Song et al.143 designed a foldable LIB with the help of the Miura-ori pattern (Fig. 6a). The origami LIB exhibited outstanding deformability and stable performance within 50 folding/unfolding cycles. As shown in Fig. 6b and c, the strain of the LIB remained at a very low level (less than 0.1%) even under bending and twisting. Besides, the combination of origami technique and printing methods can provide a facile path to construct various 3D structures.144,145 Lee et al. developed a paper-based bacteria-powered battery with compact and stackable structures. As shown in Fig. 6d, the compact and stackable structures were created from 2D sheets, which were prepared by screen-printing and laser cutting through high degrees of folding along pre-defined creases.145
 Fig. 6  (a) Photograph of the origami battery in a completely unfolded state; (b) finite element results of the origami LIB under twisting and (c) bending. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2014, Nature. (d) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication of a 3D origami-based battery. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (e) Photograph of transparent kirigami electrode (TKE); (f) resistance changes versus the number of cyclic stretching of the ITO/cPI electrode under a tensile strain of 400%. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) The stretchability of customized kirigami electrodes with edge-cut pattern (left) and center-cut pattern (right); (h) demonstration of a conceptual stretchable cell with simplified edge-cut pattern kirigami electrode lighting up an LED in static and stretched states. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, kirigami-inspired designs also have been widely used in stretchable electrodes for energy devices.146–148 For example, Won et al.149 prepared a transparent Ag nanowire (AgNW)/colourless-polyimide (cPI) electrode with a kirigami structure (Fig. 6e). Compared with the normal electrode, the electrode with the kirigami structure showed lower stress when stretched. The electrode with a long cut design exhibited excellent stability with negligible change in resistance under 400% strain. The kirigami electrode also showed good strain reversibility, its initial resistance just changed 3% even after 10000 cycles of stretching (Fig. 6f). Also, kirigami structures can be easily obtained through printing technologies and laser-cutting, which offers a novel method to fabricate stretchable LIBs and micro-SCs.27,150,151 For instance, Bao et al. developed electrodes with different kirigami designs through printing technologies for flexible LIBs. The electrodes with edge-cut and centre-cut patterns showed high stretchability with 100% and 30% tensile strains, respectively. The assembled LIB can light up an LED in both static and stretched states (Fig. 6g and h).38 Lin and co-workers developed a highly stretchable micro-SC patch using kirigami-inspired electrodes by laser cutting. The patch delivered high areal-coverage of functional electronic components (76.2%) and a high stretchability up to 282.5% strain with less than 2% loss in capacitance.152

3. Device configuration design strategies
Besides the preparation of flexible materials, rational design of device configuration can also afford flexibility to power supply devices. Recently, considerable efforts have been devoted to develop novel architecture designs such as planar thin-film, fiber-shaped, and micro-sized devices for flexible power supply devices. In addition, integrating a power supply device with multiple other components is the ultimate goal of manufacturing self-powered sensors. In this case, appropriately engineering the system integration is an essential step. In this section, we will introduce the main applications of device configuration design and the system integration strategies toward wearable self-powered systems.
3.1 Configuration design of power supply devices

3.1.1 Thin-film structural devices. 
The planar thin-film structure is a common device configuration used in the fabrication of solar cells. In recent years, this structure has been widely used in developing flexible power supply devices (e.g., solar cell, supercapacitor, battery).27,153–156 Lam et al.157 fabricated a flexible thin-film perovskite solar cell (PVSC) by packaging a low-temperature electrodeposited SnO2 electron-transporting layer (ETL) with a thin PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester) ETL and a functional encapsulating layer (Fig. 7a). The PVSC demonstrated excellent power conversion efficiency (∼15%) and significantly improved ambient stability and washability and it exhibited stable performance even after immersing in water for 35 min (Fig. 7b and c). The thin film design often affords devices with compact structures, however, the compact structures will limit ion diffusion and electronic transmission for some power supply devices (e.g., supercapacitor and battery), which might result in poor performance.155
 Fig. 7  (a) and (b) Photos of the textile-based flexible PVSC (a) and those after immersing it in water (b); (c) J–V curves of the textile-based flexible PVSC as a function of immersion time in water. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the synthesis of MXene/FeOOH hybrid films; (e) SEM image of the MXene/Fe hybrid film. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Photos of the flexible electrodes and Ni/Fe full cell; (g) photos of the Ni/Fe full cell driving LEDs and a Samsung Gear Fit. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Photograph of the fabricated flexible TENG; (i) real-time monitoring of human activity by TENG. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (j) Diagram of the hybridized flexible energy harvesting device; (k) photographs of the wearable device attached to the wrist, arm, and cap. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
To address this issue, some strategies, such as introducing other materials to increase the thickness of thin-film electrodes and designing 3D nanostructures, have been adopted to improve the performance of thin-film power supply devices. For example, Zhao et al.158 synthesized a freestanding MXene/FeOOH quantum dot (QD) hybrid film electrode through a simple electrostatic self-assembly process (Fig. 7d). The introduction of FeOOH QDs led to an increase in film thickness from 7.3 μm to 9.6 μm, showing a loose layer structure compared with the initial state (Fig. 7e), providing more active sites and facilitating the transportation of electrolyte ions and electrons during charge–discharge processes. Therefore, the film electrode delivered a high areal capacitance (485 mF cm−2) and the as-assembled flexible supercapacitor also offered a high energy density of 42 mW h cm−2 and could be arbitrarily bent without performance degradation.39,61,159–162 In another example, Xiao et al.163 developed a flexible thin-film electrode with a 3D nanoarray structure by electrodeposition, and a flexible solid-state Ni/Fe battery was fabricated with a thickness of only about 0.4 mm (Fig. 7f). The flexible Ni/Fe battery exhibited an energy density of 185.33 W h kg−1, and outstanding cycle stability with ∼86% capacity retention after 8000 cycles at 20.83 A g−1. Moreover, the Ni/Fe battery can be attached to a watchband to power a smart watch (Fig. 7g).
In addition, the thin-film structure has also been used in emerging nanogenerator devices including the triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG),164 piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG),165 and thermoelectric generator.47 Jiang et al.166 prepared an MXene/PVA composite nanofiber film as a triboelectric layer by electrospinning, and a flexible TENG was assembled by integrating the MXene/PVA composite film with a silk fibroin nanofiber film (Fig. 7h). The TENG showed extraordinary electrical performance with a peak power density of 1087.6 mW m−2 due to the high conductivity and highly electronegative surface of MXene, and excellent durability with stable output over 124000 cycles. In addition to harvesting mechanical energy, the TENG can also be used as a self-powered strain sensor to monitor various body movements in real time by directly attaching on human body (Fig. 7i). Recently, integrated self-powered systems with thin-film structures have been reported.22,167 For instance, Song et al.167 integrated a flexible amorphous silicon solar cell, a transparent TENG, and an LIB into a thin panel with a combined thickness of less than 1.0 mm (Fig. 7j). The integrated panel delivered a high voltage of 3.86 V offered by a solar cell and TENG, and it can discharge for 4.5 h at 0.4 mA. Since all components are flexible, the integrated panel showed stable performance during 1000 bending cycles, indicating excellent durability. Consequently, the panel can be attached to different positions of the human body, such as wrist, arm, and hat, for wearable applications (Fig. 7k).


3.1.2 Fiber-shaped devices. 
Fiber-type structure is another device configuration widely used in assembling flexible power supply devices, which can provide good softness, stretchability, and high damage tolerance.40,131,168,169 Assembling two fibrous electrodes in parallel is the most common structure for fabricating fiber-type energy devices.170–173Fig. 8a illustrates a typical fiber-shaped device (Zn-ion hybrid capacitor) with the parallel fiber electrode configuration,174 where an rGO/CNT composite fiber served as a capacitor-type positive electrode and a Zn/C hybrid fiber served as a battery-type negative electrode. These fiber electrodes were aligned in parallel and coated with polyacrylic acid (PAA)/ZnSO4 hydrogel electrolyte to form a fiber-shaped supercapacitor (FSC). The as-assembled FSC delivered a high volumetric capacitance of 104.5 F cm−3 and a high energy density of 48.5 mW h cm−3, benefiting from the large operating voltage window and the contribution from the Zn/Zn2+ redox reaction. In addition, the fiber design provides the device high flexibility which can be easily integrated in a wristband as an energy supply device and work under different deformation conditions, such as bending and twisting (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of parallel electrode configuration; (b) photos of the integrated FSCs lighting an LED under bending and twisting deformations. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of a fiber-shaped battery with a twisted structure; (d) an LED powered by the fiber-shaped battery under different bending angles. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) and (f) Robustness and flexibility of a wire supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) Schematic illustration of a coaxial structure; (h) charge–discharge curves of a cable-type flexible Li–O2 battery after bending thousands of times; (i) photos of the high flexibility and safety of a cable-type flexible Li–O2 battery.181 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition to the parallel arrangement, fiber-shaped devices can be assembled in a twisted structure.175–177 Compared to the parallel configuration, the twisted structure can provide higher contact area and extrinsic flexibility, enabling the flexible fiber device with good electrochemical performance. A flexible fiber-shaped Ni/Zn battery with high energy density was developed by twisting a self-standing MOF cathode and Zn anode together (Fig. 8c).178 The battery exhibited high energy density (186.3 mW h cm−3), excellent flexibility, and good electrochemical stability under bending (Fig. 8d). In addition, it has been reported that the twisted structure can enhance the mechanical robustness of devices.179,180 Xiong et al.180 fabricated a wire supercapacitor with a wrap–twist architecture based on a carbon fiber tow/graphene nanopetal (CFT/GPs) electrode and buckypaper (BP)/MnO2 paper electrode. The wire supercapacitor demonstrated stable performance under bending (93% capacitance retention after 100 bending cycles), high flexibility, and outstanding mechanical robustness which can bear over 400 g weight (Fig. 8e and f).
Coaxial structure is another configuration used in the design of fiber-shaped power supply devices (e.g., metal–air battery) due to the large surface area.40,169Fig. 8g shows a cable-type Li–O2 battery with a coaxial structure.181 In detail, the gel polymer electrolyte (GPE), flexible carbon cathode, nickel foam, and rubber were coated layer-by-layer on a lithium stick to fabricate a coaxial cable-type Li–O2 battery. The assembled cable-type Li–O2 battery demonstrated stable performance under various deformations and long-term stability over 4000 bending/stretching cycles (Fig. 8h). Notably, owing to the protection of GPE, the battery can work even under water, indicating high safety for wearable applications (Fig. 8i).
Due to the advantages of low cost, lightweight, and feasibility of integration into various substrates, textile-based materials such as cotton yarns have been used recently to fabricate fiber-shaped flexible power supply devices.182–185 For example, Chen et al.186 developed a fiber-shaped Zn-air battery based on cotton yarns. The yarn-shaped Zn/cotton anode and Co3O4/carbon fiber cathode were prepared by electroplating and spray coating techniques, respectively. The two yarn electrodes were integrated into a fiber-shaped battery through a twisting process widely used in the textile industry (Fig. 9a). The fiber-shaped Zn-air battery showed stable performance under different deformations and outstanding flexibility that it can be knotted into clothes as a wearable power (Fig. 9b). This fabrication strategy combined with textile industry technology may be a potential solution for large-scale manufacturing of flexible fiber-type energy devices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of fabrication of the yarn-based Zn-air battery; (b) photographs of the yarn-based Zn-air batteries integrated into a cloth to power an LED, thermometer, and pedometer. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic of integrated flexible self-powered fiber-shaped photo-capacitors; (d) and (e) photographs of the self-powered integrated fiber-shaped photo-capacitors powering an electronic thermohydrometer indoors and outdoors. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition, advances have also been made recently in developing integrated fiber-shape multifunctional devices with simultaneous energy harvesting, conversion, and storage.187–189 For instance, Wang and co-workers developed a flexible self-powered fiber-shaped photo-capacitor (FPC).190 Fiber-shaped dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and fiber-shaped supercapacitors were integrated by sharing a conductive polymer-based fiber electrode (Fig. 9c). Benefiting from the improved electrochemical performance of the conductive polymer electrode, the integrated self-powered FPCs presented a remarkable photoelectric conversion and storage efficiency up to 5.1% and outstanding long-term cycle stability with retention of 94.1% after 1100 cycles. Besides, the integrated devices have been successfully woven into textile fabrics as power supply devices (Fig. 9d and e).


3.1.3 Micro-sized devices. 
The miniaturization strategy is considered as a potential solution to fabricate micro power supply devices for integrating with other functional units to fabricate integrated flexible wearable electronics. Micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) have attracted much attention due to their high capacitance, large energy density, high charge/discharge rates, and ease of fabrication.191 MSCs can be prepared through various methods, such as laser-writing,41 photolithography,192 thin-film deposition,193 and printing.194–196 For example, Yang et al.197 fabricated flexible solid-state MSCs with an interdigitated electrode configuration based on conducting polymer hydrogels (CPHs) through electrochemical polymerization and printing processes (Fig. 10a and b). Owing to the intrinsic flexibility of CPHs and PET substrate, the MSC can be deformed easily without sacrificing its electrochemical performance (Fig. 10c), and it delivered a high energy density of 49.9 μW h cm−2. The planar interdigitated electrode configuration is a common design adopted in the fabrication of MSCs, which not only reduces the size of the device but is also preferable for integration with microelectronic systems.198,199 For example, Xu et al.200 developed lightweight integrated force sensors with an assembly of flexible MXene-based MSCs and force sensors (Fig. 10d and e). The MSC was prepared with an interdigitated electrode configuration through a two-step screen printing process, and it exhibited a high energy density of 8.84 μW h cm−2, enabling the MSC to serve as a power source unit for portable integrated electronic devices, for example, powering a force sensor to measure the heart rate (Fig. 10f).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process and (b) photograph of as-prepared MSC; (c) CV curves of as-prepared MSC with different mechanical loadings. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Photographs of the MSCs on commercial printing paper (left) and PET (right); (e) photographs of the integrated force sensors on paper and PET substrates; (f) the measured live heartbeat waveform by the integrated force sensors. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) and (h) Photographs of the nonplanar LIB; (i) schematics and photographs of the design and assembly processes of the customizable nonplanar LIB. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
In addition, advances have been made in developing micro-batteries based on some novel fabrication techniques.201–203 For example, Yu et al.203 developed customizable micro-LIBs through an ink-based printing method. As shown in Fig. 10g–i, the micro-LIBs can be printed on any shape substrates, even on non-planar surfaces; and the size of batteries can be readily controlled from 0.1 mm to 0.1 m. The printed non-planar LIBs offered a similar performance to planar LIBS with specific capacitance of 135 and 148 mA h g−1, respectively.

3.2 System integration for assembly of self-powered wearable devices
In recent years, great efforts have been made in developing flexible self-powered sensor systems by integrating sensors with various power supply devices such as supercapacitors,204 batteries,205 and nanogenerators.206–208 A common strategy used to fabricate a flexible self-powered sensor system is to directly integrate multiple flexible components on a flexible substrate. For example, Li et al.209 fabricated a layer-structured flexible sensing system by printing a polydopamine (PDA)-based power generator and a pressure sensor on a PET substrate (Fig. 11a). The power generator can produce a power density of about 0.246 mW cm−2, and the pressure sensor showed rapid response to pressure change. The integrated sensing system was small and lightweight, and can be placed on the wrist to monitor human physiological behaviour (e.g., breathing and pulse) in real time (Fig. 11b–d). Similar strategies have been employed in the integration of batteries and sensors. Yao and co-workers fabricated an ultra-thin micro-battery/pressure sensor integrated system on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) film.210 The micro-battery showed high energy density, endowing the sensor system with excellent stability with stable signal output under cyclic pressure for 26000 cycles, and long-term durability under constant pressure over 27 h with only 2% attenuation of the signal. In addition, the self-powered sensor system can be easily placed on the wrist to detect pulse in real time due to its high sensitivity, lightweight, and compact size of the integrated system (Fig. 11e and f).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the self-powered wearable multifunctional sensing system; (b) photograph of a sensing system placed over the radial artery of the wrist. Inset: the circuit diagram of the system; (c) real-time I–t curves of the self-powered pressure sensing system monitoring the pulse and (d) breathing of a healthy human before and after running for 20 min. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) and (f) Optical photographs of a micro-battery/pressure sensor system for pulse detection and corresponding real-time variation of the relative-current change, respectively. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Optical image of a solar cell-driven wearable sensor system, inset shows the circuit diagram; (h) image of serpentine interconnection; (i) and (j) photograph of the integrated system attached to the skin of the wrist and resistance change of the sensor system driven by the stored energy of the MSCs, charged with (red) external power supply, (green) solar simulator, and (blue) solar light, in response to the pulse signal and the bending of the wrist. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Owing to the advances in flexibility and efficiency, solar cells have been used as power supply devices integrated into wearable sensor systems in recent years.211,212 For example, Yun and co-workers developed a solar cell-driven wearable sensor system by integrating Si-based solar cells, micro-supercapacitor arrays, and strain sensors on a stretchable polyimide substrate (Fig. 11g). Benefiting from the serpentine interconnection between functional units (Fig. 11h), the system can be stretched up to 30% strain without loss of performance. The hybrid power unit can provide a stable energy output, ensuring that the wearable sensor system can output stable and reliable signals when attached to the wrist to monitor human pulse and motion (Fig. 11i and j).213
Besides the self-powered function, real-time feedback function is also essential for wearable sensor systems in practical applications, which requires the integration of data processing and transmission units into wearable sensors. Benefiting from the development of IoTs such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi, wireless transmission has been considered as a promising method for achieving real-time feedback of wearable sensors.214,215 Sun et al.216 fabricated an active-powering pressure-sensing (APPS) fabric device by integrating a soft zinc-air battery and a piezoresistive sensing layer into a flexible conductive fabric (Fig. 12a). Thanks to the high sensitivity of the sensing layer and excellent flexibility of the whole device, the APPS fabric device can be fixed to a palpable location (e.g., wrist, neck, and instep) to track the arterial pulse waveforms through contacting with skin (Fig. 12b and c). In addition, the APPS fabric device also achieved real-time data transmission by connecting with a Bluetooth microprocessor (Fig. 12d). Recently, inspired by smart watches, Zhao et al.43 reported a fully integrated self-powered sensor system with real-time data analysis and feedback. As shown in Fig. 12e, a flexible photovoltaic cell and battery, an electrochemical glucose sensor, a microcontroller, and an electronic display screen were integrated into a smart watch as the power unit, sensor unit, control unit, and display unit, respectively. The integrated smart watch was used for sweat glucose monitoring, which can provide alarm signals from “low”, “medium”, to “high” according to the output currents of the sensors (Fig. 12f). After verifying the reliability and accuracy, the smart watch was applied for real-time and continuous on-body assessment of sweat glucose levels during stationary status and dynamic activities (e.g., biking and running) (Fig. 12g and h).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the APPS fabric; (b) pressure curves of the APPS fabric device with different fabrics as the sensing layers; (c) detection of real-time pulse signals from human wrist, neck, and instep; (d) photograph of real-time pulse measurement and feedback. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Images of the smart watch on a subject's wrist and separate components; (f) displays of the smart watch corresponding to different current ranges; (g) and (h) a smart watch worn on a subject's wrist during outdoor running or indoor biking. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4. Challenges and perspectives
In summary, we have outlined the main strategies and recent progress in the manufacture of flexible power supply devices. The development of intrinsically flexible materials is the most straightforward and efficient method to fabricate flexible power supply devices. The emergence of various novel flexible polymeric materials, carbon nanomaterials, and gel materials not only affords power supply devices high electrochemical performance but also good flexibility. Besides, the architectural design of electrodes such as waving, winding, spring, and origami/kirigami inspired ones also plays an important role in the improvement of flexibility in power supply devices. To achieve flexibility in the ultimate power devices and self-powered wearable systems integrated with other devices, various device configurations such as thin-film, fiber-shaped, and micro-device have been developed. Due to the advances in the flexible power supply devices, some attempts have also been made in fabricating self-powered wearable sensor systems, which show great potential in real-time human health monitoring.
4.1 Challenges
Despite the great efforts that have been made in flexible power supply devices and self-powered integrated wearable sensor systems, there are still some challenges that limit the development of flexible power devices for practical applications. First, the capacity and energy density of current flexible power devices are still far from achieving long-term and continuous support for human health monitoring, particularly for the integrated devices which just have limited space and/or weight for installing the power component. Second, the mechanical properties of current devices cannot fully deal with the complicated situations in practical applications, such as severe deformations, humid environments caused by sweat or blood, and pressure loads during touching or collision. In addition, good flexibility not only implies the flexibility of electrode materials but also other components including the electrolyte, current collectors, and packaging materials, all of which need to have good flexibility and good interfacial adhesion strength to bond together so as to withstand deformations. Third, biocompatibility, safety, and breathability are critical issues for practical wearable applications, and thus these factors in flexible power supply devices for self-powered integrated wearable sensor systems also need to be evaluated to ensure a safe and comfortable wearing experience. Finally, breakthroughs need to be made in fabrication technology and manufacturing processes, which will promote the large-scale fabrication and integration of flexible power supply devices for self-powered integrated wearable sensor systems.
4.2 Perspectives for future development
To address the aforementioned challenges, future research should focus on the following aspects: (1) developing reliable and flexible materials with improved electrochemical performance for flexible power supply devices. The energy conversion efficiency, energy density and long-term stability of the material will be the focus of future research, because they are essential for the long-term stable operation of the flexible device; (2) in the design and synthesis of the electrode or electrolyte, taking additional features such as elasticity, self-healing, transparency, hydrophobicity, biocompatibility, and breathability into consideration can provide multiple functions and facilitate the construction of the self-powered integrated wearable sensor system; (3) adopting some conventional industrial production technologies such as printing, weaving, and photolithography to develop simple, continuous, low-cost fabrication processes and lower the fabrication cost of flexible power supply devices; (4) designing novel electrode structures or optimizing the structure of the electrode or device to enhance their mechanical properties to cope with the deformation in practical applications, and meanwhile, in order to manufacture integrated self-powered flexible electronics, the miniaturization of devices also need to be focused upon; (5) exploring novel packaging materials that are soft, elastic and waterproof to protect the full integrity of flexible power supply devices under various working conditions.
Overall, the fast development of materials and technology has largely triggered the development of flexible power supply devices in terms of material preparation, device configuration, and system integration. Meanwhile, there is still plenty of room for developing high-performance flexible power supply devices to fulfil the ever-increasing demand for applications in the coming era of big data and intelligence. By addressing the challenges highlighted here, it is anticipated that breakthroughs and wide applications of self-powered wearable sensors for human health monitoring will be achieved in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 21875253, No. 51903235) and the Fujian Science and Technology Pilot Project (Project No. 2020H0039).
Notes and references
Z. Lou, L. L. Wang and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800444 CrossRef .
T. Q. Trung and N. E. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4338–4372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Keene, D. Fogarty, R. Cooke, C. D. Casadevall, A. Salleo and O. Parlak, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1901321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, A. S. Campbell, B. E. F. de Avila and J. Wang, Nat. Biotechnol., 2019, 37, 389–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Wang, J. A. Jackman, W. B. Ng and N. J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8623–8630 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Liu, J. S. Yu, Y. Li, X. W. Yan, D. Y. Bai, X. Q. Liao, Z. Q. Zhou, Y. Y. Gao, X. Yang and L. Li, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900475 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, J. Yang, W. Zang, Z. Kou, C. Wang, X. Ding, C. Guan, T. Xiong, H. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhong, M. Liu, L. Xing, Y. Qiu, W. Li, C. Yan, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 23, 375–382 CrossRef .
T. Xu, Y. C. Ding, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, W. D. Wu, H. Fong and Z. T. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10288–10294 RSC .
S. Xia, S. Song, F. Jia and G. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2019, 7, 4638–4648 RSC .
Y. C. Ding, J. Yang, C. R. Tolle and Z. T. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 16077–16086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Ding, J. Yang, C. R. Tolle and Z. T. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 79114–79120 RSC .
H. Chae, H. J. Kwon, Y. K. Kim, Y. Won, D. Kim, H. J. Park, S. Kim and S. Gandla, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28387–28396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yamamoto, S. Nakata, K. Kanao, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2017, 2, 1700057 CrossRef .
J. J. Guo, B. Q. Zhou, C. X. Yang, Q. H. Dai and L. J. Kong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902898 CrossRef .
S. Li, Z. Ma, Z. Cao, L. Pan and Y. Shi, Small, 2020, 16, 1903822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Kong and X. Fang, Talanta, 2019, 204, 685–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lou, L. Li, L. L. Wang and G. Z. Shen, Small, 2017, 13, 1701791 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Jo, S. An, C. W. Park, D. Y. Woo, A. L. Yarin and S. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40232–40242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Khan, A. E. Ostfeld, C. M. Lochner, A. Pierre and A. C. Arias, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4373–4395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Song, S. Lee, G. Song and S. Park, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 177–186 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cha, J. Kim, Y. Lee, J. Cho and M. Park, Small, 2018, 14, 1702989 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Luo and Z. L. Wang, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 23, 617–628 CrossRef .
X. Pu, W. G. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702817 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yu, Y. Zeng, H. Zhang, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804760 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. S. Chai, N. N. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Huang, C. X. Zhao, H. J. Fang, X. Fan and W. J. Mai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9201–9207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, S. Y. Du and C. Y. Zhi, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900083 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, Y. Q. Liu, S. Beirne, J. Razal and J. Chen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1800028 CrossRef .
Y. He, B. Matthews, J. Wang, L. Song, X. Wang and G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 735–753 RSC .
W. J. Song, S. Yoo, G. Song, S. Lee, M. Kong, J. Rim, U. Jeong and S. Park, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 181–199 CrossRef .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 34 Search PubMed .
X. Gong, Q. Yang, C. Zhi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2003308 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. Liao, H. Lou, Y. Hu, X. Sun and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704261 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, N. S. Villa, Y. Zhuang, L. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Li and T. Kong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902769 CrossRef .
M. J. Deng, T. H. Chou, L. H. Yeh, J. M. Chen and K. T. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20686–20694 RSC .
K. J. Kim, J. A. Lee, M. D. Lima, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24756–24759 RSC .
J. Xu, J. N. Ding, X. S. Zhou, Y. Zhang, W. J. Zhu, Z. F. Liu, S. H. Ge, N. Y. Yuan, S. L. Fang and R. H. Baughman, J. Power Sources, 2017, 340, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2066–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bao, G. Hong, Y. Chen, J. Chen, H. Chen, W. L. Song and D. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 780–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gockeln, J. Glenneberg, M. Busse, S. Pokhrel, L. Madler and R. Kun, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 564–573 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Bi, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804975 CrossRef .
K. Brousse, S. Pinaud, S. Nguyen, P. F. Fazzini, R. Makarem, C. Josse, Y. Thimont, B. Chaudret, P. L. Taberna, M. Respaud and P. Simon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903136 CrossRef .
H. Park, J. W. Kim, S. Y. Hong, G. Lee, D. S. Kim, J. h. Oh, S. W. Jin, Y. R. Jeong, S. Y. Oh, J. Y. Yun and J. S. Ha, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707013 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Lin, J. Wu, H. Y. Y. Nyein, M. Bariya, L. C. Tai, M. Chao, W. Ji, G. Zhang, Z. Fan and A. Javey, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1925–1933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hou, M. Miao, Q. Wang, T. Yue, H. Liu, H. S. Park, K. Qi and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 1901892 Search PubMed .
W. Nie, L. Liu, Q. Li, S. Zhang, J. Hu, X. Yang and X. Ding, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 19180–19188 RSC .
P. B. Liu, J. Yan, Z. X. Guang, Y. Huang, X. F. Li and W. H. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 424, 108–130 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Li, F. X. Jiang, C. C. Liu, P. P. Liu and J. K. Xu, Applied Materials Today, 2019, 15, 543–557 CrossRef .
R. Qi, J. Nie, M. Liu, M. Xia and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7719–7725 RSC .
H. H. Li, J. Song, L. L. Wang, X. M. Feng, R. Q. Liu, W. J. Zeng, Z. D. Huang, Y. W. Ma and L. H. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 193–200 RSC .
P. Liu, R. Lv, Y. He, B. Na, B. Wang and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410–411, 137–142 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Qiu, W. Z. Song, X. X. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Y. Fan, M. Yu, S. Ramakrishna and Y. Z. Long, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 536–542 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Wang, M. Zhang, A. M. Zhang, F. C. Shen, X. K. Wang, S. N. Sun, Y. J. Chen and Y. Q. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32265–32270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Wang, H. Liu, H. Liu, W. Hua and M. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18816–18823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Hsu, A. Khosrozadeh, B. Li, G. X. Luo, M. Xing and W. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 4766–4776 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. H. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. X. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. F. Wang, H. F. Li, Q. Huang and C. Y. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600969 CrossRef .
L. Tong, M. Y. Gao, C. Jiang and K. F. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10751–10760 RSC .
M. Gu, W. J. Song, J. Hong, S. Y. Kim, T. J. Shin, N. A. Kotov, S. Park and B. S. Kim, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 10 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, S. Luo, D. Liu, W. Chen, Y. Huang, L. Dong and L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33791–33801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Kim, K. Lee, S. Kang, S. Lee, J. B. Pyo, I. S. Choi, K. Char, J. H. Park, S. S. Lee, J. Lee and J. G. Son, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13272–13280 RSC .
T. Lv, M. Liu, D. Zhu, L. Gan and T. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705489 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. D. Jiao, M. Liao, B. J. Wang and H. S. Peng, Carbon, 2017, 124, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Liu, G. H. Jiang, S. Q. Sun, B. Xu, J. Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang and J. M. Yao, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 731, 560–568 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chen, W. J. Ma, H. X. Xiang, Y. H. Cheng, S. Y. Yang, W. Weng and M. F. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 319, 271–280 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Tang, J. H. Song, W. Yang, M. S. Wang, C. Z. Zhu, W. G. Zhao, J. M. Zheng and Y. H. Lin, Carbon, 2018, 129, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. He, W. T. Shan, J. L. Wang, Q. Pan, J. G. Qu, G. F. Wang and W. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6869–6876 RSC .
W. J. Ma, S. H. Chen, S. Y. Yang and M. F. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 50112–50118 RSC .
J. Han, S. Wang, S. Zhu, C. Huang, Y. Yue, C. Mei, X. Xu and C. Xia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44624–44635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Qiu, H. B. Xiao, Y. Li, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, Small, 2019, 15, 1901285 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, K. Liao, X. Wang, P. Shi, J. Fan, Q. Xu and Y. Min, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700419 CrossRef .
C. Lu, D. X. Wang, J. J. Zhao, S. Han and W. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606219 CrossRef .
G. Zhong, J. L. Yu, P. Y. Zhuang, M. Y. Jin, Y. B. Fu and X. H. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zeng, Z. Li, X. Li, J. Wang, Z. Kong, Y. Sun, Z. Liu and H. Feng, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467–468, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Okonkwo, T. Lv, W. Hong, G. F. Li, J. J. Huang, J. X. Deng, L. S. Jia, M. H. Wu, H. Liu and M. X. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 825, 154009 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, C. Y. Xu, R. Q. Li, R. Zhang, B. L. Wang, X. F. Jiang, M. Hu, Y. Bando, D. S. Kong, P. C. Dai and X. B. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11901–11911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Dai, H.-Q. Wang, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, W. Hou, H. Yan, W. Li and J.-C. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227045 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ouyang, K. Cheng, F. Yang, J. T. Jiang, J. Yan, K. Zhu, K. Ye, G. L. Wang, L. M. Zhou and D. X. Cao, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 335, 638–646 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Wang, F. Yan, C. Zhu, B. Geng, Y. Chen and S. l. Chou, Small Methods, 2019, 4, 1900571 CrossRef .
C. Guan, A. Sumboja, H. J. Wu, W. N. Ren, X. M. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. L. Liu, C. W. Cheng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704117 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shi, G. Wen, Y. Nie, G. Zhang and H. Duan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5261–5285 RSC .
G. Li, H. Cai, X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Zhang, Y. Yang and J. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37675–37684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y.-L. Liu, G.-G. Wang, H.-Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, G.-Z. Li, Z.-P. Wu, L.-Y. Dang and J.-C. Han, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22631–22641 RSC .
J. Shen, Q. Wang, K. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Li, S. Dong, S. Zhao, J. Chen, R. Sun, Y. Wang, Z. Jian and W. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134578 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Son, S. Oh, S. H. Bae, S. Nam and I. K. Oh, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900477 CrossRef .
Y. Zhong, Z. Pan, X. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Qiu, S. Xu, Y. Lu, Q. Huang and W. Li, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802243 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhao, Y. Zheng, L. Cui, D. Jia, D. Wei, R. Zheng, C. Barrow, W. Yang and J. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 461–469 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Ma, J. P. Cheng, F. Liu and X. B. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 679, 277–284 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhu, M. Yan, R. Chen, Q. Liu, J. Liu, J. Yu, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, P. Liu, J. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Ma, H. Q. Fan, X. Y. Wei, S. M. Chen, Q. Z. Hu, Y. Liu, C. Y. Zhi, W. Lu, J. A. Zapien and H. T. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19058–19065 RSC .
L. Z. Long, S. J. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Z. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10038–10069 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Y. Ao, T. R. Lin, X. Yang, J. Peng, W. Huang, J. Q. Li and M. L. Zhai, Polymer, 2016, 87, 73–80 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Lin, M. N. Shi, F. R. Huang, J. Peng, Q. W. Bai, J. Q. Li and M. L. Zhai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29684–29693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Wang, J. Y. Qiu, J. Peng, J. Q. Li and M. L. Zhai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12393–12399 RSC .
X. L. Cheng, J. Pan, Y. Zhao, M. Liao and H. S. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702184 CrossRef .
L. Li, Z. Wu, S. Yuan and X. B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2101–2122 RSC .
D. Kim, G. Lee, D. Kim, J. Yun, S. S. Lee and J. S. Ha, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15611–15620 RSC .
Q. Wang, H. Miao, S. S. Sun, Y. J. Xue and Z. P. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 14816–14823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. J. Huang, L. Pan, T. Liu and M. Niederberger, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 10 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Pan, J. Yang, Q. C. Zhang, M. N. Liu, Y. T. Hu, Z. K. Kou, N. Liu, X. Yang, X. Y. Ding, H. Chen, J. Li, K. Zhang, Y. C. Qiu, Q. W. Li, O. Wang and Y. G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802753 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, N. Zhou, R. Li, Y. Zhou and W. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 324, 134827 CrossRef CAS .
X. E. Wang, G. M. A. Girard, H. J. Zhu, R. Yunis, D. R. MacFarlane, D. Mecerreyes, A. J. Bhattacharyya, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6237–6245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Fan, X. Liu, S. Qu, J. Liu, J. Ding, X. Han, Y. Deng, W. Hu and C. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25449–25457 RSC .
H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, B. Li and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3140–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Tang, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Z. Shi, J. Liu, Y. Huang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 164–173 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, Y. R. Shi, S. Y. Lang, J. M. Zhou, J. Y. Liang, W. Wang, S. J. Tan, Y. X. Yin, R. Wen and Y. G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18146–18149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Jo, S. Q. Li, C. Zuo, Y. Zhang, H. H. Gan, S. B. Li, L. P. Yu, D. He, X. L. Xie and Z. G. Xue, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 1024–1032 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Karan, S. Mallick, C. R. Raj and M. Bhattacharjee, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 14775–14779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Sun, Y. X. Yuan, G. Q. Lu, L. F. Li, X. Q. Zhu and J. Nie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11244–11250 RSC .
H. Peng, Y. Lv, G. Wei, J. Zhou, X. Gao, K. Sun, G. Ma and Z. Lei, J. Power Sources, 2019, 431, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, G. Sun, H. Yang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiao, J. Gao, Z. Zhang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19463–19469 RSC .
Y. Shi, J. Zhang, A. M. Bruck, Y. M. Zhang, J. Li, E. A. Stach, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok, E. S. Takeuchi and G. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603922 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Pan, Q. Wang, P. He, K. Liu, Y. Ni, L. Chen, X. Ouyang, L. Huang, H. Wang and S. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122271 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Yin, S. W. Zhang, Q. Q. Ren, C. Liu, K. Ke and Z. B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24942–24950 RSC .
P. Li, Z. Jin, L. Peng, F. Zhao, D. Xiao, Y. Jin and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800124 CrossRef PubMed .
G. P. Hao, F. Hippauf, M. Oschatz, F. M. Wisser, A. Leifert, W. Nickel, N. Mohamed-Noriega, Z. K. Zheng and S. Kaskel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7138–7146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Chen, J. Hu, J. L. Yu, G. C. Feng, B. Yang, C. H. Li, N. Zhao, C. Z. Zhu and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19323–19330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, Q. Chen, Q. Song, H. Lu and M. M. Ma, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900133 CrossRef .
L. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Lu, Y. Wang, J. Xu, J. Zhu, C. Zhang and T. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 12 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Guan, G. Lin, Y. Gong, J. Wang, W. Tan, D. Bao, Y. Liu, Z. You, X. Sun, Z. Wen and Y. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13948–13955 RSC .
T. Ye, L. Li and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000077 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhai, F. Xiang, F. Cheng, Y. Sun, X. Yang, W. Lu and L. Dai, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 33, 116–138 CrossRef .
D. G. Mackanic, M. Kao and Z. Bao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001424 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Mi, C. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Cui, X. Feng, Y. Cao and C. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806664 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, J. Meng, Q. Li, M. Huang, X. Liu, K. A. Owusu, Z. Liu and L. Mai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802016 CrossRef .
W.-J. Song, J. Park, D. H. Kim, S. Bae, M.-J. Kwak, M. Shin, S. Kim, S. Choi, J.-H. Jang, T. J. Shin, S. Y. Kim, K. Seo and S. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702478 CrossRef .
H. Guo, M.-H. Yeh, Y.-C. Lai, Y. Zi, C. Wu, Z. Wen, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10580–10588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, F. Shi, X. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, H. Hou, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9141–9145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, M. Zu, J. Yu, H. Cheng and Q. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1602994 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nasreldin, R. Delattre, C. Calmes, M. Ramuz, V. A. Sugiawati, S. Maria, J.-L. d. B. d. l. Tocnaye and T. Djenizian, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 33, 108–115 CrossRef .
C. Cao, Y. Chu, Y. Zhou, C. Zhang and S. Qu, Small, 2018, 14, 1803976 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. H. Xue, A. K. Roy and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1039–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, B. Llerena Zambrano, J. Woo, K. Yoon and T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902532 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chu, H. T. Zhang, H. Su, F. Y. Liu, B. N. Gu, H. C. Huang, H. P. Zhang, W. Deng, X. T. Zheng and W. Q. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, J. Foroughi, C. Wang, H. Long and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702047 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, D. Dong, Y. Wang, S. Gong, T. An, L. W. Yap and W. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42612–42620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, Y. Meng, Z. Lai, X. Zhang, M. Yu, P. Fang, M. Wu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702698 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhao, J. Ren, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128, 7979–7982 CrossRef PubMed .
X. S. Wang, Z. H. Pan, J. Yang, Z. Y. Lyu, Y. T. Zhong, G. M. Zhou, Y. C. Qiu, Y. G. Zhang, J. Wang and W. S. Li, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 22, 179–184 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Ge, C. Ma, Q. Kong, M. Yan, S. Ge and J. Yu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 12453–12462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. F. Ren and C. F. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805924 CrossRef .
X. Liao, C. Shi, T. Wang, B. Qie, Y. Chen, P. Yang, Q. Cheng, H. Zhai, M. Chen, X. Wang, X. Chen and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1802998 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu, Y. Han, B. Lou, L. Zhang, L. Han and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13499–13502 RSC .
M. K. Blees, A. W. Barnard, P. A. Rose, S. P. Roberts, K. L. McGill, P. Y. Huang, A. R. Ruyack, J. W. Kevek, B. Kobrin, D. A. Muller and P. L. McEuen, Nature, 2015, 524, 204–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. M. Song, T. Ma, R. Tang, Q. Cheng, X. Wang, D. Krishnaraju, R. Panat, C. K. Chan, H. Y. Yu and H. Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 6 Search PubMed .
Y. Jo, D. W. Jeong, J.-O. Lee, Y. Choi and S. Jeong, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 22755–22762 RSC .
H. Lee and S. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 549–557 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Huang, Z. Y. Chen, C. L. Chiu, T. T. Huang, H. F. Meng and P. C. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29901–29909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Yu, X. Wei and Y. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801070 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Morikawa, S. Yamagiwa, H. Sawahata, R. Numano, K. Koida, M. Ishida and T. Kawano, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701100 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Won, J. J. Park, T. Lee, I. Ha, S. Han, M. Choi, J. Lee, S. Hong, K. J. Cho and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6087–6096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, A. Zhou, M. Wu and H. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900529 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, Y. Lu, S. Honda, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9609–9617 RSC .
R. Xu, A. Zverev, A. Hung, C. Shen, L. Irie, G. Ding, M. Whitmeyer, L. Ren, B. Griffin, J. Melcher, L. Zheng, X. Zang, M. Sanghadasa and L. Lin, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2018, 4, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Brunetti, A. Operamolla, S. Castro-Hermosa, G. Lucarelli, V. Manca, G. M. Farinola and T. M. Brown, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806798 CrossRef .
A. T. Vicente, A. Araújo, M. J. Mendes, D. Nunes, M. J. Oliveira, O. Sanchez-Sobrado, M. P. Ferreira, H. Águas, E. Fortunato and R. Martins, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3143–3181 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Su, Z. Y. Sang, X. H. Su, H. Chen and X. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 328, 135088 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Song, M. Kong, S. Cho, S. Lee, J. Kwon, H. B. Son, J. H. Song, D. G. Lee, G. Song, S. Y. Lee, S. Jung, S. Park and U. Jeong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003608 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Lam, J.-Y. Chen, P.-C. Tsai, Y.-T. Hsieh, C.-C. Chueh, S.-H. Tung and W.-C. Chen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 54361–54368 RSC .
K. Zhao, H. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Lin, Z. Xu and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 308, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Qian, X. B. Liao, Y. X. Zhu, F. Pan, X. Chen and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 690–701 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Kaiser, Z. Han and J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 437, 226925 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Lou, K. Jiang and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1805596 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, M. Bai, S. Li, X. Tang, W. Wu, C. Sun, X. Yin, J. Zhou, S. Yuan and Y. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903542 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Z. Jin and D. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3274–3283 RSC .
Z. Sun, L. Yang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, Z. Hu and W. Song, Sensors, 2020, 20, 14 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, S. K. Oh, N. Nabulsi, H. Johnson, W. Wang and J.-H. Ryou, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 670–679 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Jiang, C. Wu, X. J. Li, Y. Yao, L. Y. Lan, F. N. Zhao, Z. Z. Ye, Y. B. Ying and J. F. Ping, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 268–276 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, X. Li, H. Lu, M. Zhang, X. Yang, T. Zhang, L. Wu, G. Cao and W. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104082 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, X. Sun and H. Peng, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17023 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C. H. Wang, W. Lu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1902779 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lan, X. T. Zhang, A. Zhai, W. Q. Meng, H. W. Sheng, W. Dou, C. F. Zhang, Q. Su, J. Y. Zhou and E. Q. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 374, 181–188 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Huang, L. Wang, S. B. Chen, L. P. Kang, Z. B. Lei, F. Shi, H. Xu and Z. H. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 10092–10099 RSC .
H. M. Wei, H. B. Hu, J. Feng, M. Zhang and T. Hua, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Veerasubramani, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S. J. Kim, Carbon, 2016, 105, 638–648 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Pei, C. Wang, Z. Yuan, L. Wei, Y. Pan, A. Mahmood, Q. Shao and Y. Chen, Small, 2019, 15, 1903817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Ruan, Z. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Tang, H. Li, M. Zhu, T. F. Hung, J. Liu, Z. Shi and C. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8549–8557 RSC .
L. B. Gao, R. Fan, R. Xiao, K. Cao, P. F. Li, W. D. Wang and Y. Lu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 475, 1058–1064 CrossRef CAS .
B. He, Q. C. Zhang, P. Man, Z. Y. Zhou, C. W. Li, Q. L. Li, L. Y. Xie, X. N. Wang, H. Pang and Y. G. Yao, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103935 CrossRef CAS .
P. Man, B. He, Q. C. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, C. W. Li, Q. L. Li, L. Wei and Y. G. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27217–27224 RSC .
H. Yi, Y. Ma, S. Zhang, B. Na, R. Zeng, Y. Zhang and C. Lin, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18894–18900 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Xiong, P. G. He, B. Y. Huang, T. F. Chen, Z. Bo and T. S. Fisher, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Q. C. Liu, J. J. Xu and X. B. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 3101–3105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Huang, D. R. Wang and Z. J. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600783 CrossRef .
H. Song, S. Y. Jeon and Y. Jeong, Carbon, 2019, 147, 441–450 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Lin, Q. Kang, Z. Q. Zhang, R. Q. Liu, Y. Li, Z. D. Huang, X. M. Feng, Y. W. Ma and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3638–3644 RSC .
C. Hwang, W. J. Song, J. G. Han, S. Bae, G. Song, N. S. Choi, S. Park and H. K. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705445 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Zhong, B. Liu, Z. Liu, X. X. Bi, N. Q. Zhao, X. P. Han, Y. D. Deng, J. Lu and W. B. Hu, Small, 2018, 14, 1702987 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Kwak, H.-J. Yoon and S.-W. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804533 CrossRef .
J. Pope and C. Lekakou, Smart Mater. Struct., 2019, 28, 13 CrossRef .
J. Liang, G. Y. Zhu, C. X. Wang, Y. R. Wang, H. F. Zhu, Y. Hu, H. L. Lv, R. P. Chen, L. B. Ma, T. Chen, Z. Jin and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601208 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, J. Cheng, H. Huang and B. Wang, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 24, 255–264 CrossRef .
H. X. Zhang, Y. D. Cao, M. O. L. Chee, P. Dong, M. X. Ye and J. F. Shen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 5807–5821 RSC .
B. Y. Lim, J. Yoon, J. Yun, D. Kim, S. Y. Hong, S. J. Lee, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11639–11650 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Maeng, Y. J. Kim, C. Meng and P. P. Irazoqui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13458–13465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Choi, J. Yoo, C. K. Lee and S. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2812–2821 RSC .
S. Y. Liu, J. Xie, H. B. Li, Y. Wang, H. Y. Yang, T. J. Zhu, S. C. Zhang, G. S. Cao and X. B. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18125–18131 RSC .
X. W. Yun, B. C. Lu, Z. Y. Xiong, B. Jia, B. Tang, H. N. Mao, T. Zhang and X. G. Wang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 29384–29395 RSC .
X. Chu, H. C. Huang, H. T. Zhang, H. P. Zhang, B. N. Gu, H. Su, F. Y. Liu, Y. Han, Z. X. Wang, N. J. Chen, C. Yan, W. Deng, W. L. Deng and W. Q. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 301, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yue, Z. C. Yang, N. S. Liu, W. J. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. A. Ma, C. X. Yang, J. Su, L. Y. Li, F. Long, Z. G. Zou and Y. H. Gao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11249–11257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Qiu, P. Sun, G. F. Cui, Y. X. Tong and W. Mai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8246–8255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Xu, Y. Dall'Agnese, G. D. Wei, C. Zhang, Y. Gogotsi and W. Han, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 479–488 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yadav, B. De, S. K. Singh, P. Sinha and K. K. Kar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7974–7980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Li, T. L. Christiansen, C. Li, Y. L. Zhou, H. F. Fei, A. Mamakhel, B. B. Iversen and J. J. Watkins, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 431–440 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Yu, Y. T. Liu, H. Pham, S. Sarkar, B. Ludwig, I. M. Chen, W. Everhart, J. Park, Y. Wang and H. Pan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900645 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, Y. Yi, T. Yao, Y. Song, Y. Chen, Q. Li, Z. Xia, N. Wei, Z. Tian, B. Nie, L. Zhang, Z. Liu and J. Sun, Nano Res., 2018, 12, 331–338 CrossRef .
Z. F. Wang, F. N. Mo, L. T. Ma, Q. Yang, G. J. Liang, Z. X. Liu, H. F. Li, N. Li, H. Y. Zhang and C. Y. Zhi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44527–44534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Jeong, D. Y. Hyeon, G.-T. Hwang, G.-J. Lee, M.-K. Lee, J.-J. Park and K.-I. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25481–25489 RSC .
Y. Lee, J. Kim, B. Jang, S. Kim, B. K. Sharma, J. H. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 259–267 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Hu, Y. Zhang, C. Xu, L. Lin, R. L. Snyder and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2572–2577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Chen, M. Hao, S. Wang, F. Sun, Z. Zhao and T. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5544–5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. He, Q. C. Zhang, L. H. Li, J. Sun, P. Man, Z. Y. Zhou, Q. L. Li, J. B. Guo, L. Y. Xie, C. W. Li, X. N. Wang, J. X. Zhao, T. Zhang and Y. G. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14594–14601 RSC .
C. Li, S. Cong, Z. N. Tian, Y. Z. Song, L. H. Yu, C. Lu, Y. L. Shao, J. Li, G. F. Zou, M. H. Rummeli, S. X. Dou, J. Y. Sun and Z. F. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 247–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. D. Jiang, H. L. Tai, B. H. Liu, Z. H. Duan, Z. Yuan, H. Pan, G. Z. Xie, X. S. Du and Y. J. Su, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103829 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yun, C. Song, H. Lee, H. Park, Y. R. Jeong, J. W. Kim, S. W. Jin, S. Y. Oh, L. Sun, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 644–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, K. Jiang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 624–632 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Sun, S. C. Carreira, Y. Chen, C. Q. Xiang, L. L. Xu, B. Zhang, M. D. Chen, I. Farrow, F. Scarpa and J. Rossiter, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900100 CrossRef .
H. Sun, N. Pan, X. Jin, K. Deng, Z. Liu, C.-T. Lin, T. Pan and Y. Chang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 358–368 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Jiyuan Gao	Jiyuan Gao received his B.S. degree (2019) in Applied Chemistry from Peking University. He is currently pursuing his masters degree at the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interest focuses on flexible electrochemical devices.
Yichun Ding	Yichun Ding received his PhD degree in Biomedical Engineering from South Dakota School of Mines & Technology (USA) in 2018. He then joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences as an associate professor. His research mainly focuses on high-performance polymers, electrospinning and electrospun nanofibers, flexible and wearable electronics, and electrochemical devices (battery, electrolysis, etc.).
Zhenhai Wen	Zhenhai Wen received his M.Sc. from the Beijing University of Technology in 2004 and PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Sciences, China in 2008. He then worked as a lecturer at Nanchang Hangkong University. In 2009, he worked at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research in Germany as a Humboldt postdoctoral research scholar and then moved to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee as a postdoctoral researcher in 2010. He joined the Fujian Institute of Research on the Structure of Matter, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2015. Research topics in his group mainly include the design and synthesis of functional nanostructures and exploration of their applications in electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems. He has published around 180 peer-reviewed articles with over 14000 citations, and has been selected as Thomson Reuters Highly Cited Researchers in 2018 and 2019 by Clarivate Analytics.

 	Fig. 1  An overview of the strategies for development of flexible power supply devices. (1) Material synthesis: conductive polymers. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH; carbon materials. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH; gel electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (2) Structural design: wavy structure. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry; winding or spring structure. Reproduced with permission.36,37 Copyright 2017, Elsevier and American Chemical Society; origami/kirigami-inspired structure. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (3) Device configuration: thin-film device. Reproduced with permission.39 Copyright 2018, Elsevier; fiber-shaped device. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH; micro device. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (4) System integration: planar structure. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH; smart watch. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the PANi nanotube array and the flexible SCs. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Optical photograph of a flexible aqueous Zn-ion battery. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Photos demonstrating the flexibility of TENG; (d) the corresponding output current of respiratory monitoring; (e) illustration of a wearable TENG for intensive care application. Reproduced with permission.51 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Schematic of the fabrication process of PANi/SWCNT free-standing film; (g) photographs of the flexible supercapacitor with the PANI/SWCNT film electrode and its compact configuration. Reproduced with permission.58 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h) SEM images of PDMS/PPy/GF; (i) optical image of the bent supercapacitor and (j) the integrated sensor system on a deformable substrate; (k) strain–response curve of the self-powered sensor system. Reproduced with permission.42 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) TEM image of GCNP-800; (b) capacitance retention of the supercapacitor after 500 bending cycles. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic of the preparation of the MnO@C-rGO electrode; (d) photographs of the flexible MnO@C-rGO electrode at different deformation statuses. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) SEM image of porous carbon; (f) CV curves for the flexible supercapacitor subjected to different bending degrees. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Photos of a flexible supercapacitor in different bending degrees and (h) cutting test. Reproduced with permission.88 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Relaxed and elongated state of a cross-linked PAM hydrogel; (b) dependence of capacity retention on cycle numbers with a strain of 300%; (c) capacity retention test of the yarn ZIB for 12 h underwater. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the flexible LIB; (e) drilling and cutting test of the flexible LIB. Reproduced with permission.103 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the anisotropic PVA/PANi hydrogel and photograph of the hydrogel under stretching and compression. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (g) Photographs of the TENG under various deformations and sustainably lighting 15 LEDs. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process and (b) SEM image of the PEDOT/CNS hybrid nanomembrane; (c) cycling stability of the stretchable supercapacitor at biaxial strain of 600%. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the fabrication of a superelastic fiber-based supercapacitor; (e) photos of the extraordinary elasticity of the supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the double helix structure of the supercapacitor and photographs of the supercapacitor at different strains. Reproduced with permission.134 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (g) and (h) Schematic of the fabrication of a stretchable battery and normalized capacities of the stretchable battery stretched 100 times at a strain of 100%. Reproduced with permission.137 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photograph of the origami battery in a completely unfolded state; (b) finite element results of the origami LIB under twisting and (c) bending. Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright 2014, Nature. (d) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication of a 3D origami-based battery. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (e) Photograph of transparent kirigami electrode (TKE); (f) resistance changes versus the number of cyclic stretching of the ITO/cPI electrode under a tensile strain of 400%. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) The stretchability of customized kirigami electrodes with edge-cut pattern (left) and center-cut pattern (right); (h) demonstration of a conceptual stretchable cell with simplified edge-cut pattern kirigami electrode lighting up an LED in static and stretched states. Reproduced with permission.38 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) and (b) Photos of the textile-based flexible PVSC (a) and those after immersing it in water (b); (c) J–V curves of the textile-based flexible PVSC as a function of immersion time in water. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of the synthesis of MXene/FeOOH hybrid films; (e) SEM image of the MXene/Fe hybrid film. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (f) Photos of the flexible electrodes and Ni/Fe full cell; (g) photos of the Ni/Fe full cell driving LEDs and a Samsung Gear Fit. Reproduced with permission.163 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Photograph of the fabricated flexible TENG; (i) real-time monitoring of human activity by TENG. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (j) Diagram of the hybridized flexible energy harvesting device; (k) photographs of the wearable device attached to the wrist, arm, and cap. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of parallel electrode configuration; (b) photos of the integrated FSCs lighting an LED under bending and twisting deformations. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of a fiber-shaped battery with a twisted structure; (d) an LED powered by the fiber-shaped battery under different bending angles. Reproduced with permission.178 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) and (f) Robustness and flexibility of a wire supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (g) Schematic illustration of a coaxial structure; (h) charge–discharge curves of a cable-type flexible Li–O2 battery after bending thousands of times; (i) photos of the high flexibility and safety of a cable-type flexible Li–O2 battery.181 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of fabrication of the yarn-based Zn-air battery; (b) photographs of the yarn-based Zn-air batteries integrated into a cloth to power an LED, thermometer, and pedometer. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic of integrated flexible self-powered fiber-shaped photo-capacitors; (d) and (e) photographs of the self-powered integrated fiber-shaped photo-capacitors powering an electronic thermohydrometer indoors and outdoors. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabrication process and (b) photograph of as-prepared MSC; (c) CV curves of as-prepared MSC with different mechanical loadings. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (d) Photographs of the MSCs on commercial printing paper (left) and PET (right); (e) photographs of the integrated force sensors on paper and PET substrates; (f) the measured live heartbeat waveform by the integrated force sensors. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) and (h) Photographs of the nonplanar LIB; (i) schematics and photographs of the design and assembly processes of the customizable nonplanar LIB. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the self-powered wearable multifunctional sensing system; (b) photograph of a sensing system placed over the radial artery of the wrist. Inset: the circuit diagram of the system; (c) real-time I–t curves of the self-powered pressure sensing system monitoring the pulse and (d) breathing of a healthy human before and after running for 20 min. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) and (f) Optical photographs of a micro-battery/pressure sensor system for pulse detection and corresponding real-time variation of the relative-current change, respectively. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Optical image of a solar cell-driven wearable sensor system, inset shows the circuit diagram; (h) image of serpentine interconnection; (i) and (j) photograph of the integrated system attached to the skin of the wrist and resistance change of the sensor system driven by the stored energy of the MSCs, charged with (red) external power supply, (green) solar simulator, and (blue) solar light, in response to the pulse signal and the bending of the wrist. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the APPS fabric; (b) pressure curves of the APPS fabric device with different fabrics as the sensing layers; (c) detection of real-time pulse signals from human wrist, neck, and instep; (d) photograph of real-time pulse measurement and feedback. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Images of the smart watch on a subject's wrist and separate components; (f) displays of the smart watch corresponding to different current ranges; (g) and (h) a smart watch worn on a subject's wrist during outdoor running or indoor biking. Reproduced with permission.43 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
