The OE-A OPV demonstrator anno domini 2011  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01891D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01891D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4116-4123Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThe OE-A OPV demonstrator anno domini 2011

        
          
            Frederik C. 
            Krebs
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jan 
            Fyenbo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David M. 
            Tanenbaum
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Suren A. 
            Gevorgyan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ronn 
            Andriessen
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Bart 
            van Remoortere
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yulia 
            Galagan
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Mikkel 
            Jørgensen
          
        
      a
aRisø National Laboratory for Sustainable Energy, Technical University of Denmark, Frederiksborgvej 399, DK-4000, Roskilde, Denmark. E-mail: frkr@risoe.dtu.dk
bMekoprint A/S, Hermesvej 4, DK-9530, Støvring, Denmark
cDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Pomona College, Claremont, CA 91711, USA
dHolst Centre, High Tech Campus 31, 5656 AE, Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 
      4th June 2011
    , Accepted 11th July 2011First published on 5th August 2011Abstract
Polymer solar cells were prepared in large numbers using roll-to-roll methods and were subsequently integrated into the Organic Electronics Association (OE-A) demonstrator in the year 2011 and presented as a small credit card sized lamp with a flat outline. The lamp comprised the polymer solar cell together with printed circuitry, discrete components and flexible lithium polymer batteries. The number of discrete steps required for the manufacture of the lamp was 35 and more than 10000 units of the demonstrator was manufactured. We describe the efforts towards increasing the technical yield which was 89% overall and discuss the compromises that had to be made to achieve the high technical yield for a process that was as automated as possible. All the steps in the preparation of the solar cell, the circuitry and the overlays were performed using full roll-to-roll methods. The mounting of the discrete components, such as LED, diode and Zener diode, was performed in sheets of 15 units using a fully automated SMD mounting machine. The mounting of the batteries, contacts and final testing was done manually. The lamination into the final lamp and the final laser cutting into the discrete lamps were performed using automated systems.

Broader context
The Organic Electronics Association (OE-A) represents the whole value chain in organic and printed electronics. The overall purpose is to create visibility and bridge the gap between science, technology and application for the members that comprise internationally leading companies and research institutes. The OE-A also serves as a platform to demonstrate the technology at the contemporary level and not at a level projected unrealistically into the future. The aim is to truthfully present and demonstrate technology and the progress within the realm of organic and printed electronics. This is achieved through demonstrations at the Large Area Organic and Printed Electronics Conference (LOPE-C) which is held annually. The demonstrator must comprise a complex printed organic electronic unit that has some functionality and that can be distributed in large numbers (ten thousand units). In 2011 the OE-A demonstrator comprises a credit card sized flashlight as a demonstrator of roll-to-roll manufacture of polymer solar cells (OPV) and how they can be miniaturized, mass produced and integrated into a complex unit that comprises all aspects of state-of-the-art organic electronics: energy harvesting (OPV), light (LED), energy storage (battery), functionality (printed circuitry, simple optics, overcharge protection) and high yield manufacture (many steps, efficient, few quality control points).

1. Introduction

Polymer and organic solar cells (OPV)1 have reached a technological level where they can be manufactured using fast roll-to-roll based methods2 at a cost that has the potential to be competitive, pending further development.3 The average performance and lifetime that can be reached by the manufacture of OPV modules on the small to medium scale (∼10000 modules) still places OPV as being inferior to existing thin film PV technologies and while there is currently little agreement on what the performance and lifetime that can be reached is, initiatives have started where many devices are shared between groups and measured with respect to both performance and lifetime.4,5 The knowledge gained has been used to develop a consensus on how to measure and report i.e. stability with the aim to develop a standard in the future.6 The adaptability and ease of manufacture of OPV is however far superior to any other PV technology. In addition OPV does seem to be the inherently most facile PV technology to integrate into products and more complex systems. Until now only very few examples of manufacture and demonstration of OPV on a scale beyond a few units have been presented.7–13 Common to all but one previous report the integration of the OPV was limited in complexity which could in part account for the failure of OPV to reach a large market in spite of its availability.13
The performance and stability that is currently accessible for OPV makes it unrealistic that the solar cell module itself can be a product3 and use of OPV can only be anticipated if one takes advantage of its adaptability and places it in a more complex context. The only well documented examples comprise lighting solutions for developing countries12,13 where the final evolution was a pocket sized lamp.13 The solar cell serves the purpose of charging a battery that can power a white LED when light is needed. In this example the solar cell is thus a subcomponent in a more complex system and the strength of the OPV is in this case not its cost nor its performance but the fact that it can be readily integrated.
In this work we describe how a small credit card sized polymer solar cell module comprising 16 serially connected solar cells is prepared on a scale in the range of 10000 units and integrated into a final product. We describe considerations of manufacture, technical yield, performance and integration. Finally, 10000 units of this lamp were distributed freely at the LOPE-C conference in June 2011 as the annual OE-A demonstrator (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The OE-A demonstrator 2011 presented as a credit card sized flashlight comprising an OPV charging a lithium polymer battery, printed circuitry and a white LED. 
2. Experimental
2.1. Solar cell module preparation
The preparation of the polymer solar cell modules was according to the well described ProcessOne.8 Briefly, the devices employed a 175 micron thick PET substrate with a sputtered layer of ITO. The ITO was patterned through screen printing an etch resist, etching, stripping, washing and drying. An electron transport layer comprising doped zinc oxide was slot die coated from water, followed by slot-die coating the active layer (P3HT-PCBM) from chlorobenzene and PEDOT:PSS as the hole transport layer. Finally, the silver back electrode was screen printed and the devices were encapsulated using an Amcor barrier with a pressure sensitive adhesive. The devices prepared here differed significantly in four aspects. Firstly, in the size of the modules that comprise stripes with widths of 3 mm spaced by 1 mm. Secondly, the web width was 305 mm and three sets of 16 stripes were prepared simultaneously. Thirdly, each printed motif (305 × 305 mm) presented 15 independent modules. Fourthly, the achievement of a high technical yield was only possible by employing the PEDOT:PSS as the back electrode and silver was only printed in thin stripes to connect cells and thus not formally as a back electrode (Fig. 2). Three rolls of 100 m foil were prepared representing a maximum of 4918 modules per roll. After trimming run-in and run-out each roll presented a nominal maximal yield of 4500 modules. A total of 13500 functional modules were thus prepared.
 Fig. 2  Manufacture of the OPV using R2R methods. The foil with the PET–ITO–ZnO–P3HT:PCBM is shown (A). Slot-die coating of PEDOT:PSS (B). Screen printing of the silver back electrode and contacts (C) and lamination (D). 
2.2. Solar cell performance and stability
The narrow stripe width (3 mm) and the relatively high conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS back electrode enable the successful preparation of devices where no metal back electrode is employed.
In terms of performance this implies that the initial performance is significantly higher than what could be obtained with a printed electrode (full or grid). It also implies that the performance over time presents an initial drop due to the drop in the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS back electrode. The initial performance of the solar cells was found to be quite high and averaging around 2% in terms of power conversion efficiency (when tested at 1.5 suns). A series of devices (1000 modules) were kept on the roll after initial testing and were stored at room temperature (22 ± 5 °C) and ambient humidity (40 ± 10% rh) for 3 months (ISOS-D-16). Upon storage the performance drops significantly and this can be expected to decrease the performance of the OPV powered flashlight over time. Both fill factor and open circuit voltage remain relatively unaffected meaning that the OPV will still charge the battery albeit at lower efficiency (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  The performance of 1000 modules as prepared (black) and the same modules after 3 months of storage on the roll (red). The test conditions were a R2R solar simulator with approximate conditions of AM1.5G (1500 W m−2, 75 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp). 
2.3. Humidity and encapsulation studies
Since PEDOT:PSS is used as the back electrode it can be anticipated that the effects of humidity and the variation in humidity surrounding the cell during operation. This was studied by placing an unencapsulated device in a nitrogen chamber while varying the humidity (Fig. 4). The illumination was AM1.5G (1000 W m−2, 85 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp, ISOS-L-16). The encapsulation was tested using three different barriers with two different adhesives and laminated either in ambient atmosphere or inside a dry nitrogen purged glove box. The results are summarized in Table 1, sorted by stability. The following barriers have been used: Amcor barrier (Amcor), FujiFilm barrier and self made barrier based on 100 μm PEN foil with 150 nm of silicon nitride (SixNy), applied by PE-CVD.
Table 1 Summary of stability data for 22 modules with specified lamination conditions and sorted by stability after 1000 hours under a solar simulator. T80 refers to the time for the cell to degrade to 80% of its peak efficiency











 Fig. 4  Variation in photovoltaic parameters as a function of changing the humidity. The device was not encapsulated but kept in a nitrogen atmosphere (<1 ppm O2) where the relative humidity was changed. Low humidity clearly leads to faster degradation. Please note that the device was cut so as to comprise only 4 serially connected cells in order to fit into the atmosphere chamber. The Voc is therefore lower than for the full module. 
The barriers have been laminated with 3M optically clear adhesives either 467MPF with the thickness of 50 μm or 8211 adhesive with the thickness of 50 μm. The cells were exposed at ambient conditions between when they were manufactured at Risø DTU (Denmark) and when they were received at the Holst Center (Holland), for over 30 days. During this time there is an initial degradation. Changes in humidity on the PEDOT:PSS–active layer interface accounts for some of this degradation.14 Before lamination both barrier foils and adhesives were put in nitrogen filled glow box for one week to dry and remove the absorbed water. Then comparison of glove box and ambient lamination has been performed. Twenty two modules were prepared, photographed, and imaged using light beam induced current (LBIC) mapping.
The IV curves of the modules were then recorded at 15 minute intervals during continuous soaking under an AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2 metal halide lamp at 75 ± 5 °C for 1000 hours (Table 1 and Fig. 5). All three of the barrier materials demonstrated their effectiveness by preserving module performances effectively in this study in some cases. It was expected that lamination inside the glove box would provide superior stability, because cells, barriers and adhesives have less chance to absorb water which will degrade the cells. However, in general the ambient lamination environment proved to be superior to the glove box environment. We assume that there are several reasons. Firstly, the limited space and thick gloves in the glove box hamper operational freedom, leading to low reproducibility of the results. Secondly, the applied lamination pressure in a glove box was not controlled but performed manually, while ambient lamination has been automated with a fixed pressure. This illustrates the advantage of an automated process, which provides high reproducibility of the results. Although, ambient lamination was automated, in this study the lamination has been performed individually for each module. This can lead to some spread of the results, as different bending angles have been applied both for different modules and barriers. Sheet-to-sheet processing can never compete with the uniformity of automated roll-to-roll processes.
 Fig. 5  An example of a device (highlighted in bold in Table 1) as photographed (top left). The lifetime/stability experiment testing the different barriers AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 75 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp (top right). The typical evolution of the photovoltaic parameters as a function of time during continuous illumination of the device after the initial drop in PCE from around 2% to 0.5% is shown (below). LBIC images of the device before and after the stability test (inset in graph left and right respectively, white scale bar = 1 cm). 
2.4. Electrical lamp design
The OPV powered lamp has previously been prepared using a blocking diode between the battery and the OPV.13 The diode employed was the 1N4148 type which has an exceptionally low leakage current which enables the lamp to be stored in the charged state for very long periods of time. The disadvantage is that the OPV has to deliver approximately 1 V in excess to start charging. The schematic and printed circuit are shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  The schematic diagram for the OPV flashlight is shown (left) with Z = Zener diode to prevent overcharging of the lithium polymer battery. D = blocking diode preventing discharge of the battery through the OPV. PV = the solar cells. Batt = the lithium polymer battery. LED = the white light emitting diode. SW = the ON/OFF switch to the LED and R = a printed resistor to avoid driving the LED too hard. The actual printed circuitry (middle) and the final lamp design are also shown (right). 
The previous conclusion was that this disadvantage is by far outweighed by the advantages of safekeeping the stored energy. In this improved version of the lamp it was decided to include a low cost mechanism to avoid overcharging of the lithium polymer battery as this is known to lead to destruction of the battery. This damage process comes into effect when the lithium polymer battery is charged beyond approx. 4.2 V. We placed a Zener diode (MMSZ5231BT1G. 5.1 V breakdown) across the OPV such that any charging at potentials above 4.2 V was avoided (Fig. 6). The light source was a white light LED (Micro SIDELED LW Y87C from OSRAM) with a colour temperature of 6200 K and an optical efficiency of 14 lm W−1.
The battery was a lithium polymer battery with a nominal capacity of 105 mA h. All components were RoHS compliant and lead (Pb) free. The typical current passed through the diode in the “ON” state was 20 mA giving operation for 5 hours on a fully charged battery independently of indoor or outdoor use. The full charging time of a discharged battery with the typical stabilized charging current of 3–7 mA would be 15–30 hours.
2.5. Optical design
In the first version of the pocket sized lamp13 the LED was open to the atmosphere and this resulted in malfunction in some instances. It was thus desirable to place the diode such that it was mechanically protected without adversely affecting the optical output. Since the lamps are prepared in sheets of 15 units and cut into their final shape in the final step this implies that the optical path of the emitted light goes through a lasercut area. It is naïve to think that perfect optics can be prepared by direct laser cutting in PET. Therefore the aim was that the encasement could be achieved and the optical loss compensated by a lasercut cylindrical lens. A ray tracing algorithm was developed and employed to design the position of the LED and the lasercut optics as shown in Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  The lasercut lens system as arrived at through using a ray tracing algorithm (bottom left). The actual lens designs are shown (right) along with the irradiation (upper left) from the lamps having no lasercut optics (bottom right), a spreading lens (middle right) and the focusing lens (top right). The final focusing lamp design outline is shown schematically (bottom center). 
2.6. Lamp assembly
The assembly of the lamp started with the R2R manufacture of the polymer solar cells as described above. Electric circuitry was then printed on a PET carrier substrate using full R2R screen printing. The foil with the circuits was cut into sheets and laminated onto the thick PET plates carrying adhesive on both sides and having the holes for the battery and components lasercut. The components were then mounted and the switch, metal sponges and batteries were placed in their positions before overlaminating the lasercut sheet carrying 15 solar cell modules.
Finally the overlay carrying the OE-A logo was applied. In the very final step the lamps were lasercut from the sheet and manually tested for operation (Fig. 8). A conducting silver circuit was printed first followed by an insulating lacquer around the mounting spots for the discrete components. Finally graphite was printed for the switch.
 Fig. 8  Some photographs taken during the assembly of the lamps. Mounting of SMD components (A), removal of adhesive liner (B), mounting of contact sponge and batteries (C), some of the solar cells laser cut into sheets with holes for the on/off button (D), lamination of the solar cell onto the circuit (E), final sheet without the printed overlay (F), close-up photo of the battery when mounted in the circuit (G), laser cutting into final devices (H) and the final lamp test (I). 
3. Results and discussion
3.1. The OE-A demonstrator
The purpose of the OE-A demonstrator is to identify a complex functional unit that fulfills and represents the purpose of flexible and printed electronics. The unit has to present a printed design in large numbers at low cost. While the number of 10000 units is arbitrarily set it does represent a size where manual preparation would be exceptionally tedious if not impossible. It is thus a number that sets the bar in terms of qualification but also in terms of cost since the unit cost for such numbers must be low in order to enable free distribution. The criteria set by the OE-A can thus be viewed as cleverly chosen to avoid the presentation of a demonstrator that is unrealistically expensive or exceptionally complex in its make-up. The choice of the functional unit was an OPV-powered flashlight that comprises many advances and some history of development that roots back to a demonstration for the Lighting Africa initiative12 several years ago (field tested in mid 2009). Several lessons have been learned from the large flexible lamp tested in Zambia12 through upscaling11 and improvement in product integration13 all the way to the present demonstrator in 2011. The small flashlight is a demonstrator of the possibilities that OPV has to offer in terms of scalability, miniaturization, adaptability, manufacturability, integration, complexity and a high technical yield. There are always compromises to be made and in the case of this demonstrator we have compromised performance and stability to achieve the former. The compromise is balanced such that the objective of the demonstrator is reached (a lamp that can recharge in natural sunlight) while the objectives described above and the objectives set by the OE-A are also reached (10000 units at low cost distributed for free).
3.2. Manufacture of the OE-A demonstrator
The manufacture of the demonstrators started with full roll-to-roll manufacture of the solar cells using a polymer solar cell coater from Grafisk Maskinfabrik (at Risø DTU) followed by lamp assembly (at Mekoprint) in sheets of 15 lamps. The technical yield of the demonstrator is approximately 89% based on all steps. This technical yield is exceptionally high considering that the entire manufacturing process comprises more than 35 discrete steps that are only tested twice in the process (OPV function and lamp function). To achieve this all steps were performed in automated processes except for the mounting of the batteries and the final testing of the lamp function which were done manually. When comparing the OPV flashlight to its predecessors12,13 there are several new additions, fully encapsulated LEDs with lasercut optics, improved switch, improved electric contacting, lower materials usage, better protection against delamination, rugged design, protection against overcharging, smaller outline and all this at a lower overall cost. This proves that any demonstration has to be refined through several steps (this lamp represents the 6th iteration) and only through feedback from the end user will this demonstration be able to improve further.
3.3. Stability and performance of OPV
The current performance of OPV with respect to stability and performance places it at the very bottom of the list of competitive PV technologies and it can be viewed critically as a very expensive hobby. While OPV with its current record levels of power conversion efficiency reportedly15 exceeds 8% it has so far not been scaled to any level beyond the one “hero” device. So far large scale roll-to-roll manufacture of many thousands of OPV modules leads to average efficiencies on the order of 0.5–2%. In spite of this it is of interest to identify where OPV might perform usefully even if it is not competitive in its current form. The ease of processing and its adaptability is an identified strength of OPV and the possibility of miniaturization makes it very suitable for applications where low average power levels are needed. The miniaturization also brings along with it the challenges of being able to keep the registration while coating and printing many layers, maintaining a high geometric fill factor and keeping a high technical yield. In terms of the printability and coatability we chose lines with a width of 3 mm spaced by 1 mm and aimed for a geometric fill factor of nominally 50%. The fact that the lines are narrow and the active area should only span 2 mm of the stripe width enabled us to employ the PEDOT:PSS as the back electrode; we not only used less printed silver in the devices but also used silver only for interconnecting the cells in the module. This is good when viewing the initial performance of the devices as the printing of silver pastes on top of the active layers has been demonstrated to be critical for performance.16 Another problem however takes place over time and that is the relatively difficult nature of PEDOT:PSS as a back electrode over time and under changing levels of humidity.14 This implied that the initial performance of the solar cell modules was very high (around 2%) but also that the performance quickly decreased and settled at performances in the range of 0.5–1%. It would have been possible to print full silver back electrodes and maintain a higher performance over time but at the expense of a high technical yield for such miniaturized devices. In this case we gave priority to the high technical yield and accepted a lower performance level over time since the main degradation happens to the generated current and not to the module voltage which is critical for being able to charge the battery. This implies that even though the charging efficiency will decrease over time it will not lead to complete failure as would be the case if the voltage dropped below the charging voltage (4.7–5.2 V).
3.4. The testing of different barriers for the OPV
As seen in Table 1, all three barriers demonstrated T80 values over 500 hours, although the highest stability was seen in modules with fairly low PCE values ∼0.3%. The dashed line in Table 1 separates those modules with T80 well over 100 hours from those with T80 values well below 100 hours, a clearly discernible gap in the T80 values. It is notable that the Fuji and PEN/SixNy samples are quite bimodal in performance with half above and half below this threshold. In comparison, 7 of the 8 Amcor samples are above the threshold, promising more consistent performance. In addition, as can be seen in Fig. 5, the Amcor samples (the eight samples near the front of the image) maintain a pristine clear appearance after soaking, while the other barrier materials develop a translucent, diffuse yellow haze. In Fig. 9 we plot the stability of the different barriers tested against the final Voc after 1000 hours under the solar simulator. The average and standard deviation of the initial Voc values were 7.1 ± 0.5 volts. In the flashlight application it is critical to use a barrier that enables us to maintain a high voltage over a long time period, and the Amcor barrier does this well. The failure of modules is correlated with changes in their visual appearance, as a bleaching of the polymer as well as in LBIC imaging, and is a topic of further study.
 Fig. 9  Stability (represented by T80) plotted vs. the Voc after 1000 hours under AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 75 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp. The average initial Voc value and standard deviation for all 22 modules was 7.1 ± 0.5 volts. The dashed lines represent thresholds for satisfactory devices T80 > 100 hours, and Voc >5 volts. It is clear that the Amcor barrier (blue diamonds) has the highest yield in this test. 
3.5. Operation of the OPV flashlight
The solar cell modules were manufactured in February 2011 and the 10000 flashlight units were delivered to the OE-A in mid May 2011 for demonstration at the LOPE-C conference on the 28th of July 2011. This shows that it is possible to prepare, handle and operate on the solar cell many months in advance of point in time where their application begins. How long they will operate is of course a question of the operator and the conditions that they will become subject to. Based on the previous re-incarnations of the flashlight and earlier prototypes we estimate that they will in many cases remain functional for years. On the scale of 10000 units there will undoubtedly be some catastrophic failures and failures of the components (battery, switch, loss of contact to components). The exact number is of great interest but of course difficult to firmly estimate at this point. We can however estimate it based on previous experiments with one of the earlier prototypes that were prepared on the scale of 250 lamps. Of those we know of 12 catastrophic failures or about 0.5%. The real number may of course be higher as the reports on such failures might not all be fed back to us, this is a minimum failure level. Based on this and the improvements we have made to the lamp and assembly we estimate that less than 0.1% of the lamps will fail catastrophically and that more than 98% of the lamps will remain functional after 1 year. To rate the usefulness of the flashlight is of course difficult at this point. It has undoubtedly been very successful at the LOPE-C conference and it is a very important demonstrator of the capacity of the technology at this point in time. Once the low cost potential is realized this type of application could become very important in developing parts of the world.
3.6. Considerations of the demonstrator
The OE-A flashlight demonstrator presented here is not protected by intellectual property rights. It is inconceivable that one can claim intellectual property over a light source powered by a battery that is charged by a solar cell as these sorts of applications were amongst the first to be described for photovoltaics in the very early 1960s. The replacement of i.e. a silicon solar cell with a polymer solar cell does not represent innovative height which can qualify as intellectual property. Since the materials in the lamp are not protected by intellectual property rights the flashlight was prepared without payment of royalties to any third party and the printing/processing methods of the polymer solar cell and the flashlight are free for anyone to pursue. Industrialisation of a technology such as the one presented here is free for anyone to pursue in a European context and in the context of Japan and the United States after year 2013. A careful analysis of the patent situation has been reported3 revealing how open the IPR situation is for OPV. It is very interesting to note that the regions of the world where applications such as the one presented here may ultimately become useful12 do not have any intellectual protection of the OPV technology which should be viewed as a strength. One has to bear in mind that the strengths of OPV are the scalability and the low cost potential and it is unlikely that one can realize the full potential of these if the field is dominated by only a few players.
3.7. Further developments
While this OPV demonstrator may be useful in the absence of light and it does show how far OPV has come as a technology it also clearly demonstrates the large amount of developments that are still needed before OPV can become useful to anyone outside the scientific/technical community that for instance OE-A and the LOPE-C conference represents. There are many areas that need attention; most importantly environmentally friendly processing17,18 and careful analysis of the environmental impact through life cycle assessment and analysis.19,20 Initial studies show feasibility and some promise but also that there is a long way home.
4. Conclusions
We have successfully demonstrated the medium scale manufacture and product integration of OPV at the level of 10000 units with a high technical yield. The demonstration that comprised an OPV flashlight was demonstrated and distributed freely at the LOPE-C conference 2011. It was possible to achieve the high technical yield in spite of many discrete steps through careful choice of the sequence of processing steps that for a large part was carried out using roll-to-roll methods and some by sheet-to-sheet methods on 15 units at a time. Only two of the steps involved manual handling of the discrete units (battery mounting and final testing of the flashlight). We demonstrate the possibility to miniaturize OPV and illustrate avenues for adaptability and easy product integration. Finally we also highlighted some areas that should be encouraged for furthering the development of OPV.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jakob Bork for taking photographs during lamp assembly. This work has been supported by the Danish Strategic Research Council (2104-07-0022) and EUDP (j. no. 64009-0050). Partial financial support was also received from the European Commission as part of the Framework 7 ICT 2009 collaborative project HIFLEX (grant no. 248678) from the EU-Indian framework of the “Largecells” project that received funding from the European Commission's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013. grant no. 261936) and from PV-ERA-NET (project acronym POLYSTAR).
References
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Fréchet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nielsen, C. Cruickshank, S. Foged, J. Thorsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1553–1571 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan, B. Gholamkhass, S. Holdcroft, C. Schlenker, M. E. Thompson, B. C. Thompson, D. Olson, D. S. Ginley, S. E. Shaheen, H. N. Alshareef, J. W. Murphy, W. J. Youngblood, N. C. Heston, J. Reynolds, S. Jia, D. Laird, S. M. Tuladhar, J. G. A. Dane, P. Atienzar, J. Nelson, J. M. Kroon, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen, K. Tvingstedt, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, O. Inganäs, M. Lira-Cantu, R. de Bettignies, S. Guillerez, T. Aernouts, D. Cheyns, L. Lutsen, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, M. Niggemann, H.-F. Schleiermacher, P. Liska, M. Grätzel, P. Lianos, E. A. Katz, W. Lohwasser and B. Jannon, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1968–1977 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gevorgyan, A. J. Medford, E. Bundgaard, S. B. Sapkota, H.-F. Schleiermacher, B. Zimmermann, U. Würfel, A. Chafiq, M. Lira-Cantu, T. Swonke, M. Wagner, C. J. Brabec, O. Haillant, E. Voroshazi, T. Aernouts, R. Steim, J. A. Hauch, A. Elschner, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, A. Langzettel, D. Laird, M. T. Lloyd, T. Rath, E. Maier, G. Trimmel, M. Hermenau, T. Menke, K. Leo, R. Rösch, M. Seeland, H. Hoppe, T. J. Nagle, K. B. Burke, C. J. Fell, D. Vak, T. B. Singh, S. E. Watkins, Y. Galagan, A. Manor, E. A. Katz, T. Kim, K. Kim, P. M. Sommeling, W. J. H. Verhees, S. C. Veenstra, M. Riede, M. G. Christoforo, T. Currier, V. Shrotriya, G. Schwartz and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1398–1416 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, E. Bundgaard, S. R. Kurtz, D. S. Ginley, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, P. Morvillo, E. A. Katz, A. Elschner, O. Haillant, T. R. Currier, V. Shrotriya, M. Hermenau, M. Riede, K. R. Kirov, G. Trimmel, T. Rath, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt, M. Lira-Cantu, D. Laird, C. McGuiness, S. Gowrisanker, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, J. Hauch, R. Steim, D. M. DeLongchamp, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, N. Espinosa, A. Urbina, G. Yaman- Uzunoglu, J.-B. Bonekamp, A. J. J. M. van Breemen, C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1253–1267 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, O. Hagemann, J. Alstrup, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, K. Larsen and J. Kristensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 422–441 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1636–1641 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrøm and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512–525 CAS .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jørgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994–9001 RSC .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883–16892 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.konarka.com/, http://www.solarmer.com/, http://www.heliatek.com/, http://www.mitsubishi.com/.
F. C. Krebs, R. Søndergaard and M. Jørgensen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1348–1353 CrossRef CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Helgesen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 68–71 CrossRef .
T. R. Andersen, T. T. Larsen-Olsen, B. Andreasen, A. P. L. Böttiger, J. E. Carlé, M. Helgesen, E. Bundgaard, K. Norrman, J. W. Andreasen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4188–4196 CrossRef CAS .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde, A. Urbina and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1293–1302 CrossRef CAS .
N. Espinosa, R. García-Valverde and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1547–1557 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
The Organic Electronics Association (OE-A) represents the whole value chain in organic and printed electronics. The overall purpose is to create visibility and bridge the gap between science, technology and application for the members that comprise internationally leading companies and research institutes. The OE-A also serves as a platform to demonstrate the technology at the contemporary level and not at a level projected unrealistically into the future. The aim is to truthfully present and demonstrate technology and the progress within the realm of organic and printed electronics. This is achieved through demonstrations at the Large Area Organic and Printed Electronics Conference (LOPE-C) which is held annually. The demonstrator must comprise a complex printed organic electronic unit that has some functionality and that can be distributed in large numbers (ten thousand units). In 2011 the OE-A demonstrator comprises a credit card sized flashlight as a demonstrator of roll-to-roll manufacture of polymer solar cells (OPV) and how they can be miniaturized, mass produced and integrated into a complex unit that comprises all aspects of state-of-the-art organic electronics: energy harvesting (OPV), light (LED), energy storage (battery), functionality (printed circuitry, simple optics, overcharge protection) and high yield manufacture (many steps, efficient, few quality control points).


 	Fig. 1  The OE-A demonstrator 2011 presented as a credit card sized flashlight comprising an OPV charging a lithium polymer battery, printed circuitry and a white LED.	 

 	Fig. 2  Manufacture of the OPV using R2R methods. The foil with the PET–ITO–ZnO–P3HT:PCBM is shown (A). Slot-die coating of PEDOT:PSS (B). Screen printing of the silver back electrode and contacts (C) and lamination (D).	 

 	Fig. 3  The performance of 1000 modules as prepared (black) and the same modules after 3 months of storage on the roll (red). The test conditions were a R2R solar simulator with approximate conditions of AM1.5G (1500 W m−2, 75 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp).	 




 	Fig. 4  Variation in photovoltaic parameters as a function of changing the humidity. The device was not encapsulated but kept in a nitrogen atmosphere (<1 ppm O2) where the relative humidity was changed. Low humidity clearly leads to faster degradation. Please note that the device was cut so as to comprise only 4 serially connected cells in order to fit into the atmosphere chamber. The Voc is therefore lower than for the full module.	 

 	Fig. 5  An example of a device (highlighted in bold in Table 1) as photographed (top left). The lifetime/stability experiment testing the different barriers AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 75 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp (top right). The typical evolution of the photovoltaic parameters as a function of time during continuous illumination of the device after the initial drop in PCE from around 2% to 0.5% is shown (below). LBIC images of the device before and after the stability test (inset in graph left and right respectively, white scale bar = 1 cm).	 

 	Fig. 6  The schematic diagram for the OPV flashlight is shown (left) with Z = Zener diode to prevent overcharging of the lithium polymer battery. D = blocking diode preventing discharge of the battery through the OPV. PV = the solar cells. Batt = the lithium polymer battery. LED = the white light emitting diode. SW = the ON/OFF switch to the LED and R = a printed resistor to avoid driving the LED too hard. The actual printed circuitry (middle) and the final lamp design are also shown (right).	 

 	Fig. 7  The lasercut lens system as arrived at through using a ray tracing algorithm (bottom left). The actual lens designs are shown (right) along with the irradiation (upper left) from the lamps having no lasercut optics (bottom right), a spreading lens (middle right) and the focusing lens (top right). The final focusing lamp design outline is shown schematically (bottom center).	 

 	Fig. 8  Some photographs taken during the assembly of the lamps. Mounting of SMD components (A), removal of adhesive liner (B), mounting of contact sponge and batteries (C), some of the solar cells laser cut into sheets with holes for the on/off button (D), lamination of the solar cell onto the circuit (E), final sheet without the printed overlay (F), close-up photo of the battery when mounted in the circuit (G), laser cutting into final devices (H) and the final lamp test (I).	 

 	Fig. 9  Stability (represented by T80) plotted vs. the Voc after 1000 hours under AM1.5G, 1000 W m−2, 75 ± 5 °C, metal halide lamp. The average initial Voc value and standard deviation for all 22 modules was 7.1 ± 0.5 volts. The dashed lines represent thresholds for satisfactory devices T80 > 100 hours, and Voc >5 volts. It is clear that the Amcor barrier (blue diamonds) has the highest yield in this test.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
