Efficient and ultraviolet durable planar perovskite solar cells via a ferrocenecarboxylic acid modified nickel oxide hole transport layer   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR08750K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR08750K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5617-5625Efficient and ultraviolet durable planar perovskite solar cells via a ferrocenecarboxylic acid modified nickel oxide hole transport layer†

        
          
            Jiankai 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Luo‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Weijia 
            Xie‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xuanhuai 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xian 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianping 
            Zhou
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Sumei 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Ou-Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuo 
            Sun
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiaohong 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aEngineering Research Center for Nanophotonics and Advanced Instrument, Ministry of Education, and School of Physics and Materials Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062, China. E-mail: xhchen@phy.ecnu.edu.cn
bSchool of Automation Engineering, Shanghai University of Electric Power, Shanghai 200090, China. E-mail: zhoujianping@shiep.edu.cn
Received 
      23rd November 2017
    , Accepted 13th February 2018First published on 15th February 2018AbstractPlanar perovskite solar cells (PSCs) that use nickel oxide (NiOx) as a hole transport layer have recently attracted tremendous attention because of their excellent photovoltaic efficiencies and simple fabrication. However, the electrical conductivity of NiOx and the interface contact properties of the NiOx/perovskite layer are always limited for the NiOx layer fabricated at a relatively low annealing temperature. Ferrocenedicarboxylic acid (FDA) was firstly introduced to modify a p-type NiOx hole transport layer in PSCs, which obviously improves the crystallization of the perovskite layer and hole transport and collection abilities and reduces carrier recombination. PSCs with a FDA modified NiOx layer reached a PCE of 18.20%, which is much higher than the PCE (15.13%) of reference PSCs. Furthermore, PSCs with a FDA interfacial modification layer show better UV durability and a hysteresis-free effect and still maintain the original PCE value of 49.8%after being exposed to UV for 24 h. The enhanced performance of the PSCs is attributed to better crystallization of the perovskite layer, the passivation effect of FDA, superior interface contact at the NiOx/perovskite layers and enhancement of the electrical conductivity of the FDA modified NiOx layer. In addition, PSCs with FDA inserted at the interface of the perovskite/PCBM layers can also improve the PCE to 16.62%, indicating that FDA have dual functions to modify p-type and n-type carrier transporting layers.
1. Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have attracted growing attention because of their promising advantages of low-cost and high efficiency. Although the power conversion efficiency of the mesoporous PSCs is already more than 22.7%,1 high temperature processing at 500 °C is still required for the most efficient mesoporous PSCs. Planar structured perovskite solar cells compared to the mesoporous PSCs are expected to be popular due to their simple fabrication. The emergent inverted (p-i-n) planar PSCs consist of a methyl ammonium lead halide perovskite which is usually sandwiched between the electron/hole selective layers to facilitate charge extraction. Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) as a hole buffer layer has been widely applied in inverted PSCs.2 However, PEDOT:PSS strongly limits the lifetime and performance of cells due to its hydroscopic and acidic nature along with its inability to block electrons.2,3
Inorganic p-type semiconductors, such as CuSCN,4 CuI5 and CoOx6 as a hole transport layer (HTL) instead of PEDOT:PSS have better stability for PSCs. The typical nickel oxide (NiOx) as an HTL has shown great potential due to its large band gap and deep valence band.7,8 Jen et al.9 used a solution-processed copper-doped nickel oxide as an HTL to improve electrical conductivity, which greatly enhanced the PCE of PSCs from 8.94% to 15.40%. Recently, the Li+/Mg2+ co-doped NiOx as an HTL has been developed by Chen et al.,10 where PSCs obtained a PCE of 16.2% with a square centimeter area. However, high temperature processing at 400 °C is still required to obtain high conductivity of NiOx and thus superior performance of PSCs.11 NiOx as a hole transport layer using low temperature treatment is one of the most interesting aspects. But NiOx with low temperature processing usually suffers from a series of deficiencies such as reduced carrier transport and extraction abilities, enhanced carrier recombination and a hysteresis effect due to its increasing defects and inferior crystallinity.12 The preformed nano-crystals of NiOx as the HTL with a low-temperature process were reported to be an efficient way to improve efficiency and inhibit the hysteresis effect of the PSCs.13 The sol–gel fabricated NiOx films with a relatively low temperature treatment usually need to use a surface modification method to improve the contact properties between the perovskite and hole transport layers.14 Yang et al.14 employed diethanolamine to modify the NiOx surface, which obviously improves the efficiency and reduce the hysteresis effect due to the superior NiOx/perovskite contact and perovskite crystallization. Although the origin of the hysteresis effect in PSCs still needs to be investigated, some factors such as slow trapping or detrapping of charges in electronic interface states,15 contact conductivity,16 ferroelectricity17 and ion migration,18 can all result in the hysteresis effect of the PSCs.
Ferrocene derivatives have been widely used in the fields of catalysts,19 electrochemistry,20 and organic solar cells21 due to their unique chemical structure, high thermal stability and chemical stability. The ferrocenedicarboxylic acid is inserted between ITO and n-type ZnO as a modified layer, which successfully improves the PCE of organic solar cells due to enhanced exciton dissociation and charge collection efficiencies.21 In this paper, we firstly introduced ferrocenedicarboxylic acid (FDA) as a p-type NiOx interfacial modified layer, which can overcome the inferior contact properties and high density defects of the NiOx interface. The PCE of PSCs modified with FDA is significantly increased to 18.20% from 15.13% with reference cells, and its hysteresis is eliminated. Furthermore, PSCs with FDA show better UV-resistance. The enhanced performance of PSCs with FDA is attributed to better crystallization of the perovskite, superior interface contact at the NiOx/perovskite layers, the passivation effect of FDA and enhancement of the electrical conductivity of the FDA modified NiOx layer.
2. Experimental section
FDA (purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent) powders were dispersed in chlorobenzene, and stirred at room temperature for 12 h. The chemical structure of FDA is shown in Fig. S1.† A perovskite precursor solution was prepared by dissolving 1 M methyl ammonium iodide (MAI, purchased from 1-Material Inc.) and 1 M lead(II) iodide (PbI2, 99.9%, Aladdin Reagents) in a mixture of dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO, AR 99% GC, Aladdin Reagents) and γ-butyrolactone (GBL, AR 99% GC, Aladdin Reagents) (7:3 v/v). The pre-cleaned ITO coated glass with a sheet resistance of 10 Ω □−1 was treated with ultraviolet ozone for 20 minutes. NiOx solutions were spin-coated at 4500 rpm for 1 min to form a 20 nm thick film, followed by annealing at 235 °C for 45 min. The NiOx solution was prepared by dissolving 25 mg nickel acetate tetrahydrate in 1 ml 2-methoxyethanol and 6 μl monoethanolamine. Then the FDA solution was spin-coated onto the surface of the NiOx layer at 4000 rpm for 1 min in a N2-filled glove box. Next, the samples were retained for 30 min before spin-coating the perovskite layer further. The CH3NH3PbI3 film was spin-coated on NiOx or the FDA modified NiOx layer by a consecutive two-step spin-coating process at 2000 rpm and 4000 rpm for 20 s and 60 s, respectively. During the second spin-coating step, chlorobenzene drop-casting was employed to replace DMSO solvent. The samples were dried at 100 °C for 10 minutes. After being cooled down, a 40 nm thick PCBM ([6,6]-phenyl-C 61-butyric acid methyl ester) layer was formed onto the CH3NH3PbI3 film by spin-coating the PCBM solution dissolved in chlorobenzene (10 mg ml−1) at 1200 rpm for 60 s. Finally, a 100 nm thick AgAl alloy electrode was thermally evaporated onto the PCBM layer under a base pressure of 5 × 10−4 Pa. The weight ratio (wt%) of Al to Ag in the AgAl alloy, purchased from Trillion Metals Co., Ltd (Beijing, China), is 3 wt%. The fabrication process of polymer solar cells is as follows. PTB7-Th (99%) was purchased from 1-Material Inc. and PC71BM (99.5%) was purchased from Solenne BV. A blend solution containing PTB7-Th:PC71BM (7 mg mL−1:10.5 mg mL−1) dissolved in chlorobenzene/1,8-diiodooctane (97:3, v/v) at 1000 rpm for 15 s was spin-coated onto an AZO surface to form an 80 nm photoactive layer. A 7 nm thick MoO3 interlayer and a 100 nm AgAl alloy electrode were then thermally evaporated onto the active layer.
The surface morphologies of the samples were investigated by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800) and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM, JPK Nano Wizard II), respectively. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the perovskite films were recorded with an PW3040/60 instrument (Holland Panalytical PRO) using a Cu Kα radiation source (V = 30 kV, I = 25 mA). Photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a fluorescence spectrophotometer (HORIBA Jobin Yvon Fluoromax-4). The transmission and absorption spectra of the samples were recorded using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Hitachi U-3900). The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley model 2440 source meter in a Newport solar simulator system with an AM1.5G filter and 100 mW cm−2 illumination calibrated by using a standard silicon reference cell (Newport Oriel Instruments 91150V). The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra were recorded using a Newport Optical Power Meter 2936-R by illuminating the device with monochromatic light supplied from a xenon arc lamp in combination with a dual-grating monochromator. The reference numbers of photons incident on the sample were calibrated for each wavelength using a silicon photodiode (Newport Oriel Instruments 71675-71580). EIS measurements were recorded in the dark in the frequency range from 0.1 to 1 × 106 Hz using an Autolab PGSTAT 302N electrochemical workstation. The thickness of the NiOx film was measured by using the DEKTAK XT stylus profiler.
3. Results and discussion
Similar SEM images of NiOx modified without and with FDA were observed, as shown in Fig. 1(a and b). The surface root-mean-square roughness (RMS) of NiOx/FDA and NiOx is respectively 5.57 nm and 8.01 nm, as shown in Fig. 1(c and d), indicating that the surface NiOx modified with FDA becomes smoother. Meanwhile, the contact angle of the NiOx surface modified with FDA compared to the pristine NiOx surface was increased to 57.5° from 12.5°. The reduced surface roughness and the improved contact angle of the NiOx/FDA surface are beneficial to reduce the perovskite nuclei density,22,23 helping to form larger sized perovskite grains.24 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the corresponding NiOx films are shown in Fig. 1e. The diffraction peaks at 37.24° and 62.86° are assigned to the typical diffractions of the (111) and (220) planes of the NiOx.25 The XRD curves of the NiOx modified with and without FDA are almost similar, indicating that FDA modification did not obviously change the structure of the NiOx layer. The similar transmittance spectra of the NiOx films modified with and without FDA were observed, as shown in Fig. 1f, which is consistent with the previous report,26,27 indicating that the enhanced PCE and UV-resistance of PSCs are not related to the acceptance dose of UV-visible light.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of the NiOx surface modified without (a) and with (b) an FDA interfacial layer; AFM images of the NiOx surface modified without (c) and with (d) the FDA layer; (e) XRD patterns of NiOx/FDA and NiOx films onto ITO-coated glass; (f) transmittance spectra of NiOx/FDA and NiOx films onto a glass substrate. The FDA concentration of the modified NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1. 

Fig. 2a and b show the surface morphologies of the perovskite films on NiOx modified without and with the FDA layer. The grain sizes of the perovskite layer onto NiOx/FDA compared to the pristine NiOx substrate become obviously larger, which can be further demonstrated from X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns, as shown in Fig. 2c. The strong peaks at 14.12°, 28.48° and 31.86° correspond to the (110), (220) and (310) planes of the perovskite films. The intensities of these three peaks are obviously increased for the perovskite layer grown on the FDA modified NiOx layer. In the meantime, the absorbance of the perovskite layer onto the NiOx/FDA substrate is slightly increased due to the better crystallinity of the perovskite,28 as shown in Fig. 2d. These results suggested that the FDA modified NiOx surface can improve the crystallization of the perovskite layer, which helps to reduce carrier recombination and improve the photocurrent of the PSCs.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the perovskite layer on (a) NiOx and (b) NiOx/FDA films; (c) XRD patterns and (d) UV-Vis absorption spectra of perovskite (PVK) films on the NiOx and NiOx/FDA layer, respectively. The FDA concentration of the spin-coated NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1. 
The J–V curves of the PSCs based on NiOx modified with different FDA concentrations are shown in Fig. S2.† The photovoltaic parameters of the PSCs are summarized in Table S1.† The optimized FDA concentration spin-coated onto the NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1. The J–V characteristics of typical PSCs based on NiOx with and without the FDA modified layer are shown in Fig. 3a. The improved PCE of the PSCs modified with FDA is primarily attributable to the higher Jsc and FF. PSCs without FDA modification achieved a PCE = 14.77% with a Jsc = 20.2 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.02 V, FF = 71.7% under a forward scan, and a PCE of 14.46% with a Jsc of 20.2 mA cm−2, a Voc of 1.02 V and an FF of 70.2% under a reverse scan. The hysteresis effect of the reference PSCs was obviously observed. However, PSCs with FDA modification showed a PCE of 17.87% with Jsc = 22.55 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V, and FF = 76.2% at a forward scan and a PCE of 17.59% with Jsc = 22.53 mA cm−2, Voc = 1.04 V and FF = 75.8% at a reverse scan, indicating a negligible hysteresis effect. The PCE distributions for 40 devices with and without FDA modification are shown in Fig. 3b. The highest PCEs of PSCs with and without FDA are 18.20% and 15.13%, respectively. The obviously higher PCE and more narrow distributions of PSCs with FDA modification indicate that PSCs with FDA modification have better performance and reproducibility. The incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves in the wavelength range from 350 nm to 750 nm of PSCs with FDA modification are obviously higher than those of the reference PSCs, as shown in Fig. 3c, which is partly attributed to the better crystallinity of the perovskite grown on FDA modified NiOx. The improved carrier transport and extraction abilities can also improve the IPCE values, especially in the red wavelength portion because a higher number of photons are distributed in the wavelength range from 600 to 800 nm.29 The integrated Jsc values from the IPCE spectra of PSCs with and without FDA are respectively 20.9 mA cm−2 and 18.2 mA cm−2, which are somewhat lower than Jsc values from the J–V curves. This is probably attributed to the defects of cells and part deviation of the IPCE measurement.30,31 The dark J–V curves of PSCs with and without FDA modification are shown in Fig. 3d. The reverse saturation current is obviously decreased and the rectifying property is improved for cells with FDA. This means that the carrier recombination is reduced and the charge accumulation phenomenon is weakened at the NiOx/perovskite interface due to the modification of FDA, which is helpful to improve the FF and Jsc of PSCs.30,32
 Fig. 3  (a) J–V characteristics of PSCs with and without FDA modification under forward and reverse scans with a 100 mV s−1 rate; (b) statistical PCEs of 40 devices with NiOx/PVK and NiOx/FDA/PVK; (c) IPCE curves and (d) dark J–V curves of PSCs with and without FDA modification. The FDA concentration of the spin-coated NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1. 
The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra were wildly investigated to gain insight into the photo-physical properties of the perovskite. The PL intensity of the perovskite film is related to carrier recombination and carrier transfer transport and extraction abilities at the interface between the perovskite and carrier transport layers.33Fig. 4a shows the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the perovskite layer spin-coated onto the NiOx and NiOx/FDA surface. The PL intensity of the perovskite onto NiOx/FDA compared to pure NiOx was greatly quenched, suggesting that carriers can be quickly transferred from the perovskite to the NiOx layer using FDA modification. The I–V curves of the NiOx and NiOx/FDA layers from parallel and vertical directions were further measured, as shown in Fig. 4b and c. The enhanced current of the NiOx/FDA layer from the vertical direction indicates that FDA modification helps carrier extraction, which is consistent with the stronger PL quenching of the perovskite deposited onto the NiOx/FDA layer. Furthermore, the current difference of the NiOx/FDA film compared to pure NiOx can be further enlarged in the parallel direction, indicating that FDA modification helps to improve the conductivity of the NiOx layer. Fig. 4(d and e) show the transient Jsc and Voc profiles of PSCs, respectively. The quickly increasing Jsc and a slower decay of Voc for PSCs with FDA modification indicate reduced trap states at the interface of the perovskite/NiOx layers.34,35Fig. 4f reveals the effect of FDA modification on the photocurrent density (Jph) versus effective voltage (Veff). Jph is determined as Jph = Jlight − Jdark, where Jlight and Jdark are the current density under illumination and in the dark, respectively. Veff is determined as Veff = V0 − Va, where V0 is the voltage at which Jph = 0 and Va is the applied bias voltage. Jph increases linearly at a low Veff and saturates at a high Veff. In general, the saturated photocurrent (Jsat) is correlated to the maximum exciton generation rate (Gmax), exciton dissociation probability, and carrier transport and collecting probability in a high Veff region.29,36Gmax could be obtained as Jph = qGmaxL, where q is the electronic charge and L is the thickness of the perovskite film (140 nm). The values of Gmax for devices with and without FDA modification are 9.92 × 1027 m−3 s−1 (Jsat = 222.6 A m−2) and 9.62 × 1027 m−3 s−1 (Jsat = 215.7 A m−2), respectively. The enhanced Gmax reveals the reduced charge recombination at the interface between the perovskite and NiOx layers after FDA modification. The carrier transport and collection probabilities at any effective voltage can be directly obtained from the ratio of Jph/Jsat. The carrier transport and collection probability of cells with FDA modification was increased to 98.4% from 88.2% in control cells, indicating that FDA modification can efficiently improve hole transport and collection abilities of the cells.29,37
 Fig. 4  (a) Photoluminescence of perovskite films on top of NiOx and NiOx/FDA; I–V curves of NiOx and NiOx/FDA films from parallel (b) and vertical (c) directions and the insets are the schematic diagram of the testing structure; transient (d) Jsc and (e) Voc response curves of PSCs with and without FDA modification; (f) plots of Jphversus Veff for cells based on NiOx modified with and without FDA. 
To further investigate the mechanism of the FDA modified NiOx layer, electrochemical impedance spectra of cells with and without FDA modification were measured. Nyquist plots of the cells without FDA modification exhibit an arc in the fourth quadrant in the low frequency range, as shown in Fig. 5a, indicating that negative capacitance exists in PSCs with a pure NiOx layer. However, the −Z′′ values are always positive at any voltages and frequencies after modification with FDA, as shown in Fig. 5b. The negative capacitive behavior is related to the massive accumulation of carriers at the interfaces due to the Schottky contact.38 The negative capacitive behavior of the cells can be controlled through reducing the interface barrier or forming ohmic contacts using an interface modification material.32,39,40 Therefore, the controlled negative capacitive behavior in PSCs with the FDA modified NiOx layer is attributed to the reduced carrier accumulation at the interface of the NiOx/perovskite due to the superior contact properties. The Bode-phase plots of PSCs with and without FDA modification at a bias voltage of 0.9 V are shown in Fig. 5c. The frequency response peak of PSCs with pristine NiOx becomes obvious when compared to PSCs with NiOx/FDA, which may be divided into two peaks by curve fitting. The characteristic frequencies of low-frequency and high-frequency sides are related to carrier recombination and carrier diffusion, respectively. The peak frequency of the low-frequency side is shifted to a lower region with the FDA modified NiOx layer, indicating a reduced carrier recombination due to the passivation effect of FDA and the better crystallization of the perovskite layer.41 The capacitance–voltage characteristics at 1 kHz are shown in Fig. 5d. The capacitance effect was gradually increased with increasing bias voltage, which is indicative of charge accumulation at the interface.42,43 With FDA modification, the capacitance of the cells is significantly reduced, further confirming the passivation effect of FDA and improved contact properties.42,44 The lower accumulation of charge carriers helps obtaining higher photocurrent and less J–V hysteresis.45
 Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of PSCs based on NiOx with (a) and without (b) FDA modification at the forward bias voltage of 0.9 V and 0.1 V in the dark; (c) Bode-phase plots of PSCs with NiOx and NiOx/FDA HTLs at the bias voltage of 0.9 V; (d) capacitance–voltage characteristics of cells with and without FDA modification. 
The J–V curves of PSCs with and without FDA modification as a function of light intensity are shown in Fig. S3.† The linearly fitting curves of the photovoltaic parameters versus light intensity are shown in Fig. 6. The slopes of 1.58kBT/q and 1.66kBT/q (where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, and q is the elementary charge) were simulated for FDA modified cells and the control cells, which are obviously larger than kBT/q, indicating that the recombination mechanisms of trap-assisted recombination and bimolecular recombination both play an important role in PSCs with and without FDA modification.46,47 However, the relative lower deviation slope for FDA modified PSCs suggested the reduced trap-assisted recombination due to FDA passivation. The FF of both kinds of PSCs almost remain constant at a low light density, but the FF values of PSCs without FDA are more obviously decreased at a higher light density, which is evidence of a heavy influence of trap-assisted recombination.47 The slightly linear deviation of Jph of cells with light intensity also supported a certain role of trap-assisted recombination, which is partly responsible for lower integrated Jsc than Jsc from J–V curves.30,47
 Fig. 6  
V
oc, FF and Jsc as a function of light density for PSCs with NiOx and NiOx/FDA. The FDA concentration of the modified spin-coated NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1. 
Solar cells containing organic materials or groups, for example organic solar cells and perovskite solar cells, can be quickly deteriorated under UV irradiation.48 The present light durability tests of perovskite solar cells are usually filtered ultraviolet light to avoid UV damage.11 However, the enhanced UV durability of perovskite solar cells is still an important aim to improve the lifetime of cells. UV irradiation can cause fast release of O2 on the TiO2 and ZnO surface, and induces a large amount of deep trap states leading to charge recombination,31,42 which accelerates the degradation of the TiO2/perovskite interface49 and the ZnO/organic photoactive layer.48 Therefore, PSCs using NiOx as the HTL with and without FDA modification were investigated for comparison. A UV-assisted acceleration aging test of eight devices of each type of PSC without encapsulation under a relative humidity (RH) of 40% in air was carried out to evaluate UV durability. The photovoltaic parameters of PSCs with and without FDA modification at different exposure times of UV irradiation are shown in Fig. 7. The original PCEs of selected PSCs with and without FDA modification are close to the average PCEs of each type. The parameters including the PCE, FF, JSC, and Voc for PSCs without FDA modification were more quickly deteriorated in the UV-assisted acceleration aging test. The normalized PCE of the reference PSCs was quickly decreased to 3.8% the original PCE value and the cells almost disappeared after UV exposure for 24 hours. However, PSCs with FDA modification still maintained the original PCE value of 49.8%, showing superior UV durability. Considering the similar transmittance of spectra for NiOx films modified with and without FDA, the enhanced UV durability of PSCs is not attributed to the enhanced UV absorption of FDA, although the effect of improved UV-resistance of PSCs cannot be excluded completely due to the strong UV absorption properties of FDA. The improved UV-resistance of PSCs is primarily attributed to the passivation effect of FDA and the better crystallization of the perovskite, which is consistent with the previous report that the passivation of TiO2 surfaces can improve the stability of perovskite solar cells, including better UV-resistance.42
 Fig. 7  PCE, FF, Voc and Jsc of PSCs with and without FDA modification without encapsulation at different UV exposure times with an RH of 40% in air. The exposed wavelength of UV tubes is 365 nm and UV light density is 13 mW cm−2. 
Considering the success of organic solar cells with FDA inserted between ITO and the n-type ZnO layer,21 we also investigated the performance of PSCs with FDA inserted at the interface of the perovskite/PCBM layers, as shown in Fig. S4.† The photovoltaic parameters of PSCs are summarized in Table S2.† The PCE of PSCs with a FDA/PCBM layer can reach 16.62%, which is obviously higher than the PCE of reference cells. The reverse saturation dark current density of PSCs with FDA/PCBM was inhibited and their rectifying property was improved. Furthermore, the disappeared negative capacitance of cells with FDA/PCBM at any voltages and frequencies was observed, as shown in Fig. S5b,† indicating that the carrier recombination and accumulation phenomena at the perovskite/PCBM interface can be obviously inhibited due to the interfacial modification of FDA, which results in the improvement of the FF and Jsc of PSCs. The characteristic frequency of the low-frequency side for PSCs with the FDA/PCBM electron transport layer is also shifted to a lower region compared to the reference cells, as shown in Fig. S5c,† which is attributed to the reduced carrier recombination.41 This result indicates that FDA also has the passivation function of the perovskite layer, which can reduce the surface defects of the perovskite layer. The carboxyl groups (–COOH) of FDA usually exhibit stronger interactions with Pb ions or I ions of the perovskite compared with PCBM due to the interactions of hydrogen bonds, which can passivate the surface of the perovskite layer.50 Meanwhile, the enhanced conductivity of PCBM modified with FDA compared to pure PCBM can further improve electron carrier transport and collection abilities. Therefore, these comprehensive functions are expected to be responsible for the reduced electron carrier recombination and accumulation at the interface of the perovskite/PCBM.
To directly demonstrate enhanced transport and collection abilities of the FDA modified n-type layer, the FDA solution with 0.1 mg ml−1 was spin-coated onto the AZO surface. The J–V curves and Jph–Veff curves of PTB7-Th:PC71BM based polymer solar cells with AZO modified with and without FDA are shown in Fig. 8. The PCE of the polymer solar cells with AZO/FDA were greatly increased to 9.86% from 8.27% of the control cells. The carrier transport and collecting probabilities of the polymer solar cells with the FDA modified layer were increased to 90.9% from 88.4% in control cells, and the corresponding reduced reverse dark current of the polymer solar cells with FDA modification can be observed, indicating that FDA as an n-type AZO modification layer can also efficiently improve electron transport and collection abilities and inhibit the carrier recombination.29 Therefore, these results indicate that the FDA modified layer has dual functions in modifying hole and electron transport layers.
 Fig. 8  (a) J–V curves of polymer solar cells modified with and without FDA. Dark J–V curves of the corresponding cells (inset); (b) plots of Jphversus Veff for polymer solar cells with and without FDA modification. The structure of cells: ITO/AZO (20 nm)/FDA/PTB7-Th:PC71BM (80 nm)/MoO3 (7 nm)/AgAl. 
To further explain the reason that the FDA modified layer has dual functions in improving hole and electron transport abilities, the band alignment diagrams of related layers are summarized in Fig. 9. The Fermi energy level (EF), valence band (Vb) and conduction band (Vc) for NiOx and AZO with and without the FDA modified layer were calibrated through UPS measurements and its optical band gap, as shown in Fig. S6.† The energy band gaps of NiOx and AZO films are respectively 3.7 eV and 3.3 eV, calibrated from their absorption spectra. The EF value of NiOx modified with the FDA layer is increased to −4.0 eV from −4.2 eV of pristine NiOx, which boosts hole transport from the perovskite layer to the NiOx layer due to the reduced contact barrier. Similarly, the EF value of AZO modified with the FDA layer is reduced to −3.6 eV from −3.5 eV of pristine AZO, which can lead to the reduced contact barrier and boost electron transport from PC71BM to the AZO layer. Therefore, the varied trend of the Fermi energy levels of NiOx and AZO after FDA modification further supports the dual functions of FDA modification to increase hole and electron transport and exaction abilities.
 Fig. 9  Energy level diagrams of the perovskite and polymer solar cells. (a) Perovskite solar cells based on NiOx modified with and without the FDA layer; (b) polymer solar cells based on AZO modified with and without the FDA layer. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, the champion PCEs of PSCs with FDA modified NiOx and PCBM transport layers can respectively reach 18.20% and 16.62%, which is obviously higher than the PCE (15.13%) of PSCs with pure NiOx, indicating that using FDA as the hole and electron transport modified layer is a good strategy to efficiently improve the performance of PSCs. The integrated effects of better crystallization of the perovskite layer, the passivation effect of FDA, and the improved electrical conductivity of FDA modified NiOx and superior interface contact properties at the interface of NiOx/perovskite layers after FDA modification are primarily responsible for high PCEs, the hysteresis-free effect and UV durability of PSCs. Therefore, ferrocence derivatives as a NiOx modified layer are a class material with great potential to improve the PCEs and UV-resistance of PSCs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 61275038 and 11274119).
Notes and references
NREL Best Research-Cell Efficiencies; Available from: https://www.nrel.gov/pv/assets/images/efficiency-chart.png (accessed Jan 2018).
H. Luo, X. Lin, X. Hou, L. Pan, S. Huang and X. Chen, Efficient and Air-Stable Planar Perovskite Solar Cells Formed on Graphene-Oxide-Modified PEDOT:PSS Hole Transport Layer, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9(4), 39 CrossRef .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Stability/degradation of polymer solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92(7), 686–714 CrossRef .
S. Ye, W. Sun, Y. Li, W. Yan, H. Peng, Z. Bian, Z. Liu and C. Huang, CuSCN-Based Inverted Planar Perovskite Solar Cell with an Average PCE of 15.6%, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(6), 3723–3728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, R. C. M. Fung and P. V. Kamat, An Inorganic Hole Conductor for Organo-Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. Improved Hole Conductivity with Copper Iodide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(2), 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Shalan, T. Oshikiri, S. Narra, M. M. Elshanawany, K. Ueno, H.-P. Wu, K. Nakamura, X. Shi, E. W.-G. Diau and H. Misawa, Cobalt Oxide (CoOx) as an Efficient Hole-Extracting Layer for High-Performance Inverted Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(49), 33592–33600 CAS .
J. Y. Jeng, K. C. Chen, T. Y. Chiang, P. Y. Lin, T. D. Tsai, Y. C. Chang, T. F. Guo, P. Chen, T. C. Wen and Y. J. Hsu, Nickel Oxide Electrode Interlayer in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite/PCBM Planar-Heterojunction Hybrid Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26(24), 4107–4113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. N. Peiris, A. K. Baranwal, H. Kanda, S. Fukumoto, S. Kanaya, L. Cojocaru, T. Bessho, T. Miyasaka, H. Segawa and S. Ito, Enhancement of the hole conducting effect of NiO by a N2 blow drying method in printable perovskite solar cells with low-temperature carbon as the counter electrode, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(17), 5475–5482 RSC .
J. H. Kim, P. W. Liang, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C. C. Chueh, M. S. Glaz, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, High-Performance and Environmentally Stable Planar Heterojunction Perovskite Solar Cells Based on a Solution-Processed Copper-Doped Nickel Oxide Hole-Transporting Layer, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(4), 695–701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Efficient and stable large-area perovskite solar cells with inorganic charge extraction layers, Science, 2015, 350(6263), 944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Yue, M. Cai, F. Xie, E. Bi, A. Islam and L. Han, Perovskite solar cells with 18.21% efficiency and area over 1 cm2 fabricated by heterojunction engineering, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16148 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, Y. Huang, L. Wang, L. Li, G. Zheng and H. Zhou, The Progress of Interface Design in Perovskite-Based Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(17), 1600460 CrossRef .
Y. Hou, W. Chen, D. Baran, T. Stubhan, N. A. Luechinger, B. Hartmeier, M. Richter, J. Min, S. Chen, C. O. R. Quiroz, N. Li, H. Zhang, T. Heumueller, G. J. Matt, A. Osvet, K. Forberich, Z. G. Zhang, Y. Li, B. Winter, P. Schweizer, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, Overcoming the Interface Losses in Planar Heterojunction Perovskite-Based Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(25), 5112–5120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Q. Xue, T. Zhang, Z. Zhu, Q. Li, C. Hu, Y. Yang, Z. Hu, F. Huang, K. S. Wong, H.-L. Yip and S. Yang, Effects of a Molecular Monolayer Modification of NiO Nanocrystal Layer Surfaces on Perovskite Crystallization and Interface Contact toward Faster Hole Extraction and Higher Photovoltaic Performance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26(17), 2950–2958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Origin and elimination of photocurrent hysteresis by fullerene passivation in CH3NH3PbI3 planar heterojunction solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Staebler and C. R. Wronski, Optically induced conductivity changes in discharge-produced hydrogenated amorphous silicon, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51(6), 3262–3268 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Atomistic origins of high-performance in hybrid halide perovskite solar cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14(5), 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Impedance Spectroscopic Analysis of Lead Iodide Perovskite-Sensitized Solid-State Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(1), 362–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Steffen, C. Unkelbach, M. Christmann, W. Hiller and C. Strohmann, Catalytic and stereoselective ortho-lithiation of a ferrocene derivative, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(37), 9836–9840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fernández and H. Carrero, Electrochemical evaluation of ferrocene carboxylic acids confined on surfactant–clay modified glassy carbon electrodes: oxidation of ascorbic acid and uric acid, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50(5), 1233–1240 CrossRef .
B. Li, T. Jiu, C. Kuang, Q. Chen, S. Ma, J. Li, X. Hou and J. Fang, Improving the efficiency of inverted organic solar cells by introducing ferrocenedicarboxylic acid between an ITO/ZnO interlayer, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(38), 32000–32006 RSC .
W. Yang, Y. Yao and C.-Q. Wu, Origin of the high open circuit voltage in planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells: Role of the reduced bimolecular recombination, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117(9), 095502 CrossRef .
M. A. Mahmud, N. K. Elumalai, M. B. Upama, D. Wang, L. Zarei, V. R. Goncales, M. Wright, C. Xu, F. Haque and A. Uddin, Adsorbed carbon nanomaterials for surface and interface-engineered stable rubidium multi-cation perovskite solar cells, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(2), 773–790 RSC .
K. Wang, W. Zhao, J. Liu, J. Niu, Y. Liu, X. Ren, J. Feng, Z. Liu, J. Sun, D. Wang and S. F. Liu, CO2 Plasma-Treated TiO2 Film as an Effective Electron Transport Layer for High-Performance Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(39), 33989–33996 CAS .
M. A. Peck and M. A. Langell, Comparison of Nanoscaled and Bulk NiO Structural and Environmental Characteristics by XRD, XAFS, and XPS, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24(23), 4483–4490 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, F.-Z. Liu, X.-Y. Feng, A. B. Djurišić, W. K. Chan and Z.-B. He, Cesium Doped NiOx as an Efficient Hole Extraction Layer for Inverted Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(19), 1700722 CrossRef .
S. Seo, I. J. Park, M. Kim, S. Lee, C. Bae, H. S. Jung, N.-G. Park, J. Y. Kim and H. Shin, An ultra-thin, un-doped NiO hole transporting layer of highly efficient (16.4%) organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(22), 11403–11412 RSC .
M. Li, B. Li, G. Cao and J. Tian, Monolithic MAPbI3 films for high-efficiency solar cells via coordination and a heat assisted process, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(40), 21313–21319 CAS .
X. Jia, Z. Jiang, X. Chen, J. Zhou, L. Pan, F. Zhu, Z. Sun and S. Huang, Highly Efficient and Air Stable Inverted Polymer Solar Cells Using LiF-Modified ITO Cathode and MoO3/AgAl Alloy Anode, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(6), 3792–3799 CAS .
Z. Jiang, X. Chen, X. Lin, X. Jia, J. Wang, L. Pan, S. Huang, F. Zhu and Z. Sun, Amazing stable open-circuit voltage in perovskite solar cells using AgAl alloy electrode, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 146, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, W. Zhang, S. Van Reenen, R. J. Sutton, J. Fan, A. A. Haghighirad, M. B. Johnston, L. Wang and H. J. Snaith, Enhanced UV-light stability of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with caesium bromide interface modification, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(2), 490–498 CAS .
F. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. Lu, J. Yang, S. Huang and Z. Sun, Efficiency Enhancement of Inverted Polymer Solar Cells Using Ionic Liquid-functionalized Carbon Nanoparticles-modified ZnO as Electron Selective Layer, Nano-Micro Lett., 2014, 6(1), 24–29 CrossRef .
M. Li, X. Yan, Z. Kang, X. Liao, Y. Li, X. Zheng, P. Lin, J. Meng and Y. Zhang, Enhanced Efficiency and Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells via Anti-Solvent Treatment in Two-Step Deposition Method, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(8), 7224–7231 CAS .
D. Song, J. Ji, Y. Li, G. Li, M. Li, T. Wang, D. Wei, P. Cui, Y. He and J. M. Mbengue, Degradation of organometallic perovskite solar cells induced by trap states, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108(9), 093901 CrossRef .
D. Song, P. Cui, T. Wang, D. Wei, M. Li, F. Cao, X. Yue, P. Fu, Y. Li, Y. He, B. Jiang and M. Trevor, Managing Carrier Lifetime and Doping Property of Lead Halide Perovskite by Postannealing Processes for Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(40), 22812–22819 CAS .
M.-F. Xu, X.-Z. Zhu, X.-B. Shi, J. Liang, Y. Jin, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, Plasmon Resonance Enhanced Optical Absorption in Inverted Polymer/Fullerene Solar Cells with Metal Nanoparticle-Doped Solution-Processable TiO2 Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(8), 2935–2942 CAS .
J. Wang, X. Jia, J. Zhou, L. Pan, S. Huang and X. Chen, Improved Performance of Polymer Solar Cells by Thermal Evaporation of AgAl Alloy Nanostructures into the Hole-Transport Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(39), 26098–26104 CAS .
G. Garcia-Belmonte, A. Munar, E. M. Barea, J. Bisquert, I. Ugarte and R. Pacios, Charge carrier mobility and lifetime of organic bulk heterojunctions analyzed by impedance spectroscopy, Org. Electron., 2008, 9(5), 847–851 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Yang, J. Lu, K. K. Manga, K. P. Loh and F. Zhu, Ionic liquid-functionalized
carbon nanoparticles-modified cathode for efficiency enhancement in polymer solar cells, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95(13), 133305 CrossRef .
F. Zhu, X. Chen, L. Zhou, J. Zhou, J. Yang, S. Huang and Z. Sun, Dependence of the performance of inverted polymer solar cells on thickness of an electron selective ZnO layer deposited by magnetron sputtering, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 551, 131–135 CrossRef CAS .
G. Perrier, R. de Bettignies, S. Berson, N. Lemaître and S. Guillerez, Impedance spectrometry of optimized standard and inverted P3HT-PCBM organic solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 210–216 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y. M. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, Z. Liu, Y. T. Hsieh, L. Meng, Y. Li and Y. Yang, Multifunctional Fullerene Derivative for Interface Engineering in Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(49), 15540–15547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C.-Z. Li, R. H. Friend, A. K. Y. Jen and H. J. Snaith, Heterojunction Modification for Highly Efficient Organic–Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(12), 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Schwanitz, U. Weiler, R. Hunger, T. Mayer and W. Jaegermann, Synchrotron-Induced Photoelectron Spectroscopy of the Dye-Sensitized Nanocrystalline TiO2/Electrolyte Interface: Band Gap States and Their Interaction with Dye and Solvent Molecules, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(2), 849–854 CAS .
H. Zhang, C. Liang, Y. Zhao, M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Liang, D. Li, F. Zhang and Z. He, Dynamic interface charge governing the current-voltage hysteresis in perovskite solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(15), 9613–9618 RSC .
S. R. Cowan, A. Roy and A. J. Heeger, Recombination in polymer-fullerene bulk heterojunction solar cells, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2010, 82(24), 245207 CrossRef .
C. M. Proctor, C. Kim, D. Neher and T.-Q. Nguyen, Nongeminate Recombination and Charge Transport Limitations in Diketopyrrolopyrrole-Based Solution-Processed Small Molecule Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23(28), 3584–3594 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, H. Luo, X. Jia, J. Wang, J. Zhou, Z. Jiang, L. Pan, S. Huang and X. Chen, Efficient and ultraviolet durable inverted polymer solar cells using thermal stable GZO-AgTi-GZO multilayers as a transparent electrode, Org. Electron., 2016, 39, 177–183 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Overcoming ultraviolet light instability of sensitized TiO(2) with meso-superstructured organometal tri-halide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
X. Hou, S. Huang, W. Ou-Yang, L. Pan, Z. Sun and X. Chen, Constructing Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells via Interconnecting Perovskite Grains, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(40), 35200–35208 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr08750k‡ First co-authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of the NiOx surface modified without (a) and with (b) an FDA interfacial layer; AFM images of the NiOx surface modified without (c) and with (d) the FDA layer; (e) XRD patterns of NiOx/FDA and NiOx films onto ITO-coated glass; (f) transmittance spectra of NiOx/FDA and NiOx films onto a glass substrate. The FDA concentration of the modified NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the perovskite layer on (a) NiOx and (b) NiOx/FDA films; (c) XRD patterns and (d) UV-Vis absorption spectra of perovskite (PVK) films on the NiOx and NiOx/FDA layer, respectively. The FDA concentration of the spin-coated NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) J–V characteristics of PSCs with and without FDA modification under forward and reverse scans with a 100 mV s−1 rate; (b) statistical PCEs of 40 devices with NiOx/PVK and NiOx/FDA/PVK; (c) IPCE curves and (d) dark J–V curves of PSCs with and without FDA modification. The FDA concentration of the spin-coated NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Photoluminescence of perovskite films on top of NiOx and NiOx/FDA; I–V curves of NiOx and NiOx/FDA films from parallel (b) and vertical (c) directions and the insets are the schematic diagram of the testing structure; transient (d) Jsc and (e) Voc response curves of PSCs with and without FDA modification; (f) plots of Jphversus Veff for cells based on NiOx modified with and without FDA.	 

 	Fig. 5  Nyquist plots of PSCs based on NiOx with (a) and without (b) FDA modification at the forward bias voltage of 0.9 V and 0.1 V in the dark; (c) Bode-phase plots of PSCs with NiOx and NiOx/FDA HTLs at the bias voltage of 0.9 V; (d) capacitance–voltage characteristics of cells with and without FDA modification.	 

 	Fig. 6  
V
oc, FF and Jsc as a function of light density for PSCs with NiOx and NiOx/FDA. The FDA concentration of the modified spin-coated NiOx surface is 0.1 mg ml−1.	 

 	Fig. 7  PCE, FF, Voc and Jsc of PSCs with and without FDA modification without encapsulation at different UV exposure times with an RH of 40% in air. The exposed wavelength of UV tubes is 365 nm and UV light density is 13 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) J–V curves of polymer solar cells modified with and without FDA. Dark J–V curves of the corresponding cells (inset); (b) plots of Jphversus Veff for polymer solar cells with and without FDA modification. The structure of cells: ITO/AZO (20 nm)/FDA/PTB7-Th:PC71BM (80 nm)/MoO3 (7 nm)/AgAl.	 

 	Fig. 9  Energy level diagrams of the perovskite and polymer solar cells. (a) Perovskite solar cells based on NiOx modified with and without the FDA layer; (b) polymer solar cells based on AZO modified with and without the FDA layer.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr08750k
‡ First co-authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
