Three-dimensional imaging for precise structural control of Si quantum dot networks for all-Si solar cells   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3NR01998E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3NR01998E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7499-7504Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsThree-dimensional imaging for precise structural control of Si quantum dot networks for all-Si solar cells†

        
          
            Lena F. 
            Kourkoutis
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojing 
            Hao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shujuan 
            Huang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Binesh 
            Puthen-Veettil
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Gavin 
            Conibeer
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Martin A. 
            Green
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ivan 
            Perez-Wurfl
          
        
      c
aSchool of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA. E-mail: lena.f.kourkoutis@cornell.edu;  Fax: +1 607 255 7658;   Tel: +1 607 255 9121
bKavli Institute, Cornell University, Ithaca, USA
cAustralian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. E-mail: ivanpw@unsw.edu.au;  Fax: +61 2 9385 7762;   Tel: +61 2 9385 6056
Received 
      22nd April 2013
    , Accepted 11th June 2013First published on 14th June 2013AbstractAll-Si tandem solar cells based on Si quantum dots (QDs) are a promising approach to future high-performance, thin film solar cells using abundant, stable and non-toxic materials. An important prerequisite to achieve a high conversion efficiency in such cells is the ability to control the geometry of the Si QD network. This includes the ability to control both, the size and arrangement of Si QDs embedded in a higher bandgap matrix. Using plasmon tomography we show the size, shape and density of Si QDs, that form in Si rich oxide (SRO)/SiO2 multilayers upon annealing, can be controlled by varying the SRO stoichiometry. Smaller, more spherical QDs of higher densities are obtained at lower Si concentrations. In richer SRO layers ellipsoidal QDs tend to form. Using electronic structure calculations within the effective mass approximation we show that ellipsoidal QDs give rise to reduced inter-QD coupling in the layer. Efficient carrier transport via mini-bands is in this case more likely across the multilayers provided the SiO2 spacer layer is thin enough to allow coupling in the vertical direction.
Introduction
p–n junction based solar cells are by far the most common devices commercially used for the direct conversion of solar power to electricity. The most practical way to fabricate these photovoltaic (PV) structures is the use of semiconductor materials, in particular silicon. Decades of development have seen Si cells reach 25.0% efficiency, close to the maximum theoretical limit of 29.8% for single band gap devices at the band gap of silicon when operated under standard 1-sun illumination conditions.1–3
One way to exceed this detailed balance thermodynamic Shockley–Queisser limit is by stacking multiple junctions in tandem cells.4–6 Tandem solar cell structures are the frontrunners of efficiency in state of the art PV technology. By stacking cells with different bandgaps, the highest bandgap uppermost and lowest bottom, incident light is filtered as it passes through the stacks. Each cell absorbs the light that it can most efficiently convert, with the rest passing through to underlying lower bandgap cells.
The wide range of band gaps and lattice parameters available with epitaxially grown III–V compounds allows fabrication of high quality monolithic (series connected) tandem cells. With this approach a conversion efficiency of 44.0%8 for three level tandem cells has been achieved. The scarcity of some of these elements, the high cost of the substrates and the complexity of the techniques required to grow these materials results in a technology that is viable only for applications at high concentration ratios in systems with relatively cheap concentrator optics.
Silicon is a benign readily available material, which makes it attractive for its use in solar cells. To further reduce the cost of solar cells, thin films can be used with the potential to achieve the same conversion efficiency as that of wafer based solar cells provided the proper light trapping structures are employed. To date, the three main Si thin film solar cells being commercially pursued are based on either polysilicon (poly-Si), microcystalline Si (μc-Si) or hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H). Each technology has its own advantages and drawbacks. Poly-Si and μc-Si offers the stability of the proven bulk Si technology but it has not been possible to obtain these films with a high enough quality on cheap substrates, such as glass, to demonstrate high cell efficiency. Solar cells based on a-Si:H have a larger open circuit voltage and absorb light very effectively. Unfortunately, a-Si:H cells suffer from an inherent degradation mechanism, the Staebler–Wronski effect,9 which reduces the cell efficiency by up to 30%10 of the original performance on exposure to sunlight. A solar cell based on Si quantum dot (QD) thin films, could merge the advantages of the three above-mentioned technologies with the unique possibility of engineering the bandgap to optimize the cell efficiency. Furthermore, being able to control the band gap of the above-mentioned material opens the possibility of producing an all-silicon tandem solar cell that will result in a cheap, efficient and sustainable PV technology. The concept of an “all-Si” tandem cell with Si wafer as bottom cell offers an opportunity to boost the efficiency beyond 30% or even 40% while maintaining the low cost.11 Until now silicon wafer based cells still account for about 85% of the solar cell market and will continue to dominate the PV market in the future. The concept of a Si wafer based “all-Si” tandem solar cell, allowing significant boost to higher efficiency and lower cost, in addition to being compatible with commercialized Si wafer cell technology, would be a natural “add-on” to Si wafer based PV.
All-silicon tandem solar cells rely on the tunability of the excitonic gap through quantum confinement in size controlled Si-QDs embedded in a Si-based high band gap dielectric matrix, such as SiO2. Fabrication of the Si-QD network is achieved by phase separation and crystallization during annealing of thin layers of Si rich oxide (SRO), SiOx (x < 2), separated by layers of stoichiometric SiO2.12 Compared to the fabrication of Si-QDs with a thick SRO monolayer, the multilayer approach offers better QD size control and a narrower size distribution – two parameters critical for the realization of efficient Si-QD thin film solar cells.13 Working devices based on Si-QDs embedded in an oxide matrix have been demonstrated with open circuit voltages (Voc) of up to ∼500 mV.14 While these results are encouraging, practical devices require significant improvements in the delocalization of carriers, both free and photogenerated.15 Short circuit currents obtained in Si-QD based solar cells are still ∼4 orders of magnitude lower than those of commercial Si wafer based cells.
Efficient carrier transport depends on the 3 dimensional (3D) arrangement of the Si QDs within the matrix. For charge transport dominated by hopping the typically low carrier mobility limits carrier conductivity. Improved carrier transport is, however, expected in an array of closely spaced QDs where the coupling between neighboring QDs gives rise to the formation of transport minibands.16,17 Such coupling is reduced if variations in the QD size and shape are introduced.18 Resonant charge transport via minibands therefore requires control of the 3D arrangement, shape and size distribution of the QDs.19 Si-QDs formed by annealing of thick SRO monolayers show a strong size dependence on the initial SRO stoichiometry, x.20 The multilayer approach offers size control by limiting the out-of-plane nanocrystal size to the SRO layer thickness. With this added constraint a larger range of SRO stoichiometries can be explored for optimization of the Si-QD density, which is necessary for the formation of minibands.
In this article, we demonstrate the effect of SRO stoichiometry on the Si-QD size, shape and arrangement in SRO/SiO2 multilayers by imaging the 3D structure of a series of Si QD networks using plasmon tomography. With decreasing Si concentration the QD mean size decreases, the size distribution narrows and the QD shape becomes more spherical. The electronic structure of an ellipsoidal QD is calculated using an effective mass approximation and the effect on the coupling between adjacent QDs is discussed. This work has direct implications for the practical design of all-Si tandem solar cell materials.
Results and discussion
To understand the effects of SRO stoichiometry on the QD size, shape and arrangement within the nanocrystal network, three bi-layer films with nominal O/Si ratios of 0.86, 1.0 and 1.3 in the SRO layers were prepared using RF magnetron sputtering. Each film consisted of 15 SRO/SiO2 bi-layers with thicknesses of the individual SRO and SiO2 layers around 4 nm and 6 nm, respectively. All films were capped with a ∼10 nm SiO2 layer to avoid oxidation during the subsequent high temperature annealing. The thicknesses of the SRO and SiO2 layers were deduced from deposition rates determined by both transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and X-ray reflectivity (XRR). In order to determine the chemical composition, i.e., the O/Si ratio, of the SRO layers in each bi-layer film, thick SRO monolayers around 120 nm in thickness were prepared on Si substrates under the same experimental conditions as the SRO layers in the SRO/SiO2 bi-layer films. The O/Si ratio, x, of each SiOx (SRO) monolayer was determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to be around 0.86, 1.0, and 1.3, respectively. The O/Si ratio was estimated from XPS curve fitting of five Si oxidation states to the Si2p peak, ranging from Si0 (binding energy 99.3 eV) to Si4+ (103.3 eV).21,22 The formation of Si QDs in the SRO layers was obtained by annealing the samples in a conventional quartz-tube furnace in a nitrogen atmosphere at a temperature of 1100 °C for 1 hour. The crystallinity of the Si QDs was assessed by grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD). Diffraction peaks corresponding to crystalline Si were observed for all three films upon annealing, however, their integrated intensity decreases when the O/Si ratio, x, is increased from 0.86 to 1.3.22
Energy filtered (EF)TEM images of the annealed SiO sample (x = 1.0) are shown in Fig. 1 with the energy-selecting slit placed around the Si plasmon peak. The TEM sample was aligned, so that the beam direction is perpendicular to the interface normal which allows the alternating SRO and SiO2 layers to be resolved. The bright layers correspond to layers with Si QDs while the dark layers are the SiO2 barrier layers. In the thinner area of the wedge-shaped-TEM specimen, individual Si QDs (or what appear to be individual QDs) are visible, however, the information about the shape of the QD in the projection direction and the arrangement within the QD network is lost. By combining EFTEM imaging with electron tomography the 3D shape of Si nanoparticles embedded in SiO2 can be resolved.23
 Fig. 1  Energy filtered transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the annealed SiO/SiO2 multilayer grown on a Si substrate. An energy window of 4 eV centered on the Si plasmon peak at 17 eV was used to image the embedded Si QDs. The cross-sectional TEM sample was aligned with the interface normal perpendicular to the electron beam direction, which allows the alternating SiO and SiO2 layers to be resolved. In the upper part of the film some misalignment of nucleation of nanocrystals in the layers is observed. 
In order to study the 3D structure of the Si QD network plasmon tomography was performed on a 200 kV FEI Tecnai F20 SuperTWIN TEM equipped with a Gatan Tridiem 865ER imaging filter. A series of EFTEM images with an energy window of 4 eV centered on the Si plasmon peak at 17 eV were recorded as the sample is successively tilted from −68 to +68 degrees in 4 degrees increments. The relatively large tilt step of 4 degrees was chosen to prevent radiation damage of the samples during the tilt series acquisition. The individual images in the tilt series were carefully aligned to establish a common frame of coordinates. Finally, the 3D reconstruction was computed using the SIRT (simultaneous iterative reconstruction technique) algorithm.24
The reconstructions of the individual samples are visualized by volume rendering in Fig. 2 and 3. While the SRO/SiO2 bi-layer thicknesses are approximately constant for all samples, variations of the QD size and density with the stoichiometry of the SRO layer are clearly visible. An increase in the O/Si ratio, x, results in a higher density of smaller Si QDs contrary to common expectation.12 Room temperature photoluminescence (PL) measurements show a blue-shift of the PL peak with increasing O/Si ratio (Fig. 4) in qualitative agreement with the observed reduction of the QD size. Not only the size and density, but also the shape of the QDs varies. For x = 1.3 the QDs appear more spherical, while for x = 0.86 the shape of the QDs deviates more strongly from that of a perfectly spherical nanoparticle.
 Fig. 2  Tomographic reconstructions of a series of Si QD networks formed during annealing of SiOx/SiO2 multilayers. The stoichiometry of the Si rich oxide layer, x, is varied as indicated in each panel. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the size of the Si QDs increases. The reconstructions are shown in two orientations: (left) with the interface planes aligned parallel to the viewing direction and (right) tilted ∼20° off as schematically shown at the top of the figure. 
 Fig. 3  Individual Si QD layers extracted from the tomographic reconstructions from Fig. 2 and viewed top down as indicated in the schematic at the top of the figure. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the in-plane size of the Si QDs increases, their areal density decreases and their shape becomes more elongated. 
 Fig. 4  Normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the series of Si QD networks formed by annealing of SiOx/SiO2 multilayers. With decreasing Si concentration, i.e., increasing x, the PL peak energy shifts to higher energies in qualitative agreement with the observed reduction in size of the Si QDs. 
For a more quantitative analysis of the particle size and shape, hand-segmentation of QDs in the first 6 SRO layers of each structure was performed using the commercial software package Amira (Visualization Sciences Group, Inc.). For comparison, the out-of-plane QD size, dH, and the in-plane size, dW, were measured for each QD in the segmented volume (Fig. 5). To avoid the influence of elongation artifacts in z-direction of the tomographic reconstruction due to the limited tilt range, i.e., the missing wedge, both measurements were performed in the x–y plane with the reconstruction aligned along the original projection direction. The measured in-plane QD size, dW, therefore lies between the lengths of the minor and major axes of the projected QD. Due to the alignment of the QD in the SRO layer, dH is approximately equal to the shortest principal axis of the ellipsoidal QD. Note that the inherent delocalization tail of the plasmon signal contributes to a diffuse signal around the particle which gives rise to a larger error bar in the measured QD size. In addition, contributions from an amorphous-silicon shell covering the crystalline Si core cannot be excluded.
 Fig. 5  Histograms of the Si QD size, obtained by segmentation of the Si QDs in the first 6 layers of the tomographic reconstructions shown in Fig. 2. The size of each QD was measured in two orthogonal directions with the reconstruction aligned along the original projection direction, i.e., approximately perpendicular to the interface normal. The out-of-plane QD size, dH, is approximately equal to the shortest principal axis of the ellipsoidal QD and the in-plane size, dW, lies between the lengths of the minor and major axes of the projected QD. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the mean QD size (dashed vertical lines) increases and the size distribution broadens. (Vertical solid lines around the mean QD sizes mark the two standard errors of the mean.) The difference between the mean in-plane and out-of-plane QD size increases with the Si concentration indicating the formation of more non-spherical QDs. 
The size distributions for all three samples are shown in Fig. 5. The mean QD size increases with decreasing O/Si ratio, i.e., higher Si concentration in the SRO layer. While the trends in the size evolution with Si concentration are the same for in-plane as for out-of-plane, there is an increasing disparity in actual size between the two. At low Si concentration (x = 1.3) the mean in-plane QD size is ∼31% larger than the mean out-of-plane QD size. At high Si concentration (x = 0.86), this difference increases two-fold to ∼60%, resulting in more ellipsoidal structures. Large changes can also be observed in the widths of the size distributions, which become broader with increasing Si concentration. The in-plane size distribution at high Si concentration, x = 0.86, exhibits a substantial tail at long lengths indicating a higher number of QDs that are extended in-plane as shown in Fig. 5(c). Note that dW is typically smaller than the longest principal axis of the QD which suggests that these QDs are significantly wider than they are tall. Ideally, the growth of the QDs is expected to be constrained within the SRO layer by the adjacent SiO2 barrier layers. The thickness of the SRO layers, therefore, limits nucleation and growth of Si QDs in the out-of-plane direction. Depending on the Si excess in the SRO layer, Si QDs which initially nucleated in close proximity coalesce25 during the subsequent growth forming structures that are elongated in the plane of the SRO layer. This merging mechanism might explain the increasingly ellipsoidal QD shapes we observe for higher Si concentrations.
An alternative route to determining the in-plane shape of these embedded QDs is by plan-view TEM, where the multilayer is imaged top-down. Plan-view TEM samples were prepared by cleaving, which avoids damage of the sample surface typically introduced during ion-milling steps.26 Projection TEM images of these samples, Fig. 6, confirm the presence of crystalline QDs in agreement with our previous GIXRD results.22 The plan-view TEM images further show increasingly larger and more elongated QDs as the O/Si ratio, x, decreases. These independent measurements are in agreement with the plasmon tomography results discussed above.
 Fig. 6  Plan-view TEM images of embedded Si QDs in annealed SiOx/SiO2 multilayers. In each image two Si QDs showing clear lattice fringes are outlined by white dashed ellipses. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the QDs become larger and their shape more elongated. For clarity the image background caused by an uneven illumination of the sample was removed using singular value decomposition.7 The scale bar for each image is 5 nm. 
To understand the effect of QD shape on the inter-QD coupling we performed electronic structure calculations within the effective mass approximation for a non-spherical QD extracted from the tomographic reconstruction of the SiO0.86 sample (Fig. 7).27 For this approximately ellipsoidal QD most of the ground state electron density is located at the center of the QD which results in reduced wavefunction overlap and therefore less coupling between QDs aligned along the longest principal axis compared to the shortest principal QD axis. Our experimental results show QDs with the shortest principal axis preferentially aligned perpendicular to the layer, i.e., out-of-plane. The observed ellipsoidal QD shape therefore hampers the formation of in-plane minibands for enhanced conductivity in the Si-QD layers. For carrier transport across the multilayer, i.e., perpendicular to the layers, the deviation from spherical shape is less critical because of the observed alignment of the principal QD axis. A reduction in the out-of-plane QD coupling due to lower quantum confinement in ellipsoidal QDs can be mitigated by reducing the SRO layer thickness which in turn will result in smaller QDs. In addition, the ellipsoidal QD shape could be beneficial by increasing the effective area available for resonant tunnelling.
 Fig. 7  Three-dimensional view of the electron probability iso-surface of the first three electronic states calculated for (A) a nanoparticle extracted from the tomographic reconstruction shown in Fig. 2(C) and (B) the largest spherical QD that can be confined inside the nanoparticle. In both (A) and (B) the ground state is mainly located at the center of the particle. 
Experimental
Material fabrication
Alternating layers of SRO and SiO2 were deposited using a computer-controlled AJA ATC-2200 sputtering system at room temperature. A radio frequency (RF) power supply was connected to a SiO2 target (4 inch), and a DC supply was connected to a Si target (4 inch). SRO was deposited by co-sputtering of Si and SiO2 targets, while SiO2 was deposited by sputtering with the SiO2 target only. Both Si wafer and quartz substrates were used for different characterization purposes. The substrates were cleaned with piranha cleaning solution (3:1 H2SO4:H2O2) and then rinsed in de-ionized water. A dilute HF dip (5%) was performed only for the Si substrates to remove the surface native oxide. After being blown dry with nitrogen, the substrates were immediately loaded into the load-lock chamber of the sputtering system then transferred to the deposition chamber. Upon achieving a base pressure of 5 × 10−7 Torr, Ar was introduced into the chamber for a working gas pressure of 1.5 mTorr, which was maintained throughout the whole deposition. The stoichiometry x (O/Si atomic ratio) was controlled by adjusting the power applied to the Si and SiO2 targets.
Electronic states calculations
The confined electronic states inside the nanoparticle were calculated using a numerical model in the framework of the effective mass approximation (EMA). Due to the large number of spatial points required to be solved in the three dimensional arbitrarily shaped nanoparticle problem, the full multi-grid method was employed.28–30
Conclusions
In conclusion, we demonstrate the effect of SRO stoichiometry on the Si-QD size, shape and arrangement in annealed SRO/SiO2 multilayers using plasmon tomography. With increasing Si concentration the QD size increases, the density decreases and the shape becomes more non-spherical. The ellipsoidal QDs are aligned with their shortest principal axis perpendicular to the SRO layer (out-of-plane). This deviation from spherical shape might be caused by coalescence-like growth during the initial stages of annealing. Due to the limited thickness of the SRO layer this growth is restricted in the out-of-plane direction, which could give rise to QD extended in the SRO plane.
The ellipsoidal QDs show reduced quantum confinement compared to spherical QDs with equal out-of-plane size. In order to achieve the same band gap with ellipsoidal QDs their size has to be reduced. Using electronic structure calculations within the effective mass approximation we show that most of the ground state electron density for ellipsoidal QDs is located close to the center of the QD which gives rise to a reduction in the potential in-plane coupling between adjacent ellipsoidal QDs compared to spherical QDs. These results suggest that efficient carrier transport is more likely out-of-plane, i.e., across the multilayers, were the barrier layer thickness and height can be varied to allow for the formation of minibands. In-plane carrier conductivity, on the other hand, will be limited by hopping unless the QD density can sufficiently be increased by other means.
Acknowledgements
L. F. K. thanks R. Hovden and D. A. Muller for useful discussions. The work at Cornell was supported by the Cornell Center for Materials Research with funding from the NSF MRSEC program (DMR-1120296). The work on fabrication of silicon nanostructure samples at UNSW was supported by the Australian Solar Institute (ASI), the Australian Research Council and the Euro-FP7 LIMA project. The Australian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics commenced in January 2013 with support from the ASI and the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA).
Notes and references
T. Tiedje, E. Yablonovitch, G. D. Cody and B. G. Brooks, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1984, 31, 711–716 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Martin, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2009, 17, 183–189 Search PubMed .

          E. D. Jackson, US Pat., 2,949,498, Solar Energy Converter,  16 August 1960 .
A. D. Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839–846 CrossRef .
A. Marti and G. L. Araujo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 43, 203–222 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Voyles, J. L. Grazul and D. A. Muller, Ultramicroscopy, 2003, 96, 251–273 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 1–11 Search PubMed .
D. L. Staebler and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 31, 292–294 CrossRef CAS .
C. Radue and E. E. van Dyk, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 617–622 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Green, Third generation photovoltaics: Advanced solar energy conversion, Springer,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. Zacharias, J. Heitmann, R. Scholz, U. Kahler, M. Schmidt and J. Blasing, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 661–663 CrossRef CAS .

          E.-C. Cho, Y. H. Cho, T. Trupke, R. Corkish, G. Conibeer and M. A. Green, in Proc. 19th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, WIP-Munich & ETA-Florence, Paris,  June 2004, p. 235 Search PubMed .
I. Perez-Wurfl, L. Ma, D. Lin, X. Hao, M. A. Green and G. Conibeer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 100, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Pavesi and R. Turan, Silicon Nanocrystals: Fundamentals, Synthesis and Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.,  2010 Search PubMed .
L. Esaki and R. Tsu, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1970, 14, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 193–231 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Luo, P. Stradins and A. Zunger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2546–2557 CAS .

          B. P. Veettil, Modelling and characterization of carrier transport through nanostructures, University of New South Wales,  2012 Search PubMed.
B. Garrido Fernandez, M. López, C. García, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, J. R. Morante, C. Bonafos, M. Carrada and A. Claverie, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 798–807 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Himpsel, F. R. Mcfeely, A. Talebibrahimi, J. A. Yarmoff and G. Hollinger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 6084–6096 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Hao, E. C. Cho, G. Scardera, E. Bellet-Amalric, D. Bellet, Y. S. Shen, S. Huang, Y. D. Huang, G. Conibeer and M. A. Green, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 5646–5652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yurtsever, M. Weyland and D. A. Muller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 151920 CrossRef .
P. Gilbert, J. Theor. Biol., 1972, 36, 105–117 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Yu, S. H. Lee and G. S. Hwang, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 084309 CrossRef .
J. P. McCaffrey, Ultramicroscopy, 1991, 38, 149–157 CrossRef .
A. B. C. Eric, M. S. Christopher and B. Tobias, Int. J. Numer. Model. Electron. Network. Dev. Field., 1997, 10, 121–136 CrossRef .

          W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling and B. P. Flannery, Numerical recipes – The art of scientific computing, Cambridge University Press,  2007 Search PubMed .
F. F. Grinstein, H. Rabitz and A. Askar, J. Comput. Phys., 1983, 51, 423–443 CrossRef CAS .

          E. A. B. Cole, Mathematical and Numerical Modelling of Heterostructure Semiconductor Devices: From Theory to Programming, Springer,  2009 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electron tomography reconstruction movies. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01998eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Energy filtered transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the annealed SiO/SiO2 multilayer grown on a Si substrate. An energy window of 4 eV centered on the Si plasmon peak at 17 eV was used to image the embedded Si QDs. The cross-sectional TEM sample was aligned with the interface normal perpendicular to the electron beam direction, which allows the alternating SiO and SiO2 layers to be resolved. In the upper part of the film some misalignment of nucleation of nanocrystals in the layers is observed.	 

 	Fig. 2  Tomographic reconstructions of a series of Si QD networks formed during annealing of SiOx/SiO2 multilayers. The stoichiometry of the Si rich oxide layer, x, is varied as indicated in each panel. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the size of the Si QDs increases. The reconstructions are shown in two orientations: (left) with the interface planes aligned parallel to the viewing direction and (right) tilted ∼20° off as schematically shown at the top of the figure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Individual Si QD layers extracted from the tomographic reconstructions from Fig. 2 and viewed top down as indicated in the schematic at the top of the figure. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the in-plane size of the Si QDs increases, their areal density decreases and their shape becomes more elongated.	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalized photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the series of Si QD networks formed by annealing of SiOx/SiO2 multilayers. With decreasing Si concentration, i.e., increasing x, the PL peak energy shifts to higher energies in qualitative agreement with the observed reduction in size of the Si QDs.	 

 	Fig. 5  Histograms of the Si QD size, obtained by segmentation of the Si QDs in the first 6 layers of the tomographic reconstructions shown in Fig. 2. The size of each QD was measured in two orthogonal directions with the reconstruction aligned along the original projection direction, i.e., approximately perpendicular to the interface normal. The out-of-plane QD size, dH, is approximately equal to the shortest principal axis of the ellipsoidal QD and the in-plane size, dW, lies between the lengths of the minor and major axes of the projected QD. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the mean QD size (dashed vertical lines) increases and the size distribution broadens. (Vertical solid lines around the mean QD sizes mark the two standard errors of the mean.) The difference between the mean in-plane and out-of-plane QD size increases with the Si concentration indicating the formation of more non-spherical QDs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Plan-view TEM images of embedded Si QDs in annealed SiOx/SiO2 multilayers. In each image two Si QDs showing clear lattice fringes are outlined by white dashed ellipses. With increasing Si concentration, i.e., decreasing x, the QDs become larger and their shape more elongated. For clarity the image background caused by an uneven illumination of the sample was removed using singular value decomposition.7 The scale bar for each image is 5 nm.	 

 	Fig. 7  Three-dimensional view of the electron probability iso-surface of the first three electronic states calculated for (A) a nanoparticle extracted from the tomographic reconstruction shown in Fig. 2(C) and (B) the largest spherical QD that can be confined inside the nanoparticle. In both (A) and (B) the ground state is mainly located at the center of the particle.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Electron tomography reconstruction movies. See DOI: 10.1039/c3nr01998e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
