Recent advances of crosslinkable organic semiconductors in achieving solution-processed and stable optoelectronic devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA05358F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA05358F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 18542-18576Recent advances of crosslinkable organic semiconductors in achieving solution-processed and stable optoelectronic devices

        
          
            Zongwen 
            Ma
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Biao 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huaizhi 
            Gao
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongshuai 
            Gong
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Runnan 
            Yu
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhan'ao 
            Tan
          
          
        
      *
      Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, College of Materials Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Organic-Inorganic Composites, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: tanzhanao@mail.buct.edu.cn
Received 
      5th July 2022
    , Accepted 23rd August 2022First published on 24th August 2022AbstractHigh-efficiency optoelectronic devices are attracting extensive attention nowadays. Besides efficiency, cost and long-term stability are also crucial parameters for judging the performance and application of optoelectronic devices. Multilayer solution processing technology has been proved to be an ideal and low-cost strategy. However, one of the key factors restricting this strategy is solvent erosion during subsequent solution-based device processing. Besides, the long-term stability is of vital significance for the lifetime of optoelectronic devices. Therefore, exploiting solvent-resistant and durable materials is urgently needed. Promisingly, crosslinkable organic semiconductors (COSs) can be crosslinked into an insoluble and stable network structure to achieve solvent resistance and improve long-term stability. In this review, the recent advances in COSs used in optoelectronic devices (organic photovoltaics (OPVs), perovskite solar cells (PerSCs), and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)) are systematically summarized, in which the basic considerations and key challenges to realize solvent resistance and enhance long-term stability are presented first. Then, the significance, strategies, and disadvantages of COSs are introduced. Finally, typical applications of COSs in OPVs, OLEDs, and PerSCs and their prospects are discussed and highlighted. This review is expected to attract further considerable interest in COSs and promote further progress in optoelectronic devices.Zongwen MaZongwen Ma received his bachelor's degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Shandong University of Science and Technology in 2017. Currently, he is studying in the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His current research areas focus on organic/perovskite solar cells.Biao ZhaoBiao Zhao received his PhD degree from the College of Materials Science and Engineering of Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, China) in June 2019. Currently, he works as a postdoc in Prof. Zhan'ao Tan's group in the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at BUCT. His current research focuses on photoelectric devices.Huaizhi GaoHuaizhi Gao received his master's degree from the College of Chemical Engineering of Qinghai University in 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research interests mainly focus on organic photovoltaics and perovskite solar cells.Yongshuai GongYongshuai Gong received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2015. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research interests mainly focus on organic photovoltaics.Runnan YuRunnan Yu received her PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). She currently works as an associate professor in the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology. Her primary research focuses on molecular design and device engineering in organic photovoltaic cells.Zhan'ao TanZhan'ao Tan has been a professor in the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology since 2018, and has also worked in the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University since 2009, and currently leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his PhD degree in physical chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences and then went to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a postdoctoral fellow working on semiconductor quantum dot based light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics from 2007 to 2009. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal based optoelectronics, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells and flow batteries.
1. Introduction
It is widely accepted that the typical multilayer optoelectronic devices, such as organic photovoltaics (OPVs), perovskite solar cells (PerSCs), and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), have played an essential role in energy-generating, display, and lighting applications, primarily due to their unique and outstanding optoelectronic properties.1–11 Efficiency, stability, and cost are the three critical factors for judging their future large-scale applications. With the continuous development in recent years, the efficiencies of these optoelectronic devices have been remarkably improved, meeting the commercialization requirements.12–14 Furthermore, multilayer solution printing techniques are considered low-cost processing methods, showing significant advantages in future large-scale manufacturing.15–20 However, one of the critical challenges restricting multilayer solution processability is solvent erosion during subsequent solution-based device processing.21,22 The solvents used in the upper layer will erode the underlying layer material, further causing damage to the device structure. To solve this severe problem, the method of orthogonal solvents was proposed in previous studies.23–25 Unfortunately, most semiconductor materials are dissolvable in solvents with similar polarity, which greatly impedes the applications of orthogonal solvents. Besides, even upon employing this method, part of the semiconductor material will inevitably be washed out by the upper solvent during this process. Therefore, exploiting novel solvent-resistant semiconductor materials is vital for realizing low-cost multilayer solution processability.
In addition to efficiency and cost, another critical factor limiting the development of these optoelectronic devices is long-term stability. However, research studies concerning long-term stability have not been highlighted enough to date. Generally, active layer and interlayer stability play an essential part in the long-term stability of these optoelectronic devices. In particular, the bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) morphology of the photoactive layer is of vital importance for the performance and stability of OPV devices.26–29 Due to the short exciton diffusion distance (about 10 nm),30 the donor and acceptor need to form an interpenetrating network morphology with suitable phase domain sizes.31–35 By utilizing high-boiling additives, thermal annealing, and solvent atmosphere treatment, the phase domain scale of the donor and acceptor can be effectively regulated.36,37 However, the optimal morphology is in a thermodynamically metastable state, which will excessively change the photoactive layer morphology and cause a sharp decline in the performance of OPV devices when the temperature of OPV cells increases.38 As for PerSCs, the traps/defects existing at the perovskite will cause severe nonradiative recombination, hindering charge-density buildup and reducing the photo-voltage of devices.39,40 Furthermore, these traps/defects are easily damaged by external factors such as water, heat, light, and oxygen, resulting in the decomposition of perovskite. Accordingly, it is imperative to exploit strategies to improve the long-term stability of photoelectric devices.
To achieve solvent resistance and long-term stability, crosslinking strategies of organic semiconductors are considered promising and effective methods.22,41 Crosslinkable organic semiconductors (COSs) can be polymerized under certain conditions to form insoluble network thin films, which can resist the erosion of the upper solvent layer and freeze the morphology of the film to enhance long-term stability. COSs mainly introduce multiple crosslinkable groups onto the skeleton of organic semiconductors, such as bromine, vinyl, acrylate, azide, and oxetane groups (Fig. 1). These groups can be crosslinked in the presence of stimuli like light, heat, or (light) initiators. However, the crosslinking strategies also have some defects.42 For example, residues of crosslinkable groups may affect device performance. In addition, some crosslinkable groups require initiators, which will remain in the organic semiconductor film and cause defects. More importantly, the crosslinking process of these crosslinking groups generally requires high-temperature treatment, and the high crosslinking temperature may harm large-scale commercial processing. Therefore, optimizing extant crosslinking methods and finding new and efficient crosslinking methods will be important research directions in the field of COSs in the future.
 Fig. 1  The illustration of the effect of COSs. And the structures of a single-junction OPV and PerSC, tandem solar cell, OLED, and their multilayer solution processing method. 
COS materials show excellent application value in OPVs, PerSCs, and OLEDs. Recently, COSs have been designed and used as the interlayer materials of OPVs and PerSCs (such as the hole transport layer (HTL), electron transport layer (ETL), and interconnection layer (ICL) of tandem solar cell (TSC) materials).21,43–47 Besides HTL and ETL materials, COSs are also extensively used as hole injection layer (HIL), electron injection layer (EIL), and emitting layer (EML) materials in OLEDs.19 Moreover, to improve the stability of the photoactive layer in OPVs, crosslinkable donor and acceptor materials or crosslinkers have been designed and synthesized.48–50 After crosslinking, the crosslinked functional layers can achieve solvent resistance and enhance long-term stability. With the rapid development of OPVs, PerSCs, and OLEDs, it is necessary to realize multilayer solution processing and improve long-term stability as soon as possible. This review aims to introduce the crosslinking strategies of organic semiconductors and their applications in OPVs, PerSCs, and OLEDs, which is expected to provide new insights for the future development and application of photoelectric devices.
2. Basic considerations and key challenges
Recently, OPVs and PerSCs have emerged as promising photovoltaic technologies with significant potential, primarily due to their superior performance in low-cost solution processing, flexibility, semitransparency, etc.51–55 However, the related investigations and applications of OPVs and PerSCs are still limited in the laboratory, and there is still a long way for their practical application in human life.56,57 On the other hand, active-matrix OLED displays have been extensively employed in tablet personal computers, smartphones, digital cameras, etc. Nevertheless, the high cost of these devices is an essential factor hindering their development. To realize extensive market applications, efficiency, cost, and stability are critical figures of merit for judging the device performance and deserve more attention. Delightfully, with the rapid development in recent decades, efficiency has received ever-increasing attention and reached a high level.12–14,58–60 Furthermore, the multilayer solution processing method has been proved to be an effective and low-cost technology for constructing photoelectric devices. However, the solvent erosion phenomenon within multilayer thin films in the processing of continuous organic layer deposition is extensively observed, which seriously limits the further improvement of device efficiency and stability. Besides, the long-term stability has not been sufficiently developed so far. Therefore, developing appropriate strategies for achieving high-quality devices with both solvent resistance and long-term stability is urgently needed.
2.1. Solvent resistance
In the past few decades, the device structures of these typical optoelectronic devices have undergone several innovations and continuous optimizations, resulting in state-of-the-art and common structures. As for OPV cells, the most efficient device structures are of two kinds, namely, single-junction bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells and organic tandem solar cells (OTSCs).61–65 The typical structure of a BHJ solar cell can be divided into several functional layers, namely, electrodes, hole transport layer, electron transport layer, and photoactive layer (Fig. 1). The photoactive layer materials of BHJ solar cells are composed of donor and acceptor materials, which are mainly responsible for absorbing light and producing excitons.66 Generally, the resulting excitons in the active layer are supposed to separate into electrons and holes and which are then transported to the corresponding electrode. However, due to the poor interface between the electrode and the active layer, the electrons and holes cannot be effectively transmitted to the electrode. This will result in accumulation of many electron–hole pairs, which dramatically reduces the device's performance.67–69 The hole/electron transport layer can be introduced to promote the effective collection and extraction of electrons and holes, significantly improving the device's performance.70,71 As shown in Fig. 1, tandem solar cells contain two single-junction cells (top cell and bottom cell) connected by an interconnection layer.65,72 TSCs have the advantages of absorbing different spectra of sunlight, making the most efficient use of sunlight, and reducing the high-energy photon-loss process. Thus, compared with single-junction solar cells, the performance of TSC devices will improve a lot in principle. Besides, PerSCs exhibit similar device structures to OPVs (Fig. 1), in which the organic active layer material is replaced by perovskite material. Likewise, OLED devices also contain multilayer structures (Fig. 1). The emitting layer is usually sandwiched between a hole transport layer and an electron transport layer to decrease the driving voltage and resolve the mismatch of energy levels between the emitter and the two electrodes. To enhance charge injection, a hole injection layer and an electron injection layer are usually introduced as adjacent layers of HTL and ETL, respectively.
From the perspective of device structures, OPVs, OLEDs, and PerSCs are composed of independent but closely related multilayer structures. Layer-by-layer (LL) processes, namely sequential deposition of different layers, are beneficial for realizing large-scale manufacture, which has been widely used in the fabrication of these optoelectronic devices to date.1 Furthermore, LL process methods can be divided into LL vacuum deposition and LL solution process. LL vacuum deposition technology possesses several excellent advantages. For example, it can realize the precise control of film thickness and roughness and a wide choice of substrates. Meanwhile, it has a positive effect of avoiding the influence of the upper layer on the underlying layer. However, LL vacuum deposition technology has nonnegligible defects. For instance, it can only be applied to small molecular organic materials and some inorganic materials with high thermal stability. What is more, it is necessary to employ expensive and complex vacuum equipment.73 Therefore, this method is disadvantageous for low-cost and large-scale manufacturing.
Compared with LL vacuum deposition, LL solution process technology is an efficient utility method owing to the advantages of low cost, easy printing process and more choices of semiconductor materials (especially polymer materials), which are desirable for widely large-scale fabrication (Fig. 1).3,4,18,74 It is known that OPVs and OLEDs are characterized by employing organic conjugated semiconductor materials that exhibit strong designability advantages, suitable mobility, and outstanding semiconductor properties.53,66 However, due to their generally high conjugation strength, these materials similarly tend to dissolve in solvents with appropriate polarity and strong solubility, such as chloroform (CF), chlorobenzene (CB), and dichlorobenzene (DCB).75 Unfortunately, the structural similarity of organic semiconductors will be a severe challenge to multilayer solution processing. It will cause the problem of solvent erosion phenomenon within multilayer thin films in the processing of continuous organic layer deposition. This disadvantageous result will cause serious damage to the lower film and reduce the performance of the device. Therefore, it is necessary to solve this limiting problem to realize the full solution processing method. Promisingly, seeking solvent resistance materials is a key strategy to achieve multilayer solution processibility.
Orthogonal solvents have emerged as an excellent strategy for achieving solvent resistance to solve this problem.23,76–78 Due to the solubility difference, the upper and underlying semiconductor materials are dissolved in solvents with different polarities, respectively. Therefore, the underlying layer film will not be easily destroyed during solution processing of another layer, achieving solvent resistance. One of the typical methods for orthogonal solvents is to introduce water/alcohol-soluble semiconductor materials, which are attached with strong polar groups on the skeleton of organic semiconductors, such as amino, dihydroxyethylamino, phosphate, carboxyl, quaternary ammonium, anionic carboxyl, sulfonic and zwitterionic groups.23,75 This material is usually dissolved in highly polar and green solvents, such as water, methanol, and isopropanol, but cannot be dissolved in lower polar solvents, such as CB, CF, and DCB. Therefore, multilayer films can be deposited by employing different organic semiconductor materials with huge solubility differences. This problem of solvent-induced erosion has been alleviated. However, introducing such strong polar groups will reduce mobility and result in charge traps and quenching sites, making it difficult to apply to active layer materials.23 Besides, employing these materials as interlayers will also be extremely sensitive to thickness, which is not beneficial to large-area fabrication.79 In addition, even if the upper solvent cannot dissolve the lower semiconductor material, the washing force of the upper solvent can still wash away some of the semiconductor material. Therefore, it is an urgent task to exploit novel solvent-resistance semiconductor materials for realizing multilayer solution processability.
2.2. Long-term stability
Nowadays, long-term stability has become a vital factor affecting the large-scale applications of OPVs. Although power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) of OPV cells have exceeded 18% and reached commercialization requirements, there are still many aspects to be addressed in terms of long-term stability.12,27 According to the commercial target, successful OPV devices should fulfill the requirements for achieving high PCEs and a long lifetime of 10 years simultaneously.27,80 Hence, PCEs and long-term stability should be synergistically developed to realize OPVs' commercial applications.
As for the durability of OPV devices, there are four factors that directly affect long-term stability: high temperature, chemical atmosphere, mechanical stress, and light exposure.41,81 Consequently, even if these devices possess excellent initial performance, these disadvantages can make subsequent performance unbearable. Furthermore, the influence of these factors on long-term stability is mainly reflected in three aspects: material degradation, interface layer stability, and photoactive layer stability. On the one hand, the stability of materials can be effectively improved by encapsulation of devices, which is an efficient method to avoid degradation by water or oxygen.82 In addition, interface layer stability also greatly influences long-term stability. The stable interface layer can protect the active layer and improve the long-term stability. Therefore, exploring novel stable interlayer materials is vital for the long-term stability of OPV devices.
The specific working mechanism of donor–acceptor (D–A) BHJ solar cells generally consists of the following four parts (Fig. 2): (1) photoexcitation and exciton formation; (2) exciton diffusion; (3) exciton dissociation; (4) charge transport.66 In the first step, the photoactive layer materials absorb certain energy photons. This process can generate Coulomb-correlated electron–hole pairs, namely excitons, instead of directly generating free electrons and holes. In the second step, excitons should be rapidly diffused to the D–A interface. However, it is generally believed that the diffusion length of excitons is about 10 nm. Therefore, it is difficult to transfer the excitons beyond 10 nm to the phase interface for separation.30 Accordingly, the donor and acceptor need to form bicontinuous interpenetrating network morphology with suitable phase domain sizes. In the third step, the bound exciton at the D–A interface is dissociated into electrons and holes. In the fourth step, the free charge is transferred to the corresponding electrode in time to avoid the recombination of charges in the transport process.
 Fig. 2  The working mechanism of donor–acceptor BHJ solar cells.66 Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright© 2009, American Chemical Society. 
D–A materials should achieve beneficial phase separation from the working mechanism of ideal BHJ solar cells, resulting in a bicontinuous interpenetrating network morphology. In the meantime, adaptable phase domain sizes of D–A should be in the range of several nanometers to tens of nanometers. Therefore, many approaches are employed to effectively adjust phase domain scales, such as additives control, thermal annealing, and solvent atmosphere treatment.83–86 However, the optimal morphology is thermodynamically metastable, which can be affected when the photoactive layers suffer from continuous heating or solar radiation. The photoactive layer morphology, particularly in phase domain size, will be changed a lot, causing a sharp reduction in the performance of OPV devices. For practical applications, conjugated polymers tend to be better packed or further crystallized under continuous heat conditions. Meanwhile, fullerene derivatives are inclined to diffuse into large aggregates or clusters, or even single crystals.87,88 For instance, as shown in Fig. 3a, P3HT:PC61BM blend films with 10 min annealing time did not show any large area aggregations.89 However, with the increase in thermal annealing time, increasing aggregations occurred in the blend film, owing to the crystallization of PC61BM. Consequently, the PCEs of OPV devices greatly decreased from 3.78 ± 0.14% (t = 10 min) to 0.23 ± 0.03% (t = 144 h). Similarly, molecular stacking and aggregation also occurs in non-fullerene acceptor systems under thermal conditions, affecting the stability of OPV devices.90,91 Therefore, it is extremely crucial to enhance the stability of the photoactive layer morphology.
 Fig. 3  (a) Optical microscopy images of the normal P3HT:PC61BM blend films under accelerated conditions at 150 °C for various lengths of time.89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright© 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Intrinsic and extrinsic defects in perovskite film and some passivation strategies.97 Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, the instability of PerSCs is a severe issue affecting large-scale commercial applications.92–96 It is known that the traps/defects existing at the interface and grain boundaries (GBs) will yield severe nonradiative recombination, hindering charge-density buildup and reducing the photo-voltage of devices (Fig. 3b).97 Furthermore, these traps/defects are the attack points of external factors such as water, heat, light, and oxygen, resulting in the decomposition of perovskites. Typically, the presence of water will lead to irreversible degradation of perovskite materials, which is the fatal problem of PerSC devices at present. Besides, the residue of product PbX2 (X = F, Cl, I) will cause serious ecological safety problems. In addition, perovskite materials are susceptible to heat. With the increase in temperature, perovskite materials easily decompose. Meanwhile, light and oxygen can also induce the degradation of PerSCs. Significant progress has been made to solve these problems in enhancing long-term stability, including crystal growth and defect engineering, compositional engineering, and interface engineering.92 Among them, interface engineering is a considerable approach to enhance contacts and interfaces to enable outstanding progress in the stability of PerSCs. A stable HTL and ETL can protect the perovskites from destruction by external stresses to improve the long-term stability of PerSCs.
Overall, solvent erosion between layers and device instability are two serious problems affecting the low-cost solution processability and lifetime. Therefore, exploiting solvent-resistant and stable semiconductor materials is urgently needed. Crosslinking is an effective method to improve solvent resistance and long-term stability to solve the problems.
3. Crosslinking strategies of organic semiconductors
Recently, multilayer solution processing methods have attracted increasing attention due to their advantages of low cost and ease of large-scale manufacture. In solution processing, semiconductor materials need to be dissolved or dispersed in solvents at the beginning and then processed into films. After forming the films, the semiconductor materials are still independent. Furthermore, the force between them is weak and is easily destroyed under the action of external forces. Therefore, it is best to freeze the film morphology by connecting the semiconductor molecules through solid forces, such as covalent bonds. Delightfully, it is demonstrated that the crosslinking strategy can realize freezing of the film morphology, which can achieve solvent resistance and improve long-term stability (Fig. 4). Before crosslinking polymerization, the crosslinking materials can form corresponding thin films through solution processing. After crosslinking, chemical reactions occur, resulting in the insoluble crosslinking network. Furthermore, the film morphology is frozen to resist the erosion of the upper layer solvent and make it not be affected by the external stresses.
 Fig. 4  Schematic drawing of the formation of the insoluble network by crosslinkable groups of COSs and crosslinking process for achieving solvent resistance and long-term stability. 
Many efforts have been made towards crosslinking strategies, mainly aiming to exploit novel COS materials.22,48,81 Generally, conjugated polymers (CPs) and conjugated small molecules (CSMs) belong to typical organic semiconductors. The conjugated backbone of CPs determines the intrinsic optical and electrical properties of the CPs, such as absorption, emission, energy level structure, and charge transport characteristics. Furthermore, functional groups or side chains can be grafted into the conjugated backbone of CPs that can realize a specific function.23,75 Accordingly, crosslinkable CPs are mainly constructed by introducing multiple crosslinkable groups to the skeleton of CPs, typically such as bromine, vinyl, acrylate, azide, and oxetane groups, etc.42,98–102 Furthermore, crosslinkable CPs can achieve the crosslinking function and guarantee optoelectronic performance. The typical crosslinking groups and their crosslinking mechanisms, requirements, and potential disadvantages are illustrated in Table 1. Initially, crosslinkable CPs are soluble and can form films by solution processing. Then, multiple crosslinkable groups can be crosslinked under certain conditions to create insoluble network thin films. Thus, crosslinking can lock the morphology of thin films so that the stable film cannot be destroyed by disadvantageous conditions (Fig. 4). Compared with CPs, CSMs reveal low molecular weight and definite structure, resulting in them being easier to be modified in design. Therefore, the crosslinking strategies employed in CPs are also applicable to CSMs. Similar to crosslinkable CPs, attaching functional crosslinkable groups in the conjugated backbone of CSMs is a powerful method to achieve the crosslinking effect. Furthermore, through the polymerization of the crosslinkable CSMs, the insoluble and stable thin film is formed. In addition to these conjugated materials, crosslinkable non-conjugated molecules are also used in optoelectronic devices to improve performance and stability.
Table 1 Illustration of typical crosslinking groups and their crosslinking mechanisms, requirements, and potential disadvantages




Crosslinking groups
Crosslinking mechanisms
Requirements
Potential disadvantages




Bromine
Free radical
1. UV
Remaining bromine radicals


2. Heat


Acrylate
Free radical
1. Photoinitiator
Remaining photoinitiators


2. UV


3. Heat


Vinyl
Radical or anionic
1. UV
Requirement of high temperature


2. Heat


Azide
Nitrenes
1. UV
Production of inert nitrogen gas


2. Heat


Oxetane
Cationic ring-opening polymerization
1. Photoacid generator or acid
Requirement of a photoacid generator or acid producing radical cations/trap states


2. UV


3. Heat




Under certain conditions, these crosslinkable groups can undergo crosslinking reactions to form insoluble reticular films. Furthermore, the crosslinking reaction mechanisms of these crosslinkable groups are different.103–105 For instance, crosslinking of bromide and acrylate groups occurs by free radical mechanisms, while vinyl units are crosslinked by radical or anionic mechanisms. Besides, crosslinking of azides proceeds via nitrenes. Finally, as for oxetane, the crosslinking mechanism is cationic ring-opening polymerization (CROP), which usually needs to add an extra photoacid generator or acid. The crosslinked polymerization of these crosslinkable groups generally requires the breaking of covalent bonds and the formation of new covalent bonds, which require energy to activate. Under normal conditions, these crosslinkable groups find it difficult to initiate the crosslinking reaction and require external conditions. The common ways to initiate crosslinking reactions are via light, heat, or (light) initiators. Furthermore, photoinitiation and thermal initiation are not independent of each other. Both UV-light exposure and heating can be used together to improve the degree of crosslinking or to achieve crosslinking under mild conditions.
The crosslinking and solvent-resistance properties of the films can be demonstrated by the ultraviolet (UV) absorption spectrum. For example, Sun et al. synthesized four vinyl-containing small-molecule materials, passing two UV-vis tests (Fig. 5a and b).21 Four films based on these materials were prepared by solution processing and crosslinked under the condition of heating. After that, the film was cleaned with a good solvent of the crosslinking materials, and the UV-vis absorption intensity of the film before and after the cleaning was investigated. It can be seen that there were no significant changes in UV-vis absorption strength before and after cleaning, which demonstrated that the film had excellent solvent resistance. In addition, for COS materials obtained via the thermal crosslinking method, the thermal change can be measured by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). In Fig. 5b, the exothermic peak can be seen clearly for the initial heating curve. Subsequently, the exothermic peak vanished on the second heating curve, which confirmed that the crosslinking reaction happened. The location of the exothermic peak is referenced to the crosslinking temperature used in OPV fabrication.
 Fig. 5  (a) The molecular structure of the four crosslinkable materials. (b) Illustration of DSC curves of the four crosslinkable materials in the first and the second heating cycle and UV-vis absorption spectrum of the four materials before rinsing and after rinsing with chlorobenzene.21 Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright© 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Optical micrograph of solvent-processed thin films of the five polymers blended with PCBM (1:1 wt) before (0 hours) and after annealing at 150 °C for 13 hours.106 Adapted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright© 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, crosslinking can improve long-term stability, especially the thermal stability of the photoactive layer in BHJ solar cells.41 Since the photoactive layer in OPVs is composed of donor and acceptor materials, the mixed film will undergo phase separation and form a bicontinuous interpenetrating network. The size of phase separation plays an important role in device performance. By freezing the BHJ morphology, the aggregation behavior of the materials can be inhibited so that it will not change the phase separation size under the condition of light or heat. For example, Krebs et al. synthesized five polymer acceptor materials (one without crosslinkable groups, and the other four with bromine, azide, vinyl, and oxetane groups, respectively).106 The mixed films were prepared in a ratio of 1:1 with PCBM. Their thermal stability was tested by annealing at 150 °C for 13 h. It can be seen from the optical micrographs that the thin films containing the crosslinked groups inhibit the aggregation of the materials under the condition of continuous heating and improve the thermal stability of the devices (Fig. 5c). It is proven that the crosslinking strategy is an effective method to improve the thermal stability of the devices.
These crosslinking strategies can effectively realize solvent-resistance performance and improve long-term stability. However, compared with the state-of-the-art organic semiconductors to date, COSs possess many adverse effects attributed to the defects of crosslinkable groups.42,103 The bromine group is generally tough to react entirely. The remaining bromine groups will significantly affect the carrier mobility of the film and thus reduce the device efficiency. In addition, the COSs with acrylate units usually require the use of a photoinitiator. The residue of photoinitiator decomposition remains in the film and cannot be removed, reducing the performance of the device. For the COSs with azide groups, nitrogen will be generated in the crosslinking process, and nitrene species with high activity will be formed. This active substance attacks the side chain of the polymer and can be inserted into the conjugated backbone.
Furthermore, due to the CROP mechanism, the crosslinking of epoxy groups often requires acidic substances or prolonged thermal treatment. The problem of acid-induced crosslinking is the acid residue or the counterions of the photoacid generator. Long periods of temperature processing will not be beneficial to large-scale manufacturing. The vinyl group is easy to introduce and does not require initiators. However, similar to epoxy groups, the crosslinking of vinyl groups often requires long periods of high-temperature annealing, which is a major downside of limiting vinyl-based COSs. Finally, these crosslinkable groups have a common disadvantage, namely, introducing these crosslinkable groups requires the redesign of new crosslinkable materials, which increases the synthesis difficulty and cost. Therefore, pursuing outstanding properties, mild crosslinking conditions, and low cost is vital for the large-scale applications of COSs.
4. Crosslinkable HTL materials
4.1. Basic principles
The interface contact between the active layer and the electrode will directly affect the performance parameters of the optoelectronic devices. The interface layer can be used as a bridge between the active layer and the electrode. Therefore, the interface properties between the active layer and the electrode can be significantly enhanced so that the performance of optoelectronic devices can be effectively improved. Furthermore, interlayer materials can be divided into HTL materials and ETL materials. Generally, the HTL corresponding to the anode has a high power function, while the ETL corresponding to the cathode has a low power function, thus improving charge selectivity.
Generally, interface layer materials used in OPVs and PerSCs are required to meet the following requirements in terms of optics and electricity:79,107,108 (1) they should possess good conductivity and low resistance, to speed up carrier transport; (2) appropriate energy levels are provided to improve the selective collection and extraction of charges by the corresponding electrodes; (3) better film-forming properties are required, which is beneficial to solution processing; (4) they should possess good light transmittance and the absorption of sunlight cannot be hindered by the photoactive layer; (5) they should have relatively stable physical and chemical properties to prevent the interface layer from reacting with the electrode and the active layer; (6) they should possess the advantages of low cost and comprehensive resources. Although it is difficult to obtain interlayer materials that fully meet these requirements in practice, developing interlayer materials that fulfill the above requirements as much as possible can greatly improve the performance of OPV devices, typically such as conjugated polyelectrolytes, metal oxides, and metal chelates.3,23
As for the multilayer structure of OLEDs, the hole injection layers (HILs) between the anode and the HTL are vital for promoting hole injection and lowering the hole injection barrier.109,110 In the meantime, the HIL can also enhance the film-forming performance of subsequent organic layers via smoothing the ITO surface, resulting in a longer device lifetime. In addition, the HTL between the HIL and EML is a significant part of the OLED structure to promote hole injection from the HIL to the EML.111
Recently, crosslinkable HTL materials were extensively explored to serve as the HTL, which is attributed to their attractive solvent resistance to achieve multilayer solution processing and hole transport properties to enhance the performance of optoelectronic devices. The basic design principle of crosslinkable HTL materials is to add efficient crosslinkable groups into the traditional hole transport materials, which can be used as a high power function interlayer to resist the upper layer solvent. Therefore, crosslinkable interlayers show great potential in optoelectronic devices.
4.2. Crosslinkable HTL materials in OPVs
It is known that introducing excellent crosslinkable groups into classic HTL material units is an efficient strategy for building crosslinkable HTL materials. The vinyl group is an effective group that can be polymerized without any initiator under heat or UV light conditions. For instance, Sun et al. designed and synthesized four new crosslinkable small molecular HTL materials (named 1-TPD, T-BTPA, BT-BTPA, and IDT-BTPA, the chemical structure is shown in Fig. 5a) with different units of indacenodithiophene, bithiophene, and thiophene which were bookended by two triarylamine groups as an anode buffer layer for OPVs to achieve solvent resistance and enhance stability.21 These four HTL materials can be crosslinked at high temperature from 150 °C to 180 °C to form a strong film to resist the erosion of dichlorobenzene used in the photoactive layer. Finally, a new bilayer HTL structure consisting of a doped layer and a neutral layer was used to enhance the open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (JSC), and fill factor (FF) of OPV devices, resulting in a similar performance compared to the devices employing poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) as the anode buffer layer. Besides, Strohriegl and co-workers reported a novel polymeric exciton blocking layer material, namely PFTPDAc (Fig. 6).112 The crosslinkable PFTPDAc with several pendant acrylate groups can be processed by the solution coating method to form thin films and then crosslinked by irradiation, resulting in a completely insoluble film to resist the erosion of the solvent. Compared with a reference cell without the interface layer, the EQE has been improved from 400 to 650 nm, yielding a PCE of 1.8%. Besides, Yu and co-workers fabricated a photocrosslinkable leakage current buffer layer based on a crosslinkable small molecule T43 (Fig. 6) for OPV devices.113 Employing the interlayer enhanced the performance of the OPV a lot resulting from the increase in the JSC and FF. There are few crosslinkable HTL materials used in the OPV direction. Therefore, developing other new crosslinkable HTL materials is necessary to replace the acidic and hygroscopic unstable PEDOT:PSS to achieve multilayer solution processing and enhance interface stability.
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of crosslinkable HTL materials in OPVs. 
4.3. Crosslinkable HTL materials in PerSCs
The crosslinkable HTL material is a kind of efficient high power function interface layer material, which possesses excellent solvent resistance and can improve long-term stability in PerSCs. Recently, arylamine derivatives such as triarylamine and diphenylamine units are prevailing building blocks in designing HTL materials due to their low ionization potential and hole mobility. Therefore, grafting crosslinkable groups into arylamine derivatives is an effective method to exploit novel crosslinkable HTLs. For instance, introducing vinyl units into arylamine derivatives can obtain a crosslinkable HTL, which can be crosslinked to form a strong and insoluble film. As shown in Fig. 7, several novel crosslinkable HTL materials with vinyl units are designed and synthesized. From the structures of these vinyl-based HTL materials, such as VNPB, DVTPD, DH-MeO-FDPA, VB-MeO-FDPA, and VB-Me-FDPA, it can be seen that these crosslinkable HTL materials are similar in structure and belong to arylamine derivatives with high hole transport properties.47,114–116 The differences are that their hole transport capacity energy and level alignment can be changed by fine-tuning their structure. These crosslinked HTL materials with vinyl units can react under thermal or light stimulation to generate a three-dimensional network structure, which has achieved the dual function of multilayer solution processing and sufficient stability to protect the perovskite layer. Additionally, Marder and co-workers combined the bis(triarylamine) units to design and synthesize an acrylate random copolymer with photocrosslinkable cinnamate side chains, namely P1-2.117 The crosslinked polymer film can show excellent wettability and solvent resistance, which benefits the subsequently deposited photoactive layer on the strong and pyknotic HTL film. Meanwhile, the PerSC devices with the crosslinkable HTL exhibited strong stability compared to the common PolyTPD analogue as the HTL. Consequently, the PCEs of devices did not decrease after heating for 3000 h at 85 °C in a nitrogen glovebox. However, one of the important problems for the vinyl group is the harsh conditions of crosslinking, which hurts the fabrication of devices. Wong and co-workers came up with an effective way to solve the problem.118 They designed a styrene-functionalized monomer (VB-DAAF), which showed an attractive energy level alignment with perovskite. The VB-DAAF can be thermally crosslinked under harsh conditions at 195 °C for 30 min to form a solvent-resistant film. Furthermore, an improved UV-assisted method can be used to polymerize VB-DAAF film under mild conditions by exposing it to UV light (365 nm) in a nitrogen glovebox for 10 min and then heating it at 100 °C for another 10 min. In addition, a facile thiol–ene thermal crosslinking reaction was used to lower crosslinking conditions by Jen and co-workers.119 They developed crosslinkable HTL materials (TCTA-BVP) that can react with PETMP via an easy thiol–ene reaction under mild conditions at 120 °C without an initiator. Finally, the best PCE of PerSC devices with this crosslinking HTL can be up to 18.3%. More significantly, the stability of the PerSC device improved a lot, resulting in it being able to maintain over 80% of its initial PCE under sustained light at AM 1.5G for 500 min or after 30 days storage in the air without any encapsulation. In addition, a new azide-functionalized crosslinker (TPBA) was designed to crosslink the usual HTL materials (PTAA) to achieve solvent resistance and enhance adhesion between the HTL and perovskite surfaces.120 Furthermore, Chen and co-workers reported two crosslinkable materials (QUPD and OTPD) as the anode interlayers to realize solvent resistance and decrease electron–hole recombination via blocking electrons.121 They can be crosslinked under the acid conditions provided by the underlying acidic PEDOT:PSS. In the meantime, the PCE of PerSC devices with crosslinked QUPD can improve up to 13.06%, while the PCE of the control device can only reach up to 9.93%. Overall, it can be demonstrated that designing and exploiting crosslinkable HTL materials is an attractive and effective method to achieve solvent resistance and enhance the long-term stability of PerSC devices.
 Fig. 7  Molecular structures of crosslinkable HTL materials in PerSCs. 
4.4. Crosslinkable HIL/HTL materials in OLEDs
The design philosophy of crosslinkable HIL and HTL materials in OLEDs is similar to that of crosslinkable HTL materials in OPVs and PerSCs, introducing crosslinkable groups into the backbone of organic semiconductors with excellent hole-transport properties. For instance, Hung et al. reported a thermally crosslinkable HIL material with styryl units, namely VB-DATA (Fig. 8), which can be crosslinked under thermal treatment at 190 °C.122 The crosslinking VB-DATA acting as a HIL on the top of ITO exhibited excellent solvent resistance and could form a smooth film owing to its surface roughness of RMS 0.84 nm to improve the film-forming properties. Besides, water-soluble PEDOT:PSS is a common HIL material used in OLEDs due to its excellent optoelectronic properties. However, due to its fatal defects, such as acidic corrosion of ITO, the stability of the device is affected. It is proved that VB-DATA possesses outstanding hole-transport properties, and it can replace PEDOT:PSS to enhance long-term stability.
 Fig. 8  Molecular structures of crosslinkable HIL and HTL materials in OLEDs. 
The molecular structures of HTL materials that occurred in this review are shown in Fig. 8. Among these crosslinkable units, vinyl groups, especially the styryl group, are widely employed as crosslinkable HTLs in OLEDs.123–132 For example, three novel crosslinkable HTL materials with styryl groups, namely BCzMS, BCzBOS, and MeO-BCzBOS, were designed and used in phosphorescent OLEDs by Lee and co-workers.123 These three crosslinkable HTL materials can be crosslinked at different temperatures. Furthermore, it is confirmed that the performance of devices with HTL materials crosslinked at lower crosslinking temperatures is superior to those crosslinked at higher temperatures. Besides, a curing temperature of 150 °C with solvent resistance above 95% gave the best device performance. Consequently, the current and power efficiencies of 136% and 137% in OLEDs employing BCzBOS as the HTL were increased compared to the control device without HTL. Furthermore, the OLED devices' current and power efficiencies employing MeO-BCzBOS as HTL was enhanced by 157% and 176%, respectively. On the other hand, Dubey et al. developed a crosslinkable HTL, namely VyPyMCz (the molecular structure is the same as that of BCzMS), and successfully employed it in solvent-processed OLEDs.125 Through thermal crosslinking, strong, smooth, and insoluble HTL film can achieve multilayer solution processing of OLED devices and enhance device performance. Besides, compared with crosslinkable small molecules, crosslinkable polymers that act as HTLs may acquire higher solvent-resistance properties. For example, two novel thermally crosslinkable polymers, namely X–P1 and X–P2, were reported as HTL to achieve solvent-processed multilayer OLEDs.133 The two crosslinkable polymers showed excellent solvent resistance and optoelectronic performance to obtain attractive efficiencies.
In addition to the vinyl group, the oxetane group is another effective and attractive crosslinkable unit to realize crosslinkable HTL materials.134–142 For instance, to solve the issue of exciton quenching at the interface between the HIL (PEDOT:PSS) and EML, a novel crosslinkable HTL material with two oxetane units (Oxe-DCDPA) was designed to be inserted into the HIL and EML. It can be polymerized after heating for 30 min under 200 °C in an acidic atmosphere provided by the PSS of the underlying PEDOT:PSS layer.137 It shows high triplet energy (2.89 eV) can restrain exciton quenching. Finally, combining N,N′-bis(4-(6-((3-ethyloxetan-3-yl)methoxy))hexylphenyl)-N,N′-diphenyl-4,4′-diamine and Oxe-DCDPA as the double HTLs can enhance the device performance. This resulted in the outstanding external quantum efficiency (EQE) and luminous efficiency (ηL) of 30.8% and 111.9 cd A−1 for green emission and EQE and ηL of 27.2% and 83.8 cd A−1 for bluish-green emission. Besides, 3,6-diiodo-9-(2-ethylhexyl)carbazole and 3,6-diodo-9-[6-(3-ethyloxetan-3-ylmethoxy)hexyl]carbazole monomers polymerized into a photocrosslinkable copolymer (PKOx), which was used as an HTL in OLEDs to achieve solvent resistance and enhance the hole-transport properties.138 The performance of OLED devices enhanced greatly, yielding a maximum brightness of 15000 cd m−2 and an OLED efficiency of 8.5 cd A−1.
In general, achieving mild crosslinking conditions is advantageous for the processing and large-scale manufacture of OLEDs. To solve this issue, Wang et al. reported a method combining UV light and heating to lower the crosslinking temperature.143 Specifically, they designed two crosslinkable HTLs with vinyl units, namely V-TPAVTPD and V-TPAVCBP. Meanwhile, 4-octyloxydiphenyliodonium hexafluoroantimonate (OPPI) as a cationic photoinitiator was added into the crosslinkable HTL for lowering the crosslinking condition and improving hole mobility. The two crosslinkable materials without doping OPPI should react at high temperatures of 180 and 190 °C for 30 min, respectively. However, the two materials with OPPI as photoinitiators can be crosslinked under the mild conditions of irradiation with 365 nm UV light for 5 min and heating at 120 °C for 30 min. Another method, a “thiol–ene” photo-crosslinking, was employed as a novel photo-crosslinking approach for HTL materials in OLEDs.144 An attractive allyl-based polymer (Allyl-TFB) acting as the HTL can be crosslinked with pentaerythritol tetrakis-(3-mercaptopropionate) via a “thiol–ene” reaction for UV irradiation for 30 s with solvent resistance of 70% and 180 s with solvent resistance of more than 95%. Finally, employing this method, the maximum luminous efficiency of 31.4 cd A−1 and power efficiency of 21.8 lm W−1 were achieved for Device-1 (UV irradiation for 30 s) with crosslinked Allyl-TFB as the HTL.
5. Crosslinkable ETL materials
5.1. Basic principles
An ideal ETL should fulfill several requirements, such as adaptable energy level alignment with the active layer, high charge carrier mobility, optical transparency, and low cost. Furthermore, these transporting layer materials need to be stable enough to protect the active layer. To achieve multilayer solution processability, they should possess solvent resistance. To date, COS materials have been proved to possess excellent solvent resistance and stability, and mechanical durability, which are widely used in optoelectronic devices.119,145
Like crosslinkable HTL materials, crosslinkable ETL materials are a kind of efficient low power function interface layer that possesses excellent solvent-resistance performance. Crosslinkable ETL materials are mainly constructed by grafting crosslinkable groups onto semiconductor molecules with outstanding electron transport properties.
5.2. Crosslinkable ETL materials in OPVs
Fullerenes have been proved to be a material with excellent electron transport performance, widely employed in OPVs. Crosslinkable groups can be grafted onto fullerene materials to form crosslinkable fullerene derivatives used as ETL materials, greatly improving the performance of OPV devices. For instance, a crosslinkable fullerene derivative [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric styryl dendron ester, named PCBSD, was designed and synthesized as the ETL.146–148 From the structure of PCBSD shown in Fig. 9, it was attached with a dendron including two styryl groups and can be in situ crosslinked by heating at a temperature of 160 °C for 30 min, achieving a strong and solvent-resistant film.146 Promisingly, crosslinked PCBSD (C-PCBSD) employed in the inverted OPV device structure of ITO/ZnO/C-PCBSD/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag realized an improved device performance with the PCE of 4.4%, compared with a reference device performance with the PCE of 3.5% based on the device structure of ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag. Moreover, it revealed an outstanding long-term stability performance without encapsulation. Furthermore, Li and co-workers introduced C-PCBSD into the P3HT:ICBA combination in inverted OPV devices, leading to a record high PCE of 6.2%, which greatly outperformed the PCE of 4.8% without employing C-PCBSD.147 Then, to continuously improve the promising performance of C-PCBSD, they incorporated an ordered nanostructured interface with vertically oriented C-PCBSD nanorods to enhance the device performance.148 Finally, employing the device structure of ITO/ZnO/C-PCBSD nanorods/ICBA:P3HT/PEDOT:PSS/Ag yielded an enhanced PCE of 7.3%, simultaneously achieving excellent ambient and morphological stability. In addition, Chao et al.149 introduced an ionic FPI dopant into C-PCBSD to enhance the electron mobility through an anion-induced charge transfer mechanism, leading to greatly improving the performance of OPVs. Meanwhile, the C-PCBSD that acted as an effective interface layer can be employed in the polymer: fullerene system and play an important part in the polymer donor: non-fullerene acceptor system. For example, Chen et al.150 exploited a novel non-fullerene acceptor, DTC(4Ph)-4FIC (Fig. 10a), based on a fluorinated heptacyclic dithienocyclopentacarbazol unit. The DTC(4Ph)-4FIC exhibited complementary absorption and well-matched energy levels with donors of J71, PBDB-T, and PBDB-TF (Fig. 10b and c). Besides, employing crosslinkable C-PCBSD as the cathode interface layer greatly improved the performance of inverted OPV devices, yielding a high PCE of 13.36% for the device structure of ITO/ZnO/C-PCBSD/PBDB-TF:DTC(4Ph)-4FIC/MoO3/Al (Fig. 10d). Additionally, Jen and co-workers functionalized small styrene groups onto fullerene derivatives to form crosslinkable 1,4-di(vinylbenzyl)fullerene (named full-s) as ETL (Fig. 9).151 Meanwhile, a conductive fullerene dopant was introduced into thermally crosslinkable full-s to simultaneously improve conductivity and resistance, finally resulting in improving the PCE from 2.43% to 5.26%.
 Fig. 9  Molecular structures of crosslinkable ETL materials in OPVs. 
 Fig. 10  Illustration of (a) chemical structures of donors and acceptor; (b) normalized absorption spectra of donors and acceptor in film; (c) schematic energy level diagrams of donors and acceptor; (d) inverted structure of the OPV device with C-PCBSD.150 Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright© 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to fullerene materials, there are many other organic conjugated molecules with crosslinkable groups suitable to act as crosslinkable ETLs for OPVs. Similarly, adding crosslinkable azido groups into organic conjugated molecules can achieve crosslinkable ETLs to enhance the performance of OPVs. For instance, Jen and co-workers studied three thiophene-NDI copolymers (PNDI-1Th, PNDI-2Th, and PNDI-3Th), which can be crosslinked with bis(perfluorophenyl) azide (bis-PFPA) as effective ETL for inverted OPV devices (chemical structure as shown in Fig. 9).43 The films can be photocrosslinked under UV light (λ = 254 nm) for 5 min at room temperature to form strong solvent-resistant thin films. Besides, introducing chemical dopant (4-(1,3-dimethyl-2,3-dihydro-1H-benzoimidazol-2-yl)phenyl) dimethylamine (N-DMBI) into the film enhanced the PCE of OPV devices from 0.69% to 3.42%. Moreover, combining fullerene derivatives and crosslinkable non-fullerene organic molecules as crosslinkable ETLs is an efficient method that can achieve excellent electron transport and solvent resistance at the same time. Concretely, Jeng and co-workers designed a diketopyrrolopyrrole-based small molecule with terminal crosslinkable azido groups, namely DPPBTDA (Fig. 9), employed as the cathode modifying layer for an inverted OPV device.152 The DPPBTDA can be crosslinked with PCBM at 150 °C for 10 min to form a DPPBTDA/PCBM hybrid interfacial layer embedded in the ZnO layer. This crosslinked film can reduce the degree of wetting of the ZnO film, alter the BHJ morphologies of active layers, and enhance electron mobility. Finally, the PCEs improved from 8.5 ± 0.15% (without the hybrid interfacial layer) to 9.4 ± 0.11% (with the hybrid interfacial layer).
Organic semiconductors with crosslinkable epoxy groups show great potential in crosslinkable ETLs. For instance, Udum et al. reported a hole-blocking layer based on crosslinkable amine-rich polymer polyethylenimine (PEI).153 The PEI can be crosslinked with five different ether-based crosslinkers under the heating condition at 105 °C for 10 min to achieve a solvent-resistant thin film. The five cases all revealed comparable device efficiencies. Besides, the polyfluorene derivative is a typical and efficient ETL material widely used in OPVs. Cao and co-workers introduced crosslinkable epoxy groups into the polyfluorene derivative to form an epoxy-functionalized conjugated polymer, called PFEX (Fig. 9), as the ETL of an OPV.154 Furthermore, the crosslinkable PFEX can modify the metal/metal electrode and realize multilayer solution processing of OPV devices. Not only that, but they also solved a previously difficult problem, namely severe processing conditions, such as high-temperature treatment or long-time UV radiation. To solve this disadvantage, they combined the PFEX and an amine-based small molecule (TAA) to be crosslinked under mild heating conditions (80 °C for 10 min) to form a solvent-resistant thin film resulting from the highly efficient amine–epoxide reaction. The PCEs of inverted OPVs improved a lot from 6.8% (employing pristine ITO) to 9.4% (employing the modified ITO).
The vinyl group is an efficient crosslinkable group, which is similarly employed in interface layer materials for OPVs. However, the crosslinking conditions for the vinyl group are harsh and require long periods of high temperature or UV light to activate the crosslinking reaction, which is harmful to large-scale manufacture. Therefore, it is crucial to exploit novel crosslinking strategies to crosslink under mild conditions. In 2016, Cao and his co-workers reported a new crosslinkable aminoalkyl-functionalized polymer, namely PFN-V (Fig. 9), as an efficient cathode interlayer grafted with multiple vinyl groups.155 The vinyl end-groups of PFN-V and the addition of 1,8-octanedithiol can be reacted under low activation energy (just UV-curing within 5 s) based on “click” chemistry. After crosslinking, a robust solvent-resistant thin film can be formed, which can act as a cathode interlayer and further promote the formation of ohmic contact between the cathode and active layer. Finally, resulting from PFN-V as the cathode interlayer, the PCEs of the inverted OPV devices have enhanced a lot from 3.11% (without the cathode interlayer) to 9.18% (with PFN-V). These results have proved this is an efficient crosslinking method that can be accomplished under mild conditions. Furthermore, Tan et al. designed a novel crosslinkable acetylacetone chelate (namely, Hf(ACBV)4), which acted as an ETL in inverted OPVs (Fig. 9).156 This Hf-based chelate possesses better stability than the pure crosslinkable organic molecule (ACBN). Consequently, the stability of this crosslinkable chelate-based device enabled it to maintain 90% of its initial efficiency after 20 h of continuous illumination in air.
Achieving water/alcohol soluble organic semiconductors with crosslinkable groups is an excellent method for simultaneously realizing orthogonal solvent and crosslinking strategies. These crosslinkable water/alcohol soluble organic semiconductors will possess better solvent-resistance performance and employ green solvent processing, which is advantageous for green and low-cost large-scale manufacture. Cao and his co-workers developed a crosslinkable water/alcohol soluble conjugated polymer (WSCP) material poly[9,9-bis(6′-(N,N-diethylamino)propyl)-fluorene-alt-9,9-bis(3-ethyl(oxetane-3-ethyloxy)-hexyl) fluorene], namely PFN-OX (Fig. 9), as the ETL for inverted OPVs.157 The PFN-OX can dissolve in methanol:acetic acid (100:1 v/v) solution and be crosslinked at 150 °C for 20 min to form solvent-resistant thin films.
Furthermore, the PFN-OX can achieve three beneficial functions to improve the performance of OPV devices. Firstly, it can adjust the cathode work function to enhance the Voc of OPV devices. Then, it can be doped with PC71BM at the interface and then enhance electron extraction. Finally, the FF of the OPV device can be improved a lot by efficient extraction of electrons and blocking of holes of PFN-OX.
5.3. Crosslinkable ETL materials in PerSCs
A crosslinkable ETL material is a kind of efficient low power function interface layer, which exhibits considerable solvent resistance and can improve long-term stability in PerSCs. Recently, fullerene derivatives have been prevailing materials with outstanding electron mobility, widely used as ETLs in PerSCs. Introducing crosslinkable units into fullerene materials to form crosslinkable fullerene derivatives is a promising approach to designing crosslinkable ETLs in PerSCs.158 The molecular structure of crosslinkable ETLs is illustrated in Fig. 11. For example, a crosslinkable fullerene derivative with vinyl units, namely PCBSD (Fig. 9), has been demonstrated to be an effective ETL in OPVs. Similarly, it is also adaptable to be an ETL in PerSCs.159,160 Furthermore, Watson et al. designed and synthesized a novel styrene-functionalized fullerene derivative, MPMIC60.161 The MPMIC60 as an ETL in PerSCs can enhance solvent resistance and address the issue of weak fracture resistance of PC61BM and C60 transport layers. In addition, Hsu and co-workers reported novel crosslinkable fullerene derivatives with oxetane crosslinking units, namely crosslinkable [6,6]phenyl-C61-butyric oxetane dendron ester (C-PCBOD), which can be crosslinked under mild conditions via UV-curing treatment for 45 s.162 Meanwhile, it can act as an interface layer and modify the ETL of TiO2 (doped with Au nanoparticles) to reduce the density of traps at the TiO2 (Au) surface, resulting in enhanced electron extraction and decreased charge recombination and yielding an optimized PerSC device with a high PCE of 18.3%.
 Fig. 11  Molecular structures of crosslinkable ETL materials in PerSCs. 
Jen and co-workers designed novel ETL materials to lower the crosslinking temperature, namely HATNA (Fig. 11), which can be crosslinked with PETMP (Fig. 7) via the thiol–ene reaction at 110 °C.145 Another crosslinkable material (TCTA-BVP, as shown in Fig. 7) can act with PETMP to form a crosslinkable HTL in PerSCs. Furthermore, combining the crosslinking HTL and ETL can achieve all-crosslinked charge transport layers (CTLs) for PerSCs, achieving a high PCE of 16.08%. More encouragingly, the thermal stability of PerSC devices has enhanced a lot with the all-crosslinked CTLs, maintaining 70% of their original PCE after heating at 70 °C for 300 h. Besides, crosslinkable water/alcohol soluble organic semiconductors can be widely used in PerSCs due to their solvent resistance and green processing. Gong and co-workers employed a crosslinkable conjugated polymer, PFN-OX (Fig. 9), in PerSCs.163 They used PFN-OX and ZnO nanoparticles as the hybrid composite ETL film in PSCs, yielding a high PCE of over 16%. Furthermore, crosslinkers with azide groups can be added to the ETL to achieve a crosslinkable ETL.164,165 For instance, Yum et al. developed a novel conjugated crosslinker perylenediimide-diazide with pendant azide unit (PDI-DA, the chemical structure is illustrated in Fig. 11) crosslinked PCBM under mild heating or UV treatment.165 The crosslinkable ETL showed remarkable advantages of solvent resistance, adaptable electron mobility, and hydrophobicity, which effectively achieved strong, stable, and crosslinkable ETL films in optoelectronic applications.
5.4. Crosslinkable EIL/ETL materials in OLEDs
Similar to crosslinkable HIL and HTL materials, crosslinkable EIL and ETL materials are also applied in OLEDs, especially inverted OLEDs, to achieve multilayer solution processibility.19,103,111,166,167 For instance, two crosslinkable amino-functionalized electron-injecting conjugated polymer materials, namely oxetane-based PFN-OX (Fig. 9) and styrene-based PFN-S (Fig. 12), were reported by Cao and co-workers.168 The PFN-OX can be crosslinked by heating under 150 °C and fluorescence lamp illumination (without UV lamps) for 20 min, while the PFN-S can be polymerized by heating under 185 °C for 30 min. The two crosslinkable HIL materials exhibited excellent electron injection properties, which can replace the n-type metal oxide for acting as a single EIL, resulting in highly effective inverted OLEDs. In the meantime, it was demonstrated that amino groups played a significant part in lowering the work function of ITO, which was highly advantageous for electron injection for the resulting OLED devices. Similarly, Zhang et al. studied the crosslinkable amino-functionalized polyfluorene (PFN-OX) that acted as a single EIL in inverted OLEDs, resulting in a stunning performance.169 Accordingly, the considerable results demonstrated a promising approach to achieving the multilayer solution processibility of OLEDs.
 Fig. 12  Molecular structures of crosslinkable EIL and ETL materials in OLEDs. 
Crosslinkable ETL materials with high electron mobility, low injection barrier, and strong hole-blocking ability are significant for highly efficient solvent-processed OLEDs. Organic semiconductors with crosslinkable vinyl groups show great potential in crosslinkable ETLs in OLEDs.170–172 Cui's group developed a thermally crosslinked small molecule (DV-46PymTAZ, Fig. 12) with two vinylbenzyl ether units serving as the ETL in OLEDs, which can be crosslinked under heating without using any initiators.170 After crosslinking, the resulting films exhibited attractive solvent resistance and excellent electron-transport properties with high electron mobility of 1.5 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1. Additionally, to study the influence on the film-forming properties and device performance from the view of the molecular level, Wei et al. designed and synthesized four crosslinkable ETL materials built from pyridine, 1,2,4-triazole, and vinylbenzyl ether units, namely DV-24PyTAZ, DV-25PyTAZ, DV-26PyTAZ, and DV-35PyTAZ (Fig. 12), which are employed in inkjet-printed OLEDs.171 The four crosslinkable ETL materials exhibited outstanding solvent resistance, film formation, and solubility in organic solvents. It was demonstrated that the 2,6-pyridine-based compound was better than the 2,4-pyridine-based, 2,5-pyridine-based, and 3,5-pyridine-based compounds. Furthermore, for investigating the difference between solution processing and vacuum deposition, novel crosslinkable ETL materials, namely 1,3,5-tris(5(4-vinylphenyl)pyridin-3-yl)benzene (TV-TmPY, the molecular structure is shown in Fig. 12), was developed for fabricating solution-processed OLED devices. In contrast, a small molecule as the ETL, namely 1,3,5-tris(5-phenylpyridin-3-yl)benzene (TmPY), was used for preparing vacuum-deposited OLED devices.172 In conclusion, the EQE of the solution-processed blue phosphorescent OLED device with TV-TmPY as the ETL is close to the EQE of the vacuum-deposited OLED device with TmPY as the ETL (EQE of 13.9% and 15.4% at a luminance of 1000 cd m−2, respectively). Meanwhile, the TV-TmPY-based solution-processed device exhibited the smallest EQE deviation value of 0.7%, whereas for the TmPY-based vacuum-deposited one it was 24.5%, in the luminance range of 100 to 1000 cd m−2. The excellent results have demonstrated that low-cost solvent-processed OLEDs show great potential in practical display and lighting applications.
6. Crosslinkable ICL materials
6.1. Basic principles
Recently, TSCs have attracted extensive interest due to their higher PCEs than single-junction cells.65 TSCs consist of two or more photoactive layers, which effectively broaden the absorption of sunlight and improve the efficiencies of the cells. In structure (Fig. 1), ICLs are vital for connecting the top cell and bottom cell to realize the addition of the voltage of each cell and finally improve the PCEs.
Generally, an outstanding ICL should meet the following requirements.72,173,174 Firstly, the upper and lower surfaces of the ICL need to have low and high work functions, which can effectively collect electrons and holes from the top cell and bottom cell, respectively. Then, it can effectively recombine the electrons and holes collected from the top and bottom cells without generating a potential loss. Besides, in terms of optics, its transmittance should be as good as possible so as not to affect the absorption of sunlight by the cells. Furthermore, there are also outstanding requirements for its processing performance. The TCLs must have excellent solvent-resistance performance for the active layer processed by solution. It can ensure that the bottom cell will not be damaged during the preparation of the upper active layer, which is vital for multilayer solution processing of TSCs. As can be seen from the above requirements, the requirements for the ICL of TSCs are incredibly rigorous. To obtain high efficiency of TSCs, looking for increased efficiency and solvent-resistant ICLs is necessary.
To achieve solvent resistance and improve interface stability, crosslinking strategies have been used in ICLs. These interlayer materials can achieve solvent resistance, improve interface stability, and meet the interface requirements to realize the high performance of optoelectronic devices.
6.2. Crosslinkable ICL materials of OTSCs
To meet the requirement of solvent resistance for efficient ICLs, COSs with excellent carrier transport performance can act as ICLs for organic tandem solar cells (OTSCs). For instance, Chang et al. designed and synthesized a thermally crosslinkable, n-doped efficient azidofullerene derivative PCBN3 (Fig. 13a), employing tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) as the dopant to alter the carrier concentrations.44 Promisingly, the n-doped PCBN3 has the advantages of good solubility in an organic solvent, suitable electrical conductivity (up to 2.8 × 10−3 S cm−1), remarkable stability, fine tunability of the work function, extensive applicability with a range of efficient polymers and relatively weak thickness sensitivity, which make it adaptable as an efficient ETL for OPVs. More importantly, it exhibits outstanding solvent resistance due to its crosslinkable properties to form insoluble thin films. Furthermore, it can be crosslinked under moderate conditions at a temperature of about 140 °C. Then, they combined PCBN3 (as the ETL to transport electrons) and PSS:PEDOT (as the HTL to transport holes) into an efficient ICL used in OTSCs (the device structure is illustrated in Fig. 13a). The PCBN3 layer is responsible for achieving electron transport and resistance to the solvent erosion functions. Consequently, employing this ICL in double-junction OTSC yielded a remarkable result for producing a PCE of 10%, exceeding 8.8% in single-junction devices.
 Fig. 13  Illustrations of (a) molecular structures of PCBN3 and TBAI and the device structure of OTSCs.44 Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Molecular structures of GOPS and PEDOT:PSS and the device structure of OTSCs.175 Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright© 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, PSS:PEDOT is a typical semiconductor with excellent hole transporting performance, which is widely employed as HTLs in OPV devices. However, PSS:PEDOT employed in ICL of OTSCs has relatively weak solvent-resistance properties, limited reliability, reproducibility, and generic applicability for OTSC devices. Therefore, introducing crosslinkable properties into the initial PSS:PEDOT will be an effective method to realize solvent resistance. For example, a hydrolyzed silane crosslinker (3-glycidyloxypropyl)trimethoxysilane (GOPS) was introduced into PSS:PEDOT to enhance solvent resistance (the molecular structure of GOPS and PSS:PEDOT and OTSC device structure are shown in Fig. 13b).175 Consequently, the crosslinkable PSS:PEDOT film showed remarkable effects on protecting the bottom cell against the solvent employed in the top cell and achieving excellent reliability and reproducibility for organic OTSC fabrication.
In conclusion, outstanding ICLs play an essential part in OTSCs. However, they need to meet highly rigorous requirements. Based on satisfying the excellent optoelectronic performance requirements, ICLs also have to meet the requirements of resisting the erosion of the upper solvent and not eroding the lower active layer. Promisingly, the crosslinkable ICLs with outstanding solvent resistance can be advantageous for multilayer solution processing of OTSCs and extensively broaden solvent selection in the processing of photoactive semiconductors, which shows extraordinary potential for the future large-scale commercialization of OTSCs. Therefore, with the development of COS materials, increasingly crosslinkable ICLs will be applied to OTSCs, significantly promoting the development of OTSCs.
6.3. Crosslinkable ICL materials of PTSCs
For solar cell devices, efficiency is an essential criterion for evaluating the performance of solar cells. However, the continuous increase of efficiency of a single-junction solar cell is limited. To make full use of the sunlight effectively, the development of tandem solar cells is an effective method. The ICL mentioned above is an integral part of TSCs, which can connect the top and bottom sub-cells to improve efficiency. As for perovskite tandem solar cells (PTSCs), the requirements of the ICLs are the same as those of the ICLs of OTSCs. Solvent resistance and high stability must be achieved based on excellent optoelectronic performance. Promisingly, the COS materials have the characteristics of solvent resistance and high stability, and show great potential as ICLs in PTSCs.
For example, Chang et al. reported a highly efficient and stable PTSC with a considerable ICL consisting of a crosslinkable p-doped PTAA as HTL and n-doped PC61BM as ETL (the device architecture of PTSC, the molecular structures of ICL materials, and an equivalent circuit model of the PTSC device are shown in Fig. 14a and b).45 The PTAA can be crosslinked by a crosslinker (TPE-MN3) via C–H insertion of nitrene radicals produced by UV irradiation (the reaction mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 14c) to achieve solvent resistance for multilayer deposition and improve the long-term stability of PTSC devices. Furthermore, Mo(tfdCOCF3)3 as a p-type dopant was introduced to enhance the hole transport performance. In addition to solvent resistance, the resulting novel crosslinkable HTL exhibited excellent features used in PTSCs, such as suitable energy level matching, remarkable electrical conductivity, and high compatibility with different perovskite materials. From the performance point of view, the PTSC devices achieved a high PCE of 18.69%, which revealed the highest PCE for monolithic all-PTSCs. More delightfully, the long-term stability of the PTSC device with encapsulation improved a lot, for it could maintain about 91% of its initial PCE after 9300 h (≈387 days) stored in air. This work has demonstrated an effective method of designing solvent-resistant ICLs for realizing high efficiency and long-term stability PTSCs.
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the device architecture of PTSC and the molecular structures of ICL materials. (b) The equivalent circuit model of the PTSC device. (c) Reaction mechanism for employing TPE-MN3 to crosslink PTAA via C–H insertion of nitrene radicals produced by UV irradiation.45 Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright© 2019, Elsevier. 
From the above example, it is demonstrated that the introduction of COS materials into ICLs can effectively improve solvent resistance and enhance the long-term stability of PTSCs. Moreover, COSs tend to dissolve in halogenated solvents with suitable polarities, such as CF, CB, and DCB. Therefore, as for the crosslinkable ICLs of OTSCs, COSs need to be specially designed to adjust dissolution characteristics to satisfy the multilayer solution processing. In the case of PerSCs, the perovskite precursor and the resulting perovskite is usually dissolved in highly polar solvents, such as N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Hence, the resulting perovskite film is not easily eroded by relatively low-polar halogenated solvents. Therefore, it is not necessary for COS materials in PerSCs to be specially designed regarding the dissolution properties of COSs, which exhibit a more simple and intensely adaptable design principle. Although there are still relatively few applications of COSs as ICL, they will show excellent application value in the visible future.
7. Crosslinkable active layer materials
7.1. Basic principles
In addition to PCEs and cost, long-term stability, especially thermal stability of the photoactive layer, is vital for future large-scale commercial applications of OPVs. The interpenetrating network morphology of the photoactive layer can be influenced by heating or solar radiation, resulting in a sharp decline in long-term stability. Therefore, it is crucial to lock the morphology of the photoactive layer as much as possible to improve the device's stability. It has been proved that crosslinking strategies significantly improve the photoactive layer thermal stability.41,42,48,81 Typically, crosslinkable groups can be introduced into the conjugated backbone of the initial donor or acceptor materials to form crosslinkable donors or acceptors. Furthermore, there are three combinations: crosslinkable donor and usual acceptor, usual donor and crosslinkable acceptor, and crosslinkable donor and crosslinkable acceptor, all practical approaches to stabilize the BHJ morphology of the photoactive layer in OPVs.
Furthermore, it is widely considered that emitting layers (EMLs) play a vital part in OLEDs for improving device luminous efficiency and lifetime. To fulfill multilayer solution-processed OLEDs, crosslinkable EML materials have been proved successful in multilayer solvent-processed OLEDs to resist the solvent employed in the upper layer. Like crosslinkable HTL and ETL materials, the design principles of crosslinkable EML materials are also to graft crosslinking groups on the skeleton of luminous organic semiconductor materials.
7.2. Crosslinkable active layer materials in OPVs
The initial efficiency and aging comparison for the crosslinkable donor/acceptor-based OPV devices is illustrated in Table 2. Typical crosslinkable donor materials are widely employed in OPVs due to their strong designability and efficient functionality.41,42 Donor materials with crosslinkable groups can be crosslinked under heat or UV light conditions to inhibit the aggregation of the acceptor materials and freeze the active layer morphology. Many efforts have been made to design all kinds of crosslinkable donors with different crosslinkable groups (Fig. 15). Among them, the bromine group is a kind of promising crosslinkable group used in OPVs.104,176–178 For instance, Mynar and co-workers designed and synthesized the first case regarding the thermal stability of a BHJ solar cell device based on photocrosslinkable D–A copolymers with bromide-functionalized groups named TPD-Br.104 Meanwhile, they investigated the effects of the novel crosslinkable polymers with different contents of bromine units (16% Br-units named TPD-Br16 and 33% Br-units called TPD-Br33) on crosslinking properties and thermal stability of OPV devices. Consequently, employing TPD-Br16 as a photocrosslinkable donor resulted in the most favorable OPV performance. Furthermore, it demonstrated remarkable long-term stability and reached an average PCE of 4.6% ± 0.1% under 72 h of thermal annealing at 150 °C. Similarly, our group has also reported photocrosslinkable bromine-functionalized low-bandgap copolymers (PBDTTT-Br25 and PBDTTT-Br50) for stabilizing BHJ solar cells with a photoactive layer morphology.176 In 2013, a UV-crosslinkable donor polymer, P2FBTT-Br, was studied, which can be processed by green solvent, 2-methylanisole, and can be crosslinked with 150 s of UV light.178 After crosslinking, the morphology of the photoactive layer will be frozen to prevent lateral crystallization and aggregation of the donor and acceptor to achieve better long-term stability compared to pristine OPV devices.
Table 2 Crosslinkable donor/acceptor-based OPV devices: initial efficiency and ageing comparison




COSs
Crosslinkable groups
Initial PCE (%)
PCE retention (%)
Ageing conditions
Ref.





Donors



TPD-Br
Bromine
3.3
139.4
150 °C, 72 h

104



PBDTTT-Br
Bromine
5.17
—
150 °C, 24 h

176



P2FBTT-Br
Bromine
9.8
90.8
75 °C, 90 h

178



P3HT-azide
Azide
3.32
100.6
150 °C, 40 h

179



PFDTBTOx
Epoxy
—
65.0
100 °C, 100 h

183



PBDTTPD-Vx
Vinyl
6.06
91.0
150 °C, 40 h

184



PPDT2FBT-Vx
Vinyl
5.28
∼100
150 °C, 40 h

185







Acceptors



PC61BA
Vinyl
3.54
80.0
150 °C, 35 h

188



PC71PeA
Vinyl
4.16
91.7
150 °C, 35 h

189



DTODF-4F
Epoxy
16.1
72.7
150 °C, 50 h

191



c-PCBSD
Vinyl
16.1
90.0
100 °C, 500 h

192







Donors and acceptors



PBDTTT-V and PCBD
Vinyl
2.5
80.0
150 °C, 8 h

193



PBDT-TPD-x and PNDI-T-x
Vinyl
2.69
86.0
150 °C, 24 h

194





 Fig. 15  Molecular structures of crosslinkable donors and acceptors. 
Introducing azide crosslinkable groups into a conjugated polymer has been proved to be useful for crosslinkable donor materials in OPV devices.179,180 For instance, Kim and co-workers developed a crosslinkable organic semiconductor (grafting crosslinkable azide groups into pristine P3HT, named P3HT-azide) to realize solvent resistance and thermal stability (Fig. 15).179 The P3HT-azide copolymer can be photocrosslinked by UV light or thermally crosslinked at 150 °C. When employed in BHJ solar cells as a crosslinkable donor, a high average PCE of 3.3% for P3HT-azide and PCBM was obtained after 40 h annealing at 150 °C, which was the highest record for thermally stable OPVs at the time. This approach demonstrated an effective way to achieve solvent-resistant and thermally stable OPVs.
Several efforts on the conjugated polymer with crosslinkable epoxy units were made to freeze the morphology of films.181–183 The crosslinkable conjugated polymers acted as donors in OPVs and have obtained lots of success to date. For instance, as for the typical P3HT polymer, crosslinkable oxetane groups were introduced into the conjugated backbone of the initial P3HT to achieve the crosslinkable P3HT polymer to stabilize the morphology of the photoactive layer. Charas and co-workers designed an oxetane-containing donor polymer based on P3HT (P3HT-Ox10), which greatly affected long-term stability (Fig. 15).182 Furthermore, low bandgap polymers as donors are popular in the OPV field. Hence, it is necessary to exploit crosslinkable low bandgap polymers. Knauer et al. designed and synthesized a crosslinkable low bandgap polymer with oxetane groups, named PFDTBTOx, to enhance the stability of BHJ solar cells.183 Based on the mechanism of CROP of the oxetanes, the crosslinkable donor can be crosslinked by exposure to trifluoroacetatic acid vapor at 80 °C but also by heating to 100 °C without using an initiator. In particular, crosslinking without an initiator can avoid the potential electron traps and quenching sites caused by the initiator. Consequently, the PCEs and thermal stability of BHJ solar cells were substantially improved. Under the condition of heating for 30 h at 100 °C, the final efficiency reached 65% of the initial efficiency; furthermore, there was no decrease up to 100 h. Therefore, grafting crosslinkable epoxy groups into conjugated polymers as a donor is an efficient approach to achieve long-term stability.
The vinyl group is an efficient and crosslinkable unit easy to introduce into conjugated polymers to freeze the morphology of the photoactive layer used in OPV cells.49,184–187 For instance, a crosslinkable donor polymer with vinyl groups (PTB7-TV) was designed to adjust the vertical composition distribution of photoactive layer materials and control the morphology of the phase separation domain.49 As a result, a high PCE of 8.55% was achieved based on the PTB7-TV:PC71BM system, while a PCE of 7.41% was yielded based on the PTB7:PC71BM system. Besides, a series of crosslinkable polymers with different amounts of terminal vinyl units, namely PBDTTPD-Vx (x = 0, 0.0125, 0.025, 0.05, 0.1), were reported by Li and co-workers.184 It is demonstrated that the polymer with too many vinyl groups will cause a decrease in PCEs, which is due to incomplete crosslinking, resulting in residual vinyl groups in the photoactive layer. Therefore, suitable vinyl content is of vital significance. Consequently, a crosslinkable polymer with a vinyl content of 2.5% is better for achieving high efficiency and thermal stability simultaneously. The PBDTTPD-V0.025/PC71BM combination device yielded a high PCE of 6.06% and kept 91% of its initial PCE after heating at 150 °C for 40 h. Similarly, a series of crosslinkable polymers with different contents of terminal vinyl units, named PPDT2FBT-Vx (x mol%, x = 0, 5, 10, and 15), were designed by Li and co-workers.185 However, they revealed that different vinyl contents (vinyl content of ≤10%) did not significantly affect the original high efficiency of the polymers in OPVs. Through UV crosslinking, the PCE of the device based on PPDT2FBT-V10:PC71BM was up to 5.28% and showed high thermal stability for no decrease upon heat treatment at 120 °C for 40 h. As illustrated above, vinyl is an influential crosslinkable group to achieve high efficiency and enhanced thermal stability.
In addition to the strategy of crosslinkable donors, another crosslinking strategy is to develop crosslinkable acceptors which possess the same crosslinking effect to stabilize the morphology of the photoactive layer (Fig. 15).188–192 For example, Li and co-workers introduced highly reactive acrylate groups into fullerenes to synthesize PC61BA with a similar molecular structure and molecular volume to PC61BM.188 They used PC61BA as the acceptor and P3HT as the donor to fabricate the OPV device, which is similar to the efficiency of the reference device with PC6lBM as the acceptor. After heating at 150 °C for 35 h, it can be seen that there is no aggregation of large particles before and after heating, and the device can maintain 80% of the maximum efficiency, while the reference device can only maintain 40%. Furthermore, they designed four crosslinkable C70 fullerene derivatives with acrylate groups, namely PC71EA, PC71PrA, PC71BA, and PC71PeA, which are similar to PC71BM in molecular structure, shape, and size.189 The four crosslinkable C70 fullerene derivatives as an acceptor with P3HT as donors showed high efficiencies in the range from 3.32% to 4.16%, while the efficiency of PC71BM-based reference cells achieved 4.06%. Among them, the PC71PeA exhibits the best performance. The PCE of the device achieved 4.16%, and kept 91.7% of the initial efficiency under the heating condition at 150 °C for 35 h, which shows excellent thermal stability. Besides, Tan et al. designed a crosslinkable material (namely, DTODF-4F), which can in situ crosslink into a stable polymer structure under ultraviolet radiation (Fig. 16a).191 This molecule acted as a third component to fix the morphology of the bulk heterojunction, resulting in improving the efficiency and stability of OPV devices (Fig. 16b and c). Moreover, Hou and co-workers employed c-PCBSD as the third component of the PBDB-TF:Y6-based OPV cells to enhance the long-term stability.192 Finally, device C maintained 90% of its initial PCE under 100 °C thermal treatment for 500 h, which greatly improved device stability (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) Crosslinking process of DTODF-4F.191 Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright© 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) AFM images of the active layer before and after aging under 150 °C for 24 h. (c) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for morphological stability. (d) Efficiency evolution of the devices under different conditions.192 Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright© 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Furthermore, combining the crosslinkable donor and crosslinkable acceptor will show more excellent crosslinking performance in principle.193,194 In 2013, Chen's research group used the crosslinkable donor PBDTTT-V and the crosslinkable acceptor PCBD (Fig. 15).193 The efficiency of the device made of PBDTTT-V and PCBD was 2.5%, which was lower than the PCE of 3.3% when PC61BM was the acceptor. After that, the active layer was thermally annealed at 150 °C at different times. When PBDTTT-V:PCBD was used as the active layer material, the device could maintain 80% of the initial efficiency, resulting in remarkable thermal stability. Furthermore, it can also be found that the film morphology of the PBDTTT-V:PCBD system does not generate large particles after heating for 8 h. As for all-polymer solar cells (all-PerSCs), it is also necessary to enhance the thermal stability of the photoactive layer for long lifetimes. Feng et al. reported a series of novel crosslinkable polymer donors (PBDT-TPD-x, x = 5, 8, 10) and a series of novel crosslinkable polymer acceptors (PNDI-T-x, x = 3, 5).194 These donors and acceptors all possess different content vinyl units and can be crosslinked on long-term heating, resulting in different crosslinking properties. Consequently, employing the combination of polymer donor PBDT-TPD-8 and acceptor PNDI-T-5, the PCE of all-PerSCs maintained 86% of their highest PCE under heating at 150 °C for 24 h. In contrast, the reference devices combined the non-crosslinkable polymer donor (PBDT-TPD-0) and acceptor (PNDI-T-0); the PCE only retained 40% of its highest PCE under the same conditions.
Overall, there are three crosslinking strategies for stabilizing the photoactive layer morphology, namely crosslinkable donor and usual acceptor, usual donor and crosslinkable acceptor, and crosslinkable donor and crosslinkable acceptor. Employing crosslinking strategies can simultaneously achieve high performance and enhance thermal stability. Introducing crosslinkable groups into conjugated polymers to form crosslinkable donors is a popular and efficient method to maintain the phase separation domain size. As for crosslinkable acceptors, lots of efforts have focused on crosslinkable fullerene acceptors. However, non-fullerene acceptors have become state-of-the-art acceptor materials because of their excellent properties. Thus, crosslinkable non-fullerene acceptors should be studied. Furthermore, more efforts need to be made in crosslinkable donors and acceptors to improve the long-term stability of OPV devices.
7.3. Crosslinkable EML materials in OLEDs
The molecular structure of crosslinkable EML materials is illustrated in Fig. 17. Firstly, the vinyl group is an effective crosslinkable group widely employed in EML materials in OLEDs. Kido's group designed a novel thermally crosslinkable host material named DV-CBP, consisting of two vinylbenzyl ether end groups and a carbazole derivative core for preparing solvent-processed OLEDs.195 The DV-CBP can be crosslinked under heating at 180 °C without any initiator. After crosslinking, the resulting EML film is insoluble and exhibits excellent solvent resistance. Accordingly, incorporating DV-CBP as the host materials and a blue-emitting dopant into an efficient EML in OLEDs achieved high photoluminescence quantum efficiency of more than 75%. Similarly, a series of crosslinkable host materials, namely VB-CzTAZ, DVB-CzDTAZ, and TVB-CzTTAZ, consisting of the carbazole and 1,2,4-triazole moieties, were designed and synthesized by the Cui group.196 They can be thermally crosslinked by styryl units under heating at 172–190 °C without any initiator to achieve solvent resistance. Employing the crosslinkable host material realized a current efficiency of 15.3 cd A−1 and external quantum efficiency of 4.6% for Ir(mppy)3-based OLEDs. Furthermore, a novel crosslinkable wide bandgap host material with styrene units (SPhPC) was presented by the Bolink group to apply in multilayer solution-processed blue OLEDs, which can be polymerized by radical polymerization.197 Besides, novel crosslinking strategies of fully crosslinked EML were investigated by the Sun group.198 They designed a thermally crosslinkable molecule DV-CDBP as host and a thermally crosslinkable thermally activated delayed fluorescent material DV-MOC-DPS as an emitter. Combining the two crosslinkable materials to form an EML can achieve a fully crosslinked EML in solution-processed OLEDs. After being thermally crosslinked by vinylbenzyl ether groups after curing at 180 °C, the crosslinking EML film exhibited excellent solvent resistance, thermal stability, and a smooth interface. This crosslinkable EML film in solvent-processed OLEDs yielded the maximum external quantum efficiency of 2.0%. In addition, the acrylate unit is another efficient crosslinkable group to achieve crosslinkable EML materials, which can be crosslinked under UV light. A novel photocrosslinkable red-emitting material with two acrylate groups, namely FVIN-A, was published by Derue et al., which acted as EML and exhibited good film-forming properties in all solution-processed OLEDs.199 Moreover, it can be crosslinked under UV irradiation employing low illumination doses without further postcuring.
 Fig. 17  The illustration of molecular structures of crosslinkable EML materials in OLEDs. 
Metal complexes have the advantage of outstanding semiconductor properties originating from both the metal and organic ligands, which attracted ever-increasing attention in OLEDs. Especially due to the strong spin–orbit coupling effect of the heavy metal, the heavy metal complexes can simultaneously obtain singlet and triplet excitons to achieve internal quantum efficiency up to 100%, to act as EML materials in OLED devices. To achieve multilayer solution-processed OLEDs, crosslinkable iridium(III) complexes, which consist of iridium(III) and crosslinkable organic ligands, were developed a lot.200–202 For instance, Ma et al. developed four novel crosslinkable iridium(III) complexes, namely (PPZ-VB)2Ir(C^N), employed in phosphorescent OLEDs, which are composed of three parts, namely iridium (Ir), crosslinkable organic ligands with vinylbenzyl ether groups (PPZ-VB) and the C^N ligands (C^N including PZZ, DFPPY, TPY, and PQ).200 The four complexes can be crosslinked after curing at 180 °C for 30 min to realize insoluble smooth films. Besides, the four complexes with different cyclometallating C^N ligands exhibit tunable triplet energy within the range of 3.0–2.2 eV. Therefore, they possess different functions and can act as several functional layer materials in OLEDs, such as HTL, an electron blocking layer (EBL), and EML. Among them, (PPZ-VB)2IrPPZ can serve as HTL, EBL, and host material, while the other three crosslinkable materials, (PPZ-VB)2IrDFPPY, (PPZ-VB)2IrTPY, and (PPZVB)2IrPQ, can be employed as phosphorescent emitters, resulting in fulfilling blue-green, red and near-white phosphorescent solution-processed OLEDs. In addition, incorporating crosslinkable oxetane-functionalized organic ligands and iridium, a series of attractive crosslinkable iridium(III) complexes (X-IrG1-3) were designed, which can be crosslinked by CROP with a photoacid generator.202 Furthermore, two crosslinkable host materials with oxetane groups, namely X–H1 and X–H2, were introduced, exhibiting excellent solvent resistance. Combining the guest crosslinkable iridium complexes and the two host crosslinkable materials, solvent-processed “double-emission layer” OLEDs yielded a luminous efficiency of 33.5 cd A−1 and a power efficacy of 30 lm W−1. The outstanding results have demonstrated that metal complexes show great potential in low-cost solvent-processed OLEDs. In conclusion, the COSs provide an effective multilayer solution processing method, beneficial to OLEDs' low-cost and large-scale preparation.
8. Crosslinkers
8.1. Basic principles
The development of new crosslinkable donor or acceptor materials for OPV devices can achieve the frozen photoactive layer morphology and improve the long-term stability. However, the structures of the crosslinkable donors or acceptors are complex, difficult to synthesize, and not universal. Therefore, a more effective and simple method is to design crosslinkers to achieve the fixation of donor and acceptor BHJ phases. Similarly, the crosslinker itself has multiple crosslinkable groups, which can be chemically crosslinked by employing heating or ultraviolet radiation to achieve the initially frozen morphology of the photoactive layer and improve thermal stability.203 Meanwhile, remarkable crosslinkers have the advantages of ease of synthesis, suitable for many kinds of donor and acceptor systems. They have strong crosslinking performance, widely used in crosslinkable OPVs.
It is known that perovskites are unstable and can decompose under external conditions, for instance, moisture, solvents, and heating, which is attributed to their extremely ionic character.114,204,205 Besides, the resulting ion complexes can react with transition metal oxides (such as MoO3) and metal contacts, causing a decrease in performance.206,207 Therefore, the instability of perovskites should be solved urgently. Promisingly, employing stable crosslinkers into perovskite is an effective approach to protecting the perovskites from destruction.
8.2. Crosslinkers in OPVs
A small molecule with multiple azide groups is a kind of typical crosslinker widely used in OPVs. In 2010, Ho and co-workers developed a bis(fluorophenyl azide) crosslinker, namely sFPA (Fig. 18), added to crosslink conjugated polymers by alkyl side-chain insertion reactions. Furthermore, the semiconductor properties of the polymers were not affected.208 Subsequently, they added sFPA to the P3HT:PC61BM system to fabricate crosslinkable OPV devices, and the PCE of the device increased by 20% after radiation crosslinking.209 Besides, Tao et al.210 employed the sFPA as a crosslinker to crosslink P3HT film for decreasing erosion caused by the upper layer solvent. Then, PCBM was deposited onto the P3HT film to form a bilayer structure to investigate interdiffusion in this model system. Employing this bilayer structure to fabricate OPV devices, the PCE achieved a comparable level compared with BHJ devices for the same photoactive layer materials. Wantz and co-workers designed a new crosslinker named BABP (Fig. 18), which can be crosslinked with PC61BM under heating conditions and effectively inhibits aggregation of PC61BM.211 For the P3HT:PC61BM system, the device efficiency was maintained at 3.4% after annealing at 150 °C for 45 h. For low bandgap systems, such as PTB7 and PDPPTBT, the device efficiency can reach 4.6% and 3%, respectively, after annealing at 150 °C for 15 h. The crosslinker has a certain universality for the polymer: PCBM system. Furthermore, Dautel and co-workers reported a new bis-azide crosslinker, namely N3-[CPDT(FBTTh2)2] (Fig. 18), which exhibits the characteristics of low bandgap with wide absorption.212 This crosslinker can stabilize the morphology of the photoactive layer and improve thermal stability and expand the spectral absorption of the original photoactive layer to improve the PCEs of OPV devices. Finally, the PCE of the thermally stable OPV device can reach up to 3.5% after 24 h of annealing at 150 °C. Promisingly, Chao et al. designed and synthesized a star-shaped small molecular crosslinker, DPPTPTA (Fig. 18), with two terphenyl units and four crosslinkable alkyl azide groups.213 Consequently, the PCEs of PTB7-Th:PC61BM devices have enhanced a lot from 6.7% (without DPPTPTA) to 8.2% (with DPPTPTA). Furthermore, DPPTPTA acted as a remarkable crosslinker that can restrain the large-scale crystallization of PCBM, to lock the morphology of the photoactive layer to enhance thermal stability. In conclusion, small molecular crosslinkers with multiple azide groups can effectively improve the thermal stability of the OPV photoactive layer morphology.
 Fig. 18  Molecular structures of crosslinkers in OPVs. 
Another way to enhance the thermal stability of OPV devices is to develop crosslinkers with crosslinkable epoxy groups. Lin and co-workers reported a strategy to stabilize the morphology of the photoactive layer and enhance the device performance simultaneously by using an efficient crosslinkable polymer, PFN-ox (Fig. 18), with multiple epoxy groups as crosslinkers into the photoactive layer.50 The crosslinkable PFN-ox can be crosslinked under thermal annealing at 120 °C for 20 min to form an insoluble three-dimensional network, to enhance solvent resistance and long-term stability. In addition, the improved long-term stability may be due to both the effects on enhanced hydrophobicity of the photoactive layer films and the suppressive fullerene aggregation with the PFN-ox as an efficient crosslinker into BHJ films. Furthermore, the efficiencies have been improved a lot resulting from the outstanding performance of PFN-ox due to it improving both the carrier dynamics and the electrical properties of OPV devices.
In addition, organic semiconductors with vinyl groups or acrylate groups were exploited as the crosslinkers into the photoactive layer to enhance long-term stability.214,215 Take one case, for example: Ding and co-workers synthesized a crosslinker named OBOCO (Fig. 18) for crosslinking PC61BM by a heat-triggered Diels–Alder reaction.215 The crosslinker used in a photoactive layer can be crosslinked after heating at 150 °C for 20 min to control the aggregation of fullerene molecules, which exhibited an efficient effect on the locking morphology of the BHJ film and enhanced long-term stability. As a result, the efficiencies of devices with 5% OBOCO reduced from 2.77% to 1.72% under the harsh heating condition at 150 °C for 4 days. In contrast, the efficiencies of devices without OBOCO dropped dramatically from 2.74% to 0.78%. Therefore, it is confirmed that employing OBOCO as a crosslinker can dramatically enhance the thermal stability of OPV devices.
Using crosslinkable fullerene derivatives as a crosslinker to add to the photoactive layer is an efficient method to enhance long-term stability. In 2011, to inhibit the thermal aggregation of PC6lBM, the Hsu research group used crosslinkable PCBS (Fig. 18) and PCBSD (Fig. 9) as additives and added them into the photoactive layer.88 The blend system of P3HT, PCBM, and crosslinker started to be thermally annealed at 110 °C for 10 min to result in an optimal morphology and was then heated to 150 °C for 10 min to crosslink the styrene groups. After the device with PCBSD as crosslinker was heated at 150 °C for 40 h, the average efficiency of the devices was maintained at 3.7%. Furthermore, the devices with PCBS as crosslinker achieve an average PCE of 3.8% heating at 150 °C over 25 h. In 2014, Hudhomme and co-workers introduced azide groups on the side chain of fullerene derivatives and designed two molecules: [60]PCB-C6-N3 and [60]PCB-C3-N3 (Fig. 18).216 When the [60]PCB-C6-N3 was used as an additive, the PCE could maintain 76% of the initial efficiency after heating at 150 °C for 24 h, while the efficiency of the reference device without a crosslinker could only maintain 39% of the initial efficiency. Besides, Chuang and co-workers designed and synthesized crosslinkable open-cage fullerenes, namely COF (Fig. 18), as crosslinkers added into the photoactive layer to build highly thermal stable OPV devices.89 The styryl units in COF can be activated under the condition of 150 °C for 10 min. Finally, the devices with COF maintained excellent performance in thermal stability for heating at 150 °C for 144 h. The promising results proved that the introduced additives effectively improved the thermal stability of the device.
In conclusion, the crosslinking strategy for introducing crosslinkers into photoactive layers is an effective and straightforward method to freeze the BHJ morphology, and further improve its long-term stability. Compared with the crosslinkable donor and acceptor materials, this method of crosslinkers is more simple, applicable, and efficient. In particular, crosslinkable small molecules acting as crosslinkers show increasing potential in crosslinkable OPVs. They have the advantages of clear molecular structure, easy synthesis, low price, and excellent performance, which are beneficial to future large-scale industrial production. Therefore, in crosslinkable OPVs, the design and synthesis of small molecule crosslinkers may be a research hotspot in the future.
8.3. Crosslinkers in PerSCs
Introducing a crosslinker at the grain boundary of perovskite can freeze the morphology of perovskite and enhance its stability.46,217,218 For instance, Hsu and co-workers introduced PCBSD as a crosslinker into a perovskite to promote the sequential solution process and prevent solvent erosion between layers.46 In the meantime, the crosslinker can improve the crystallization of perovskites and electron extraction efficiency. Finally, an attractive and high PCE of 17.21% was achieved, significantly enhancing the long-term stability. Besides, for example, Li et al. employed an in situ crosslinking-enabled strain-regulating crystallization strategy through a small molecule (trimethylolpropane triacrylate) to realize long-term operationally sound α-FAPbI3-based PerSCs.218 Finally, the aged device maintained 95% of its initial PCE under long-term storage over 4000 h and 80% of initial PCE under light soaking for 1248 h.
The metal ions (such as Pb2+ and Sn2+) in perovskite enable the formation of stable complexes with lots of organic molecules containing lone pair electrons on oxygen, sulfur, or nitrogen by coordination bonds, reducing the defect sites of the perovskite. Therefore, designing molecules comprising the function of crosslinking and coordination is an efficient method to effectively lower the traps/defects and enhance the long-term stability of PerSCs.219,220 For instance, Tan et al. synthesized a dual-functional organic ligand (C1) with crosslinkable styrene side-chains and a chelatable phenanthroline backbone.219 C1 can chemically chelate with Sn4+ in the SnO2 electron transport layer and Pb2+ in the perovskite layer via coordination bonds, suppressing nonradiative recombination caused by traps/defects existing at the interface and GBs (Fig. 19a). The working mechanism of coordination interaction was systematically investigated via theoretical analysis (Fig. 19b). Meanwhile, C1 enables in situ crosslinking via thermally initiated polymerization to form a hydrophobic and stable polymer network, freezing perovskite morphology and resisting moisture degradation. Similarly, Tan and co-workers employed a triphenylamine-based crosslinker to simultaneously realize defect passivation and grain protection from moisture.220 Furthermore, the perovskite film can even be immersed in water for several seconds without damaging the perovskite film (Fig. 19c). Consequently, through the in situ cross-linked grain encapsulation strategy, the resulting PerSCs demonstrate a high PCE of 22.7% with excellent water/moisture and light stability (Fig. 19d).
 Fig. 19  (a) The mechanism of chemical anchoring and in situ crosslinking for this C–C1-based molecule.219 Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright© 2022, Wiley-VCH. (b) Initial and optimized structures of C1 on SnO2 and FAPbI3, respectively. (c) Tolerance of perovskite films against water and moisture.220 Adapted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright© 2021, Elsevier. (d) Long-term stability of PerSCs under different conditions. (e) Schematic illustration of the process for the formation of cross-linked 2D perovskites and the energy level diagram for the 2D/3D interface.222 Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright© 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Some organic salts were employed to treat the perovskite to suppress the defects of perovskite polycrystalline films for PerSCs.221 Furthermore, the organic salts can form low-dimensional and three-dimensional perovskites (1D/3D or 2D/3D), which is advantageous for enhancing the stability of PSCs. Moreover, crosslinkable organic salts can further protect perovskite from degradation and improve device stability.222–224 For example, Sargent et al. employed a ligand 4-vinylbenzylammonium to form a thin 2D layer on the 3D perovskite layer (Fig. 19e).222 Combining the 2D and 3D perovskites in heterostructures, the UV-cross-linked PerSC devices exhibited an extremely enhanced long-term dark stability in the air (maintaining 90% of their PCE after aging for 2300 h). Besides, Chen and co-workers used an in situ cross-linking polymerizable propargylammonium to build a 1D/3D perovskite heterostructure.223 Consequently, the devices obtained a high champion efficiency of 21.19% with excellent stability maintaining 93% of their PCE after continuous illumination for 3055 h.
Due to the particularity of the perovskite structure, crosslinking can occur just through the interaction between ligand and metal cations in the perovskite.225–228 For instance, Li and co-workers introduced a small molecule (2-aminoterephthalic acid) into a perovskite to enhance the stability of PerSCs.227 The molecules can act as a crosslinker to freeze the perovskite film, resulting in the inhibited migration of ions and the passivated traps/states at the perovskite. Besides, Guo et al. employed a crosslinkable organic small molecule thioctic acid (TA), which enables in situ crosslinking to achieve a stable polymer (poly(TA)) network after heating.228 It can simultaneously be chemically anchored on the surface of TiO2 and perovskite through coordination interaction. Moreover, the interaction occurred through the interaction of the multi-functional groups of –COOH and –C–S in poly(TA) with under-coordinated Pb2+ in perovskite and Ti4+ in TiO2. As a result, the efficiency and stability of the devices are improved simultaneously.
In conclusion, crosslinkers used in perovskite can be divided into three categories, namely, the crosslinker with the conventional crosslinking groups (such as bromine, vinyl, acrylate, azide, and oxetane groups), the crosslinker with the groups that can directly interact with perovskite by ionic or coordination bonds (such as an ammonium ion, carboxyl group, and a hydroxyl group), and the crosslinker with the above two kinds of groups. The first kind of crosslinker can form a crosslinked hydrophobic network structure in perovskite, protecting perovskite from external factors such as water, heat, light, and oxygen. Besides, the second kind of crosslinker is easy to use, and employing this crosslinker can generally passivate the traps/defects at the perovskite. Moreover, the third kind of crosslinker exhibits the function of the first two crosslinkers, which can passivate perovskite and form a hydrophobic polymer network structure, improving device performance and stability at the same time. Therefore, the third kind of crosslinker demonstrates broad application prospects in the future.
9. Conclusion and outlook
Over the past few decades, significant efforts have been devoted to improving the performance of multilayer optoelectronic devices. In addition to efficiency, low cost and stability have been highlighted for achieving large-scale applications of these optoelectronic devices. To reduce the cost of devices, multilayer solution printing technology is introduced for the fabrication of optoelectronic devices. However, one of the inevitable problems is solvent erosion during the multilayer solution processing, destroying the device structure. In addition, the long-term stability of the devices is also a decisive factor in determining whether these optoelectronic devices can enter the market. In short, solving solvent resistance and enhancing long-term stability are urgent needs to change the status quo of multilayer solution-processed optoelectronic devices.
This review introduced crosslinking strategies of organic semiconductors that can simultaneously achieve solvent resistance and improve long-term stability. COSs are formed by grafting crosslinkable groups (e.g., bromine, vinyl, acrylate, azide, and oxetane groups) onto organic semiconductor materials. These COSs can be crosslinked under the appropriate conditions of light, heat, or (light) initiator to form an insoluble network structure and then freeze the film morphology, which has realized lots of encouraging achievements in large-scale applications of multilayer optoelectronic devices. Despite the excellent achievements, the exploration of COSs is still in the primary state, and there are several disadvantages that need special attention, which will influence their practical applications. To be more extensively used in the optoelectronic field, an excellent COS should possess the following advantages. Firstly, the crosslinkable groups should be as fully crosslinked as possible to prevent the unreacted crosslinked groups from remaining in the film and affecting the device performance. Besides, during the crosslinking process of COSs, an attempt should be made not to introduce other components, such as the initiator and photoacid generator. Furthermore, the crosslinking reaction cannot produce adverse reactions which are harmful to device performance. In addition, the crosslinking conditions need to be mild, which is beneficial to the application of large-scale printing technology. Finally, to reduce the cost, on the premise of ensuring the performance, the COSs should be designed with as simple a molecular structure as possible to reduce the difficulty of synthesis. The crosslinking method that can satisfy all the above conditions is the goal of the current crosslinking field. This review merely lists the most commonly used crosslinking strategies in COSs. Furthermore, with the development of chemical and material research, it is believed that there will be increasingly new crosslinking methods and applications in the field of optoelectronic devices and improve the performance of devices.
COSs have been widely used in these multilayer solution-processed optoelectronic devices, typically including in OPVs (HTL, ETL, ICL, crosslinkable donor and acceptor and crosslinker), in PerSCs (HTL, ETL, ICL, and crosslinker), and OLEDs (HIL, HTL, EML, ETL, and EIL). Firstly, the COSs used as interface layer materials can improve solvent resistance and stability. Especially acting as ICL, they exhibit excellent application potential in OTSCs and PTSCs, which can solve the problem of solvent erosion during subsequent solution-based device processing. Therefore, it can provide an effective method for the whole solution processing of TSCs. In addition, COSs are most commonly used as crosslinkable polymer-based donor and fullerene-based acceptor materials. After crosslinking, the morphology of the photoactive layer can be frozen. Besides, the morphology of the active layer can be inhibited under the condition of a long time of light radiation and heating, preventing the performance of the device from being significantly reduced. However, crosslinking strategies have been rarely employed in the state-of-the-art non-fullerene acceptors, which may be a considerable research direction in the future. In addition, the use of crosslinkers, especially simple small molecule crosslinkers added into the active layer, will be a simpler and cheaper universal solution. In conclusion, it is hoped that this review can provide an overview of the current status of the research on COSs and guidelines for future research.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51873007, 21835006, 22005024, 62075005) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (buctrc202009).
Notes and references
Y. Wang and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600414 CrossRef .
L. Lu, T. Zheng, Q. Wu, A. M. Schneider, D. Zhao and L. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12666–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. a. Tan and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1059–1091 RSC .
M. Graetzel, R. A. Janssen, D. B. Mitzi and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2012, 488, 304–312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Nature, 2018, 561, 516–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fan, X. Du, F. Liu, W. Zhong, L. Ying, R. Xie, X. Tang, K. An, J. Xin, N. Li, W. Ma, C. J. Brabec, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1051–1058 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, E. H. Jung, G. Kim, D. Kim, B. J. Kim and J. Seo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801668 CrossRef .
J. Feng, X. Zhu, Z. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Niu, Z. Wang, S. Zuo, S. Priya, S. Liu and D. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801418 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, E. S. Shin, A. Liu, D. Ji, Y. Xu and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1904588 CrossRef .
C. Poriel and J. Rault-Berthelot, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910040 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, F. Ma, Z. Qu, S. Yu, T. Shen, H.-X. Deng, X. Chu, X. Peng, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang and J. You, Science, 2022, 377, 531–534 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, E. Y. Park, C. S. Moon, T. J. Shin, T.-Y. Yang, J. H. Noh and J. Seo, Nature, 2019, 567, 511–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, C. Li, Y. Cui, Z. Li, J. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1614–1622 RSC .
L. Hong, H. Yao, Z. Wu, Y. Cui, T. Zhang, Y. Xu, R. Yu, Q. Liao, B. Gao, K. Xian, H. Y. Woo, Z. Ge and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903441 CrossRef .
J. G. Tait, T. Merckx, W. Li, C. Wong, R. Gehlhaar, D. Cheyns, M. Turbiez and P. Heremans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3393–3398 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kang, L. Ye, B. Xu, C. An, S. J. Stuard, S. Zhang, H. Yao, H. Ade and J. Hou, Joule, 2019, 3, 227–239 CrossRef CAS .
R. Søndergaard, M. Hösel, D. Angmo, T. T. Larsen-Olsen and F. C. Krebs, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 36–49 CrossRef .
S. Ho, S. Liu, Y. Chen and F. So, J. Photonics Energy, 2015, 5, 057611 CrossRef .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S.-C. Chien, H.-L. Yip, Y. Zhang, K.-S. Chen, D. F. Zeigler, F.-C. Chen, B. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5006–5015 CrossRef CAS .
J. Freudenberg, D. Jansch, F. Hinkel and U. H. F. Bunz, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5598–5689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071–9104 RSC .
A. M. Gaikwad, Y. Khan, A. E. Ostfeld, S. Pandya, S. Abraham and A. C. Arias, Org. Electron., 2016, 30, 18–29 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, S. Wang, Y. Xiao, F. Peng, N. Zhou, L. Ying and X. Li, Chem.–Asian J., 2018, 13, 1335–1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman, S. A. Gevorgyan, T. Tromholt, B. Andreasen and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 580–612 CrossRef .
E. M. Speller, A. J. Clarke, J. Luke, H. K. H. Lee, J. R. Durrant, N. Li, T. Wang, H. C. Wong, J.-S. Kim, W. C. Tsoi and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23361–23377 RSC .
K. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2019, 41, 1900437 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pan, H. Li, B. Akgun, S. K. Satijia, Y. Zhu, D. Xu, J. Ortiz, D. Gersappe and M. H. Rafailovich, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 1812–1819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, X. Tan, W. Jang, J. S. Cho, Y.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kwon and D. H. Wang, Org. Electron., 2017, 46, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bi, H. B. Naveed, Y. Mao, H. Yan and W. Ma, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6682–6691 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, S. Zhang, C. He, J. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Zhu, Y. Cui, W. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. Wei and J. Hou, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2129–2134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, X. Jiao, M. Zhou, S. Zhang, H. Yao, W. Zhao, A. Xia, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6046–6054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, D. Deng, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Fang, Y. Yang, G. Lu, W. Ma and Z. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701548 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, E. J. Kramer, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7006–7043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. McDowell, M. Abdelsamie, M. F. Toney and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707114 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Müller, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2740–2754 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, Y. Hou, C. Bao, J. Yin, F. Yuan, Z. Huang, K. Song, J. Liu, J. Troughton, N. Gasparini, C. Zhou, Y. Lin, D.-J. Xue, B. Chen, A. K. Johnston, N. Wei, M. N. Hedhili, M. Wei, A. Y. Alsalloum, P. Maity, B. Turedi, C. Yang, D. Baran, T. D. Anthopoulos, Y. Han, Z.-H. Lu, O. F. Mohammed, F. Gao, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z. K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Rumer and I. McCulloch, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 425–435 CrossRef CAS .
F.-J. Kahle, C. Saller, A. Köhler and P. Strohriegl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700306 CrossRef .
N. Cho, H.-L. Yip, J. A. Davies, P. D. Kazarinoff, D. F. Zeigler, M. M. Durban, Y. Segawa, K. M. O'Malley, C. K. Luscombe and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 1148–1153 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, W.-K. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, K.-T. Lee and H.-Y. Siao, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1869–1875 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, B.-C. Tsai, Y.-C. Hsiao, M.-Z. Lin and H.-F. Meng, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 354–367 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y.-H. Chao, T. Kang, Z.-K. Wang, Y.-G. Yang, S.-L. Feng, Y. Hu, X.-Y. Gao, L.-S. Liao and C.-S. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15088–15094 RSC .
C.-C. Chang, J.-H. Tao, C.-E. Tsai, Y.-J. Cheng and C.-S. Hsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21466–21471 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wantz, L. Derue, O. Dautel, A. Rivaton, P. Hudhomme and C. Dagron-Lartigau, Polym. Int., 2014, 63, 1346–1361 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meng, Z. Wang, W. Ma, Z. Xie, J. Liu and L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Hsu and J.-Y. Lin, Org. Electron., 2019, 67, 128–135 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeng, J. Zhang, X. Chen, H. Gu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 851–858 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ouyang, Z. Huang and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804660 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Yan, Y. Yao and Z. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802004 CrossRef .
S. Rahmany and L. Etgar, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1519–1531 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. J. Bing and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1901114 CrossRef .
J. Wu, M. Gao, Y. Chai, P. Liu, B. Zhang, J. Liu and L. Ye, Materials Reports: Energy, 2021, 1, 100062 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, Z. Lin, J. Zhang, Y. Hao, J. Ouyang, S. Liu and J. Chang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2022, 9, 021307 CAS .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Hong, K. Xian, B. Xu, S. Zhang, J. Peng, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2515 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Fan, D. Zhang, M. Li, W. Zhong, Z. Zeng, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. J. Yuan, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1–12 CrossRef .
G. A. Chamberlain, Sol. Cells, 1983, 8, 47–83 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramoto, H. Fujiwara and M. Yokoyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 1062–1064 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudi and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Z. Shi, X. Chen, R. Zeng and Z. Tan, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 910–934 RSC .
S.-H. Y. Y.-J. Cheng and C.-S. Hsu, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5868–5923 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Menke, N. A. Ran, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Joule, 2018, 2, 25–35 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Naveed, K. Zhou and W. Ma, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2904–2915 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, P. C. Chow, S. Gelinas, C. W. Schlenker, C. Z. Li, H. L. Yip, A. K. Jen, D. S. Ginger and R. H. Friend, Nature, 2013, 500, 435–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Bai, B. Yang, J. Zhang, X. Chen, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi, Y. Yang, J. Hou and Z. a. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2667–2676 RSC .
Y. Lin, B. Adilbekova, Y. Firdaus, E. Yengel, H. Faber, M. Sajjad, X. Zheng, E. Yarali, A. Seitkhan, O. M. Bakr, A. El-Labban, U. Schwingenschlogl, V. Tung, I. McCulloch, F. Laquai and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902965 CrossRef CAS .
D. Di Carlo Rasi and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806499 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 RSC .
Z. Ma, B. Zhao, Y. Gong, J. Deng and Z. a. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22826–22847 RSC .
A. L. Ayzner, C. J. Tassone, S. H. Tolbert and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20050 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Li, C.-Y. Chang, Y. Zang, H.-X. Ju, C.-C. Chueh, P.-W. Liang, N. Cho, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6262–6267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, T. Dai, W. Ha, H. Du, S. Li, K. Wang, F. Meng, D. Xu and A. Geng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24446–24452 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, P. Taranekar, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4300–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Brabec, S. Gowrisanker, J. J. Halls, D. Laird, S. Jia and S. P. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3839–3856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Cardinaletti, J. Kesters, S. Bertho, B. Conings, F. Piersimoni, J. D'Haen, L. Lutsen, M. Nesladek, B. Van Mele, G. Van Assche, K. Vandewal, A. Salleo, D. Vanderzande, W. Maes and J. V. Manca, J. Photonics Energy, 2014, 4, 040997 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yu, Y.-Q. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Tao and Y.-F. Liu, Opt. Commun., 2016, 362, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Chen, C. Luo, C. Ting and S. C. Chuang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1845–1847 RSC .
C.-P. Chen, Y.-C. Chen and C.-Y. Yu, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 1161–1166 RSC .
K. H. Park, Y. An, S. Jung, H. Park and C. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3464–3471 RSC .
R. Yu, H. Yao, L. Hong, Y. Qin, J. Zhu, Y. Cui, S. Li and J. Hou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4645 CrossRef .
J. K. J. v. D. X. Yang, R. A. J. Janssen, M. A. J. Michels and J. Loos, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 2151–2158 CrossRef .
Y.-J. Cheng, C.-H. Hsieh, P.-J. Li and C.-S. Hsu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1723–1732 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Chen, C.-Y. Huang and S.-C. Chuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 207–213 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, D. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104552 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, X. Zhang, D. Liu and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15607–15619 RSC .
J. W. Lee and N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903249 CrossRef .
N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wali, F. J. Iftikhar, M. E. Khan, A. Ullah, Y. Iqbal and R. Jose, Org. Electron., 2020, 78, 105590 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, N. Haji Ladi, Z. Yi, H. Li, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1900744 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, J. Su, J. Di, Z. Lin, S. Zhang, J. Ma, J. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Chang and Y. Hao, Nano Energy, 2022, 94, 106960 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867 RSC .
F.-J. Kahle, I. Bauer, P. Strohriegl and A. Köhler, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2017, 55, 112–120 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, Q. Tan, S. Liu, D. Qin, Y. Mo, L. Hou, A. Liu, H. Wu and Y. Ma, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Chen and Y. Chen, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 4156–4166 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Y. Teo, Z. Jamal, H. Y. Phua, C. G. Tang, R. Q. Png and L. L. Chua, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 48103–48112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Haberkorn, J. S. Gutmann and P. Theato, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1415–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Zuniga, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 658–681 CrossRef CAS .
G. Griffini, J. D. Douglas, C. Piliego, T. W. Holcombe, S. Turri, J. M. Frechet and J. L. Mynar, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1660–1664 CrossRef CAS .
S. Feser and K. Meerholz, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5001–5005 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Carlé, B. Andreasen, T. Tromholt, M. V. Madsen, K. Norrman, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24417–24423 RSC .
R. Steim, F. R. Kogler and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2499–2512 RSC .
D. Bilby, B. Frieberg, S. Kramadhati, P. Green and J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14964–14974 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, F. You, Q. Zheng, Z. Zhang, P. Cai, X. Xue, J. Xiong and J. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2016, 39, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, D. Lee, Y. Ahn, E. W. Lee, L. S. Park and Y. Lee, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8565–8570 RSC .
S. Shahnawaz, S. Sudheendran Swayamprabha, M. R. Nagar, R. A. K. Yadav, S. Gull, D. K. Dubey and J.-H. Jou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 7144–7158 RSC .
T. Hahn, C. Saller, M. Weigl, I. Bauer, T. Unger, A. Köhler and P. Strohriegl, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2015, 212, 2162–2168 CrossRef CAS .
N. Su Kang, B.-K. Ju, T. Wan Lee, D. H. Choi, J.-M. Hong and J.-W. Yu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2831–2836 CrossRef .
J. Xu, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, X. Gong, G. Walters, M. Liu, P. Kanjanaboos, X. Lan and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2807–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Kou, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, W. Li, Z. Bo and M. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5522–5529 RSC .
J. C. Yu, J. Sun, N. Chandrasekaran, C. J. Dunn, A. S. R. Chesman and J. J. Jasieniak, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104635 CrossRef CAS .
M.-H. Tremblay, K. Schutt, Y. Zhang, J. Lim, Y.-H. Lin, J. H. Warby, S. Barlow, H. J. Snaith and S. R. Marder, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 190–198 RSC .
T. Y. Chiang, G. L. Fan, J. Y. Jeng, K. C. Chen, P. Chen, T. C. Wen, T. F. Guo and K. T. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24973–24981 CrossRef CAS .
Z. a. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, J. Luo and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1601165 CrossRef .
B. L. Watson, N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, L. Taleghani and R. H. Dauskardt, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19267–19279 RSC .
H.-J. Jhuo, P.-N. Yeh, S.-H. Liao, Y.-L. Li, S. Sharma and S.-A. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9291–9297 RSC .
W.-Y. Hung, C.-Y. Lin, T.-L. Cheng, S.-W. Yang, A. Chaskar, G.-L. Fan, K.-T. Wong, T.-C. Chao and M.-R. Tseng, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2508–2515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ameen, J. Lee, H. Han, M. C. Suh and C. Lee, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 33212–33220 RSC .
A. Babaei, K. Rakstys, S. Guelen, V. Fallah Hamidabadi, M.-G. La-Placa, L. Martínez-Sarti, M. Sessolo, H. A. Joel, O. P. M. Gaudin, V. Schanen, M. K. Nazeeruddin and H. J. Bolink, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 35719–35723 RSC .
D. K. Dubey, S. S. Swayamprabha, R. A. Kumar Yadav, D. Tavgeniene, D. Volyniuk, S. Grigalevicius and J.-H. Jou, Org. Electron., 2019, 73, 94–101 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Dubey, R. A. K. Yadav, D. Tavgeniene, S. Grigalevicius and J.-H. Jou, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 660, 956–960 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Jeong, M. Godumala, J. Yoon, S. Choi, Y. W. Kim, D. H. Choi, M. J. Cho and D. H. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17602–17609 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Jeong, H. J. Jang and J. Y. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 78, 324–329 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jou, T.-H. Li, S. Kumar, C.-C. An, A. Agrawal, S.-Z. Chen, P.-H. Fang, G. Krucaite, S. Grigalevicius, J. Grazulevicius and C.-F. Sung, Org. Electron., 2015, 24, 254–262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiang, N. Chopra, J. Wang, C. Brown, S. Ho, M. Mathai and F. So, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1702–1706 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Li, S. Wang, Y. Pan, Z. Zhong, L. Ying and Y. Xiao, Org. Electron., 2018, 57, 345–351 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Chang, H.-F. Meng, G.-L. Fan, K.-T. Wong, H.-W. Zan, H.-W. Lin, H.-L. Huang and S.-F. Horng, Org. Electron., 2016, 29, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Cha, S.-N. Cho, W.-H. Lee, H.-S. Chung, I.-N. Kang and M. C. Suh, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 807–812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Bayerl, T. Braig, O. Nuyken, D. C. Miiller, M. Groß and K. Meerholz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1999, 20, 224–228 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liaptsis and K. Meerholz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schelter, G. F. Mielke, A. Kohnen, J. Wies, S. Kober, O. Nuyken and K. Meerholz, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1560–1567 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Tsai, M. K. Hung, Y. H. Mao and S. A. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901025 CrossRef .
S. Grigalevicius, B. Zhang, Z. Xie, M. Forster and U. Scherfc, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 2253–2257 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Zuniga, J. Abdallah, W. Haske, Y. Zhang, I. Coropceanu, S. Barlow, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1739–1744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jungermann, N. Riegel, D. Muller, K. Meerholz and O. Nuyken, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 8911–8919 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hempe, J. Paschek, J. Schelter, A. Umbach, K. Meerholz and M. Reggelin, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 151–158 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zacharias, M. C. Gather, M. Rojahn, O. Nuyken and K. Meerholz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2007, 46, 4388–4392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Liu, S. Wu, Y. Jia, H. Yu, X. Li and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 391, 123479 CrossRef .
J. Lee, H. Han, J. Lee, S. C. Yoon and C. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1474–1481 RSC .
Z. Zhu, D. Zhao, C.-C. Chueh, X. Shi, Z. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Joule, 2018, 2, 168–183 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Hsieh, Y.-J. Cheng, P.-J. Li, C.-H. Chen, M. Dubosc, R.-M. Liang and C.-S. Hsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4887–4893 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Cheng, C.-H. Hsieh, Y. He, C.-S. Hsu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17381–17383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Chang, C. E. Wu, S. Y. Chen, C. Cui, Y. J. Cheng, C. S. Hsu, Y. L. Wang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2011, 50, 9386–9390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chao, Y.-Y. Huang, J.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Peng, W.-Y. Tu, Y.-J. Cheng, J. Hou and C.-S. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20382–20388 RSC .
T. W. Chen, C. C. Chang, Y. T. Hsiao, C. Chan, L. Hong, L. Zhong, W. T. Chuang, J. Hou, Y. Li and C. S. Hsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31069–31077 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cho, C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 638–643 RSC .
H. L. Hsu, Y. C. Chao, Y. H. Liao, C. L. Chung, Y. J. Peng, C. P. Chen and R. J. Jeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8885–8892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Udum, P. Denk, G. Adam, D. H. Apaydin, A. Nevosad, C. Teichert, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and M. C. Scharber, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, J. Wang, Z. Hu, R. Xu, J. Liu, X. Liu, B. Xu, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 168, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, K. Lin, K. Zhang, X.-F. Jiang, K. Mahmood, L. Ying, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502563 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Z. Ma, R. Yu, H. Gao, J. Lin, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. a. Tan, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 2995–3002 RSC .
K. Zhang, C. Zhong, S. Liu, C. Mu, Z. Li, H. Yan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10429–10435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, I. Ramirez, T. Gorisse, O. Dautel, R. Dasari, N. Sakai, J. M. Hardigree, S. Song, S. Marder, M. Riede, G. Wantz and H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tao, J. Van Der Velden, L. Cabau, N. F. Montcada, S. Neutzner, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. Marras, L. Brambilla, M. Tommasini, W. Xu, R. Sorrentino, A. Perinot, M. Caironi, C. Bertarelli, E. Palomares and A. Petrozza, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604493 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, Z.-K. Wang, T. Kang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, C.-S. Hsu, Y. Li and L.-S. Liao, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Watson, N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, T. Leijtens, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25896–25904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kang, C.-M. Tsai, Y.-H. Jiang, G. Gollavelli, N. Mohanta, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-S. Hsu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38530–38536 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, L. Ying, T. Liu, F. Huang, S. Wang, W. Huang, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18483–18491 RSC .
W. Qiu, J. P. Bastos, S. Dasgupta, T. Merckx, I. Cardinaletti, M. V. C. Jenart, C. B. Nielsen, R. Gehlhaar, J. Poortmans, P. Heremans, I. McCulloch and D. Cheyns, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2466–2472 RSC .
J.-H. Yum, S.-J. Moon, L. Yao, M. Caretti, S. Nicolay, D.-H. Kim and K. Sivula, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6616–6623 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Pu, T. Chiba, N. Aizawa, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, J. Photopolym. Sci. Technol., 2013, 26, 403–410 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Dumur and D. Gigmes, Dyes and Chromophores in Polymer Science, ISTE-Wiley,  2015, ch. 5, p. 139 Search PubMed .
C. Zhong, S. Liu, F. Huang, H. Wu and Y. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4870–4876 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, C. Zhong, S. Liu, A. Liang, S. Dong and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3270–3277 RSC .
C. Wei, J. Zhuang, Y. Chen, D. Zhang, W. Su and Z. Cui, Chem. - Eur. J., 2016, 22, 16576–16585 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, J. Zhuang, D. Zhang, W. Guo, D. Yang, Z. Xie, J. Tang, W. Su, H. Zeng and Z. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38716–38727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xie, J. Zhuang, X. Chen, Z. Xie, R. He, L. Chen, W. Wang, D. Zhang, W. Su, J. Tang, X. Yan and Z. Cui, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 449–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, R. Zhu, Z. Hong, Y. He, A. Kumar, Y. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3465–3470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Y. Zhang, C.-K. Mai, S. D. Collins, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1767–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, X. Du, S. Gao, A. Classen, A. Osvet, Y. He, K. Mayrhofer, N. Li and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903800 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qian, Q. Xu, X. Hou, F. Wang, J. Hou and Z. a. Tan, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 3123–3131 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, F. Wang, D. Qian, Z. Tan, L. Li, S. Li, X. Tu, G. Sun, X. Hou, J. Hou and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6591–6597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. W. Kim, S. A. Park, S. Y. Son, K. Choi, W. Lee, M. Kim, J. Y. Kim and T. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901829 CrossRef .
H. J. Kim, A. R. Han, C.-H. Cho, H. Kang, H.-H. Cho, M. Y. Lee, J. M. J. Fréchet, J. H. Oh and B. J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2011, 24, 215–221 CrossRef .
M.-R. Chen, C.-C. Fan, T. R. Andersen, H. F. Dam, W.-F. Fu, Y.-Z. Lin, E. Bundgaard, F. C. Krebs, X.-W. Zhan and H.-Z. Chen, Synth. Met., 2014, 195, 299–305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Charas, Q. Ferreira, J. Farinhas, M. Matos, L. s. Alcácer and J. Morgado, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7903–7912 CrossRef CAS .
G. Brotas, J. Farinhas, Q. Ferreira, J. Morgado and A. Charas, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 2052–2058 CrossRef CAS .
P. Knauer, T. Hahn, A. Köhler and P. Strohriegl, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 10347–10357 RSC .
X.-Q. Chen, X. Yao, X. Xiang, L. Liang, W. Shao, F.-G. Zhao, Z. Lu, W. Wang, J. Li and W.-S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9286–9292 RSC .
S. C. Wu, L. T. Strover, X. Yao, X. Q. Chen, W. J. Xiao, L. N. Liu, J. Wang, I. Visoly-Fisher, E. A. Katz and W. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35430–35440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Waters, J. Kettle, S.-W. Chang, C.-J. Su, W.-R. Wu, U. S. Jeng, Y.-C. Tsai and M. Horie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7370–7378 RSC .
F. Fischer, T. Hahn, H. Bässler, I. Bauer, P. Strohriegl and A. Köhler, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6172–6177 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Wang, X.-Q. Chen, X. Yao, S.-C. Wu, L.-N. Liu, W.-J. Xiao, H. Wang, J. Li, Z. Lu and W.-S. Li, Tetrahedron Lett., 2017, 58, 2695–2699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, X. Yao, J. Wang, J.-L. Wang, S.-C. Wu, S.-P. Yang and W.-S. Li, Tetrahedron, 2019, 75, 4676–4685 CrossRef CAS .
N. Deb, R. R. Dasari, K. Moudgil, J. L. Hernandez, S. R. Marder, Y. Sun, A. Karim and D. G. Bucknall, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21856–21863 RSC .
Z. Ma, Y. Dong, Y. J. Su, R. Yu, H. Gao, Y. Gong, Z. Y. Lee, C. Yang, C. S. Hsu and Z. Tan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 1187–1194 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hong, H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, Y. W. Lin, T. W. Chen, Y. Xu, J. Qin, C. S. Hsu, Z. Ge and J. Hou, Small, 2021, 17, 2101133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Li and Y. Chen, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 5637–5644 RSC .
W. Feng, Z. Lin, J. Cui, W. Lv, W. Wang and Q. Ling, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109982 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aizawa, Y.-J. Pu, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 1614–1620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, J. Zhuang, L. Xie, X. Chen, D. Zhang, J. Hao, W. Su and Z. Cui, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2016, 2016, 3737–3747 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Hallani, V. Fallah Hamidabadi, A. J. Huckaba, G. Galliani, A. Babaei, M.-G. La-Placa, A. Bahari, I. McCulloch, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12948–12954 RSC .
K. Sun, X. Xie, Y. Liu, W. Jiang, X. Ban, B. Huang and Y. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 8973–8979 RSC .
L. Derue, S. Olivier, D. Tondelier, T. Maindron, B. Geffroy and E. Ishow, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16207–16217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ma, B. J. Kim, D. A. Poulsen, S. J. Pastine and J. M. J. Fréchet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1024–1031 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cho, S. S. Reddy, J. Kim, Y.-R. Cho and S.-H. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11714–11721 RSC .
G. Liaptsis, D. Hertel and K. Meerholz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2013, 52, 9563–9567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chao, C.-H. Chuang, H.-L. Hsu, H.-J. Wang, Y.-C. Hsu, C.-P. Chen and R.-J. Jeng, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 666–675 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, G. Adam, E. D. Glowacki, M. Drack, R. Schwodiauer, L. Leonat, D. H. Apaydin, H. Groiss, M. C. Scharber, M. S. White, N. S. Sariciftci and S. Bauer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1032–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, X. Liu, L. Lyu, H. Xie, H. Zhang, D. Niu, H. Huang, C. Bi, Z. Xiao, J. Huang and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 193903 CrossRef .
R. Q. Png, P. J. Chia, J. C. Tang, B. Liu, S. Sivaramakrishnan, M. Zhou, S. H. Khong, H. S. Chan, J. H. Burroughes, L. L. Chua, R. H. Friend and P. K. Ho, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 152–158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, R. Q. Png, L. H. Zhao, L. L. Chua, R. H. Friend and P. K. Ho, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1321 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Tao, M. Aljada, P. E. Shaw, K. H. Lee, H. Cavaye, M. N. Balfour, R. J. Borthwick, M. James, P. L. Burn, I. R. Gentle and P. Meredith, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Derue, O. Dautel, A. Tournebize, M. Drees, H. Pan, S. Berthumeyrie, B. Pavageau, E. Cloutet, S. Chambon, L. Hirsch, A. Rivaton, P. Hudhomme, A. Facchetti and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5831–5838 CrossRef CAS .
H. Awada, T. Gorisse, R. Peresutti, T. Tjoutis, J. J. E. Moreau, G. Wantz and O. J. Dautel, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 1340–1349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chao, Y.-H. Liao, H.-L. Hsu, B.-H. Jiang, J.-C. Kao, T.-H. Lai, C.-P. Chen and R.-J. Jeng, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 833–843 CrossRef .
M. S. Ryu and J. Jang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1384–1388 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, X. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Xiao and L. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4589 RSC .
A. Diacon, L. Derue, C. Lecourtier, O. Dautel, G. Wantz and P. Hudhomme, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7163–7167 RSC .
X. Li, W. Zhang, Y. C. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Q. Wang and J. Fang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3806 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Chen, M. Qin, Z. Ren, K. Liu, J. Huang, D. Shen, Z. Wu, Y. Zhang, J. Hao, C. S. Lee, X. Lu, Z. Zheng, W. Yu and G. Li, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008487 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, R. Yu, Z. Xu, G. Wu, H. Gao, R. Wang, Y. Gong, J. Yang and Z. Tan, Small, 2022, 18, 2201820 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiao, Q. Han, Y. Gao, S. Gu, X. Luo, R. Lin, J. Zhu, J. Xu and H. Tan, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 56, 455–462 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Chen, Z. Chu, Q. Ye, X. Li, Z. Yin and J. You, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Proppe, M. Wei, B. Chen, R. Quintero-Bermudez, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14180–14189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, C. Zhu, Y. Chen, H. Zai, C. Wang, X. Wang, H. Wang, S. Ma, Z. Gao, X. Wang, H. Zhou, B.-B. Cui and Q. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4344–4352 RSC .
C. Yu, H. Zhang, P. Wang, H. Wang, T. Li, X. Zhang, S. Cheng, C. Guo, C. Gao, D. Liu and T. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2101475 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Han, J. W. Lee, C. Choi, S. Tan, C. Lee, Y. Zhao, Z. Dai, N. De Marco, S. J. Lee, S. H. Bae, Y. Yuan, H. M. Lee, Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 520 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. I. Dar, C. Yi, J. Luo, M. Tschumi, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, H. Han and M. Gratzel, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 703–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, F. Cao, M. Wang, M. Wang and L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4161–4167 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, T. Liu, P. Zhou, S. Li, J. Ren, H. He, J. Wang, N. Wang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1905661 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Zongwen Ma	Zongwen Ma received his bachelor's degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Shandong University of Science and Technology in 2017. Currently, he is studying in the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His current research areas focus on organic/perovskite solar cells.
Biao Zhao	Biao Zhao received his PhD degree from the College of Materials Science and Engineering of Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT, China) in June 2019. Currently, he works as a postdoc in Prof. Zhan'ao Tan's group in the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at BUCT. His current research focuses on photoelectric devices.
Huaizhi Gao	Huaizhi Gao received his master's degree from the College of Chemical Engineering of Qinghai University in 2018. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research interests mainly focus on organic photovoltaics and perovskite solar cells.
Yongshuai Gong	Yongshuai Gong received his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Beijing University of Chemical Technology in 2015. He is currently pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering at Beijing University of Chemical Technology. His research interests mainly focus on organic photovoltaics.
Runnan Yu	Runnan Yu received her PhD from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). She currently works as an associate professor in the College of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology. Her primary research focuses on molecular design and device engineering in organic photovoltaic cells.
Zhan'ao Tan	Zhan'ao Tan has been a professor in the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology since 2018, and has also worked in the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University since 2009, and currently leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his PhD degree in physical chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences and then went to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a postdoctoral fellow working on semiconductor quantum dot based light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics from 2007 to 2009. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal based optoelectronics, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells and flow batteries.

 	Fig. 1  The illustration of the effect of COSs. And the structures of a single-junction OPV and PerSC, tandem solar cell, OLED, and their multilayer solution processing method.	 

 	Fig. 2  The working mechanism of donor–acceptor BHJ solar cells.66 Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright© 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Optical microscopy images of the normal P3HT:PC61BM blend films under accelerated conditions at 150 °C for various lengths of time.89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright© 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Intrinsic and extrinsic defects in perovskite film and some passivation strategies.97 Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright© 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic drawing of the formation of the insoluble network by crosslinkable groups of COSs and crosslinking process for achieving solvent resistance and long-term stability.	 

Bromine	Free radical	1. UV	Remaining bromine radicals
2. Heat
Acrylate	Free radical	1. Photoinitiator	Remaining photoinitiators
2. UV
3. Heat
Vinyl	Radical or anionic	1. UV	Requirement of high temperature
2. Heat
Azide	Nitrenes	1. UV	Production of inert nitrogen gas
2. Heat
Oxetane	Cationic ring-opening polymerization	1. Photoacid generator or acid	Requirement of a photoacid generator or acid producing radical cations/trap states
2. UV
3. Heat

 	Fig. 5  (a) The molecular structure of the four crosslinkable materials. (b) Illustration of DSC curves of the four crosslinkable materials in the first and the second heating cycle and UV-vis absorption spectrum of the four materials before rinsing and after rinsing with chlorobenzene.21 Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright© 2011, American Chemical Society. (c) Optical micrograph of solvent-processed thin films of the five polymers blended with PCBM (1:1 wt) before (0 hours) and after annealing at 150 °C for 13 hours.106 Adapted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright© 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of crosslinkable HTL materials in OPVs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Molecular structures of crosslinkable HTL materials in PerSCs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Molecular structures of crosslinkable HIL and HTL materials in OLEDs.	 

 	Fig. 9  Molecular structures of crosslinkable ETL materials in OPVs.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustration of (a) chemical structures of donors and acceptor; (b) normalized absorption spectra of donors and acceptor in film; (c) schematic energy level diagrams of donors and acceptor; (d) inverted structure of the OPV device with C-PCBSD.150 Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright© 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Molecular structures of crosslinkable ETL materials in PerSCs.	 

 	Fig. 12  Molecular structures of crosslinkable EIL and ETL materials in OLEDs.	 

 	Fig. 13  Illustrations of (a) molecular structures of PCBN3 and TBAI and the device structure of OTSCs.44 Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Molecular structures of GOPS and PEDOT:PSS and the device structure of OTSCs.175 Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright© 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of the device architecture of PTSC and the molecular structures of ICL materials. (b) The equivalent circuit model of the PTSC device. (c) Reaction mechanism for employing TPE-MN3 to crosslink PTAA via C–H insertion of nitrene radicals produced by UV irradiation.45 Adapted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright© 2019, Elsevier.	 


Donors

TPD-Br	Bromine	3.3	139.4	150 °C, 72 h	
104

PBDTTT-Br	Bromine	5.17	—	150 °C, 24 h	
176

P2FBTT-Br	Bromine	9.8	90.8	75 °C, 90 h	
178

P3HT-azide	Azide	3.32	100.6	150 °C, 40 h	
179

PFDTBTOx	Epoxy	—	65.0	100 °C, 100 h	
183

PBDTTPD-Vx	Vinyl	6.06	91.0	150 °C, 40 h	
184

PPDT2FBT-Vx	Vinyl	5.28	∼100	150 °C, 40 h	
185



Acceptors

PC61BA	Vinyl	3.54	80.0	150 °C, 35 h	
188

PC71PeA	Vinyl	4.16	91.7	150 °C, 35 h	
189

DTODF-4F	Epoxy	16.1	72.7	150 °C, 50 h	
191

c-PCBSD	Vinyl	16.1	90.0	100 °C, 500 h	
192



Donors and acceptors

PBDTTT-V and PCBD	Vinyl	2.5	80.0	150 °C, 8 h	
193

PBDT-TPD-x and PNDI-T-x	Vinyl	2.69	86.0	150 °C, 24 h	
194


 	Fig. 15  Molecular structures of crosslinkable donors and acceptors.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Crosslinking process of DTODF-4F.191 Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright© 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) AFM images of the active layer before and after aging under 150 °C for 24 h. (c) Schematic illustration of the mechanism for morphological stability. (d) Efficiency evolution of the devices under different conditions.192 Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright© 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  The illustration of molecular structures of crosslinkable EML materials in OLEDs.	 

 	Fig. 18  Molecular structures of crosslinkers in OPVs.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The mechanism of chemical anchoring and in situ crosslinking for this C–C1-based molecule.219 Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright© 2022, Wiley-VCH. (b) Initial and optimized structures of C1 on SnO2 and FAPbI3, respectively. (c) Tolerance of perovskite films against water and moisture.220 Adapted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright© 2021, Elsevier. (d) Long-term stability of PerSCs under different conditions. (e) Schematic illustration of the process for the formation of cross-linked 2D perovskites and the energy level diagram for the 2D/3D interface.222 Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright© 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
