Intrinsic aging in mixed-cation lead halide perovskites   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SE00828A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SE00828A
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 4925-4937Intrinsic aging in mixed-cation lead halide perovskites†

        
          
            Fernando B. 
            Minussi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Eduardo M. 
            Bertoletti
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            José A. 
            Eiras
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Eudes B. 
            Araújo
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physics and Chemistry, São Paulo State University, 15385-000 Ilha Solteira, Brazil. E-mail: fbminussi@gmail.com
bDepartment of Physics, Federal University of São Carlos, 13565-905 São Carlos, Brazil
Received 
      16th June 2022
    , Accepted 16th September 2022First published on 19th September 2022AbstractAmong the several characteristics for which halide perovskites (HPs) are recognized, their (in)stability is one main topic of numerous research fronts, which seeks to enable their long-term application in different devices. Many routes for degradation by environmental stressors (light, humidity, oxygen, temperature, etc.), and strategies to mitigate them are known. However, studies involving intrinsic changes these materials can undergo are still scarce in the literature. Among the few reported, those that stand out are related to thin films and devices, in which the presence of additional layers possibly alters the way the HPs change over time. In turn, thermodynamic studies are not in consensus about the intrinsic (in)stability of these systems, and even if they were, other changes could occur beyond those predicted by the known degradation routes. This work studies the temporal aging of the physical properties of the system methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) partially substituted by guanidinium. Using an aging procedure in the dark under controlled humidity and temperature for more than 4000 hours, we demonstrate changes in their structural and microstructural parameters. These changes are much less pronounced in mixed compositions than in pure MAPbI3. While the band gap energy remains constant for all compositions, pure MAPbI3 changes ionic conductivities, relaxation times, intrinsic charge carrier and trap densities, and carrier mobility. Shedding light on the subject, the findings are relevant for developing strategies to achieve more stable and efficient optoelectronic devices for long-term applications.
1. Introduction
Halide perovskites (HPs) are a fascinating class of materials well known for their broad properties, synthetic routes, and optoelectronic applications, notably excelling as absorbers in solar cells. Unfortunately, HPs are also well known for their low stability against diverse environmental conditions. Indeed, this last characteristic is one of the main reasons HP-based solar cells (PSCs) might be somewhat far from being widely commercial. Usually, solar cells are expected to operate for decades. However, PSC technologies are currently characterized by irreversible degradation effects occurring during the first thousand hours of operation, particularly at elevated temperatures.1 The relevance of this topic has been outlined thoroughly in numerous studies regarding degradation, (in)stability, and possible strategies to increase stability (a few recent ones can be found in ref. 2–7).
Methylammonium lead iodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3) and MAPbI3-based materials and devices serve as prototypical systems to understand the degrading behavior of the hybrid HP class. To this date, the most common factors known to cause their degradation are the exposure to moisture, oxygen, light, high temperatures, and electric fields, and the mechanisms and kinetics of degradation phenomena are dependent on the composition of materials, the type, severity, and combination of the degrading agents involved,8–14 to name a few. In turn, attention also has to be drawn to the presence of additional layers, which can be either beneficial or detrimental to the degradation behavior of HP-based devices.15–18 Nowadays, encapsulation is a possible forefront of long-term usage of HP solar cells and other devices.19–21
A common approach to studying the stability of PSCs is to track how a figure of merit (e.g., the open-circuit voltage, short-circuit current density, and the power conversion efficiency) varies with time when submitted to a given condition.22–25 In this sense, major concerns have been establishing standard aging conditions for PSCs.26,27 Despite the absolute importance of such aging studies, a few comments might be made if one is interested in obtaining the actual HP aging behavior. In devices, some other degradation pathways may be present, for example, associated with the interfacial instability between the various layers of a solar cell, which would affect its efficiency without necessarily meaning that the HP layer itself was degraded. Also, the existence of different layers makes it difficult, to say the least, to obtain the evolution of some characteristics, such as the microstructure and the phases present, as these layers limit access to the inner HP layer for detailed analyses. The desired characterization must be performed directly on the HP to clarify the aging behavior in this scenario. In this regard, several studies have characterized HP thin films and single/polycrystal behavior under the action of a given stressor (moisture, temperature, etc.).28–35 It is a good approach to study the extrinsic stability of HP materials. However, the way HPs intrinsically change over time is still somewhat missing in current literature. In this regard, it was pointed out that if HPs are intrinsically stable or not is still a matter of debate,8 as thermodynamic studies have led to different conclusions.8,10,36–39 In this sense, even if the thermodynamic data were consensual, there is still the difficulty of introducing all aspects responsible for changes in these materials into thermodynamic models. It demands that broader experimental data be obtained. After all, it is reasonable to suppose that forced degradation effects and any changes in the HPs may affect the properties of its solar cells and other devices. Hence, it becomes necessary to know how HPs intrinsically change over time. An important study in this regard dealt with the intrinsic stability of non-encapsulated MAPbI3 thin films, showing that storage over long periods in inert or mild conditions could preserve the phase and microstructural integrity.14 However, different layers, such as the substrate and interfaces, can change how the material transforms over time. For example, the introduction of a strain by the structural and/or thermal expansion mismatch between the HP and the other layers may affect the shape and speed of material degradation.2,40–42
Considering the depicted scenario, the question under the radar is: how do HP materials intrinsically change with time under mild conditions? From our point of view, these aging aspects of HPs have not been receiving much attention during the past few years of developing HP materials and devices. At first, one could expect that the aging of HPs would lead to degrading-related effects, as was observed in CsPbBr3 nanocrystals aged in a vacuum.43 However, exciting recent results demonstrate positive effects of aging (maturing) over PSCs under the appropriate conditions.44,45 Could the defect tolerance and/or self-healing of HPs46 overcome the eventual degradation effects if given the right aging conditions?
Here, we investigate the aging-related changes that HPs may undergo. From a materials perspective, the formulation of mixed compositions is a common strategy to achieve higher intrinsic stability, where, in particular, mixed A-site cation systems are well known, in which MA+, Cs+, FA+ (formamidinium), and GA+ (guanidinium) cations are among the most common.47–50 The partial substitution of A-site cations by guanidinium has been used satisfactorily to obtain more stable and efficient devices.51–58 Consequently, the GAxMA1−xPbI3 system is an excellent model for studying the aging of halide perovskites. Therefore, in the present work, we report the time evolution of the structural, microstructural, and electrical properties of polycrystalline GAxMA1−xPbI3 samples during an aging process monitored over six months (above 4000 hours) in the dark, at room temperature, and under low relative humidity. We also show that the aging behavior is affected not only by the presence of mixed cations but also by their concentrations. These results illustrate that both extrinsic and intrinsic factors must be considered when dealing with HPs and HP-based devices.
2. Materials and methods
2.1 Samples synthesis
To synthesize the GAxMA1−xPbI3 polycrystalline samples, we used the procedure described in ref. 59. Amounts of PbI2 (Sigma-Aldrich, 211168, 99%), MAI (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), and GAI (Sigma-Aldrich, 99%) were weighted in desired proportions and dissolved to 0.75 mol l−1 solutions in a mixture consisting in 70 v% of DMF (Sigma Aldrich, 99.8%) and 30 v% of DMSO (Sigma Aldrich, 99.9%). The solutions were stirred at ∼30 °C for 2 hours and then slowly evaporated at 70–80 °C for ∼10 hours under magnetic stirring in the dark. The remaining yellowish mixtures were dried in an oven at 80–90 °C for ∼11 hours, resulting in blackish perovskite powders. The powders were ground and sieved in a 250 μm aperture sieve (60 mesh). Approximately 250 mg of the powders were uniformly spread into a 13 mm diameter circular cavity of a metallic mold and compacted with a pressure of about 220 MPa to produce GAxMA1−xPbI3 pellets. Lastly, the pellets were sintered in an electric furnace at 120 °C for 2 hours and slowly cooled to room temperature inside the furnace. The chosen compositions were MAPbI3 (x = 0.0), GA0.1MA0.9PbI3 (x = 0.1) and GA0.2MA0.8PbI3 (x = 0.2).
2.2 Sample aging protocol
The sintered polycrystalline pellets were stored in closed sample holders with individual 2 × 2 × 1 cm (W × L × H) compartments. The sample holders were sealed with several layers of PVC film, covered with aluminum foil, and other PVC film layers. The sealed sample holders were kept in a desiccator filled with silica gel granules. The desiccator was covered with layers of PVC film and, finally, with black polyethylene foil. This system was held in a room at 22–25 °C ambient temperature and relative humidity below 30% for six months. Periodically, the samples were removed from the holders for programmed characterization using different experimental techniques. After each characterization, the entire sealing procedure described above was repeated.
It is important to mention that each sample was used for only one characterization technique. One might find it inconsistent that we used different samples for each characterization. There is no guarantee that all samples were equal and that the aging conditions in each sample were the same as well. It is worth mentioning that all samples were synthesized from the same powder, having been sintered all together and stored in the same sample holder. Therefore, we judge it reasonably considering that the samples were submitted to the same aging conditions. In the case of impedance spectroscopy, measurements were performed using two fragments on a given sample. It avoided the differences observed after six months of aging due to possible thermal effects generated during the measurements.
2.3 Characterization
The crystalline structure of the MAPbI3 pellet was characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku Ultima IV diffractometer with CuKα1 radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) at 24–25 °C, under 40 kV and 20 mA, with a continuous scan (2° min−1), in the range of 2θ from 10 to 60°. The microstructure images of the samples were obtained in a Zeiss EVO LS15 scanning electron microscope (SEM), with a tungsten beam, operating in the voltage range between 10 and 20 kV, by secondary electron analysis (SE mode). Elemental I and Pb mass compositions were estimated using a coupled energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis in an Oxford Instruments INCA x-act using areas of 500× magnification. SEM and EDX analysis over time were performed in fragments of a sample to avoid the effect of the gold coating on the aging of samples.
Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV/vis) spectra were collected in a Shimadzu UV-2600 spectrophotometer, in the range from 200 to 1100 nm, using the slow speed mode with a 2 nm data interval. For electrical measurements, a matrix of 10 × 10 circular gold electrodes of ∼0.6 mm diameter was sputtered on top of the GAxMA1−xPbI3 pellets using a shadow mask, while a bottom gold electrode was deposited over the entire sample surface.
Impedance spectroscopy (IS) measurements were performed in a Displex ARS CSW-202 closed system using an Agilent 4284A LCR meter to measure the conductance (G) and susceptance (B) in the frequency range of 6 × 102–106 Hz and temperature range of 300–380 K. All electrical measurements were carried out in a vacuum and in the dark to avoid external effects using a closed Displex ARS CSW-202 system. Several electrodes are tested before starting the experiment, and impedance spectra are collected to ensure choosing an electrode representative of the overall sample electrical characteristics. The steady-state current–voltage (I–V) data were collected using a Keithley 6517B electrometer. The measurements were performed in the dark, under ambient conditions (22–25 °C, RH < 30%) to study the I–V hysteresis from −6 to +6 V with a 0.1 V s−1 scan rate. Forward measurements were performed from 0 to +40 V with a scan rate of 0.1 or 0.2 V s−1 to extract the relevant electronic conduction parameters.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Structural evolution

Fig. 1 shows the XRD patterns of the studied GAxMA1−xPbI3 compositions, recorded to study their crystalline structure evolution over time. In Fig. 1(a), the important regions to identify the crystal structures of each composition and other phases eventually present are shown. As discussed recently,59 the x = 0.0 and x = 0.1 compositions are tetragonal at room temperature, whereas the composition x = 0.2 was taken as a cubic perovskite. From the phase composition perspective, the first interesting feature observed in the XRD results is the absence of PbI2 formation in all compositions regardless of the aging time, except for x = 0.2 where a small PbI2 peak was already present in the pristine sample. Similarly, from the XRD results, thick MAPbI3 pellets were stable against PbI2 segregation even after 18 months of storage in a nitrogen-filled glovebox.60 In degraded lead halide perovskites, the formation of PbI2 is a common feature, which is easily identified by means of the peak appearance/increase in diffractograms at ∼12.6°.14 For instance, several degradation paths may lead to PbI2 formation, where decomposition reactions8,10 were promoted/accelerated by high temperatures, CH3NH3PbI3 ⇌ CH3NH3I + PbI2, CH3NH3PbI3 ⇌ CH3NH2 + HI + PbI2 and CH3NH3PbI3 ⇌ CH3I + NH3 + PbI2, reaction with molecular oxygen,8,61 4CH3NH3PbI3 + O2 ⇌ 2H2O + 2I2 + 4CH3NH2 + 4PbI2, and, lastly, the reaction with humidity,28,62,63 4CH3NH3PbI3(s) + 4H2O(g) ⇌ 4CH3NH3PbI3·H2O(s) ⇌ (CH3NH3)4PbI6·2H2O(s) + 3PbI2(s) + 2H2O(g).
 Fig. 1  Evolution of crystal characteristics with aging in GAxMA1−xPbI3. (a) XRD profiles as a function of aging time on selected 2θ intervals, showing only the representative peaks. (b) Experimental data (hollow dots) and Le Bail fits (thick lines) in the representative range from 27.5 to 29.0°. Vertical dashed lines reference the peak maximum of pristine samples of each composition. (c) Crystal properties as a function of aging time obtained using Le Bail fits. For tetragonal structures (x = 0.0 and x = 0.1), a and c are the pseudocubic lattice parameters used to calculate the unit cell volume and the tetragonality factor (i.e., the c/a ratio). Lines are guides to the eyes. 
The well-known degradation of HPs under light exposure was not considered in the present work since all samples were aged in the dark. As no clear signs of PbI2 formation are noticeable in the XRD results in Fig. 1(a), we do not consider the possibility that our samples suffered these reactions to a large extent. Even though these results are a corroboration of the possible intrinsic stability of HPs, three facts have to be mentioned. First, for pure MAPbI3, we observed the appearance of small surface segregates on aged samples (ESI Note 1†). Due to a brighter aspect (higher average atomic number) compared to the perovskite surface64 and a possible release of volatile molecules, as discussed in the next paragraph, we deduce that these small segregates are likely to be of PbI2. However, it is important to mention that any PbI2 segregation might be limited to the surface since the fraction of secondary phases remains too low to be identified in the respective diffractograms throughout the aging time. Indeed, it is expected that the degradation of MAPbI3 is mainly a surface process.14 Second, for the x = 0.2 composition, a minor formation of GAPbI3 seems to occur after one month of aging, as a minor peak at ∼11.2° appeared in the diffractogram, which persists until the end of the aging study. Even for the x = 0.1 composition, no sign of GAPbI3 is visible in Fig. 1(a) diffractograms at any aging time, and some distinct microstructural constituents can be noticed after three months of aging (more details in ESI Note 2†). In principle, the GAxMA1−xPbI3 system possesses a GA+ solubility of about 25 molar percent (x = 0.25).52 These results suggest that the GAxMA1−xPbI3 compositions might form somewhat metastable solid solutions, which can undergo progressive phase segregation if enough time is given (more details in ESI Note 3†). A-site phase segregation in mixed-cation perovskites is a known phenomenon in several compositions, where different stressors might play a role.65 In particular, the GAxMA1−xPbI3 system with x values in the solid solution range has been reported to undergo the formation of a 1D-phase (possibly GAPbI3) upon a few hours of light exposure.66 Not surprisingly, the rate of this 1D-phase segregation appeared to be proportional to the GA+ content and was not observed for compositions with less than five molar percent, which is in line with eventual metastability in such a system. For instance, we hypothesize that this segregation process might guide the system to relieve the stress caused by incorporating guanidinium into the host matrix, as GA+ cations are much larger than the MA+ cations (278 vs. 217 pm, respectively67). This would explain why the segregation rates are increased for higher GA+ contents. Importantly, our finding of GAPbI3 segregation under mild aging conditions has not been reported so far and may imply that GAxMA1−xPbI3 compositions might not be intrinsically stable to this type of change. The third aspect refers to the changes in the material's lattice parameters. For example, there is a clear sign of this change in separating the peaks associated with the (004) and (220) planes in pure MAPbI3 with increasing aging time.
To study changes in the lattice parameters of GAxMA1−xPbI3 with aging, we performed Le Bail fittings to the experimental data of 2θ from 10 to 50° (see details in ESI Note 4†). In Fig. 1(b), we show the fits in the representative range of 2θ from 27.5 to 29.0°, whereas, in Fig. 1(c), we show the calculated lattice parameters, cell volume, and tetragonality factor as a function of the aging time. Fig. 1(b) notes intense peak displacement with the aging time in MAPbI3. However, this displacement is less pronounced in the GA+-substituted compositions. Quantitatively, these trends can be verified in the variation of lattice parameters and the unit cell volume with aging. For MAPbI3, a steep reduction is observed in all these crystal characteristics, but remain almost constant in x = 0.1 and x = 0.2 compositions. For instance, the cell volume reduction and lattice parameter changes might be consequences of any ionic/molecular loss and, as mentioned before, the typical processes that lead to degradation. Indeed, it was proposed that the degradation of MAPbI3 is coupled with a slight octahedral rearrangement after volatilization of HI + CH3NH2 or MAI with a relatively low energy cost.68 However, from our perspective, the decomposition reactions mentioned earlier would not alone explain the observed trends. First, as discussed earlier, the major occurrence of these processes would later leave PbI2, which was not observed in our XRD results. Second, these processes affect the materials in stoichiometric proportions (the entire MAPbI3 formula acts as a reagent); thus, they would ultimately result in “fewer unit cells” but not in modified unit cells. Based on that idea, we argue that the trends observed result from non-stoichiometric losses of one or more components. In this case, one could expect the following cell contraction, as is observed for MAPbI3. Even though the release of organic molecules such as CH3NH2 to the surroundings might probably be a major cause of material losses occurring in our samples, unfortunately, we cannot probe it directly under the given experimental conditions. However, considering the possible release of iodine-containing molecules, such as MAI, HI, and molecular iodine, we would observe a reduction of the I/Pb molar ratio with the aging time. To test this hypothesis, we used the results of EDX measurements over time (details in the ESI Note 5†), for which pure MAPbI3 presented the most prominent reduction of the I/Pb molar ratio, while the GA+-containing compositions showed almost constant I/Pb molar ratios with the aging time. Hence, not surprisingly, we observed that the compositions with constant lattice parameters over the aging time seem to be less prone to iodine loss. Thus, as the GA+-containing compositions showed constant lattice parameters and cell volumes across the aging period, we conclude that they are more stable against component losses. Importantly, non-stoichiometry may directly affect the concentration of vacancies and electronic charge carriers, which have implications on the electric characteristics of the study compositions, discussed later. Notably, the observed molar I/Pb ratio reduction of our pure MAPbI3 pellet is much slower than that seen in thin films subjected to ultra-high vacuum aging.69
For now, we mention the peculiar behavior observed in Fig. 1(b) for MAPbI3, for which there is a clear progressive separation of the (004) and (220) peaks with the aging time. This result can also be visualized through the increasing tetragonality factor with the aging time in Fig. 1(c). The same behavior, albeit less intense, is observed for the x = 0.1 composition. From a structural point of view, tetragonal unit cells become progressively more elongated along the z-axis, contrary to what was observed in thin films. The XRD results concluded that the tetragonal structure became “more cubic” with aging.14,68 The contradictory results might be due to the possible difference between bulk crystals and thin films, where the substrate may affect the way the material changes. The reason behind the tetragonality factor increase can be related to the discussed molecular release, a structural relaxation towards a given preferred, lower energy orientation and/or internal stress relief. Whatever the reason, it is evident from the results that the presence of GA+ cations affects how this change occurs.
In addition to the structural evolution discussed in the above paragraphs, another important characteristic to be considered in HPs is their microstructure. In HPs, for example, numerous phenomena are associated with the grain size and the presence of grain boundaries (GBs), such as moisture penetration70 and accumulation of deep traps,71 making it important to verify possible microstructural changes. In Fig. 2, we show the effect of aging time on the grain sizes of the studied compositions (additional images for better comparison are given in ESI Note 6†). In all cases, we note a grain growth with the aging time, which indicates the existence of sintering processes happening at room temperature. This surprising event agrees with results showing that sintering processes start to occur at room temperature in MAPbI3.60 However, we note that pure MAPbI3 showed the highest grain growth rate, followed by the GA0.2MA0.8PbI3 composition and GA0.1MA0.9PbI3. Typically, sintering phenomena lead to the densification and/or coalescence of particles and grains are mainly related to two factors. These are the existence of a driving force guiding the transport of chemical species towards an energy minimization and the kinetic conditions for such, i.e., the diffusion of these chemical species.
 Fig. 2  Box plots of grain sizes as a function of aging time of each composition and representative SEM images. The grain sizes are the equivalent spherical diameter of the particles obtained through image analysis using the ImageJ software. The box plots are the results of data from three to six images on each aging/composition. The boxes delimit the standard deviation, while the whiskers are 10–90%. In inset SEM images, scale bars are 1 μm. 
The driving force for sintering is the reduction of the chemical potential of atoms/ions in interfaces, which usually translates into increasing the radius of curvature of grains, leading ultimately to stress relief and grain growth. In polycrystals, grain boundaries are a driving force for grain growth. From the kinetic perspective, HPs possess fairly high ionic conductivities and diffusivities.72,73 It enables grain growth at room temperature. In the GAxMA1−xPbI3 system, the ionic conductivity was shown to be inversely proportional to the guanidinium content.59 Having that in mind, we can rationalize our results by the following. In MAPbI3, the grain growth driving force is mainly due to GB area reduction and internal stress relief. With higher ionic conductivity, i.e., higher ion diffusivity, among the studied compositions, MAPbI3 thus meets both requisites for room temperature grain growth. Hence, we can say that it possesses low stability against RT grain growth. We even observed some abnormal grain growth in aged samples (see details in the ESI Note 7†), typical of later stages of grain growth. Considering the reduction in the area of GBs, there is a great tendency to minimize the already high internal stress due to the substitution of MA+ by GA+ for the x = 0.2 composition. Thus, we expect that it has the highest driving force for grain growth. However, it has the lowest ionic conductivity (diffusivity) among the three compositions. For this reason, the grain growth in the x = 0.2 composition is kinetically hindered and thus shows higher stability against grain growth than MAPbI3. As for the x = 0.1 composition, a lower driving force associated with stress relief than at x = 0.2 is expected. Other than that, it has a lower ionic diffusivity than pure MAPbI3. As a result, neither driving force nor kinetic conditions greatly favor the grain growth, making x = 0.1 the most stable against grain growth at RT among the studied compositions. It is also necessary to consider that the activation energy for ion transport in these compositions has the same tendency, that is, MAPbI3 < GA0.2MA0.8PbI3 < GA0.1MA0.9PbI3,59 which certainly has its role in the observed stability against grain growth. In all compositions, the grain size distributions broaden with aging time, which is a signature of larger grains growing at the expense of the smaller grains, as expected in sintering processes. However, in the composition x = 0.1, the grain size distribution remains much less variable than in other compositions, corroborating the greater stability. Lastly, even though detrimental and beneficial effects might be related to grain boundaries,74 we mention that large grain sizes are usually desired for optoelectronic applications,75 making the RT grain growth over time possibly a beneficial phenomenon. Hence, we do not classify the (in)stability in this regard as beneficial or harmful. We just stress that this seems to be an intrinsic change that HP polycrystals are prone to and should be considered in future developments.
From the application perspective, one of the most important properties of HPs is their band gap energies. In this sense, we studied the potential effect of aging on the band gap energies of our GAxMA1−xPbI3 compositions, as shown in Fig. 3. The full data and procedure used for the band gap calculations from UV/vis diffuse reflectance curves recorded at different times are summarized in ESI Note 8.†
 Fig. 3  Band gap energy as a function of the aging time in GAxMA1−xPbI3 polycrystals. Error bars are the uncertainties calculated from the fits. 
In Fig. 3, we note that all band gap energies of pristine samples are similar to each other and close to the expected values.55,76 These values remain almost unchanged with the aging time, as no clear, prominent change tendency is observed. In the literature, a direct, albeit slight, relation between the band gap energy and cell volume expansion is reported for mixed-cation HPs,35,55 possibly due to a reduced orbital overlap. Considering this, we initially expected that MAPbI3 would decrease the band gap energy as a cell volume contraction occurred, which was not verified. Although surprising at first, this finding is reasonable as no prominent bulk chemical and phase composition change was observed in our results. It seems to be in line with a report on a FA0.85MA0.10Cs0.05PbBr3 thin film, where no additional transitions were observed after aging in an N2-filled glovebox for 30 days.77 From the microstructure point of view, the constant band gap energies with aging time are in accordance with the observation that the optoelectronic properties of MAPbI3 appear to be independent of grain size.78 Thus, within our margins of error, we conclude that the band gap of the GAxMA1−xPbI3 system is essentially insensitive to the changes observed previously, namely, in the lattice parameters and cell volumes, possible surface segregation of secondary phases, and the grain size increase.

Fig. 4 shows the effect of aging on the J–V hysteresis of the GAxMA1−xPbI3 compositions. J–V hysteresis is a known phenomenon observed in HPs and PSCs. This topic is of particular importance since it is reported as a source of operational instability of solar cells and affects the reliable and reproducible achievement of relevant parameters, such as the power conversion efficiency (PCE) itself.79 This hysteresis is generally reported in a hysteresis index, which relates, for example, to the PCEs obtained in forward and reverse scans in solar cells. Here, instead of using actual solar cells, we obtained the J–V curves of the GAxMA1−xPbI3 pellets on forward and reverse measurements and used the differences between such curves to estimate the J–V hysteresis, as recently employed59 and described in detail in ESI Note 9.† Possibly due to the GAPbI3 segregation in x = 0.2, the effect of aging on the J–V hysteresis does not follow a clear trend, as also shown in the same ESI Note.†
 Fig. 4  
J–V hysteresis as a function of the aging time in MAPbI3 and GA0.1MA0.9PbI3 compositions. Error bars are the standard deviation. Lines are guides to the eyes. 
In general, throughout the measurement period, the hysteresis in the samples is shown to be lower in x = 0.1 than in pure MAPbI3, in accordance with previous results.59 Several possible factors may play a role in this phenomenon, but it is widely accepted that the presence of mobile ions is one of the main reasons behind the hysteresis.80 Thus, the increasing GA+ content reduces the ionic transport, as obtained recently.59 Interestingly, as can be seen, there is a trend of reduction in hysteresis with the aging time. Importantly, a low scan rate of 0.1 V s−1 was used in the present study. The hysteresis is highly dependent on the scan rates,81 thus affecting the quantitative results. A similarly reduced hysteresis in aged MAPbI3 solar cells was observed at low scan rates but was found to be contrary at higher scan rates.81 However, this was attributed to the presence of PbI2, which does not seem to be the main case in our samples. Also, we argue that using the same scan rates for all samples and throughout the entire aging time makes the results comparable. Recently, an effect of self-attenuation of hysteresis was studied in several PSCs aged under different conditions,82 leading to increased PCEs over time. Their results conclude that the reduced hysteresis is a consequence of better homogeneity in the films after aging. A reducing hysteresis with progressive room-temperature maturing was found in MAPb3 solar cells.44 In another MAPbI3 solar cell, the aging has increased hysteresis, which was suggested to result from enhanced ion migration over time.83 Our results indicate a reduction in the ionic conductivity with time, considering the relationship between the hysteresis and the ionic mobility.
The possible aging effects on ionic transport changes were studied considering analyses of impedance spectroscopy data recorded on pristine MAPbI3 and the same sample six months later. Fig. 5 show the temperature dependencies of the dc conductivity and relaxation times of the samples from impedance spectroscopy analyses, whose details are summarized in ESI Note 10.†Fig. 5(a) shows the Arrhenius plots of σ for both pristine and six months aged MAPbI3 are shown. In general, for HPs, the dc conductivity obtained through IS measurements in the studied frequency range can be used to evaluate the transport properties of ions.84 Based on these results, we conclude that the aging reduced ionic conductivity by about 50 times in MAPbI3. Similar results were not shown for the GA+-containing compositions because the conductivities of aged samples were too low even to be measured. It corroborates the idea that aging reduces the ionic conductivity of the HPs studied and agreed with the interpretation made for the hysteresis reduction. It should be noted that the grain size of the materials could alter both the degree of hysteresis and the ionic transport itself since both are often associated with the presence of grain boundaries and the defects present in them.71,85–87 The room temperature activation energy increases significantly with aging, possibly contributing to decreased hysteresis.88 The calculated activation energies from 0.3 to 0.6 eV are consistent with the usually reported values for the migration of iodine ions.89 Also, iodine ions are related to the hysteresis phenomenon in HP materials and devices.90 Hence, despite a possible influence of the grain size increase on the observed results, the pictured scenario suggests that the mobile iodine ion concentration and mobility change during the aging.
 Fig. 5  Aging effect on the ionic transport characteristics of MAPbI3. (a) Arrhenius plot of dc conductivity (σ). Lines are the linear fits to the experimental data. Numbers are the respective activation energies in each range. (b) Relaxation time (τ) as a function of temperature. 
The earlier discussion argued that iodine-based chemical species might desorb from the samples, especially MAPbI3. For instance, let us consider the release of molecular iodine, as was found for this material.1,91–93 Possible reactions in this regard would be  and , guided in the forward direction by an entropy increase. The last equilibrium seems to be favored in the forward direction for MAPbI3 at low I2 partial pressure, in which defects at a higher concentration are expected to be  and e′.94 Indeed, elimination of I2 from MAPbI3 has been shown to increase the concentration of  and a change from a p-type to an n-type behavior.91 In turn, the iodine conduction in MAPbI3 is reported to occur by the movement of its vacancies95,96 and/or interstitials.97 Thus, if the  concentration increases, one should expect that the ionic conductivity would also increase. However, considering the defect chemistry of MAPbI3, several other equilibriums would be indirectly affected in this case. For example, the  point defect participates in the equilibrium of both full and partial Schottky defects with low formation energies, leading to reduced concentrations of  and  (ref. 98) and, and thus contributing to the total ionic conductivity. Iodine vacancies are also in equilibrium with iodide ions through the formation of Frenkel pairs in  and . Hence, as the concentration of  increases, the concentration of iodide in both the crystal and grain boundaries will decrease, diminishing their contributions to the ionic conductivity. It is in line with the proposal that iodine interstitials segregate to grain boundaries in a model CsPbI3 system,71 which would lead to a drop in ionic conductivity due to the transport of this type of defect. A study directly demonstrating or refuting the elimination of I2 by HPs under similar aging conditions, with a direct correlation to the ionic conductivity, would be highly welcome. For now, we mention that it is clear that the ionic and electronic conductivity changes of MAPbI3 submitted to the atmosphere with an I2 partial pressure control96 demonstrate that the effects proposed here are plausible. Lastly, we explain the higher activation energy in the aged MAPbI3 due to the unit cell contraction with aging.

Fig. 5(b) shows a direct consequence of reducing ionic conductivity by slowing down the relaxation times related to the ionic charge carriers. The aging of our MAPbI3 increases more than an order of magnitude over the entire temperature range studied. This observation contrasts with a previous report proposing that the acceleration of slow processes by a factor of 10 to 100 was possibly due to more mobile ions after aging in a MAPbI3 solar cell.81 We find that the increased relaxation times are consistent with the reduced hysteresis obtained here. Either way, the comparison of our results and literature reports indicates that the interpretation of hysteresis changes over time in solar cells seems to be more complex than the attributed sole perovskite degradation. Possibly microstructure changes and those associated with interfacial instabilities, which would hinder the charge collection, should also be considered when interpreting aging-induced modification of hysteresis in HPs.
Lastly, we studied the changes in parameters related to electronic charge carriers over time. To do so, we employed the well-known space-charge limited-current (SCLC) model. Here, the main properties obtained were the dark charge carrier density, electrical mobility, and the density of traps. The experimental data and details on the calculations are given in ESI Note 11.† Noteworthily, even though extensively applied to model steady-state I–V data of HPs, the SCLC model might lead to quantitative errors in the estimations of electronic charge carrier parameters in HPs and related devices, as elaborated elsewhere.99–101 In this regard, the best approach would possibly be drift-diffusion. However, since we are more interested in the trends with aging rather than in the actual values of calculated parameters, we opted to use the SCLC model due to its simplicity. Unfortunately, this was only possible for pure MAPbI3, for which the typical J–V features of an SCLC behavior are noticeable. For the GA+-containing compositions, the obtained J–V curves unequivocally prevent the application of the SCLC model. From the inspection of experimental data for these compositions, we believe that concentrations of trap and mobile ions might be similar, deviating from the typical SCLC behavior. These two compositions should be treated using the drift-diffusion model, which will be the subject of future studies. Thus, from here on, we only focus on pure MAPbI3. Thus, Fig. 6 shows the obtained carrier density, trap density, and mobility as a function of aging time obtained for MAPbI3.
 Fig. 6  Electronic charge carrier parameters of MAPbI3 as a function of the aging time. Error bars are the standard deviation. Lines are guides to the eyes. 
Despite the limitations of the SCLC model in our case, we were able to find reasonable values for the electrical parameters compared to the reported for MAPbI3 and similar materials.102–104 From the analysis of results in Fig. 6, we straightforwardly conclude that both charge carrier and trap densities increase with the aging time. Based on the previous equations for I2 release, the charge carrier density increase can be explained as a direct consequence of the formation of additional free electrons. Analogously, the increased trap density with aging is then related to the progressive formation of  since this defect is commonly associated as a source of trap-states in MAPbI3.103 The results are consistent with intrinsic defect formation in aged mixed-cation films under inert or ambient conditions.77 Trap densities were also shown to increase MAPbI3 films under thermal stress.105 There is a clear trend of reduction over the aging time regarding electrical mobility. Even though the increased grain size would result in higher mobility,106,107 it seems that the likely formation of  is the dominant cause for the progressive drop in the charge carrier mobility, which should be due to the coulombic interaction between charges of opposite signs.
4. Conclusions
Overall, the results indicate that the relevant parameters for optoelectronic applications deteriorate with the aging time in MAPbI3. In theory, this must be a consequence of the other variations the material is subjected to, likewise the possible elimination of I2. In this sense, it is worth mentioning that there may be a self-catalytic effect, given that the initial elimination of I2 increases its concentration in the local atmosphere as the material ages, which should trigger and accelerate other degradation processes.1,93 Given the set of results, it appears that MAPbI3 can be considered an intrinsically unstable material, in agreement with other results.37,38,92,108 From this perspective, the incorporation of GA+ seems to be an approach to increase the intrinsic stability of MAPbI3, as can be concluded by the smaller variations in the XRD and SEM results. These compositions show a lower release of volatile molecules and should preserve their stoichiometry for longer periods. Thus, considering the entropic stabilization of mixed compositions,109 we speculate that these conclusions can be extrapolated to other mixed cation systems. However, attention should be paid to possible differential modification pathways, such as the segregation of secondary phases. Compositions with “intermediate” degrees of substitution (e.g. x = 0.1 in GAxMA1−xPbI3) appear to be optimal in this regard. Current literature would greatly benefit if additional data on the electrical properties of other mixed-cation systems were collected on samples subjected to aging under similar conditions. We believe that our results and interpretations will further help in guiding new studies and contribute to the fundamental comprehension of halide perovskites.
Author contributions
F. B. Minussi: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, writing-original draft, and writing-review, and editing. E. M. Bertoletti: investigation, writing-review, and editing. J. A. Eiras: conceptualization, writing-review, and editing. Eudes B. Araújo: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, writing-review, and editing, and project administration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, FAPESP (Project: 2017/13769-1) and Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior, CAPES (CAPES-PRINT Project: 88881.310513/2018-01). The first author was granted CAPES (Finance Code 001). The authors would like to thank Mr Elton José de Souza for support with SEM measurements and Dr Sandro Marcio Lima and Dr Luis Humberto da Cunha Andrade for their collaboration in the discussion of UV/vis measurements.
References
F. Fu, S. Pisoni, Q. Jeangros, J. Sastre-Pellicer, M. Kawecki, A. Paracchino, T. Moser, J. Werner, C. Andres, L. Duchêne, P. Fiala, M. Rawlence, S. Nicolay, C. Ballif, A. N. Tiwari and S. Buecheler, I 2 Vapor-Induced Degradation of Formamidinium Lead Iodide Based Perovskite Solar Cells under Heat–Light Soaking Conditions, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3074–3088 RSC .
Y. Cheng and L. Ding, Pushing Commercialization of Perovskite Solar Cells by Improving Their Intrinsic Stability, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3233–3255 RSC .
L. Duan and A. Uddin, Defects and Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells: A Critical Analysis, Mater. Chem. Front., 2022, 6, 400–417 RSC .
M. T. Mbumba, D. M. Malouangou, J. M. Tsiba, L. Bai, Y. Yang and M. Guli, Degradation Mechanism and Addressing Techniques of Thermal Instability in Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. Energy, 2021, 230, 954–978 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, S. Tan and Y. Yang, Material, Phase, and Interface Stability of Photovoltaic Perovskite: A Perspective, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 19088–19096 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chi and S. K. Banerjee, Stability Improvement of Perovskite Solar Cells by Compositional and Interfacial Engineering, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 1540–1570 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chi and S. K. Banerjee, Achieving Resistance against Moisture and Oxygen for Perovskite Solar Cells with High Efficiency and Stability, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 4269–4303 CrossRef CAS .
A. Senocrate, G. Y. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Thermochemical Stability of Hybrid Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2859–2870 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, S. Kim, S.-W. Lee, K. J. Cho, S. Park, S. Lee, Y. Kang, H.-S. Lee and D. Kim, Electric-Field-Induced Degradation of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3091–3096 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ciccioli and A. Latini, Thermodynamics and the Intrinsic Stability of Lead Halide Perovskites CH 3 NH 3 PbX 3, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3756–3765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen and H. Zhou, Defects Chemistry in High-Efficiency and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 060903 CrossRef CAS .
A. Senocrate and J. Maier, Solid-State Ionics of Hybrid Halide Perovskites, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8382–8396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. McLeod and L. Liu, Prospects for Mitigating Intrinsic Organic Decomposition in Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 2411–2417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Deretzis, E. Smecca, G. Mannino, A. La Magna, T. Miyasaka and A. Alberti, Stability and Degradation in Hybrid Perovskites: Is the Glass Half-Empty or Half-Full?, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3000–3007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ahmad, A. Mishra, S. M. Abdulrahim, D. Taguchi, P. Sanghyun, F. Aziz, M. Iwamoto, T. Manaka, J. Bhadra, N. J. Al-Thani, M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. Touati, A. Belaidi and S. A. Al-Muhtaseb, Consequence of Aging at Au/HTM/Perovskite Interface in Triple Cation 3D and 2D/3D Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, One-Year Stable Perovskite Solar Cells by 2D/3D Interface Engineering, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Not All That Glitters Is Gold: Metal-Migration-Induced Degradation in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu and T. L. Kelly, Improving the Moisture Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells by Using PMMA/P3HT Based Hole-Transport Layers, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 81–89 RSC .
F. Corsini and G. Griffini, Recent Progress in Encapsulation Strategies to Enhance the Stability of Organometal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys.: Energy, 2020, 2, 031002 CAS .
Y. Wang, I. Ahmad, T. Leung, J. Lin, W. Chen, F. Liu, A. M. C. Ng, Y. Zhang and A. B. Djurišić, Encapsulation and Stability Testing of Perovskite Solar Cells for Real Life Applications, ACS Mater. Au, 2022, 2, 215–236 CrossRef .
M. Mohammadi, S. Gholipour, M. Malekshahi Byranvand, Y. Abdi, N. Taghavinia and M. Saliba, Encapsulation Strategies for Highly Stable Perovskite Solar Cells under Severe Stress Testing: Damp Heat, Freezing, and Outdoor Illumination Conditions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 45455–45464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Elnaggar, L. A. Frolova, A. M. Gordeeva, M. I. Ustinova, H. Laurenzen, A. V. Akkuratov, S. L. Nikitenko, E. A. Solov’eva, S. Yu. Luchkin, Y. S. Fedotov, S. A. Tsarev, N. N. Dremova, K. J. Stevenson, S. I. Bredikhin, S. Olthof, S. M. Aldoshin and P. A. Troshin, Improving Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells Using Fullerene-Polymer Composite Electron Transport Layer, Synth. Met., 2022, 286, 117028 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schwenzer, T. Hellmann, B. A. Nejand, H. Hu, T. Abzieher, F. Schackmar, I. M. Hossain, P. Fassl, T. Mayer, W. Jaegermann, U. Lemmer and U. W. Paetzold, Thermal Stability and Cation Composition of Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Perovskites, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15292–15304 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavlovetc, M. C. Brennan, S. Draguta, A. Ruth, T. Moot, J. A. Christians, K. Aleshire, S. P. Harvey, S. Toso, S. U. Nanayakkara, J. Messinger, J. M. Luther and M. Kuno, Suppressing Cation Migration in Triple-Cation Lead Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2802–2810 CrossRef .
M. R. FarooqKhan, T. Abzieher, A. D. C. Lupascu, U. VoigtLemmer, B. S. Richards and U. W. Paetzold, Photodegradation of Triple-Cation Perovskite Solar Cells: The Role of Spectrum and Bias Conditions, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3083–3092 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, M. Stolterfoht, C. M. Wolff, D. Neher and A. Abate, Measuring Aging Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells, Joule, 2018, 2, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry, C. Brabec, F. Brunetti, V. Bulović, Q. Burlingame, A. Di Carlo, R. Cheacharoen, Y.-B. Cheng, A. Colsmann, S. Cros, K. Domanski, M. Dusza, C. J. Fell, S. R. Forrest, Y. Galagan, D. Di Girolamo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt, E. von Hauff, H. Hoppe, J. Kettle, H. Köbler, M. S. Leite, S. Liu, Y.-L. Loo, J. M. Luther, C.-Q. Ma, M. Madsen, M. Manceau, M. Matheron, M. McGehee, R. Meitzner, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. F. Nogueira, Ç. Odabaşı, A. Osherov, N.-G. Park, M. O. Reese, F. De Rossi, M. Saliba, U. S. Schubert, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks, W. Tress, P. A. Troshin, V. Turkovic, S. Veenstra, I. Visoly-Fisher, A. Walsh, T. Watson, H. Xie, R. Yıldırım, S. M. Zakeeruddin, K. Zhu and M. Lira-Cantu, Consensus Statement for Stability Assessment and Reporting for Perovskite Photovoltaics Based on ISOS Procedures, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .
M. A. Leguy, Y. Hu, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. I. Alonso, O. J. Weber, P. Azarhoosh, M. van Schilfgaarde, M. T. Weller, T. Bein, J. Nelson, P. Docampo and P. R. F. Barnes, Reversible Hydration of CH3NH3PbI3 in Films, Single Crystals, and Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3397–3407 CrossRef .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono, M. Maeda, Y. Jiang, Z. Hawash and Y. Qi, Photodecomposition and Thermal Decomposition in Methylammonium Halide Lead Perovskites and Inferred Design Principles to Increase Photovoltaic Device Stability, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9604–9612 RSC .
L. Chen, Y.-Y. Tan, Z.-X. Chen, T. Wang, S. Hu, Z.-A. Nan, L.-Q. Xie, Y. Hui, J.-X. Huang, C. Zhan, S.-H. Wang, J.-Z. Zhou, J.-W. Yan, B.-W. Mao and Z.-Q. Tian, Toward Long-Term Stability: Single-Crystal Alloys of Cesium-Containing Mixed Cation and Mixed Halide Perovskite, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1665–1671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kaslasi, Y. Feldman, Y. Rakita, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, Single-Crystal Growth and Thermal Stability of (CH3NH3)1−xCsxPbBr3, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20, 4366–4374 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, D. Wu, Z. Zhang, W. Cao, X. Zhao, Y. Hao, P. Yang and J. Wang, Rapid Synthesis of Inorganic Halide Perovskite Single Crystals with High Thermal Stability, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 759, 137985 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Chen, Y. C. L. Song and F. Hao, A Critical Review on the Moisture Stability of Halide Perovskite Films and Solar Cells, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132701 CrossRef .
N. A. Manshor, Q. Wali, K. K. Wong, S. K. Muzakir, A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende and R. Jose, Humidity versus Photo-Stability of Metal Halide Perovskite Films in a Polymer Matrix, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 21629–21639 RSC .
F. B. Minussi, L. A. Silva and E. B. Araújo, Structure, Optoelectronic Properties and Thermal Stability of the Triple Organic Cation GAxFAxMA1−2xPbI3 System Prepared by Mechanochemical Synthesis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 4715–4728 RSC .
A. Latini, G. Gigli and A. Ciccioli, A Study on the Nature of the Thermal Decomposition of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite, CH3NH3PbI3: An Attempt to Rationalise Contradictory Experimental Results, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1351–1357 RSC .
B. Park and S. I. Seok, Intrinsic Instability of Inorganic–Organic Hybrid Halide Perovskite Materials, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805337 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Zhang, S. Chen, P. Xu, H. Xiang, X.-G. Gong, A. Walsh and S.-H. Wei, Intrinsic Instability of the Hybrid Halide Perovskite Semiconductor CH3NH3PbI3*, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2018, 35, 036104 CrossRef .
L. Ivanov, A. S. Steparuk, M. S. Bolyachkina, D. S. Tsvetkov, A. P. Safronov and A. Yu. Zuev, Thermodynamics of Formation of Hybrid Perovskite-Type Methylammonium Lead Halides, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2018, 116, 253–258 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Deng, H. Wei, X. Zheng, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, J. E. Shield and J. Huang, Strained Hybrid Perovskite Thin Films and Their Impact on the Intrinsic Stability of Perovskite Solar Cells, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao5616 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Rolston, K. A. Bush, A. D. Printz, A. Gold-Parker, Y. Ding, M. F. Toney, M. D. McGehee and R. H. Dauskardt, Engineering Stress in Perovskite Solar Cells to Improve Stability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802139 CrossRef .
D.-J. Xue, Y. Hou, S.-C. Liu, M. Wei, B. Chen, Z. Huang, Z. Li, B. Sun, A. H. Proppe, Y. Dong, M. I. Saidaminov, S. O. Kelley, J.-S. Hu and E. H. Sargent, Regulating Strain in Perovskite Thin Films through Charge-Transport Layers, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Baranov, A. Fieramosca, R. X. Yang, L. Polimeno, G. Lerario, S. Toso, C. Giansante, M. D. Giorgi, L. Z. Tan, D. Sanvitto and L. Manna, Aging of Self-Assembled Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystal Superlattices: Effects on Photoluminescence and Energy Transfer, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 650–664 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, S. Bi, J. Zhou, N. Ahmad, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang and H. Zhou, Enhanced Stability in Perovskite Solar Cells via Room-Temperature Processing, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14749–14756 RSC .
D. Commandeur, T. Draper, Z. T. Y. Alabdulla, R. Qian and Q. Chen, Dramatic Maturing Effects on All Inorganic CsPbBr 3 Perovskite Solar Cells under Different Storage Conditions, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 19642–19652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cahen, L. Kronik and G. Hodes, Are Defects in Lead-Halide Perovskites Healed, Tolerated, or Both?, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 4108–4114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, T. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Zhao, Mixed Cation Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskites with Enhanced Performance and Stability, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11450–11461 RSC .
J. Gong, P. Guo, S. E. Benjamin, P. G. Van Patten, R. D. Schaller and T. Xu, Cation Engineering on Lead Iodide Perovskites for Stable and High-Performance Photovoltaic Applications, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1017–1039 CrossRef .
F. Ünlü, E. Jung, J. Haddad, A. Kulkarni, S. Öz, H. Choi, T. Fischer, S. Chakraborty, T. Kirchartz and S. Mathur, Understanding the Interplay of Stability and Efficiency in A-Site Engineered Lead Halide Perovskites, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 070901 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Lin, T. Wu, Q. Han, Y. Zhang and L. Han, Effects of A Site Doping on the Crystallization of Perovskite Films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1372–1394 RSC .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E.-P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Guanidinium: A Route to Enhanced Carrier Lifetime and Open-Circuit Voltage in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef .
D. Jodlowski, C. Roldán-Carmona, G. Grancini, M. Salado, M. Ralaiarisoa, S. Ahmad, N. Koch, L. Camacho, G. de Miguel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Large Guanidinium Cation Mixed with Methylammonium in Lead Iodide Perovskites for 19% Efficient Solar Cells, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 972–979 CrossRef .
J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, M. Saski, P. Yadav, D. Bi, N. Pellet, J. Lewiński, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, Formation of Stable Mixed Guanidinium–Methylammonium Phases with Exceptionally Long Carrier Lifetimes for High-Efficiency Lead Iodide-Based Perovskite Photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3345–3351 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kumar, P. K. Sarkar, B. Pradhan, M. Hossain, K. D. M. Rao and S. Acharya, Large-Area Transparent Flexible Guanidinium Incorporated MAPbI 3 Microstructures for High-Performance Photodetectors with Enhanced Stability, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 696–704 RSC .
L. Gao, X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Fang, S. Huang, I. Spanopoulos, X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Chen, G. Yang and M. G. Kanatzidis, Incorporated Guanidinium Expands the CH3NH3PbI3 Lattice and Enhances Photovoltaic Performance, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 43885–43891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, S. Pang, F. He, H. Yang, W. Zhu, D. Chen, H. Xi, J. Zhang, Y. Hao and C. Zhang, Annealing-Free, High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells by Controlling Crystallization via Guanidinium Cation Doping, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100097 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ramos-Terrón, J. F. Illanes, D. Bohoyo-Gil, L. Camacho and G. de Miguel, Insight into the Role of Guanidinium and Cesium in Triple Cation Lead Halide Perovskites, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2100586 CrossRef .
Z. Li, L. Hao, D. Liu, X. Sun, Q. Zhao, Z. Shao, C. Chen, X. Wang, L. Wang, G. Cui and S. Pang, Inhibiting Ion Migration by Guanidinium Cation Doping for Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells with Enhanced Operational Stability, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200003 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Minussi, E. M. Bertoletti, S. P. Reis, J. F. Carvalho and E. B. Araújo, Guanidinium Substitution-Dependent Phase Transitions, Ionic Conductivity, and Dielectric Properties of MAPbI3, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 2212–2215 RSC .
C. Witt, A. Schmid, N. Leupold, M. Schultz, J. Höcker, A. Baumann, R. Moos and F. Panzer, Impact of Pressure and Temperature on the Compaction Dynamics and Layer Properties of Powder-Pressed Methylammonium Lead Halide Thick Films, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 2619–2628 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. Haque, The Role of Oxygen in the Degradation of Methylammonium Lead Trihalide Perovskite Photoactive Layers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Askar, G. M. Bernard, B. Wiltshire, K. Shankar and V. K. Michaelis, Multinuclear Magnetic Resonance Tracking of Hydro, Thermal, and Hydrothermal Decomposition of CH3NH3PbI3, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1013–1024 CrossRef .
P. Toloueinia, H. Khassaf, A. Shirazi Amin, Z. M. Tobin, S. P. Alpay and S. L. Suib, Moisture-Induced Structural Degradation in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Thin Films, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 8240–8248 CrossRef CAS .
B. Roose, K. Dey, Y.-H. Chiang, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Critical Assessment of the Use of Excess Lead Iodide in Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 6505–6512 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, J. Lu, H. Wang, Z. Cui, G. Giorgi, Y. Bai and Q. Chen, A-Site Phase Segregation in Mixed Cation Perovskite, Materials Reports: Energy, 2021, 1, 100064 CrossRef .
L. C. Ellis, H. Javaid, E. C. Smith and D. Venkataraman, Hybrid Perovskites with Larger Organic Cations Reveal Autocatalytic Degradation Kinetics and Increased Stability under Light, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 12176–12186 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Sani, S. Shafie, H. Lim and A. Musa, Advancement on Lead-Free Organic-Inorganic Halide Perovskite Solar Cells: A Review, Materials, 2018, 11, 1008 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alberti, I. Deretzis, G. Pellegrino, C. Bongiorno, E. Smecca, G. Mannino, F. Giannazzo, G. G. Condorelli, N. Sakai, T. Miyasaka, C. Spinella and A. La Magna, Similar Structural Dynamics for the Degradation of CH3NH3PbI3 in Air and in Vacuum, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 3064–3071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, Defect Tolerance in Methylammonium Lead Triiodide Perovskite, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. H. Woo, Y. Heo, J. Seidel, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and M. A. Green, Benefit of Grain Boundaries in Organic–Inorganic Halide Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Park, J. Calbo, Y.-K. Jung, L. D. Whalley and A. Walsh, Accumulation of Deep Traps at Grain Boundaries in Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1321–1327 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walsh and S. D. Stranks, Taking Control of Ion Transport in Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1983–1990 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Futscher, J. M. Lee, L. McGovern, L. A. Muscarella, T. Wang, M. I. Haider, A. Fakharuddin, L. Schmidt-Mende and B. Ehrler, Quantification of Ion Migration in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells by Transient Capacitance Measurements, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1497–1503 RSC .
G. W. P. Adhyaksa, S. Brittman, H. Āboliņš, A. Lof, X. Li, J. D. Keelor, Y. Luo, T. Duevski, R. M. A. Heeren, S. R. Ellis, D. P. Fenning and E. C. Garnett, Understanding Detrimental and Beneficial Grain Boundary Effects in Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804792 CrossRef .
Q. An, F. Paulus, D. Becker-Koch, C. Cho, Q. Sun, A. Weu, S. Bitton, N. Tessler and Y. Vaynzof, Small Grains as Recombination Hot Spots in Perovskite Solar Cells, Matter, 2021, 4, 1683–1701 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vega, M. Mollar and B. Marí, Effect of Guanidinium on the Optical Properties and Structure of the Methylammonium Lead Halide Perovskite, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 739, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS .
I. Levine, O. G. Vera, M. Kulbak, D.-R. Ceratti, C. Rehermann, J. A. Márquez, S. Levcenko, T. Unold, G. Hodes, I. Balberg, D. Cahen and T. Dittrich, Deep Defect States in Wide-Band-Gap ABX3 Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1150–1157 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Muscarella, E. M. Hutter, S. Sanchez, C. D. Dieleman, T. J. Savenije, A. Hagfeldt, M. Saliba and B. Ehrler, Crystal Orientation and Grain Size: Do They Determine Optoelectronic Properties of MAPbI3 Perovskite?, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6010–6018 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, R. Pathak and Q. Qiao, Origin and Alleviation of J-V Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells: A Short Review, Catal. Today, 2021, 374, 86–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Habisreutinger, N. K. Noel and H. J. Snaith, Hysteresis Index: A Figure without Merit for Quantifying Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2472–2476 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, N. Marinova, T. Moehl, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Understanding the Rate-Dependent J–V Hysteresis, Slow Time Component, and Aging in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells: The Role of a Compensated Electric Field, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 995–1004 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, M. Hu, N. Pai, T. Qin, Y.-B. Cheng, U. Bach, A. N. Simonov and J. Lu, Self-Enhancement of Efficiency and Self-Attenuation of Hysteretic Behavior of Perovskite Solar Cells with Aging, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 2792–2799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahapatra, N. Parikh, P. Kumar, M. Kumar, D. Prochowicz, A. Kalam, M. M. Tavakoli and P. Yadav, Changes in the Electrical Characteristics of Perovskite Solar Cells with Aging Time, Molecules, 2020, 25, 2299 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moia and J. Maier, Ion Transport, Defect Chemistry, and the Device Physics of Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 1566–1576 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Sherkar, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. J. A. Koster, Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells: Significance of Grain Boundaries, Interface Traps, and Defect Ions, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1214–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. McGovern, I. Koschany, G. Grimaldi, L. A. Muscarella and B. Ehrler, Grain Size Influences Activation Energy and Migration Pathways in MAPbBr3 Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 2423–2428 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Grain Boundary Dominated Ion Migration in Polycrystalline Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskite Films, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
T. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, L. Zhu, C. Hu, Q. Xue and S. Yang, Understanding the Relationship between Ion Migration and the Anomalous Hysteresis in High-Efficiency Perovskite Solar Cells: A Fresh Perspective from Halide Substitution, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 620–630 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Ferdani, S. R. Pering, D. Ghosh, P. Kubiak, A. B. Walker, S. E. Lewis, A. L. Johnson, P. J. Baker, M. S. Islam and P. J. Cameron, Partial Cation Substitution Reduces Iodide Ion Transport in Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2264–2272 RSC .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kießling, A. Köhler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Iodine Migration and Its Effect on Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446–2454 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Kim, A. Senocrate, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Large Tunable Photoeffect on Ion Conduction in Halide Perovskites and Implications for Photodecomposition, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 445–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Intrinsic Thermal Instability of Methylammonium Lead Trihalide Perovskite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
S. Wang, Y. Jiang, E. J. Juarez-Perez, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Accelerated Degradation of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskites Induced by Exposure to Iodine Vapour, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 16195 CrossRef CAS .
A. Senocrate, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, G. Y. Kim, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, Charge Carrier Chemistry in Methylammonium Lead Iodide, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 321, 69–74 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barboni and R. A. De Souza, The Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Iodine Vacancies in the Hybrid Perovskite Methylammonium Lead Iodide, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3266–3274 RSC .
A. Senocrate, I. Moudrakovski, G. Y. Kim, T.-Y. Yang, G. Gregori, M. Grätzel and J. Maier, The Nature of Ion Conduction in Methylammonium Lead Iodide: A Multimethod Approach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7755–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Minns, P. Zajdel, D. Chernyshov, W. van Beek and M. A. Green, Structure and Interstitial Iodide Migration in Hybrid Perovskite Methylammonium Lead Iodide, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15152 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Walsh, D. O. Scanlon, S. Chen, X. G. Gong and S. Wei, Self-Regulation Mechanism for Charged Point Defects in Hybrid Halide Perovskites, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1791–1794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Le Corre, E. A. Duijnstee, O. El Tambouli, J. M. Ball, H. J. Snaith, J. Lim and L. Jan Anton Koster, Revealing Charge Carrier Mobility and Defect Densities in Metal Halide Perovskites via Space-Charge-Limited Current Measurements, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6(3), 1087–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Duijnstee, J. M. Ball, V. M. Le Corre, L. J. A. Koster, H. J. Snaith and J. Lim, Toward Understanding Space-Charge Limited Current Measurements on Metal Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 376–384 CrossRef .
M. S. Alvar, P. W. M. Blom and G.-J. A. H. Wetzelaer, Space-charge-limited electron and hole currents in hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4023 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Herz, Charge-Carrier Mobilities in Metal Halide Perovskites: Fundamental Mechanisms and Limits, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, E. Debroye, M. Keshavarz, I. G. Scheblykin, M. B. J. Roeffaers, J. Hofkens and J. A. Steele, It's a Trap! On the Nature of Localised States and Charge Trapping in Lead Halide Perovskites, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 397–410 RSC .
V. Adinolfi, M. Yuan, R. Comin, E. S. Thibau, D. Shi, M. I. Saidaminov, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. Hoogland, Z.-H. Lu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, The In-Gap Electronic State Spectrum of Methylammonium Lead Iodide Single-Crystal Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3406–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Khan, J. A. Schwenzer, J. Lehr, U. W. Paetzold and U. Lemmer, Emergence of Deep Traps in Long-Term Thermally Stressed CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Revealed by Thermally Stimulated Currents, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 552–558 CrossRef CAS .
O. G. Reid, M. Yang, N. Kopidakis, K. Zhu and G. Rumbles, Grain-Size-Limited Mobility in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Thin Films, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 561–565 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Xia, J. Peng, S. Poncé, J. B. Patel, A. D. Wright, T. W. Crothers, M. Uller Rothmann, J. Borchert, R. L. Milot, H. Kraus, Q. Lin, F. Giustino, L. M. Herz and M. B. Johnston, Limits to Electrical Mobility in Lead-Halide Perovskite Semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 3607–3617 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Nagabhushana, R. Shivaramaiah and A. Navrotsky, Direct Calorimetric Verification of Thermodynamic Instability of Lead Halide Hybrid Perovskites, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 7717–7721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Ünlü, E. Jung, S. Öz, H. Choi, T. Fischer and S. Mathur, Chemical Processing of Mixed-Cation Hybrid Perovskites: Stabilizing Effects of Configurational Entropy, in Perovskite Solar Cells, ed. M. Grätzel, S. Ahmad and S. Kazim, Wiley, 1st edn,  2021, pp. 1–31 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The ESI includes additional details on the methods and results used to support the findings of this study. The raw data are available with the corresponding author upon reasonable request. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se00828aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Evolution of crystal characteristics with aging in GAxMA1−xPbI3. (a) XRD profiles as a function of aging time on selected 2θ intervals, showing only the representative peaks. (b) Experimental data (hollow dots) and Le Bail fits (thick lines) in the representative range from 27.5 to 29.0°. Vertical dashed lines reference the peak maximum of pristine samples of each composition. (c) Crystal properties as a function of aging time obtained using Le Bail fits. For tetragonal structures (x = 0.0 and x = 0.1), a and c are the pseudocubic lattice parameters used to calculate the unit cell volume and the tetragonality factor (i.e., the c/a ratio). Lines are guides to the eyes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Box plots of grain sizes as a function of aging time of each composition and representative SEM images. The grain sizes are the equivalent spherical diameter of the particles obtained through image analysis using the ImageJ software. The box plots are the results of data from three to six images on each aging/composition. The boxes delimit the standard deviation, while the whiskers are 10–90%. In inset SEM images, scale bars are 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 3  Band gap energy as a function of the aging time in GAxMA1−xPbI3 polycrystals. Error bars are the uncertainties calculated from the fits.	 

 	Fig. 4  
J–V hysteresis as a function of the aging time in MAPbI3 and GA0.1MA0.9PbI3 compositions. Error bars are the standard deviation. Lines are guides to the eyes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Aging effect on the ionic transport characteristics of MAPbI3. (a) Arrhenius plot of dc conductivity (σ). Lines are the linear fits to the experimental data. Numbers are the respective activation energies in each range. (b) Relaxation time (τ) as a function of temperature.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electronic charge carrier parameters of MAPbI3 as a function of the aging time. Error bars are the standard deviation. Lines are guides to the eyes.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: The ESI includes additional details on the methods and results used to support the findings of this study. The raw data are available with the corresponding author upon reasonable request. See https://doi.org/10.1039/d2se00828a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
