Imbibition of polypyrrole into three-dimensional poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate/ glycerol ) gel electrolyte for robust quasi-solid-state dye -sensitiz ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA11166K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA11166K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8055-8060Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsImbibition of polypyrrole into three-dimensional poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate/glycerol) gel electrolyte for robust quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Qinghua 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoxu 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qunwei 
            Tang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Haitao 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Benlin 
            He
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Yuancheng 
            Qin
          
        
      a
aInstitute of Measuring and Optical Engineering, Nanchang Hangkong University, Nanchang, 330063, P. R. China
bInstitute of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, 266100, Shandong Province, P. R. China. E-mail: tangqunwei@hotmail.com; blhe@ouc.edu.cn
Received 
      22nd March 2013
    , Accepted 2nd May 2013First published on 3rd May 2013AbstractHydrophobic poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate/glycerol) [poly(HEMA/GR)] gel with a three-dimensional (3D) framework was successfully fabricated and employed to integrate with polypyrrole (PPy). The resultant PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte exhibited interconnective porous structure for holding I−/I3−, giving a similar conduction mechanism and ionic conductivity to that of a liquid system but a much enhanced retention of I−/I3− redox couple. Scanning electron microscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction technique, Tafel-polarization measurements as well as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy were employed to evaluate the morphology, molecular structure, crystallinity, and the electrochemical behaviors. The results showed that the combination of PPy with poly(HEMA/GR) caused a lower charge-transfer resistance and higher electrocatalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox reaction in the gel electrolyte. The resultant quasi-solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells based on PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte gave an overall light-to-electric conversion efficiency of 6.63%.
1 Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are promising devices to convert solar energy into electric energy, due to low fabrication cost, environmentally friendly operation and relatively high efficiency.1,2 A record of around 13% total power conversion efficiency has recently been reached using a liquid organic electrolyte.3 However, liquid electrolytes can lead to major technological problems associated with performance limitation in long-term operation due to sealing problems. Therefore, in order to improve the long-term stability of the DSSCs, many efforts have been made to replace the liquid electrolyte with the quasi-/full-solid-state electrolytes, such as ionic liquid-based gel electrolytes,4 gel polymer electrolytes5–8 and solid polymer electrolytes.9 Among these studies, the quasi-solid state polymer gel electrolytes have attracted a great attention due to their high ionic conductivity and excellent long-term stability.
It is well known that the photovoltaic performances of polymer gel electrolyte based quasi-solid-state DSSCs are lower than that of the corresponding liquid electrolyte based DSSCs. In order to improve the efficiencies of quasi-solid-state DSSCs, a modification of gel electrolyte is a prerequisite. Conductive polymers such as polyaniline (PANi), polypyrrole (PPy), polythiophene, polyphenylenevinylene, and polyacetylene can be combined with polymer gel electrolytes as they exhibit reasonable environmental stability, good electrical properties, and low cost. Although many literatures have shown the improvement in DSSC performances employing conductive polymer counter electrodes,10–12 only few reports have presented the investigation of the conductive polymer integrated gel electrolytes.5–8 It is believed that the conductive polymers exhibit good electrical and electrochemical behaviors. The combination of conductive PPy with insulating polymer gel matrix can significantly enhance the electronic conduction and redox property. In our previous reports,5–8 we developed a simple two-step method to fabricate a conductive polymer combined with polymer gel electrolytes, in which monomers were imbibed into the three-dimensional (3D) framework to form a semi-interpenetrating network structure. In comparison with insulting polymer gel imbibed I−/I3− electrolytes, the polymer gel/conductive polymer imbibed I−/I3− electrolytes are expected to accelerate the charge transport and redox kinetics. PPy has attracted much attention due to its higher electrical conductivity than that of PANi. However, there is only limited research on the combination of PPy with hydrophobic gel for quasi-solid-state DSSCs.
In the current work, a microporous hydrophobic poly(hydroxyethyl methacrylate/glycerol) [poly(HEMA/GR)] with a 3D framework was synthesized by an aqueous solution method. The pyrrole (Py) monomers could be absorbed into the 3D framework because of the unique absorption behaviors. A semi-interpenetrating network structured PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) was firstly obtained by in situ polymerization of Py monomers in the presence of oxidant solution. The resultant PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte with an enhanced conductivity, electrochemical behaviors and therefore light-to-electric conversion efficiency of 6.63% in assembled quasi-solid-state DSSC were achieved.
2 Experimental
Materials
Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA), purchased from Shanghai Chemical Agent Company, was distilled under reduced pressure prior to use. The organometallic sensitized dye N-719 [RuL2(NCS)2, L = 4,4′-dicarboxylate-2,2′-bipyridine] was obtained from Solaronix SA (Switzerland). Titanium(IV) isopropoxide, poly(ethylene glycol) (molecular weight of 20000 PEG-20000), glycerol, OP emulsification agent (Triton X-100) and other reagents were obtained from Shanghai Chemical Agent, China and used as received.
Synthesis of poly(HEMA/GR) super absorbent polymer
Poly(HEMA/GR) polymer was synthesized according to the procedure: 5 mL of glycerol (GR) and 10 g of hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) were dispersed in 10 mL of deionized water. Subsequently, initiator potassium peroxydisulfate (KPS) (mass ratio of KPS to HEMA was 0.008) and crosslinker N,N′-methylene bisacrylamide (NMBA) (mass ratio of NMBA to HEMA was 0.0005) were added to the mixed solution system. Under a nitrogen atmosphere, the HEMA/GR monomers would be initiated by the thermal decomposition of KPS for forming poly(HEMA/GR) prepolymer. With the proceeding of polymerization, the viscosity increased gradually. When the viscosity of the poly(HEMA/GR) prepolymers reached around 180 mPa s−1 (the viscosity of the reagent was measured using a Haaker ReoStress RS75 rheometer at a shear rate of around 100 s−1), the reagent was poured into a Petri dish and cooled to room temperature until the formation of an elastic gel. After rinsing with excess deionized water, the samples were vacuum dried at 80 °C for more than 12 h.
Preparation of PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte
PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) hybrid polymer was prepared according to the following procedures: the dried poly(HEMA/GR) was immersed in the mixed solution of N-methyl pyrrolidine (NMP) and Py monomer [NMP/Py = 4/1 (v/v)] for adequately adsorbing Py monomers. Later, the Py loaded swollen poly(HEMA/GR) gel was immersed in 0.05 M of iodine acetonitrile solution at 4 °C for 24 h, resulting in an in situ polymerization reaction of Py monomers in the 3D framework of poly(HEMA/GR) to form PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR), which was further immersed in a liquid electrolyte composed of 0.1 M KI, 0.01 M I2, 20 vol% NMP and 80 vol% acetonitrile. After reaching equilibrium, a black colored PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte was obtained.
Assembly of quasi-solid-state DSSCs
A layer of TiO2 nanocrystal anode film with a thickness of 10 μm was prepared by coating the TiO2 colloid using a doctor blade technique, followed by sintering in air at 450 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, the TiO2 film was soaked in a 0.3 mM N719 [cis-di(thiocyanato)-N,N′-bis(2,2′-bipyridyl-4-carboxylic acid-4-tetrabutylammonium carboxylate), purchased from Solaronix, SA, Switzerland] ethanol solution for 24 h to uptake N719 dye for the fabrication of dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. Quasi-solid-state DSSCs from poly(HEMA/GR) or PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte were fabricated by sandwiching a slice of gel electrolyte between dye-sensitized TiO2 anode and a Pt counter electrode.
Photovoltaic measurements
The photocurrent–voltage (J–V) curves of the assembled quasi-solid-state DSSCs were recorded on an Electrochemical Workstation (Xe Lamp Oriel Sol3A™ Class AAA Solar Simulators 94023A, USA) under irradiation of a simulated solar light from a 100 W xenon arc lamp in ambient atmosphere. The incident light intensity was 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5). The fill factor (FF) and light-to-electric energy conversion efficiency (η) were calculated according to the equations:    where JSC was the short-circuit current density (mA cm−2), VOC was the open-circuit voltage (V), Pin was the incident light power, Pmax was the maximum power output, Jmax (mA cm−2) and Vmax (V) were the current density and voltage at the point of maximum power output in the J–V curves, respectively.
Characterizations
The morphologies of the gel electrolytes were captured with a Zeiss Ultra plus field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM). To observe the internal 3D microstructure, swollen gel electrolytes were first cut into ultrathin film, followed by loading in a chamber under freezing temperature and high vacuum to remove solvent. The phases were identified by a Rigaku MiniFlex II X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154 nm) at a power of 30 kV and 40 mA. The XRD data were collected in a scan mode with a scanning speed of 10° min−1 in the 2θ range between 5 and 40°. Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (FTIR) spectra were recorded on a Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer (Bruker). The ionic conductivity of gel-electrolyte was measured by using a pocket conductivity meter (HANNA8733, Hanna Instruments). The instrument was calibrated with 0.01 M KCl aqueous solution prior to experiments, Tafel-polarization curves of the symmetrical cells fabricated from the samples were measured by a CHI660D electrochemical workstation. The symmetrical dummy cells were fabricated with two identical Pt electrodes (Pt electrode/gel electrolyte/Pt electrode). The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was carried out using a CHI660D electrochemical workstation at a constant temperature of 20 °C with an ac-signal amplitude of 20 mV in the frequency range from 0.1 to 105 Hz at 0 V dc bias in the dark.
3 Results and discussion
Synthesis and morphology observation
The mixing of HEMA and GR results in the hydrogen-bonding between CO groups in HEMA and –OH groups in GR to HEMA/GR complex monomers. The polymerization reaction of poly(HEMA/GR) hydrophobic framework is an example of free radical polymerization, in which KPS is used as a thermal initiator. Homolytic cleavage of each peroxide bond (–O–O–) in the KPS provides two SO4˙− radical anions which react with water to form hydroxyl radicals (OH˙). The OH˙ radicals serve as the initiator for the process of polymerization by generating the free radicals on the >CC< bonds of NMBA and HEMA/GR monomers (Fig. 1). During the propagation step, crosslinking of HEMA/GR by NMBA occurs to form 3D poly(HEMA/GR) framework because of the macrobiradical nature of NMBA. The integration of HEMA/GR results in the loss of hydrophilicity of –OH groups and appearance of hydrophobicity. The hydrophobic poly(HEMA/GR) is expected to absorb the liquid electrolyte into the 3D framework to form a stable quasi-solid-state electrolyte. The absorbed liquid electrolyte can not leak from the system even under pressure.
 Fig. 1  Synthesis schematic illustration of 3D PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) framework and therefore the gel electrolyte. 
To reveal the interconnected porous microstructure of the poly(HEMA/GR) framework, a freeze-drying technique was employed and the cross-sectional SEM photograph was also shown in Fig. 2a. It was evident that the resultant poly(HEMA/GR) was indeed a well-interconnected and microporous framework capable of caging a large order of liquid electrolyte in the microporous structures. In fact, the pore size and porosity can be controlled by adjusting the synthesis conditions, such as initiator dosage, crosslinker dosage, reaction temperature, concentration of HEMA, and molar ratio of HEMA to GR. The focus of the current work was to display the feasibility of employing hydrophobic gel material as a liquid electrolyte support. The in situ polymerized PPy was filled in the pores and attached on the surface of the 3D framework (Fig. 2b), playing a role in enhancing the charge transport and electrocatalysis toward I−/I3− redox couple.
 Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) poly(HEMA/GR) and (b) PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes. 
The electrical, electrochemical and photovoltaic performances of the quasi-solid-state DSSC have a strong dependence on the microstructure of the polymer gel electrolyte. There is an agreement in gel materials that the microstructure, especially pore structure can significantly influence their physical or physicochemical properties. The homogeneous and interconnective micropores from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) provide a vast space to hold I−/I3−, and the loaded I−/I3− can freely transport in the 3D framework like that of the liquid system. In comparison with other systems, such as poly(glycidyl acrylate)/PPy,5 poly(acrylic acid)-g-cetyltrimethylammonium bromide/PANi,6 and poly(acrylic acid-g-gelatin)/PPy,7 the microstructure of PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) in Fig. 2 has been dramatically improved, which is expected to provide better performances.
Structural analysis
Infrared spectroscopy is a useful technique in characterizing structures of materials. From the micro-transformations in FTIR spectra, we can detect the changes in structures and analyze the potential mechanism. The FTIR spectra of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) are shown in Fig. 3, where the absorption bands at 3363, 1720, and 1257, 1167, 1046, and 800 cm−1 in the pure poly(HEMA/GR) were originated from the vibrations of O–H stretching, CO stretching, C–O stretching, C–O (alcohol) stretching, C–O (ester) stretching, and OC–O scissoring vibrations, respectively. However, all of these bands shift, i.e., to 3400, 1728, 1265, 1175, 1048, and 745 cm−1 in PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR), respectively. The shift of absorption bands was a sign of H-bonding formation between PPy and poly(HEMA/GR). The bands in Fig. 3 observed at 1428 and 1509 cm−1 presented the C–N stretching and CC stretching vibrations, respectively, and these are in agreement with literature.13,14 The bands at 1300 and 980 cm−1 may be assigned to the doped bands. The detection of bands from PPy as well as the band shift indicated integration of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy.
 Fig. 3  FTIR spectra of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR). 
The XRD patterns of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) are shown in Fig. 4. At the first glance, no sharp diffraction peaks were found in the two kind polymers, indicating an amorphous in situ polymerized PPy, which maybe attributed to the fact that a homogeneous distribution of PPy molecular chains and H-bonding with poly(HEMA/GR) framework. The peaks at 2θ = 21.2°, 26.7°, and 31.4° are maybe the reflection of residual sulfates.
 Fig. 4  XRD patterns of anhydrous poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR). 
Electrical and electrochemical behaviors
The ln σ versus 1/T plots for the poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes are shown in Fig. 5. In both polymer gel electrolytes, the ionic conductivities increased with the elevation in temperature, giving linear dependencies of ionic conductivity on temperature. The results were consistent with that in isotropic ionic liquids, as previously described.15 Therefore, the Arrhenius equation can be employed to describe the conductivity–temperature behaviors of the gel electrolyte.  where A was a constant, Ea was the activation energy, kB was Boltzmann's constant, and T was the absolute temperature. The Ea values of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes were calculated by plotting the linear fitting, which were 12.4 kJ mol−1 and 10.6 kJ mol−1, respectively. The diminished Ea from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) suggesting an energetically favorable ion transfer process.
 Fig. 5  Temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity from polymer gel electrolytes containing 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI), 0.1 M tetramethylammonium iodide (TMAI), 0.1 M tetraethylammonium iodide (TEAI), 0.1 M KI, 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M NaI, 0.06 M I2 in mixed organic solvent of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and acetonitrile (NMP/AC = 2/8). 
As a powerful tool to explore the electrochemical process, EIS has been widely used in testing the electrocatalytic activity for the regeneration of a redox couple. For EIS experiments, the Pt/gel electrolyte/Pt was contained in an asymmetric sandwich cell composed of a gel electrolyte sandwiched by two FTO supported Pt glass electrodes. Fig. 6 showed the Nyquist plots of the Pt/gel electrolyte/Pt devices using two electrolytes. The high frequency intercept on the real axis can be attributed to the series resistance (Rs). The first semicircle at the middle frequency region can be assigned to the resistance capacitance networks of the electrode/electrolyte interface, including the charge transfer resistance (Rct) and the corresponding capacitance (Cdl). The second semicircle at low frequency can be assigned to the diffusion impedance (ZW) of the redox couple (I−/I3−) in the electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  Nyquist plots of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes and equivalent circuit models for the I−/I3− reaction: Rs, ohmic serial resistance; Rct, charge-transfer resistance of a single electrode; Cdl, double-layer capacitance; ZW, diffusion impedance. 
The EIS curves are shown in Fig. 6 and the data are summarized in Table 1. The poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes displayed differences in Rs and Rct. Compared to poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte, PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte exhibited a lower Rct of 9.47 Ω cm−2, implying an acceleration of the I3− reduction rate that was attributed to a higher electrocatalytic activity and conduction of PPy. A lower interfacial charge-transfer resistance occurred at the interface between the Pt counter electrode and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte, due to the high electrical conductivity and superior electrocatalytic activity of the PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte.16,17 Furthermore, the lower Rct may contribute to the higher JSC for the DSSCs based on PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte (listed in Table 1).
Table 1 The photovoltaic performances of the DSSCs with poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes




Electrolytes

R
s (Ω cm−2)

R
ct (Ω cm−2)

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF

η (%)




Poly(HEMA/GR)
28.58
11.66
0.636
13.21
0.70
5.88


PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR)
25.27
9.47
0.677
14.68
0.67
6.63




Tafel-polarization measurements were used to reconfirm the electrocatalytic activity of the electrolytes and electrodes, which was also performed with the dummy cells similar to those used in EIS measurements to verify the electrochemical catalytic activities of the two Pt electrodes. Fig. 7 shows the Tafel curves of the poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes. The polarization curve from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) electrolyte exhibited a large exchange current density (J01) in comparison with that (J02) of the poly(HEMA/GR) electrolyte, suggesting that PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) electrolyte showed superior electrocatalytic activity for I3− reduction.
 Fig. 7  Tafel-polarization curves of the symmetrical cells fabricated with poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes. 
On the other hand, PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte showed a high limiting diffusion current density (Jlim) relative to that of poly(HEMA/GR), reflecting a higher diffusion velocity for the redox couple in the electrolyte. In theory, J0 varies inversely with Rct. With the EIS results, the change tendency of J0 for various electrodes is generally in accordance with those presented in the Tafel curve plots. Jlim is determined by the diffusion properties of the redox couple and the counter electrodes; at the same potential, a large Jlim indicates a large diffusion coefficient and a small ZW.18,19
Under illumination with a simulated solar light of 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5), J–V curves of DSSCs based on gel electrolytes with poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) were measured and are shown in Fig. 8. The photoelectric parameters of DSSCs such as short circuit photocurrent density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC), fill factor (FF) and the overall energy conversion efficiency (η) are listed in Table 1. It was evident that all photoelectric parameters of the quasi-solid-state DSSC from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte were higher than that from poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte.
 Fig. 8  Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of DSSCs from poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes under irradiation of AM 1.5. 
The η of the quasi-solid-state DSSC from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte was 6.63%, while that of poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte was only 5.88%, which was much better than the previous reports.5,7 The enhanced light-to-electric conversion efficiency from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte based DSSC compared with that of poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte is attributed to the increased ionic conductivity and electrocatalytic activity. As measured above, the introduction of PPy molecules lead to a decreased Ea (from 12.4 to 10.6 kJ mol−1) and a faster transportation rate of I−/I3− in PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) hybrid polymer.7,11 PPy had a good electrocatalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox reaction, which causes a lower energy loss from I3− to I− and therefore an increased JSC (from 13.21 to 14.68 mA cm−2) and an enhanced η. In conclusion, the addition of PPy into the gel electrolyte is an efficient way to enhance the photovoltaic performances of quasi-solid-state DSSCs.
4 Conclusions
In summary, highly conductive PPy was employed to combine with hydrophobic poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte to fabricate an interconnective 3D framework. The unique microporous structure, extraordinary absorption and reasonable retention resulted in a good I−/I3− loading and retention. The resultant PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte showed a significantly enhanced ionic conductivity, transport kinetics and electrocatalytic activity for the I−/I3− redox couple. The quasi-solid-state DSSCs from PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte yielded a reasonable conversion efficiency of 6.63%, which was higher than 5.88% from the quasi-solid-state DSSCs using a poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolyte. This research opens a gateway to improve the photovoltaic performances of DSSCs and highlighted the competitive capacity of the quasi-solid-state DSSCs among photovoltaic devices.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Xin Wang for his contributions on polishing the language and organizing the manuscript. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the national scientific and technological project (No:2010DFB50790), the science and technology project of the education department of Jiangxi Province, China (GJJ12449), the doctor science and technology program of Nanchang Hangkong University (EA 201108198), the Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2011BQ017), China, the Seed Fund from Ocean University of China, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (201313001), and the Natural Science Foundation of China (51102204).
References
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Cao, Y. Bai, Q. J. Yu, Y. M. Cheng, S. Liu, D. Shi, F. F. Gao and P. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6290–6297 CrossRef CAS .
O. W. Jensen, V. Armel, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 479–483 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, J. Wu, Q. Li, Z. Lan, L. Fan, J. Lin and M. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4883–4888 Search PubMed .
Z. Tang, Q. Liu, Q. Tang, J. Wu, J. Wang, S. Chen, C. Cheng, H. Yu, Z. Lan, J. Lin and M. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 52–57 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Wu, Z. Tang, Y. Xiao, M. Huang and J. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2777–2781 Search PubMed .
Q. H. Li, H. Y. Chen, L. Lin, P. J. Li, Y. C. Qin, M. J. Li, B. L. He, L. Chu and Q. W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5326–5332 RSC .
M. Li, L. Yang, S. Fang and S. Dong, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 366, 245–250 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Wu, Q. Tang, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and L. Fan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 9, 1299–1302 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, Q. Li, L. Fan, Z. Lan, P. Li, J. Lin and S. Hao, J. Power Sources, 2008, 181, 172–176 CrossRef CAS .
Q. W. Tang, H. Y. Cai, S. S. Yuan and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 317–323 RSC .
L. T. Qu, G. Q. Shi, F. E. Chen and J. X. Zhang, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 1063–1067 CrossRef CAS .
Q. W. Tang, X. M. Sun, Q. H. Li, J. M. Lin and J. H. Wu, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 849–854 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Wu, X. Lin, T. H. Wang, J. H. Qiu and T. L. Ma, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2308–2315 RSC .
S. Gagliardi, L. Giorgi, R. Giorgi, N. Lisi, T. D. Makris, E. Salernitano and A. Rufoloni, Superlattices Microstruct., 2009, 46, 205–208 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Wei, C. C. Wan, Y. Y. Wang, C. C. Chen and H. S. Shiu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4847–4853 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Lan, Y. Y. Wang, C. C. Wan, T. C. Wei, H. P. Feng, C. Peng, H. P. Cheng, Y. H. Chang and W. C. Hsu, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2010, 10, S168–S171 CrossRef .
Y. D. Wang, M. X. Wu, X. Lin, Z. C. Shi, A. Hagfeldt and T. L. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4009–4014 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis schematic illustration of 3D PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) framework and therefore the gel electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) poly(HEMA/GR) and (b) PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 3  FTIR spectra of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR).	 

 	Fig. 4  XRD patterns of anhydrous poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity from polymer gel electrolytes containing 0.1 M tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI), 0.1 M tetramethylammonium iodide (TMAI), 0.1 M tetraethylammonium iodide (TEAI), 0.1 M KI, 0.1 M LiI, 0.1 M NaI, 0.06 M I2 in mixed organic solvent of N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) and acetonitrile (NMP/AC = 2/8).	 

 	Fig. 6  Nyquist plots of poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes and equivalent circuit models for the I−/I3− reaction: Rs, ohmic serial resistance; Rct, charge-transfer resistance of a single electrode; Cdl, double-layer capacitance; ZW, diffusion impedance.	 

Poly(HEMA/GR)	28.58	11.66	0.636	13.21	0.70	5.88
PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR)	25.27	9.47	0.677	14.68	0.67	6.63

 	Fig. 7  Tafel-polarization curves of the symmetrical cells fabricated with poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of DSSCs from poly(HEMA/GR) and PPy imbibed poly(HEMA/GR) gel electrolytes under irradiation of AM 1.5.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
