High-performance planar green light-emitting diodes based on a PEDOT:PSS/CH 3 NH 3 PbBr 3 /ZnO sandwich structure  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR00818F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR00818F
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10035-10042High-performance planar green light-emitting diodes based on a PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbBr3/ZnO sandwich structure

        
          
            Zhi-Feng 
            Shi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xu-Guang 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ting-Ting 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi-Wei 
            Zhuang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yong-Tao 
            Tian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin-Jian 
            Li
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Guo-Tong 
            Du
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Physics and Laboratory of Material Physics, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450052, China. E-mail: shizf@zzu.edu.cn; lixj@zzu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-371-67766629;   Tel: +86-150-9333-9165
bState Key Laboratory on Integrated Optoelectronics, College of Electronic Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Qianjin Street 2699, Changchun 130012, China
Received 
      29th January 2016
    , Accepted 20th March 2016First published on 21st March 2016AbstractRecently, perovskite-based light-emitting diodes based on organometal halide emitters have attracted much attention because of their excellent properties of high color purity, tunable emission wavelength and a low-temperature processing technique. As is well-known, organic light-emitting diodes have shown powerful capabilities in this field; however, the fabrication of these devices typically relies on high-temperature and high-vacuum processes, which increases the final cost of the product and renders them uneconomical for use in large-area displays. Organic/inorganic hybrid halide perovskites match with these material requirements, as it is possible to prepare such materials with high crystallinity through solution processing at low temperature. Herein, we demonstrated a high-brightness green light-emitting diode based on PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbBr3/ZnO sandwich structures by a spin-coating method combined with a sputtering system. Under forward bias, a dominant emission peak at ∼530 nm with a low full width of half-maximum (FWHM) of 30 nm can be achieved at room temperature. Owing to the high surface coverage of the CH3NH3PbBr3 layer and a device design based on carrier injection and a confinement configuration, the proposed diode exhibits good electroluminescence performance, with an external quantum efficiency of 0.0645%. More importantly, we investigated the working stability of the studied diode under continuous operation to verify the sensitivity of the electroluminescence performance to ambient atmosphere and to assess the suitability of the diode for practical applications. Moreover, the underlying reasons for the undesirable emission decay are tentatively discussed. This demonstration of an effective green electroluminescence based on CH3NH3PbBr3 provides valuable information for the design and development of perovskites as efficient emitters, thus facilitating their use in existing applications and suggesting new potential applications.
Introduction
Solution-processed organometal halide perovskites have increasingly received considerable attention due to their exceptional optoelectronic properties.1–5 This upsurge was initially driven by the perovskite solar cell, which achieved a remarkable power conversion efficiency above 20% in the short term.4 More recently, the demonstrations of optically pumped lasing and room temperature (RT) electroluminescence (EL) from perovskites also promised a bright future for perovskite-based light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes (LDs).6–9 The appealing properties of such emerging materials that might enable advances in electroluminescent devices are a high quantum efficiency, wavelength-tunable emissions, ambipolar charge transport characteristic, and a rather high color purity. Compared to the intensive efforts on solar cell applications, the investigation of perovskites as light emitters in energy-efficient light sources is relatively less intensive and there is still a lack of a significant breakthrough that could propel perovskite-based LEDs into the commercialization stage, which is chiefly attributed to the difficulty in obtaining a complete coverage of the perovskite emissive layer and the absence of a device design based on carrier injection and a confinement configuration.10 Besides, of particular concern are the inherent instability of perovskites and the underlying reasons for the poor working stability of perovskite-based diodes, which are important pursuits and certainly worthwhile subjects. From an application point of view, improvement in the electrically driven process of perovskite-based LEDs should start with the restraint caused by discontinuity of the perovskite emissive layer, which provides shunt paths for the conduction current,11 and the establishment of a balanced carrier injection and confinement configuration that could directly determine the emission onset of the proposed diode.12 In the previous reports on perovskite-based LEDs, the device performances in terms of emission efficiency, brightness, and other related parameters have been highlighted, but crucial stability studies needed on an unencapsulated diode have been rarely reported. To be employed more widely in low-cost displays, lighting, and optical communication applications, research on the operation stability of perovskite-based LEDs is highly desired and should be promoted.
In this study, a flat and uniform CH3NH3PbBr3 (MAPbBr3) thin film was successfully prepared on a sputtered ZnO layer, which features a well-compact structure. Furthermore, a planar heterojunction LED based on a PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO sandwich structure was fabricated. Under forward bias, a dominant green emission at ∼530 nm was detected at RT without any parasitic emission from electron and/or hole contributors. The EL performance of the proposed diode was remarkable in terms of its high color purity and external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.0645%. We further investigated the working stability of the diode under continuous operation to verify the sensitivity of the EL performance to ambient atmosphere and to assess the suitability of the studied diode for practical applications. The underlying reasons for the undesirable emission decay are also tentatively discussed. It is believed that the experimental results obtained here will provide valuable information for the future design and development of high-performance perovskite-based LEDs.
Experimental
The fabrication procedure of the PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO sandwich structure started with a commercially available indium tin oxide (ITO, 8 Ω per square resistance) glass, which was pre-cleaned with acetone, ethyl alcohol, and de-ionized water several times. First, a dense ZnO thin film layer was deposited by a radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering system using a high purity ZnO:Al2O3 (2.0 wt%) ceramic target (99.999%). Before deposition, the sputtering chamber was evacuated to a base pressure below 10−4 Pa using a turbo-molecular pump, then the chamber was filled with working gas (argon) to a pressure of 1.0 Pa. The RF power, argon flow rate, and temperature of the sample holder were kept constant at 150 W, 50 sccm, and 400 °C, respectively. During deposition, the sample holder was rotated to obtain a good uniformity of the ZnO thin film. The electrical properties of the ZnO:Al film on sapphire substrate were examined by Hall measurements, which revealed an electron concentration of ∼8.7 × 1018 cm−3 and a resistivity of ∼9.3 × 10−3 Ω cm. Also, the corresponding work function of the ZnO:Al film was calculated as 4.33 eV. Second, the MAPbBr3 layer was deposited on the ZnO-coated ITO glass subsequently by using a two-step spin-coating method. A solution of 1 mol L−1 PbBr2 (Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., ≥99.99%) dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide was spin-coated onto the resulting ZnO/ITO glass substrates at 2000 r for 30 s, and then dried at 100 °C for 10 min in a glove box. Thereafter, a 200 μL portion of the MABr (Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corp., ≥99.5%) solution dissolved in 2-propanol at a concentration of 10 mg mL−1 was dropped onto the substrates, and then the sample was spun at 2000 r for 30 s, followed by annealing on a hot plate at 100 °C for 15 min to evaporate the solvent and to achieve a better coverage. After the process, a hole injection layer of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS, 4083, Heraeus) was spin-coated at the condition involving first a low-speed spinning at 500 rpm for 6 s and then a fast-speed spinning at 4000 rpm for 30 s. Unlike previous reports, a dynamic spin-coating method was used in the process. When the rotation speed reached 500 r, the PEDOT:PSS precursor solution was immediately dropped onto the substrate. The following drying procedure was taken at 120 °C for 15 min in a nitrogen atmosphere. Note that an ultra-thin Al2O3 layer (∼2 nm) was deposited by magnetron sputtering on top of the MAPbBr3 layer in advance before PEDOT:PSS spinning, in order to minimize the effect of the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution on the bottom MAPbBr3 emissive layer, and further, a certain amount of 2-propanol was added into the PEDOT:PSS solution in a 20:1 volume ratio to improve its adhesivity. For the LED preparations, a semi-transparent Au film (∼35 nm) was thermally evaporated on the PEDOT:PSS layer as the anode contact electrode, and then patterned into a circular pad (1.5 mm) by a customized shadow mask. Then, the constructed device was annealed in a nitrogen atmosphere at 150 °C for 3 min to reduce the contact resistance as well as to increase the contact adhesion.
The microstructures of the products were investigated by a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; Jeol-7500F). The crystallinity characterizations were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Panalytical X’ Pert Pro). Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) attached to the SEM was utilized to study the composition and elemental distribution of the multi-layer nanostructures. The absorption spectra of the products were measured using a Shimadzu UV-3150 spectrophotometer. The photoluminescence (PL) spectra were recorded using a double grating spectrofluorometer (Spex Fluorolog-3). The electrical properties of the products were examined by Hall effect measurements using the van der Pauw configuration (ACCENT HL5500PC, UK). X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) determinations were carried out with a SPECS XR50 system with Mg-Kα (1254 eV, width 0.7 eV) as the X-ray source. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the fabricated heterojunction device were performed by using a semiconductor characterization analyzer (Keithley 2400), and the EL spectra were recorded by using home-made acquisition equipment that included a photomultiplier tube and lock-in amplifier systems. The output power of the studied diode was recorded by using a silicon photodetector. Note that all the measurements were performed at RT.

Fig. 1a presents the cross-sectional SEM image of a planar perovskite-based LED grown directly on ITO-coated glass, revealing a compact and uniform configuration, which consists of ITO and Au as the transparent contact electrodes, ZnO as an electron injection layer, PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer, and MAPbBr3 as the emissive layer, respectively. One can easily estimate the thickness of each layer from this configuration because all the layer deposited are clearly highlighted: Au (40 nm, yellow), PEDOT:PSS (180 nm, green), MAPbBr3 (230 nm, pink), ZnO (110 nm, orange), ITO (160 nm, pale blue). Further analysis of the EDS elemental mapping conducted on the cross-sectional Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO/ITO structure was performed by employing the Au, S, Pb, Zn, and Sn signals, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1a, the spatial distribution of the detected elements could be well understood by the clear and uniform hetero-interfaces. Fig. 1b shows the typical SEM image of the MAPbBr3 product, which displays a somewhat rough surface, with many striped pores existing in the film. Note that these pores do not penetrate throughout the entire film; instead, they only extend a certain depth during the synthesis process. The reason for the formation of such microcracks is primarily the restricted diffusivity of the perovskite precursor in the solvent drying stage during the spin-coating.10,13 In addition, the Br/Pb molar ratio of MAPbBr3 product was also determined by applying EDS measurements. As shown in Fig. 1c, no other chemical impurities were detected in the resulting MAPbBr3 film except for the well-known compositions, and the incorporated Br and Pb elements have a molar ratio of ∼3.11.
 Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO/ITO structure and the corresponding elemental mapping images. (b) Top-view SEM image of the MAPbBr3 layer. The scale bar is 200 nm. (c) EDS spectra of the obtained MAPbBr3 product. 
The formation and structural characteristics of the MAPbBr3 layer were also confirmed by the XRD 2θ pattern shown in Fig. 2a. The characteristic and dominant diffraction peaks at 14.86° and 30.11° could be assigned to the (001) and (002) planes of crystalline MAPbBr3, suggesting the formation of a cubic perovskite structure with a high phase purity.14 Note that no secondary phase (e.g., PbBr2 at 18.57°) was observed. Fig. 2b shows the total XPS spectrum of the MAPbBr3 layer, where only the signals related to C, N, Pb, and Br elements were observed above the detection limit. To further confirm the chemical bond configuration of the elements presented in the film, the bonding states of Br and Pb were determined by XPS analysis. As shown in the upper pane of Fig. 2c, the typical Br 3d spectrum could be fitted with two Gaussian peaks, with the binding energies at around 68.2 (Br-1) and 69.4 eV (Br-2), respectively. The former corresponds to the Br 3d5/2 level, and splits to the Br 3d3/2 level (latter) at ∼1.2 eV. These two components can be assigned to the Br− in MAPbBr3.11 In addition, the Pb 4f spectrum of the product was also performed and is presented in the bottom pane of Fig. 2c, where two separated peaks with binding energies of 138.3 (Pb-1) and 145.7 eV (Pb-2) can be fitted, which correspond to the Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 levels, respectively. Considering the obvious energy differences of the Pb 4f7/2 and Pb 4f5/2 levels with those in metallic lead and PbBr2,15,16 we herein consider that the contributions for Pb-1 and Pb-2 in our case are associated with the stoichiometric MAPbBr3, in other words, Pb2+ in PbBr3−. To evaluate the optical properties of MAPbBr3, absorption and PL spectra of the products at RT were both characterized. As shown in Fig. 2d, the absorption onset of MAPbBr3 occurs at 543 nm, which is in agreement with the previously reported result on a solution-processed MAPbBr3 film.11,17 The green line shows the corresponding PL spectrum of the MAPbBr3 film measured at RT, which features a dominant emission peak at 540 nm with a relatively narrow FWHM of 25 nm. Note that no obvious sub-bandgap emission typically associated with the defects in perovskites was observed. An excellent emission performance and high color purity are the signature of a high-quality MAPbBr3 film with a low defect density, making the material suitable as an effective green emitter to be employed in LEDs. In addition, the low-temperature PL spectrum (red line) of the MAPbBr3 film measured at 10 K was also characterized and put together for comparison. Note that the intensities of the two spectra were normalized to clarify the change of the spectral shape and the position of the emission peaks. As shown in Fig. 2d, the dominant emission peak at 10 K shows an obvious red-shift and is significantly narrowed, with a reduced FWHM of 19 nm. This phenomenon is a trend opposite to the well-known Varshni relation.18 As deduced from previous research, the shift in the emission peak could be assigned to the structural phase transition of organometal halide perovskites at different temperature regions. The temperature dependence of the structural phase is the unique physical property of such hybrid perovskite semiconductors, and similar observations have been reported in previous studies.18–20
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD 2θ scans of the MAPbBr3 layer. (b) Total XPS spectrum of the produced MAPbBr3 layer. (c) XPS spectra corresponding to the Br 3d (upper pane) and Pb 4f (lower pane) core levels of the MAPbBr3 layer. (d) Absorption spectrum and PL spectra measured at RT and 10 K of the MAPbBr3 layer. 

Fig. 3 presents a schematic illustration of the studied diode consisting of multilayers of the Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO/ITO structure. The corresponding flat-band energy-level diagram is shown in the bottom-right corner of Fig. 3 and assumes that there are no imperfections at the hetero-interfaces. The electrical parameters, such as electron affinity (χ) and the band gap (Eg), of the involved materials shown in the schematic energy band are known from the literature.12,21,22 Owing to the reason that the MAPbBr3 thin films employed in this study are highly resistive and have a low carrier concentration, typically below the detection sensitivity of our Hall measurement system (1014 cm−3), the depletion region largely resides in the perovskite layer. If the length of the space charge region is longer than the carrier diffusion length, the electrons and holes injected from the bottom n-ZnO and top PEDOT:PSS layers would be confined in the MAPbBr3 layer, where the recombination process occurs, producing light emission corresponding to the band gap of MAPbBr3. In the present case, the ZnO layer could be deemed to be the electron-providing and hole-blocking layer because of the combination of a high electron concentration, matched χ with MAPbBr3, and a relatively deep valence band energy level. Analogously, the PEDOT:PSS layer serves as the hole-providing and electron-blocking layer simultaneously in virtue of its high ionization energy and low χ. Although a low injection barrier of electrons from the ZnO layer to the MAPbBr3 active layer still exists, the potential profile at the ZnO/MAPbBr3 interface depends strongly on the magnitude of the applied bias. A slightly low externally forward bias can effectively compensate the energy barrier of electrons, and thus electron transport or conduction from n-ZnO to MAPbBr3 takes effect, making the recombination of electrons injected from n-ZnO with the holes confined in the MAPbBr3 layer possible.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the perovskite LED configuration, with a 270 nm layer of MAPbBr3 sandwiched between a ZnO compact layer acting as the electron-providing layer and a PEDOT:PSS layer as the hole-providing layer. The right-bottom pane illustrates the simplified energy band alignment of the Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/n-ZnO/ITO structure, showing the transmission and confinement processes of the injected carriers. 
To confirm the above inference and to assess the suitability and rationality of the device structure design for efficient light emission, the resulting diode was electrically stimulated with the positive voltage connected with the Au electrode, and the corresponding EL spectra were collected from the back glass side. We first examined the I–V characteristics of the Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO/ITO structured diode in the dark, and a turn-on voltage of about 2.8 V was obtained, obviously larger than the band gap of the MAPbBr3 active layer. The relatively high turn-on voltage could be attributed to the voltage drop across the MAPbBr3/ZnO interface, where an undesired electron injection barrier exists. Above the onset voltage, effective light emission can be detected, with the integrated emission intensity increasing rapidly by orders of magnitude, suggesting that the series resistance or nonradiative recombination through defects does not increase in proportion with the bias voltage,23 and also demonstrating efficient operation of the studied diode. Fig. 4b displays the EL spectra generated at 1.0 V increments ranging from 4.0 to 7.0 V. Under a low bias voltage of 4.0 V, a single and well-defined emission peak at 533 nm with a FWHM of 30 nm was achieved, which matches well with the PL spectrum of the MAPbBr3 active layer. As the applied voltage was increased, the corresponding emission intensity increased monotonously and, at the same time, the emission peak position was slightly blue shifted. Such a wavelength shift trend can be attributed to the well-known band-filling effect, involving the carrier injection and confinement configuration in a positive-biased heterojunction.24 Unlike other reports, no parasitic emission from the ZnO electron injection layer was observed and the spectral shape showed no significant change with increasing the applied voltage.8,12 These observations indicate that the injected carriers are well confined within the MAPbBr3 layer and that the recombination region does not shift under different operating conditions. In addition, the design and selection of the electron (hole)-providing layer featuring a hole (electron)-blocking function restricts the additional or parasitic radiative recombination pathways radically, thus behaving as a single emission origin that is perfectly consistent with the PL spectrum. The inset of Fig. 4b displays a colored photo taken from the diode from back side at 7.0 V using a digital camera. The overall emission appeared green, is distributed over the whole circle electrode, and is bright enough to be clearly observed by the naked eyes in a normal light environment. The strong emission performance with high purity makes the studied diode interesting for future applications. By recording the light output power of the studied diode in a continuous current mode, we plotted a curve of EQE versus the operated voltage. As shown in Fig. 4c, the EQE of the studied diode achieved a maximum value of 0.0645% at a current density of 1.5 A cm−2, and increased with the increasing voltage. This interesting and desired behavior has been reported in Tan's study,8 and indicates one possibility of a high density of charges required for dominant radiative bimolecular recombination to enhance quantum efficiency. In our opinion, there is still room for improvement in the EQE of the proposed LED because the device configuration could be optimized further. The relatively low EQE of the studied diode is presumably due to the following two aspects. First, the undesired and inevitable carrier injection barriers at hetero-interfaces could induce significant exciton quenching at the ZnO/MAPbBr3 and MAPbBr3/PEDOT:PSS interfaces, and thereby could reduce the device efficiency by limiting the radiative recombination of charge carriers. Second, the hush sputtering process of the Al2O3 layer is detrimental to the underneath MAPbBr3 emissive layer, and its optical and crystalline properties may be degraded. As for the consequent device degradation and efficiency drop-off above a critical forward bias of 9.0 V, the inevitable heating effect at the high current density level might be the main cause. Being at the mercy of a low thermal conductivity of the dielectric glass substrate and the inherent instability of perovskite materials, the working stability of such structured diodes is not always appreciated or seen as positive. From a device point of view, the heating effect could cause a rapid proliferation of structural defects that would benefit the formation of nonradiative recombination centers, and thus a lead to a substantial reduction in the probability of carrier recombination and decay of the emission quantum. In addition, the studied diode exhibited a maximum luminance of 196 cd m−2, giving a luminous efficiency of ∼0.12 cd A−1. Compared with other reports on MAPbBr3-based LEDs,25,26 there is clearly a large room for improvement in device performance. The thicknesses of the MAPbBr3 emissive layer and electron/hole-providing layers, and the electrode contact were not optimized currently, so the light extraction efficiency of the studied diode might be further improved by device optimization.
 Fig. 4  (a) Current density and emission intensity of the studied diode as a function of voltage under forward bias. (b) EL spectra of the studied diode at different driving currents measured at RT. The inset shows the corresponding light emission image at 7.0 V bias. (c) EQE of the diode at different applied voltages. (d, e) Luminance versus voltage and luminous efficiency versus voltage characteristics of the studied diode. (f) Normalized EL intensity of the diode as a function of running time under air and nitrogen atmospheres with the same bias voltage of 11 V. 
As further verification of the stability of the studied diode, the preliminary stability study of the EL performance of the unencapsulated device was carried out using “single point versus time” measurements, in which a constant bias voltage (7.0 V) was applied and the light output power was recorded in real-time using a silicon photodetector at a fixed wavelength of 530 nm. As is well-known, the operating stability of optoelectronic devices based on emerging perovskite materials is still far from satisfactory. Assuming that the poor performance originates from the instability or hypersensitivity of lead perovskites in air, a careful investigation of the operating stability in the ambient environment is necessary and its importance and significance should be self-evident. Fig. 4f illustrates the light output power of the device versus running time in different measurement environments (air and nitrogen) in the laboratory environment (15 °C, 30% humidity). Note that measurements in nitrogen were performed by spreading a constant nitrogen flux on the device holder at a distance of ∼10 cm, with the nitrogen supplied at a flow rate of 1.0 slm. A drastic quenching in light output power was observed as the diode was operated in air, showing ∼80% decay within 4 min running time. Even so, the stability of the proposed LED is still superior to that in other reports where MAPbI3 or MAPbI3−xBrx were employed as the emissive layer.9,27 The key reason is probably the higher sensitivity of MAPbI3 or MAPbI3−xBrx to moisture than that of MAPbBr3. It have been suggested that MAPbBr3 possesses a more compact and stable structure compared with MAPbI3.28 If the ambient humidity is not high enough, it is indecomposable. While the decomposition of MAPbI3 at a relatively high humidity (≥55%) has been confirmed and an additional diffraction peak from PbI2 in the corresponding XRD pattern is the most convincing evidence.28 However, the decreasing trend was substantially suppressed once the measurement atmosphere was replaced by inert nitrogen gas. After a long-term running time of 20 min, the device demonstrated ∼46% decay in the emission intensity, while the typical green emission peak was still detected and its central position remained unchanged (as illustrated by the blue curve in Fig. 5a). The obvious difference in the operating stability of the studied diode under the two environment conditions confirms the poor suitability of the perovskite-based LED for working in harsh environments, and also implies the necessity of protecting the vulnerable perovskites by using packaging technology.
 Fig. 5  (a) EL spectra of the studied diode measured before aging (red), 20 min operation later (blue), and after a relaxation time of 5 min (pink) under the same bias voltage of 7.0 V. (b) Angle-dependence of the EL intensity for the studied diode in a polar coordinate system. 
Understanding the emission decay of the studied diode seems challenging because no color changes of the MAPbBr3 layer and device appearance were observed during the whole aging test, which is an obvious difference from MAPbI3-based optoelectronic devices. Due to the short running time and a relatively low injection current density (2.15 A cm−2), the heating effect is presumably not the main contributor to the device degradation. Here, we consider that degradation of the optical properties of the MAPbBr3 layer exposed in an air environment is responsible for the emission decay. In virtue of the nonideal operational environment, where a mass of adsorbates such as H2O, OH−, and O2 species exist, the inevitable and undesirable surface states play an important role in controlling the EL performance of the diode, especially for nanodevices with an incomplete coverage emissive layer. The surface states serve as nonradiative recombination centers and favor a surface-mediated nonradiative process, which can substantially quench the emission performance.29 In other words, the optical quality of the MAPbBr3 layer suffers from degradation due to activation of the nonradiative pathways, which is detrimental to the intrinsic radiative recombination processes. More importantly, such an EL fluctuation effect is not just a transient behavior; after a relaxation time of ∼5 min, the EL performance (pink curve shown in Fig. 5a) could not recover to its original states, instead, it gets worse. Such phenomenon confirms the non-recoverable feature of device performance. In our previous study on ZnO-based LEDs, the EL performance after the aging test was recoverable practically.30,31 This was because the long running time only influences the electrical properties of the active layer due to the generated heat, but its optical and structural characteristics are not degraded after the working temperature of the device chip drops to RT, although the ZnO active layer in our case is characterized by a nanorod/wall morphology. In terms of the stability of LEDs alone, maybe this is the essential difference between organometal halide perovskites with high-temperature semiconductor materials (ZnO, GaN, etc.). Up to now, no studies on the operational stability of perovskite-based LEDs have been reported, making our results original and useful for making progress toward a practical energy-efficient light source. Additionally, the emission profile of the studied diode was further verified by the angular-dependent EL integrated intensity at different inclination angles of the detector with respect to the device, i.e., from −90 to 90°. Herein, the angle θ was the detection angle between the device's normal direction and the detector, and the distance between the operating detector and the device was maintained during each measurement. One can see that the emission intensity monotonically decreased from 0 to 90° (−90°) with the maximum intensity occurring in the normal direction of the device. Considering the practical application of multiple-angle light source in our daily life, the proposed diode here should be useful for the development of high-brightness green perovskite-based LEDs.
There are still many additional points involved in the proposed LED model that deserve comments herein. First, in light of the well-known hypersensitivity of lead perovskite materials in air with moisture, perovskite-type hybrids are easily decomposed because of the hygroscopic amine salts, and such a chemical reaction process is irreversible, even if the resulting device is dried again. Therefore, it is difficult for us at present to drive such a prototype device substantially above the emission onset, which would otherwise allow for a higher light output power and also a broader application potential. Second, as a uniform and pinhole-free perovskite film is still challenging, typically the device performance will lack consistency and comparability. The morphology characteristics of solution-processed organometal halide perovskites are inferior to that of epitaxial technology in essence, and a uniform distribution of nano-sized crystal grains or films cannot be guaranteed. Actually, another three Au electrode units were also employed for EL measurements, while the EL performances for those tested devices were not very consistent with the observations shown above, except for the unchanged emission position. Third, we consider that there is still room for improvement in the EQE of the proposed LED because the device configuration could be optimized further. More sophisticated carrier injection and confinement configurations have been proposed in other reports by introducing an ultra-thin Al2O3 layer or ethanolamine-based solvent treatment between the TiO2 and perovskite layers to minimize the luminescence quenching and to reduce the electron injection energy barrier at the TiO2/perovskite interface.8,26 Finally but not least, renovation of perovskite film processing techniques is highly desired to yield a thinner and flatter continuous perovskite layer without any pin-holes. A rather thin perovskite layer on the premise of acceptable continuity is appreciated because the re-absorption effect of the emitted photons could be weakened greatly. Of course, a high surface coverage of perovskite layer can also avoid electrical short-circuits and undesired current pathways, which are detrimental to the device performance. By contrast, an incomplete surface coverage implies a high density of surface states, which serve as nonradiative recombination centers and substantially quench the emission action. Wang et al. recognized that a high current filament through the pin-holes would cause local Joule heating.32 Thus, the resulting LED cannot survive under a high excitation level, and a premature breakdown is logical and understandable. Currently, there are many scientific and technical approaches that have been or that need to be addressed to improve the morphology characteristic of the perovskite layer, such as employing a mixture solution containing the perovskite and poly(ethylene oxide) as the precursor to form uniform precipitates within the poly(ethylene oxide) matrix,25 or introducing a multifunctional polyethyleneimine interlayer between the electron-transporting layer and perovskite layer to provide a high-energy hydrophilic surface that allows formation of high-quality perovskite thin film.31 It can be qualitatively anticipated that more work is needed to be performed on the device structure design and film processing techniques and this should provide instructive guidelines for the fabrication and development of high-performance perovskite-based LEDs and provide additional evidence for understanding the emission mechanisms of such diodes.
Conclusions
In conclusion, we carried out detailed investigations into the synthesis, morphology, structural and optical properties of MAPbBr3 products. Furthermore, green LEDs based on PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO sandwich structures were fabricated by a spin-coating method combined with a sputtering system. Under forward bias, the diode exhibited a dominant green emission at ∼530 nm with high color purity. More importantly, we investigated the working stability of the diode under continuous operation to verify the sensitivity of the EL performance to ambient atmosphere and to assess the suitability of the studied diode to practical applications, and it was found that the EL quenching action was strongly dependent on the working atmosphere and that the emission decay was unrecoverable. By contrast, the emission decay in nitrogen gas protection conditions showed a bit slower rate. Unfortunately, the origin of the emission decay is not completely understood at the present stage. Devoting efforts and research toward the understanding of the underlying reasons for the emission decay are crucial to optimize the current device performance. Moreover, we believe that the investigation and understanding on the working stability of the studied diode will aid in the future improvement of such devices, promoting existing applications and suggesting new opportunities.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 61176044 and 11504331) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2015M582193).
Notes and references
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, J. H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N. G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Gratzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu and J. Seo, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Sutherland, A. K. Johnston, A. H. Ip, J. Xu, V. Adinolfi, P. Kanjanaboos and E. H. Sargent, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 1117 CrossRef CAS .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D. D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Zhu, Y. P. Fu, F. Meng, X. Wu, Z. Z. Gong, Q. Ding, M. V. Gustafsson, M. T. Trinh, S. Jin and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. A. J. Quintero, R. S. Sanchez, M. Rincon and I. M. Sero, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1883 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cho, S. H. Jeong, M. H. Park, Y. H. Kim, C. Wolf, C. L. Lee, J. H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. Yoo, S. H. Im, R. H. Friend and T. W. Lee, Science, 2015, 350, 1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Z. Hoye, M. R. Chua, K. P. Musselman, G. Li, M. L. Lai, Z. K. Tan, N. C. Greenham, J. L. M. Driscoll, R. H. Friend and D. Credgington, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Kim, H. Cho, J. H. Heo, T. S. Kim, N. S. Myoung, C. L. Lee, S. H. Im and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Pederson, Two-dimensional chemical-state plot for lead using XPS, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1982, 28, 203 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Nefedov, X-ray photoelectron spectra of halogens in coordination compounds, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1977, 12, 459 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Kumawat, A. Dey, K. L. Narasimhan and D. Kabra, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 349 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Wong, M. Lai, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, E. Lin, L. Dou, A. Fu and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Wu, A. Bera, C. Ma, Y. M. Du, Y. Yang, L. Li and T. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22476 RSC .
R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6218 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Ayguler, M. D. Weber, B. M. D. Puscher, D. D. Medina, P. Docampo and R. D. Costa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 12047 Search PubMed .
Z. F. Shi, Y. T. Zhang, X. C. Xia, W. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Dong, B. L. Zhang and G. T. Du, Nanoscale, 2013, 113, 5080 RSC .
S. Xu, C. Xu, Y. Liu, Y. Hu, R. Yang, Q. Yang, J. H. Ryou, J. Kim, Z. Lochner, S. Choi, R. Dupuis and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Shi, X. C. Xia, W. Yin, S. K. Zhang, H. Wang, J. Wang, L. Zhao, X. Dong, B. L. Zhang and G. T. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 101112 CrossRef .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, E. D. Jung, B. R. Lee and M. H. Song, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 7036 RSC .
J. C. Yu, D. B. Kim, G. Baek, B. R. Lee, E. D. Jung, S. Lee, J. H. Chu, D. K. Lee, K. J. Choi, S. Cho and M. H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Li, S. G. R. Bade, X. Shan and Z. B. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Dijken, E. A. Meulenkamp, D. Vanmaekelbergh and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1715 CrossRef .
Z. F. Shi, Y. T. Zhang, B. Wu, X. P. Cai, J. X. Zhang, X. C. Xia, H. Wang, X. Dong, H. W. Liang, B. L. Zhang and G. T. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 161101 CrossRef .
Z. F. Shi, Y. T. Zhang, J. X. Zhang, H. Wang, B. Wu, X. P. Cai, X. J. Cui, X. Dong, H. W. Liang, B. L. Zhang and G. T. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 021109 CrossRef .
J. Wang, N. Wang, Y. Z. Jin, J. Si, Z. K. Tan, H. Du, L. Cheng, X. L. Dai, S. Bai, H. P. He, Z. Ye, M. L. Lai, R. H. Friend and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of the Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/ZnO/ITO structure and the corresponding elemental mapping images. (b) Top-view SEM image of the MAPbBr3 layer. The scale bar is 200 nm. (c) EDS spectra of the obtained MAPbBr3 product.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD 2θ scans of the MAPbBr3 layer. (b) Total XPS spectrum of the produced MAPbBr3 layer. (c) XPS spectra corresponding to the Br 3d (upper pane) and Pb 4f (lower pane) core levels of the MAPbBr3 layer. (d) Absorption spectrum and PL spectra measured at RT and 10 K of the MAPbBr3 layer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the perovskite LED configuration, with a 270 nm layer of MAPbBr3 sandwiched between a ZnO compact layer acting as the electron-providing layer and a PEDOT:PSS layer as the hole-providing layer. The right-bottom pane illustrates the simplified energy band alignment of the Au/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbBr3/n-ZnO/ITO structure, showing the transmission and confinement processes of the injected carriers.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Current density and emission intensity of the studied diode as a function of voltage under forward bias. (b) EL spectra of the studied diode at different driving currents measured at RT. The inset shows the corresponding light emission image at 7.0 V bias. (c) EQE of the diode at different applied voltages. (d, e) Luminance versus voltage and luminous efficiency versus voltage characteristics of the studied diode. (f) Normalized EL intensity of the diode as a function of running time under air and nitrogen atmospheres with the same bias voltage of 11 V.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) EL spectra of the studied diode measured before aging (red), 20 min operation later (blue), and after a relaxation time of 5 min (pink) under the same bias voltage of 7.0 V. (b) Angle-dependence of the EL intensity for the studied diode in a polar coordinate system.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
