Semiconductor-mediated photodegradation of pollutants under visible-light irradiation  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B921692H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B921692H
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4206-4219Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSemiconductor-mediated photodegradation of pollutants under visible-light irradiation

        
          
            Chuncheng 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wanhong 
            Ma
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jincai 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *
      Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Photochemistry, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: jczhao@iccas.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-10-8261-6495
Received 
      16th October 2009
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      20th September 2010
    AbstractThe semiconductor and the surface-adsorbed antenna molecule (dyes or other color species) can constitute efficient photochemical systems for environmental remediation. The major advantage of these systems is that they are able to achieve the degradation of organic pollutants by using visible light from the sun as energy and O2 in the air as the oxidant under ambient conditions. In this tutorial review, the unique mechanistic characteristics, the constitution of photodegradation systems and their performance are described. The involved radical reactions during the degradation are also discussed.
Chuncheng Chen
Chuncheng Chen obtained his PhD in 2003 from the Institute of Chemistry (CAS). Currently, he is an associate professor in Zhao's group. His research focuses on TiO2-mediated photodegradation of dye pollutants under visible irradiation and the relevant mechanisms.
Wanhong Ma
Wanhong Ma received his PhD in 1999 from Wuhan University, China. Following two-years’ post-doctoral research in the Institute of Chemistry, he joined Zhao's group as an associate professor in 2001. His current research interests include photocatalytic oxidative degradation of organic pollutants and selective photooxidation for the synthesis of organic chemicals.
Jincai Zhao
Jincai Zhao obtained his PhD in 1994 from Meisei University, Japan. In 1995, he became a full professor in the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, CAS. In 1999, he moved to his current position as a full professor in the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. His research fields include: degradation of toxic and persistent organic pollutants; photochemical reaction mechanisms of pollutants in the environment; synthesis of photo-functional materials. Currently, he is a member of the Editorial Advisory Boards of six international scientific journals such as Environ. Sci. Technol. (ACS) and Energy Environ. Sci. (RSC).
1. Introduction
With industrialization and population growth, the environmental contamination caused by organic pollutants is becoming an overwhelming problem all over the world. In the past years, conventional biological and physical treatment methods (adsorption, ultrafiltration, coagulation, etc.) have been the main-stream techniques to remove the organic pollutants from various waters and wastewaters. Nevertheless, the decontamination of many emerging anthropogenic organic pollutants, particularly those with high toxicity but at very low concentration, requires novel techniques to chemically transform them into non-hazardous compounds. These techniques should be efficient enough to remove the organic pollutants rapidly. Ideally, they also should be inexpensive and “green”, that is, the used chemical reagents, energy source and catalysts should be abundant, cheap, and environmentally friendly, and no secondary pollution is produced.
The oxidation of the organic pollutants into CO2, water and other inorganic species by using molecular O2 as oxidant (eqn (1)) is of the few approaches that might meet the above criteria. O2, which constitutes 20.9% of the volume of air, is abundant and economic. It is also much greener than other oxidants as its reaction product is H2O, and no secondary pollution from the oxidant is expected. Furthermore, the final oxidation products of the organic pollutants (CO2, water and other inorganic species) are nontoxic. However, most of the organic pollutants are rather stable in the air at ambient temperature. To degrade organic pollutants efficiently through oxidation under ambient conditions, the organic pollutants, O2 or both have to be activated, during which external energy and/or catalysts are usually needed. As a renewable energy source, sunlight is most attractive to supply energy for these activation processes. The sun delivers about 3 × 1024 J of energy to the earth's surface per year, which is about 4 orders of magnitude larger than the energy annually used by humans over all the world. Besides its abundance, solar energy is also clean and safe. (1)
The use of sunlight to drive the chemical transformation of organic pollutants requires a photochemical system into which the energy enters via the absorption of light with a certain wavelength by one of the components such as the organic pollutant and the photocatalyst. In this review, we will highlight some photochemical systems for the efficient activation of both O2 and organic pollutants. These systems generally consist of a semiconductor and an antenna molecule (dye or other color species) that adsorbs on the surface of the semiconductor. The adsorbed dye or other color species can absorb visible light to be excited. The excited species can inject electrons into the conduction band of the semiconductor, forming conduction band electrons (ecb−) and the oxidized antenna molecules to realize the charge separation (eqn (2) and (3)). This process extends the photo-response of wide-band-gap semiconductors such as TiO2 from the UV to the visible region, and opens a unique route to use visible light from the sun. Dye + hν (visible) → Dye*(2) Dye* + TiO2 → Dye+˙ + TiO2 (ecb−)(3)
The radical reactions following the charge separation can lead to the redox degradation of the organic pollutants. For instance, due to the presence of the oxidized dye (Dye+˙) and the active oxygen species (e.g. O2−˙/˙OOH via the reduction of O2 by the conduction band electron), the organic dyes themselves (they may be the target organic pollutants) and the co-existing other pollutants can be oxidized to CO2, H2O and other products. By using more tolerant color species as the antenna, the semiconductor/antenna systems can be used to degrade even colorless organic pollutants under visible light irradiation, but the antenna species are not consumed during the degradation. Moreover, many pollutants such as halogenated compounds can be reductively decontaminated usually in the absence of O2 because of the strong reduction power of the injected conduction band electrons.
These degradation processes unveil important opportunities to eliminate organic pollutants from water, and emerge as a promising technique for the treatment of wastewaters containing low-concentration organic dye pollutants. It can be also potentially used to remove colorless organic pollutants from water by constructing stable and efficient photochemical systems. In addition, given the ubiquitous existence of semiconductor minerals, such as transition metal oxides and sulfides, and natural chromophoric matters in the environment, this degradation pathway under visible light irradiation could play a prominent role in transformation fate and effect of environmental organic matter, particularly the organic pollutants.
In the following sections, we will first discuss briefly the background and basic aspects of degradation reactions. Then, the degradation of dye pollutants and the removal of coexisting pollutants will be discussed to highlight the unique degradation pathways and the potential applications in environmental remediation. Meanwhile, the recent advances in construction of stable visible-light photocatalysis systems mediated by semiconductors on the basis of surface electron injection are also reviewed briefly in conjunction with selected examples.
2. Background and mechanistic features
2.1 Activation of O2 and organic pollutants at room temperature
Although the oxidative degradation of most organic pollutants by O2 is thermodynamically favorable, that is, the overall degradation reaction is exothermic, the uncatalyzed reactions of triplet ground state O2 with singlet organic compounds have to conquer a high energy barrier (Path A in Fig. 1), and thus, are rather slow kinetically at room temperature.1 For the oxidation reaction, one of reactants O2 has a triplet ground state (with two spin-parallel electrons), while the electrons in the other reactant organic pollutant and the products are usually spin-paired. This means that one of the electrons has to be spin-reversed during the reaction, which is a spin-forbidden process and kinetically unfavored. Another reason for the slow reaction between the dioxygen and organic compounds comes from the low one-electron reduction potential of ground state O2. Although the mutielectron reduction potential of O2 is rather high, for example, E°(O2/H2O2) = +0.695 V and E°(O2/H2O) = +1.229 V vs. NHE at pH = 0, its one-electron reduction to O2−˙ has a potential of only −0.16 V.2 As a result, it is difficult for O2 to get the first electron to take part in the oxidation reactions.
 Fig. 1  Different paths for the reaction between organic pollutants (Org) and triplet ground state of molecular oxygen (3O2). (A) Direct thermal reaction process with a high barrier; (B) thermal-catalyzed degradation with lowered barrier via the formation of a series of stationary (e.g.S1) and transitional (T1 and T2) intermediates; (C) photochemical or photocatalytic degradation by supplying light energy. 
Two strategies are usually used to accelerate the reaction between the organic pollutants and O2. The first one is to lower the energy barrier of the degradation reaction by catalysis. In this process, the organic compounds or O2 or both react with the catalysts to form intermediates. The followed reaction occurs along a pathway (path B) via the formation of a series of stationary (e.g.S1 in Fig. 1) and transitional intermediates (e.g.T1 and T2), which have lower activation energies than the uncatalyzed reaction. Consequently, the oxidation reaction can be markedly accelerated at the same temperature (path B). A well known example for the catalytic aerobic oxidation of organic compounds is the enzyme- or the noble-metal-catalyzed activation of O2 for oxidation of organic compounds.3,4 In the thermal catalysis process, both the stationary and transitional intermediates are usually in their electronic ground states and bound to the catalyst. The free radicals are seldom involved.
The second strategy to activate the O2 and organic compounds is supplying energy to overcome or circumvent the barrier of oxidation degradation. At room temperature, the photochemical reaction is a unique process that can supply energy into the reaction system (path C). When a component in the system, such as the organic pollutant or the photocatalyst, absorbs the energy in the form of light with a certain wavelength, the transient electronic excited states of the component are formed. These excited states are more reactive than the corresponding ground states. They are able to deliver the excitation to other species by energy or electron transfer, and thus photochemically or photocatalytically promote many chemical transformations at room temperature.5
The photochemical activation of the organic compounds and O2 has been extensively studied in the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants, in which a semiconductor is used as a photocatalyst to absorb the light. As shown in Fig. 2(A) process (a), the absorption of a photon with energy larger than the band gap of the semiconductor can excite an electron from the valence band to the conduction band. This band–band excitation produces the reductive conduction band electrons (ecb−) and oxidative valence band holes (hvb+). The holes can react with surface adsorbed H2O to produce ˙OH radicals (eqn (4)) or directly oxidize the organic substrates into their radicals (eqn (5)). In aerated systems, the conduction band electrons are usually scavenged by O2 to yield superoxide radical anions O2−˙ (eqn (6)). By this way, both the O2 and organic substrates are activated. The subsequent radical reactions (for example, eqn (7)–(9)) usually have low- or non-barriers, resulting in the facile oxidative degradation of organic substrates. In the photocatalytic degradation, the net result is the transformation of organic pollutants into their degraded products by absorbed light, while the photocatalyst is not consumed. This is why such a process is termed “photocatalysis”.6–8 H2O + hvb+ → ˙OH + H+(4) R–H + hvb+ → RH+˙ ⇌ R˙ + H+ →→(5) O2 + ecb− → O2−˙(6) R–H + ˙OH → R˙ + H2O(7) (8) (9)
 Fig. 2  Strategies to realize visible-light-induced degradation of organic pollutants on a semiconductor with a wide band gap. (A) the band–band excitation of the pure semiconductor under UV irradiation (a) and the bulk-doping to extend the photoresponse by forming electronic states just below the conduction band (b) or above the valence band (c) of the semiconductor in the band gap. (B) The semiconductor-mediated photodegradation initiated by the surface electron injection from the adsorbed dye molecules that harvest visible light. 
TiO2 has been proven to be the best semiconductor material for the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants because (1) it possesses suitable redox potentials of conduction band and valence band to ensure the simultaneous reduction of O2 and oxidation of the H2O or organic compounds; (2) it also has many desirable properties as environmental photocatalysts, such as high efficiency, ready availability, non-toxicity, and high chemical stability.
2.2 Efficient use of visible light from the sun
Because of its large band gap (3.2 eV for anatase), TiO2 can only absorb the UV light (λ < 387 nm). Unfortunately, UV light only accounts for less than 5% of the solar energy that reaches the surface of the earth. It practically limits the effective use of sunlight to drive the reactions when pure TiO2 is used as photocatalyst. As is well-known, visible light (λ = 400–700 nm) accounts for about 50% of solar energy. Thus, it is more desirable to use visible light as the energy source for the degradation of the organic pollutants. Recently, much effort has been directed toward the development of TiO2-based visible-light-active photocatalytic systems, which preserve the favorable properties of TiO2 as a photocatalyst, but endow it with visible light activity. The most frequently adopted approach for this proposal is by the bulk-doping of TiO2.8–10 The bulk-doping approach is based on the formation of allowed electronic states within the gap between the conduction band and the valence band by incorporating dopants, such as metal ions or nonmetal elements. The electronic transition between these states and the bands of the semiconductors requires less energy, compared to the band to band transition of the semiconductor. Thus, the photons of visible light can also excite the electron transitions, and cause the redox reactions (Fig. 2A b and c).
Another promising strategy to extend the photo-response of a semiconductor with a wide band gap to the visible region is to harvest visible light by adsorbed dyes or other color species. In this strategy, the semiconductor does not absorb light directly, while the adsorbed molecules (such as dyes) act as antennae to absorb the light energy into the degradation system. The electron injection from the excited states of the adsorbed molecules into the conduction band of the semiconductor can initiate the photochemical reactions, as mentioned above (eqn (2) and (3)). As illustrated in Fig. 2B, these photochemical processes generally include the following steps: (a) dye excitation upon the visible light absorption, (b) electron injection, (c) trapping the injected electrons by surface sites, (d) scavenging ecb− by electron acceptors such as O2, and (e) subsequent radical reactions.
This photochemical reaction first found application in the wide-band-gap silver halide photography. In the presence of organic dyes, the silver halide emulsion was found to be able to exhibit photographic response at wavelengths longer than the absorption onset of the silver halide itself due to the absorption of visible light by the dyes. In 1977, Watanabe and co-workers11 first reported that the electron transfer from the adsorbed dye (Rhodamine B) in its singlet excited state to the conduction band of CdS powders could lead to an efficient photochemical N-deethylation of the dye. Kamat et al.12,13 showed that visible light irradiation could induce the bleaching of the pre-adsorbed azo dyes on dry TiO2 powders in the presence of O2.
Recently, such a semiconductor-mediated charge separation emerged as a potential environmental remediation technology for the removal of pollutants from water, and has been the subject of numerous investigations. A wide range of organic pollutants were found to be efficiently degraded on the surface of TiO2 by the electron injection of excited organic dyes or other color species. (1) Taking advantage of their strong visible absorption, various organic dye pollutants have been successfully degraded in the TiO2 aqueous suspensions under visible irradiation and in the presence of O2 (eqn (10)).14 (2) During the degradation of organic dye pollutants, the formed organic radicals or active oxygen species can attack the other co-existing pollutants to drive their decontamination under visible light irradiation (eqn (11)).15,16 (3) The surface modification by using more tolerant color species, such as inorganic metal complexes and noble metal nanoparticles, can be conducted to construct stable photocatalysis systems, which are able to degrade even colorless pollutants under visible light irradiation, whereas these color species themselves are regenerated and remain undegraded at the end of the degradation reaction (eqn (12)).17,18 (4) The organic pollutants with appropriate redox potential (such as halogenated pollutants) can be reductively decontaminated by electrons injected into the conduction band (for example, dehalogenation as shown in eqn (13)).19,20 In the present review, for convenience, all these degradation processes are classified into semiconductor-mediated photodegradation initiated by the surface electron injection (henceforth, denoted as SMPD). (10) (11) (12) (13)
2.3 Mechanistic characteristics of SMPD
The role that the semiconductor plays in SMPD is different from that in the conventional photocatalysis process. In the latter, the semiconductor (as the photocatalyst) is directly excited by light to initiate the degradation reactions (Fig. 2A).6–8 However, in SMPD, it is the adsorbed dye or other color species, rather than the semiconductor, that absorbs light to be excited. The main function of the semiconductor in SMPD is a medium of electron transfer from the excited dye to the electron acceptors (e.g. O2). During this process, no hole on the valence band of the semiconductor is involved. It is known that, in the photocatalysis, the primary oxidative species are the photogenerated holes, which are able to oxidize H2O to ˙OH or directly oxidize the organic pollutants. Because of the strong oxidizing power of the hole (E0 = +2.7 V vs. NHE for anatase TiO2) and ˙OH (E0 = +1.9 V vs. NHE), such oxidations can lead to complete mineralization of organic pollutants. In SMPD, the mineralization extent of organic pollutants is greatly dependent on the properties of the color species. For SMPD of organic dye pollutants under visible light irradiation, the reaction is driven by the photoexcitation of dye pollutants themselves. When the dye pollutants are discolored completely, the reaction system can not absorb any more light. Consequently, the overall photoreaction ceases and some colorless organic products will remain. That is to say, the SMPD process can decolorize fully dye pollutants, but is difficult to realize their complete mineralization under visible irradiation. If the SMPD systems use stable inorganic color species to absorb visible light, it is still possible to completely mineralize the organic pollutants in the SMPD processes. The conduction band electrons in both the photocatalysis and SMPD share similar fates: to be scavenged by O2 to give superoxide radical anion (O2−˙), or by other electron acceptors (e.g. halogenated pollutants, as shown in eqn (13)).
2.4 Role of the semiconductor in SMPD
The electron injection at the semiconductor surface has been proven a rather fast process (in a subnanosecond time scale) for both the organic and metal-complex dyes, while the subsequent charge recombination, in which the electron is back-transferred from the conduction band to the dye radical, occurs in a rate of several orders of magnitude slower than the forward charge injection. Such a rapid electron injection and sluggish unwanted recombination are advantageous for the charge separation as it offers more chance for conduction-band transport of the injected electrons to surface reaction sites and for the oxidized dyes to react.
Generally, the photoinduced charge separation between the dye and O2 takes place in a rather inefficient way in the homogeneous solution. Accordingly, most of the dyes are rather stable in the air-equilibrium homogeneous solution under visible light irradiation. However, when the dyes are adsorbed on the semiconductor surface, the mediated role of semiconductor nanoparticles can efficiently accelerate the electron injection, but hinder the charge recombination.
The conduction band of the semiconductor provides sufficient unoccupied electron-acceptor states with a wide and continuous energy distribution (Fig. 3),21 which ensures rapid and efficient electron injection, and avoids useless (radiative or nonradiative) loss of the dye excited states. The magnitude of density of states in the conduction band can also contribute much to the relatively slow backward electron transfer, as the recombination reaction results in an entropy decrease of the system. As exemplified by Grätzel et al.,22 in a TiO2 particle with diameter of 120 Å, the electron is delocalized over 3600 states in the conduction band. The recombination of the oxidized sensitizer with this electron will be associated with a significant entropy decrease of ca. 16 cal K−1 mol−1. This makes the recombination reaction thermodynamically unfavorable. In addition, the reducing potential of the oxidized dyes is usually located in the band gap of the semiconductor. According to Marcus theory, the absence of electronic states in this gap (the so-called forbidden band) is extremely unfavorable for the electron transfer between the conduction band electron and the oxidized dyes because of lack of state overlap between donor and acceptor. In other words, the driving force for the back-electron transfer, defined as the difference between the conduction band-edge energy and the reduction potential of the oxidized dye, is so large that the recombination reaction might fall deeply in the Marcus inverted region where the rate drops with increasing exothermicity.23,24 This presents another reason for the relatively slow backward electron recombination.
 Fig. 3  Electron injection from the dye excited state (Dye*) with vibrational levels into electronic states with a wide and continuous energy distribution in the conduction band of the semiconductor. 
For the nanocrystalline semiconductor, there is a broad distribution of trap states over the surface, which possess energy below the conduction band edge.25 Because of the delocalized nature of electrons in the conduction band of a semiconductor, the injected electrons are able to facilely migrate away from the dye to the surface trap sites (b in Fig. 4), where they are trapped and stabilized (c). Such a surface trapping could hinder the charge recombination between the electrons and the oxidized dyes, because the trapped electrons have to conquer an energy barrier to detrap (e) and migrate to absorbing sites of the oxidized dyes which are usually different from the trapping sites (f). On the other hand, the trapped electrons can be easily scavenged by the surface adsorbed electron acceptors such as O2 (d), if the level of the trapping states is above the reducing potential of the acceptors. However, this reaction will became difficult once the potential of trapping states is more positive than that of O2, as illustrated in Fig. 9 below.
 Fig. 4  Roles of semiconductor particles in the SMPD process. The solid arrows indicate the charge separation and the dotted arrows indicate the charge recombination. 
In addition, as in other heterogeneous catalytic reactions, the surface of the semiconductor particles also provides the place for the degradation reactions by adsorbing the reaction substrates (e.g. O2 and organic substrates) on their surface sites. The surface adsorption of O2 markedly enhances the removal of the surface-trapped electron, and suppresses the competitive charge recombination. Many dye pollutants also tend to accumulate on the particle surface (see section 3.1.1), which can enhance their removal from water even at very low concentration. The surface can also capture other species. Depending on the substrates, their adsorption may be promotive or depressive for the degradation of target organic pollutants. When the substrates are the target pollutants, their adsorption can usually increase the chance of their reactions with the surface active species. However, many species compete for the surface active sites with O2, dyes or the target pollutants or act as recombination centers. The surface accumulation of these species usually hinder the degradation reactions.
3. SMPD of organic pollutants
3.1 SMPD of organic dye pollutants themselves
Textile dyes and other industrial dyestuffs constitute one of the largest groups of organic pollutants. Even at very low concentration, these dyes can not only cause aesthetic problems, but also exhibit great biotoxicity and possible mutagenic and carcinogenic effects. Most of the commercial dyes are designed to resist photodegradation, and many of them can not be decomposed by the applied microbial processes.26 Other traditional processes such as adsorption, chlorination, ozonation and flocculation prove to be insufficient and uneconomic for treatment of these effluents.27 A common characteristic for these dye pollutants is that they have strong visible absorption. Hence, these dye pollutants themselves can be readily removed by SMPD in the air-equilibrium solution under visible irradiation,28–30 except Methylene Blue (MB) which was found to be difficult to degrade by SMPD under visible irradiation and often was used as a model contaminant to evaluate the visible-light activity of a photocatalyst.10 In this section, we will discuss some basic aspects of the photodegradation of dye pollutants, including the interaction between the dye pollutants and the surface of TiO2, the decolorization, mineralization and formation of intermediates during the degradation of dye pollutants, and the effect of surface modification of TiO2 on them.

3.1.1 Interaction between dye pollutants and the surface of TiO2. 
The interaction between the dyes and the TiO2 particle is indispensable for the efficient photoinduced electron injection and the following degradation reactions. Both the surface properties of TiO2 and the structures of dye pollutants can exert great effect on this interaction. Due to the high hydrophilicity of the TiO2 surface, the photodegradation by SMPD is especially efficient for water-soluble dye pollutants. These dyes usually contain cationic, anionic or other hydrophilic functional groups, and these groups are often the position where the dyes interact with the surface of TiO2. Fig. 5 illustrates several representative dyes with different functional groups, and they will be used frequently in the following discussion.
 Fig. 5  Several representative dyes with different functional groups. 
Direct bonding and electrostatic interaction are the two most important interaction modes between the dye and the TiO2 surface. Anchoring of dyes onto the TiO2 surface by a chemical bond is a strong interaction mode between the functional groups of dyes and the surface sites of TiO2. For example, Rhodamine-B (RhB) is known to be bound on the TiO2 surface via esterification between the carboxylic group of the dye and the surface hydroxyl of TiO2 (Fig. 6A).31 Alizarin was reported to link to the coordinatively unsaturated surface Ti atoms via a strong bidentate chelating mode involving covalent bonding with the oxygen atoms of its two hydroxyl groups in the ortho position (Fig. 6B).32 The electrostatic interaction between the dyes and TiO2 surface is expected to greatly depend on the pH of the media, which can alter the charge nature of the TiO2 surface and the ionization of dyes by protonation and deprotonation (acid-base) equilibria. Dyes with strong ionized anionic groups (e.g. sulfonic group) tend to adsorb on the surface at low pH, due to electrostatic interactions between the positive TiO2 surface and dye anions (Fig. 6C). For example, Kondarides et al.33 reported that adsorption of Acid Orange 7 (AO7) on the TiO2 surface occurred to a significant extent only at pH values lower than 7, via the sulfonic group of the azo-dye. At high pH, contrarily, cationic dyes such as Malachite Green (MG) can facilely adsorb on the TiO2 surface (Fig. 6D).
 Fig. 6  Interaction between the dyes and surface of TiO2. (A) bond between carboxylic group of the dye and surface Ti sites of TiO2; (B) bidentate chelating mode between a dye with two hydroxyl groups in the ortho position and the surface Ti sites; (C) electrostatic interactions between the TiO2 surface with positive charges and dye anions at low pHs; (D) electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged TiO2 surface and dye cations at high pHs. 
When the adsorbed dye has weak electronic coupling with the surface of TiO2, the electronic structure of the dye is not changed significantly after the adsorption. In these situations, the electron is injected from the (singlet or triplet) excited state of the dye molecules into the TiO2 conduction band (Fig. 7A). This pathway is the most studied electron injection process of TiO2.22,34 However, when there is a strong electronic coupling between the π orbital of the dye with the 3d orbital of Ti4+, a surface charge-transfer complex may be formed between the dye and coordinatively unsaturated surface Ti(IV) atom.35 Upon excitation of the charge-transfer complex, the electron is promoted from the ground state of the complex into the conduction band of TiO2 in a coherent one-step manner (Fig. 7B). Such photoexcitation and injection process is often referred as ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT).36 Typical compounds that can form such surface charge-transfer complexes with the Ti(IV) site are those with enediol groups such as catechol and dopamine, and with the related structures such as salicylic acid and ascorbic acid.37,38 These surface charge-transfer complexes of even small organic molecules which are colorless in solution can exhibit visible light absorption. For example, the absorption of catechol is located in solution at 270 nm, whereas the catechol/TiO2 complex shows an absorption in the visible region up to 600 nm due to the catechol-to-TiO2 charge-transfer complex.39 This spectral extension is able to make the colorless organic compounds undergo photoinduced reactions on the surface of TiO2 under visible light irradiation.36 Such a process may be particularly important to the chemical transformation of organic compounds in the environment, because there are ubiquitous natural organic matters such as humic substances and natural pigments that can form LMCT complexes with the surface metal sites of the minerals. Visible light irradiation on these LMCT complexes can initiate the radical reactions by SMPD, eventually leading to degradation of the organic substances themselves and the redox reactions of other co-existing environmental species.
 Fig. 7  Two types of electron-injection pathways from the dyes to the conduction of TiO2 upon visible light excitation. (A) Injection from the excited states of the dyes, and (B) injection by formation of LMCT complexes. 


3.1.2 Performance of the degradation of dye pollutants by SMPD. 
The degradation process of the dyes can be characterized by several parameters: (i) rate of decolorization, (ii) extent of mineralization to CO2, H2O and other inorganic species, and (iii) formation of intermediates and products. The decolorizing process can be facilely monitored from the change in the absorption of the dye pollutants by a UV-vis spectrophotometer. For most of the dye pollutants, the chromophoric structures of the dyes are broken down during the photodegradation via SMPD, and the formed intermediates are colorless small molecules. Accordingly, all the absorption bands of the dyes were found to diminish gradually, but no new bands appeared in the visible region. The rate of decolorization is greatly dependent on the structures of the dyes and the experimental conditions. Usually, the decolorization process is very efficient. For example, the photoefficiency, defined as how many dye molecules are destroyed by absorbing one photon, was estimated to be about 0.041 for the degradation of AR under visible light irradiation (420 nm). In this case, the photoefficiency was about 5 times greater than that under UV irradiation (365 nm) under otherwise identical conditions.29
In addition to the decolorization, the total mineralization of organic carbon, hydrogen and other elements such as N, S, P and halogen in the dyes to the corresponding inorganic species is another important parameter that reflects the removal efficiency of the dye pollutants. The degree of dye mineralization can be monitored by the change in chemical oxygen demand (COD), total organic carbon (TOC), or the formation of CO2 and inorganic ions. Generally, the COD values in both the whole dye/TiO2 suspension and the bulk solution were observed to gradually decrease with illumination at the early stage of the degradation. However, when the systems are discolored completely, the COD remains at a certain level and does not decrease any more.14 This is reasonable since degradation of the dyes is initiated via the visible light absorption of colored matters. A decrease in TOC of the bulk solution was also observed during the degradation of dyes, which exhibited a similar trend to that of COD.
Formation of CO2 has been detected in several systems. In agreement with the decrease in COD and TOC, the amount of CO2 was found to increase first with the irradiation until the dispersion was completely discolored, and then remain almost unchanged.30 In addition, during the degradation of dyes, inorganic ions are also produced. For example, bromide ions were generated concomitantly during Eosin degradation40 and the degradation of AO7 led to the release of SO42−, NO3−, NO2−, and NH4+.30
The existence of residual TOC and COD after the complete decolorization of the dyes during photodegradation by SMPD indicates that colorless organic products are formed during the process. Generally, the degradation products possess much less aromaticity and higher ratios of aliphatic structures, carbonyl and carboxylic groups than the original dye pollutants,30 which can be usually biodegraded more rapidly than the initial dyes. Therefore, photodegradation by SMPD can be combined with a biological process for the complete removal of dye pollutants.

3.2 Removal of co-existing pollutants on TiO2 modified by organic dyes
SMPD can also drive the decontamination of other co-existing colorless pollutants. These reactions are classified into two categories: oxidation degradation of co-existing organic pollutants and reduction decontamination of pollutants. The oxidation of colorless organic compounds has been proposed to be attributed to the radical cation of the dyes41,42 and the active oxygen species after electron injection.15,16 Hodak et al.42 found that the photooxidation of phenol, thiophenol, 4-chlorophenol, hydroquinone and salicylic acid was successfully realized on the TiO2 (Degussa P-25) particles by SMPD using the organic dye of a phthalocyanine derivative. They also found that not all the colorless organic compounds could be degraded by SMPD. The degradation of EDTA, oxalic acid and benzoquinone was not observed in this SMPD system. The SMPD process using various organic dyes such as Thionine, Eosin Y and Rhodamine B was also reported to result in the efficient photodegradation of various organic pollutants.15,16
Studies on the reduction decontamination of pollutants by SMPD are mainly centered on the reduction of halogen-containing compounds and toxic high-valence transition metal ions. Choi et al. have developed several dye-modified TiO2 systems for the removal of these pollutants.19,20 For example, they found that TiO2 modified with tris-(4,4′-dicarboxy-2,2′-bipyridyl) ruthenium(II) complexes could reduce CCl4 with a quantum yield of about 0.1% in the absence of dissolved O2.19 In this system, the reduction reaction is induced by the conduction band electrons injected from the excited dyes. To sustain the reduction process, sacrificial electron and hydrogen donors (e.g. 2-propanol) were used to regenerate the oxidized dyes and to provide a hydrogen source for the dehalogenation reaction. They further expanded this concept into a more practical system by using organic dye pollutants themselves as the reductant to reduce heavy metal ions under visible irradiation. Their results showed that the removal rates of both dye pollutants (AO7 or RhB) and the heavy metal ions (Cr6+ or Ag+) were markedly enhanced when they coexist in the visible-light-illuminated TiO2 suspensions.20
3.3 Effects of surface modification on SMPD
Depending on specific dye pollutants, the photodegradation efficiency by SMPD can be controlled by different steps of the process. For example, the degradation of dyes with weak adsorption on TiO2 can be accelerated by enhancing the adsorption of dyes to achieve more efficient photoinduced electron injection. Provided that the electron injection efficiency is settled, the overall degradation efficiency is determined by two competitive processes: the removal of the photogenerated charge carriers (ecb− and dye+˙) by useful reactions and their recombination. The surface modification of TiO2 can present much influence on the adsorption of dye and the surface charge transfer processes, and consequently change the rate and pathway of SMPD reactions.
Noble metals such as Pt have a high work function and are able to trap the injected electrons, while the formation of a Schottky-barrier between the semiconductor and the deposited metal suppresses the back electron transfer from metal to the conduction band.43 Pt-deposited TiO2 was found to exhibit much greater activity than pure TiO2 for the degradation of SRB by SMPD. In the Pt/TiO2 system, the rapid formation of relatively large quantities of reactive oxygen species such as O2−˙/˙OOH and H2O2 was detected during the degradation process of SRB, in comparison to those in the pure TiO2 systems.44 The role of Pt in the acceleration of the dye degradation is two-fold. First, the injected electrons from the dyes migrate easily to platinum islands and are trapped there, and thus more efficient charge separation is realized. Second, the platinum is an excellent catalyst for the reduction of O2. On the surface of Pt nanoparticles, the electrons can be rapidly scavenged by O2, avoiding the accumulation of electrons on Pt and also enhancing the formation of superoxide radical anions (see Fig. 8). Similarly, during their study on the reductive dechlorination of trichloroacetate (TCA) and CCl4 by SMPD, Choi et al.45 found that the deposition of platinum nanoparticles on the surface of TiO2 drastically enhanced reaction efficiency. The reductive dechlorination of these compounds was able to occur to a significant extent in the Pt-deposited TiO2 systems even in the absence of organic sacrificial reagents. However, the Pt-deposited TiO2 was completely inactive for the reduction reactions in the presence of dissolved O2, because O2 is more competitive to win the injected electrons than CCl4 and TCA due to the excellent catalytic ability of Pt for O2 reduction, and screens the reduction of these halocarbons.
 Fig. 8  Enhancement of the photodegradation efficiency by depositing metal Pt on the semiconductor surface. 
On the contrary, the pre-adsorption of transition metal ions with high oxidative ability (Cu2+ or Fe3+) on the surface of TiO2 was found to have a deleterious effect on the visible-light-induced degradation of dyes, because the reduction of O2 by the conduction band electrons is suppressed in the presence of these metal ions.46 These metal ions can trap the injected electrons, but, unlike in the case of Pt, the reaction rate of trapped electrons with O2 is rather slow. Such, the metal ions in these systems actually act as recombination centers for the back electron transfer from the conduction band to the oxidized dyes, as shown in Fig. 9, rather than to enhance the charge separation.
 Fig. 9  Deleterious effect of Cu2+ ions adsorbed on the TiO2 surface on the degradation of dye pollutants because of the formation of recombination centers on the surface. 
It was found that depositing an insulating Al2O3 shell (several nanometres in thickness) on the surface of TiO2 resulted in a significant retardation in the charge recombination dynamics (up to a 10-fold).47 Similarly, the rate constant for the SMPD of RhB in an Al2O3-modified TiO2 system was nearly five-fold higher than that on pure TiO2.31 Very recently, Choi et al.48 also reported that introducing a thin Al2O3 overlayer on TiO2 enhanced the visible light activities for the dechlorination of CCl4 by SMPD. By measuring time-resolved diffuse reflectance spectra of bare TiO2 and Al2O3/TiO2 in suspensions, they observed an increase in the average lifetime of the separated charges by about 3 times in the presence of an Al2O3 layer. In these systems, the dyes (RhB or Ruthenium bipyridyl complexes with carboxylate anchoring groups) were proved to be preferably adsorbed on the Al2O3, and the electrons can be injected into the TiO2 by tunneling through the porous Al2O3 layer. On the other hand, the presence of the Al2O3 layer increases the physical separation between the injected electrons and the oxidized dye, thereby retarding the charge recombination reactions. But, the electron acceptors (such as O2 and CCl4) are still able to scavenge the conduction band electrons (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Enhancement of the photodegradation efficiency by inserting an insulating Al2O3 layer between the dye and TiO2 to increase the physical separation between the injected electrons and the oxidized dye. 
In addition, the adsorption extent and mode of dyes can be controlled via the surface modification of TiO2. The adsorption configuration of RhB was proposed to be switched from carboxylic-based adsorption on pristine TiO2 to that with the cationic moiety (–NEt2 group) toward the surface-fluorinated TiO2 particles (Fig. 11), because the surface positive charges under acidic conditions are greatly decreased by surface fluorination.49 Such changes in the adsorption mode can have a marked influence on the degradation pathway and then distribution of the products. On the surface of pure TiO2, RhB was found to undergo predominantly direct cleavage of the chromophoric structure (Xanthene ring, see Fig. 5) of the dye, while the preferential degradation route becomes N-de-ethylation after the modification of the TiO2 surface by fluoride ions.49
 Fig. 11  Proposed adsorption modes of RhB in aqueous pure TiO2 (left) and F-TiO2 (right) dispersions.49 
3.4 Application consideration
In the cases when the colored organic pollutants are needed to be selectively removed, for example, to improve the visual quality of waters, SMPD is expected to be an effective approach. To apply the SMPD principle to the treatment of wastewaters that do not contain colored pollutants, some external dyes have to be preadsorbed on the TiO2 surface to fabricate a visible-light absorption systems, as those described in section 3.2. However, when the organic dyes are used as antenna molecules, the stability of these dyes in the air-equilibrium solutions is really a problem. Since the formed oxidative species can result in the degradation of the organic dyes themselves, these systems would become inactive once the dyes are completely discolored. Therefore, as a technique to remove colorless pollutants from wastewaters, the photodegradation via organic-dye-based SMPD may be limited by the poor stability of the dye. Nonetheless, by using more tolerant inorganic species to absorb visible light, this obstacle can be conquered to some extent (see section 4).
During SMPD reactions, the visible light has to penetrate through the bulk solution to reach the TiO2 surface. Too much colored species in the solution would exhaust the light and make less light available for the surface. Also, many organic or inorganic species in the water can compete for the surface active sites or act as a recombination center (e.g. Cu2+ or Fe3+ ions shown in Fig. 9). If the concentrations of these species are too high, the SMPD reactions could be seriously inhibited. Accordingly, the SMPD method is particularly applicable for systems with low concentrations of pollutants and retardant species. For example, it could be used as a deep-treatment process, after the wastewater is pretreated by other techniques.
Although SMPD has proved itself a promising method to remediate environmental pollutants, there is still quite a bit of room to increase the degradation efficiency and the stability of the systems to be sufficient for practical application. Besides that, other practical issues such as the design of the photoreactor and the evaluation of the cost should be considered critically.
Another potential application of the SMPD is in the field of environmental photochemistry. As is known, natural chromophoric organic matter and organic dye pollutants discharged by human activity are abundant in the environment. Natural minerals with semiconductor properties such as many metal oxide and metal sulfide minerals are ubiquitous on the surface of the earth. They can constitute the SMPD systems under sunlight irradiation, which can lead to enhanced or changed chemical transformation of the colored matter on the surface of the semiconductor minerals, with respect to those in other environmental media. SMPD also has the ability to drive the reactions of the colorless species. Thus, it could greatly influence the fate of these colorless species, for example, halogen-containing pollutants. Although laboratory efforts have been made to understand the detailed mechanism of SMPD, there is still a dramatic lack of field data to evaluate its contribution to transformation of dye pollutants and its effect on other environmental species at the present stage.
4. Photodegradation by SMPD with stable inorganic species for visible light absorption
As mentioned above, organic dyes generally show very poor oxygen-tolerance and chemical stability. A possible strategy to conquer this intrinsic limitation is to replace the organic dyes with inorganic color species that are more resistant to degradation. There are many inorganic species exhibiting visible light absorption, but not all these species display SMPD activity. In most cases, the excited states of the inorganic color species suffer from rapid charge recombination due to the short lifetime of the excited state, unmatchable potential level, or weak electronic coupling with the conduction band of the semiconductor. Nonetheless, there are some successful examples of SMPD degradation of organic pollutants (even colorless organic pollutants) by using inorganic color species as antennae to absorb visible light.
4.1 SMPD by metal-complexes for visible light absorption
Kisch et al.18 developed a class of photocatalyst with visible response by distributing a noble metal chloride (Pt4+, Rh3+, and Au3+) on the surface of TiO2. The TiO2 modified by hexachloroplatinate exhibited visible-light absorption in the range of 400–550 nm due to the excitation of the metal complex. Such a photocatalyst was found to have significant visible activity for the degradation of organic pollutants such as 4-chlorophenol. In addition, the deactivation of the photocatalyst during the irradiation occurred only to a minor extent. To explain the visible-activity of these catalysts, it was proposed that the photoinduced homolytic cleavage of the metal-chloride bonds yields the reduced metal ions and chlorine atoms first, and the reduced metal ions inject electrons into the TiO2, while the chlorine atoms capture electrons from the pollutants, resulting in the degradation of pollutants and regeneration of the inorganic metal-complex (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Postulated mechanism of the photoinduced charge separation on TiO2 loaded by noble metal chlorides, ArOH = 4-chlorophenol.18 
Recently, Castellano et al.17 reported a stable system by anchoring PtII chloride complex dyes (Pt(dcbpy)Cl2, dcbpy = 4,4′-dicarboxyl-2,2′-bipyridine) on a commercial TiO2 (P25). Under visible irradiation, the Pt(dcbpy)Cl2/TiO2 exhibited significant activity for the degradation of 4-chlorophenol, and little decomposition of the complex was observed. The complex with an organic ligand of 1,2-benzenedithiolate to substitute the two inorganic chlorides was found to be also active under visible irradiation, but the complex itself was completely decolorized during the degradation of organic pollutants. However, the best sensitizer used in solar cells cis-Ru(dcbpy)2(NCS)2 was found to exhibit rather poor activity and stability for the degradation reactions.
4.2 SMPD by plasmon resonance absorption of noble metals
Some noble-metal nanoparticles such as gold and silver have strong absorption in the visible-light region due to plasmon resonance of electrons, which stems from the collective oscillation of the conduction electrons under the perturbation of the external electromagnetic field of the light. The unique optical features of noble-metal nanoparticles have endowed them with a wide variety of sensing applications including enhanced Raman scattering or fluorescence of the adsorbed molecules. Only very recently, the plasmon resonance excitation of noble metal particles was reported to exhibit visible activity after deposition on the wide-band-gap semiconductors50–53 or even on the inert supports.54 There are appealing advantages that make noble metal particles attractive light-absorbers for the SMPD removal of the organic pollutants, e.g. (1) the plasmon-based absorption of the noble metals can be easily tuned by control of the size and shape of the nanoparticles; (2) these noble metals are chemically and photochemically stable.
Silver nanoparticles have plasmon resonance absorption in the visible region. Fujishima et al.52 found that irradiation of the TiO2-supported silver nanoparticles with various sizes and shapes by a monochromatic visible light caused selective removal of the Ag particles due to the selective plasmon absorption of the nanoparticles. As a result, the color of the Ag-deposited TiO2 film changed with the wavelength of irradiation. Huang et al.53 loaded Ag nanoparticles on the surface of AgCl to constitute a plasmon-based photocatalyst with strong absorption in the visible region. They found that methyl orange dye was decomposed very rapidly under visible light irradiation on this plasmonic photocatalyst. Unlike the TiO2-supported Ag nanoparticles, the AgCl-loaded Ag nanoparticles were reported to be fairly stable under repeated use with nearly constant photodecomposition rates.
Tatsuma and co-worker50 reported that Au-deposited TiO2 films exhibited anodic photocurrents and negative photopotential which changed under visible light irradiation. Furthermore, the photoaction spectra of these films for open-circuit potential and short-circuit current exactly agreed with the absorption spectrum of Au–TiO2 films (Fig. 13). These facts clearly indicate that the process is driven by photoinduced electron injection from photoexcited gold nanoparticles to the conduction band of TiO2. By using femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy, Furube et al.51 observed plasmon-induced electron injection from excited gold nanoparticles directly to TiO2 nanocrystalline films. The interfacial injection process occurred within 240 fs after the visible light excitation. One finding that is more implicative to the degradation of organic pollutants is that the Au–TiO2 film in N2-saturated electrolyte could generate significant photocurrent by oxidizing the organic compounds (ethanol or methanol) under visible light illumination. In addition, the presence of O2 decreased markedly the anodic photocurrent due to the competition for the injected electron between the electrode and O2.50 Based on these results of photoelectrochemical conversion, it is evident that these systems are potentially applicable to the degradation of organic pollutants. Actually, Au-deposited TiO2 has been reported to exhibit enhanced photodegradation of Methylene Blue under visible light irradiation because of the increased absorption in the visible range.55
 Fig. 13  Resemblance of action spectra (IPCE) to the absorption spectra of the Au–TiO2 film in a N2-saturated ethylene glycol/acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M LiNO3. The open circles denote the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the photovoltaic cell fabricated by the Au-deposited TiO2 film; the solid line is the absorption spectrum of the corresponding film.50 
5. Possible radical reactions during SMPD
The degradation of organic pollutants by SMPD is believed to be controlled by free-radical chemistry. As mentioned above, the charge separation via the electron injection can activate both O2 and the organic pollutants to form various kinds of reactive species. These reactive species are expected to have different lifetimes and undergo distinct reaction pathways during the subsequent reactions. In some systems, transient techniques such as flash photolysis, time-resolved infrared absorption spectroscopy, and time-resolved electron spin resonance (ESR) were used to investigate the lifetime and kinetics of the photogenerated dye radicals, the trapped electrons and other free radicals.12,13,56,57 Nevertheless, because of the short lifetime, the small steady concentration and the complicated reaction processes of these reactive species, the experimental study on the formation and role of these species is a rather complex task. In the practical SMPD systems, one of the widely used approaches for studying these species is to analyze the degradation products and reaction kinetics, by which the radical reaction pathways can be speculated upon indirectly.30 Another conventional method to probe the role of reactive species is to add suitable probes (i.e. radical quencher or initiator) into the systems, by which the contribution of the targeted reactive species is estimated from the effect of the probes on the reaction rate and formation of the intermediate and products.21,58 Steady-state electron spin resonance is another useful tool for the study of radicals during the SMPD process. To detect and identify the short-lived radicals by steady-state ESR, the radicals have to be stabilized by spin-trapping techniques or at low temperature (e.g. 4–100 K).38,44,46,59 By using spin-trapping reagents such as 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO), the transient radicals were trapped to generate stable radicals (Scheme 1), which are then examined by ESR spectroscopy.
Numerous studies have been conducted on the related radical reactions during the photodegradation by SMPD and much useful information has been thus acquired on the radical processes, although many radical details remain poorly understood. In the following subsections, we will discuss the formation mechanism of possible radicals during photodegradation by SMPD and their roles in the degradation process.
 Scheme 1  Trapping of reactive radicals (R˙) by spin-trapping reagent (DMPO) to form stable radicals. 
5.1 Active oxygen species
Superoxide anion (O2−˙), which is easily protonated to form ˙OOH in acidic solution (pKa = 4.8) according to eqn (14), is the most anticipated active oxygen species in SMPD, since the injected electrons are trapped by the dissolved O2 (eqn (6)), and the organic radicals formed during the degradation reaction may also give their unpaired electron (eqn (15)) or hydrogen atom to O2 (eqn (16)). Experimental evidence for the formation of superoxide radicals has been obtained in many degradation systems by the spin-trapping ESR technique (Fig. 14A).60 The formation of O2−˙ was also observed by using a chemiluminescent probe luminol in SMPD.15 There is much experimental evidence demonstrating that (1) the degradation rates of dye pollutants are often found to be proportional to the detected amount of superoxides;44,46,58 (2) addition of superoxide scavengers such as Superoxide Dismutase (SOD)61 or 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ)30,58 into the degradation systems markedly suppresses the degradation of the dyes; and (3) capturing the conduction band electrons by other electron trappers (Cu2+ or Fe3+), rather than O2, or by an external positive bias can also significantly hinder the degradation of dyes.46,58 All these facts indicate that the superoxide radicals (O2−˙/˙OOH) are an important active oxidative species in the degradation of organic pollutants. O2−˙ + H+ → ˙OOH(14) R˙ + O2 → R+ + O2−˙(15) RH˙ + O2 → R + ˙OOH(16)
 Fig. 14  Changes in ESR spectra of (A) DMPO-˙OOH and (B) DMPO-˙OH adducts during the photosensitized degradation of AR.55 
H2O2 is a rather stable oxygen-bearing species, which makes it possible to detect by static state methods. Considerable concentration of H2O2 in bulk solution was observed during photodegradation of dye pollutants by SMPD. The general trend for the changes in H2O2 concentration is that H2O2 increases at the beginning of degradation, and after reaching a maximum, starts to decrease with further irradiation. This trend is the reflection of the formation and consumption of H2O2. The formation of H2O2 is mainly attributed to the disproportionation or the one electron reduction of O2−˙ (eqn (17) and (18)). H2O2 is consumed by reacting with the conduction band electron (eqn (19)), or by visible-induced decomposition via formation of a TiO2/H2O2 surface complex (eqn (20)).62 2O2−˙ + 2H+ → O2 + H2O2(17) O2−˙ + TiO2(e) + 2H+ → H2O2 + TiO2(18) H2O2 + TiO2(e) → ˙OH + OH− + TiO2(19) H2O2-Ti(IV) complex + hν → decomposition(20)The H2O2 formed in the reaction systems seems to play an insignificant role in the degradation of dyes until the dispersions are discolored completely. It was found that addition of H2O2 to the RhB/TiO2 dispersions had a very weak effect on the degradation of the dye, although the added H2O2 was decomposed rapidly. The addition of catalase, which catalyzes effectively the dismutation of H2O2 into H2O and O2, also influences the degradation of dyes to only a small extent.61 Nonetheless, it should be pointed out that when the dispersions are completely bleached, the formed H2O2 could be a precursor of reactive radicals, which can cause the further degradation of intermediates under the visible irradiation, since visible-induced electron transfer from the surface TiO2/H2O2 complexes to the conduction band is able to cause degradation of colorless organic compounds.62 However, compared to the degradation by SMPD, the reactions induced by the H2O2 decomposition are too slow to be observable before the complete decolorization.
The formation of hydroxyl radical (HO˙) was also detected during the degradation of dyes (Fig. 14B). During the degradation of SRB by SMPD, the signals of DMPO-˙OH adduct disappeared after addition of catalase into the system, and increased after addition of external H2O2, according to spin-trapped ESR. This suggests that the ˙OH radical is primarily produced from reduction of the H2O2 formed by the conduction band electron according to eqn (19). The ˙OH radical is one of the most oxidative species, which can degrade most organic substrates. Unexpectedly, the hydroxyl radical seems to have a minor contribution to the degradation of dye pollutants by SMPD, probably because they are formed at very low concentrations. This argument is supported by the facts that the initial rate of degradation of dyes exhibited insignificant changes after the addition of H2O2 or catalase to the TiO2 dispersions to enhance or depress the formation of ˙OH radicals, respectively, as mentioned above.61
Singlet oxygen (1O2) represents another important active oxygen species, which has been extensively investigated in organic chemistry and environmental chemistry. This species is usually formed via energy transfer from the triplet state of a dye to the triplet ground state of molecular oxygen (eqn (21) and (22)). The water-induced dismutation of two superoxide anions to ground state O2 and H2O2 in eqn (17) was also proposed to produce some singlet oxygen (1O2), although the yield is very low.38 Once formed, 1O2 is expected to degrade many organic substrates such as unsaturated hydrocarbons. By employing quenchers of 1O2 such as 1,4-diazabicyclo[2,2,2]octane (DABCO) and sodium azide (NaN3), Kondarides et al.30 showed that 1O2 plays a minor role in the degradation of dye Acid Orange 7 (AO7), at least in the initial stages of the reaction. However, for dyes with high triplet quantum yield, their photodegradation may be important via1O2 in the bulk solution, in parallel with the degradation by SMPD on the TiO2 surface. 1Dye + hν (visible) → 1dye* → 3dye*(21) 3dye* + 3O2(e) → 1dye + 1O2(22)
5.2 Oxygen-bearing organic reactive species
The process of mineralization of organic compounds into CO2 means that oxygen atoms in O2 can insert themselves into the organic substrates by certain pathways, which will generate various oxygen-bearing organic reactive species. There are essentially two kinds of initiating reaction courses for the formation of these species: either by the reaction between organic radicals and ground-state oxygen or by the attack of a ground-state substrate molecule by active oxygen species. There were experimental attempts to detect the organo-peroxides in several degradation systems. However, little organoperoxide species was detected in the degradation of all the examined dyes.30,63 The organic oxyl and peroxyl radicals have also been proposed to be one of the primary intermediates in the secondary or “dark” reactions during the degradation. However, the formation of these radicals has not been verified by experiment. In principle, these oxygen-bearing organic reactive species should be involved, at least, in the formation of carboxylates before the mineralization of organic pollutants. These species usually bear excess energy, and their fragmentation can generate new radicals to realize the radical propagation in the presence of O2.
Concluding remarks
We have concisely reviewed the current progress in the environmental application of semiconductor-mediated photodegradation initiated by the surface electron injection (SMPD). Most organic dye pollutants can be effectively degraded in the TiO2 suspensions under visible irradiation, in which the dye pollutants themselves absorb visible light. The efficient degradation of colorless organic pollutants can also be realized by using coexisting organic dyes or inorganic color species to absorb visible light. The achieved progress in this field indicates that SMPD affords a promising route to remediate the environmental contamination because it is very efficient in the use of sunlight. The reactive intermediates involved in the degradation include active oxygen species and reactive oxygen-bearing organic species. Among them, the superoxides have proven to play a particularly important role in the degradation of organic pollutants. Some strategies including modification of the TiO2 surface have proven to be effective for enhancing the separation of photogenerated charges and promoting the degradation of organic pollutants. Several systems using inorganic color species to absorb visible light have been designed and exploited for the degradation of organic pollutants in an effort to overcome the instability shortcomings of the organic dyes. The studies in this emerging area are currently unsystematic, and the photodegradation systems with high efficiency and stability are needed to be further developed. It should also be noticed that the SMPD should represent an important transformation pathway for organic/inorganic species in the environment. Currently systematic evaluation on such transformation has not been reported yet, and needs further investigation.
Acknowledgements
We thank the financial support by 973 projects (1010CB933503 and 2007CB613306), NSFC (Nos. 20537010, 20920102034 and 20777076) and CAS. We are grateful to all domestic and international colleagues and students who worked with us on the semiconductor-mediated degradation of pollutants, and to Prof. H. Zhu (Queensland University of Technology) and Prof. L. Zang (University of Utah) for their modification of this manuscript.
References
M. Y. M. Pau, J. D. Lipscomb and E. I. Solomon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 18355 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Sawyer and J. S. Valentine, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 393 CrossRef CAS .
M. Costas, M. P. Mehn, M. P. Jensen and L. Que, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 939 CrossRef CAS  , and references cited therein.
T. Mallat and A. Baiker, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3037 CrossRef CAS  , and references cited therein.
O. Legrini, E. Oliveros and A. M. Braun, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 671 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999 RSC .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, W. H. Ma, C. C. Chen, J. C. Zhao and Z. G. Shuai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4782 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS .
T. Watanabe, T. Takizawa and K. Honda, J. Phys. Chem., 1977, 81, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vinodgopal, D. E. Wynkoop and P. V. Kamat, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1996, 30, 1660 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nasr, K. Vinodgopal, L. Fisher, S. Hotchandani, A. K. Chattopadhyay and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 8436 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Wu, G. M. Liu, J. C. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 5845 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chatterjee and A. Mahata, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 165, 19 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chatterjee and A. Mahata, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 33, 119 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Y. Sun and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12566 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kisch, L. Zang, C. Lange, W. F. Maier, C. Antonius and D. Meissner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 3034 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cho, W. Choi, C. H. Lee, T. Hyeon and H. I. Lee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 966 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kyung, J. Lee and W. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 2376 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takeshita, Y. Sasaki, M. Kobashi, Y. Tanaka, S. Maeda, A. Yamakata, T.-a. Ishibashi and H. Onishi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2963 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, Chem. Phys., 1993, 176, 493 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kuciauskas, M. S. Freund, H. B. Gray, J. R. Winkler and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 392 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kopidakis, N. R. Neale, K. Zhu, J. v. d. Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 202106 CrossRef .
C. Meehan, I. M. Banat, G. McMullan, P. Nigam, F. Smyth and R. Marchant, Environ. Int., 2000, 26, 75 CrossRef CAS .
T. Robinson, G. McMullan, R. Marchant and P. Nigam, Bioresour. Technol., 2001, 77, 247 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Zhao, T. X. Wu, K. Q. Wu, K. Oikawa, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 2394 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Liu, T. X. Wu, J. C. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1999, 33, 2081 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stylidi, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Appl. Catal., B, 2004, 47, 189 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, C. C. Chen, Y. F. Wang, W. H. Ma, J. C. Zhao, T. Rajh and L. Zang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 308 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nawrocka and S. Krawczyk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10233 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bourikas, M. Stylidi, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9222 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115 RSC .
P. Persson, R. Bergstrom and S. Lunell, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 10348 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lana-Villarreal, A. Rodes, J. M. Perez and R. Gomez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12601 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Tae, S. H. Lee, J. K. Lee, S. S. Yoo, E. J. Kang and K. B. Yoon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22513 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, E. Rozhkova and T. Rajh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2893 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Wang, K. Hang, N. A. Anderson and T. Q. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9434 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Zhang, J. C. Zhao, T. Shen, H. Hidaka, E. Pelizzetti and N. Serpone, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 15, 147 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, C. C. Chen, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9730 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hodak, C. Quinteros, M. I. Litter and E. S. Román, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 5081 RSC .
V. Subramanian, E. E. Wolf and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4943 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, C. C. Chen, X. Z. Li, J. C. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5022 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bae and W. Choi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 147 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, X. Z. Li, W. H. Ma, J. C. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 318 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Durrant, S. A. Haque and E. Palomares, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3279 RSC .
W. Kim, T. Tachikawa, T. Majima and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, C. C. Chen, D. Zhao, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632 CrossRef CAS .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohko, T. Tatsuma, T. Fujii, K. Naoi, C. Niwa, Y. Kubota and A. Fujishima, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 29 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai, J. Wei and M.-H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7931 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Y. Zhu, J. C. Zhao, Z. F. Zheng and X. P. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5353 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Li and F. B. Li, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 2381 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Asbury, E. Hao, Y. Wang, H. N. Ghosh and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4545 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Turro, M. H. Kleinman and E. Karatekin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 4436 CrossRef .
J. Yang, C. C. Chen, H. W. Ji, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21900 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, O. G. Poluektov, Z. V. Saponjic and T. Rajh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25392 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Liu, X. Z. Li, J. C. Zhao, S. Horikoshi and H. Hidaka, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 153, 221 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, W. Zhao, P. X. Lei, J. C. Zhao and N. Serpone, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 1956 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Li, C. C. Chen and J. C. Zhao, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 4118 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Wu, G. M. Liu, J. C. Zhao, H. Hidaka and N. Serpone, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4862 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Chuncheng Chen
	Chuncheng Chen obtained his PhD in 2003 from the Institute of Chemistry (CAS). Currently, he is an associate professor in Zhao's group. His research focuses on TiO2-mediated photodegradation of dye pollutants under visible irradiation and the relevant mechanisms.

Wanhong Ma
	Wanhong Ma received his PhD in 1999 from Wuhan University, China. Following two-years’ post-doctoral research in the Institute of Chemistry, he joined Zhao's group as an associate professor in 2001. His current research interests include photocatalytic oxidative degradation of organic pollutants and selective photooxidation for the synthesis of organic chemicals.

Jincai Zhao
	Jincai Zhao obtained his PhD in 1994 from Meisei University, Japan. In 1995, he became a full professor in the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, CAS. In 1999, he moved to his current position as a full professor in the Institute of Chemistry, CAS. His research fields include: degradation of toxic and persistent organic pollutants; photochemical reaction mechanisms of pollutants in the environment; synthesis of photo-functional materials. Currently, he is a member of the Editorial Advisory Boards of six international scientific journals such as Environ. Sci. Technol. (ACS) and Energy Environ. Sci. (RSC).
	(1)
Dye + hν (visible) → Dye*	(2)
Dye* + TiO2 → Dye+˙ + TiO2 (ecb−)	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Different paths for the reaction between organic pollutants (Org) and triplet ground state of molecular oxygen (3O2). (A) Direct thermal reaction process with a high barrier; (B) thermal-catalyzed degradation with lowered barrier via the formation of a series of stationary (e.g.S1) and transitional (T1 and T2) intermediates; (C) photochemical or photocatalytic degradation by supplying light energy.	 
H2O + hvb+ → ˙OH + H+	(4)
R–H + hvb+ → RH+˙ ⇌ R˙ + H+ →→	(5)
O2 + ecb− → O2−˙	(6)
R–H + ˙OH → R˙ + H2O	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 2  Strategies to realize visible-light-induced degradation of organic pollutants on a semiconductor with a wide band gap. (A) the band–band excitation of the pure semiconductor under UV irradiation (a) and the bulk-doping to extend the photoresponse by forming electronic states just below the conduction band (b) or above the valence band (c) of the semiconductor in the band gap. (B) The semiconductor-mediated photodegradation initiated by the surface electron injection from the adsorbed dye molecules that harvest visible light.	 
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 3  Electron injection from the dye excited state (Dye*) with vibrational levels into electronic states with a wide and continuous energy distribution in the conduction band of the semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 4  Roles of semiconductor particles in the SMPD process. The solid arrows indicate the charge separation and the dotted arrows indicate the charge recombination.	 

 	Fig. 5  Several representative dyes with different functional groups.	 

 	Fig. 6  Interaction between the dyes and surface of TiO2. (A) bond between carboxylic group of the dye and surface Ti sites of TiO2; (B) bidentate chelating mode between a dye with two hydroxyl groups in the ortho position and the surface Ti sites; (C) electrostatic interactions between the TiO2 surface with positive charges and dye anions at low pHs; (D) electrostatic interactions between the negatively charged TiO2 surface and dye cations at high pHs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Two types of electron-injection pathways from the dyes to the conduction of TiO2 upon visible light excitation. (A) Injection from the excited states of the dyes, and (B) injection by formation of LMCT complexes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Enhancement of the photodegradation efficiency by depositing metal Pt on the semiconductor surface.	 

 	Fig. 9  Deleterious effect of Cu2+ ions adsorbed on the TiO2 surface on the degradation of dye pollutants because of the formation of recombination centers on the surface.	 

 	Fig. 10  Enhancement of the photodegradation efficiency by inserting an insulating Al2O3 layer between the dye and TiO2 to increase the physical separation between the injected electrons and the oxidized dye.	 

 	Fig. 11  Proposed adsorption modes of RhB in aqueous pure TiO2 (left) and F-TiO2 (right) dispersions.49	 

 	Fig. 12  Postulated mechanism of the photoinduced charge separation on TiO2 loaded by noble metal chlorides, ArOH = 4-chlorophenol.18	 

 	Fig. 13  Resemblance of action spectra (IPCE) to the absorption spectra of the Au–TiO2 film in a N2-saturated ethylene glycol/acetonitrile solution containing 0.1 M LiNO3. The open circles denote the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the photovoltaic cell fabricated by the Au-deposited TiO2 film; the solid line is the absorption spectrum of the corresponding film.50	 

 	Scheme 1  Trapping of reactive radicals (R˙) by spin-trapping reagent (DMPO) to form stable radicals.	 
O2−˙ + H+ → ˙OOH	(14)
R˙ + O2 → R+ + O2−˙	(15)
RH˙ + O2 → R + ˙OOH	(16)

 	Fig. 14  Changes in ESR spectra of (A) DMPO-˙OOH and (B) DMPO-˙OH adducts during the photosensitized degradation of AR.55	 
2O2−˙ + 2H+ → O2 + H2O2	(17)
O2−˙ + TiO2(e) + 2H+ → H2O2 + TiO2	(18)
H2O2 + TiO2(e) → ˙OH + OH− + TiO2	(19)
H2O2-Ti(IV) complex + hν → decomposition	(20)
1Dye + hν (visible) → 1dye* → 3dye*	(21)
3dye* + 3O2(e) → 1dye + 1O2	(22)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
