Si photoanode protected by a metal modified ITO layer with ultrathin NiO x for solar water oxidation   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP00033A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP00033A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4612-4625Si photoanode protected by a metal modified ITO layer with ultrathin NiOx for solar water oxidation†

        
          
            Ke 
            Sun‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Shaohua 
            Shen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Justin S. 
            Cheung
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolu 
            Pang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Namseok 
            Park
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jigang 
            Zhou
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yongfeng 
            Hu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhelin 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sun Young 
            Noh
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Conor T. 
            Riley
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Paul K. L. 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sungho 
            Jin
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Deli 
            Wang
          
        
      *aeg
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, California 92093, USA. E-mail: deliwang@ucsd.edu; k3sun@ucsd.edu;  Fax: +1 858 534 0556;   Tel: +1 858 822 4723
bInternational Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Lab of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710049, China
cDepartment of Materials Physics and Chemistry, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
dCanadian Light Source Inc., Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N0X4, Canada
eMaterials Science and Engineering, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, California 92093, USA
fDepartment of NanoEngineering, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, California 92093, USA
gQualcomm Institute, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, California 92093, USA
Received 
      29th July 2013
    , Accepted 6th January 2014First published on 8th January 2014AbstractWe report an ultrathin NiOx catalyzed Si np+ junction photoanode for a stable and efficient solar driven oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in water. A stable semi-transparent ITO/Au/ITO hole conducting oxide layer, sandwiched between the OER catalyst and the Si photoanode, is used to protect the Si from corrosion in an alkaline working environment, enhance the hole transportation, and provide a pre-activation contact to the NiOx catalyst. The NiOx catalyzed Si photoanode generates a photocurrent of 1.98 mA cm−2 at the equilibrium water oxidation potential (EOER = 0.415 V vs. NHE in 1 M NaOH solution). A thermodynamic solar-to-oxygen conversion efficiency (SOCE) of 0.07% under 0.51-sun illumination is observed. The successful development of a low cost, highly efficient, and stable photoelectrochemical electrode based on earth abundant elements is essential for the realization of a large-scale practical solar fuel conversion.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) solar fuel conversion is one of the very promising approaches to solve energy problems.1 PEC relies on a separate production process of electricity generation (free energetic carriers) and the chemical products generation (fuels).2 The produced fuels can then be separated, stored, transported, and consumed remotely. Water oxidation for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in a PEC device is challenging due to the instability of a large variety of photo-absorbers under oxidizing conditions (anodic bias or basic electrolyte) by either corrosion or forming an insulating oxide which causes deactivation over time or effectively blocks the photogenerated carriers from reaching the surface for desired water oxidation reaction, respectively. Therefore, realistic photoanodes using materials that are thermodynamically unstable need to be properly protected.3 Therefore, production of a robust and compact interfacial film that protects photoanode materials, provides minimum attenuation to the light absorption as a window layer, also separates and conducts photogenerated hole carriers to the surface, and catalyzes the water oxidation reaction is the key to enabling traditional materials or new material systems for practical solar fuel production.4
Methods using a compact heterogeneous compound coating to isolate the troublesome interface between a photoanode, such as Si, and the oxidizing electrolyte have been developed before. In this method, two interfaces to separate the processes of the carrier generation at one (photoelectrical junction) and the chemical fuel formation at the other (electrochemical junction) are utilized to replace the single photoelectrochemical interface formed directly by the photoanode with or without a catalyst and the electrolyte. Materials include metals or metallic silicides,5 wide band gap semiconductors (such as TiO26–9, ZnO,10 WO3,11 GaN,12 and Fe2O313), transparent conducting oxides (TCO, such as mixtures of SnO2 and In2O3,14,15 SnO216,17 and Sb/Ru-SnO218,19), transition metal and its oxides (Ni,20 Fe2O3,21 NiO,22,23 MnOx,24 and CoOx25,26), and organic polymers (PEDOT:PSS,27 polyaniline,28 polyacetylene,29 and polypyrrole30). Performances of the so-far developed materials or systems greatly depend on the properties of the coating and the two interfaces, such as the barrier height for charge separation, light absorption, photostability/electrochemical stability, hole conductivity, and OER catalytic activity. Noteworthy successes have been achieved in terms of efficiency and stability. For example, Chen et al. used a high quality ultrathin TiO2 within the tunneling range to protect n-Si photoanode and a thin Ir film for catalyzing OER reaction.8,31 This structure showed the champion solar-to-oxygen conversion efficiency (SOCE) of 0.37%, due to the high barrier height defined by the metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) junction and the high activity of Ir noble metal. This technique remains a challenge when used on other crystal structures or high profile photoelectrodes. Earth abundant materials are preferred for large-scale production of solar fuels.32 A few other recent studies have demonstrated the capability of using transition metal oxides or single layer of graphene to protect and catalyze n-Si photoanodes for water oxidation.24,33 Detailed examination revealed that the band bending of Si was defined by the metal oxide and the electrolyte semiconductor junctions through the pin-holes or by the equilibrium formed between solution and the metal oxide.21 Challenges using this approach remain. Specifically, the uniform coating of metal oxide does not provide a large surface area which is important for non-noble metal catalysts with inferior catalytic activity. Due to the pin-holes developed during fabrication or operation, the long-term stability of the thin oxide is also a concern.23 Recently, Dai's group demonstrated a Ni metal directly coated n-Si photoanode with a native oxide that showed nearly 100 hours stability under water oxidation condition after Li treatment.20 This structure shared a few common features with the device presented in ref. 8, where an ultrathin Ni metal (2 nm) served as a metal Schottky contact for charge separation, a window layer, and a OER catalyst for the Si photoanode. This structure showed a SOCE of 0.14% under 2-sun illumination in alkaline solution. Using TCOs for n-Si photoanode with a buried junction has been demonstrated before.25,26,34 However, a traditional n-type TCO like FTO or ITO has a large hole effective mass and a low hole conductivity. On the other hand, using high work function metal contact would cause significant light attenuation from the thick protection coatings, which lead to decoupling of light absorption and electrochemical reaction.26
Therefore, the goal of this research is to investigate strategies that can efficiently alter the photoanode surface using inexpensive and robust methods, and to explore the potential problems associated with this photoelectrode during integration. Specifically, we have synthesized and characterized an efficient ultrathin porous NiOx OER nanocatalyst using a low-temperature hydrolysis method. The effects of the surfactant in the precursor and thermal treatment on its OER catalytic activity have been systematically investigated. A high work function metal has been intentionally sandwiched into the traditional n-type ITO to increase its work function, facilitate the minority hole conduction, and improve the ITO stability. The low-temperature synthesis, nondestructive electrochemical activation, and low absorption of the catalyst allow the integration to the protected Si buried junction photoanode. Finally, comparative performances to the state-of-the-art have been summarized.
Experimental
Ultrathin NiOx OER catalyst preparation
All chemicals were used as it is without further purification. Aqueous chemical precursors were prepared by mixing nickel acetate (Ni(Ac)2) (50 mM) in ethanol with a non-ionic surfactant Triton-X 100 (with average molar weight of 624.82) (TX, 0.6 mM) followed by a thorough stirring of the mixture to obtain a clear solution.35 The deposition of NiOx on different substrates (Ti foil, FTO glass, n-Si, and np+-junction Si) was carried out by dropping 100 μL precursor, spin-casting at 5000 rpm for 90 s, and heating on a hotplate at 300 °C in atmosphere for various times from 10 s to 5 min to remove excessive solvent. The NiOx OER catalyst (labeled as NiOx-TX) was synthesized by spin-coating the precursor solution on substrate followed by a thermal annealing as recently reported.35 For comparison, a catalyst from a similar precursor but without the surfactant (labeled as NiOx) and a precursor with only the TX surfactant in ethanol (labeled as TX) were also prepared and investigated.
Device fabrication
All the Si substrates were diced into 0.5 × 0.5 inch2 squares and cleaned using diluted HNO3, acetone, and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) with intermediate DI water rinsing and ultrasonication. Si substrates used in the study included boron doped p+-Si with a bulk resistivity of 0.005 Ω cm and phosphors doped n-Si with a bulk resistivity of 0.3–0.5 Ω cm (UniversityWafers). The indium tin oxide and gold (Kurt J. Lesker) sandwich (ITO|Au|ITO) structure (100 nm/5 nm/100 nm) was deposited using the RF magnetron sputtering (Denton) with Ar gas. During the deposition, the pressure in the chamber was kept constant at 10 mTorr. This contact was then thermally annealed at 300 °C for 30 s to improve the transmittance and conductivity. To realize an np+-Si junction, we started with an n-Si wafer and a diffusion process was performed using a boron-containing spin-on dopant (SOD, Filmtronics, Inc.). 400 μL SOD solution was first spin-coated onto a 2 inch Si dummy wafer at 3000 rpm for 15 s. The SOD coated dummy wafer together with the samples was immediately transferred to a rapid thermal annealing (RTA) furnace (AG associates Heat Pulse 610). The SOD coated dummy wafer and samples were facing each other separated by quartz spacers with a thickness of 1 mm. The diffusion was then conducted at 950 °C for 120 s under a constant flow of N2 at 0.85 L min−1. After the diffusion process, the samples were unloaded from the furnace and immersed in a buffered HF etchant (BOE) to remove oxides and residuals. Finally, the back side of the diffused sample was then etched using reactive ion plasma etching (RIE, Oxford P100) with a mixed SF6/CH8 (25 sccm/50 sccm) gas at a rate of 3.3 nm s−1 for 10 min while the front side was protected using a photoresist (PR1818). During etching, the chamber pressure was maintained at 15 mTorr, the RIE and ICP power at 30 W and 1200 W during the etching process. GaIn eutectic liquid metal (ELM) back contact was then scratched into the Si sample for an ohmic contact to n-Si. Metal wires used were attached to the back side of the Si (photoelectrode contact) and the ITO (activation/solar cell anode contact) using Ag paste (Tedpella 16040-30). Samples made on Ti foil were fixed on a homemade sample holder with a front side area of exactly 1 × 1 cm2 exposed to the electrolyte. Samples on FTO glass were fabricated by attaching a Cu wire to the sample surface using the Ag paste. Samples were then embedded in Epoxy (Hysol C1) with only the part covered by NiOx exposed to the electrolyte. The Cu wire was enclosed in a high-grade polystyrene pipette tip instead of a glass tube to avoid etching in alkaline solution and introduction of additional contamination to the measurement. Epoxy was dried overnight (>12 hrs) before measurement. Sample areas were then measured through the digital images using Photoshop before further measurements.
Solar cell and photoelectrode characterization
Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the Si solar cells with ITO|Au|ITO semitransparent contact (s-TCO) and buried junction photoelectrodes with NiOx OER catalysts were measured using a two-channel potentiostat (Digi-Ivy DY2300). AM 1.5 illumination was achieved with a 150 W xenon-lamp-based solar simulator (Newport Corporation) using an AM 1.5 filter. The light intensity on the masked light beam was calibrated using a Si photodiode. Effects of the measurement reactor, IR filter, and electrolyte on the light intensity was also measured without compensation in the presented data (Fig. S1, ESI†).
An electrochemical study was conducted using a DY2100B potentiostat from Digi-Ivy in a three-electrode configuration. All the measurements were conducted in 1 M NaOH solution (with 17.6 Mohm cm deionized water) at room temperature in a Teflon container to avoid excessive ions from being introduced by the glassware etching in this extremely alkaline environment. A Hg/HgO with 1 M NaOH electrode (CH Instruments, CHI 152) and a Pt coil were used as a reference electrode (RE) and a counter electrode (CE), respectively. The reference electrode was placed very close to the working electrode (WE) surface to minimize any uncompensated solution resistance loss and the distance between RE and WE was fixed between measurements. The current density and Tafel slope reported here are without iR correction on the uncompensated resistance loss between the RE and WE. The equilibrium oxygen electrode potential is E0 = 0.415 V vs. NHE under this condition. The oxygen evolution overpotential is calculated to be E − E0. The electrolyte was mechanically agitated and purged with N2 gas before and during measurement. Data collection was conducted using DY2100B software from Digi-Ivy. All the reported potentials are converted to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) unless specified.
Surface characterization
The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were conducted on a Kratos spectrometer (AXIS Ultra DLD) with a monochromatic Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.69 eV) and a concentric hemispherical analyzer. Atomic force microscopic measurements were conducted using a tapping mode atomic force microscope (AFM, Veeco scanning probe microscope) equipped with a standard silicon probe (Umasch NSC15/no Al) to evaluate the surface nanoscale topological difference between the thin film coatings. Raw data collected by AFM were processed using NanoScope Software; surface roughness and grain size were obtained using NanoScope Analysis software. While electrochemical studies of the NiOx were conducted on samples deposited on fluorine-doped tin oxide glasses (MTI, TEC 15), as well as Ti foils and Si photoanode, the surface morphological study was carried out on atomically flat Si (100) substrates and the surface chemical compositional study was performed were conducted on Au coated Ti foils (Alfa Aesar, 10385).
Using X-ray Absorption Near Edge Spectroscopy (XANES) spectra were obtained on the spherical grating monochromator (SGM) beamline (ΔE/E: ∼10−4) at the Canadian Light Source (CLS) in a surface sensitive, total electron yield (TEY) mode using the specimen current. Data were normalized to the incident photon flux, which were collected with a refreshed gold mesh (evaporation of a fresh Au layer prior to the measurements).
Extracting data from reported I–V curves
The curves were extracted from the corresponding published articles for comparative analysis using the MATLAB Grabit function developed by Jiro Doke download from http://www.mathworks.us.
Results and discussions
Catalyst activation, OER activity, and stability
The NiOx OER catalysts with or without a non-ionic surfactant triton X-100 (labeled as NiOx-TX or NiOx, respectively in later discussions) and a control sample with only a surfactant (TX) were activated electrochemically and investigated. Cyclic voltammograms (CV at a scan rate 10 mV s−1) for the NiOx OER catalyst coated on a FTO glass without TX are shown in Fig. 1a and the corresponding Tafel analyses are shown in Fig. 1b, which show clear evidence of the cyclic activation. As-prepared NiOx (black curve) shows a plateau in the potential window of 0.4–0.7 V. The Tafel slope in this case is 87 mV per dec at 0.7 mA cm−2, which results in an overpotential of 380 mV to drive an OER current density of 0.52 mA cm−2. During the second scan, a significant enhancement in the oxidation peak appeared at 0.58 V, as well as a slightly higher reduction peak at 0.5 V (red curve). The Tafel slope at 1 mA cm−2 dropped to 57 mV per dec and the current density at the overpotential of 380 mV reached 3.34 mA cm−2. After 500 cycles of activation at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1, the magnitude of the oxidation and reduction peaks was further increased and both peaks became sharper with a noticeable asymmetry, and most importantly, the position of the peaks was shifted to higher potential (around 0.63 V) (magenta curve in Fig. 1a, at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1). Improvements of both the Tafel slope and the overpotential were also noticed. Continued activation for another 310 cycles did not further improve the catalytic activity at the OER current, but the oxidation peak was slightly shifted to a higher potential. This result suggests that the OER activity is definitely maintained after 810 cycles of scan for over 5 h of measurements. Note that the TX sample annealed for 30 seconds (TX-30s) showed a current density comparable to that of the bare FTO within the potential window, which suggested no catalytic activity from the TX treated FTO glass. Active NiO catalysts during the water oxidation have been reported having different phases including the α-Ni(OH)2/γ-NiOOH (α/γ) and the β-Ni(OH)2/β-NiOOH (β/β) transition, where the α/γ transition is typically located at a lower potential with a typically higher equivalent valence state of Ni (3.5–3.67) due to the intercalated cation and water in the NiO2 sheet. On the other hand, β/β transition is typically located at a higher potential with a lower valence state of Ni (2.7–3).36 We believe that the plateau in the CV of the as-prepared NiOx sample indicates a mixed phase of α/γ and β/β transition, as the direct decomposition of nickel precursor did not yield a phase-pure NiOx. The shoulder in the oxidation peak after the first scan suggests that the mixed phases still exist in the catalyst although the α/γ transition becomes stronger. Anodic-shifted oxidation peaks after cyclic activations suggest a phase transition from the α/γ-dominant to the β/β-dominant. Anodic-shifted redox peaks were noticed on aged samples rescanned after being stored under normal lab conditions due to the dehydration of α-Ni(OH)2 to β-Ni(OH)2. This aged catalyst can then transform back to the γ-NiOOH due to overcharging of the β-NiOOH.37
 Fig. 1  CV curves and Tafel plots of the NiOx (a and b) annealed for 30 seconds with different activation cycles, and the NiOx-TX (c and d) annealed at 300 °C for various times. 
On the other hand, the second CV scans on a NiOx-TX catalyst annealed for different times are shown in Fig. 1c. Interestingly, the oxidation peaks from the NiOx-TX annealed for 30 s and 1 min were located at potentials around 0.65 V and 0.63 V, respectively (Fig. 1c). These were about 70 and 50 mV higher than that for the NiOx case, respectively. Increasing the annealing time from 30 s to 1 min reduced the overpotential from 357 to 341 mV and the Tafel slopes at 1 mA cm−2 and current density from 63 to 56 mV per dec (Fig. 1d). The calculated exchange current density obtained by fitting the Tafel behavior was 7.8 × 10−7 mA cm−2 from the NiOx-TX annealed for 1 minute. For catalysts that were annealed for 2 and 5 minutes, no significant reduction–oxidation peaks or improved Tafel behavior was noticed suggesting a diminished organized phase and possibly reduced active sites with the increased annealing time. Moreover, cyclic activation over 1 h did not show improved OER activity on these two samples with a longer annealing time. The oxidation peaks located at higher potentials suggest an inherent β/β phase in NiOx-TX catalysts without a cyclic activation. Presumably, this is because the surfactant has the effect of complexing the metal ions, so that the individual oxides do not form prematurely. Such a complexing effect is well known in the powerful sol–gel technique for nanophase formation. However, this sample after more than 500 cyclic scans showed a formation of the second peak at lower potentials, suggesting an occurrence of the α/γ phase transition (Fig. S1, ESI†). Overheating of the catalyst material suppresses the magnitude of the oxidation–reduction peaks and more importantly degrades the OER activity.4 This overheating effect on the NiOx-TX activation was also observed on a gas-phase sputtered nickel oxide film, where the film annealed in an inert gas atmosphere at 400 °C showed a significantly lower OER activity and less chance to become activated than the as-sputtered ones within a fixed number of activation cycles (data not shown). In summary, a careful control of the catalyst preparation conditions, such as concentration of the complexing agents or altering the sintering process, can result in an active catalyst without going through potentially destructive and energy/time-consuming activation processes. Experiments conducted on Ti foil and Au coated Ti foil also showed similar trends with some variations in the current densities due to the differences in the surface roughness, substrate stability, and series resistance. A direct probe into the active phase of catalysts during reaction is needed to fundamentally understand the activation process, which is currently under investigation through an in situ study in our group and will be reported elsewhere.
Ultrathin NiOx OER catalysts – effects of surfactant and annealing temperature
The structural formulae of precursors and reaction process are illustrated in Fig. 2a. Morphologies of the Si surface coated with and without the complexing agent annealed for 30 seconds at 300 °C are shown in Fig. 2b and c. AFM studies revealed a film with dense and compact nanoparticles in NiOx-TX, while NiOx showed sparse assemblies. The presence of a complexing agent in the precursor affects the physical and morphological properties of the thin film. The TX surfactant possesses a polar head group attached to a long chain aliphatic non-polar tail. Similar to the observation reported by Canfield et al.,38 the metal–surfactant complexes can be formed. Meanwhile, the long chain Ni–TX complex could also act as a spacer.39 Thus the presence of a non-ionic surfactant TX, which bears a chain of approximately 10 ether groups, played a crucial role in organizing the structure of the material and in creating well-defined and reproducible nanophases.40 Sintering the nanoparticles at a high temperature and a higher hydrolysis rate or for a longer period of time was avoided due to the formation of large particles from coalescence of small particles.41 This may directly affect the catalytic activity due to the reduced active sites, as seen in Fig. 1d.
 Fig. 2  Structural formulae of the precursors (a) and AFM images on the NiOx catalyst coating on a polished crystal Si with (b) and without (c) the triton-X complexing agent in the precursors. 
We used XPS analysis to study the chemical composition of the catalysts prepared from different precursors and from different annealing times. Ni 2p spectra of a bare Au substrate, TX, NiOx, and NiOx-TX annealed for 30 seconds are shown in Fig. 3a. No Ni peak was noticed on the bare substrate or the TX coated substrate. A stronger signal was noticed on NiOx-TX compared to NiOx suggesting a denser film consistently with the AFM observations. The O 1s spectrum revealed that the peak at a bare substrate at the binding energy of 532.8 eV was probably from the carbon contamination in the form of C–O (Fig. 3b). Appearance of the peak at the binding energy of 530.54 eV was presumably due to the formation of Au2O3 during the annealing in air. Deconvolution of O 1s peaks of NiOx and NiOx-TX using the classical oxygen fitting revealed the existence of oxygen in the form of the lattice oxygen (529.46 eV), hydroxyl group (531.41 eV) and surface-absorbed water (532.67 eV). The appearance of the new peak at 529.46 eV with the increasing annealing time suggested the presence of increased lattice oxygen and the formation of NiOx. The increasing intensity ratio between 529.46 eV and 531.41 eV partially suggested a decreasing valence state of Ni along with annealing. Interestingly, the high resolution C 1s spectra revealed not only the presence of the carbon contamination in the form of a C–C group at the binding energy of 284.8 eV, but also a peak typically recognized from the carboxylate group at the binding energy of around 288 eV potentially from Ni(Ac)2 (Fig. 3c).42 Note that this peak was not resolved from samples made from precursors containing only Ni(Ac)2 and certainly not from TX in ethanol annealed at the same temperature. This was a sign of the Ni–TX complex formation in the precursor. Higher intensity at the binding energy of 284.8 eV could be a sign of a higher carbon concentration on the surface due to the C–C or CC groups from the partially decomposed Ni–TX complexes. Therefore, annealing for 30 seconds may not lead to a complete removal of the organic compound.43 It could also be suggested that acetate capped nanoparticles could be also formed.44 The physical reasons behind this observation are not absolutely clear at this point, which needs future study. However, carbon residuals could potentially facilitate the charge transfer between catalytic active sites and substrate and aid the activation process. Moreover, the carboxylate component was also present in the sample prepared with a higher concentration of the surfactant (Fig. S2, ESI†). These observations suggested a surfactant effect of the complexing agent on the decomposition of precursors.
 Fig. 3  XPS spectra of (a) Ni 2p, (b) O 1s, (c) C 1s on control samples, NiOx, and NiOx-TX without complexing agent. XPS spectra of Ni 2p (d), O 1s (e) and C 1s (f) on NiOx-TX catalysts annealed for various times. 
We also used XPS to examine the effect of the annealing time on the chemical composition of NiOx-TX (Fig. 3d). The high resolution Ni 2p spectrum showed a larger peak at a lower energy with increased annealing time indicating an improved stoichiometry, which is believed to have a strong effect on the catalytic activity. In addition, Ni 2p spectra showed an observable change in the peak shape with the change of the annealing time. This result is consistent with the O 1s spectrum (Fig. 3e) in which an increased intensity of the lattice oxygen at the binding energy of 529.46 eV was noticed. Although the Ni 2p3/2 peak could originate from different sources of Ni2+ species (partially decomposed nickel acetate–surfactant complexes, Ni(OH)2 and NiO), one can effectively control the crystallization process and tune the catalytic activity by controlling the annealing time at a low temperature for the NiOx catalyst. The high resolution C 1s spectrum (Fig. 3f) further showed that the peak at 288 eV was reduced in its intensity with increasing annealing time indicating a further completed decomposition of precursors.
The shape of the Ni L-edge spectra from the XANES measurements showed that the Ni was mainly in the 2+ valence state in all the samples, but the existence of Ni3+ cannot be excluded, which is consistent with the XPS results. The shift of the absorption edge to lower energy and the increase of the peak ratio between ∼856.2 eV and ∼858.4 eV at the L3 edge of the samples with the increased annealing time clearly indicated an improved stoichiometry (Fig. S3, ESI†).45 Since Ni L-edge is a direct probe of Ni 3d vacancy, an increase of Ni 3d vacancy in NiOx can only be caused by an enhanced ionic bonding contribution from the Ni–O bond in the samples with a longer annealing time.
Si photoanode
The ultrathin NiOx-TX alone was not capable of directly protecting the Si photoanode due to the porous nature of the nanoparticles, where a continuous drop of the photocurrent was noticed (Fig. S3, ESI†). Exposure of Si to an extremely alkaline environment results in a corrosion of Si46 and eventually causes the loss of the catalyst. An interfacial TCO is thus introduced for protection. This interfacial TCO also serves as a component to decouple the photovoltaic cell and the overlying electrocatalyst, which allows in situ characterization of the photovoltaic performance and also the pre-activation of the OER electrocatalyst.
Photovoltaic measurement was first conducted in situ in the measurement setup filled with the electrolyte (1 M NaOH) with an IR filter under masked illumination, which resulted in nearly half of the intensity loss due to our measurement setup (Fig. S4, ESI†). The current density vs. potential behavior of a representative Si photoanode is shown in Fig. 4a. A Schottky junction between ITO|Au|ITO and n-Si was capable of providing a small Voc under illumination due to the Fermi level pinning. The Si np+ homogeneous junction exhibited a better photovoltaic performance with a larger Voc and Jsc due to the improved junction configuration compared to the one without the inversion layer. Light loss at the NiOx-TX catalyst is ignorable due to the large band-gap and the small thickness. However, during the active reaction, particularly during oxidation, NiOx could attenuate the light to up to 10% in the wavelength range of 400–950 nm due to its electrochromic property.47
 Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of the photovoltaic performances of the n-Si|ITO|Au|ITO Schottky junction and the Si np+-junction solar cell measured under attenuated light. (b) CV curves and (c) Tafel slopes of the photoanodes across the water oxidation current density of 1 mA cm−2. (d) Energy band diagrams of the NiOx-TX OER catalyst on a conducting substrate (top) and on np+-Si junction photoanode (bottom). Energy band diagram for n-Si is not shown. 
Cyclic activation of the NiOx-TX catalyst was then conducted prior to the PEC measurement by connecting the working electrode to the activation contact (ITO|Au|ITO) in a three-electrode configuration in the electrolyte with ambient light. A typical series of CV scans for varying activation cycles is shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). CV scans at a fast scan rate (100 mV s−1) were capable of activating the NiOx-TX OER catalyst within the first 40 cycles for 7 minutes. Positions of the oxidation peak initially dropped and then shifted to a slightly higher potential (0.63 V, red curve in Fig. S5, ESI†) indicating an inherent and enhanced β/β transition. This observation is consistent with the experiments conducted on FTO glasses. However, no significant shift in the reduction peak position (black curve in Fig. S5, ESI†) was noticed and thus an enlarged difference between oxidation and reduction peaks with the increasing activation cycles. This observation suggested a poor reversibility with the activation cycles. One can also see an increase of the magnitude of the oxidation peaks from 0.27 to 4.28 mA cm−2 with the varying activation cycles and a saturation appearing after 40 cycles of scan (red curve in Fig. S5, ESI†). Although the reduction peak magnitude also increased with the activation cycles, the difference over the oxidation peak magnitude indicates an incomplete reduction which could lead to a degradation of performance and loss of efficiency.48 Most importantly, OER current densities at the overpotential of 493 mV first dropped during the first 3 cycles of scan and then immediately shot up and saturated after 40 cycles of scan (red curve in Fig. S5, ESI†). Also, the overpotential to reach 1 mA cm−2 OER current density in the oxidation branch increased initially and eventually dropped by 75 mV after 40 activation cycles (black curve in Fig. S5, ESI†). Therefore, the activation of the NiOx-TX OER catalyst within the potential window for 40 cycles was really effective for improving the catalytic activity. The water oxidation current density at the overpotential of 493 mV increased by about 4 times from 3.2 to 12.1 mA cm−2.
The PEC performance of the activated electrodes was then measured by switching the working electrode from the activation contact on the ITO|Au|ITO to the back contact of the Si (Experimental section). CV scans under illumination and in the dark are shown in Fig. 4b. The reduced onset potential and the overpotential needed to drive a certain current density compared to the one measured directly through the activation contact (dark cyan curve in Fig. 4b) were due to the photo voltage generated from the ITO|n-Si Schottky junction (magenta curve in Fig. 4b) and the np+-Si junction (black curve in Fig. 4b). The onset potential was reduced by 270 mV and 380 mV on ITO|n-Si Schottky junction and np+-Si junction, respectively. Current saturation was observed within a low bias (<500 mV) for the np+-Si junction based photoanode. The Tafel slope at the current density of 1 mA cm−2 on ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX is 63.2 mV per dec, n-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX is 203.9 mV per dec, and np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX is 97.4 mV per dec (Fig. 4c).
The mechanism we proposed is illustrated in Fig. 4d using the energy band diagrams based on the actual measurement results shown in Fig. 4b. To maintain a current density of 1 mA cm−2 on the ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX, an overpotential of at least 350 mV was required which includes the activation overpotential and uncompensated resistance loss. Note that the OER reaction potential at pH = 13.8 from calculations is located at 0.415 V. This results in an external bias of 0.76 V required to drive this amount of the OER current density. When n-Si was added to the backside of ITO, the Voc (∼270 mV) upon illumination shifted the external bias that is needed to reach 1 mA cm−2 cathodically by 220 mV. On the other hand, when an np+-Si junction was added to the ITO, this structure was able to further shift the onset potential cathodically, as well as the bias needed to drive the OER current density by 380 mV under illumination. This resulted in a reduced external potential required to drive the OER current. Higher Tafel slopes on the Si photoanodes were believed to be due to the series resistance loss across the Si junction as well as the Si ITO interface (contact resistance and substrate resistance). This can also be noticed from the finite slope of I–V curves across the x-axis in Fig. 4a. To further achieve a photocurrent of 8.13 mA cm−2, overpotentials of 450 mV and 200 mV were needed on the catalyst and the np+-Si photoanode, respectively.
To enhance the hole-conduction to that of the traditional n-TCO, we sandwiched a thin Au layer in ITO. The average transmittance of the sandwich TCO in the wavelength range of 360–1100 nm was about 70% after the same annealing process as the NiOx-TX precursor, which is comparable to the as-deposited bare ITO (78%) (Fig. S6, ESI†). Annealing improved the transmittance of the ITO, but degraded its conductivity. However, the sandwich TCO was able to reach a low resistivity (0.43 mΩ cm) after annealing, 6 times smaller than that for the annealed bare ITO (2.4 mΩ cm). Most importantly, the bare ITO coated n-Si showed significant degradation during the measurements which has been reported previously.25 The electrochemical stability of ITO is strongly environment and bias dependent. ITO is not stable in reductive or acidic environment due to its tendency to be reduced to metallic phase (tin metal). However, ITO is much more stable in base under anodic conditions. Experiments have been conducted and showed that the stability of ITO greatly depends on the oxygen partial pressure, deposition power, substrate heating, and current density, which in-turn strongly affect the defects and oxygen vacancies on the ITO stability. To stabilize the ITO, use of a thin layer of noble metal nanoparticles such as Au on the surface was suggested. Due to the strong faradaic interference, we did not want Au to be in direct contact with the electrolyte, because Au could cause a strong interference in the OER reaction on the NiOx. On the other hand, we did not perform strong mixing of the Au and ITO through co-sputtering or directly deposit Au on Si substrate which can diffuse further into Si buried junction and/or cause potential delamination because of the poor adhesion without an adhesion layer. Although the Au is sandwiched between ITO films, it can still carry the majority of the applied current, as one can see in later discussions. Most importantly, the low work function ITO (∼4.7 eV) can be tuned by changing the stoichiometry or the surface chemistry. A high work function noble metal can be used to increase the work function of ITO for hole injection in light emitting diode49 and hole extraction in solar cell,50 in which the high work function metal could effectively lower the hole transport barrier. Furthermore, the Au interlayer reduced not only the series resistance of the ITO film, but also the contact resistance to the p+-Si properties discussed above. In addition, ITO|Au|ITO could deplete the NiOx which could minimize the unfavorable surface band bending at the p-type NiOx electrolyte interface for a facilitated charge transfer and minimized light response. The effect of the intermediate Au and the resulting high work function on the electronic and catalytic properties of NiOx is unclear. Therefore, the extended work could be focused on developing a fundamental understanding of the hole transport in the sandwich TCO, as well as the interfacial energetics including the work function and band edge positions.
np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoanode
We have performed detailed studies on the np+-Si based photoanode with regard to the incident light intensity, stability and pH effects. The effect of light intensity on the solar cell performance was studied by applying a series of neutral density (ND) filters with the sample in the measurement setup where light was attenuated. Samples were also measured in air with an unmasked solar simulated light intensity of 1 sun at the sample position (100 mW cm−2, navy blue curve in Fig. 5a). Under this standard condition, a Voc of 424 mV, a Jsc of −22.43 mA cm−2, a light-limited current density of −24.51 mA cm−2, a fill factor (FF) of 30.79% and a conversion efficiency of 2.93% were achieved using the np+-Si photovoltaic cell. However under attenuated light in the PEC measurement setup where the intensity was measured to be 51.2 mW cm−2, a Voc of 388 mV, a Jsc of −11.30 mA cm−2, a FF of 36.97% and a conversion efficiency of 3.17% were achieved (black curve in Fig. 5a). It was observed that Voc increased non-linearly, while Jsc increased linearly with the increasing light intensity (Fig. 5b). The inferior photovoltaic behavior can be contributed by several non-optimized fabrication conditions, including the doping concentrations and the junction depth. For example, a high doping in the emitter results in a high recombination, although reducing the resistance loss. Meanwhile, oxide residuals on the surface may result in a high resistance loss and a high thermal shot results in the crystal damage from RTA, which increases the density of recombination centers. Extended work is currently being conducted in the group including using Si HIT (heterojunction with intrinsic thin-layer) cell with a high Voc, which will be reported elsewhere.
 Fig. 5  (a) I–V curves of the np+-Si solar cell under different light intensities measured in the PEC measurement setup and in air. (b) Voc and Jscvs. light intensity. (c) CV curves of the np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoanode under different light intensities. (d) Saturation current density at 0.908 V vs. NHE and redox position of Ni vs. light intensity. 
PEC performance was also measured under different light intensities and displayed in Fig. 5c. Saturation of the photocurrent at a low overpotential was noticed due to the light limited carrier generation. The solar to oxygen conversion efficiency (SOCE) under 0.51-sun illumination can be calculated by  where Vonset is the overpotential when water oxidation current starts typically after the Ni oxidation peak, E0 is the equilibrium water oxidation potential at 1 M NaOH solution, which is calculated to be 0.415 V, and JH2O/O2 is the current density at E0. The data used for this efficiency calculation were based on a three-electrode configuration. Therefore only the half-reaction on the photoanode was considered. The calculated SOCE, representing the upper limit of the conversion efficiency under applied bias,51 is 0.07% (inset Fig. 5c).
A smaller Voc caused by the reduced light intensity effectively shifted the Ni reduction–oxidation peaks and the onset water oxidation potential to higher anodic potentials approaching the position directly measured through the activation contact. The magnitudes of the peaks were effectively reduced (Fig. S7, ESI†) and the shapes of the peaks were broadened with the decreasing light intensity. Similar to light intensity dependent Jsc (blue curve in Fig. 5b), the saturation current density measured at 0.908 V decreased linearly with the decreasing light intensity (Fig. 5d). The linear relationship between the Jsc and the light intensity indicated that the charge generation and transportation in the np+-Si junction was the rate-limiting step. Therefore, the catalytic reaction at the NiOx catalysts as well as the mass transfer in the electrolyte was very efficient, which did not limit the water oxidation process at the corresponding current levels.
The chemical stability and lifetime of the np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoanode was studied in an oxidative environment. Fig. 6a shows the comparison of CV scans (10 mV s−1) obtained before and after 360 cycles of the CV studies with a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 under 0.51-sun illumination. Note that the current density was normalized to show the degradation after 360 scans. Ni reduction–oxidation peaks showed anodic shift while the current density was reduced within the bias window. No saturation was noticed at the overpotential of 493 mV after 360 cycles. Analysis showed that the Tafel slope increased from 97.4 mV per dec to 105.2 mV per dec and the current density dropped 5% at the overpotential of 493 mV. However, the solid-state photovoltaic I–V analysis under illumination revealed that no degradation occurred on the Si np+-junction photovoltaic unit after all the PEC measurement (red and blue curves in Fig. 6b). This also suggested that no significant conductivity change was observed in the s-TCO film,25 indicating a well-protected Si substrate by the s-TCO in extreme alkaline conditions with the addition of the Au intermediate layer.52 Therefore, the performance degradation of the photoanode (Fig. 6a) may be caused by a deterioration at the ITO|NiOx-TX interface due to the potential delamination and/or a decomposition of the NiOx-TX OER catalyst (Fig. S8, ESI†).
 Fig. 6  (a) Degradation of the photoanode after 310 cycles of scans under 0.51 sun illumination. (b) Stable performance of the np+-Si solar cell. 
Resistive (iR) losses from the p+-Si substrate and ITO|Au|ITO are negligible based on the geometry and resistivity. The small potential drop in these two layers facilitates the hole transportation in the catalysts, which thus suppresses the recombination, and increases the photocurrent and the fill factor. However, iR fitting on the CV curves measured after activation of the OER catalyst showed a loss of about 8–9 ohms in the p+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX electrode (black curve) compared to the ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX electrode (red curve in Fig. 7a). This number suggested that an additional loss mechanism was involved in the electrode since no changes were made to the cell configuration during the switching of the contact and thus no changes to the uncompensated solution resistance loss. This additional loss was recognized from the substrate including effects from the native oxide between ITO and Si, and between GaIn eutectic liquid metal (ELM) and Si, as well as the contact resistance loss between ITO and Si.
 Fig. 7  (a) CV curves showing additional ohmic losses. Red curve measured through the ITO|Au|ITO activation contact and black curve measured through the back contact of p+-Si on p+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoelectrode. (b) CV curves showing the pH effect on the photoanodic performance. 
The as-prepared photoelectrodes were also measured in a neutral pH environment made up of PBS buffered Na2SO4 electrolyte (pH = 7.2). The catalyst activation was also conducted in this neutral electrolyte. Differently from the activation behavior typically noticed in a NaOH solution (Fig. S5, ESI†), the activation CV scans in a neutral pH did not show improved catalytic activity. The CV curves of the n-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoanodes, as an example, after activation in a different environment are shown in Fig. 7b. Both electrodes showed a significant increase in the current density after the water oxidation potential. No Ni reduction–oxidation peaks were noticed on the electrode measured in the neutral pH environment. The overpotential needed for a current density of 1 mA cm−2 for water oxidation is much larger (417 mV) than the sample measured in the NaOH electrolyte (127 mV). This is presumably due to the lower activity of the alkaline metal oxide catalyst in a neutral electrolyte, a lower concentration of available OH− ions that results in a higher activation barrier, and a potentially poisoning of the catalyst in PBS buffered electrolyte.
Discussions
Note that among the four elements in the first row transition metals (Mn, Fe, Co and Ni) which hold great potential to replace the noble metal based OER catalysts for large-scale solar fuel conversion, a Ni based OER catalyst is believed to outperform others based on the theoretical and experimental studies.53,54 The activity of the NiOx OER catalyst prepared from the solution-casted precursors depends greatly on the annealing process. Overheating the precursors even at a considerably low temperature with the hope of improving crystallinity can degrade its catalytic activity. The β-Ni(OH)2/β-NiOOH transition is recognized as a more active phase transition in the NiO OER catalyst. The activation process is typically used on amorphous catalysts either from a constant or a cycling current/bias.55–57 The conditioning of catalysts using a constant anodic current on a Ni–Bi OER catalyst can also induce a change of structure and valence state of Ni.56 This conditioning on the catalyst enhances the activity greatly depends on the concentration of the conditioning solution. Yeo and Bell prepared β-Ni(OH)2 by cycling the Ni metal electrode from the α-Ni(OH)2 in concentrated KOH for up to 15 h.57 The β-Ni(OH)2 from their experiment also showed the anodically shifted reduction–oxidation peaks. The activation process is also applied to other catalysts.58 The addition of foreign molecules by forming metal–surfactant complexes and the control over the thermal treatment process can effectively lower the energy input needed to achieve an intrinsically activated catalyst. Amorphous electrocatalysts without the activation process are desired through an introduction of doping59 or carbon-composites.60 Alternatively, a mesoporous structure can be also applied.61,62 This can be realized by impregnation and calcinations of precursors on a mesoporous template and subsequent removal of the template, providing enhanced surface reaction sites and potential photon trapping.
Also note that utilizing a hypothetical crystal Si single junction substrate with a 600 mV Voc, 30 mA cm−2Jsc, and stabilized by a TCO coating with a minimum light loss, one can further cathodically shift the onset potential, e.g., Si HIT cell.63 A minimum 10 mA cm−2 photocurrent at the EOER can be achieved based on a rough estimation on the blue curve in Fig. 7a. However, the maximum SOCE is limited by the single junction Si solar cell due to the large overpotential needed to drive an efficient water oxidation current using the earth abundant transition metal based catalysts, which typically need ∼400 mV to drive a 8.13 mA cm−2 OER current.64 This results in a SOCE above 0.4% using the ultrathin NiOx OER catalyst on a hypothetical cell, suggesting that a further development of the hole conducting TCO and better Si pn junction are important for improved efficiency.
One figure-of-merit to evaluate the photoelectrode performance is the current density at the water oxidation equilibrium potential (E0) in different electrolytes, and the other is the Tafel slope. However, the Tafel slopes reported in the respective reports in the literature are measured at different current densities, and direct comparison of the reported numbers does not lead to consistency. To be fair, we have extracted the reported data and calculated the Tafel slopes at the current density of 1 mA cm−2. Comparative performances of the Si based photoanodes for water oxidation from previous reported work are summarized in Table 1. The device presented in this work shows a comparable current density at the water oxidation potential to others despite it being measured under 0.51-sun intensity. Predictions based on the solid-state device performance under 1-sun condition show that the as-reported photoanode is capable of providing a photocurrent of ∼5 mA cm−2 at E0 and a current density of ∼22 mA cm−2 at the overpotential of 493 mV.
Table 1 Comparative performance of Si based photoanode structures with various catalysts




Structure

J/mA cm−2 @ EOER

b/mV dec−1 @ J = 1 mA cm−2
Condition
Ref.




n-Si|α-Fe2O3
1.86
132.2
100 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)

21



n-Si|SiOx|TiO2|Ir
8.34
107.5
100 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)

8



n-Si|MnO
5.3
—
100 mW cm−2 1 M KOH (aq)

24



n-Si|SiOx|NiOx
0.13
461
100 mW cm−2 0.25 M PBS Na2SO4 (aq)

23



npp+-Si|ITO|CoPi
0.86
307.9
100 mW cm−2 0.1 M K–Pi (aq)

25



npp+-Si|FTO|NiBi
3.81
72.5
100 mW cm−2 0.5 M K–Bi 1.5 M KNO3 (aq)

26



npp+-Si|FTO|NiFeO
1.9
119
100 mW cm−2 0.5 M K–Bi 1.5 M KNO3 (aq)

26



n-Si|SiOx|Ni
10.47
64.23
200 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)

20



np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX
1.97
97.4
51 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)
This work




Annealing temperature and time are important factors that need to be controlled to reach an optimized activity of a catalyst by decomposing a solution phase precursor.59 In addition, the ratio between the complexing agent and the nickel salt is another parameter affecting the activity. It was noticed in this study that the activity of the NiOx-TX catalyst reached a local maximum after annealing for a shorter time.35 Moreover, this catalyst showed an anodic shift of the redox peak position during the cyclic activation process. A systematic study including using a surfactant with a smaller molecular size, varying the concentration of the surfactant, the anion effect in the nickel precursor, introducing doping with other transition metals,65 controlling the annealing temperature and environment, and their effects on the NiOx activity and stability is currently being conducted in our lab. In this work, Au was used in the ITO to tune its electrical properties for demonstration. It will be interesting to examine the earth abundant transition metals with a high work function (such as Cu, Ni, Mo, and etc.) and the possibilities of replacing Au in the ITO as a window layer for hole transportation.52,53 It will also be interesting to develop transition metal based p-type TCO to further replace the use of indium. In terms of the diffusion of solar cell fabrication, the dimension and doping concentration of the surface inverted layer need to be optimized to minimize the light absorbed in the p-layer and maximize the junction depth for an efficient charge generation in the n-Si. Albeit no significant degradation in performance was observed, the long-term stability under constant bias needs to be addressed and improved by controlling the precursor composition and annealing/activation conditions.
Conclusions
Metal oxide nanoparticles prepared using a sol–gel method can be a promising candidate OER catalyst for photoanodes due to their facile synthesis and high activity. Au sandwiched in ITO has been demonstrated to stabilize the instable Si, efficient hole conduction, and reduce the contact and film resistance. Much higher energy conversion efficiency can be expected by using an optimized Si solar cell with higher photovoltage and long wavelength response for device integration purpose. The developed ultrathin OER catalyst, along with the stable semi-transparent ITO|Au|ITO protection layer, is broadly applicable to other photoanode structures, such as III–V compound semiconductor solar cells, which normally need to be stabilized and have much higher efficiency.
Author contributions
The experiment was designed by K.S. The OER catalyst was studied by K.S. and J.C. SOD diffusion was performed by N.P., K.S., and S.N. The surface morphology was studied using AFM by Z.S. XPS analysis was performed by S.S., X.P., and K. S. XANES was performed by J.Z and Y.H. Electrodes were prepared by K.S. and J.C. Data were analyzed by K.S., C.R., and D.W. K.S. and D.W. wrote the manuscript. P.Y. and S.J. helped with the manuscript preparation.
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Additional information
Stability of the NiOx-TX catalyst; XPS and XANES spectrum of samples prepared with different TX concentration and NiOx-TX annealed for different amounts of time; p+-Si|NiOx electrode, ITO, FTO and ITO|Au|ITO electrode; light loss evaluation through measurement setup and water absorption; in situ catalyst activation process; transmittance and resistivity of ITO films with and without intermediate Au before and after annealing on a hotplate; redox potential position vs. light intensity on a buried junction photoanode; degradation of NiOx-TX catalyst after 200 cycles of scans.
Acknowledgements
DW acknowledges the financial support of this work by the National Science Foundation (NSF CBET1236155) and UCSD Senate Research Award. DW thanks Drs R. Rao and B. Fruhberger from Qualcomm Institute of UCSD for their unconditional support. The authors acknowledge the staff of UCSD Nano3 facilities for their timely and professional support.
References
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. F. Fan, G. A. Hope and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1647–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Kohl, S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 225–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsubomura, Y. Nakato, M. Hiramoto and H. Yano, Can. J. Chem., 1985, 63, 1759–1762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Dühnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiu, P. Pavaskar, G. Zeng, Z. Li and S. B. Cronin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013 10.1039/C3CP54674H .
K. Sun, K. Madsen, P. Andersen, W. Bao, Z. Sun and D. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 194013 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Coridan, M. Shaner, C. Wiggenhorn, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6949–6957 CAS .
K. Fujii, T. Kato, K. Sato, I. Im, J. Chang and T. Yao, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2010, 7, 2218–2220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Morisaki, H. Ono, H. Dohkoshi and K. Yazawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 19, L148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Thompson, J. DuBow and K. Rajeshwar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1934–1935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hodes, L. Thompson, J. DuBow and K. Rajeshwar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 324–330 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bélanger, J. P. Dodelet and B. A. Lombos, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 1113–1119 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cachet, J. Bruneaux, G. Folcher, C. Lévy-Clément, C. Vard and M. Neumann-Spallart, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 46, 101–114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Decker, M. Fracastoro-Decker, W. Badawy, K. Doblhofer and H. Gerischer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 2173–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Badawy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 281–294 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Kenney, M. Gong, Y. Li, J. Z. Wu, J. Feng, M. Lanza and H. Dai, Science, 2013, 342, 836–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jun, Y. S. Lee, T. Buonassisi and J. M. Jacobson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 423–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, X. Pang, S. Shen, X. Qian, J. S. Cheung and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 5, 2064–2072 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sun, N. Park, Z. Sun, J. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Pang, S. Shen, S. Y. Noh, Y. Jing, S. Jin, P. Yu and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7872–7877 CAS .
N. C. Strandwitz, D. J. Comstock, R. L. Grimm, A. C. Nichols-Nielander, J. Elam and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4931–4936 CAS .
J. J. H. Pijpers, M. T. Winkler, Y. Surendranath, T. Buonassisi and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 10056–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Cox, M. T. Winkler, J. J. H. Pijpers, T. Buonassisi and D. G. Nocera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 6, 532–538 Search PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, M. Moskovits and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1633–1639 CAS .
R. Noufi, A. J. Nozik, J. White and L. F. Warren, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2261–2265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Simon and M. S. Wrighton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 930–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Skotheim, L. G. Petersson, O. Inganas and I. Lundstrom, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1737–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. D. Prange, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2487–2496 CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Nielander, M. J. Bierman, N. Petrone, N. C. Strandwitz, S. Ardo, F. Yang, J. Hone and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17246–17249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Young, R. Costi, S. Paydavosi, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2058–2061 CAS .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. G. Lyons and M. P. Brandon, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2008, 3, 1386–1424 CAS .
H. Bode, K. Dehmelt and J. Witte, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1079–1087 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Canfield, M. Bizimis and S. E. Latturner, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 330–337 CrossRef .
P. Matejka, B. Vlckova, J. Vohlidal, P. Pancoska and V. Baumruk, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 1361–1366 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stathatos, P. Lianos and C. Tsakiroglou, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2004, 75, 255–260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Niederberger and N. Pinna, Metal Oxide Nanoparticles in Organic Solvents, Springer, London,  2009, ch. 2, pp. 7–18 Search PubMed .
I. T. Kim, G. A. Nunnery, K. Jacob, J. Schwartz, X. Liu and R. Tannenbaum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6944–6951 CAS .
J. C. De Jesus, I. González, A. Quevedo and T. Puerta, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 228, 283–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Znaidi, G. J. A. A. Soler Illia, S. Benyahia, C. Sanchez and A. V. Kanaev, Thin
Solid Films, 2003, 428, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, P. Ge, C. G. Riordan, S. Brooker, C. G. Woomer, T. Collins, C. A. Melendres, O. Graudejus, N. Bartlett and S. P. Cramer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 8343–8346 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sakaino, Y. Kawabata and S. Adachiz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Trotochaud, T. J. Mills and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 931–935 CrossRef CAS .
K. Provazi, M. J. Giz, L. H. Dall'Antonia and S. I. Córdoba de Torresi, J. Power Sources, 2001, 102, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, D. B. Jacobs, G. G. Malliaras, G. Koley, M. G. Spencer and A. Ioannidis, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1234–1238 CrossRef CAS .
C.-D. Wang and W. C. H. Choy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
E. Matveeva, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, H138–H145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. M. Bockris, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 817–827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, K.-C. Chang, D. Strmcnik, A. P. Paulikas, P. Hirunsit, M. Chan, J. Greeley, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 550–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. T. Lu and S. Srinivasan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 1416–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Bediako, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, Y. Surendranath, J. Yano, V. K. Yachandra and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6801–6809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Yeo and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8394–8400 CAS .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12703–12706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. L. Smith, M. S. Prévot, R. D. Fagan, Z. Zhang, P. A. Sedach, M. K. J. Siu, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2013, 340, 60–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Y. Gorlin, Z. Chen and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7758–7765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Wang, T.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Hsu, M.-L. Tsai, C.-H. Huang, W.-R. Wei, M.-Y. Huang, Y.-J. Chien, P.-C. Yang, C.-W. Liu, L.-J. Chou and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9325–9335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00033a‡ Current address: Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Jorgensen Laboratory, Mail Code 132-80, 1200 East California Blvd, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  CV curves and Tafel plots of the NiOx (a and b) annealed for 30 seconds with different activation cycles, and the NiOx-TX (c and d) annealed at 300 °C for various times.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structural formulae of the precursors (a) and AFM images on the NiOx catalyst coating on a polished crystal Si with (b) and without (c) the triton-X complexing agent in the precursors.	 

 	Fig. 3  XPS spectra of (a) Ni 2p, (b) O 1s, (c) C 1s on control samples, NiOx, and NiOx-TX without complexing agent. XPS spectra of Ni 2p (d), O 1s (e) and C 1s (f) on NiOx-TX catalysts annealed for various times.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Comparison of the photovoltaic performances of the n-Si|ITO|Au|ITO Schottky junction and the Si np+-junction solar cell measured under attenuated light. (b) CV curves and (c) Tafel slopes of the photoanodes across the water oxidation current density of 1 mA cm−2. (d) Energy band diagrams of the NiOx-TX OER catalyst on a conducting substrate (top) and on np+-Si junction photoanode (bottom). Energy band diagram for n-Si is not shown.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) I–V curves of the np+-Si solar cell under different light intensities measured in the PEC measurement setup and in air. (b) Voc and Jscvs. light intensity. (c) CV curves of the np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoanode under different light intensities. (d) Saturation current density at 0.908 V vs. NHE and redox position of Ni vs. light intensity.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Degradation of the photoanode after 310 cycles of scans under 0.51 sun illumination. (b) Stable performance of the np+-Si solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) CV curves showing additional ohmic losses. Red curve measured through the ITO|Au|ITO activation contact and black curve measured through the back contact of p+-Si on p+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX photoelectrode. (b) CV curves showing the pH effect on the photoanodic performance.	 

n-Si|α-Fe2O3	1.86	132.2	100 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)	
21

n-Si|SiOx|TiO2|Ir	8.34	107.5	100 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)	
8

n-Si|MnO	5.3	—	100 mW cm−2 1 M KOH (aq)	
24

n-Si|SiOx|NiOx	0.13	461	100 mW cm−2 0.25 M PBS Na2SO4 (aq)	
23

npp+-Si|ITO|CoPi	0.86	307.9	100 mW cm−2 0.1 M K–Pi (aq)	
25

npp+-Si|FTO|NiBi	3.81	72.5	100 mW cm−2 0.5 M K–Bi 1.5 M KNO3 (aq)	
26

npp+-Si|FTO|NiFeO	1.9	119	100 mW cm−2 0.5 M K–Bi 1.5 M KNO3 (aq)	
26

n-Si|SiOx|Ni	10.47	64.23	200 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)	
20

np+-Si|ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx-TX	1.97	97.4	51 mW cm−2 1 M NaOH (aq)	This work
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00033a
‡ Current address: Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Jorgensen Laboratory, Mail Code 132-80, 1200 East California Blvd, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
