Semi-transparent organic photovoltaics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CS00233K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CS00233K
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2023, 52, 4132-4148Semi-transparent organic photovoltaics

        
          
            Hailin 
            Yu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiayu 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Qiao 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiaqiang 
            Qin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yinghan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xinhui 
            Lu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Pei 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, China. E-mail: wangjiayu@scu.edu.cn; chengpei@scu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, New Territories, Hong Kong 999077, China
Received 
      28th March 2023
    First published on 14th June 2023AbstractAs an economical solar energy conversion technology, organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are regarded as a promising solution to environmental problems and energy challenges. With the highest efficiency of OPVs exceeding 20%, the research focus will shift from efficiency-oriented aspects to commercialization-oriented aspects in the near future. Semi-transparent OPVs (STOPVs) are one of the most possible commercialized forms of OPVs, and have achieved power conversion efficiency over 14% with average visible light transmittance over 20% so far. In this tutorial review, we first systematically summarize the device structures, operating principles and evaluation parameters of STOPVs, and compare them with those of opaque OPVs. Then, strategies to construct high-performance STOPVs by cooperatively optimizing materials and devices are proposed. Methods to realize the scale-up of STOPVs in terms of minimization of electrode and interconnect resistance are summarized. The potential applications of STOPVs in multifunctional windows, agrivoltaics and floating photovoltaics are also discussed. Finally, this review highlights major challenges and research directions that need to be addressed prior to the future commercialization of STOPVs.
Hailin Yu
Hailin Yu received his ME from the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University in 2021. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Pei Cheng at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are focused on the fabrication and application of high-performance semi-transparent organic photovoltaics.
Jiayu Wang
Jiayu Wang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2014. Then he joined Prof. Xiaowei Zhan's group at Peking University and obtained PhD in Advanced Materials and Mechanics in 2019. After working as a research assistant in Prof. Zhan's group at Peking University and a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Xinhui Lu's group at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Dr Wang joined the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University as an associate professor in 2022. His research interests are focused on the design and synthesis of organic functional materials and their applications in optoelectronics.
Qiao Zhou
Qiao Zhou received her BE from College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University in 2022. Currently, she is pursuing her ME under the supervision of Prof. Pei Cheng at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research interests cover the preparation and application of high-performance organic solar cells.
Pei Cheng
Pei Cheng received his BE in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2011. He then joined Prof. Xiaowei Zhan's group at ICCAS/Peking University, and received his PhD in Chemistry (2016). Dr Cheng worked in Prof. Yang Yang's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) from 2017 to 2020 as a postdoc researcher. He is currently a professor at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are focused on organic photovoltaics and functional optoelectronic devices.

Key learning points
1. The fundamentals of STOPVs including device structures, operating principles and evaluation parameters.
2. Differences between STOPVs and opaque OPVs in structures and working mechanisms.
3. Ideas and strategies in molecular and device engineering for building high-performance STOPVs.
4. Applications of STOPVs in architecture, agriculture and floating photovoltaics.
5. Major obstacles and future research directions in STOPVs toward higher performance and commercialization.

1. Introduction
Solar energy plays a key role in solving the serious environmental problems and energy challenges facing the world today. The development of high-performance photovoltaic technology can meet the requirements of power production and solve the above predicament. Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) are considered as a promising and economical solar energy conversion technology due to some advantages of solution processing, low cost, light-weight, and flexibility.1–3 In the past few years, OPVs have achieved rapid development and their power conversion efficiency (PCE) has exceeded 20% thanks to the advances in new organic semiconductors and device technology.4 Compared with commercial silicon-based solar cells, light-weight and flexible OPVs do not need a proprietary installation environment, and can be integrated with various surfaces such as the roof and facade of buildings. Besides, the absorption of organic semiconductors originates from the electron transition between molecular orbitals, and thus is not as continuous as that of inorganic semiconductors, offering an opportunity for the realization of semi-transparent OPVs (STOPVs). Moreover, compared with semi-transparent perovskite photovoltaics, STOPVs exhibit advantages of non-toxicity, higher visible transmittance, and color tunability. These unique characteristics of STOPVs enable some distinctive applications such as multifunctional power generation windows,5–8 photovoltaic greenhouses9,10 and floating photovoltaics.11
The concept of STOPVs was first reported by Yang and Forrest in 2006, which were fabricated using ultrathin gold (Au) and silver (Ag) as electrodes, respectively, achieving PCE of less than 1%12 and average visible transmittance (AVT) of 26%.13 At the early development stage of STOPVs (2006–2015), research mainly focused on the preparation and optimization of transparent electrodes.14–16 Owing to the limitation of fullerene acceptors, the PCE of single-junction STOPVs was difficult to exceed 6% with AVT over 30%.17–19 Until 2015, the rapid development of non-fullerene acceptors (NFAs), especially the fused-ring electron acceptors represented by ITIC, opens up new opportunities for STOPVs.20,21 New narrow-bandgap (<1.5 eV) NFAs not only exhibit high PCE, but also show strong absorption in the near-infrared (NIR) region, which benefits high AVT.22–27 At present, STOPVs exhibit a PCE over 14% and AVT around 20%.28–30
In this tutorial review, we first summarize the basic concepts in STOPVs, including device structures, operating principles, and key evaluation parameters. Then, strategies on how to construct high-performance STOPVs using synergistic material and device optimization are proposed, such as the design of narrow-bandgap materials with strong NIR absorption, new processing techniques, electrode optimization, and introduction of optical structures. The potential applications of STOPVs in building-integrated photovoltaics, agricultural photovoltaics and floating photovoltaics (FPVs) are also discussed. Finally, this review highlights the major obstacles and gaps that need to be addressed for the future commercialization of STOPVs.
2. Basic concepts of STOPVs
2.1 Device architectures of STOPVs
As shown in Fig. 1, a typical STOPV device comprises an active layer, transport layers and transparent electrodes. The active layer possesses the function of photovoltaic conversion. At present, the widely studied active layer structures include bulk heterojunction (BHJ) and pseudo p–i–n structure, which consist of an electron donor (p type) and electron acceptor (n type). Different from that of opaque OPVs, the active layer of STOPVs shows weak absorption in the visible region. Therefore, the bandgap of active layer materials in STOPVs must be wider (>2.5 eV) or narrower (<1.5 eV). For STOPVs, the combination of a narrow-bandgap acceptor with a narrow or wide bandgap donor is favourable, since an active layer with strong absorption in the NIR region but weak absorption in the visible region provides great advantages for achieving high photocurrent and high visible transparency simultaneously. However, narrowing the bandgap of organic semiconductors to red-shift the absorption inevitably involves the trade-off between absorption breadths and the achievable highest VOC of STOPVs, thus it is a fundamental challenge to balance the absorption and voltage through rational molecular design in narrow-bandgap materials.
 Fig. 1  Typical device structure and the basic requirements of STOPVs. 
Transport layers are used to tune the energy level alignment and form desirable ohmic contact at the electrode/active layer interfaces for effective charge extraction. Some basic requirements for transport layers include: (1) ability to adjust the work functions of electrodes; (2) excellent electron/hole transporting properties and selectivity; (3) ability to form nice contact between the active layer and electrode to reduce interfacial defects and energy losses. Besides, high visible light transmittance is another important requirement for the transport layers in STOPVs. At present, common electron transport materials in STOPVs include metal oxides (e.g., zinc oxide (ZnO), titanium oxide, tin oxide, et al.), thin-layer polymers (e.g., PFN, PFN-Br, PEI, PEIE, et al.) and small molecules (e.g., PDIN, PDINO, BCP, et al.), and common hole transport materials include conducting polymers (e.g. PEDOT:PSS) and metal oxides (e.g. molybdenum trioxide (MoO3)). Different from the transport layer of opaque OPVs, the higher transmittance materials in STOPVs such as ZnO and MoO3 are preferred.
Electrodes play the role of charge extraction. The bottom electrode is usually deposited on a rigid glass substrate or a flexible transparent substrate such as polyethylene terephthalate, polyimide and polydimethylsiloxane. In STOPVs, the top electrode is also transparent, which is one of the fundamental differences compared with the opaque counterparts. Electrodes with high conductivity and transmittance are the basic requirements for STOPVs. Generally, the materials used for transparent electrodes can be divided into three categories: (1) metal and metal oxide, including ultrathin Ag, Au and aluminium (Al), silver nanowires (Ag NWs), Ag grid, indium tin oxide (ITO), etc.; (2) carbon-based electrodes, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene; (3) transparent conducting polymers such as PEDOT:PSS.
2.2 Operating principles of STOPVs
The working processes of OPVs can be summarized as follows (Fig. 2):31
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the operating principles of STOPVs. 
(1) The donor (channel 1) and the acceptor (channel 2) absorb photons and then generate excitons;
(2) Excitons diffuse to the donor/acceptor interface;
(3) Excitons dissociate into free charges (holes and electrons) at the donor/acceptor interface;
(4) Charges are transported to electrodes;
(5) Charges are extracted by electrodes and photocurrent is formed.
Compared with opaque OPVs, STOPVs absorb fewer photons because of the reduced light reflection from the transparent top electrode, which lowers the concentration of excitons and charge carriers, leading to suppressed recombination. Meanwhile, the charge extraction ability of the top transparent electrode decreases due to the reduced thickness.
2.3 Key parameters of STOPVs

Power conversion efficiency (PCE). 
PCE is defined as the ratio of the maximum output power of the device to the power of the incident sunlight, which could be calculated by the following equation:  where VOC is the open-circuit voltage, JSC is the short-circuit current density, Pin is the power density of the incident solar radiation, and FF is the fill factor which could be calculated by:  where VMP and JMP are the voltage and the current density at the maximum power point, respectively.
A typical current density–voltage (J–V) curve of STOPVs is shown in Fig. 3a. VOC is positively correlated with the energy difference between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the donor and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the acceptor. JSC is affected by photon absorption, exciton diffusion and dissociation, and charge transportation and extraction. FF is influenced by the competitive relationship between charge generation/transportation/extraction and charge recombination. To realize high PCE, it is important to maximize VOC, JSC and FF.
 Fig. 3  (a) Typical J–V curve of STOPVs; (b) the transmittance spectrum and photograph of a STOPV device with the structure of Glass/ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F/MoO3/Ag (10 nm); (c) AM 1.5G solar spectrum (300–1200 nm); (d) CIE 1931 color space. 


Average visible transmittance (AVT). 
AVT is the average transmittance of a STOPV device (Fig. 3b) and can be simply defined as the arithmetic mean value of transmittance in the visible region. While for specific applications, AVT can also be weighted by other factors. For example, in window applications, the light source is usually the sun and the receiver is usually the human eye, thus AVT can be calculated by the following equation:  where T(λ) is the transmission of the device, AM 1.5G(λ) (Fig. 3c) is the solar spectral irradiance at AM 1.5G, and E(λ) is the spectral response of the human eye.
A higher AVT means a higher visible transparency of the device. AVT is influenced by the optical behaviour of each layer and interface, such as reflection, absorption, refraction, etc. The requirements for AVT vary with the different scenarios, for example, an AVT over 25% is sufficient for window applications, whereas electronic displays usually require an AVT higher than 80%.32


Color coordinates and color rendering index (CRI). 
The Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) 1931 color space (Fig. 3d) is used as the standard to quantitatively define the color of STOPVs. The color of a STOPV device is described by color coordinates (x, y), which are calculated from the transmitted light under a standard illuminate such as AM 1.5G sunlight or D65. If the color coordinate of a STOPV device is close to the white point (1/3, 1/3), the device is generally preferred in window or human vision applications owing to its color neutrality. The color neutrality can be described using CRI, which reflects the color difference between incident and transmitted light. The value of CRI ranges from 0 to 100, and a high CRI means that the transmitted light has a good color rendering ability.


Light utilization efficiency (LUE) and quantum utilization efficiency (QUE). 
Due to the trade-off between PCE and AVT, some figures of merit such as LUE and QUE are proposed to provide an overall evaluation of STOPVs. In STOPVs, the absorbed light is converted to electricity and the transmitted light is used for lighting. LUE is defined as the product of PCE and AVT:32LUE = PCE × AVTwhich assesses the overall utilization of light in STOPVs. For STOPVs which only absorb ultraviolet and NIR light, the AVT will be 100%. The PCE limit for single-junction STOPVs with AVT of 100% is calculated to be 20.6%,33 thus the LUE limit is 20.6%.
QUE is defined as the sum of external quantum efficiency (EQE) and transmittance:34QUE(λ) = T(λ) + EQE(λ)which describes the use of photons in STOPVs at each wavelength.

3. Strategies to improve the performance of STOPVs
3.1 Targeting high PCE
As aforementioned, PCE is determined by JSC, VOC and FF, hence it is necessary to maximize these parameters through material design and device optimization.
Different from that of opaque OPVs, the active layer of STOPVs shows weak absorption in the visible region. The infrared region accounts for the largest portion of solar flux, thus designing narrow-bandgap organic materials with strong NIR absorption is a powerful strategy to obtain high JSC in STOPVs. Enlarging the effective π-conjugation and strengthening the intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) are two approaches to up-shift the HOMO level and down-shift the LUMO level, thus red-shifting absorption (Fig. 4). Some ultra-narrow-bandgap organic semiconductors may not match the existing materials in terms of energy level or solubility, thus can be used as third components to harvest photons over a wide range, resulting in improved JSC and PCE.
 Fig. 4  The design principles of NIR absorption materials. 
The active layers of a number of high-performance STOPVs consist of medium-bandgap donors and narrow-bandgap acceptors. Lowering the content of the donor can improve AVT but inevitably restrains hole transport and thus leads to imbalanced charge transport and reduced FF. Introducing large-bandgap visual-transparent donors as third components can reconstruct the continuous hole-transporting network, leading to improved FF and PCE.
Electrodes with high conductivity are beneficial to charge extraction. Commercialized ITO shows high conductivity (104 S cm−1) and high visible transmittance (>85%), and is widely used as the bottom electrode in STOPVs. ITO is generally deposited using magnetron sputtering, while high-energy sputtered atoms are very likely to damage the organic active layer, which limits the use of ITO as the top electrode, thus new deposition techniques should be developed. Considering the high cost of ITO, other alternative materials include metals, conducting polymers and carbon-based are also developed as transparent electrodes. For ultrathin metal electrodes, the transmittance can be improved by reducing the thickness, which has adverse effects on conductivity due to poor morphology. Introducing a seed layer composed of materials with surface energy close to the metal electrode can improve the wetting properties of the metal on the substrate, resulting in a continuous and smooth electrode thus enhanced electrical properties.16 For Ag NWs, high roughness and wire–wire junction resistance are the main problems as a transparent electrode. Some solutions including coating an extra layer to flatten the Ag NWs surface and physically/chemically welding are used to improve the conductivity.35 Conducting polymers such as PEDOT:PSS and carbon-based materials such as CNTs and graphene suffer from low conductivity when used as electrodes; doping with surfactants, solvents, salts, acid or other chemicals can improve their conductivity as well as PCE.
Optical structures can optimize the light utilization in the device. Antireflection coating (ARC) is widely used to reduce the refection of the optical surface by coating a film with a low-refractive index (Fig. 5a). An ideal single-layer homogeneous ARC should meet the following criteria: (1) d = kλ/4, where d is the optical thickness of the ARC, λ is the wavelength of incident light; (2) n = (nair × ns)1/2, where n, nair and ns are refractive indices of the ARC, air, and substrate, respectively. The utilization of ARC on the external surface of the bottom transparent substrate is a viable strategy to enhance the light absorption of the active layer, resulting in a higher JSC.
 Fig. 5  The design principle of (a) antireflection coating, (b) photonic crystal, (c) optical microcavity and (d) D/M/D structure. 
Photonic crystals are periodic dielectric structures with the function of controlling the propagation of light (Fig. 5b). One pair of photonic crystal comprises two thin-film layers with different thicknesses (d1, d2) and indices of refraction (n1, n2). In STOPVs, photonic crystals can be deposited on the top electrode to selectively reflect infrared photons, which contribute to a higher JSC without reducing the AVT of the device. The reflected wavelength of one-dimensional photonic crystals (also called distributed Bragg reflectors or dielectric mirrors) can be tuned according to this equation:  where λ0 is the center wavelength with maximum reflection.
3.2 Targeting high AVT
AVT is mainly influenced by the optical properties of the active layer and electrodes. For the BHJ active layer, at present, the widely used medium-bandgap donors show strong absorption in the visible region, thus if the medium-bandgap donors are fully or partially replaced by narrow-bandgap (<1.5 eV) or wide-bandgap (>2.5 eV) donors which show weak visible absorption, the AVT can be significantly improved. For a pseudo p–i–n active layer, the donor and acceptor are sequentially deposited, allowing for independent charge transport and facile adjustment of donor and acceptor layers, therefore the AVT of the device can be effectively improved by reducing the thickness of medium-bandgap donors.
A uniform electrode is favourable for high optical transmittance. The growth of some common metal electrodes such as Ag follows the Volmer–Weber (three-dimensional island) mode,36 thus, it is easy to form a rough surface with isolated metal islands when the penetration threshold of ultrathin metal film is not reached, leading to strong surface plasmon resonance in the visible region and thus low visible transmittance.16,37 Process control and substrate surface modification are some strategies to improve the quality of ultrathin metal film.
Optical microcavity is also called the Fabry–Pérot resonant cavity, which is prepared by constructing a dielectric cavity between two ultrathin metal films (metal/dielectric/metal, M/D/M). As shown in Fig. 5c, by simply adjusting the thickness (d) or refractive index (n) of the dielectric, the M/D/M electrode can adjust the band of transmitted light and thus realize colorfulness and high transmittance. The transmission band can be calculated using the following equation, which describes constructive interference modes in an etalon structure:mλ = 2ndcosθwhere m is the order of interference, λ is the wavelength of transmitted light, and θ is the angle of incident light.
Dielectric/metal/dielectric (D/M/D) structure consists of an ultrathin metal between two dielectric films ((n1, d1), (n2, d2)), which is used to minimize visible light trapping in the device (Fig. 5d). At the dielectric/metal interface, light will be dissipated through the emission of non-radiative surface plasmons if the dielectric constant of the dielectric material is low, resulting in low transmittance. Thus, the D/M/D structure based on high-dielectric-constant materials is developed to enhance the transparency of the electrode.38 In addition, the D/M/D structure can also behave like an antireflection layer to reduce the light reflection of metal, arising from the interference of reflection lights at the dielectric/metal interface.39
To sum up, increasing the transmission of the device in the visible region and the absorption in the NIR region are key points to improve the PCE and AVT of STOPVs (Fig. 6). Reducing the donor proportion, depositing donor and acceptor sequentially and adding third components with weak visible absorption are some strategies to improve the AVT of STOPVs device. Other strategies such as applying a photonic crystal structure and adding third components to harvest photons over a wider range are used to improve the PCEs of STOPVs.
 Fig. 6  Strategies to improve the PCE and AVT of STOPVs. 
4. Recent progress on the construction of high-performance STOPVs
4.1 Active layer optimization

4.1.1 Active layer materials design. 
Due to the large proportion of NIR light in solar irradiation, construction of active layers composed of narrow-bandgap donors and acceptors, both exhibiting strong absorption in the NIR region but weak absorption in the visible region, are considered a powerful strategy to simultaneously improve the PCE and AVT of STOPVs. Large π conjugation and strong ICT contribute to narrow-bandgap and red-shifted absorption, thus extension of the molecular backbone and strengthening of electron-donating and/or electron-withdrawing ability of building blocks are some common design strategies for NIR-absorbing materials. The chemical structures of donor and acceptor materials mentioned in this review are presented in Fig. 7. The device performance of STOPVs is summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 7  The chemical structures of donor materials. 
Table 1 The device performance of STOPVs




Strategies
Device structure
PCE [%]
AVT [%]
CRI
LUEi [%]
Ref.





a The best value of PCE.
b The average values of PCE.
c AVT is the integral of the transmittance by the human eye's response. AVT is estimated as the simple arithmetic mean value of the transmittance.
d 380–760 nm.
e 370–740 nm.
f 400 to 700 nm.
g 380 to 740 nm or.
h 380 to 780 nm.
i LUE = PCE × AVT.





Active layer materials design
ITO/ZnO/PBT1-C-2Cl:Y6/MoO3/Au (12 nm)
9.1a
40.1c


3.65

45



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PL-Cl:F8IC/PDINO/Au/Ag (24 nm)
11.3a
21.7c
87.3
2.45

42



ITO/ZnO/PL2:Y6:PC61BM/MoO3/Au (12 nm)/MoO3
9.9a
40.4d


4.00

43



ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:IHIC/MoO3/Au/Ag (15 nm)
9.8a
36.0e
86
3.53

54



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-TF:BTP-2Br/PFN-Br/Ag (10 nm)
9.6a
20.1


1.93

60



Ternary strategy
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7Th:BDTThIT-4F:IEICO-4F/PDIN/Au/Ag (10 nm)
9.4a
24.6e


2.31

62



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6:SN/PDINN/Ag (10 nm)
14.0a
20.2c
95
2.83

28



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBT1-S:PTB7-Th:PC71BM/ZrAcac/Ag (15 nm)
9.2a
20.0


1.84

63



ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PTAA:Y1/MoO3/Au/Ag (25 nm)
12.1a
20.1f


2.43

65



ITO/PM6:Y6-BO:2PACz/PNDIT-F3N/Ag (15 nm)
15.2a
19.2g


2.91

29



Sequential deposition strategy
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6/Y6/ZnO/Au/Ag (15 nm)
12.2a
22.2c
94
2.71

67



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6/ICBA:Y6/PDINO/Al:Ag (20 nm)
14.6a
20.4h


2.98

30



Electrode optimization
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:L8-BO/ZnO/AgNPs/Ag (7 nm)
12.8a
34.6c
87
4.42

68



ITO/ZnO/PM6:Y6/MoO3/PEDOT:PSS/Au/Ag (15 nm)
13.4b
22.2f


2.97

70



Optical structure
ARC/Glass/ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag (10 nm)
8.5a
26.2e
90
2.23

75



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/J71:PTB7-Th:IHIC/PDINO/Au/Ag (15 nm)/3 pairs (MoO3/LiF)
9.4a
21.4h
97
2.01

77



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:F8IC:PC71BM/PDINN/Ag (20 nm)/inverse-opal photonic crystal
9.93b
40.4h


4.01

78



ITO/ZnO/PDTP-DFBT:FOIC/MoO3/Ag(10 nm)/MoO3
3.5a
61.5c
91
2.15

80



ARC/ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:BT-CIC:TT-FIC/MoO3/Cu–Ag (16 nm)/outcoupling layer
8.0b
44.2c


3.56

81





Near-infrared donor materials. 
Extension of the π conjugation can red-shift absorption. PTB7 (Fig. 7) consists of electron-donating benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene (BDT) and electron-withdrawing ester-substituted thieno[3,4-b]thiophene units,40 and shows a bandgap of 1.63 eV and absorption edge at ∼760 nm. Introduction of thienyl side chains on the BDT unit extends the conjugation, and the afforded PTB7-Th (Fig. 7) show a narrower bandgap of 1.58 eV with the absorption edge red-shifted by 25 nm.41 Further incorporating benzodithiophenedione and thiophene moieties into the molecular backbone contributes to larger conjugation, thus PL-Cl (Fig. 7) exhibits a narrower bandgap of 1.55 eV.42 Other fused multicyclic building blocks can also be used to construct NIR donors. The fused hexacyclic building block in PL2 (Fig. 7) enlarges the π conjugation of the polymer main chain, and thus PL2 shows an absorption edge at 820 nm and a bandgap of 1.51 eV.43
Adjusting the electron-donating/electron-withdrawing ability of building blocks can tune the ICT and thus absorption. Substitution is a common strategy to alter the energy levels as well as absorption of materials. Introduction of halogens on electron-donating building blocks usually down-shifts HOMO level and leads to a larger bandgap, while introduction of chalcogens on electron-donating building blocks usually up-shifts HOMO level and leads to narrower bandgap. The bandgap of PBT1-C (Fig. 7) is 1.84 eV,44 the bandgap of PBT1-C-2Cl (Fig. 7) with chlorine atoms substituted on thiophenes is a little larger (1.85 eV),45 while those of PBT1-O (1.82 eV, Fig. 7) with alkoxy side chains and PBT1-S (1.83 eV, Fig. 7) with alkylthio side chains are narrower.44 Dithienopyran is a more electron-donating unit relative to BDT, which contributes to stronger ICT, thus PDTP-DFBT (Fig. 7) exhibits a narrower bandgap of 1.38 eV with a significantly red-shifted absorption edge at ∼900 nm.46 Diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) is an electron-withdrawing unit with planar structure and strong absorption, which is a common building block for NIR-absorbing materials.47 PDPP3T (Fig. 7) is a polymer donor based on DPP and oligothiophene, and shows a bandgap of 1.30 eV.48 Dithienopyrrole is more electron-donating than thiophene and thus strengthens the ICT in PDPPTDTPT (Fig. 7), leading to red-shifted absorption and a reduced bandgap of 1.23 eV. Substituting thiophene with selenophene in PDPPTDTPT affords PDPPSDTPS (Fig. 7), which up-shifts the HOMO energy level while keeping the LUMO energy level, further reducing the bandgap to 1.13 eV.49
Near-infrared acceptor materials. 
Recent development in NFAs brings new opportunities for high-performance NIR acceptors.31,50–52 Similar to the design of NIR donors, conjugation extension and ICT strengthening are also available for the construction of NIR acceptors. IC-1IDT-IC (Fig. 8) comprises an electron-donating indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene (IDT) core and electron-withdrawing 3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-1-indanone (IC) end groups, exhibiting a bandgap of 1.70 eV and absorption edge at 730 nm.53 Replacing the central benzene in the IDT core of IC-1IDT-IC with strong electron-donating thieno[3,2-b]thiophene affords IHIC (Fig. 8). Owing to a larger effective conjugation and significantly enhanced ICT, IHIC shows a much smaller bandgap of 1.38 eV than that of IC-1IDT-IC, which contributes to a PCE of 9.8% with an impressive AVT of 36% in PTB7-Th:IHIC-based STOPVs.54 Introducing π bridges into the molecules not only extends the π conjugation, but also provides more modification sites, which is beneficial to further tuning the absorption of NFAs. Inserting thiophene bridges between the IDT core and IC end groups of IC-1IDT-IC extends molecular conjugation, thus the afforded IEIC (Fig. 8) shows a narrower bandgap of 1.57 eV.55 Oxygen atoms can up-shift the HOMO level and down-shift the LUMO level due to the π-conjugative and σ-inductive effects, respectively, therefore IEICO (Fig. 8) with alkoxy side chains on the thiophene π bridges show red-shifted absorption and a narrower bandgap of 1.34 eV relative to IEIC.56 The device based on PBDTTT-E-T (Fig. 7): IEICO shows a PCE of 8.4%, higher than the PBDTTT-E-T:IEIC device (4.9%) owing to stronger NIR absorption. Modification on the end group can influence its electron-withdrawing ability and thereby ICT. Compared with IEICO, IEICO-4F (Fig. 8) with difluoro IC as the end groups shows strengthened ICT and thus a further reduced bandgap of 1.24 eV with an absorption edge at ∼1000 nm.57 The end groups of BTTPC,58 Y5,59 BTP-2Br60 and Y661 (Fig. 8) are thiophene-fused IC, IC, monobromo IC and difluoro IC, respectively, whose electron-withdrawing ability increases gradually, thus the ICT in these molecules are strengthened gradually, leading to reduced bandgaps of 1.39 eV, 1.38 eV, 1.35 eV and 1.33 eV, respectively.
 Fig. 8  The chemical structures of acceptor materials. 


4.1.2 Ternary strategy. 
Third components can improve the performance of STOPVs through versatile functions. The introduction of third components with strong NIR absorption can extend the absorption of the active layer, which is a simple strategy to improve the performance of STOPVs. The PTB7-Th:BDTThIT-4F (Fig. 8) binary blend shows an absorption edge at ∼850 nm, and incorporation of IEICO-4F extends the photo response region to ∼1000 nm. STOPVs based on the PTB7-Th:BDTThIT-4F binary blend show a PCE of 7.53% with JSC of 15.13 mA cm−2 and an AVT of 24.2%, and those based on the PTB7-Th:BDTThIT-4F:IEICO-4F ternary blend show a higher PCE of 9.40% with improved JSC of 19.21 mA cm−2 and an AVT of 24.6%.62 Similarly, the absorption of SN (Fig. 8) red-shifts over 40 nm relative to Y661 (Fig. 5); the PM6:Y6:SN-based STOPVs exhibits a PCE of 14.0% with an AVT of 20.2%, higher than PM6:Y6-based ones (PCE = 13.5%, AVT = 19.1%), due to the extended absorption and lowered voltage loss in the ternary blend.28 Third components can also optimize the morphology of the active layer thus improve the PCEs of STOPVs. PBT1-S (Fig. 7) third component improves the relative domain purity in the PTB7-Th:PBT1-S:PC71BM ternary blend compared with the PTB7-Th:PC71BM binary blend, leading to improved exciton diffusion, suppressed charge recombination and thus higher PCE. The PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based STOPVs show a PCE of 8.0% and an AVT of 20.8%, while PTB7-Th:PBT1-S:PC71BM-based STOPVs show a higher PCE of 9.2% and a comparable AVT of 20.0%.63
In a blend composed of a medium-bandgap donor and narrow-bandgap acceptor, partially replacing the medium-bandgap donor with a wide-bandgap donor can weaken the visible absorption while keeping the hole-transporting pathways. PTAA (Fig. 7) is a visible-transparent polymer with a large bandgap of 2.9 eV. When keeping AVT at ∼20%, STOPVs based on PBDB-T:Y164 (Fig. 8) show a PCE of 10.9%, while those based on PBDB-T:PTAA:Y1 show an improved PCE of 12.1%.65 2PACz (Fig. 7) is a multifunctional small-molecule additive, which not only promotes exciton dissociation, facilitates charge transport and suppresses charge recombination in a low-donor-content active layer, but also self-assembles at the anode/active layer interface as a hole transport layer. The STOPVs based on PM6:Y6-BO:2PACz show a PCE of 15.2% with an AVT of 19.2%.29


4.1.3 Sequential deposition strategy. 
A sequential deposition strategy that processes donor and acceptor independently can effectively improve the performance of STOPVs by precisely controlling the thickness of donor and acceptor layers.66 Compared with PM6:Y6-based BHJ devices, sequentially deposited devices exhibit higher PCE owing to optimized morphology in the vertical direction.67 Furthermore, in sequentially deposited devices, the hole transport pathway has been formed after the deposition of the donor layer, thus further reducing the thickness of donor layer does not significantly affect hole transport, which contributes to higher AVT without a large PCE loss. At a fixed active layer thickness of 85 nm, the BHJ device shows a PCE of 11.23% and an AVT of 16.6%, while the sequentially deposited device exhibits a higher PCE of 12.22% and a higher AVT of 22.2%.67 The sequential deposition strategy can also be combined with a ternary strategy. The STOPVs based on a sequentially deposited PM6/ICBA:Y6 active layer show a PCE of 14.62% and an AVT of 20.42%, higher than those based on PM6:ICBA:Y6 BHJ films (PCE of 13.83% with an AVT of 19.87%).30

4.2 Electrode optimization
High optical transmittance and high electrical conductivity are two basic requirements for the electrodes of high-performance STOPVs. An additional requirement is to avoid damaging the active layer during the deposition of the top electrode. Electrode optimization is very important for high-performance STOPVs, and the optimization strategies are different for various transparent electrodes.
For ultrathin metal electrodes, when the thickness is low enough for achieving high transmittance, the conductivity is low due to rough and discontinuous morphology. Modification of the active layer/electrode interface can improve the wetting property and induce smooth growth of metal film. Introducing a pre-located and ligand-optimized Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs) at the active layer/electrode interface can induce the evaporated Ag clusters to form a high-quality semi-transparent electrode with sheet resistance less than 15 Ω sq−1 and AVT of 59.3%. Based on this optimized Ag electrode, the PM6:L8-BO-based STOPVs achieve a PCE of 12.8% and AVT of 34.6%.68 ZnO nanoparticle/PEI composite film is used as the electron transport layer, on which the ultrathin Ag electrode is deposited.69 The Ag electrode grown on a ZnO nanoparticle/PEI composite film shows a homogenous and continuous morphology and thus high visible transmittance of 31.3% at 550 nm, while that grown on bare ZnO nanoparticles only shows transmittance of 27.2% at the same wavelength. PEDOT:PSS can also be used to improve the quality of the transparent top anode, which greatly enhances the charge carrier extraction and decreases the contact resistance. As a result, STOPVs with the PEDOT:PSS interlayer exhibit a PCE of 13.7% with an AVT of 22.2%, higher than the counterparts without the interlayer (PCE of 12.3% and AVT of 21.1%).70
Ag NWs suffer from high roughness and wire-wire junction resistance when used as transparent electrodes. A water-dispersed homogeneous suspension of Ag NWs with poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) as a polyelectrolyte is used to fabricate a transparent electrode with high transmittance and conductivity. Owing to the ionic electrostatic charge repulsion, the Ag NWs form grid-like structures, resulting in a highly smooth Ag NWs electrode with a sheet resistance of around 10 Ω sq−1 and a transmittance of around 92%, which was close to commercial glass/ITO electrodes.71 Chemical welding is another strategy to optimize Ag NW-based electrodes. The Ag NWs are welded by in situ formed Ag at the junction of Ag NWs, which is realized by adding silver nitrate and an ionic liquid, 3-(2,3-dihydroxylpropyl)-1-methyl-1H-imidazol-3-ium chloride, into Ag NWs solution. The Cl− in ionic liquid regulates the concentration of Ag+, and dihydroxyl reduces Ag+ to form Ag. The atomic-level contact between Ag NWs and reduced Ag significantly enhances the conductivity of electrodes. Consequently, the welded Ag NWs electrode shows a low sheet resistance of 12 Ω sq−1 and a high transmittance of 95% at 550 nm.72
The conductivity of conductive polymer and carbon-based electrodes is not as high as metal-based electrodes, which can be improved by various strategies such as doping and post treatments.73 Through xylitol doping and methanesulfonic acid treatment, the sheet resistance of PEDOT:PSS electrodes can be reduced to 82 Ω sq−1.9 Bis(trifluoronethanesulfonyl)-amide or triethylene tetramine doped graphene are used as the bottom or top transparent electrodes in STOPVs, respectively, which show sheet resistances of 185 Ω sq−1 and 220 Ω sq−1, respectively, much lower than that of the pristine graphene electrode (773 Ω sq−1).74
4.3 Optical structure

4.3.1 Antireflection coating. 
Utilization of an ARC on the external surface of the bottom transparent substrate is a viable strategy to enhance the light absorption in the active layer. An ARC composed of subwavelength architecture polydimethylsiloxane was deposited on the glass substrate of a PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based device. The antireflection layer not only increases the PCE from 7.07% to 8.52%, but also increases the AVT from 23.0% to 26.2%.75 An asymmetric-reflection film was fabricated through the combination of randomly arranged nanostructures and periodically assembled microstructures, which shows different reflection behaviours according to the incident light direction. STOPVs with the reflection films on both sides of the device show reduced light reflection at the bottom substrate and trapped transmitted light inside the device, achieving a higher PCE of 8.36% relative to the bare STOPVs (7.73%).76


4.3.2 Photonic crystals. 
Photonic crystals with controlled reflection wavelength can flatten the transmittance spectra of the STOPVs and thus achieve high CRI. The control STOPVs without photonic crystals show a PCE of 8.93%, an AVT of 25.8% and a CRI of 87; after incorporating one-dimensional photonic crystals consisting of three-pair MoO3/LiF layers, the STOPVs show a higher PCE of 9.37% but a lower AVT of 21.4%, due to enhanced reflection, and a much higher CRI of 97.77 There are other types of photonic crystals such as the inverse-opal photonic crystal, which is a three dimensional photonic crystal and can be prepared by a template method. The STOPVs based on PTB7-Th:F8IC:PC71BM show a PCE of 9.20% and an AVT of 39.5%; an inverse-opal photonic crystal increases the light absorption of the active layer in 600–700 nm and reduces the absorption in 400–500 nm, thus the STOPVs with a photonic crystal exhibit a simultaneously improved PCE of 9.93% and AVT of 40.4%.78


4.3.3 Optical microcavity. 
M/D/M electrodes using antimony oxide (Sb2O3) as the dielectric cavity material and Ag as the metal are used to tune the colors of STOPVs. By varying the thickness of the Sb2O3 layer, M/D/M electrodes exhibit high transmittance at tunable wavelengths in blue, green and red regions. The obtained blue, green and red STOPVs exhibit PCEs of 13.3%, 9.71% and 7.63%, respectively, and maximum transmittance of 24.6%, 35.4% and 34.7%, respectively.79 Likewise, PM6:Y6-based STOPVs with Ag/tellurium oxide/Ag electrodes show blue, green and red colors with PCEs of 14.04–14.60% and a maximum transmittance of 31.0–21.8%.6


4.3.4 Dielectric/metal/dielectric structure. 
STOPVs with the device structure of ITO/ZnO/PDTP-DFBT:FOIC/MoO3 (3 nm)/Ag (10 nm) exhibit a PCE of 4.2% and an AVT of 52.0%; incorporation of a 35 nm MoO3 layer atop the semi-transparent Ag electrode improves the AVT to 61.5% and a slightly decreased PCE of 3.5%.80
Furthermore, combining the advantages of the above optical structures can greatly improve the comprehensive performance of STOPVs. Compared with the devices without any optical structures (PCE = 8.1%, AVT = 25.6%), the antireflection layer- and photonic crystal-modified devices show a comparable PCE of 8.0% and a significantly improved AVT of 44.2%.81

5. Scalability of STOPVs
Manufacture of large-area devices/modules is essential for the commercialization of STOPVs. A PCE decrease is commonly observed during the scale-up from lab-scale devices to large-area devices/modules, which is mainly attributed to the increase in electrode resistance and interconnect resistance, thus minimizing the electrode and interconnect resistance is crucial for high-performance large-area devices/modules. The resistance of a semi-transparent electrode is affected by its uniformity. Compared with thermal evaporation, printing is a more suitable electrode deposition method for a large-area device.82,83 Conductive polymers, graphene, CNTs, metal oxide, metallic NWs and nanofibers are widely used as the printable transparent electrodes. The printing technologies of the transparent electrodes include jet printing, gravure printing, screen printing, nanoimprint lithography, microcontact printing and flexographic printing.84 Water-dispersed Ag NWs can be uniformly coated as the top transparent electrode through doctor blading, which is beneficial to achieve low electrical loss. Based on this printed Ag NWs electrode, the large-area STOPVs show a comparable FF to small-area counterparts.85
Choosing a suitable patterning technique compatible with organic materials is important for the reduction of interconnect resistance in STOPV modules. Module patterning techniques such as slot-die coating, shadow masking, gravure printing and mechanical scribing often yield interconnection widths at a millimeter scale and result in a low geometric fill factor (GFF = active area/total area).86 Combining photolithography with a peel-off patterning technique enables micron-scale pattern resolution of organic materials; furthermore, the peel-off technique protects the organic materials from damage caused by conventional photolithography. As a result, the optimized STOPVs modules with 12.8 cm2 active area show GFF of 95.8%, PCE of 7.3% and AVT of 41.8%.87
6. Applications of STOPVs
STOPVs have been demonstrated in various applications such as multifunctional power generation windows, self-powered greenhouses for agricultures and FPVs.
6.1 Multifunctional power generation windows
The features of OPVs include semi-transparency, color tunability, light-weight and intrinsic flexibility, enabling the opportunity for power generation windows with various functions beyond electricity generation, such as daylighting, decoration, thermal management and heat insulation. Photonic crystal-modified STOPVs based on a PM6:m-BTP-PhC6:BO-4Cl active layer show PCEs over 11%, AVT of 32%, CRI of 90, and infrared radiation rejection rate of 0.90, which are potentially used as windows for energy generation and saving (Fig. 9a). Through model analysis, the installation of these STOPVs in the buildings is predicted to cut the annual carbon dioxide emission by 0.13 billion metric tons in China and 0.67 billion metric tons worldwide.88 For visual aesthetic purposes, biomimetic optical structures are used to tune the colors of STOPVs. By incorporating a beetle cuticle-inspired optical structure of Al:Ag (15 nm)/dielectric stacks/Al:Ag (70 nm)/dielectric stacks/carbon fluoride, the STOPVs show various colors and PCE up to 15.07%, color purity close to 100% and peak transmittance approaching 30% (Fig. 9b).89 STOPVs with photonic structures that reflect infrared lights can achieve both power generation and heat insulation functions. The photonic structures selectively enhance the transmittance of visible light, which contributes to a PCE over 6% with an AVT of over 25%, while maintaining high reflectance to infrared light, which results in an infrared radiation rejection rate of over 80% (Fig. 9c).7
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of see-through power windows with power generation and energy saving functions in buildings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Montage photographs of a building taken through various spectrally selective electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of STOPVs with power generation and heat insulation functions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic showing a smart window based on gasochromic STOPVs as the sunroof windshield of a hydrogen fuel cell vehicle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. € Schematic of STOPVs installed on a greenhouse. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Photographs of the mungs length change after 13 days under normal sunlight, STOPVs and dark conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of a FPV system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
The STOPVs can also be integrated with other functional devices to form smart windows. Stacking a tungsten trioxide/platinum gasochromic back reflector atop the Ag electrode of STOPVs can realize a smart change in electrode reflectance owing to the dynamically color switch of the back reflector under hydrogen/oxygen exposure. Under a high reflectance state, the STOPVs exhibit a higher PCE of 10.23% with a lower AVT of 25.4%; while under a low reflectance state, the STOPVs exhibit a lower PCE of 9.13% with a higher AVT of 33.8%. This design can be used as a smart window with gas-control on/off and power generation functions, for example, on the sunroof windshield of a hydrogen fuel cell vehicle (Fig. 9d).8
6.2 Agrivoltaics
Integration of agricultural and photovoltaic technologies can achieve simultaneous food and electricity production and improve light utilization efficiency. Semi-transparency, light weight and intrinsic flexibility of STOPVs allow for easy installation of STOPVs as roofs of greenhouse, which benefits high land use efficiency. The pigments in crops mainly absorb visible light for photosynthesis, for example, the absorption bands of chlorophyll a are 350–450 nm and 640–680 nm, those of chlorophyll b are 420–470 and 630–650 nm, and those of carotenoids are 390–510 nm. Hence, the transmittance spectra of agrivoltaics should be precisely tuned to match the spectral requirements for crop photosynthesis, and the light from other spectral regions is converted into electricity. Flexible STOPVs based on PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F show strong absorption in the NIR region, thus the absorbed NIR light is used for electricity generation, while the penetrated visible light is used for photosynthesis (Fig. 9e). STOPVs exhibit a PCE over 10% with an AVT of 34%, and more importantly, plants under STOPVs show similar growing conditions compared with those under normal sunlight (Fig. 9f).90
6.3 Floating photovoltaics
Compared with conventional ground-mounted photovoltaics, FPVs are installed on water bodies (Fig. 9g), which is a good solution to the competition for land use, especially in highly populated areas. In addition, FPVs offer various advantages including boosting PCE due to the cooling effect of water, reducing water temperature by blocking sunlight, and preventing the algae blooms via shading effect.11,91 Relative to silicon-based photovoltaics, STOPVs are more suitable for FPVs because the feature of semi-transparency allows the necessary light to pass through for the aquatic flora and fauna to survive. Large-area ternary STOPVs based on PM6:Y6:PC71BM with a PCE of 9.7% and an AVT over 20% are exemplified for FPVs applications. STOPVs lower the surface temperature of water by 5 °C compared with that without any heat protection; furthermore, STOPVs provide a specific transmittance region with controlled light intensities, thereby effectively regulating the photosynthetic process and growth rates of chlorella.92
7. Conclusion and outlook
STOPVs have achieved PCEs of over 14% with an AVT of about 20%. The semi-transparent top electrode is the main difference between STOPVs and opaque OPVs in the device structure, which significantly affects the optical and electric properties of STOPVs. Due to reduced light reflection from the semi-transparent top electrode, the active layer harvests less light and thus generates less excitons as well as charges, resulting in suppressed recombination; besides, a thinner electrode shows a decreased charge extraction ability and larger sheet resistance. Thus, to improve the PCE and AVT of STOPVs, optical and electric optimizations are two main optimization focuses.
The strategies to improve PCE include: (1) introduction of donor, acceptor or third component with strong NIR absorption, which can be obtained by expanding the effective π conjugation and/or strengthening ICT of the molecule. (2) Improvement of the conductivity of the electrode through various approaches such as interfacial modification, doping and post treatment. (3) Incorporation of optical structures that can enhance the light harvesting of an active layer, such as antireflection coating and photonic crystal. The strategies to improve AVT include: (1) reducing the content of the visible-absorbing component in a BHJ active layer or the thickness of that in a sequentially deposited active layer. (2) Partially or fully replacing the visible-absorbing component with visible-transparent materials. In addition, some optical structures such as optical microcavity (M/D/M) and D/M/D can also tune the colors of STOPVs.
To realize the commercialization of STOPVs, manufacture of large-area devices/module without sacrificing PCE is of high importance. Generally, suitable transparent electrodes and patterning technique are crucial to obtain high-performance large-area devices/modules. At present, widely used printable transparent electrodes include metallic NWs and grids. A combination of various module patterning techniques such as photolithography and peel-off technique can reduce the interconnect resistance and thus improve GFF as well as PCE.
Owing to the feature of semi-transparency, STOPVs can be integrated with other devices or facilities for various practical applications. In architecture, STOPVs can not only be used as power generation windows, but also have other functions such as heat insulation and smart switching, contributing to building energy conservation. In agriculture, STOPVs can serve as the roof of a self-powered greenhouse, which generates electricity with little impact on photosynthesis. When using as FPVs, STOPVs can generate power, reduce water temperature and adjust the underwater ecosystem.
STOPVs is one of the most possible forms for the commercialization of OPVs. To promote the lab-to-fab transition of STOPVs, the following aspects deserve further investigation.
(1) New high-performance narrow-bandgap donors and acceptors with strong NIR absorption should be developed. Currently, the absorption edge of most high-performance materials is lower than 1000 nm, thus further red-shifting the absorption can harvest more NIR photons, which is beneficial to both PCE and AVT.
(2) New design concepts that can solve the VOC–JSC trade-off in NIR-absorbing materials should be proposed. NIR materials usually exhibit low luminescence intensities due to strong non-radiative deactivation processes, which is described as the energy gap law. The low luminescence quantum yield will lead to large voltage loss in OPVs; thus, it is necessary to propose new molecular design concepts to overcome this issue. Some strategies have been developed for NIR organic light-emitting diode materials,93 which can provide a reference for the design of high-performance NIR photovoltaic materials.
(3) A combination of ultraviolet and NIR materials is beneficial to high AVT, but the design concepts for high-performance ultraviolet photovoltaic materials are still very rare and need to be developed.
(4) High stability and large-area fabrication are two prerequisites for practical applications of STOPVs. For stability, new strategies for stable molecules, morphology and interface should be explored.94 For large-area device fabrication, appropriate materials, equipment and processing techniques are necessary.82
(5) New applications that utilize the features of STOPVS in building-integrated, agriculture-integrated and bio-integrated fields can further promote the commercialization process.
Abbreviations

OPVsOrganic photovoltaics
STOPVsSemi-transparent OPVs
PCEPower conversion efficiency
AuGold
AgSilver
AVTAverage visible transmittance
NFAsNon-fullerene acceptors
NIRNear-infrared
BHJBulk heterojunction
ZnOZinc oxide
PFNPoly[(9,9-bis(3-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]
PFN-Br(Poly[(9,9-bis(3-((N,N-dimethyl)-N ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9 dioctylfluorene)]dibromide)
PEIPolyethyleneimine
PEIEEthoxylated polyethyleneimine
PDINAmino terminal substituted perylene diiminde
PDINO(N,N-dimethyl-ammonium N-oxide)propyl perylene diimide
BCPBathocuproine
MoO3Molybdenum trioxide
AlAluminium
Ag NWsSilver nanowires
ITOIndium tin oxide
CNTsCarbon nanotubes
PEDOT:PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate

V
OC
Open-circuit voltage

J
SC
Short-circuit current density

P
in
Power density of the incident solar radiation
FFFill factor

J
MP
Current density at the maximum power point

V
MP
Voltage at the maximum power point
HOMOHighest occupied molecular orbital
LUMOLowest unoccupied molecular orbital
CRIColor rendering index
CIECommission Internationale de l’Eclairage
D65Artificial daylight
AM1.5GGlobal spectrum at 1.5 air mass
LUELight utilization efficiency
QUEQuantum utilization efficiency
ICTIntramolecular charge transfer
D/M/DDielectric/metal/dielectric
BDTBenzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene
PC71BM[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric-acid-methyl-ester
DPPDiketopyrrolopyrrole
IDTIndaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene
IC3-(1,1-Dicyanomethylene)-1-indanone
ICBAIndene-C60 bisadduct
D/M/DDielectric/metal/dielectric
M/D/MMetal/dielectric/metal
Sb2O3Antimony oxide
ARCAntireflection layer
PTAAPoly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine]
2PACz[2-(9-H-Carbazol-9-yl)ethyl] phosphonic acid
AgNPsAg nanoparticles
FPVsFloating photovoltaics
GFFgeometric fill factor

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.: 51873127 and 22179087), the Sichuan Science and Technology Program (Grant No.: 2023YFH0085, 2023YFH0086 and 2023YFH0087), the State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering (Grant No.: sklpme2022-3-02) and the Tibet Foreign Experts Program (Grant No.: 2022wz002). J. Wang and X. Lu acknowledge the financial support from the Research Grants Council (RGC) of Hong Kong (General Research Fund No. 14303519).
References
C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185–1199 RSC .
Y. F. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9071–9104 RSC .
Z. Zheng, J. Q. Wang, P. Q. Bi, J. Z. Ren, Y. F. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Y. Liu, S. Q. Zhang and J. H. Hou, Joule, 2022, 6, 171–184 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, R. Qin, G. Zhou, X. Li, R. Xia, Y. Li, L. Zhan, H. Zhu, X. Lu, H.-L. Yip, H. Chen and C.-Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, R. Xia, K. Yan, J. Ren, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3115–3123 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, R. Xia, H. Shi, H. Yao, X. Liu, J. Hou, F. Huang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1816–1826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, T. Li, Y. Long, P. Shen, G. Wang, C. Li, J. Liu, W. Guo, Y. Wang, L. Shen and X. Zhan, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, B. Fanady, R. Peng, L. Hong, L. Wu, W. Zhang, T. Yan, T. Wu, S. Chen and Z. Ge, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000136 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ravishankar, R. E. Booth, C. Saravitz, H. Sederoff, H. W. Ade and B. T. O'Connor, Joule, 2020, 4, 490–506 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, G. Chen, Y. Xu, X. Xu and L. Yu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6060–6070 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C.-W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 253503 CrossRef .
R. F. Bailey-Salzman, B. P. Rand and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233502 CrossRef .
J. Huang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 415–419 CrossRef CAS .
Z. K. Liu, J. H. Li, Z. H. Sun, G. A. Tai, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 810–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schubert, J. Meiss, L. Müller-Meskamp and K. Leo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 438–443 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, L. Zuo, H.-L. Yip, Y. Li, C.-Z. Li, C.-S. Hsu, Y.-J. Cheng, H. Chen and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5084–5090 CrossRef CAS .
R. Betancur, P. Romero-Gomez, A. Martinez-Otero, X. Elias, M. Maymó and J. Martorell, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 995–1000 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Guo, W. Ma, H. Ade and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4655–4660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Wang, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1170–1174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, P. Xue, Y. Jiang, Y. Huo and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2022, 6, 614–634 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, C. Yan, W. Ma, W. You and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702125 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Xiao, T. Xiao, R. Zhu, C. Yan, Y. Fu, G. Lu, X. Lu, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9140–9147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, H. Lai, Z. Chen, Y. Zhu, H. Wang, L. Han, Y. Zhang and F. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3238–3246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Chen, M. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhou, J. Yang, Y. Liu, F. Liu, Z. Tang, Q. Bao and Z. Bo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22714–22720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Y. Chang, K. Lu, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Yan, D. Qiu, Y. Liu, M. A. Adil, W. Ma, X. Hao, L. Zhu and Z. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 3256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, X. Jia, D. Li, S. Wang, X. Geng, F. Liu, J. Chen, S. Yang, T. P. Russell and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1494–1496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, S. Sun, L. Zhou, Y. Cui, W. Zhang, J. Hou, F. Liu, S. Xu and X. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202116111 CAS .
J. Jing, S. Dong, K. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Q. Xue, Y. Song, Z. Du, M. Ren and F. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200453 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Li, X. Wu, D. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Meng, L. Tan, X. Hu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2201604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, G. Li, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Traverse, R. Pandey, M. C. Barr and R. R. Lunt, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 849–860 CrossRef .
R. R. Lunt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 043902 CrossRef .
R. Xia, H. Gu, S. Liu, K. Zhang, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1800270 CrossRef .
M. R. Azani, A. Hassanpour and T. Torres, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002536 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Venables, G. D. T. Spiller and M. Hanbucken, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1984, 47, 399–459 CrossRef .
S.-K. Kim, H.-S. Ee, W. Choi, S.-H. Kwon, J.-H. Kang, Y.-H. Kim, H. Kwon and H.-G. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 011109 CrossRef .
C.-C. Chueh, M. Crump and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 321–340 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, G. Huang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Li, T. Jiang, B. Han, Y. Zhang and H. Zhou, Solar RRL, 2022, 6, 2100818 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135–E138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Liao, H.-J. Jhuo, Y.-S. Cheng and S.-A. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4766–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, X. Zhu, L. Zhu, Y. Wang, C. Yang, X. Gu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, K. Lu, X. Sun and Z. Wei, Nano Energy, 2021, 86, 106098 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Yoon, H. Bae, J. Yang, J.-W. Ha, C. Lee, J. Lee, S. C. Yoon, H. Choi and S.-J. Ko, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 452, 139423 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, L. Huo, S. Chandrabose, K. Chen, G. Han, F. Qi, X. Meng, D. Xie, W. Ma, Y. Yi, J. M. Hodgkiss, F. Liu, J. Wang, C. Yang and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707353 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Cai, L. Zhu, R. Xia, L. Ye, X. Feng, H.-L. Yip, F. Liu, G. Lu, S. Tan and Y. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002181 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Dou, C. C. Chen, K. Yoshimura, K. Ohya, W. H. Chang, J. Gao, Y. S. Liu, E. Richard and Y. Yang, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 3384–3390 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. H. Hendriks, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 78–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Bijleveld, A. P. Zoombelt, S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. M. Wienk, M. Turbiez, D. M. de Leeuw and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16616–16617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Hendriks, W. Li, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12130–12136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend and F. Gao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 119–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. S. Tan, X. Guo, A. Facchetti and H. Yan, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 720–731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, T. Li, F. Zhao, L. Han, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, Q. He, J. Wang, L. Huo, Y. Sun, C. Wang, W. Ma and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600854 CrossRef .
W. Wang, C. Yan, T. K. Lau, J. Wang, K. Liu, Y. Fan, X. Lu and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701308 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Z.-G. Zhang, H. Bai, J. Wang, Y. Yao, Y. Li, D. Zhu and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 610–616 RSC .
H. Yao, Y. Chen, Y. Qin, R. Yu, Y. Cui, B. Yang, S. Li, K. Zhang and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8283–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, Y. Cui, R. Yu, B. Gao, H. Zhang and J. Hou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3045–3049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qin, D. Wang, G. Zhou, Z.-P. Yu, S. Li, Y. Li, Z.-X. Liu, H. Zhu, M. Shi, X. Lu, C.-Z. Li and H. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27632–27639 RSC .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, C. Zhang, T.-K. Lau, G. Zhang, X. Lu, H.-L. Yip, S. K. So, S. Beaupré, M. Mainville, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, H. Chen, H. Peng, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807577 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-P. Yu, X. Li, C. He, D. Wang, R. Qin, G. Zhou, Z.-X. Liu, T. R. Andersen, H. Zhu, H. Chen and C.-Z. Li, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 1991–1996 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, G. Zhang, H.-L. Yip, T.-K. Lau, X. Lu, C. Zhu, H. Peng, P. A. Johnson, M. Leclerc, Y. Cao, J. Ulanski, Y. Li and Y. Zou, Joule, 2019, 3, 1140–1151 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, J. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Gao, Q. An, M. Zhang, X. Ma, J. Wang, J. Miao, C. Yang and F. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 424–432 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, L. Huo, B. Fan, H. Fu, Y. Cai, L. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Wang, W. Ma, Y. Chen and Y. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800627 CrossRef .
J. Yuan, T. Huang, P. Cheng, Y. Zou, H. Zhang, J. L. Yang, S.-Y. Chang, Z. Zhang, W. Huang, R. Wang, D. Meng, F. Gao and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, H. C. Wang, Y. Zhu, R. Zheng, T. Li, C. H. Chen, T. Huang, Y. Zhao, R. Wang, D. Meng, Y. Li, C. Zhu, K. H. Wei, X. Zhan and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, Y. Hu, M. Qin, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. Qin and P. Cheng, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 2097 RSC .
H. C. Wang, P. Cheng, S. Tan, C. H. Chen, B. Chang, C. S. Tsao, L. Y. Chen, C. A. Hsieh, Y. C. Lin, H. W. Cheng, Y. Yang and K. H. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Zheng, Z. Jiang, X. He, J. Kim, L. Xu, M. Qin, X. Lu, A. K. K. Kyaw and W. C. H. Choy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 2203266 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, C. He, L. Zuo, F. Zhao, L. Zhan, X. Li, R. Xia, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li, X. Liu and H. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, P. Cheng, H. Yang, M. Wang, D. Meng, Y. Zhu, R. Zheng, T. Li, A. Zhang, S. Tan, T. Huang, J. Bian, X. Zhan, P. S. Weiss and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1231–1238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, M. Chang, L. Meng, X. Wan, H. Gao, Y. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. Sun, C. Li, S. Liu, H. Wang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 513–520 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zeng, W. Chen, X. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Chen, B. Zhang, H. Chen, W. Sun, Y. Shen, Y. Li, F. Yan and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 8658–8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Anand, M. M. Islam, R. Meitzner, U. S. Schubert and H. Hoppe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100875 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Shin, C. W. Jang, H. S. Lee, S. W. Seo and S.-H. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3596–3601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dudem, J. W. Jung and J. S. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14769–14779 RSC .
J. Lee, Y. J. Moon, J. Cho, S. Park, S. Baek, M. Nam, S. K. Kim and D. H. Ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, G. Xu, F. Tao, G. Zeng, M. Zhang, Y. Yang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807159 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, L. G. Gerling, F. Bernal-Texca, J. Toudert, T. Li, X. Zhan and J. Martorell, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904196 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Yeom, S. Song, S. Y. Park, H. S. Ryu, J. W. Kim, J. Heo, H. W. Cho, B. Walker, S.-J. Ko, H. Y. Woo and J. Y. Kim, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105146 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, R. Xia, T. Li, L. Ye, X. Zhan, H. L. Yip and Y. Sun, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900424 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Ji, Y. Qu, X. Huang, S. Hou, C.-Z. Li, L.-S. Liao, L. J. Cuo and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xue, P. Cheng, R. P. S. Han and X. Zhan, Mater. Horiz., 2022, 9, 194–219 RSC .
D. Tian, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 5184–5209 RSC .
H. Zhou and Y. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 3493–3511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, P. Kubis, T. Przybilla, E. Spiecker, A. Hollmann, S. Langner, K. Forberich and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401779 CrossRef .
S. Dong, T. Jia, K. Zhang, J. Jing and F. Huang, Joule, 2020, 4, 2004–2016 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, D. Fan, Y. Li and S. R. Forrest, Joule, 2022, 6, 1581–1589 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Li, G. Zhou, E. Gu, R. Xia, B. Yan, J. Yao, H. Zhu, X. Lu, H.-L. Yip, H. Chen and C.-Z. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2629–2637 RSC .
S. Wang, J. Chen, L. Li, L. Zuo, T.-Y. Qu, H. Ren, Y. Li, A. K. Y. Jen and J.-X. Tang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5998–6006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, P. Cheng, T. Li, R. Wang, Y. Li, S.-Y. Chang, Y. Zhu, H.-W. Cheng, K.-H. Wei, X. Zhan, B. Sun and Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1071–1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cazzaniga, M. Cicu, M. Rosa-Clot, P. Rosa-Clot, G. M. Tina and C. Ventura, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1730–1741 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, T. Jiang, C. Guo, L. Qiao, Q. Ji, L. Yin, L. Yu, P. Murto and X. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105111 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Wei, S. F. Wang, Y. Hu, L.-S. Liao, D.-G. Chen, K.-H. Chang, C.-W. Wang, S.-H. Liu, W.-H. Chan, J.-L. Liao, W.-Y. Hung, T.-H. Wang, P.-T. Chen, H.-F. Hsu, Y. Chi and P.-T. Chou, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 570–577 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, J. Qin, Y. Wang, G. Li and P. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2201087 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Hailin Yu
	Hailin Yu received his ME from the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University in 2021. Currently, he is pursuing his PhD under the supervision of Prof. Pei Cheng at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are focused on the fabrication and application of high-performance semi-transparent organic photovoltaics.

Jiayu Wang
	Jiayu Wang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Beijing Institute of Technology in 2014. Then he joined Prof. Xiaowei Zhan's group at Peking University and obtained PhD in Advanced Materials and Mechanics in 2019. After working as a research assistant in Prof. Zhan's group at Peking University and a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Xinhui Lu's group at The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Dr Wang joined the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University as an associate professor in 2022. His research interests are focused on the design and synthesis of organic functional materials and their applications in optoelectronics.

Qiao Zhou
	Qiao Zhou received her BE from College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University in 2022. Currently, she is pursuing her ME under the supervision of Prof. Pei Cheng at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. Her research interests cover the preparation and application of high-performance organic solar cells.

Pei Cheng
	Pei Cheng received his BE in Polymer Materials and Engineering from Sichuan University in 2011. He then joined Prof. Xiaowei Zhan's group at ICCAS/Peking University, and received his PhD in Chemistry (2016). Dr Cheng worked in Prof. Yang Yang's group in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) from 2017 to 2020 as a postdoc researcher. He is currently a professor at the College of Polymer Science and Engineering, Sichuan University. His research interests are focused on organic photovoltaics and functional optoelectronic devices.

Key learning points
1. The fundamentals of STOPVs including device structures, operating principles and evaluation parameters.
2. Differences between STOPVs and opaque OPVs in structures and working mechanisms.
3. Ideas and strategies in molecular and device engineering for building high-performance STOPVs.
4. Applications of STOPVs in architecture, agriculture and floating photovoltaics.
5. Major obstacles and future research directions in STOPVs toward higher performance and commercialization.


 	Fig. 1  Typical device structure and the basic requirements of STOPVs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the operating principles of STOPVs.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Typical J–V curve of STOPVs; (b) the transmittance spectrum and photograph of a STOPV device with the structure of Glass/ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:IEICO-4F/MoO3/Ag (10 nm); (c) AM 1.5G solar spectrum (300–1200 nm); (d) CIE 1931 color space.	 

 		 
LUE = PCE × AVT
QUE(λ) = T(λ) + EQE(λ)

 	Fig. 4  The design principles of NIR absorption materials.	 

 	Fig. 5  The design principle of (a) antireflection coating, (b) photonic crystal, (c) optical microcavity and (d) D/M/D structure.	 

 		 
mλ = 2ndcosθ

 	Fig. 6  Strategies to improve the PCE and AVT of STOPVs.	 

 	Fig. 7  The chemical structures of donor materials.	 


Active layer materials design	ITO/ZnO/PBT1-C-2Cl:Y6/MoO3/Au (12 nm)	9.1a	40.1c	
	3.65	
45

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PL-Cl:F8IC/PDINO/Au/Ag (24 nm)	11.3a	21.7c	87.3	2.45	
42

ITO/ZnO/PL2:Y6:PC61BM/MoO3/Au (12 nm)/MoO3	9.9a	40.4d	
	4.00	
43

ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:IHIC/MoO3/Au/Ag (15 nm)	9.8a	36.0e	86	3.53	
54

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBDB-TF:BTP-2Br/PFN-Br/Ag (10 nm)	9.6a	20.1	
	1.93	
60

Ternary strategy	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7Th:BDTThIT-4F:IEICO-4F/PDIN/Au/Ag (10 nm)	9.4a	24.6e	
	2.31	
62

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:Y6:SN/PDINN/Ag (10 nm)	14.0a	20.2c	95	2.83	
28

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PBT1-S:PTB7-Th:PC71BM/ZrAcac/Ag (15 nm)	9.2a	20.0	
	1.84	
63

ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PTAA:Y1/MoO3/Au/Ag (25 nm)	12.1a	20.1f	
	2.43	
65

ITO/PM6:Y6-BO:2PACz/PNDIT-F3N/Ag (15 nm)	15.2a	19.2g	
	2.91	
29

Sequential deposition strategy	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6/Y6/ZnO/Au/Ag (15 nm)	12.2a	22.2c	94	2.71	
67

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6/ICBA:Y6/PDINO/Al:Ag (20 nm)	14.6a	20.4h	
	2.98	
30

Electrode optimization	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PM6:L8-BO/ZnO/AgNPs/Ag (7 nm)	12.8a	34.6c	87	4.42	
68

ITO/ZnO/PM6:Y6/MoO3/PEDOT:PSS/Au/Ag (15 nm)	13.4b	22.2f	
	2.97	
70

Optical structure	ARC/Glass/ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag (10 nm)	8.5a	26.2e	90	2.23	
75

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/J71:PTB7-Th:IHIC/PDINO/Au/Ag (15 nm)/3 pairs (MoO3/LiF)	9.4a	21.4h	97	2.01	
77

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7-Th:F8IC:PC71BM/PDINN/Ag (20 nm)/inverse-opal photonic crystal	9.93b	40.4h	
	4.01	
78

ITO/ZnO/PDTP-DFBT:FOIC/MoO3/Ag(10 nm)/MoO3	3.5a	61.5c	91	2.15	
80

ARC/ITO/ZnO/PTB7-Th:BT-CIC:TT-FIC/MoO3/Cu–Ag (16 nm)/outcoupling layer	8.0b	44.2c	
	3.56	
81


 	Fig. 8  The chemical structures of acceptor materials.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of see-through power windows with power generation and energy saving functions in buildings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88, Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Montage photographs of a building taken through various spectrally selective electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89, Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic of STOPVs with power generation and heat insulation functions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) Schematic showing a smart window based on gasochromic STOPVs as the sunroof windshield of a hydrogen fuel cell vehicle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2020, Elsevier. € Schematic of STOPVs installed on a greenhouse. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90, Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Photographs of the mungs length change after 13 days under normal sunlight, STOPVs and dark conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic of a FPV system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 
OPVs	Organic photovoltaics
STOPVs	Semi-transparent OPVs
PCE	Power conversion efficiency
Au	Gold
Ag	Silver
AVT	Average visible transmittance
NFAs	Non-fullerene acceptors
NIR	Near-infrared
BHJ	Bulk heterojunction
ZnO	Zinc oxide
PFN	Poly[(9,9-bis(3-(N,N-dimethylamino)propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9-dioctylfluorene)]
PFN-Br	(Poly[(9,9-bis(3-((N,N-dimethyl)-N ethylammonium)-propyl)-2,7-fluorene)-alt-2,7-(9,9 dioctylfluorene)]dibromide)
PEI	Polyethyleneimine
PEIE	Ethoxylated polyethyleneimine
PDIN	Amino terminal substituted perylene diiminde
PDINO	(N,N-dimethyl-ammonium N-oxide)propyl perylene diimide
BCP	Bathocuproine
MoO3	Molybdenum trioxide
Al	Aluminium
Ag NWs	Silver nanowires
ITO	Indium tin oxide
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes
PEDOT:PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):polystyrene sulfonate

V
OC
	Open-circuit voltage

J
SC
	Short-circuit current density

P
in
	Power density of the incident solar radiation
FF	Fill factor

J
MP
	Current density at the maximum power point

V
MP
	Voltage at the maximum power point
HOMO	Highest occupied molecular orbital
LUMO	Lowest unoccupied molecular orbital
CRI	Color rendering index
CIE	Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage
D65	Artificial daylight
AM1.5G	Global spectrum at 1.5 air mass
LUE	Light utilization efficiency
QUE	Quantum utilization efficiency
ICT	Intramolecular charge transfer
D/M/D	Dielectric/metal/dielectric
BDT	Benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene
PC71BM	[6,6]-Phenyl-C71-butyric-acid-methyl-ester
DPP	Diketopyrrolopyrrole
IDT	Indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b′]dithiophene
IC	3-(1,1-Dicyanomethylene)-1-indanone
ICBA	Indene-C60 bisadduct
D/M/D	Dielectric/metal/dielectric
M/D/M	Metal/dielectric/metal
Sb2O3	Antimony oxide
ARC	Antireflection layer
PTAA	Poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine]
2PACz	[2-(9-H-Carbazol-9-yl)ethyl] phosphonic acid
AgNPs	Ag nanoparticles
FPVs	Floating photovoltaics
GFF	geometric fill factor

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
