Photoanodes based on TiO 2 and α-Fe 2 O 3 for solar water splitting – superior role of 1D nanoarchitectures and of combined heterostructures  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00015K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00015K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716-3769Photoanodes based on TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 for solar water splitting – superior role of 1D nanoarchitectures and of combined heterostructures

        
          
            Stepan 
            Kment†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Francesca 
            Riboni†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Sarka 
            Pausova
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Wang‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Lingyun 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hyungkyu 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zdenek 
            Hubicka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Josef 
            Krysa
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Patrik 
            Schmuki
          
          
        
      *abd and 

        
          
            Radek 
            Zboril
          
          
        
      *a
aRegional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, Faculty of Science, Palacky University, 17. listopadu 1192/12, 771 46 Olomouc, Czech Republic. E-mail: stepan.kment@upol.cz; schmuki@ww.uni-erlangen.de; radek.zboril@upol.cz
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Martensstrasse 7, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany
cDepartment of Inorganic Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technicka 5, 166 28 Prague 6, Czech Republic
dDepartment of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, P.O. Box 80203, Jeddah 21569, Saudi Arabia
Received 
      7th January 2016
    First published on 11th April 2017AbstractSolar driven photoelectrochemical water splitting (PEC-WS) using semiconductor photoelectrodes represents a promising approach for a sustainable and environmentally friendly production of renewable energy vectors and fuel sources, such as dihydrogen (H2). In this context, titanium dioxide (TiO2) and iron oxide (hematite, α-Fe2O3) are among the most investigated candidates as photoanode materials, mainly owing to their resistance to photocorrosion, non-toxicity, natural abundance, and low production cost. Major drawbacks are, however, an inherently low electrical conductivity and a limited hole diffusion length that significantly affect the performance of TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 in PEC devices. To this regard, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructuring is typically applied as it provides several superior features such as a significant enlargement of the material surface area, extended contact between the semiconductor and the electrolyte and, most remarkably, preferential electrical transport that overall suppress charge carrier recombination and improve TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 photoelectrocatalytic properties. The present review describes various synthetic methods and modifying concepts of 1D-photoanodes (nanotubes, nanorods, nanofibers, nanowires) based on titania, hematite, and on α-Fe2O3/TiO2 heterostructures, for PEC applications. Various routes towards modification and enhancement of PEC activity of 1D photoanodes are discussed including doping, decoration with co-catalysts and heterojunction engineering. Finally, the challenges related to the optimization of charge transfer kinetics in both oxides are highlighted.
Stepan Kment
Stepan Kment received his PhD in solid state physics and photoelectrochemistry in 2010 from Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic. He then spent one year as a postdoctoral research fellow at Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Nebrasca – Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA. Since 2011 he has been working at the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials of Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic as a Senior Researcher in the group of Photoelectrochemistry. His research is focused on development of new materials and nanostructures for PEC water splitting application mainly via advanced plasma deposition methods.
Francesca Riboni
Francesca Riboni studied Chemical Sciences at the University of Milan, Italy, and obtained her PhD in Chemistry from the University of Milan, Italy, in 2014. She joined the group of Prof. Schmuki at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany, in 2015 as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include the synthesis of functional nanomaterials by electrochemical processes and their application as energy conversion and storage devices.
Lei Wang
Lei Wang received her PhD degree from University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2010. From 2007–2010, she was an exchange student in National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. She worked as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Patrik Schmuki's research group in University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany from 2011–2016. Since Aug. 2016, she is a professor in Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Science. Her research interests include the fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductors for photoelectrochemical water splitting applications.
Josef Krýsa
Josef Krýsa graduated from University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague (UCT), where he obtained also PhD degree in 1995. In 2008 he obtained full professorship at UCT, Department of Inorganic Technology, where he is at the moment a leader of the group Photocatalysis (http://www.josefkrysagroup.com). He published more than 106 papers, h-index is 24. His research interest is the preparation and characterization of nanostructured photocatalysts materials, photoelectrochemistry, energy and environmental applications of photo(electro)catalysis.
Patrik Schmuki
Patrik Schmuki obtained his PhD from ETH Zurich, Switzerland, in 1992. From 1994–1997 he worked at Brookhaven National Laboratory, US, and at the Institute for Microstructural Sciences of the National Research Council of Canada. From 1997–2000, he has been Associate Professor for Microstructuring Materials at EPFL, Switzerland, and since 2000 he is Full Professor and Head of the Institute for Surface Science and Corrosion at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. His research interests target electrochemistry and materials science at the nanoscale, with a particular focus on functional materials and self-organization processes.
Radek Zboril
Prof. Radek Zboril, PhD after finishing the PhD study (2000) underwent several short-term stays e.g. at University of Delaware and University of Tokyo. From 2010, he is a professor at the Palacky University Olomouc and the general director of the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, RCPTM in Olomouc, Czech Republic. He is an author and co-author of more than 380 papers. He is focused on nanomaterials research including iron, iron oxide, noble metal and carbon-based (graphene derivatives, carbon dots, etc.) nanostructures, magnetic nanoparticles, and hybrid systems. Their advanced nano-architecture and applications in water treatment, energy materials, catalysis, etc.
1. Introduction
The fulfilment of global energy demand still mainly relies on supply and use of fossil fuels such as coal, crude oil, natural gas, etc. The energy content of fossil fuels is typically released upon their combustion, which in turn generates significant emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere and ultimately promotes global warming and climate change. In 2013 the global primary energy consumption amounted to ca. 17 TW (90% of which was generated from fossil fuel).
Taking into account the pace at which the world economy grows, a consequent drastic increase of global energy consumption is predicted to take place in the near future.1,2
Therefore, the urgency to find secure, sustainable, clean and renewable energy sources appears of primary importance and various alternatives to current sources have been introduced with the attempt of limiting CO2 emissions.3,4
Dihydrogen (H2), in particular, is one of the most promising energy carriers and fuel sources due to its high energy-per-mass content, a wide range of available storage and transport approaches, and reduced harmful emissions. Indeed, the energy stored into its chemical bond can be used in fuel cells to produce clean electricity. In addition, H2 represents the reactant for well-established industrial processes, such as petroleum refinement, ammonia synthesis, etc.
Although industrial mass scale production of dihydrogen is still based on fossil fuel combustion (i.e., the most common method for extracting H2 is still the steam-reforming of methane),4 green alternatives that utilize only water (H2O) as primary H2 source are currently under development.
One of the most promising solutions is represented by the use of photoelectrochemical cells (PECs) for light-driven water splitting. In these devices, semiconductor materials are used as photoelectrodes that under illumination and an applied electric bias can split H2O into H2 and O2. Ideally, the goal of this technology is to convert sunlight into clean energy available on demand.
1.1 Photoelectrolysis of water – background and basic requirements
After the pioneering work in 1972 by Fujishima and Honda,5 the photoelectrochemical water splitting (PEC-WS) reaction has been largely investigated as promising energy vector (H2) supplying.
PEC-WS consists in the reduction of water into hydrogen (cathodic reaction) accompanied by the anodic reaction of oxygen generation.5–7 In a conventional PEC device, the reduction and oxidation reactions occur at the surface of photoelectrodes (i.e., the photocathode and the photoanode, respectively) that are immersed in an aqueous electrolyte. The charge carriers that correspondingly promote H2 and O2 evolution (i.e., electrons and holes, respectively) are generated in the semiconductor(s) upon absorption of photons of adequate energy (hν ≥ band-gap, Eg).
Different configurations apply to PEC devices: in a so-called tandem cell configuration, both the electrodes are semiconductive materials, while in a Schottky type cell one of the two is a metal electrode. Regardless of the configuration, n-type semiconductors are used as photoanodes while p-type semiconductors as photocathode – this is related to the electronic properties of these materials and the type of majority carriers, i.e., electrons (e−) or holes (h+) produced by photoexcitation.8
The focus of the present review is on n-type photoanodes – as the most important class of materials discussed in this review, namely α-Fe2O3 and TiO2, are in their most abundant forms intrinsically n-type materials.
Overall, the PEC-WS reaction consists of four main sequential steps (Fig. 1(a)): (i) light absorption, (ii) separation of photogenerated charge carriers, (iii) transport of charges (h+) towards the electrode surface (electrons to the back contact), and (iv) surface reactions (h+ transfer). In most cases of available n-type semiconductors in contact with a common electrolyte, a space-charge depletion layer is formed at the semiconductor/liquid junction (SCLJ). Upon light illumination, electron–hole (e−/h+) pairs are generated (1) and separated due to the space-charge field promoted by band-bending (band-bending depends on the intrinsic work-function (redox potential) differences between the semiconductor and the electrolyte).9
 Fig. 1  (a) Principle of operation of a photoelectrochemical cell based on n-type semiconductor; the water splitting reaction steps (i–iv) are described in the text (Section 1.1). (b) Band edge positions of semiconductors in contact with an aqueous electrolyte at pH = 0, relative to NHE and to the vacuum level. For comparison HER and OER redox potentials are also reported. 
As a consequence, holes in the valence band (VB) diffuse and migrate towards the SCLJ where the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) occurs (3). By contrast, electrons promoted into the semiconductor conduction band (CB) are driven away from the SCLJ, transported through the anode towards the back-contact, and are conveyed through the external circuit to a metallic cathode (e.g., platinum), where the H2O reduction to H2 (hydrogen evolution reaction, HER – (2)) takes place. Hence, the photoelectrolysis of water can be summarized as follows: (1) (2) (3) (4)
The overall reaction (4) is endoenergetic, with a Gibbs free energy ΔrG0 = 237.2 kJ mol−1 per mole of H2 produced (according to the Nernst equation, ΔE = 1.23 V). Therefore, the semiconductor used as photoelectrode must absorb light with photon energy greater than 1.23 eV (that is, the semiconductor should exhibit an absorption edge at λ < ca. 1100 nm).
However, due to the intrinsic kinetic limitations of reactions (2) and (3) and the resulting overpotential needed for oxygen and hydrogen production, ΔG > ∼2.0 eV (corresponding to a limiting absorption edge λ of ca. 610 nm) is frequently reported as the threshold energy required to achieve a water splitting reaction at a reasonable rate.10,11
Basic requirements for a photoanode material include low cost of production, high chemical stability, high carrier mobility, long carrier lifetime, and rapid interfacial charge transfer. Furthermore, it should feature a conduction band-edge (Ecb) more negative than the redox potential E° (H+/H2) and a valence band-edge (Evb) more positive than the redox potential E° (O2/H2O), with the electronic nature of the band edges that also provides photostability to the material itself. Additionally, it is also desired that the semiconductor absorbs a large fraction of visible light in order to enable sunlight-driven water splitting.
Band edges and band-gap energies of semiconductors typically explored for photoelectrochemical H2O splitting are reported in Fig. 1(b).
Despite large efforts and hundreds of semiconductors explored, the thermodynamic and kinetic requirements for an efficient PEC-WS reaction have not yet been satisfied by a single semiconductor candidate. For instance, Si, Ge or III–V compounds suffer from severe photocorrosion and instability in water solutions, while transition metal oxides rarely meet the criteria of (i) a band-gap width suitable for sunlight activation, or of (ii) adequate band-edges to spontaneously promote OER and HER.
Nevertheless, metal oxides still represent one of the most viable options for PEC water splitting application, particularly owing to their low processing cost and high stability against photocorrosion even in harsh environments.
The engineering of metal oxide semiconductor photoelectrodes that exhibit long-term stability and a high photoefficiency could be realized using different strategies (applied individually or in combination).
A first approach can be based on theoretical prediction and synthesis of new materials that could intrinsically satisfy the aforementioned criteria.12
A second approach, based on experimental attempts, relies on bulk and/or surface modifications of already known/widely investigated semiconductors (e.g., TiO2, α-Fe2O3, WO3, BiVO4, etc.) in view of improving their properties and functionalities. This translates into strategies such as: (i) doping, that is by introducing other elements (metallic or non-metallic), into the semiconductor lattice, to modify electronic properties such as the donor density and thus the charge mobility, and/or to narrow the band-gap of the material and enable visible light photoresponse (this often applies to TiO2); (ii) anchoring a co-catalyst onto the photoelectrode surface to promote charge carrier separation and to facilitate hydrogen and oxygen evolution kinetics; (iii) surface modification by organic dyes, plasmonic materials or quantum dots to enhance visible light absorption; (iv) passivation of surface states or protection of the electrode by deposition of ultra-thin overlayers, to avoid surface charge recombination and enhance charge transfer to the environment (or to suppress photocorrosion).
Finally, another viable strategy is the nanostructuring of photoelectrode material into nanoparticles, nanotubes, nanoplatelets, etc. This is an efficient approach in the context of heterogeneous (i.e., solid–liquid and solid–gas) reactions since it typically leads to large surface-to-volume ratio for the semiconductor (large surface area) that facilitates charge transfer at the SCLJ. Also, e.g., for one-dimensional nanostructures (discussed below), their geometry is crucial for achieving high PEC-WS efficiency owing to the control over light absorption and orthogonal charge separation, as well as for establishing preferential percolation pathways.
1.2 Calculation of solar-to-hydrogen efficiency
To promote the advancement of PEC-WS technologies, the discovery and development of new materials are of primary importance. However, also the identification of protocols and standard parameters to cross-compare the materials (in terms of properties and efficiency) is highly necessary – reliable and reproducible protocols may accelerate knowledge transfer and process development.
Therefore, we discuss the most important parameters, that is, we provide a description of the most useful figures of merit (see below) typically reported to characterize the performance of a photoelectrochemical device in terms of light to energy conversion efficiency and indicate the limits within which each of these benchmarks may be applied.
Photoconversion efficiency (η) depends on many factors such as the spectrum of the incident radiation, the band-gap of the semiconductor, the reflection of light, and the transport of e−/h+ through the semiconductor.
The comparison of photoconversion efficiencies obtained for different semiconductor materials requires that these efficiencies are presented for a standard solar spectrum, usually the Air Mass AM 1.5 global solar spectrum at a given power density (100 mW cm−2).
Most measurements of photoconversion efficiency are performed under illumination by artificial light sources. This is convenient mainly because artificial sources are stationary and their intensity is essentially constant with time (although the lamp spectrum varies in intensity with the lamp lifetime), while spectrum and intensity of solar radiation reaching the ground depend on the time of day and on the atmospheric conditions. A most suitable artificial light for this purpose is a Xe lamp which, adequately filtered and compared to other artificial lights, best replicates the solar spectrum.
Several measures are commonly used to determine the efficiency of materials for PEC-WS:
• solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency, STH
• applied bias photon-to-current efficiency, ABPE
• incident photon-to-current efficiency, IPCE
• absorbed photon-to-current efficiency, APCE.
STH describes the overall efficiency of a PEC-WS device exposed to a broadband solar AM 1.5G illumination, under zero bias conditions.11 The working and the counter electrodes (WE and CE, respectively) should be short-circuited, that is, STH is measured in a 2-electrode system. In detail, STH represents the ratio of the chemical energy stored in the form of H2 molecules to the solar energy input, and is expressed by (5): (5)where rH2 is the rate of hydrogen production (mmolH2 s−1) measured with a gas chromatograph or mass spectrometer, ΔG is the change in Gibbs free energy per mole of H2 produced (237 kJ mol−1), Pin is the incident illumination power density (mW cm−2) and A is the illuminated electrode area (cm2). STH can also be calculated as a function of the short-circuit photocurrent density, jSC(6):13 (6)where 1.23 V is the thermodynamic water splitting potential and ηF the Faradaic efficiency for H2 generation. It should be emphasized that (5) and (6) can be considered valid only if experiments are performed under AM 1.5G illumination and in the absence of competing redox couples and sacrificial molecules in the electrolyte (that is, electron donors or acceptors).
A loss of faradaic efficiency for H2 or O2 evolution is observed not only when a sacrificial agent such as methanol, ethanol, etc., is added to the electrolyte (this limits the O2 evolution), but also when dissolved O2 (from air) is present in the cathodic side of the PEC cell. That is, O2 reduction to O2−˙ competes with the H2 evolution reaction. O2−˙ radicals further react with water and form H2O2 which is a typical by-product detected in the cathodic compartment when the electrolyte is not purged with an inert gas prior to PEC-WS experiment, or if the anode material/electrolyte combination favors H2O2 production over O2 production.
Therefore, a reliable evaluation of STH should imply (i) standard experimental conditions (such as purging the electrolyte to remove O2, absence of sacrificial agents, checking for H2O2 in the cathodic compartment), and (ii) a comparison between the STH determined from measured jSC(6) and that calculated from the actual amount of evolved gases (5) – this is crucial to avoid an overestimation of STH.
ABPE, IPCE and APCE are measured under applied bias in a 3-electrode PEC configuration.
Under electrical bias applied between working and counter electrodes, the current extracted from the device is higher compared to the bias-free condition of STH; therefore, it does not accurately reflect a solar-to-hydrogen conversion process but the so-called applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) is determined (7): (7)where jph is the photocurrent density under bias Vb.
Noteworthy, Vb is applied across the working and counter electrodes, that is, the two electrodes across which the photocurrent jph flows. The product (jph × Vb) represents the electrical power loss that has to be subtracted in calculating the efficiency of the cell. By contrast, using the potential applied between working and reference electrodes (VW–R) in place of Vb typically leads to an overestimation of the cell efficiency (because VW–R < Vb).11
One of the most adopted tools for the estimation of PEC properties of a semiconducting material is represented by IPCE. IPCE provides a measure of the efficiency of conversion of incident monochromatic photons to photocurrent flowing between WE and CE.
IPCE takes into account all the three fundamental steps of a light-driven process: (i) photon absorption (the absorption of one photon generates an e−/h+ pair); (ii) efficiency of h+ transport to the solid–liquid interface and collection of e− at the back contact; (iii) efficiency of h+ transfer at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. It is expressed as: (8)where jph(λ) is the photocurrent measured at the specific wavelength λ, I(λ) is the incident photon flux, and e is the electronic charge. Due to photon losses associated with the reflection of light or imperfect absorption, and due to the recombination of photogenerated e−/h+ pairs, typical IPCE values are below 100%,11 except for rare cases where e.g. current doubling occurs.14
Compared to STH, the main advantage of IPCE is that it is measured as a function of the irradiation wavelength and normalized vs. the irradiation intensity (8), and it can be measured under irradiation of a common Xe lamp combined with a monochromator. A most reliable estimation of the semiconductor PEC efficiency can then be obtained simply by integrating the IPCE spectrum (measured at the cell bias voltage of maximum efficiency) over the AM 1.5 global solar spectrum (9): (9)where ES is the incident irradiance that describes the spectrum of a light source.
Murphy et al. showed that his approach leads to efficiency results that are well in line with those measured under direct solar light irradiation, thus avoiding an under- or overestimation ascribed to spectral variations between different artificial sources.11
Finally, to understand the intrinsic PEC performance of a material, APCE is particularly useful to describe the collected current per incident photon absorbed. APCE takes into account also losses caused by reflection and/or transmission of photons and can be obtained by combining (8) with the number of charge pairs generated per incident photon ηe−/h+(10). Assuming that ηe−/h+ is equal to the number of photons absorbed (that is, no photon losses occur), then: (10)

Eqn (10) can be combined with the Lambert–Beer's law (A = −log(I/I0)): ηe−/h+ = 1–10−A(11)
Since APCE describes the collected current as a function of absorbed photons, that is: APCE = IPCE/ηe−/h+(12)
Then (12) combined with (8) and (11) leads to: (13)
However, regardless of the figure used to express the PEC efficiency of a certain device, an additional problem often encountered when cross-comparing the performances of different photoelectrodes is that PEC devices may also be operated under different electrochemical conditions such as applied potential, electrolyte composition, and reference electrode.
The lack of uniformity of electrochemical parameters can, in principle, be addressed by referring the applied bias to the Reversible Hydrogen Electrode (RHE) according to the Nernst equation: ERHE = Eref + E0ref + 0.059 pH(14)where Eref is the measured potential referred to the used reference electrode (e.g., Ag/AgCl, Saturated Calomel Electrode SCE, Hg/HgO, etc.), E0ref is the potential of Eref with respect to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE) at 25 °C, and the pH is that of the electrolyte solution.
This approach, when comparing different pHs, however implies that no significant changes in the water splitting mechanism occur with pH. Additionally, the Nernst equation assumes the linear dependence of ERHE on the electrolyte pH. However, these assumptions are not always valid and, therefore, many material specific data are truly comparable only when different materials are tested in view of their PEC performance in the same electrolyte and at the same pH.
1.3 α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 based photoanodes
Among all the investigated metal oxide semiconductors, α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 have stimulated an immense research interest due to their natural abundance, chemical stability in liquid solutions, non-toxicity, high resistance to photocorrosion, and low production costs.5,8,15–17
TiO2 has suitable conduction and valence band energies to drive water reduction (to H2) and oxidation (to O2) – ECB(TiO2) = ca. −0.2 V vs. RHE and EVB(TiO2) = ca. 3.0 V vs. RHE.8 However, a severe limitation of TiO2 is represented by its optical band-gap (i.e., 3.2 and 3.0 for anatase and rutile polymorphs, respectively). This means that only UV light (λ < ca. 380–410 nm) is absorbed and thus only ca. 4% of the solar spectrum can promote charge carrier generation in the material, and the consequent photoelectrochemical reactions.
By contrast, α-Fe2O3 absorbs light in the visible range up to λ ∼ 600 nm owing to its optical band-gap (Eg = 2.0–2.2 eV). This corresponds to a light absorption of ca. 40% of the solar spectrum.18 Nevertheless, while the valence band of hematite matches the thermodynamic requirements for oxygen evolution from water (ECB(α-Fe2O3) = ca. 2.4 vs. RHE, that is, the VB lies at more positive potential than E°(O2/H2O)),8 an external electrical bias (and thus a PEC configuration) is needed to drive hydrogen generation due to the more positive conduction band position with respect to the HER potential (ECB(α-Fe2O3) = ca. 0.4 vs. RHE) – in other words, H2 evolution does not occur on α-Fe2O3 under open circuit conditions.8
Furthermore, both TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 suffer from inherently low electrical conductivity, owing to bulk electron–hole recombination. In addition, TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 feature limited excited state lifetime (less than 10 ns and 10 ps, respectively) and a short hole diffusion distance (less than 20 nm and 5 nm, respectively), which significantly reduces the efficiency of hole transfer and collection at the SCLJ.9,17 All these aspects are typically reported to be primary reasons for a limited PEC performance in H2O splitting.18,19
While bulk materials have been extensively investigated (and reviewed) in classical photoelectrode configurations (deposited film layers, compacted particle layers or single crystals) – see e.g.ref. 5, 15, 17 and 19–23, a main focus of this review is to highlight the use of nanostructuring techniques to fabricate efficient photoanodes. Particularly, we will provide an overview of recent breakthroughs relative to synthesis and use of one-dimensional (1D) TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 photoanodes. The most explored strategies for doping, surface sensitization and the coupling of Ti and Fe oxides with narrow band-gap semiconductors will also be illustrated.
Moreover, we describe most recent results relative to α-Fe2O3–TiO2 heterojunction-based materials or combination compounds (e.g., Fe2TiO5) that were shown to outreach the PEC-WS performance of the single counterparts. For these materials, modification and exploitation of the (as such detrimental) conduction band offset between α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 has led to various new designs that combine (i) the efficient charge carrier separation, provided by TiO2 that suppresses electron back injection in hematite, with (ii) the strong visible light absorption promoted by an α-Fe2O3 thin layer. A comprehensive description of this approach will be presented in the final section, along with studies on charge carrier dynamic observed for these composites and useful tools for the rational design of potentially new platforms for efficient solar-driven water splitting.
2. Nanostructuring and nanostructures for PEC water splitting
Why micro- and nanostructuring? One of the reasons is that the properties of materials can be significantly different from the quantum-, to nano- and to bulk scale. Another reason is that defined structuring of electrode/electrolyte systems allows a much better control over light guiding, reactant diffusion, and electron pathways.
In regard to the first reason, nanostructured materials (NMs) can provide significantly modified physical, chemical, and biological properties and thus can exhibit unique functionalities.24–27
NMs are low dimensional materials, i.e., in the nanoscopic size range, composed of assemblies of building units that have at least one dimension confined to the submicron- or nano-scale.28 According to this definition, zero- (0D), one- (1D), two- (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) NMs can be distinguished (examples are sketched in Fig. 2).29–34
 Fig. 2  Classification of nanostructures based on nanoscale dimensions – their structural and functional features are discussed in Section 3. 1D nanostructures (upper panel) include e.g. (i) carbon nanofibers fabricated by the spin-electrodeposition (reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Elsevier), (ii) TiO2 nanotubes by self-organizing electrochemical anodization (adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16562–16566. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society) and (iii) TiO2 nanorods grown on FTO substrate by a hydrothermal procedure (adapted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4883–4890. Copyright 2014 American Chemical). The lower panel of the picture reports SEM and TEM images of (i) 0D nanoparticles (TiO2 and Au nanoparticles, respectively – unpublished results); (ii) 2D sheaths of TiO2 grown perpendicularly on FTO substrate, and of (iii) 3D nanostructures – left: inverse opal TiO2 (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the National Academy of Science); right: TiO2 nanorods branched with α-Fe2O3 nanosheets (reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Typical features of NMs that are beneficial for PEC applications are: (i) the possibility of decoupling the direction of light absorption and charge-carrier collection; that is, instead of a diffusion through the bulk material, orthogonal separation of photogenerated charges occurs and the probability of charge recombination is reduced; (ii) improved photogenerated charge pair separation, promoted by the internal electric field (e.g., the upward band bending in the walls of TiO2 nanotubes facilitate h+ transfer to the electrolyte and e− collection in the center of the material); (iii) the possibility of controlling crystal faceting that, in turn, influences the material band-bending, flat band potential, surface states, etc.
Moreover, compared to bulk materials, NMs exhibit remarkable size effects owing to high surface-to-volume ratio. In particular, a larger specific surface area represents a great advantage when a material is intended for catalytic applications: a higher number of active surface sites facilitates the adsorption of reactants, offers extended contact with solutions, etc., and typically leads to higher reaction rates.
Size effects imply that the nanomaterial dimensions (<100 nm) are comparable to the critical length scale of physical phenomena, e.g., charge transport distances and light absorption depth, the mean free path of electrons and phonons, or (typically for particles <10 nm) the Bohr exciton radius.
On the one hand, this can be exploited for a more efficient charge carrier separation in the lattice of a nanomaterial in order to improve its PEC-WS performance. In other words, charge (e.g., h+) diffusion towards the environment occurs over minimized distances since the size of the semiconductor is within the length scale of solid state charge diffusion.
On the other hand, quantum size electronic effects, such as ballistic electron transport or optical gap widening, can occur due to quantum confinement. This was experimentally demonstrated, e.g. in the case of TiO2, for nanoparticle suspensions,35,36 and for ALD layers.37 These works showed that a clear onset of quantum confinement for TiO2 nanomaterials can be expected only if size-scales are <5 nm. This can be observed for hydrothermal TiO2 nanotubes,38,39 which exhibit a measured band-gap of ∼3.84 eV compared to Eg ≈ 3.2 or 3.0 eV commonly reported for larger anatase or rutile TiO2 crystals.40 This difference is ascribed to the structure of hydrothermal tubes that is based on atomic sheets originating in quantum confinement effects.
Such size effects were already widely described in the 1960s,41 but the first classification attempts in materials science dates back to 2000,42 and only more recent reports consider also more complex architectures and mesoscale assemblies such as nanocones, nanohorns, nanoegg-yolk, and nanoflowers (lilies, roses, tulips, etc.).28
In the following sections we will provide a description of the different nanostructures (0D to 3D) and hierarchical assemblies, in particular with respect to their application for the photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction.
2.1 From 0D to 3D
Zero-dimensional nanostructures feature all the three dimensions in the nanoscale regime (i.e., no dimension is larger than 100 nm). Typical examples are nanoparticles (NPs), such as nanospheres, quantum dots (QDs), core–shell structures, hollow spheres, etc. An attractive feature is that 0D-NMs typically smaller than 5–10 nm (the Bohr exciton radius) show tunable band-gap. The smaller the size of a crystal the more affected its electronic structure: when a crystal is composed of a limited number of atoms, bulk electronic bands are discretized to distinct energy levels with a widening of the gap for smaller dot sizes. Subtraction or addition of just a few atoms alters the energy level distribution and thus leads to band-gap shift in the QDs.43
Clearly, photoelectrochemical water splitting using a water dispersion of 0D nanoparticles is not possible, that is NPs should first be immobilized on an electrically conductive substrate (e.g., ITO, FTO, etc.) to form various nanoparticulate assemblies or thin films that serve as electrodes in a photoelectrochemical cell arrangement.44
Therefore, despite some fundamental early works on the electrochemical and photoelectrochemical investigation of TiO2 colloidal solutions that led to a detailed mechanism of redox reactions occurring on hydroxylated titania surfaces,45,46 electrochemical studies of TiO2 solutions remained scarce in comparison to investigations of solid TiO2 as electrode material.
However, films composed of stacked NPs often suffer from carrier recombination at grain boundaries (owing to the presence of trapping states) and long carrier diffusion paths (random walk) through the NP network (Fig. 3(a)). In this regard, replacing a nanoparticulate electrode with a one dimensional (1D) nanostructured electrode offers several advantages.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustrating three typical photoelectrodes and their corresponding charge separation/transport behaviors. (b) Cross-sectional (left) and top (right) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of α-Fe2O3 nanoflake array, grown by thermal oxidation of Fe foil. (c) Cross-sectional (left) and top view (right) SEM images of single crystalline rutile TiO2 nanoplatelet arrays, grown by chemical bath deposition on FTO glass. Fig. (a) is reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (b) is reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (c) is reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In terms of charge collection and transfer efficiencies, one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures exhibit superior performances in a wide range of applications (e.g., nanoelectronics, nanodevices, energy-related fields) with respect to the other nanoarchitecture arrangements. In many cases, the size effects of a 0D material can be maintained but harvesting of charge carriers is facilitated.17,47–51
Charge collection efficiency depends on both the recombination lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers and on their collection lifetime, that is, the time needed by the e− (h+) to reach the semiconductor–electric contact (semiconductor/electrolyte interface).52 1D nanostructures such as nanotubes (NTs), nanorods (NRs), and nanofibers (NFs) provide a preferential percolation pathway for charge carriers (Fig. 3(a)) that significantly enhances electron collection at the back-contact (typically, a metal foil or a conductive glass such as FTO and ITO). This leads to a remarkable improvement in the PEC efficiency.48
Also, compared to 0D nanoparticles, the recombination time of e−/h+ pairs is longer in 1D-NMs (e.g., in TiO2 nanotubes recombination times are 10 times higher than in a TiO2 nanoparticle layer) and this leads to larger charge collection efficiency.53–58
We illustrate in detail one-dimensional nanoarchitectures and their application in PEC water splitting in Section 3.
Two-dimensional nanostructures have only one dimension in the nanoscale. Typical examples of 2D-NMs are nanoflakes, nanoplatelets, etc. (Fig. 3(b)), but also thin films (i.e., with a thickness <100 nm). 2D-NMs exhibit relatively large lateral size and a ultrathin thickness confined to the atomic scale regime that collectively lead to surface areas typically larger than those of 1D-NMs. Moreover, the ultrathin thickness of two-dimensional nanomaterials grants a high mechanical flexibility and optical transparency. These characteristics make 2D-NMs promising candidates particularly for high-performance flexible electronic and optoelectronic devices.59,60
However, 2D-nanostructures are also advantageous when used in PEC devices particularly when perpendicularly oriented to the electrode (Fig. 3(b)).61–64 This arrangement simultaneously offers (i) enhanced charge transport properties, owing to a directional transport of charges to the back-contact, (ii) a facilitated access for electrolyte impregnation into the structure, owing to the high surface area, and (iii) a limited diffusion distance of photogenerated holes to the electrode/electrolyte interface that reduces the charge recombination rate.
Typical methods for the fabrication of 2D-NMs are e.g., sputtering techniques,65 hydrothermal and chemical bath deposition methods,61,62 thermal oxidation,66 and spray pyrolysis techniques.67
According to the definition of NMs, 3D-nanostructures should be more appropriately considered bulk materials as none of their dimensions is confined to the nanoscale. However, 3D-NMs feature properties that are locally confined to the nanoscale, when composed of nanosized crystals. These 3D-nanomaterials may include layers of e.g. nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanoplatelets where the 0D-, 1D- and 2D-nanostructured elements are in close contact.59,68,69
A combination of their mesoporous matrix along with their nanoscopic structure (formed e.g. of nanoparticle aggregates) provides an ideal morphology for PEC-WS as the permeability of the scaffold is maximized and charge diffusion towards the environment has to occur over minimized distances (within each single nanoparticle). Moreover, 3D NMs have higher surface area and supply enough absorption sites for all involved molecules in a small space. In more details these structures are discussed in the following section and Section 4.
2.2 3D Hierarchical nanostructures
Hierarchical nanostructures (HNs) are 3D-NMs that, owing to their intrinsic properties and morphology, are attracting increasingly wider attention as scaffolds suitable for PEC-WS devices.
In general, a hierarchical nanostructure is composed of a distinct backbone (typically with a 1D-arrangement) onto which nanodimensional building blocks are grown – these usually include nanoparticles (0D), nanowires/rods/tubes (1D) and nanosheets (2D).
Therefore, HNs often resemble nanotrees that simultaneously combine the properties of the one-dimensional backbone (e.g., enhanced carrier separation and directional charge transport) with a significantly increased surface area and a much higher amount of active sites, owing to the highly porous arrangement provided by the branches.59,68,69
In most cases, hierarchical structures can be produced by combining or modifying conventional processes for nanostructure synthesis: e.g., hydrothermal growth, solution-phase chemical synthesis, chemical vapor deposition techniques or branch formation by in situ catalyst generation.70–72
Regardless of the synthetic procedure, hierarchical nanostructures can either be composed of a single material (Fig. 4(a and b)) or be a combination of two or more (Fig. 4(c–e)).60
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM images of 3D hierarchically branched TiO2 NWs: (a1) tilted view, (a2) top view. The insets show high-magnification images of an individual hierarchically branched array. (b) Tilted view SEM picture of ZnO NW nanoforest. (c) Cross-sectional view SEM image of WO3-α-Fe2O3 host–guest film. The broken white line indicates the FTO/WO3 interface. (d) FESEM image of SnO2 nanowire covered with TiO2 nano needle leaf-like structures via TiCl4 treatment. (e) SEM image of a nanotree heterostructure; (e2) magnified SEM image showing the large surface area of the TiO2 segment used for water oxidation – scale bars are 1 μm. Structural schematics of the nanotree heterostructure: small diameter TiO2 nanowires (blue) and Si nanowires (gray). The two insets report the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs. Energy band diagram of the nanotree heterostructure for solar-driven water splitting. Fig. (a1 and a2) are reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (b) is adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671. Copyright 2011 American Chemical. Fig. (c) is adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867. Copyright 2009 American Chemical. Fig. (d) is reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Elsevier. Fig. (e1–e4) are adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992. Copyright 2013 American Chemical. 
In the first case, a hierarchical arrangement is mainly exploited in view of its significantly higher surface area and a major application is often as photoanode in a dye-sensitized solar cell (Fig. 4(a and b)). Higher dye loading, enhanced light harvesting, as well as a reduced charge recombination owing to preferential electron transport along the branches to the backbone, increase the power conversion efficiency of a TiO2-HN photoanode compared to a more conventional 1D-TiO2 arrangement.72 Such nanostructures can be for instance fabricated through a pulsed chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process, using an anodic aluminum oxide membrane as template. Upon template removal by etching under mild conditions, a nicely 3D spatially arranged TiO2 nanorod network is observed.73
Hierarchical nanostructures composed of two or more materials exhibit an additional advantage, that is, the possibility of combining materials with different (complementary) properties and band structures. This in turns can either be exploited to enhance electron collection from the branched-material to the back-bone nanostructure (i.e., host–guest approach) and/or to extend the light absorption (and, hence, its conversion) over a broader wavelength range.
The so-called “host–guest approach” typically provides a support material (the “host”) for majority carrier conduction, into which a photoactive “guest” material can inject photogenerated electrons while, at the same time, providing proximity to the semiconductor/liquid junction (Fig. 4(c and d)). Therefore, the performance of such host–guest assemblies strictly depends on the availability of (i) a host material with good electronic transport properties, (ii) a guest material with optimized light absorption, and (iii) a suitable band alignment between the two counterparts that enable e− injection from the branches to the backbone, with holes accumulating at the (branched) semiconductor/electrolyte junction.74 Examples of efficient host–guest HNs have been for instance reported for (n-)Si–TiO2,75,76 WO3–α-Fe2O3,77 SnO2–TiO2,78 and SnO2–α-Fe2O3 combinations.74,79 In particular, the conducting properties of tin oxide as host-scaffold can be further improved by F- or Sb-doping as a consequence of growing (and annealing) SnO2 1D nanostructures on a FTO glass.74,80
In the framework of this review, HNs composed of α-Fe2O3–TiO2 assemblies are worth mentioning.33,81,82 Regardless of the architectural composition of the hierarchical assemblies (i.e., titania branched on hematite81 or the opposite configuration33,82) a photocurrent enhancement is typically achieved compared to the single oxide (α-Fe2O3 or TiO2) cases.
In particular, a “Z-like scheme” resembling that of natural photosynthesis has been proposed to support the results observed with TiO2 NRs branched on α-Fe2O3 NR arrays:81 both oxides are excited under AM 1.5G solar illumination and produce photoexcited e−/h+ pairs. Holes in the VB of TiO2 migrate towards the electrolyte and electrons in the CB of α-Fe2O3 are collected at the layer back-contact (FTO glass). Simultaneously, photogenerated e− (TiO2) recombine with h+ (α-Fe2O3) at the two oxide interface. This largely increases the separation between charge carriers and reduces the probability of their recombination, ultimately resulting in the enhanced PEC performance of TiO2-on-α-Fe2O3 HNs.
An enhanced separation of photogenerated carriers has been reported also for the observed enhanced PEC-WS ability of α-Fe2O3-on-TiO2 HNs:33 in this case, e− photogenerated in TiO2 are collected at FTO, while h+ are transferred to the α-Fe2O3 nanobranches that serve as charge mediators to the electrolyte. In particular, for an improved PEC structure, a combination of critical factors that should be achieved has been identified, such as (i) TiO2 light absorption and photoactivation vs. α-Fe2O3-induced shadowing effect and (ii) the availability of free TiO2 surface vs. α-Fe2O3-coated surface.
Recently, also more advanced hierarchical systems composed of n- and p-type semiconductors have been shown to provide improved solar-driven PEC-WS ability. In this context, an assembly composed of Si nanowires branched with TiO283 (or N-doped TiO2)84 nanowires has been reported. Here, the different intrinsic electronic properties of the two semiconductors allow for the production of O2 and H2 at the two separate sites (n-type (TiO2) and p-type (Si) semiconductors, respectively): the photogenerated minority carriers (i.e., h+ in TiO2 and e− in Si) promote the corresponding oxidation/reduction half reactions, while the majority carriers (i.e., e− in TiO2 and h+ in Si) recombine at the ohmic contact. PEC J–V curves showed that the system can promote solar water splitting under open circuit conditions, in contrast with the state-of-the-art materials typically used for photoelectrochemical applications.
p-Si NWs coated with a thin SnO2 layer and a dense α-Fe2O3 nanocrystal shell has been finally reported as photocathode for enhanced and stable (2.5 hours) solar water splitting.85 This p-Si/SnO2/α-Fe2O3 hierarchical assembly exhibited considerably higher photocurrent and lower onset potential compared to both simple p-Si and p-Si/SnO2 NW arrays, revealing the potential of thin (SnO2) and/or nanostructured (α-Fe2O3) metal oxide layers in overcoming the poor stability and the HER kinetic limitation intrinsic of p-Si photocathodes.
3. α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 nanostructures for PEC water splitting
In the following sections we will deal with the different one-dimensional arrangements of TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 typically used for photoelectrochemical water splitting experiments.
We will mainly report on 1D-nanostructures such as nanorods (NRs), nanowires (NWs), and nanotubes (NTs).
In particular, we will show how the use of 1D-morphology is strategic to realize efficient electron transport and charge carrier separation and to overcome the short diffusion length of holes in both TiO2 and α-Fe2O3.
We will mainly focus on 1D-nanotubes, fabricated by various techniques such as hydrothermal methods and self-organizing electrochemical anodization.
Emphasis will be then on a number of modification strategies that (coupled to 1D-nanostructuring) have been adopted to address other critical aspects of hematite- and titania-based photoelectrodes, e.g., the sluggish kinetic of hole injection into the electrolyte (that mainly affect α-Fe2O3) and a limited use of solar light irradiation for promoting the PEC-WS reaction (for TiO2).
3.1 Typical synthesis approaches
Solution-based growth techniques offer several major advantages including low-cost, simple processing, and good scalability. Many advanced nanomaterials that are currently commercially available are made via solution-based approaches, including colloidal NPs and QDs.86
Despite the large number of morphologies that can be grown via solution-based methods (nanoparticles of different size and shapes, nanorods, nanowires, nanoflowers, nanotubes, etc.), in recent years other techniques, such as template-assisted synthesis and self-organizing anodization, have also been developed. These techniques allow a higher degree of control on morphology and physical properties, both crucial aspects when considering 1D nanostructured materials.
1D nanostructure arrays can be typically fabricated by either bottom-up or top-down approaches. Bottom-up methods are solution- and vapor-based methods but, despite the several advantages offered by these approaches (see above), optimization and control over morphology and physical properties sometimes (still) represent a challenging aspect for practical applications.
On the other hand, top-down strategies (e.g., (photo)lithography and focused-ion beam methods), in spite of a better control on the nanostructure morphology, are typically complex and expensive.
Here, we will give larger attention to the most versatile methods (in our view), i.e., hydrothermal synthesis and self-organizing electrochemical anodization.
A remarkable aspect is the possibility of combining, e.g. hydrothermal and self-organizing anodization methods to other synthesis procedures (such as solution-based and/or sputtering techniques) to grow hierarchical composite nanomaterials.

3.1.1 Sol-methods for nanoparticles. 
Sol–gel methods certainly represent the most widely used approach for the synthesis of nanoparticles. It is based on the slow hydrolysis and polymerization reaction of a colloidal suspension of the metal oxide precursor (i.e., alkoxide, halide, nitrate salt, etc.) that, at controlled rate and under specific conditions, evolves toward the formation of a solid gel phase.87–89
Typical precursors for TiO2 nanoparticles include titanium(IV) iso-propoxide (TTIP) or butoxide, and TiCl4.86 Crucial for the nucleation of nanoparticles is the formation of Ti–O–Ti chains that is favored with a low content of water (that is, low Ti/H2O ratio), low hydrolysis rate (that is, relatively low temperature), and in the presence of excess titanium alkoxide in the reaction mixture. As-synthesized nanoparticles are amorphous and annealing (typically, ∼400–700 °C in air) is required to attain a crystalline solid.
Inorganic precursors, such as iron nitrate, are commonly used for α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. In a typical synthesis procedure, Fe(NO3)3 is dispersed in an aqueous solution also containing EDTA as capping agent. Upon the formation of a solid gel, the evaporation of the liquid phase leads to iron oxide/oxy-hydroxide nanopowders. Annealing at 450–900 °C is typically reported to crystallize the amorphous powders into single phase hematite nanoparticles.87,89,90
Despite simple processing and large versatility (e.g., doping can be achieved by simply adding the dopant source into the colloidal solution), sol–gel methods lack of a precise control on nanoparticle size and shape distribution. Therefore, alternative approaches have been developed that include micelle and inverse micelle, hydrothermal, and solvothermal methods.88
In particular, hydrothermal methods for TiO2 lead to small particles (∼5–25 nm), the size of which can be controlled by adjusting the concentration of Ti precursor and the solvent composition91 – e.g., the presence of additives such as peptizers largely influenced the nanoparticle morphology.86 Typical precursors are Ti alkoxide (e.g., TTIP and Ti butoxide) colloidal solutions that, under acidic conditions, mainly form TiO2 anatase NPs, with no secondary phase formation.86,91
Colloidal synthesis of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles through hydrothermal route has been first introduced in the early 1980s.92 Nano-sphere, -disk, and -plate morphologies were reported depending on the precursor concentration,92 and follow-up works demonstrated that 60–100 nm α-Fe2O3 NPs synthesized through similar methods are ideal catalysts for the photocatalytic generation of hydrogen from water solutions, containing sacrificial agents (e.g., methanol) or electron donors (e.g., methyl viologen).93–95
More recently, TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles and hollow spheres have been reported by solvothermal method,96,97 that is, a procedure almost identical to the hydrothermal method except for the use of non-aqueous solvents – this enables the use of higher temperature, due to a large number of organic solvents with a high boiling point.88
However, as mentioned before, the use of nanoparticle water dispersion is not possible in view of photoelectrochemical applications, and immobilization of NPs on a conductive substrate in the form of assemblies or thin films has several drawbacks (e.g., long (random) carrier diffusion pathways, enhanced carrier recombination at grain boundaries, lower surface area compared to NP suspensions, etc.).
Thus, a most elegant approach is one-dimensional nanostructuring of photoanode materials.


3.1.2 Hydrothermal methods. 
Hydrothermal synthesis certainly belongs to the most commonly used methods for the synthesis of nanorods/wires/tubes of various metal oxides.
As for sol–gel methods, titanium isopropoxide,98 tetrabutyl titanate,99 or titanium isobutoxide are typically used as TiO2 precursors,100–102 while iron(III) chloride is mostly used as α-Fe2O3 precursor.103–107
Hydrothermal synthesis is carried out in a pressure vessel under controlled temperature and/or pressure, in aqueous or organic based-solutions (as anticipated, in the latter case, the term solvothermal is more appropriate) and, in some cases, in the presence of surfactant agents.88 Temperature, solution volume and nature of capping agent (e.g., F−vs. SO42−) largely influence the internal pressure and, hence, the aspect ratio (i.e., the diameter/length ratio) of NRs, NWs and NTs.49
α-Fe2O3 hydrothermal nanotubes are mostly prepared from a FeCl3 solution in the presence of NH4H2PO4 at 220 °C for several (2–3) days.108–110
Under these conditions, the formation of α-Fe2O3 hydrothermal nanotubes has been reported to occur via a coordination-assisted dissolution process.108 In particular, it was demonstrated that crucial factor to induce the formation of a tubular structure is the presence of phosphate ions (from NH4H2PO4) that adsorb on the surface of hematite aggregates and coordinate with ferric ions.108–110 In detail, nanotube formation proceeds through controlled “dissolution” along the long axis of the spindle-like precursors formed at the early stage of the reaction; this generates rod-like nanocrystals and semi-nanotubes, and for sufficiently long times hollow tubes – remarkably, the inner part of tubes is only partially dissolved, and a non-uniform dissolution from spindle to spindle has also been reported.
More recently also alternative reactants have been proposed (e.g., [Fe(CN)6]4− precursor in H2O2 based solution) that significantly lowered both the temperature and the reaction time needed (160 °C for <2 h).111
Regardless of the used precursors (and hence conditions), α-Fe2O3 tubes are single-crystalline (i.e., hematite is the only crystalline phase) and are typically 200 nm–1 μm long, with a diameter in the 100–150 nm range and a wall thickness of 25–30 nm.108–111
Hydrothermal TiO2 NTs were first reported by Kasuga et al.,38 by alkaline treatment of anatase TiO2 powders in a NaOH solution at 20–110 °C. Approximately 100 nm thick nanotubes with a ∼8 nm diameter were obtained upon acidic washing of the reaction suspension. Several follow-up works demonstrated that amorphous and crystalline (that is, also rutile and commercial powders) TiO2 as well as metallic Ti are suitable precursors,39,112 and that NaOH can be replaced by KOH – under these conditions, the reaction temperature can be increased and TiO2 NWs can also be formed.113 In general, large NaOH concentrations and high operating temperatures facilitate the formation of tubes – and in particular the higher the T, the longer the tubes.
Most interesting feature of TiO2 hydrothermal tubes is their multi-walled morphology, featuring inter-wall distance of ∼0.7 nm114 and (in contrast to α-Fe2O3 tubes) a wall thickness in the range of atomic sheets.38 That is, only TiO2 hydrothermal tubes should be considered “real” nanotubes, with quantum confinement effects such as band-gap widening being practically observable (only) in the walls of tubes prepared through such a procedure.
Another remarkable aspect of hydrothermal methods is the possibility of growing 1D-nanostructures such as NRs and NWs anchored on a conductive substrate (usually a FTO layer immersed in the reaction vessel), for a direct use as photoelectrode – this, in contrast to nanotubes that grow in bundles/agglomerates, dispersed in a reaction media.48
Normally, the F-SnO2 side of FTO layers has to face the bottom of the reactor, so to enable the growth of NRs/NWs on the conductive substrate, while the metal oxo-species (e.g., TiOx and FeOOH), which form on the glass side due to gravimetric precipitation from the precursor solution, can be easily washed away.115
Growing thin films directly from a substrate not only does considerably improve the adherence and mechanical stability of the film compared to standard deposition techniques (such as spin coating, dip coating, screen printing, or doctor blading), but also grants better charge transfer and collection to the back-contact with no extra binder layers to be tunneled.33,103
Under these conditions, the formation mechanism relies on the constant supply of H2O molecules at the hydrophilic surface of FTO (i.e., the F-SnO2 side) through hydrolysis of the metal oxide precursor. Nuclei will appear on the entire substrate and if their formation rate is controlled and limited by the precipitation conditions, epitaxial crystal growth will take place (from the nuclei). If the concentration of precursors is high, a condensed phase of vertically aligned arrays perpendicular to the substrate will be generated.103
Concerning TiO2, it is known that acidic media set the conditions for rutile TiO2 NR formation; key aspect to such a growth is the presence of Cl− ions in solution, i.e., Cl− ions preferentially adsorb on the rutile(110) plane and, by retarding the growth along this direction, promote NR formation.116 Accordingly, TiO2 NRs were not formed when HCl was replaced by HNO3 or H2SO4.
Nevertheless, a major limitation of Cl− ions is their blocking effect towards the TiO2 surface sites that are active for the water splitting reaction,116 and annealing at T > 200–250 °C represents a most common approach to remove the Cl− termination.117
By contrast, alkaline media and an excess of OH− ions favor the crystallization of anatase TiO2118 – however, an alternative way to anatase is also the presence of an anatase-based seed layer on FTO.119 Moreover, it is reported that the reaction temperature (not time) has a critical effect on rod/wire morphology and crystal structure.120
Inorganic iron salts such as FeCl3103,104,121 and FeSO4105,107 are most typical precursors for the hydrothermal synthesis of hematite rods/wires (∼100 nm–1 μm long and with a ∼5–10 nm diameter, reaction temperature varies within 100–120 °C and reaction time up to 24 h).
In particular, FeCl3 is usually dissolved in a NaNO3 based solution, also containing HCl to establish an acidic environment.103,104,121 On the other hand, FeSO4 is used under milder conditions and in the presence of CH3COONa.105
Common aspect to all these procedures is that, contrary to the TiO2 case, the formation of hematite rods/wires proceeds through the initial nucleation and aggregation of β-FeOOH 1D nanoarrays and hence annealing at T > 400 °C103 is required to convert the Fe oxide–hydroxide into hematite.


3.1.3 Template-assisted techniques. 
We mentioned that hydrothermal approaches for nanotube fabrication results in single tubes or loose agglomerates of tubes dispersed in a solution and that non-homogeneous tube lengths are typically obtained.
Most critical aspect to a use of these structures in electrically contacted devices (e.g., photoelectrochemical cell) is that tubes need to be compacted to layers (similar to powders) on an electrode surface. This leads to an arbitrary orientation of the nanotubes on the electrode and, in turn, eliminates many advantages of their one-dimensional nature (e.g., providing a 1D direct electron path to the electrode).48
However, using aligned templates (or self-organizing electrochemical anodization, see below) not only leads to an array of oxide nanotubes oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface, but also tubes in the template can relatively easily be contacted by metal deposition (before removal of the template by selective dissolution).
Numerous different nanotube morphologies can be obtained by simply tuning the morphology of templates.40,122–124
Most classic template for TiO2 NTs is porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO),125–127 which can be produced with a hexagonal pattern of nanopores in a virtually perfect (long-range) order, and with interpore distances between 10 and 500 nm.128
Historically, the first attempt to produce TiO2 NTs through a template-assisted method was seemingly that reported by Hoyer125 who electrodeposited titanium oxide from a TiCl3 solution. The oxide first is in the form of polymer-like hydrous titania, and after annealing crystallizes into anatase TiO2 (Fig. 5(a)). More recently, also other filling approaches have been developed that include sol–gel techniques122,129,130 and atomic layer deposition (ALD).131–133
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic view of the replication process and SEM image of the corresponding TiO2 NTs. (b) Schematic representation of TiO2 (or α-Fe2O3) nanotube formation process: first a ZnO seed layer is deposited on FTO, and ZnO nanorods are grown through a hydrothermal method; afterwards, TiO2 (or α-Fe2O3) nanotubes are grown and the ZnO sacrificial template is simultaneously dissolved. Fig. (a) adapted with permission from Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1411–1413. Copyright 1996 American Chemical Society. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As already discussed for the synthesis of NPs (Section 3.1.1), sol–gel methods are based on the hydrolysis reaction of Ti-alkoxide, TiCl4, and TiF4, followed by condensation into a solid gel phase.87 After appropriate heat treatment, the alumina template can be easily dissolved. ALD techniques offer an even larger control on tube morphology as conformal coating of the template with one atomic layer after the other can be achieved, also by alternating different titania precursors.131,132
Another effective approach is the use of a ZnO nanorod array as sacrificial template (Fig. 5(b)).33,134,135 A thin ZnO seed layer is first deposited (e.g., sputtered) on a FTO glass; hydrothermal growth of ZnO nanorods follows. As-synthesized ZnO NRs on FTO are then immersed into the Ti (or Fe) precursor solutions that also contain boric acid (H3BO3). Hydrolysis reaction of the metal oxide precursor to TiOx (or FeOOH) on the individual ZnO nanorods results in the formation of TiO2 (or α-Fe2O3) based nanotubes with the simultaneous dissolution of the ZnO template in the acidic environment.33 Remarkably, in a one-step “NT growth/template dissolution” synthetic approach, no extra reactions are needed that may damage the NT array.


3.1.4 Self-ordering anodization. 
Electrochemical anodization is often considered a most straightforward synthesis path to fabricate one-dimensional vertically oriented layers for photoelectrochemical applications since it is scalable (it allows one to coat virtually any shape of various metal surfaces), offers an extended control over nanoscale geometry, produces directly back-contacted photoanodes, and is a versatile approach as it can be used to grow nanostructures of various metal oxides (Fig. 6(a)).47,48,136
 Fig. 6  (a) Typical 2-electrode electrochemical anodization set-up and possible anodic morphologies for different metal oxides: TiO2 (upper row), and Al2O3, WO3, Ta2O5, and α-Fe2O3 (lower row). (b) High field oxide (TiO2) formation in the presence of fluoride ions: a steady-state is established between the oxide formation at the inner interface and its dissolution at the outer interface (due to dissolution/complexation of Ti4+ as TiF62−). Rapid fluoride migration leads to the formation of a fluoride-rich layer at the Ti/TiO2 interface. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Classically, electrochemical anodization is carried out in a 2-electrode electrochemical arrangement where a metal substrate (M) is immersed in a suitable electrolyte (most commonly H2SO4) and subjected to a positive electrical bias (U).
In this configuration, with M as working electrode (anode) and platinum or carbon as counter electrode (cathode), oxidation of the metal substrate occurs and leads to the formation of a metal oxide (MOz/2). Oxide growth is sustained by field-assisted ion-migration. Briefly, as long as high field conditions hold, metal cations are subjected to outward migration from the metal substrate towards the electrolyte, while at the same time O2− ions migrate (from water) towards the anode (Fig. 6(b)).
This process is self-limited since the formed oxide is stable in the anodizing electrolyte: with increasing the oxide thickness (d), the electric field (i.e., ΔE = ΔU/d) gradually drops and so does the inward/outward ion migration. This results in the formation of an oxide layer with a finite thickness. Such an oxide film is compact or, more generally, does not exhibit specific morphological features.
However, when using a suitable electrolyte and under specific electrochemical conditions (that largely depend on the metal of interest), a steady-state equilibrium can be established between the electrochemical oxide formation and its dissolution (Fig. 6(b)).
In particular, electrochemical parameters can be adjusted to establish controlled oxide growth and etching to form porous oxide layers or, even more, to enable the growth of one-dimensional self-organized metal oxide structures. Typically, the use of electrolytes containing ClO4−, NO3− or F− ions under self-organizing electrochemical conditions is key for the anodic growth of Ti and Fe oxide layers in the form of arrays of nanopores or nanotubes.47,48,137,138
Key advantage of anodization is that the self-ordering degree of the formed one-dimensional nanostructures, their morphology and physicochemical properties can be adjusted by simple tuning of electrochemical parameters (electrolyte composition and temperature, applied voltage, anodization time, etc.).
As the effects of such parameters on the growth of α-Fe2O3 tubes are qualitatively comparable to what is observed for anodic TiO2 NTs, general guidelines can be summarized as follows:
– electrolyte composition: tube growth in H2O-based electrolytes is limited to a maximum length of ∼2–3 μm. For TiO2, significantly thicker NT layers (up to some hundreds nanometers) can be grown in organic-based electrolytes (ethylene glycol, glycerol, etc.). Also the fluoride concentration and the H2O content play a crucial role, that is, the growth of thicker layers requires higher F− concentration137,139 while limited H2O contents lead to highly ordered tubes.140,141
– electrolyte temperature: the higher the temperature, the faster the tube growth.142,143 Rapid tube growth can also be achieved in the presence of complexing agents (lactic acid) in the electrolyte.144
– anodization voltage: the larger the anodization voltage, the longer and wider the tubes. Long tubes are also grown by extended anodization time.141
A final aspect common to both α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 is that as-formed tubes are amorphous and adequate thermal annealing (mostly in air at T ∼ 400–700 °C) is required to convert the non-crystalline arrays into hematite and anatase (or rutile, or anatase/rutile mixed phases), respectively.48,138


3.1.5 Other methods. 
A range of other approaches to form α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 nanotubes/nanofibers have been reported.44,48 Among these, for instance, electrospinning represents a simple and versatile method for generating ultrathin fibers made of various materials (i.e., functional polymeric materials such as hierarchical nanofibers, inorganic-doped hybrid nanofibers, core–shell nanofibers, etc.).
Moreover, if combined to other techniques, in particular sol–gel methods and annealing, electrospinning can be used to fabricate a large number of inorganic nanomaterials with controlled morphologies and properties.145
In this process, a strong electric field is used to pull a thin jet out of a drop of polymer solution or melt through a nozzle. The jet then is deposited in the form of a nanofiber. Ti and/or Fe precursors can be used to coat the fibers (most elegant is a simultaneous coating of the fibers while spinning, through a coaxial two-capillary spinneret nozzle system) and generate single hollow-nanofibers (nanotubes) that are well separated and can be uniformly distributed over a several centimeters range. Finally, annealing is carried out to induce thermal degradation of the organic fiber template and crystallize the amorphous metal oxide nanotubes (Fig. 7(a and b)).146
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the setup for electrospinning nanofibers. Spinneret is fabricated by means of a two-capillary coaxial jet, through which heavy mineral oil and an ethanol solution of Ti precursor are simultaneously ejected. (b) SEM image of a uniaxially aligned array of anatase hollow-nanofibers. (c) FESEM images of α-Fe2O3 hollow fibers by electrospinning an iron acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) solution. (d) SEM image of porous fibers obtained via electrospinning of a polymer solution in dichloromethane. Fig. (a and b) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933–938. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (d) reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
Typically, NTs by electrospinning exhibit extremely high aspect ratios and a diameter that ranges from a few tens of nanometers to a few tens of micrometers.
TiO2 nanotubes are fabricated, for example, by using titanate as well as Ti-alkoxide (Ti(IV) iso-propoxide) precursors,146–148 while iron inorganic salts (e.g., iron nitrate) or organic precursors (e.g., Fe(III) acetylacetonate) are used for α-Fe2O3149,150 – examples of such nanotubes are shown in Fig. 7(c).
Key to the fabrication of these hollow nanostructures is a use of two immiscible liquids, that is, the solvent to dissolve the Ti or Fe precursor (e.g., an ethanol-based solution) and the polymer to fabricate the nanofibrous array (e.g., a heavy mineral oil) – Fig. 7(c).146
In addition, it is possible to use this method to obtain nanofibers/nanotubes, with specific surface topologies. Since electrospinning to a first approximation involves fast evaporation of the solvent, the use of a solvent that evaporates rapidly (e.g., dichloromethane) induces rapid phase separation. The following rapid solidification generates fibers as those reported in Fig. 7(d), with pores of regular shape and narrow size distribution (diameter ∼100–200 nm).151

3.2 Typical modification approaches
Experimental conditions and parameters for the modification of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 may be significantly different. However, for both oxides two main strategies can be distinguished, namely methods that modify the intrinsic electronic properties of the oxide (charge mobility, donor density, band-gap, etc.), and methods that provide a co-catalytic effect for chemical reactions (e.g., deposition of a co-catalyst to improve the kinetics of water oxidation). In addition, also other methods are reported that enable for instance visible light PEC-WS and/or generate suitable surface states for enhanced charge transport/transfer properties (e.g., surface decoration with plasmonic metals and quantum dots, or the formation of a heterojunction).

3.2.1 Doping. 
Semiconductors for practical applications are often modified (doped) by introducing a secondary active species into the lattice. In particular, doping is carried out to (i) improve the material electronic properties, by adjusting a desired conductivity (typically, at low dopant concentrations), or to (ii) adjust (that is, in the case of TiO2, to narrow) its band-gap and extend the light absorption properties (usually at high dopant concentrations).
The incorporation of dopants into TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 can be achieved through a range of different methods, e.g., hydrothermal procedures, thermal diffusion of ions from the substrate (FTO), drop casting, wet chemical treatments, thermal treatments under controlled atmospheres (containing the dopant), high-energy ion implantation.44,48,49,51
For TiO2, band-gap narrowing is necessary in view of enhancing its visible-light absorption and promoting photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic reactions under solar irradiation.
Since the report by Asahi on N-doped TiO2 and the photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue and acetaldehyde under visible light,152 there have been (and still there are) a large number of attempts to produce differently doped TiO2. This is typically achieved by introducing a non-metal element into its lattice, such as C, N, S, P, etc.153–159
The presence of non-metallic dopants forms electronic intra-gap states and this influences the oxide light absorption characteristics by leading to a redshift in the light absorption threshold.
However, more recently, some studies underlined the difficulty in unequivocally ascribing a photoresponse under visible light to the influence of anion dopants. In some cases, the anion dopant may be confined to the surface and promote the formation of surface trap states that typically lead to detrimental charge recombination, which in turn limits the photoactivity of the material.160
Also some metal dopants such as Cr, V and Fe were reported to be successful in activating a TiO2 response under visible light.161 However, the photocurrents for, e.g., Fe- or Cr-doped TiO2 are typically low, and a use of cation doping to improve the visible light absorption of wide band-gap semiconductors is only partially considered in photoelectrochemistry.44
Finally, an aspect that is often overlooked in the literature is that to an extended light absorption to visible light wavelengths (that is, determined by reflectivity measurements) does not always correspond the generation of mobile charge carriers. This was deeply investigated by Murphy, who pointed out that the effects on vis light induced PEC activity of e.g. TiO2 should be anyway considered valid only if IPCE spectra that demonstrate this ability are also measured. Even more, a most reliable estimation of photoresponse is provided if photocurrent spectra are associated to photocurrent transients measured under monochromatic λ.11,162
Another promising way to enhance the photoelectrochemical response of TiO2 is to improve its charge transport abilities, therefore reducing charge carrier recombination. This can be achieved, e.g., by introducing a metal dopant (electron donor) such as Ru, Nb or Ta into TiO2 lattice.163–165 The amount of dopants is usually limited to 1–2 at% that corresponds to a carrier concentration of ∼1021 cm−3. Higher concentrations are not likely to be effective, and may even lead to segregation of the dopant phase.
Finally, it is well established that, regardless of their non-metallic/metallic nature, some dopants such as F and Nb also inhibit the transition from anatase to rutile when annealing TiO2 at relatively high temperature (>400 °C) – rutile is detrimental in photoelectrochemical applications due to its poor electronic properties compared with anatase.166–168 The presence of such dopants retards the seeding of the rutile phase and, therefore, allows annealing at relatively high temperature. This in turn increases the crystallinity degree of TiO2 and enhances the charge transport properties as electron transport becomes considerably faster.169,170
On the other hand, α-Fe2O3 exhibits absorption properties that already fit to a solar spectrum. That is, light absorption of hematite extends up to λ ∼ 600 nm and any doping attempt is clearly performed with the only aim of increasing its intrinsically limited conduction properties that are inadequate for PEC applications.17
This is commonly achieved by substitutional doping using elements with oxidation states +4 to +6, such as Ti4+, Sn4+, Zr4+, Nb5+.171,172 By substituting at sufficient levels, high carrier conductivities can be attained.
In general, titanium is less effective compared to other +4 ions as it may form Tisurf sites that may also act as electron–hole recombination centers. However, it has also been recently reported that Ti4+ surface species might effectively capture and store photogenerated holes and facilitate their transfer to the electrolyte for O2 evolution by water oxidation.173
Zr4+ doped into α-Fe2O3 single crystals led to one order of magnitude higher donor densities (in the order of 1019 cm−3), and increased conductivity and electron mobility compared to undoped hematite.174
Also for hematite, optimum impurity concentrations are ca. 1 at% or less and, while introducing inter-band gap energy states that are beneficial for α-Fe2O3 conductivity, doping does not significantly alter the oxide band-gap or its absorption properties.17


3.2.2 Heterojunction engineering. 
The recombination of photopromoted charge carriers in solid-state semiconductors typically takes place within μs, while the time for electrons and holes to react with acceptor and donor species, respectively, is in the ns–μs.
The time scale for charge transfer to a donor or acceptor molecule largely depends on its specific nature, in particular, on its red-ox potential and chemical adsorption to the surface. It is, therefore, apparent that charge recombination and charge transfer to the electrolyte are competing processes.50,175–178
One of the most common strategies to tackle the rapid charge recombination and thus to increase solar conversion efficiencies is increasing the charge spatial separation by creation of a heterojunction.
Heterojunctions are typically designed to combine the functionality of the two (or more) constituent phases, with the aim of addressing (at least one of) the primary requirements for an efficient PEC-WS using solar energy: visible light activity, chemical stability, appropriate band-edge characteristics, and potential for low-cost fabrication.179
Heterojunctions may be formed by combining, e.g. (i) two semiconductors (S–S), or (ii) a semiconductor and a metal (S–M).
Enhancement of charge separation can be achieved through various mechanisms that mainly depend on the electronic properties of the partner materials:
(i) via the formation of an internal electric field at the heterojunction interface, in S–S type heterostructure. Upon favorable band bending, e− will tend to move from the higher to the lower lying CB, while h+ will follow the opposite direction (i.e., from the lower to the higher lying VB).
(ii) driven by the Schottky barrier that typically forms when interfacing a semiconductor with a metal (in S–M type heterojunction). This promotes electron flow from the material with the higher Fermi level to that with a lower Fermi level, until steady-state equilibrium is reached.
Different configurations may apply to the S–S type heterojunction: both semiconductors are photoactive, that is, they generate e−/h+ pairs (e.g., α-Fe2O3–WO3, TiO2–WO3, TiO2–BiVO4, α-Fe2O3–SrTiO3, TiO2–ZnO, TiO2–SrTiO3etc.)77,180–188 or only one component absorbs light and generates energetic charge carriers (e.g., metal oxide/QDs, metal oxide/OEC). It is also remarkable that narrow band-gap semiconductors can be combined to a larger band-gap semiconductor and complementary light absorption properties can be exploited (e.g., NiO/TiO2 systems). Therefore, an additional advantage is the photosensitization of the large band-gap material, as observed for instance in metal oxide/QDs configurations (see below).
A detailed description of heterojunction formation and working principles is out of the scope of this review and additional information can be found elsewhere.1,189,190 In the following sections we will provide examples and describe strategies that apply to α-Fe2O3 and/or TiO2 for photoelectrochemical applications.


3.2.3 Decoration with a co-catalyst. 
A widely investigated strategy towards higher PEC ability is the surface decoration of photoanodes with an oxygen evolution catalyst (OEC) and/or the decoration of cathodes with a hydrogen evolution catalyst (HER, such as MoS2 and WS2191,192).
As discussed in Section 1.1, the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetics is sluggish: this reaction requires a four-electron oxidation of two water molecules (that is, the concerted transfer of four holes from the photoanode surface to the electrolyte) coupled to the removal of four protons to form a relatively weak oxygen–oxygen bond.
If O2 evolution from water splitting represents only a minor challenge for TiO2-based photoelectrode (some examples of co-catalyst decoration for the EOR have been anyway reported in the literature and are shown in Section 3.4.3), the poor match between the orbitals of hematite valence band (that partially exhibits Fe 3d character) and those of H2O (that is, O 2p states – see Section 3.3 for discussion) significantly limits the efficiency of hematite in water photooxidation.
To overcome the limitation of poor OER kinetics, various catalysts have been coupled to hematite photoanodes to assist hole transport from the hematite surface to the electrolyte.
Typical OECs are noble metals such as IrO2 and RuO2. Though efficient and stable under working conditions, Ir and Ru based catalysts are however preferentially replaced with cheap and earth-abundant elements for a significant reduction of the costs.
In this context, Co oxide-based catalysts193 and the more recent amorphous cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi)194 catalyst represent valuable candidates. While the mechanism behind the improvement obtained with Co-Pi is still not completely understood, the electrocatalytic activity of cobalt oxides/hydroxides for water oxidation is well established and involves the CoII/CoIII and CoIII/CoIV couples and the formation of high-valent Co(IV)–O intermediates that can “store” up to four holes from the valence band of hematite. Holes injection into the electrolyte for the generation of O2 then regenerates again CoII centers.193
Finally, recently also more complex structures (e.g., NiFe double-layered hydroxide (LDH) and NiFe oxide)195,196 have been introduced. NiFe based co-catalysts have been shown to possess excellent electrocatalytic activity and durability for OER catalysis; even more, although the active site of NiFe still remains unclear, its transparency towards visible light irradiation (that can therefore be absorbed by hematite) represents an intrinsic advantage, particularly with respect to more common cobalt-based co-catalysts.195,196


3.2.4 Other strategies. 
Aside from doping and surface-decoration with a co-catalyst, a number of various other approaches have been developed to improve the photoelectrochemical response of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2. Some of these methods are here described, but a more complete overview can be found in Section 3.3.3 and in Section 3.4.3 for hematite and titania, respectively.
In view of the “too” large optical band-gap of TiO2 for efficient sunlight absorption, the recent finding of “black” TiO2 by Chen and Mao197 is often mentioned as a promising approach to (partially) address this issue.100,198–200
Black TiO2 is typically obtained by exposing TiO2 to a reduction treatment (e.g., high pressure/high temperature treatment in H2, vacuum annealing, electrochemical reduction, Ar/H2 annealing under atmospheric conditions) that produces the typical dark coloration ascribed to the formation of oxygen vacancies or Ti3+ defect states.201 This in turn generates a strong light absorption in the visible range.
In particular, Chen and Mao reported that compared to conventional “white” TiO2, black TiO2 loaded with a Pt co-catalyst could reach a significantly higher open-circuit water-splitting activity, with the photoactivity enhancement ascribed to a thin amorphous TiO2 hydrogenated layer encapsulating the TiO2 anatase core.
However, the findings of Mao and many of the follow-up studies seem to limit the outstanding properties of black TiO2 to its visible-light extended photoabsorption.
Only more recently, a unique co-catalytic effect towards efficient water splitting could be observed for “black” TiO2 anatase nanoparticles and nanotubes treated with H2 under high pressure202,203 or high-energy proton implantation.204 Such a co-catalyst effect enabled strongly enhanced photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production in the absence of any noble metal co-catalyst. A combination of different characterization techniques pointed out that hydrogenation generates voids in the anatase nanoparticles202,203 and nanotubes (an additional discretization of walls on the length scale of around 10–20 nm was observed for the implanted tubes)204 that are responsible for the observed outstanding photoactivity.
Therefore, “black” titania not only should be regarded as a tool to extend the absorption properties of TiO2 into the visible light region, but hydrogenation should also be considered a powerful tool for the engineering of suitable structural defects that can activate TiO2 for noble metal-free photocatalytic water splitting.
Thermal reducing treatments have also been explored for hematite. However, the reduction of α-Fe2O3 crystals is typically reported to generate a Fe3O4 surface layer which typically acts as a recombination center.205 For instance, the exposure of α-Fe2O3 pellets to an inert He-atmosphere produced conductive pellets that are also visibly darker than untreated hematite, but a photocurrent drop due to the enhanced surface recombination promoted by Fe3O4 is observed.
More recent studies suggested that a low amount of oxygen vacancies in α-Fe2O3 may be beneficial for solar water splitting, as long as no lattice distortions are formed and no incorporation of Fe3O4 inclusions occurs.206
Another popular approach for the adjustment of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 optical properties, namely for enhancing their light absorption, is the incorporation of a plasmonic metal nanostructure (e.g., nanoparticles, nanorods, nanopillars, nanohole arrays) on the semiconductor surface.207–215
Briefly, a plasmonic metal (such as Ag, Au and Cu) can harvest visible light due to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR), i.e., the oscillation of free electrons with the incident radiation that promotes either electron injection (hot e−) or energy transfer (PRET) into the adjacent semiconductor.
A most efficient method for capturing hot electrons is the formation a Schottky barrier (φSB) with an appropriate semiconductor (see Section 3.2.2), that is, proper alignment of the Fermi level of the plasmonic nanostructure with the bands of the semiconductor is crucial. Therefore, important factors to consider are (i) the band-gap of the semiconductor, which affects the height of the Schottky barrier and (ii) the density-of-states (DOS) available in the CB, which affects the efficiency of the hot electron injection process.214,216 PRET is based on the generation of an intense electric field at the surface of the plasmonic nanostructure that is able to increase the efficiency of electron–hole pair generation in the nearby semiconductor. The basic principle that regulates PRET is that the LSPR wavelength should be resonant with the band-gap energy of the semiconductor (or excite some intra-band gap transition).207,217
In other words, regardless of the mechanism, a plasmonic metal can be thought as an antenna that absorbs light, and the semiconductor as the reaction center that promotes the photoreaction.
Since the resonance frequency of plasmonic metals depends (primarily) on the nature of the metal and can be tuned from visible to near infra-red wavelengths by adjusting the nanostructure shape and size, LSPR can be envisaged as a versatile strategy for the sensitization of semiconductors below their band-gap and/or to increase the range of solar light absorption.213–215,218
For solar water splitting applications, studies have been mainly limited to Ag and Au (LSPR at λ = 400–450 nm and 530–560 nm, respectively). This is due to the relatively large optical cross sections of the two metals and, in particular for Au, due to its stability under the harsh conditions (pH, potential) that are needed for water splitting.211
Early studies on water splitting with plasmonic-metal/semiconductor photoelectrodes report Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2 nanocomposites, synthesized by immersion of mesoporous TiO2 films in solutions containing nanoparticles of either Au or Ag.219,220
Photocurrent and photovoltage action spectra of Au/TiO2 and Ag/TiO2 showed an increased photoresponse compared to a pure TiO2 photoelectrode, that also matched the LSPR of the metal nanoparticles (i.e., λ = 450 and 550 nm for Ag and Au, respectively). Although the increase in the absolute value of IPCE was modest (∼1–2%), these works paved the way for follow-up studies.
In particular, more recently, plasmonic-metal/semiconductor arrangements other than the more conventional “plasmonic-nanostructure on metal oxide-array” have been developed, e.g., by using a thin Ag mirror underneath a α-Fe2O3 film, the photocurrent of hematite could be significantly enhanced due to the metallic film promoting photon re-trapping schemes that increase resonant light trapping into the oxide layer.221
Further improvements in terms of water splitting efficiency have also been reported for a plasmonic/semiconductor/mirror photoanode arrangement, with TiO2 “sandwiched” between an Au/Cr-based metallic mirror and plasmonic gold nanodisks.222 The optimized architecture exhibited multiple resonance peaks due to hybridized LSPR in the nanodisks and multiple internal photoemission between the mirror and the plasmonic nanostructures that enabled an 8–10 time photocurrent enhancement under resonant conditions.
Besides sensitization by plasmonic resonance, also quantum dots of semiconductors such as CdS, CdSe, PbS, PbSe, InAs, MoS2, etc. can be used as light harvesting functionalities and combined to a semiconductor photoelectrode for solar water splitting.
Quantum dots (QDs) are semiconductor nanoparticles (with d ∼ 5–10 nm) subjected to quantum-confinement effect, i.e., their dimension is smaller than the exciton Bohr radius. Above mentioned semiconductor QDs can absorb visible light (Eg ∼ 2.2–2.4 eV) and generate photoexcited states (electron–hole pairs) that once separated can be used to enable redox processes with suitable acceptor and donor species.
In our context, the electron acceptor is the conduction band of a (large) band-gap semiconductor (e.g., TiO2) – clearly, for an efficient charge injection, a suitable alignment of the CB of the QD semiconductor with that of e.g. TiO2 is a prerequisite.223–225
Moreover, charge recombination in some QDs (e.g., PbSe and CdS–CdSe dual QDs) leads to the emission of photons that are then absorbed by the semiconductor and generate reactive e−/h+ pairs.226,227
Numerous studies of QDs show that their light absorption/emission features can be controlled adjusting their particle size.43
However, in spite of the large number of reports on QD-sensitized semiconductor scaffolds for light conversion reactions and of the significant IPCE enhancement (e.g., for CdS/TiO2 an IPCE as high as 20% has been determined at λ ∼ 450 nm),224,228 two main limitations still remain to be addressed: (i) the slower interfacial hole transfer rate (to a donor species, e.g. in the electrolyte) compared to electron injection into the semiconductor; that is, for the efficient II–VI materials, QDs typically suffer of photochemical instability due to hole-induced corrosion; (ii) a low internal quantum efficiency in the visible region, ascribed to a slow hole transfer kinetics compared to the rate of surface-mediated electron–hole recombination.
Recently, carbon quantum dots (CDs) have been introduced and regarded as promising materials due to their lower toxicity and eco-friendly properties compared with traditional metal sulphide and selenide QDs.229
Among the superior and unique features of carbon-based QDs are their broad and strong absorption across a major portion of the solar spectrum, and their efficiency in generating and separating photopromoted charges. In view of PEC-WS applications, electrons in the excited energetic level of CDs can be efficiently injected into the conduction band of e.g. TiO2 and α-Fe2O3, while the holes left in the ground state have a redox potential to oxidize a suitable donor species in the environment. Thus, a co-catalytic effect towards the oxygen evolution reaction can also be exploited.
In addition, two other characteristics of CDs are beneficial for enhancing solar energy conversion efficiency: first, a so-called up-conversion photoluminescence (PL) effect, associated with the radiative recombination of electrons and holes, where the emitted λ is lower (more energetic) than absorbed λ.230 Charge recombination in the CDs leads to photon emission that can be absorbed by the adjacent semiconductor, provided that the emitted λ is in resonance with the band-gap energy of the semiconductor; this then generates reactive e−/h+ pairs in the semiconductor.
Also, the relatively weak intensity of fluorescence from “naked” carbon nanoparticles can be easily addressed by surface passivation with organic molecules or polymeric species – in this case, a main concern remains however the photostability of the surface ligands.231,232

3.3 α-Fe2O3 for photoelectrochemical applications
In its fully oxidized form, Fe2O3 exists as crystalline as well as amorphous material. In particular, crystalline Fe2O3 may assume one of the four α, β, γ, ε possible forms.
α-Fe2O3 (hematite) is the most thermodynamically stable polymorph of iron oxide under ambient conditions. It crystallizes in a rhombohedral lattice system, with lattice parameters a = 5.0356 Å and c = 13.7489 Å, and exhibits the same crystal structure as corundum (Al2O3). That is, O2− atoms arrange in a hexagonally close-packed lattice along the [001] direction and Fe3+ atoms occupy octahedral interstices in the (001) basal planes.233
A combination of hexagonally packed oxygen atoms with interstitially positioned iron atoms results in a highly dense structure (d = 5.26 g cm−3), with high polarizability and, hence, high refractive index. This in turn may lead to complex behavior while interacting with photons and electrons.
In particular, the electronic nature of the band-gap in hematite is of great interest to understand its performance as a material for solar energy conversion, and Tauc analysis of the band-gap absorption onset has shown an indirect (phonon-assisted) band-gap nature of the material.234Ab initio calculations by the Hartree–Fock approach235 and density functional theory approximation,236 also supported by soft X-ray absorption and emission spectroscopies at the O K-edge,237 showed that the valence band of α-Fe2O3 primarily exhibits a O 2p character, with a significant contribution from the Fe 3d orbitals (much higher compared to other metal oxide semiconductor such as TiO2).238
Photon absorption of hematite starts in the visible-near infrared region at λ > 650 nm (with low absorption coefficient α ∼ 103 cm−1), that is well below its optical band-gap (i.e., Eg ∼ 2.1 eV that corresponds to λ ∼ 550–580 nm). This is most likely due to spin-forbidden d–d transitions associated to Fe3+ ions .239 However, although increasing its conductivity, photoexcitation of hematite at these wavelengths does not produce any significant photocurrent in PEC systems and confirms that, in view of a measurable photocurrent, efficient e−/h+ pairs are associated to a charge transfer process of the type , that is, an O(2p)–Fe(3d) indirect transition.17,44
The first report on the use of α-Fe2O3 as a photoanode material for splitting water dates back to 40 years ago, when Hardee and Bard produced hematite thin films on Ti or Pt foils by chemical vapor deposition and observed a photocurrent from λ = 550 nm, under 0.8 V vs. SCE in a KCl-based electrolyte.15
Later works explored crystal faceting of α-Fe2O3,240 and n-type doping with elements from the IVa (i.e., Si, Ge, Sn, and Pb)241–243 and IVb (e.g., Ti and Zr)244 groups as a mean to ameliorate the performance of hematite by tackling its intrinsic low carrier mobility. In particular, the introduction of an extra e− in the conduction band of α-Fe2O3 by substitutional doping leads to higher photocurrent (under anodic bias).243
Particularly relevant is the work by Sanchez et al. who reported on Nb-doped (1.5 mol%) α-Fe2O3 single crystals with a quantum efficiency for water splitting as high as ca. 40% at 370 nm at +0.5 V vs. SCE.245,246
This value was only recently outperformed by Pt-doping single-crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanostructures. In particular, IPCE as high as 60–80% in the 300–400 nm range was reported upon decoration of the Pt/α-Fe2O3 surface with a Co-Pi layer.247
Common to all these early studies is the conclusion that hematite exhibits a flat-band potential that cannot spontaneously reduce water to H2 and, therefore, an external bias is needed to complete the water splitting reaction. Not only this, but also a few other critical points have to be addressed when considering α-Fe2O3 as photoanode material for PEC-WS applications, namely low water oxidation (OER) kinetics, low light absorption coefficient, and short diffusion length of holes.
Poor OER kinetics, which translates into a relatively high overpotential for the anodic reaction, is related to two different factors:17,44 (i) the presence of oxygen vacancies and crystalline disorder on the surface of hematite that, by trapping and accumulating h+ at the interface, may lead to Fermi level pinning, and (ii) the partial Fe3+ character of the valence band that results in the energy mismatch between d orbitals (where the hole moves) and the p orbitals of e.g. the hydroxide donor species in solution (i.e., the acceptor) resulting in a slow charge transfer.
One of the most commonly adopted strategies to overcome surface crystalline disorder is the decoration of α-Fe2O3 with thin surface passivation layers that reduce (h+ trapping) surface defects and limit hole back injection (see below).248–252
In addition, the use of a co-catalyst (e.g., Co-Pi and IrO2, see below) is known to (i) increase the kinetics of hole transfer to the electrolyte, limiting their accumulation at the interface and therefore leading to an overall higher photocurrent, (ii) reduce the photocurrent-onset overpotential and enhance the overall energy conversion efficiency, and (iii) extend the long-term stability of the photoanode under operating conditions.
More recent efforts have been devoted to optimizing the hematite-based electrode morphology by nanostructuring to address the intrinsic low absorption coefficient and short hole diffusion length of α-Fe2O3. However, as described in the next paragraphs, a combination of all mentioned strategies (i.e., doping, surface decoration and nanostructuring) is key to an ideal hematite photoanode that features an optimal material composition/structural configuration and therefore a maximized PEC ability.
In the next sections we will primarily focus on one-dimensional hematite-based nanostructures for improved PEC performance, along with examples of the most promising and rationally designed architectures obtained by a tailored combination of above mentioned strategies. Table 1 provides some examples of different synthetic/modification approaches to 1D α-Fe2O3 nanostructures and their PEC performances.
Table 1 Selected examples of 1D α-Fe2O3 based photoanodes and their PEC performance




Structure
Preparation
SEM
Electrolyte

j/mA cm−2
Ref.




In all cases solar light AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) was used for irradiation. SEM images (from top to bottom): adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048–3055. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24060–24067. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society; reproduced from ref. 452 with permission from Elsevier; reproduced from ref. 311 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society; reproduced from ref. 247 with permission from Springer Nature.




α-Fe2O3 NTs
Anodization (H2 annealing)



1 M KOH
1.4 at 1.5 VRHE

450



Ni-doped α-Fe2O3 NTs
Anodization and electrochemical deposition



1 M KOH
∼3.3 at 1.45 VRHE

451



α-Fe2O3 NRs
Hydrothermal synthesis



1 M NaOH
3 at 1.6 VRHE

452



α-Fe2O3 NRs
Template synthesis



1 M NaOH
8 at 1.6 VRHE

311



Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 NWs
Hydrothermal synthesis



1 M NaOH
1.2 at 1.23 VRHE

121



Pt-doped α-Fe2O3 NRs, with Co-Pi co-catalysts
Solution-based methods and two-step annealing



1 M NaOH
4.3 at 1.23 VRHE

247






3.3.1 Doping to enhance α-Fe2O3 conductivity. 
As briefly outlined in previous sections, α-Fe2O3 suffers from very low electrical conductivity (∼10−14 ohm−1), low carrier density (1018 cm−3), and limited electron mobility (10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1).253,254 All these aspects result from a Fe3+/Fe2+ valence alternation on spatially localized 3d orbitals.
Concerning conductivity, empirical data well match the theoretical predictions of a conduction mechanism based on small polarons' hopping for both electron and hole transport.255 In particular, the extremely low mobility of electrons leads to severe energy loss due to electron–hole recombination.
Doping hematite with a metallic element, either n-type doping (i.e., with ions with a net charge higher then 3+) or p-type doping (i.e., with elements in their I or II oxidation state), is a practical solution to these limitations.255–258 DFT calculations showed that transition metals (TMs, e.g., Ti, Cr, Mn, Ni, etc.) can provide a dual functionality, namely not only TMs enhance the electron conductivity, but they can also influence other parameters, such as morphology, stoichiometry, crystallinity, lattice symmetry, grain size, etc.259
For instance, addition of titanium carbonitride (TiCN) as Ti precursor during the hydrothermal growth of α-Fe2O3 changes the morphology from porous α-Fe2O3 to Ti-doped 1D urchin-like nanostructures and leads to a photocurrent density of 1.9 mA cm−2 (measured at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G and in 1 M NaOH).260
Combining Ti-doping with the formation of oxygen vacancies introduced in hematite by controlling the oxygen pressure during α-Fe2O3 nanorod growth has been reported to lead to Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 with a coral-like morphology that exhibits a significantly larger surface area with respect to the undoped α-Fe2O3 case. The high PEC performance obtained (2.25 mA cm−2 and 4.56 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V and 1.6 V vs. RHE, respectively) was attributed to the synergistic effect of the high specific area of the nanorod/nanocoral morphology and the increased donor density, due to oxygen vacancies and Ti doping (Fig. 8(a and b)).261
 Fig. 8  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry scans of reduced and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanoarrays, showing the synergistic effect induced by Ti and oxygen vacancies on the photoanode PEC performance (measurements were performed under simulated solar light AM 1.5G irradiation, 100 mW cm−2). (b) SEM images and TEM elemental mapping of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods. (c) Effects on α-Fe2O3 morphology and properties induced by low (left) and high (right) Nb doping amounts. (d) Calculated volumes of defective α-Fe2O3 supercells containing 3d TM substitutions. (e) Schematic representation of thermally induced Sn-doping of α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays and dependence of photoanode performance, extent of Sn diffusion and FTO resistivity on the annealing time. (f) Schematic representation of the destabilizing effect induced in the α-Fe2O3 lattice by Sn4+ dopants, and the recovery of a more ordered structure promoted by Be2+ dopants. Fig. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (d) reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from the American Institute of Physics. Fig. (e) adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3810–3817. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Fig. (f) reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. 
However, the effect induced on hematite by Ti-doping has been reported to largely depend on the synthesis procedure.262–264 This in turn makes very challenging to identify a model that could be generally valid to describe the impact of Ti doping on α-Fe2O3 photoelectrochemical activity.262 Recent studies report that keys are the homogeneity263 and distribution of Ti centers (that is, shallow doping vs. bulk doping)264 in the hematite nanostructures.
In particular, Wang et al. showed that hematite layers with a larger concentration of Ti4+ accumulated in the bulk exhibited a 100% higher photocurrent than that of samples with Ti4+ segregated on the surface.264
Also the distribution of a nonmetallic dopant (e.g., P) has been recently reported to be crucial for achieving an enhancement in α-Fe2O3 PEC activity.258,265 Although doping hematite is a means to promote charge conductivity, doped α-Fe2O3 still suffers of a high charge recombination rate in the bulk. Gradient phosphorous doping, obtained by short-time annealing (10 min at 750 °C) of hematite nanobundle arrays after immersion in a Na3PO4 aqueous solution, widens the band bending region at the electrode/electrolyte interface and hence improves the separation of charge carriers. A photocurrent density of 1.5 mA cm−2 was measured at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G illumination, that is a 50% enhancement compared to uniformly P-doped α-Fe2O3 nanobundles.265
Clearly, one of the most critical aspects to take into account when introducing a dopant element into a “host” structure is the identification of the optimal dopant amount, in order to achieve the desired effects (e.g., increased donor density and charge conductivity), with a minimum of side effects.
For α-Fe2O3, for instance, an excess amount of Ta has been reported to negatively affect nanorod growth along the [110] direction, with a consequent drop of the material overall PEC performance266 – remarkably, the (110) plane of hematite with its surface termination dominated by Fe(III) ions features high conductivity.193
A similar effect was also observed for an excess amount of Nb dopant, as reported in Fig. 8(c).267
A significant lattice cell reduction, which in turn promotes larger probability for localized charge carrier (polaron) hopping and thus increases the conductivity, has been calculated for Mn-doped α-Fe2O3 (Fig. 8(d)).268,269 Mn-Doped hematite nanorods (with a dopant content in the 5–7 mol% range) has been fabricated through hydrothermal methods and photocurrent density as high as 1.6 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE has been reported. Remarkably, 5% Mn-doped hematite NRs have been recently reported to enable unassisted (bias-free) light-induced water splitting, when combined to CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite in a tandem solar cell, with a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 2.4%.270
Also Pt and Ru have been considered as TM dopants for α-Fe2O3. Guo et al. recently developed a synthetic procedure to dope ultrathin α-Fe2O3 nanorods with Ru cations.271 α-FeOOH nanorods coated with a ruthenium(III) acetylacetonate-based layer were deposited on FTO substrate via doctor blading technique; annealing in air at 700 °C converted the amorphous nanorods into crystalline hematite NRs and produced Ru nanoparticles with different valence states (+4 and +3). Such photoanodes showed a photocurrent density as high as 5.7 mA cm−2 that was attributed to (i) an enhanced carrier transport promoted by tetra- and lower-valent Ru cations, and to (ii) the absence of intra-gap trapping states in α-Fe2O3.
A most straightforward strategy for doping α-Fe2O3 nanostructures grown on FTO glass is the thermally-induced diffusion of Sn from the substrate, while annealing at temperatures above 750 °C.16,121,272,273
Among the first reports on “unintentional” Sn-doping of hematite layer on FTO is the study of Sivula et al.16 The significant enhancement of photocurrent observed upon annealing at 800 °C was attributed to a two-fold enhancement of the optical absorption coefficient, due to the structural distortion of the hematite lattice induced by tin-doping.
A similar strategy was applied by Ling et al.121 who reported a photocurrent density of 1.24 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE and attributed the enhanced PEC performance to an increased donor density (i.e., from 1.89 × 1019 cm−3 and 5.38 × 1019 cm−3 for undoped and Sn-doped hematite, respectively) and hence higher carrier conductivity.
From these early studies it is apparent that to achieve a desired functionality associated to Sn-doping, high temperature annealing is required; however, annealing FTO at 800 °C also leads to a significant change in the material stoichiometry, already after 20 min, and typically doubles tin oxide resistivity – a 10 min annealing was reported to be optimal to establish a trade-off between a desired increase in conductivity and the drawbacks related with treatment at high T (Fig. 8(e)).272 Moreover, another side effect associated with high T treatment is the collapse of α-Fe2O3 nanostructure morphology. Clearly, both effects have a negative impact on the photoanode overall PEC performance.
Therefore, different techniques including e.g. solution-based approaches, microwave hybrid annealing or chemical encapsulation have also been reported that overcome the requirement of a high temperature annealing (see also Section 3.3.3).121,274,275 For instance, efficient Sn doping of hematite was achieved starting from hydrated tin(IV) chloride as metal precursor. As for Ti-doped α-Fe2O3,260 a morphology change from nanowires for undoped hematite to nanocoral-like structures for Sn-hematite was observed, together with a surface area increase and an improved electrical conductivity that were identified as dominant factors leading to a higher photoactivity.

In situ doping of α-Fe2O3 nanotube layers was investigated by Lee et al. and Chitrada et al.276,277 Self-organizing anodization on Fe–Si alloys with various Si content (1, 2, and 5 at%) led to the simultaneous formation of iron oxide-based NT arrays and to the incorporation of Si. The introduction of Si decreased the layer growth rate and led to a more pronounced nanotubular morphology.
In particular, hematite layer with 5 at% Si exhibited a 5-fold increase in the photocurrent, along with a negative shift of the onset potential compared to the undoped sample.276
Iron oxide based nanoporous layers were also synthesized by electrochemical anodization of Fe14Nd2B permanent magnet. Highly regular structure with a pore diameter ranging from 30 to 60 nm and a thickness of about 0.5 μm were produced, while incorporation of Nd3+ and B3+ resulted in a direct band-gap of 2.05 eV for doped iron oxide, and shifted the flatband potentials to −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl.277
Despite the abovementioned beneficial effects observed upon doping α-Fe2O3, the introduction of a single dopant into the oxide lattice may induce also some undesired side effects, such as narrowing of the space charge layer and generation of impurity states within the oxide band-gap that act as recombination centers. A rational combination of two (or more) dopants can then be crucial for overcoming such drawbacks.
This has been e.g., reported in the case of Sn4+ and Be2+ co-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods (Fig. 8(f)).
Sn4+ alone, despite providing an enhanced charge conductivity, (i) introduces shallow n-type defect states beneath the conduction band minimum of hematite, thus leading to an undesired band edge shift, and (ii) increases micro-strain in the α-Fe2O3 lattice, decreasing the Fe–O bond ordering.
Nevertheless, the co-presence of Be2+ ions attenuates these negative effects, by recovering α-Fe2O3 CBM and reducing lattice distortion in hematite – remarkably, the sequence in which the co-doping is carried out was also found to be very crucial. For the optimized Sn(4%)–Be(6%) containing α-Fe2O3 NR array, a maximum photocurrent density of 1.7 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE has been reported.278
Similar effects have been demonstrated also for other co-dopant couples, including e.g. Ti–Sn,279 In–Sn280 and Ti–Si,281 while DFT calculations showed that metal/non-metal dopant combinations, such as Ti–N and Zr–N can effectively reduce the band-gap of hematite and increase its absorption properties in the visible region. Moreover, the charge distribution of the CBM and the VBM becomes spatially separated after co-doping, which is beneficial for extending the charge carrier lifetime.282
Worth mentioning are also Zn-doped (i.e., p-type doping) α-Fe2O3 NTs fabricated by means of electrodeposition.283 A precursor ZnO nanorod array simultaneously served as sacrificial template and Zn source, while a FeCl2 aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte for iron deposition. Under optimized conditions (1 VSCE anodic potential and 5–15 min reaction time), Fe2+ to Fe3+ oxidation occurs in the electrolyte, and trivalent-Fe ions precipitate and form an amorphous γ-FeOOH layer on the surface of ZnO nanorods. During this oxidation/precipitation process, ZnO is gradually dissolved due to the acidic environment and the applied anodic potential, and some of the Zn2+ ions are eventually incorporated as p-type doping species into the γ-FeOOH layer. A positive flat band potential of 1.82 V vs. RHE and an acceptor density of 4.19 × 1018 cm−3 were determined for the optimally Zn doped α-Fe2O3 NTs array, together with a cathodic photocurrent of 40.4 μA cm−2 measured at 0.5 V vs. RHE.


3.3.2 Co-catalyst decoration. 
A most effective approach to accelerate the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) kinetics in α-Fe2O3 by increasing h+ transfer rate to the electrolyte is the modification of hematite with an oxygen evolution catalyst (OEC).
Tilley et al. demonstrated that IrO2 nanoparticles (ca. 2 nm diameter) on hematite nanostructure photoanodes lead to a 200 mV cathodic shift in the onset potential and increase the photocurrent from 3.45 to 3.75 mA cm−2,284 while non-stoichiometric IrOx nanoparticles (with x = ca. 2.1) on α-Fe2O3 were reported to decrease the overpotential for the water oxidation reaction to an even larger extent.285 However, despite the fact that iridium oxide (IrOx) co-catalysts typically exhibit the highest performance in terms of OER activity,284 only a few reports deal with IrOx-decorated hematite for PEC applications, the main limitation being the high cost of Ir.
Other reported efficient co-catalyst materials for α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode include cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi), Ni–Fe and Zn–Co based layered double hydroxides (LDH), FeOOH, NiOOH, etc.
In particular, Co-Pi on 1D α-Fe2O3 nanostructures improves the overall photoanode current density and shifts the current onset potential to more cathodic values, due to the bridging effect of phosphate ions that facilitate hole injection from α-Fe2O3 to Co ions.248,249,286
Several methods are reported to deposit Co-Pi on hematite nanostructure surface, such as chemical immersion deposition, electrodeposition and photoassisted electrodeposition.248,250
In particular, photoassisted electrodeposition of Co-Pi catalyst enables the formation of an optimized junction between hematite and the catalyst for a maximized interfacial charge transfer, with the amount of co-catalyst that can be easily controlled by deposition time and current density. For these reasons, such technique provides Co-Pi/α-Fe2O3 layers with superior photoelectrochemical water oxidation ability compared to both Co-Pi electrodeposition and Co2+ wet impregnation methods.287,288
More recently, NiOOH, FeOOH, and Ni–Fe LDH, NiFeOx and Zn–Co LDH layers have shown remarkable performance used in combination with α-Fe2O3 for photoelectrocatalytic water oxidation.251,252,289,290 Several methods are known for the deposition of oxy-hydroxide and LDH layers onto hematite nanostructures, the most common being e.g. solvothermal techniques, electrodeposition or photoelectrodeposition and pulsed laser deposition (PLD).291–294 For all these co-catalyst/α-Fe2O3 combinations, a remarkable increase in photocurrent and decrease in water oxidation overpotential has been reported compared to naked hematite layers. In particular, a NiFeOx-decorated hematite layer prepared by a photochemical deposition technique exhibited a significant cathodic shift of the water oxidation overpotential, primarily due to improvement in the interface energetics. Moreover, used as photoanode in combination with a TiO2/Pt-modified Si photocathode, NiFeOx-decorated α-Fe2O3 provided one of the first examples of a tandem solar cell made of earth-abundant elements that could enable unassisted light-induced water splitting.290
Although the co-catalysts studied for PEC water splitting reactions are typically inorganic materials, also organic based ones have been recently explored. Among these, Ru-based molecular water oxidation catalysts, also conveniently functionalized (e.g., with a strong 2,6-pyridine-dicarboxylic acid anchoring group), are worth mentioning.295,296 In spite of improving the PEC performance of hematite-based photoanodes, a major challenge for the use of such materials still remains their poor photostability.


3.3.3 Other strategies. 
As previously mentioned (Section 3.2.4), strategies that can be used to improve the PEC performance of 1D hematite photoanodes include e.g. surface passivation, the formation of heterostructures, sensitization by quantum dots and plasmonic metal nanoparticles, the use of graphene derivatives for enhancing the photogenerated charge dynamics, etc.
Modification of α-Fe2O3 nanostructures by solution methods (e.g., impregnation) has been explored to protect/modify the oxide surface and enable higher PEC efficiency and longer stability under operating conditions.
Kim et al. reported that upon impregnation in a phosphate-based solution, the isoelectric point (IEP) of hematite is shifted to a considerably lower value (i.e., from pH 8.3 for the bare oxide, to pH 4.8 for the PO34−-modified oxide). For photocurrent measurements performed in a potassium phosphate buffered electrolyte (pH 7), the negatively charged PO34− ions attached to the α-Fe2O3 surface promoted hole extraction and injection from the photoanode into the electrolyte, thus increasing the electron–hole pair separation in hematite and leading to a three-time higher photocurrent density than that measured with the bare oxide.297
Improved efficiency of charge separation and enhanced photocurrent have been also observed upon acetic acid treatment of hematite nanowires doped with Sn from FTO glass (see Section 3.3.1). Transient absorption and transient photocurrent spectroscopies provided evidence that this effect may be ascribed to a minimization of surface electron–hole recombination due to the passivation of surface electron trap states by acetic acid.298
A popular approach to enhance the intrinsically low visible light absorption coefficient of hematite is to integrate a plasmonic nanostructure (e.g., Au and Ag) with the semiconductor.299 In contrast with e.g. Au on TiO2 (see Section 3.4.2), the intense local field enhancement of gold at the LSPR wavelength overlaps with the absorption band edge of hematite and can thus enhance solar energy collection at energies below the band edge of α-Fe2O3 through a plasmon-induced energy transfer effect.66,212,300
In particular, plasmonic nanostructures can be designed to concentrate LSPR effects into small regions and, if the absorbed photon flux is simultaneously confined within a ultrathin film of e.g. α-Fe2O3, this clearly shortens the diffusion distance of photogenerated holes to the electrolyte, thus reducing the charge recombination rate and leading to an overall increase in PEC performance.301–303
Gao et al. showed a ∼30% enhancement in the photocurrent of a α-Fe2O3 thin-film photoanode coated on arrays of Au nanopillars (∼0.4 mA cm−2 at 1.5 VRHE under AM 1.5G illumination), compared to a α-Fe2O3/Au flat electrode (∼0.3 mA cm−2), and attributed the effect to an increased LSPR-induced optical absorption and to a photonic light trapping mode in the nanostructured film.301
Similar light and plasmonic effect confinements were reported also for more complex semiconductor–plasmonic-metal–metal-oxide core–multishell (CMS) nanowire arrays, composed of a Si core (40 nm diameter) – Si is known to reduce the overpotential of hematite for OER, and of Al (50 nm) and a α-Fe2O3 ultrathin film (<50 nm) as inner and outer shells, respectively (Fig. 9(a)). Under ideal conditions, a maximum photocurrent density of ∼12 mA cm−2 was achieved that corresponds to a STH efficiency of 14.5%,302i.e., about 93% of the theoretical maximum efficiency reported for bulk hematite.17 This outlined that nanostructuring (of both the metal oxide and the plasmonic metal) is key to manipulate and concentrate the incident light in small regions where photogenerated charges can reach the reaction site (i.e., the semiconductor/electrolyte interface) with minimal recombination.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic and band-structure of a Si–Al–α-Fe2O3 CMS NW photoelectrode (upper panel). Integrated absorbed photon flux and ideal photocurrent density of various CSM NW arrays – the gray dashed line indicates the theoretical maximum absorption in bulk hematite (lower panel). (b) Schematic representation of the main electron–hole recombination pathways in hematite NRs photoanodes for solar water splitting, and of the three-step approach to reduce bulk, interface, and surface recombination. SEM image of the Ti/flame hematite NRs after sequential oxalic acid etching and FeOOH decoration. J–V curves measured at 0.8 VRHE of Ti/flame hematite NRs, also modified according to different surface treatments: (i) oxalic acid (OA) etching, (ii) FeOOH deposition, and (iii) combined OA etching and FeOOH deposition. (a) Adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4517–4522. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced from ref. 326 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
Moreover, Si–Al–α-Fe2O3 CMS NWs were also shown to outperform Si–Au–α-Fe2O3 arrays (Fig. 9(a)) and indicate that Al may be an excellent alternative plasmonic material compared to more precious and conventional metals, such as Ag and Au.302
Charge injection (i.e., hot electron transfer) from a plasmonic metal to hematite has been demonstrated for Ag NPs on α-Fe2O3 nanosheets (NSs) with exposed active (001) facets; for this assembly, the introduction of Ag NPs led to significantly improved light harvest in a broad wavelength region, from UV to the NIR.304 The possibility of charge injection from Ag to α-Fe2O3 is enabled by the higher energy position of the metal Fermi level with respect to that of hematite. This led to a photocurrent increase from 1.5 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE for pristine hematite NS photoanode to 3.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE for the Ag/α-Fe2O3 layer. Moreover, by further decoration of the Ag/α-Fe2O3 photoanode with Co-Pi, a remarkable photocurrent density of 4.68 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE was achieved that could be attributed to the solely co-catalytic effect of Co-Pi for the OER, as no significant change in the light absorption properties of the layer was correspondingly observed.
In the context of C-based co-catalytic materials, a multi-heterojunction assembly consisting of α-Fe2O3 (core)/reduced graphene oxide (rGO, interlayer)/BiV1−xMoxO4 (shell) has been investigated by Hou et al. as photoanode material for PEC water splitting.305 According to the authors, the system provides multiple beneficial functionalities: the BiV1−xMoxO4 shell enhances light harvesting properties, while the rGO interlayer bridges the photoactive shell with the hematite core and enables shuttling of photogenerated electrons from BiV1−xMoxO4 to α-Fe2O3, significantly reducing charge recombination due to enhanced e−/h+ separation. For such a system, a negative shift of the onset potential has been observed, along with an increased photocurrent density of 1.97 mA cm−2 measured at 1.6 V vs. RHE.
A synergistic co-catalytic effect has been also described for carbon nanodots (CDots) and a Co3O4 layer, both deposited on α-Fe2O3.306 In particular, the interaction between CDots and Co3O4 co-catalyst improves the PEC efficiency of pure α-Fe2O3 by accelerating the two-step-two-electron O2 evolution from H2O. That is, the kinetically slow process of water oxidation molecule to H2O2 that takes place at Co3O4 sites is significantly accelerated by the fast oxidation reaction of H2O2 to O2, catalyzed by CDots.
Other efficient heterojunction partners for α-Fe2O3 include n-Si,303,307 ZnFe2O4,308 MgFe2O4309 and AgxFe2−xO3.310
A heterojunction based on Co-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorod array branched with a MgFe2O4 ultrathin layer has been reported by Hou et al.309 A Co-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorod photoanode prepared by hydrothermal method is decorated with an MgFe2O4 film using a wet impregnation method, in combination with thermal annealing. Due to the suitable band alignment between the two components, electrons photopromoted in the MgFe2O4 overlayer migrate to the conduction band of Co-α-Fe2O3 and, along the nanorods, to the back contact. At the same time, holes from the valence band of Co-α-Fe2O3 are transferred to that of MgFe2O4 where they react with water to form O2.
A significant enhancement in PEC performance has also been reported for an inverse heterostructure consisting of ZnO nanowires (core)/ultrathin α-Fe2O3 (∼5 nm, shell). This n/n heterojunction generates a negative shift in the flat-band potential and increases surface band bending, thus promoting charge carrier separation. Both these features resulted in a 2-fold enhancement of the PEC activity compared to that of a bare ZnO photoanode.188
Mao et al. reported on a template-assisted method for use of noble metals (such as Pt and Au) as conducting support to enhance charge conductivity in α-Fe2O3.311 At first, Au nanorods are grown in an aluminum oxide template (AAO). Afterwards, Fe ions are electrodeposited onto the Au nanorods, followed by annealing in oxygen atmosphere. Upon removal of the AAO template, a photocurrent density of 8 mA cm−2 was measured, with 10 μm long NRs. Following a similar procedure, Pt-supported α-Fe2O3 nanorods were also prepared that exhibited a photocurrent density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. RHE.
Clearly, for both Au- and Pt-supported heterostructures, a crucial contribution to such a high PEC performance is given by the high conductivity of the noble metals, although also their contribution towards an increased light absorption cannot be excluded.
The use of 1D (or 3D) transparent conductive oxides (TCOs), namely ITO (In:SnO2),312 FTO (F:SnO2),313 ATO (Sb:SnO2),74,314–316 NTO (Nb:SnO2),79 as electron collecting scaffolds has been investigated as a means to hinder the intrinsically low conductivity of hematite. Such host–guest architectures (i.e., TCO-α-Fe2O3) have been shown to meet both the electronic and the optical requirements to achieve high PEC performance with a hematite-based photoelectrode.
Supported by first-principle full-field electromagnetic simulations, Wang et al. demonstrated that an ITO nanocone array decorated with a 20 nm α-Fe2O3 light absorbing layer can in principle exhibit a nearly total above band-gap solar absorption, which corresponds to a maximum theoretical photocurrent density of 12.5 mA cm−2.317
Zhang et al. showed that ITO (core)/α-Fe2O3 (shell) nanostructures, also decorated with a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) layer, exhibit a photocurrent as high as 5.38 mA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs. SCE – that is, a 3.5-fold enhancement compared to ITO/α-Fe2O3 photoelectrodes.
In this configuration, not only the TCO/hematite assembly is crucial for optimizing electron transport/collection, but also the rGO layer forms an ohmic contact with hematite that facilitates the transfer of photogenerated holes to the electrolyte and, hence, accelerates the oxygen evolution reaction kinetics.312
Similar to the more commonly reported black TiO2, also reduced α-Fe2O3 has been prepared by hydrogen plasma treatment of an α-Fe2O3 layer.318 “Black-like” hematite consists of mixed Fe3O4 and α-Fe2O3 phases, where the mixed Fe:O stoichiometry (due to the valence switching between Fe3+ and Fe2+) is crucial to increase hematite donor density and hence improve its conductivity.319 This aspect, in combination with a reduced band-gap, led to a considerable increase of photocurrent density and a most significant cathodic shift in the photocurrent onset potential (from 1.68 to 1.28 V vs. RHE upon hydrogen plasma treatment), most likely due to the appearance of new surface-states.206,320,321
Oxygen vacancies engineering in α-Fe2O3 can also be achieved upon annealing under various other (reducing) atmospheres. Highly conductive Fe2O3−x nanowire arrays were for instance reported for a thermal decomposition of β-FeOOH akaganeite at 550 °C in N2–air mixture (with an oxygen content as low as 0.43%).
Remarkably, the relatively low temperature did not damage the film wire morphology. A significant increase of the donor density from ∼3.3 × 1019 cm−3 (for a hematite NW layer annealed at 550 °C in air) to ∼3.7 × 1020 cm−3 (for the N2–air annealed sample) was attributed to Fe2+ shallow donors and a photocurrent of 3.37 mA cm−2 at 1.5 V vs. RHE was reported.322 A comparable effect has been more recently reported upon multi-step annealing of as-deposited β-FeOOH films at even lower temperatures (i.e., 1 hour annealing at 350 °C in pure N2, followed by 30 min annealing in air at the same T).323
As shown by Moir et al., oxygen vacancies can also be generated by annealing crystalline α-Fe2O3 thin-films (produced from amorphous layer by thermal treatment at 450 °C in air for 2 h) in an Ar/H2(5%) atmosphere at 450 °C for 2 h.321
Aside from thermal treatments in oxygen-poor atmosphere at T ∼ 450–550 °C, annealing hematite at higher temperatures (e.g. in the 650–800 °C range) in air is also often explored as a means to increase its PEC performance; however, under such conditions, sintering and collapse of the ordered one-dimensional arrays often occur.
Brillet et al. and Morrish et al. observed that the energy barrier for hematite activation is higher than that for morphology evolution. Therefore, decoupling the two events can enable (i) the growth of highly ordered 1D nanostructures, upon annealing performed at lower T and (ii) hematite activation to higher PEC performance (e.g., owing to Sn-doping from FTO glass), upon annealing at higher T (>600 °C).274,324
In particular, if the nanostructured α-Fe2O3 layer (that is, the layer obtained after the first annealing step) is protected through conformal coating with a rigid SiO2 layer, the desired film morphology can be preserved up to 800 °C – however, anodic shift of the onset potential is observed, and the desired hematite PEC features can be restored only upon removal of the SiO2 coating.274
Remarkably, also decorating FTO glass with Sb-doped SnO2 (ATO) NPs enables the growth of sintering-resistant α-Fe2O3 nanorods. Wang et al. reported that the high lattice energy of the ATO–FTO interface can control hematite morphology evolution during annealing at high temperature (800 °C), and a photocurrent density of 2.12 mA cm−2 was measured at 1.23 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5G solar illumination – for such an heterostructure, a contribution similar to that mentioned for TCO–hematite host–guest composites (see above) should not be anyway excluded.325
Finally, an example of a sequential-multifold approach applied to α-Fe2O3 nanorods for (i) reducing electron–hole recombination in the bulk oxide, (ii) promoting electron transport to the back-contact, while simultaneously enabling fast hole injection into the electrolyte has been provided by Cho et al. (Fig. 9(b)).326
A flame-treatment in the presence of a Ti precursor can be used to produce Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods, with reduced bulk and surface charge recombination, without affecting the morphology of the hematite NRs. The addition of a dense-layer between the hematite array and the fluorine-doped SnO2 substrate effectively reduced the interfacial recombination by suppressing electron back-injection. The deposition of a FeOOH on the surface of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods passivated hematite surface states and provided a highly active interface for hole injection into the electrolyte. These sequential treatments led to an overall significant decrease of the photocurrent onset potential (ca. 400 mV).

3.4 TiO2 for photoelectrochemical applications
Titanium dioxide crystallizes in three major different polymorphs, namely anatase (A), brookite (B), and rutile (R). In particular, anatase and rutile TiO2 represent the crystalline forms more widely investigated for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic applications.201 It is commonly reported that, for bulk TiO2, anatase into rutile transition occurs at annealing T > 600 °C, under ambient atmospheric conditions.327
While holding for TiO2 nanopowders, this observation is however not always valid: as we will discuss in the following section, amorphous TiO2 may even crystallize directly in the form of rutile, or the anatase-into-rutile transformation may occur at lower temperature. These are the cases of e.g. hydrothermal TiO2 nanorods that, fabricated at high pressure (∼15–20 atm) and at T ∼ 150–200 °C, typically nucleate with a rutile crystal structure, or of anodic TiO2 nanotubes on Ti metal foil.328,329
Both anatase and rutile TiO2 exhibit a tetragonal structure with lattice cell parameters a = b = 3.782 Å and c = 9.502 Å for anatase, and a = b = 4.594 Å and c = 2.953 Å, respectively.201 In both structures, crystalline units consist of TiO6 octahedra (i.e., each Ti4+ atom is surrounded by six O2− atoms), with a more or less pronounced distorted configuration: two long bonds between the (central) Ti atom and the O atoms at the apices and four shorter Ti–O equatorial bonds (i.e., 1.966 Å vs. 1.937 Å in anatase, and 1.983 Å vs. 1.946 Å in rutile).330 Despite having the same chemical composition, differences in the coordination environments and chemical bonding of anatase and rutile TiO2 strongly affect the electronic properties of the material.
Early studies by Earle in 1942 demonstrated that TiO2 is an n-type semiconductor, with a valence band that exhibits a strong O 2p character and a conduction band mainly composed of Ti 3d orbitals.331
In its amorphous form, TiO2 has a mobility gap of 3.2–3.5 eV and a very low electron mobility. Upon crystallization to anatase or rutile an indirect optical band-gap of 3.2 eV and 3.0 eV is obtained, respectively, with both polymorphs showing a higher mobility than amorphous TiO2.332 In particular, a crystallization into anatase is often reported to be crucial to obtain a high electron mobility.333
Not only the crystal structure, but also oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ states in the lattice largely influence the electronic and optical properties of TiO2. Electrons may be trapped in Ti3+ states (or holes in the oxygen vacancies) and injected in the nearby conduction (or valence) band by thermal excitation. Electron conductivity of TiO2 is therefore dominated by Ti3+ trap states and, in the polycrystalline materials, also by the grain size.334,335
Spectro-/photo-/electrochemical characterization336,337 performed on anatase and rutile crystals showed that both polymorphs exhibit positive holes with adequate oxidative power to promote H2O oxidation to O2 and mainly differ for the position of their conduction band edges; in particular, while the conduction band of rutile is slightly more positive than E°(H+/H2), the flat-band potential of anatase is 0.2 V more negative than rutile. Therefore, splitting of water into H2 and O2 is in principle thermodynamically possible (that is, spontaneous) without external bias on anatase only. However, due to the slow kinetics of the cathodic HER, also a TiO2 anatase-based photoanode is often assisted by an applied voltage that by inducing favorable band bending increases charge separation.
The first study on the use of TiO2 as electrode material in a photoelectrochemical arrangement dates back to 1968;338 rutile (single crystal) reduced in H2 atmosphere was shown to evolve O2 from a phosphate buffered aqueous solution, under chopped UV illumination from a mercury arc lamp and 0–50 V vs. SCE applied bias. Only the anodic reaction was considered and tunneling of electrons from occupied levels at the surface directly into the empty conduction band was suggested to produce upward band bending near the surface, at the TiO2 electrode.
However, only after the ground-breaking work of Fujishima and Honda in 1972 on the “complete” photoelectrochemical water splitting reaction (i.e., into H2 and O2), TiO2 has been regarded as the key semiconductor material for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic applications.
This not only because of its intrinsic electronic and optical properties, but also because it is abundant, cheap, non-toxic and stable against (photo)corrosion – all relevant aspects when targeting the production of e.g. large-scale devices for energy conversion.
A large number of studies have been promoted to address one of the (still) biggest limitations of TiO2, that is, its relatively wide band-gap (as mentioned, 3.0–3.2 eV) that rules out any possible use of λ > 400 nm for light-promoted reactions.
After various early findings339,340 and, in particular, since the report by Asahi on the visible light activity of nitrogen-doped titania,152 doping has been (one of) the leitmotivs for the fabrication of visible light active materials.
As discussed in the previous Section (3.2.1), doping of TiO2 is achieved by replacing metal (titanium) or nonmetal (oxygen) atoms with a nonmetal or a transition metal cation (i.e., substitutional doping), or by filling in interstitial lattice spaces (i.e., interstitial doping). Typical nonmetal dopants for TiO2 nanomaterials are B, C, N, F, P, S, Cl, and Br;88,152,159,160,341 on the other hand, Cr, V, W, Ta and Nb are commonly used as metal dopants.342–346
Along with the development of strategies for its sensitization, nanostructuring (in particular one-dimensional nanostructuring) of TiO2 has also attracted tremendous interest in view of improving charge separation and collection in TiO2-based (photo)electrodes.
In the following sections we will deal with one-dimensional TiO2-based nanostructures, that exhibit improved PEC-WS ability and that were obtained by a rational design of complementary strategies (doping, co-catalytic effects, and other (more recent) strategies) to tackle the specific (mentioned) limitations of the material – Table 2 reports some examples of different synthetic/modification approaches to 1D TiO2 nanostructures and their PEC performances.
Table 2 Selected examples of 1D TiO2 based photoanodes and their PEC performance




Structure
Preparation
SEM
Electrolyte

j/mA cm−2
Ref.




In all cases solar light AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) was used for irradiation. SEM images (from top to bottom): reproduced from ref. 453 with permission from Elsevier; adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5629–5631. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society; reproduced from ref. 454 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; reproduced from ref. 344 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8438–8449. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society; reproduced from ref. 428 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.




TiO2 NTs
Anodization



1 M KOH
0.90 at 1.23 VRHE

453



Ru-doped TiO2 NTs
Anodization



1 M KOH
1.8 at 1.23 VRHE

364



TiO2 NWs
Hydrothermal



1 M NaOH
2.6 at 1.23 VRHE

454



Fe-doped TiO2 NRs
Hydrothermal method



1 M KOH
3.0 at 1.23 VRHE

344



CdS–Au–TiO2 NRs
Hydrothermal method and chemical bath deposition



0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3
4.1 at 0.0 VAg/AgCl

455



TiO2/ln2S3/AgInS2 core–shell branched NRs
Two-step hydrothermal method and SILAR



1 M KOH
22.1 at 0.56 VAg/AgCl

428






3.4.1 TiO2 one-dimensional arrays. 
The beneficial characteristics of one-dimensional nanoarrays (e.g., enhanced charge carrier separation, improved e− transport, large carrier collection efficiency, etc. – see Section 2.1) combined with the intrinsic electronic and optical properties of TiO2 (see above) contributed to the development of 1D-TiO2 based nanostructures for a large variety of (but not limited to) light-related applications: for photoelectrochemistry and photocatalysis, in Grätzel-type solar cells, for photovoltaic and electrochromic devices, etc.47–49,347,348
In many of these applications, the efficiency depends to a large extent on the available surface area, that is, on the surface area of the electrode that is accessible to both the electrolyte and the incident irradiation.
However, it has been observed that for nanoparticle and nanotube layers with the same thickness, although the effective surface area of the particles is higher than that of the nanotubes, the quantum efficiency for nanotubes is higher (Fig. 10(a)).349 Therefore, also other factors should be considered that play an important role in the photoelectrochemical characteristics of 1D-TiO2 based nanostructures, e.g., the lower number of surface states in nanotubes and the upward band bending.
 Fig. 10  (a) Photocurrent and IPCE vs. applied potential measured for flat compact oxide (60 nm thick), 2.4 μm thick nanoparticle, and 2.4 μm thick nanotube TiO2 layers under incident λ = 350 nm. (b) IPCE vs. wavelength spectra measured for different thicknesses of nanotube layers anodized in an ethylene glycol-based electrolyte. (c) SEM images of TiO2 NRs and branched TiO2 NRs (B-NRs). (d) TEM images of a branched nanorod. (e) Photocurrent vs. applied potential measured for TiO2 NRs and B-NRs. Fig. (a and b) reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157(3), G76. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society. Fig. (c and d) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the photoelectrochemical performance of one-dimensional nanostructures is largely influenced by the geometrical aspect of the arrays, that is, it varies with the thickness and/or diameter of the nanostructures; overall, the different carrier mobility (in different structures and morphologies) seems to dominate the efficiency.
For TiO2 nanotube arrays, the work of Lynch et al. outlined how the morphology of nanotubes affects their photoelectrochemical properties also in comparison to other TiO2 nanostructures.349 In particular, the IPCE efficiency of tubes was shown to increase with increasing the layer thickness up to a critical maximum length (i.e., d = ca. 5–6 μm for ethylene glycol-based nanotubes – Fig. 10(b)). When an e−/h+ pair is generated in the tube walls, holes are promptly transferred to the electrolyte – this as long as depletion conditions are established in the tube walls,350,351 while electrons must be transported to the substrate (e.g., metallic back-contact, FTO, ITO). The longer the tube, the larger is the contribution of charge recombination.
Other morphological features were also shown to be crucial to enhance the PEC-WS ability of TiO2 NTs, such as the smoothness of the tube walls,349 and the geometry of the tube top.352 In particular, tubes grown in organic electrolyte exhibit superior performance compared to tubes grown in aqueous electrolyte (i.e., ripple-walled NTs); a possible reason could be the increased wall smoothness and the greater order of the formers that also lead to a significant increase in the charge carrier diffusion length compared to ripple-walled tubes.349 On the other hand, the presence of “grass” on the tube tops was shown to be highly detrimental for photoelectrochemical solar light water splitting, more likely due to a trap filling mechanism predominant in the “grass” part of the tubes.352
Compared to classic TiO2 thin films (with no specific 1D morphology), also TiO2 NW arrays exhibit significantly higher PEC ability.353 In particular, also for nanowires on conductive ITO substrate photocurrent measurements showed that the layer thickness plays a significant role and a maximum photocurrent can be achieved for ∼5 μm thick layers,354 confirming that under specific conditions a critical thickness exists to enable efficient transport and collection of electrons in TiO2-based one-dimensional arrays.98,349,354
Moreover, for TiO2 in particular a crystallization into anatase is crucial for photoelectrochemical applications.333,355
However, for titania nanotubes, a common problem of annealing tubes on Ti metal substrate is that such a thermal treatment also induces the formation of undesired rutile phase at the metal/oxide interface, due to the thermal oxidation of metallic Ti, and typically catalyzes the anatase to rutile transition in the NT walls.328 Therefore, large efforts are dedicated to the identification of strategies for overcoming this detrimental crystal phase transition: e.g., optimized annealing rate profile,356 doping the TiO2 NTs with low amount of Nb,357 detachment of tubes from the metallic substrate,329etc.
Nevertheless, also TiO2-based nanomaterials with a rutile crystal structure are reported for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting.
This is particularly relevant for single-crystalline TiO2 NRs grown on FTO glass by hydrothermal methods. Such nanorods exhibit a rutile crystal structure due to the significantly low lattice mismatch (∼2%)358 between tetragonal FTO (a = b = 0.4687 nm)359 and rutile TiO2 (a = b = 0.4594 nm),201 and typically grow vertically oriented from the FTO substrate, along the (110) crystal plane with a preferred (001) orientation.120,358,360,361 The single-crystalline nature of these NRs plays a critical role for the observed PEC efficiency. Clearly, the absence of grain boundaries, which contribute to poor electron mobility in conventional polycrystalline TiO2 films, suppresses charge carrier losses due to recombination and leads to relatively high performance (∼0.5–1.0 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5G illumination).116,360,361
More recently, also the synthesis of branched single crystal rutile TiO2 nanorods has been reported for PEC hydrogen production.362 Due to their branched structure (Fig. 10(c–e)), these NRs exhibit larger surface area and excellent light-trapping characteristics due to enhanced light scattering phenomena that collectively contribute to the ca. four-fold enhancement in photocurrent density compared to more conventional NRs.
Although, in view of single crystal materials, rutile crystals are much easier to synthesize, produce defined surfaces, and are much better characterized on an atomic level, also the fabrication of single crystal anatase TiO2 1D nanostructures has been recently developed for light-induced applications. In this case, the use of an alkaline reaction media and, particularly, the presence of a seed layer on the FTO substrate are essential prerequisites (see Section 3.1). Due to the higher electron mobility that characterizes anatase with respect to rutile TiO2,333,355 single crystal anatase TiO2 nanorods/wires mostly find applications as photoanode for dye-sensitized solar cells.118,119


3.4.2 Doping and defect engineering. 
When considering TiO2 for solar PEC water splitting, strategies for a rational design are needed that address its intrinsic limitations, namely (i) a band-gap too large for an efficient use of solar light and (ii) a conduction band minimum (more appropriately, a Fermi level EF) only slightly negative on an electrochemical potential scale to the hydrogen evolution potential (see Section 3.2.1).160,363 Typically, (i) is overcome by nonmetal doping of TiO2, while (ii) is addressed with the introduction of a metal dopant into the oxide lattice.
For instance, the highest PEC-WS current density reported for anodic TiO2 tubes, under most optimized conditions, is 0.25–0.3 mA cm−2 measured in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5G illumination.364 This is ascribed to the slow transport of electrons along the nanotube length, i.e., in the order of seconds,349 which cannot be overcome by simply adjusting the tube morphology. Nevertheless, clearly better results are obtained when the tubular morphology is combined to the modification of the TiO2 physicochemical properties (see below).
In general, since the valence band minimum of TiO2 is much lower than the H2O/O2 redox potential, band-gap reduction should be approached by shifting the VBM upwards, i.e., without affecting the more “critical” position of the conduction band. This is typically accomplished by introducing a high density of states (or a band) above the original valence band of TiO2, that is, by incorporating into the TiO2 lattice anions with p orbitals that are more energetic than those of O 2p. To this regard, most appropriate dopants are substitutional nitrogen and carbon that, beside introducing suitable acceptor levels, also exhibit ionic radii similar to that of oxygen; hence, their incorporation causes minimal distortion in the oxide lattice.160
Clearly, depending on the synthetic approach to 1D-nanostructured TiO2 materials and also on the dopant element, different doping strategies are available.
For instance, nitrogen-doping and visible light driven PEC water splitting have been reported upon annealing single-crystal rutile TiO2 NWs in NH3 atmosphere under optimized conditions (i.e., annealing temperature, time, and NH3 pressure).98 The low-energy threshold of IPCE spectra for N-doped TiO2 was red-shifted to λ ∼ 520 nm (Fig. 11(a)). A more significant shift of photocurrent threshold to λ ∼ 570 nm was also reported upon nitridation (in NH3 atmosphere) and hydrogenation (in H2/Ar atmosphere) of a TiO2 NW array. The interaction between substitutional N- and the Ti3+-centers induced by hydrogenation (i.e., between midgap levels close to the valence and conduction bands, respectively – Fig. 11(b and c)) has been proposed as key for spectrum extension and visible light photoactivity.199
 Fig. 11  (a) IPCE spectra of N-modified TiO2 films at 1.4 VRHE, in 1 M KOH. (b) IPCE spectra measured at 1.23 VRHE, 1 M KOH electrolyte and under AM 1.5G irradiation. (c) Proposed mechanism for the interaction between Ti3+ (formed upon hydrogenation) and substitutional N. (d) Photocurrent transient under monochromatic laser (λ = 474 nm) for aminated nanotubes; (e) IPCE spectra of the TiO2 nanotube before and after hydrothermal treatment for amination; at different temperature in DETA; (f) comparison of transport time constants for bare and aminated TiO2 nanotube as a function of the incident photon flux, for monochromatic 369 and 475 nm light illumination. Fig. (a) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Fig. (b and c) adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3659–3662. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Fig. (d–f) reproduced from ref. 371 with permission from Elsevier. 
However, the effects induced by substitutional N and by midgap state formation on the N-TiO2 PEC activity are strongly debated. Despite several reports showing an improved PEC performance for N-doped TiO2 nanostructures,98,199,365 other studies demonstrated that to a promoted vis-light activity of N-TiO2 also corresponds an increase of carrier recombination rate under UV irradiation, particularly when the N amount exceeds the optimum concentration.153
It should be noted that, with respect to various methods used to achieve nitrogen doping, different states of nitrogen are observed, and the active species may be present in bulk TiO2 or on the surface. To determine the nature of doping-induced states, typically non-destructive surface spectroscopic techniques such as XPS are used. Low-dose N ion-implantation into TiO2 tube layers shows an XPS peak at ∼396 eV,154,155 which is in accordance with the peak position of Ti–N bonds in titanium nitride.156
On the other hand, wet treatments in amine-based solutions typically lead to peaks at ∼400 eV (or higher) and also yield visible light response. This is the case, for instance, of nitrogen-doping from NH4F contained in the electrolyte for the anodic growth of tubes,366 or of N-doping by hydrothermal treatment of TiO2 nanotubes in the presence of trimethylamine.367 However, such a peak in many cases corresponds to adsorbed molecular nitrogen on TiO2 and often leads to neither (or negligible) visible photocurrent nor photocatalytic activity.157,368 That is, although absorption spectra of such N-TiO2 materials provide evidence of extended sub-band gap absorption, corresponding photocurrent spectra (if provided) may not show significant response.
Visible light photocurrent response and IPCE spectra of TiO2 anodic layers modified with urea,369,370 and the photocurrent transients of aminated TiO2 nanotubes under monochromatic laser (λ = 474 nm)371 provided evidence of a significantly improved solar PEC activity compared to undoped TiO2 (Fig. 11(d and e)). Remarkably, the decoration of the tubes with amino group (i.e., formation of surface states), along with interstitial nitrogen doping, not only leads to an increase in the photocurrents for both UV and visible regions of the light spectrum, but also significantly improves the electrode conductivity due to a lower charge transfer resistance and hence a faster carrier transport in the nanotubes after amination (Fig. 11(f)).371
In the case of carbon-doped TiO2, reported findings are to a certain extent ambiguous and particularly limited amount of IPCE data on C-doped TiO2 questions the actual role of C-doping on the visible light PEC-WS ability of these materials.162
According to DFT calculations, carbon-doping TiO2 leads to a modest variation of the oxide band-gap, while at the same time induces several midgap occupied states which may account for the observed red shift in the light absorption threshold and for the formation of oxygen vacancies, but may also promote charge carrier trapping.372
From the experimental point of view, little to no photocurrent in the visible range is usually reported for C-doped TiO2 nanostructures.157–159 For instance, C-doping by annealing titania nanotube arrays under controlled CO gas flow showed a slight enhancement in the PEC-WS performance measured under visible light illumination with respect to undoped TiO2 NTs.159 Interestingly, C-containing tubes (that is, tubes with a double-walled morphology where carbon uptake is due to the decomposition of the anodizing organic electrolyte under applied voltage) also exhibit a change in the TiO2 optical properties and sub-band gap response has been reported for carbon contaminations as low as ∼3 at% (Fig. 12(a)).349
 Fig. 12  (a) IPCE spectra of different C-contaminated TiO2 nanotube layers that show sub-band gap response: (■) amorphous NTs, (●) NTs annealed in air, (○) NTs annealed in CH3OH-containing atmosphere. (b) Potential-dependent capacity measurements of the different nanotube layers in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution at 1 kHz and plotted in a Mott–Schottky graph. (c) Hardness vs. carbonization temperature plot for various treated TiO2 nanotube layers, obtained from nanoindentation tests (the inset reports the SEM image of a nanoindentation test spot). (d) Schematic representation of the growth pathway of porous single-crystal rutile TiO2 nanorods; (e) SEM image and dark-field TEM image of F-doped porous single-crystal rutile TiO2 nanorods; (f) linear sweep voltammograms of undoped solid TiO2 NRs, and F-doped solid and porous TiO2 NRs. Fig. (a) reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157(3), G76. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 373 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 374 with permission from Elsevier. Fig. (d–f) reproduced from ref. 376 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
By contrast, in line with theory predicting that the incorporation of carbon and/or related defects strongly affects the electronic structure of TiO2,372 a drastic change to a semimetallic TiOxCy compound,373 also with improved mechanical stability,374 has been reported by thermal treatment of TiO2 nanotubes in an acetylene atmosphere (Fig. 12(b and c)).
Finally, although theoretical calculations do not consider F as a suitable substitutional dopant for TiO2 because it is in principle a donor at O sites,160 Fang et al. reported on porous single-crystal F-doped TiO2 NRs where fluorine-doping is shown not only to improve the electron transport properties of single crystal rutile TiO2, but also to enhance the PEC activity under both UV and visible irradiation (Fig. 12(d–f)).375,376
Doping TiO2 with a metal (that is, a donor species) is reported to promote faster electron transport and, hence, to reduce charge recombination. As mentioned, it is of primary importance that any doping attempt in TiO2 does not affect the conduction band minimum (or, even better, slightly upshifts the CBM) to satisfy the correct band-edge position relative to the H+/H2 redox potential and provides sufficient driving force for hydrogen production. For this, transition metals (TMs) are suitable dopant candidates, since they have d orbitals with energies higher than those of Ti and are similar in size. DFT calculations, in particular, showed that most suitable metal dopants are Ta, Nb, W, and Mo.160 However, experimental evidence has been provided that also other transition metals are suitable for TiO2 doping to achieve a better charge carrier transport.
In the case of self-organized NTs, a most unique approach to X-doped TiO2 is offered by the possibility of anodizing Ti–X alloys (with e.g., X = Ru, Ta, W, Nb, Cr). In this case, simple tailoring of the anodization parameters is sufficient to fabricate highly aligned and variously doped TiO2-based nanotube arrays.343,346,357,377–384
For instance, RuO2-modified TiO2 nanotubes grown from Ru–Ti alloys exhibit PEC characteristics that depend on the Ru content. In particular, strong and stable enhancement of the PEC activity has been obtained for a Ru concentration as low as 0.5 at% and for annealing at 450 °C (Fig. 13(a)). Under these conditions, a 6-fold increase in photocurrent density was measured compared to pristine TiO2 NTs, and the effect was also shown to be far superior compared to anodic TiO2 NTs modified with RuO2 nanoparticles.364 Here RuO2 is considered to be dopant and co-catalyst for O2 evolution.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of TiO2 nanotube layers with different Ru contents (0–0.5 at%) after annealing at 450 °C for 1 h. Measurements were carried out in 1 M KOH electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination. (b) Photocurrent transients vs. potential curves for TiO2 and Ti0.1Nb nanotube layers after annealing at 450 or 650 °C. Measurements were carried out in 1 M KOH electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of Ta-doped TiO2 nanotube layers after annealing at 450 °C for 1 h, measured in 1 M KOH solution under AM 1.5G illumination – Ta contents (at%): light grey, 0.1% Ta; medium grey, 0.03% Ta; dark grey, 0.4% Ta; black, pure TiO2. (d–f) Cross-section SEM images of 2 μm TiO2 nanotubes annealed at 650 °C in air: (d) pure TiO2 NTs, (e) 0.1 at% Nb TiO2 NTs, (f) 0.2 at% Nb TiO2 NTs. A clear decrease of the rutile layer thickness underneath the nanotubular layer can be observed, from ∼1 μm for undoped TiO2, to ∼0.75 μm and ∼0.45 μm for 0.1 at% and 0.2 at% Nb doped TiO2, respectively. Fig. (a) adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5629–5631. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 382 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 383 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (d–f) reproduced from ref. 357 with permission from Elsevier. 
In optimally doped and annealed TiO2 tubes, both Nb and Ta act as electron donors and increase the electron conductivity of the NT layers. This was observed for nanotube arrays doped with small amounts (up to 0.1 at%) of Nb379,381,382 or Ta343,383 for which a significant enhancement of photoelectrochemical water splitting and dye-sensitized solar cell performances was observed (Fig. 13(b and c)). In particular for Nb-doped TiO2 tubes, a more recent study shows that Nb doping is also beneficial in view of retarding rutile formation at the metal/oxide interface, while annealing the tube layers (Fig. 13(d–f)).357
Similar effects on the charge carrier transport properties of TM-doped TiO2 arrays have also been observed for layers synthesized by wet chemical methods.
For instance, Xu et al. reported on the preparation and PEC activity of Sn-doped single-crystalline rutile TiO2 nanowires.99 Due to the low lattice mismatch between rutile and SnO2,358 Sn dopants could be easily incorporated into TiO2 NWs by hydrothermal synthesis. For low Sn doping levels (up to Sn/TiO2 ∼ 12%), a photocurrent increased under simulated sunlight illumination was observed compared to pure TiO2 NWs. In particular, photocurrent spectra revealed that this effect is mainly ascribed to the enhancement of photoactivity in the UV region, while electrochemical impedance measurement confirmed the higher density of n-type charge carriers within the NWs produced by Sn doping.
Interestingly for some TM-doped TiO2 combinations, beside the effect on charge carrier transport, also a shift in light absorption edge from UV to visible has been reported and, correspondingly, a visible-light activated photocurrent has been observed.
For instance, TiO2 NRs doped with Fe, Mn or Co and synthesized through a hydrothermal method (Fig. 14(a)) produced higher photocurrent than undoped TiO2 NRs, both under solar and visible light irradiation (Fig. 14(b and c)).344 In particular, Mott–Schottky analysis showed that a significant enhancement in the charge carrier density Nd can be obtained by Fe-doping; it was concluded that not only does iron significantly increase the concentration of electrons in the conduction band, with an overall beneficial effect on charge carrier separation and transport, but it also generates impurity states near the conduction band of TiO2 improving visible light absorption (by apparently reducing TiO2 band-gap) and enabling visible light PEC activity.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of (i) TiO2, (ii) Fe–TiO2, (iii) Mn–TiO2, and (iv) Co–TiO2 nanorod arrays on FTO substrates. Insets represent the corresponding digital pictures. All scale bars are 1 μm. (b) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of undoped and variously doped TiO2 nanorod layers, under AM 1.5G solar illumination. (c) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of undoped and variously doped TiO2 nanorod layers, under visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm). (d) Overpotential measurement for OER using FTO and TiO2 nanowire with/without transition metal doping of electrodes in basic solutions. The dashed vertical line represents the thermodynamic redox potential for water oxidation at pH ∼13.6. (e) Fourier transforms of EXAFS spectra of various transition metal-doped samples. Fig. (a–c) reproduced from ref. 344 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (d and e) adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9995–9998. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
For single crystal rutile TiO2 nanowires doped with V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Nb, Mo, and Rh by means of a molten-salt synthesis, a dual effect due to TM doping was reported:345 not only the doped layers exhibited optical absorption extended to the visible light (though not supported by the corresponding photocurrent spectra), but most interestingly a decrease in the overpotential for the OER was measured with respect to pure TiO2 layers (Fig. 14(d)). Liu et al. attributed this result to the homogeneous distribution of dopants achieved by means of the molten-salt procedure. In particular, EXAFS spectra (Fig. 14(e)) showed that the introduction of TM atoms occurs uniformly at Ti subsurface sites with no significant alteration in the rutile lattice (that is, neither crystal defects nor other phases could be observed). This affects the adsorption energy of water splitting reaction intermediates (O, OH, and OOH radicals) on the surface of the material, and accounts for the substantial decrease in the overpotential for OER.
Another method to achieve TiO2 uniform doping has been reported by Resasco et al.385 TiO2 NWs, prepared by hydrothermal method, are decorated with a thin MnOx layer by ALD followed by a solid state reaction at high temperature (i.e., 600–1000 °C) in Ar atmosphere.
For dopant concentration below 10%, that is, the solubility limit of manganese into titania, Mn could be homogeneously incorporated in the rutile TiO2 lattice through an interstitial dissolution/diffusion mechanism,386 with no formation of new crystalline phases. Despite a decrease in the PEC performance with respect to pure TiO2 NWs (in contrast with other studies345 and most likely due to the introduction of an impurity level in the band-gap of TiO2), these nanowires show promising electrocatalytic activity for water oxidation, confirming the co-catalytic effect of Mn-doping on the OER. Noteworthy, this method could also be successfully extended to zirconium-doped TiO2 with the maximum achievable dopant concentration being significantly lower than that of Mn, likely due to the lower solubility of Zr in TiO2.385
Crystal defect engineering can be achieved by reduction of TiO2 to black titania, typically carried out by thermal treatment in a H2-containing atmosphere – more recently also alternative methods such as high-energy proton implantation have been investigated. As anticipated in Section 3.2.4, beside the extension of the absorption properties of TiO2 to visible light wavelengths, hydrogenation introduces voids and defects in the material (mainly in the outer shell) that exhibit a co-catalytic effect towards a stable and noble metal-free photocatalytic H2 generation.202–204
Hydrogenation of TiO2 has been reported also for photoelectrochemical water splitting. For instance, H2-treated single crystal TiO2 NWs have been shown to provide stable photocurrent and higher PEC efficiency compared to TiO2 NWs annealed in air. Mott–Schottky plots demonstrated an enhanced donor density in H-TiO2, due to the increased concentration of oxygen vacancies. This in turn positively affects the electron conductivity and enables a more efficient charge transport in the reduced array.100
Similar results were also reported for TiO2 NWs that underwent a rapid flame-reductive treatment in a CO/H2 atmosphere (Fig. 15). Compared to other reduction methods, flame reduction can be operated at ambient conditions and provides an adjustable concentration of oxygen vacancy by controlling the reduction time. That is, reduction treatment as short as 5 s has been reported to double the photocurrent density of TiO2 NWs, compared to untreated titania nanowires. Clearly, the significantly short exposure time of the nanoarray to high temperature is of great advantage also in view of preserving the electrode morphology and crystallinity.101
 Fig. 15  Flame reduction process and characterization of oxygen vacancy distribution. (a) Schematic illustration of the flame reduction method. (b) A photograph of the flame reduction process. (c) Representative cross-sectional SEM image of the flame-reduced TiO2 NWs. (d) Bright-field STEM image and the corresponding electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) elemental mapping of Ti-L2,3 and O–K edges inside the rectangular box, showing an oxygen deficiency near the NW surface. Darker color: lower concentration of oxygen. (e) O/Ti molar ratio distribution along the NW diameter (as-synthesized TiO2 NW: black rectangles and flame-reduced TiO2 NWs: red circles: 40 s, green triangles: 120 s), which is estimated using EELS spectra taken from a cross-line shown in the inset of a cross-sectional TEM image. Flame reduction conditions: T = 1000 °C, Φ = 1.4, and t = 40 or 120 s. Adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society. 


3.4.3 Surface decoration and heterojunction formation. 
Decoration of TiO2 with metals, semiconductors, and polymers is frequently used to influence the electronic and physicochemical properties of the oxide and achieve a desired increment in PEC activity.
In particular, metal nanoparticles can introduce local variations in the band bending of the adjacent semiconductor (i.e., pinning of the Fermi level of an energy that depends on the work function of the metal), inducing an effect similar to that observed by applying an external bias387 – remarkably, a great advantage is that such a Fermi level pinning is obtained under “open circuit conditions”, and thus this approach is often preferred for open circuit photocatalytic applications.
As for hematite, also the surface properties of TiO2 can significantly limit the overall PEC reaction due to a limited kinetics of water oxidation as well as the charge recombination loss at the electrode surface. Photogenerated holes can be trapped by surface states and recombine with electrons before they can diffuse to the TiO2/electrolyte interface for interfacial charge transfer and water oxidation.387
Therefore, techniques for passivating surface trap states and decreasing trap state-mediated charge recombination often apply also to TiO2 photoanodes. Typically, atomic layer deposition (ALD)361,388 or treatments based on the use of different TiO2 precursors (e.g., TiCl4, Ti(OiP)4, Ti(OBu)4)102 are often applied to decorate the surface of TiO2 nanoarrays (usually rods or wires) with a TiO2-based thin shell layer (Fig. 16(a)).
 Fig. 16  (a) HR-TEM image of TiO2 nanowire array decorated with a TiO2 anatase thin layer prepared from a Ti(OBu)4 solution. (b) Linear sweep voltammograms of pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2-based nanowire photoanodes recorded in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. (c) Photovoltage–time spectra collected for pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2-based nanowire photoanodes. (d) EIS spectra of pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2-based nanowire photoanodes. The inset shows the equivalent circuit used to fit the spectra. In (b–d) TCL, TiCl4; TIP, Ti(OiP)4; TBU, Ti(OBu)4. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15086–15094. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
A combination of photoelectrochemical and photovoltage measurements with impedance spectroscopy demonstrated that the presence of a thin TiO2 (anatase or rutile) shell passivates the surface trap states and, compared to naked TiO2 arrays, significantly increases the PEC activity by promoting interfacial charge transfer at the TiO2/electrolyte interface as well as a better carrier utilization (Fig. 16(b–d)).102,361,388
Also the more classical Co-based oxygen evolution catalyst is used to passivate TiO2 surface states, and significantly higher photocurrent density has been reported with respect to unmodified TiO2.98
In spite of a remarkable effect on the photoelectrochemical performance of TiO2 electrodes, the long-term stability often represents an issue for oxygen evolution co-catalysts, as e.g. in the case of Ru-based molecular catalysts [Ru(bda)L2] (bda2− = 2,2′-bypyridine-6,6′-dicarboxylate; L = N-cyclic aromatic ligands, such as pyridine and imidazole)296,389–392 and the more recently introduced Co393 complexes.
In details, major aspects to be considered are (i) the selection of an efficient anchoring group (e.g., carboxylic vs. phosphonic acids, or silane groups) for the attachment of the Ru(bda) catalysts,296 and (ii) the possibility of tuning the length of the carbon link chain between the Ru catalyst and the anchoring group itself – long flexible alkane chains (such as, –CH2CH2CH2–) have been shown to decrease the electron recombination between TiO2 and the Ru-catalyst mainly by hindering electron back transfer processes.392
Metal nanoparticles with plasmonic features (mainly Ag and Au) can be used to enable visible light photoelectrochemical water splitting on TiO2 photoanodes (Fig. 17(a and b)).
 Fig. 17  (a) Photocurrent versus bias voltage of anodic TiO2 with and without Au nanoparticles irradiated with visible light (λ = 532 nm) – inset: SEM image of a 5 nm thick Au island film deposited on anodic TiO2 NTs. (b) Intensity of the plasmon-generated electric field at the interface of Au–TiO2 calculated using FDTD. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of Au decorated TiO2 nanotubes on 0.2 at% of Au containing TiAu alloy (inset: TEM image of Au decorated TiO2 nanotubes on Ti–(0.2 at%)Au alloy); (d) photoresponse spectra of 12 μm thick TiO2 nanotubes with different contents of Au in TiAu alloy. Photoelectrochemical spectra were measured in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at 500 mV (Ag/AgCl). (e) Example of self-ordering templated dewetting of Au film (20 nm-thick) on a highly ordered TiO2 nanocavity array leading to total filling with exactly one metal nanoparticle per TiO2 cavity (inset: FFT conversion of a top-view SEM image of array of highly-ordered Au NPs embedded in TiO2 nanocavities). (f) SEM image of TiO2 NTs decorated with Au–Ag alloyed-dewetted NPs; (g) photocurrent density vs. potential curves under chopped solar light illumination under solar light illumination of TiO2 NTs and TiO2 NTs decorated with Au–Ag alloyed-dewetted NPs. Fig. (a and b) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. Fig. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 396 with permission from Elsevier. Fig. (e) reproduced from ref. 399 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (f and g) reproduced from ref. 401 with permission from with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
Overall, this mechanism is particularly effective as the photogenerated holes remain on the surface of the photoanode, overcoming the relatively short exciton diffusion length of h+, while electrons percolate through the one-dimensional array to the back-contact.
A range of different methods is available for the decoration of TiO2 surfaces with plasmonic metals: (i) photoreduction of the precursor (e.g., HAuCl4 to Au NPs),394 (ii) precipitation from a precursor-based solution,395 (iii) anodization of noble metal alloys of Ti such as Au–Ti (or Pt–Ti); in contrast to previous examples on Ti–X alloys (with X being a non-noble metal – Section 3.4.2), this approach leads to noble metal nanoparticle-decorated tubes as the noble metals are not oxidized during the anodization process (Fig. 17(c and d));396–398 (iv) templated dewetting and dewetting/dealloying of sputtered metal thin films;208,399–401 when applied to a TiO2 nanotube array, this approach is entirely based on self-ordering principles, that is, self-organized nanotubes offer an ideal topological substrate for a controlled split up of a metal thin film into nanoparticles whose size, density and placement are influenced by the nanotubes' geometry itself (Fig. 17(e–g)).402
Remarkably, for both (iii) and (iv), the decoration density of noble metal co-catalytic nanoparticles can be easily controlled by the amount of noble metal in the alloy or sputtered-deposited, respectively.
Pu et al. demonstrated that the performance of titania in PEC-WS can be enhanced in the entire UV-visible solar spectrum (from 300 to 800 nm) by tuning the shape of Au nanostructures (i.e., nanoparticles vs. nanorods) decorating the surface of TiO2 NW arrays.395 In particular, a combination of IPCE measurements, photovoltage experiments and Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) simulation pointed out that the observed enhancement in the UV region should be ascribed to Au NPs inducing a surface passivation effect and a two-fold electric field enhancement under irradiation – the amplified electric field in the UV region overlaps with the TiO2 absorption spectrum and contribute to the generation of e−/h+ pairs in the metal oxide owing to Plasmon Resonance Energy Transfer (PRET). In the visible-light region both Au NPS and NRs contribute to the electric field amplification (i.e., ∼×5 at 550 nm and ∼×15 at 750 nm for NPs and NRs, respectively) and to hot electron generation under LSPR irradiation, leading to an overall IPCE enhancement for λ > 450 nm.
Visible light sensitization due to charge (electron) injection into TiO2 is instead achieved by decoration with semiconductive quantum dots (CdS, CdSe, ZnS, etc. – see Fig. 18(a) and Section 3.2.3 for discussion on the mechanism).
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of CdS QDs deposited on TiO2 nanorods, relative energy band alignment, and photoinduced charge separation and injection mechanisms. (b) Morphologies of FTO/TiO2 and FTO/TiO2/CdS electrodes: typical top view SEM images of FTO/TiO2 electrode at (A) high and (B) low magnifications; (C) cross-sectional view of the well-aligned TiO2 nanorod array; (D) FTO/TiO2/CdS electrode; (E and F) HRTEM image and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of bare TiO2 nanorod array, respectively (inset in panel E: TEM image of a single bare TiO2 nanorod); (G and H) TEM image and the corresponding HRTEM image of a single TiO2 nanorod decorated with CdS QDs. (c) Photocurrent action spectra and (d) IPCE spectra of pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2 nanorod array. Photoelectrochemical spectra were measured under 475 nm (15 μW cm−2) monochromatic irradiation. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16451–16455. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Sun et al. reported that the synergy between the unique morphology of nanotubes and the visible light sensitization promoted by surface deposited QDs led to a 35-time higher photocurrent with respect to that of plain TiO2 nanotubes.224 Due to their small band-gap of 2.4 and 1.7 eV, respectively, CdS and CdSe are the most common sensitizers or co-sensitizers for TiO2.224,403–405
QDs are usually deposited on the nanotube/wire walls by different methods: (i) in situ growth of QDs by sequential chemical bath deposition (CBD), (ii) deposition of pre-synthesized colloidal QDs by direct adsorption, and (iii) linker-assisted adsorption.
The CBD method is based on repetitive cycles of immersion/rinsing of the oxide array into the quantum dot precursor solution. QDs form according to a deposition/aggregation process and uniformly cover the surface of the TiO2 nanoarrays (Fig. 18(b));224,403,404 clearly, the control on the number of cycles is crucial to avoid excessive particle growth and aggregation that would in turn increase the chance of carrier recombination.
The adsorption of pre-synthesized QDs certainly offers a higher control on particle aggregation; in particular, the solvent used to disperse the QDs plays a critical role as the establishment of a favorable interaction of the QDs with both the solvent and the oxide surface leads to a high degree of coverage with a low degree of aggregation.406
However, the adsorption of pre-synthesized colloidal QDs often leads to a low surface coverage (i.e., ∼14%)406 that limits the efficiency of the QDs/TiO2 assemblies compared to the CBD method.404 Also, a direct contact between the oxide matrix and the sensitizers is beneficial for a higher PEC efficiency – that is, QDs deposition by direct adsorption is preferred over the linker-assisted method.406
Regardless of the formation/deposition method, sensitization of TiO2 with e.g. CdS QDs leads to a broadband light absorption that extends up to λ ∼ 600 nm.403,406 Remarkably, light absorption up to λ ∼ 750 nm has been reported for TiO2 NT arrays decorated with CdS/CdSe/ZnS QDs;404 that is, as for plasmonic metals, also for semiconductive QDs the degree of extended light absorption depends on the material (but also on the size and shape of the nanoparticles). Typically, an enhancement in the IPCE and photocurrent is observed (Fig. 18(c and d)).403
In particular, comparative studies showed that CdSe/TiO2 assemblies exhibit an initial higher photocurrent with respect to CdS/TiO2, due to the smaller band-gap of the selenide-based QDs; however, CdSe/TiO2 efficiency decreases quite rapidly as a consequence of the QDs low photostability. On the other hand, despite the lower PEC performance, CdS/TiO2 exhibits higher e− injection from the QDs and a lower charge recombination rate.
In line with this, a maximized photoelectrochemical performance was therefore observed for CdS/CdSe co-sensitized TiO2 nanorod arrays that could exploit the advantages of both single cadmium-based materials.404,405
Among the strategies more recently investigated for the visible-light sensitization of TiO2 is the surface decoration of titania nanostructures with polydopamine (PDA).407–409
PDA that forms from the oxidative self-polymerization of dopamine, a mussel-inspired building block, is a layer-structured polymer that can in principle stick on the surface of any substrate – i.e., metal, metal oxide, metal alloy, polymer, glass, etc., regardless of its chemical nature and morphology. Moreover, such a polymerization is a mild process and simple immersion of the substrate in an aqueous dopamine solution results in the spontaneous precipitation of the PDA film, with the thickness of the film controlled by the immersion time.410–412
In PDA-decorated TiO2 layers under visible solar spectrum irradiation, polydopamine (Eg ∼ 2.2 eV)413 is the photo-active part while TiO2 serves as semiconductive scaffold. In other words, after light absorption and charge carrier generation, electrons photopromoted in PDA are injected into the oxide CB (due to a favorable band alignment) and, owing to the one-dimensional porous structure of the TiO2 film, percolate towards the back-contact. This configuration has been shown to provide up to ∼35% photocurrent enhancement compared to uncoated TiO2 NTs.407 Noteworthy, PDA exhibits low conductivity414 and, therefore, a trade-off between a desired increase in visible light absorption and e−/h+ pair generation, and the drawbacks connected with its insulating properties should be established, that is, a 4 nm-thick PDA film has been shown to represent an optimum.407
PDA-coated titania tube arrays can also serve as a platform for the co-decoration of TiO2 NTs with metal or metal oxide nanoparticles including e.g., Ag, Pt and Co(OH)x that further increase the material photoelectrochemical properties by co-catalytic and/or light absorption effects. In particular, Pt NPs-PDA co-decoration of TiO2 NTs led to ∼70% higher photocurrent, measured under AM 1.5G illumination with a 400 nm cut-off filter, compared to the efficiency of uncoated TiO2 tubes. This effect has been attributed to metal-induced enhanced light absorption and low charge recombination rate.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that when annealed under reducing atmosphere (typically Ar or H2/Ar mixtures) PDA can be graphitized and, therefore, represents a precursor to a graphite-like state.411,415,416 Remarkably, this can be further exploited towards an enhanced charge carrier transfer effect to increase the performance of TiO2 nanostructures in photoelectrochemical applications.
Suitable electronic heterojunctions can be “built” also by surface decoration of TiO2 with metal oxides including CuO2,417,418 NiO,419 ZnO420,421 and Bi2O3,422 as well as with alkaline earth titanates (MTiO3) with a cubic perovskite structure, such as SrTiO3 and BaTiO3.181,184,186,187 Slow hydrolysis of the precursors, electrochemical techniques, hydrothermal methods, microwave-assisted reactions, CVD or PVD deposition, and electrochemical polymerization are typically adopted as preparation procedures.
One of the most followed up schemes is the combination of TiO2 with a p-type material (e.g., Cu2O or NiO) to establish useful p–n heterojunctions. This configuration enables solar light water splitting by combining a narrow band-gap semiconductor (p-type) to a larger band-gap semiconductor (n-type TiO2) and utilizes both electron and hole majority charge carriers (from the n-type and p-type counterparts, respectively) for the PEC-WS reaction.418,419 Also, for TiO2/NiO assemblies, a higher visible light photoresponse in comparison to other classical approaches (e.g., N-doping) has been observed. For this assembly, a beneficial effect is attributed to charge injection from the NiO excited states to the conduction band of titanium oxide.419
Nevertheless, it should be noted that for many of these compounds (namely, all II–VI and red-ox active materials) the long-time stability in photoelectrochemical applications still needs to be improved, not only in terms of resistance to corrosion or photocorrosion, but also due to the instability of some of the co-catalysts under applied voltage.
Hwang et al. showed that not only p–n, but also n–n heterojunctions may represent a promising alternative for increasing the performance of TiO2 for PEC applications.423 In particular, n-type (B-doped) Si nanowire arrays coated with a TiO2 conformal layer by ALD (i.e., n-Si/n-TiO2 core–shell array) have been fabricated that exhibited ∼20–25% higher photocurrent and a more negative onset potential compared to a more conventional p-Si/n-TiO2 core–shell arrangement. The result was attributed to the favorable band bending at both the n-Si/TiO2 and the TiO2/electrolyte interfaces that facilitates charge separation: under full lamp irradiation (450 W Xe lamp), e−/h+ pairs are photogenerated in both the shell and the core semiconductors (i.e., TiO2 and Si, respectively). Holes from TiO2 move towards the interface with the electrolyte, while electrons tend to accumulate at the n-Si/TiO2 interface and recombine with h+ photogenerated in the core material. Finally, photogenerated electrons in n-Si move to the counter electrode where the reduction reaction takes place.
By contrast, in p-Si/n-TiO2, h+(TiO2) can move either towards the electrolyte or to the interface with p-Si. This clearly reduces the availability of positive charges for the OER and overall limits the anodic photocurrent.
MTiO3 perovskites, with M = Ca, Sr or Ba, exhibit piezoelectric and ferroelectric properties, i.e., feature an internal dipolar field that increases the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. Owing to such a characteristic and to other superior properties, namely, high thermal stability, photocorrosion resistance, high stability as metal-ion dopant host, a CB more negative than that of TiO2, etc., SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 perovskite titanates.
For these features, SrTiO3 and BaTiO3 perovskite titanates have also been used in combination with 1D TiO2 array, aiming at enhancing titania PEC performances.181,184,186
A remarkable advantage of perovskite/TiO2 assemblies is the possibility of fabricating such heterojunctions by in situ hydrothermal treatment of the TiO2 one-dimensional scaffold in the presence of a Sr (or Ba) precursor. Such a direct and, hence, highly stable coupling of TiO2 and SrTiO3 (or BaTiO3) causes the Fermi level of the two oxides to equilibrate and reduces the recombination of charge carriers at the two materials' interface. Nevertheless, MTiO3 titanates exhibit a band-gap similar to that of TiO2 (i.e., Eg ∼ 3.1–3.2 eV) and doping with e.g. Cr3+ cations that introduce intra band-gap levels is a typical approach to enable visible light induced photoelectrochemical activity.187
More complex systems such as hierarchical ZnIn2S4/TiO2,424 CuxZn1−xIn2S4/TiO2,425 CuInS2/TiO2,426,427 TiO2/ln2S3/AgInS2428 core–shell structures and “umbrella” hybrid (Bi2S3/rGO)5/TiO2 NR heterostructures429 have been recently shown (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Schematic representations of (a) the TiO2 BNRs–CulnS2 core–shell structure and (b) TiO2/ln2S3/AgInS2 branched NRs electrode and relative band alignment. (c) Schematic diagram and SEM image of five layers of Bi2S3/rGO (purple and light yellow) modified Bi2S3/TiO2 NRs. Fig. (a) reproduced from ref. 427 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 428 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 429 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Common to all these hierarchical assemblies is a beneficial band misalignment that enables charge carrier separation, with the preferential collection of electrons in TiO2 (and, thus, to the back-contact) through a cascade down-hill process, with holes accumulating in the shell material (i.e., in the valence band with the least positive redox potential – see Fig. 19(a and b)).
This clearly suppresses charge carrier recombination and overall contributes to the enhancement of the multi-junction electrode PEC performance.
In particular, for 2D ZnIn2S4 nanosheets/TiO2 1D NR assemblies, aside from an enhancement in charge carrier separation, the improved PEC performance of the hybrid nanostructures with respect to a benchmark TiO2 NR photoelectrode has been attributed to the unique features of two-dimensional materials including e.g. a larger surface area that not only provides a larger number of surface active sites, but also promotes an increased photon–matter interaction via multiple reflection and scattering at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface.
Noteworthy, the ZnIn2S4/TiO2 assembly also exhibits a remarkable shift in the onset of photocurrent (i.e., from 0.05 V vs. RHE to −0.53 V vs. RHE in Na2SO3/Na2S electrolyte) with respect to 1D TiO2 NRs.424
In addition to the previously mentioned strategies, theoretical studies showed that geometrical modulation of the TiO2 nanostructure architecture can be used in view of enhancing the material light absorption properties.430,431 In particular, integrating photonic crystals (PCs), such as 1D SiO2/TiO2 alternate layers or 3D TiO2 (or Si) inverse opal layer,432 with nanoporous structures (e.g., TiO2 NTs) has been used to optimize photon management and, hence, to increase light harvesting of the absorbing (TiO2 NT) layer.
Owing to their periodicity, photonic crystals allow to localize the incident radiation, that is, to trap and slow photons, in a specific wavelength range that depends on the PC periodicity. If the energy of the slow photons overlaps with the optical band-gap of the light absorbing layer, then an enhancement of light absorption can be expected as a result of the increased optical length. Photonic crystals also find application in dye-sensitized solar cells. In this case the periodicity of the PCs is adjusted to match with the light absorption features of the dye (i.e., in the visible range).433–435
Recently, Al-Haddad et al. showed that the optical band-gap of TiO2 NT arrays can be tuned by controlling geometrical parameters.436 The authors concluded that the optical absorption edge of TiO2 nanotubes can be red-shifted with increasing the tube diameter while simultaneously decreasing their inter-distance – this assuming that the wall thickness remains constant and, therefore, excluding any contribution from quantum confinement effects.35,36 Supported by FDTD simulations, this effect was attributed to a strong confinement of the local electric field between the tubes, as their inter-distance becomes smaller.

4. α-Fe2O3–TiO2 heterojunction-based materials – the Fe2TiO5 case
We have already pointed out that the relative misalignment of α-Fe2O3 and TiO2 band edges can be exploited to design a suitable heterojunction for enhanced charge carrier separation, that is, holes generated in TiO2 will be transferred to α-Fe2O3 with electrons preferentially accumulating in TiO2 at the same time.33,437,438
Under specific conditions, hybrid composites, i.e., iron titanates (e.g., Fe2TiO5, Fe3TiO4, and FeTiO3) form at the interface between hematite and titania that, despite some controversial results, exhibit remarkable performances as photoanode materials in PEC devices.
Typically, iron titanates are formed via solid-state reaction between TiO2 and α-Fe2O3. Due to the similar ion sizes of Ti and Fe, thermal annealing of the two oxides generates the composite – the various stoichiometric forms of titanates are given by the different valence configurations of the metal ions (such as Fe2+Ti4+, Fe3+Ti3+, etc.).
Among all the possible titanates, Fe2TiO5 has been recently the most widely explored Fe–Ti combination compound as photoanode material.439–443
Fe2TiO5 has a pseudobrookite structure and, as TiO2, has a valence and a conduction band that are (in principle) suitable to drive spontaneous water oxidation and reduction reactions, respectively. Moreover, it has a band-gap of ca. 2.0 eV and thus can generate e−/h+ pairs under visible light illumination (Fig. 20). Clearly, both aspects are highly desired for materials intended for PEC applications.
 Fig. 20  Energy band structure of TiO2, α-Fe2O3, and Fe2TiO5 relative to the vacuum level (EVAC) and the normal hydrogen electrode (ENHE). 
Keys to efficient Fe2TiO5 for PEC-WS are a layer thickness of only a few nm and a use of Fe2TiO5 in combination with TiO2 or α-Fe2O3.
In fact, early studies on iron titanates based photoanodes for direct solar water oxidation,444 showed that for a “pure” Fe2TiO5 layer (not supported on TiO2 or α-Fe2O3) an applied bias higher than that required for α-Fe2O3 is needed to promote efficient PEC water splitting, and that composites such as FeTiO3 and Fe2TiO4 suffer from significant photocorrosion.
Typically, two different approaches are reported that instead lead to improved PEC efficiency in the presence of Fe2TiO5: (i) a use of nanostructured TiO2 array as core material, where a thin α-Fe2O3 overlayer is deposited, or (ii) nanotubes/nanorods of α-Fe2O3 on FTO as supporting scaffold modified with a thin TiO2 layer. In both cases, thermal annealing at 500–700 °C in air converts the thin overlayers into Fe2TiO5.439–443
For the Fe2TiO5(overlayer)/TiO2(core) configuration, two aspects contribute to the enhancement of the PEC activity: the titanate layer significantly extends the absorption spectrum of the material to visible wavelengths, and contributes to the generation of e−/h+ pairs up to λ ∼ 600 nm. In addition, while h+ are preferentially transferred to the electrolyte, e− are injected into the TiO2 CB.
Although, in principle, the CBs of TiO2 and Fe2TiO5 are not suitably located to promote e− transfer from Fe2TiO5 into TiO2 – see Fig. 20, enhanced charge separation has been reported and suggested as the origin for the higher photoelectrochemical activity compared to both TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 photoelectrode counterparts.439
Different synthesis methods have been explored for the deposition of α-Fe2O3 thin layers on one-dimensional TiO2 scaffolds: (i) electrodeposition (e.g., from a Fe(NO3)3 solution – Fig. 21(a)), (ii) thermal pyrolysis of Fe-based organic solutions (e.g., FeCl3 ethanol solution – Fig. 21(c)), (iii) chemical bath deposition.440,441
 Fig. 21  (a) SEM image of Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox nanoarchitecture and schematic drawing of the photoanode design with most likely water oxidation mechanism considering the idealized electronic structure alignment of the composite photoanode, Ef represents the Fermi level; (b) IPCE spectra of pure TiO2, pure α-Fe2O3, Coox decorated TiO2 and Coox decorated Fe2TiO5/TiO2 layers. The spectra were measured in 1 M KOH at 1.23 V for α-Fe2O3, and at 0.4 V vs. RHE for the other layers. (c) SEM and TEM (inset) images, and schematic representation of TiO2 nanorod array covered by a thin α-Fe2O3 layer; (d) linear sweep voltammetry plots of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 nanorod photoanodes, containing different amounts of α-Fe2O3. The data were collected in 1.0 M NaOH, under Xe lamp irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Fig. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 440 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. Fig. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 441 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, the PEC performance is largely influenced by the thickness of the Fe2TiO5 layer, that is, there is a threshold thickness (∼100 nm) that grants both significant light absorption and carrier separation. Above this limit, h+ and e− tend to recombine due to a high charge transport resistivity, with a detrimental effect on the overall PEC performance of the composite (Fig. 21(d)).441
To overcome this issue and further promote carrier utilization, Liu et al. reported on the use of a Co-based layer as a (more) efficient co-catalyst for the anodic reaction.440 A current density of 4.1 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE was measured along with a lower photocurrent onset potential (i.e., 0.18 V versus RHE) with respect to pure TiO2. The authors proposed that the natural band bending at the interface between the three oxides (Fe2TiO5, TiO2, and CoOx) enables holes produced in Fe2TiO5 to accumulate in CoOx, while electrons from Fe2TiO5 are transferred to TiO2 (Fig. 21(b)).
For the second core/shell configuration, that is, a Fe2TiO5(shell)/α-Fe2O3(core) composite, enhanced PEC efficiency is mainly attributed to the beneficial role of Fe2TiO5 in passivating hematite surface trapping states. This clearly reduces surface e−/h+ recombination. Moreover, due to the favorable band offset between the two oxides, e− photopromoted in Fe2TiO5 are injected into the CB of α-Fe2O3 that supplies a direct transport path to the back-contact; similarly to the previous case, holes migrate to the Fe2TiO5/electrolyte interface and the increased charge separation results in an overall increase of the photoefficiency.442
Experimental evidence for this mechanism was provided by transient absorption spectra (TAS) measured with Fe2TiO5/α-Fe2O3 and pure α-Fe2O3 (Fig. 22).445
 Fig. 22  Charge generation, recombination, and transfer in the nanocomposite photoelectrodes. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2859–2864. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
With respect to pure α-Fe2O3, Fe2TiO5 features an increased density of energy states near the CB and improved hole dynamics. This creates competitive trapping pathways for photopromoted electrons, decreases e−/h+ recombination probabilities and, clearly, increases the lifetime of photogenerated holes.
Therefore, the pseudobrookite/hematite heterojunction generates a large amount of long-lived surface holes and, at the same time, acts as a block layer for the photogenerated electrons transferred to α-Fe2O3. By preventing e− back injection (and therefore e−/h+ recombination), Fe2TiO5 leads to an overall increase of the photoanode efficiency.
Two possible approaches have been proposed to grow a Fe2TiO5 ultra-thin film over vertically aligned hematite α-Fe2O3 nanorods. In the first case, a FeOOH photoanode is immersed in a HF solution containing the Ti precursor; the second procedure is based on the evaporation of TiCl4 on the surface of FeOOH. In both cases, adequate thermal treatment produced a Fe2TiO5 film.443
Fe2TiO5 was identified by synchrotron-based soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (Fig. 23(a and b)) and TEM mapping (Fig. 23(c)), and a suitable lattice match between pseudobrookite Fe2TiO5 and α-Fe2O3 was suggested to favor a specific crystallographic growth direction, i.e., the (110) plane for hematite and the (101) plane for pseudobrookite.
 Fig. 23  (a) O K-edge XAS spectra of pristine and Ti-treated (2 s) hematite nanostructures compared with the spectra of rutile TiO2, anatase TiO2, and Fe2TiO5. The difference spectrum between pristine and Ti-treated hematite is also shown; (b) Ti L-edge XAS spectra of Ti-treated (2 and 40 s) hematite nanostructures compared with the spectra of rutile TiO2, anatase TiO2, and Fe2TiO5; (c) dark field TEM image and corresponding TEM elemental mappings of HF-Ti treated (30 s) hematite 1D nanostructured photoanode; (d) J–V characteristics of pristine hematite photoanode, HF-Ti treated hematite photoanodes for different times (10 s, 30 s, 1 min, 5 min, and 8 min), and a Co-Pi deposited HF-Ti treated (30 s) hematite photoanode. Adapted with permission from ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5348–5356. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
As for the Fe2TiO5/TiO2 composite system, also Fe2TiO5/α-Fe2O3 exhibits enhanced solar water oxidation activity, also supported by IPCE spectra; particularly, the HF-assisted synthesis of Fe2TiO5/α-Fe2O3 resulted in a photocurrent density of 2.0 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V versus RHE that was significantly higher than that measured with pure hematite nanorods, and that could be further improved by coupling with Co-Pi catalyst (Fig. 23(d)).
The beneficial effect of an oxygen evolution co-catalyst on the overall PEC activity of Fe2TiO5/TiO2 assemblies has been also pointed out with the use of less “conventional” materials (other than Co-Pi443 and Co-based446 co-catalysts).
Passivation of surface states, reduction of electron–hole recombination, and, therefore, a photocurrent improvement have been reported by decorating Fe2TiO5/TiO2 photoanodes with an SnOx447,448 (Fig. 24) or with a FeNiOx449 overlayer (Fig. 25). This overall enabled enhanced photoanode stability for up to 5 h under operating conditions.449
 Fig. 24  SEM images of hematite α-Fe2O3 photoanodes prepared by thermal oxidation of Fe foils: (a) 1D nanoflakes (NFs) and (b) nanocorals (NCs); (c–e) TEM images of α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 NFs; PEC polarization curves of hematite-based photoanodes: (f and h) NFs and (g and i) NCs. The PEC experiments were performed in 1 M KOH electrolyte AM 1.5G simulated solar light irradiation (intensity 100 mW cm−2) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 448 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
 Fig. 25  (a) Representation of the process used to fabricate α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 NR photoanodes; (b) HRTEM images of pristine FeOOH nanorod (left), after 90 cycles of TiO2 ALD deposition (middle), and α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 heterojunction NR after a two-step thermal treatment of FeOOH/TiO2 (right); (c) linear sweep voltammetry (under AM 1.5G irradiation, in 1 M KOH), and (d) IPCE spectra (under 150 W Xe lamp irradiation, in 1 M KOH at 1.23 V vs. RHE) of pristine α-Fe2O3, α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5, and α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5/FeNiOx based photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 449 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
5. Conclusion and perspective
Decades of experimental research on TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 have pointed out that the two semiconductor metal oxides are promising candidates as anodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting. The reason for this is that, compared to other efficient materials such as CdS, CdSe, GaAs, etc., TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 are chemically stable against (photo)corrosion in a wide range of (electro)chemical conditions. Additionally, they are cheap, abundant and nontoxic.
In spite of these positive features, still some specific limitations hamper the development of highly efficient PEC devices based on the use of TiO2 and α-Fe2O3 that could meet the requirements for high-scale applications. A main issue is certainly represented by the limited charge transfer kinetics intrinsic to both oxides. In this review, we have shown that key to overcoming such a limitation in a PEC arrangement is the use of one-dimensional oxide nanostructures (i.e., nanotubes, nanorods, nanowires).
To this regard, we provided a range of available techniques and illustrate their possibilities and potentials. Particularly, we focused on the most promising routes that, in our view, are electrochemical anodization and hydrothermal methods: by adjusting simple experimental parameters, they offer a fine morphology control over the fabricated materials. In this context, we outlined how the resulting 1D geometry of the oxides is crucial towards a photoelectrochemical enhancement. This should be mainly ascribed to the possibility of decoupling the direction of light absorption and charge-carrier collection, as well as to establishing a preferential percolation pathway for charges (i.e., h+ transfer to the electrolyte and e− vertical diffusion towards the back-contact).
We highlighted the main morphological parameters that affect the PEC activity of the bare oxides; in particular, for α-Fe2O3-based photoanodes, key is a use of (1D) nanostructures the size of which is within the length scale of solid state charge diffusion (typical hole diffusion length in hematite, ∼5 nm). In the case of TiO2, 1D nanotubular arrays from self-organizing anodization were shown to be very convenient for PEC applications as, besides their morphology, they are fabricated in the form of directly back-contacted photoanodes; worth mentioning are also TiO2 nanorods, owing to their single-crystalline nature: the absence of grain boundaries, which contribute to poor electron mobility in conventional polycrystalline TiO2 films, suppresses charge carrier losses due to recombination and leads to relatively high performance.
Besides, these structures represent suitable platforms for further modifications, namely to induce doping effects or by the deposition of co-catalysts, light absorbers, charge transfer mediators, etc. We outlined how e.g. Ta- or Nb-doping TiO2 is a most efficient approach to overcome its intrinsically low conductivity, while non-metal doping (mainly, N) and/or surface decoration with sensitizers are mostly carried out to extend the titania absorption features to the visible light. Two major approaches, often used in combination, were reported for α-Fe2O3: (i) a use of earth abundant co-catalysts to improve the poor oxygen evolution kinetics, (ii) metal doping (mainly Zr4+, Sn4+ and Nb5+) to increase charge conductivity. In this context, thermally-induced Sn-doping, promoted by tin diffusion from FTO layers, represents one of the most straightforward strategies.
In addition to the (surface or bulk) modification of these two oxides, we illustrated achievements and outlooks regarding the use of TiO2–α-Fe2O3 systems that combine the complementary features and functionalities of the two counterparts in terms of light absorption, charge transport and, for open circuit photocatalysis, in terms of band energy positions. Although only limited attention has been given to such composites and the mechanism underlying their working principle is still under debate, promising results have been reported in the recent literature. Further investigations on these TiO2–α-Fe2O3 heterostructures may generate a new promising research trend in the frame of energy conversion processes.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the projects LO1305 and 8E15B009 of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic and by the project 15-19705S of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic. ERC, DFG, and the DFG cluster of excellence “Engineering of Advanced Materials”, as well as DFG “funCOS” are also gratefully acknowledged for financial support. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support by the Operational Programme Research, Development and Education - European Regional Development Fund, project no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000416 of the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic.
References
S. J. A. Moniz, S. A. Shevlin, D. J. Martin, Z.-X. Guo and J. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 731–759 CAS .
J. Michael and H. Jérome, Nature, 2015, 517, 150–152 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Davis, K. Caldeira and H. D. Matthews, Science, 2010, 329, 1330–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mazloomi and C. Gomes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 3024–3033 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. X. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bard, A. B. Bocarsly, F. F. Fan, E. G. Walton and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 3671–3677 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Castelli, F. Hüser, M. Pandey, H. Li, K. S. Thygesen, B. Seger, A. Jain, K. A. Persson, G. Ceder and K. W. Jacobsen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 14009151 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hykaway, W. M. Sears, H. Morisaki and S. R. Morrison, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 6663–6667 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Hardee and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1024–1026 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
D. a Tryk, A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2363–2376 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Lindgren, L. Vayssieres, H. Wang and S. E. Lindquist, in Chemical Physics of Nanostructured Semiconductors, ed. A. I. Kokorin and D. W. Bahnemann, CRC Press,  2003, pp. 83–110 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima, K. Kohayakawa and K. Honda, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1975, 122, 1487–1489 CrossRef CAS .
N. Getoff, Int. J. Hydrogen
Energy, 1990, 15, 407–417 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Aroutiounian, V. M. Arakelyan and G. E. Shahnazaryan, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 581–590 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, Y. Piao and T. Hyeon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 372–390 RSC .
E. Boisselier and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1759–1782 RSC .
C. Liu, F. Li, L.-P. P. Ma and H.-M. M. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Jing, W. Zhou, G. H. Tian and H. G. Fu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9509–9549 RSC .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari and K. S. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 724–803 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kment, Z. Hubicka, H. Kmentova, P. Kluson, J. Krysa, I. Gregora, M. Morozova, M. Cada, D. Petras, P. Dytrych, M. Slater and L. Jastrabik, Catal. Today, 2011, 161, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, R. Kirchgeorg and P. Schmuki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16562–16566 CAS .
J. Bian, C. Huang, L. Wang, T. Hung, W. A. Daoud and R. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4883–4890 CAS .
B. Hatton, L. Mishchenko, S. Davis, K. H. Sandhage and J. Aizenberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 10354–10359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Han, F. Riboni, F. Karlický, S. Kment, A. Goswami, P. Sudhagar, J. Yoo, L. Wang, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, O. Haderka, C. Terashima, A. Fujishima, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 134–142 RSC .
T. Guo, M.-S. Yao, Y.-H. Lin and C.-W. Nan, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 3551–3585 RSC .
M. Anpo, T. Shima, S. Kodama and Y. Kubokawa, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 4305–4310 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kormann, D. W. Bahnemann and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 5196–5201 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. King, X. Du, A. S. Cavanagh and A. W. Weimer, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445401 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160–3163 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1307–1311 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, J. M. Friedrich and F. C. Walsh, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2807–2824 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Lutskii, Phys. Status Solidi, 1970, 1, 199–220 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gleiter, Acta Mater., 2000, 48, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .

          R. van de Krol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer Link, New York,  2012, vol. 102 Search PubMed .
W. J. Albery, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heyrovsky and J. Jirkovsky, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 4300–4308 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, A. Mazare and P. Schmuki, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9385–9454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Shi and Y. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9346–9384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Wheeler, G. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682 CAS .
A. G. Tamirat, J. Rick, A. A. Dubale, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 243–267 RSC .
L. Bertoluzzi and S. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4283–4285 RSC .
J. M. Macak, M. Zlamal, J. Krysa and P. Schmuki, Small, 2007, 3, 300–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, T. B. Vinzant, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3739–3746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, J. Ioccozia, L. Sun, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 4, 2182–2202 Search PubMed .
Q. X. Zhou, Z. Fang, J. Li and M. Y. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 202, 22–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. So, I. Hwang and P. Schmuki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 849–854 CAS .

          J. Lee and S. H. Ko, Hierarchical Nanostructures for Energy Devices,  2015, pp. 7–25 Search PubMed .

          D. Lee and C. P. Grigoropoulos, in Hierarchical Nanostructures for Energy Devices, ed. S. H. Ko and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2015, pp. 174–203 Search PubMed .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2332–2335 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoang, S. P. Berglund, R. R. Fullon, R. L. Minter and C. B. Mullins, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4307 CAS .
L. Wang, C.-Y. Y. Lee, A. Mazare, K. Lee, J. Mueller, E. Spiecker, P. Schmuki, J. Müller, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ji, J. Cai, Y. Ma and L. Qi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3651–3660 CAS .
S. Kment, P. Schmuki, Z. Hubicka, L. Machala, R. Kirchgeorg, N. Liu, L. Wang, K. K. Lee, J. Olejnicek, M. Cada, I. Gregora and R. Zboril, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7113–7123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Nguyen and P. Schmuki, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 618–622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Thimsen, F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and S. C. Warren, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 35–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Cheng and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 327–343 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Chen, S. H. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Qiu, S. H. Yang, M. A. Butler, D. S. Ginley, R. Memming, A. J. Bard, P. V. Kamat and M. Gratzel, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 96–108 RSC .
P. X. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2883–2885 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, Y. Rho, F. I. Allen, A. M. Minor, S. H. Ko and C. P. Grigoropoulos, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11147–11152 RSC .
J. Shi, C. Sun, M. B. Starr and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 624–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, A. Palacios-Padrós, R. Kirchgeorg, A. Tighineanu and P. Schmuki, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 421–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Noh, K. Sun, C. Choi, M. Niu, M. Yang, K. Xu, S. Jin and D. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, Y. Hara, C. Sun, M. A. Anderson and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3413–3419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Park, C. W. Lee, I. S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Park, H. J. Kim, D. W. Kim, S. Lee and K. S. Hong, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, Elsevier Ltd,  2014, vol. 39, pp. 17508–17516 Search PubMed .
M. Stefik, M. Cornuz, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, S. Mhaisalkar and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5431–5435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Dunn, J. M. Feckl, A. Müller, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, S. G. Morehead, J. Roos, L. M. Peter, C. Scheu and T. Bein, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 24610–24620 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Wei, B. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Tang, T. C. Sum and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11284–11290 RSC .
D. Wang, G. Chang, Y. Zhang, J. Chao, J. Yang, S. Su, L. Wang, C. Fan and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12697–12701 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, F. Wang, A. Kvit and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4397–4405 CAS .
A. Kargar, S. J. Kim, P. Allameh, C. Choi, N. Park, H. Jeong, Y. Pak, G. Y. Jung, X. Pan, D. Wang and S. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2609–2615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 906–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Dormann, N. Viart, J. L. Rehspringer, A. Ezzir and D. Niznansky, Hyperfine Interact., 1998, 112, 89–92 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Sarangi, S. R. Vadera, M. K. Patra, C. Prakash and N. N. Ghosh, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 2425–2428 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Sarangi, B. Naik and N. N. Ghosh, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 4145–4147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurav, T. Kodas, T. Pluym and Y. Xiong, Aerosol Sci. Technol., 1993, 19, 411–452 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Sapieszko and E. Matijević, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1980, 74, 405–422 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Stramel and J. K. Thomas, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1986, 110, 121–129 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kiwi and M. Grätzel, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1987, 1101 RSC .
S. Chatterjee, S. Sarkar and S. N. Bhattacharyya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 72, 183–187 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lian, E. Wang, L. Gao, D. Wu, Y. Song and L. Xu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2006, 41, 1192–1198 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X.-Y. Lu, L. K. Yu, J. Xuan, M. K. H. Leung and H. Guo, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 10046–10055 RSC .
S. Hoang, S. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, P. Da, H. Wu, D. Zhao and G. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1503–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, M. Logar, C. H. Lee, L. Cai, F. B. Prinz and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 24–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Pu, Y. Ling, K. Der Chang, C. M. Liu, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15086–15094 CAS .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S. E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Shao, X. F. Qian, J. Yin and Z. K. Zhu, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 3130–3136 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, G. Wang, L. Zhuo, J. Ge and L. Cui, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5196–5200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Baruwati, K. Madhusudan Reddy, S. V. Manorama and S. S. Madhavendra, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 2602–2605 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zeng, K. Tang and T. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 312, 513–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Jia, L.-D. Sun, Z.-G. Yan, L.-P. You, F. Luo, X.-D. Han, Y.-C. Pang, Z. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4328–4333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, D. Qi, C. Deng, X. Zhang and P. Yang, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1892 RSC .
Y. P. F. H. M. Fan, G. J. You, Y. Li, Z. Zheng, H. R. Tan, Z. X. Shen and S. H. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 9928–9935 Search PubMed .
L. Song, S. Zhang, B. Chen, J. Ge and X. Jia, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 360, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakahira, W. Kato, M. Tamai, T. Isshiki, K. Nishio and H. Aritani, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 4239–4245 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, Y. Zhao, S. Liu, C. L. Korzeniewski, S. Wang and Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3944–3950 CAS .
D. V. Bavykin, V. N. Parmon, A. A. Lapkin and F. C. Walsh, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 3370 RSC .
A. Kumar, A. R. Madaria and C. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7787–7792 CAS .
C. Fàbrega, T. Andreu, A. Tarancón, C. Flox, A. Morata, L. Calvo-Barrio and J. R. Morante, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 2979–2985 CrossRef .
E. L. D. Hebenstreit, W. Hebenstreit, H. Geisler, C. A. Ventrice, D. A. Hite, P. T. Sprunger and U. Diebold, Surf. Sci., 2002, 505, 336–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu, H. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Zhou, B. J. Li, L. Xin, Y. Zhou and H. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2110–2117 CAS .
J. Wang, C. Chen, Z. Ren and Z. Wang, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2014, 29, 055006 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Q. Sun, Q. Zhang, Q. Zhu, H. Dong and L. Dong, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 095102 CrossRef .
Y. C. Ling, G. M. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Sander, M. J. Côté, W. Gu, B. M. Kile and C. P. Tripp, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2052–2057 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Sander and H. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12158–12159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, T. Nishikawa, B. Ohtani and A. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4530–4537 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hoyer, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1411–1413 CrossRef CAS .
E. Moyen, L. Santinacci, L. Masson, W. Wulfhekel and M. Hanbücken, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5094–5098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Nishinaga, T. Kikuchi, S. Natsui and R. O. Suzuki, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2748 Search PubMed .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466–1468 CAS .
B. B. Lakshmi, C. J. Patrissi and C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2544–2550 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imai, Y. Takei, K. Shimizu, M. Matsuda and H. Hirashima, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 2971–2972 RSC .
H. Shin, D. K. Jeong, J. Lee, M. M. Sung and J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1197–1200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Knez, K. Nielsch and L. Niinistö, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3425–3438 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ku, G. C. Jo, C. H. Bak, S. M. Kim, Y. R. Shin, K. H. Kim, S. H. Kwon and J.-B. Kim, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 085301 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qiu, W. Yu, X. Gao and X. Li, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4695–4698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Han, T. Song, E. K. Lee, A. Devadoss, Y. Jeon, J. Ha, Y. C. Chung, Y. M. Choi, Y. G. Jung and U. Paik, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8308–8315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Riboni, N. T. Nguyen, S. So and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 445–466 RSC .
H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4285–4291 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, C.-Y. Lee, R. Kirchgeorg, N. Liu, K. Lee, Š. Kment, Z. Hubička, J. Krýsa, J. Olejníček, M. Čada, R. Zbořil and P. Schmuki, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2015, 41, 9333–9341 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Albu, A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2007, 1, R65–R67 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, L. Taveira, S. Aldabergerova and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7463–7465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, A. Ghicov, K. Yasuda, R. Hahn, S. Bauer and P. Schmuki, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2007, 11, 3–18 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ruff, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8177–8181 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Latempa, X. Feng, M. Paulose, C. A. Grimes, V. Uni, U. V. Park and V. Pennsyl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16293–16298 CAS .
S. So, K. Lee and P. Schmuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11316–11318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Reneker and I. Chun, Nanotechnology, 1996, 7, 216–223 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bognitzki, H. Q. Hou, M. Ishaque, T. Frese, M. Hellwig, C. Schwarte, A. Schaper, J. H. Wendorff and A. Greiner, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 637–640 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933–938 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakane, N. Shimada, T. Ogihara, N. Ogata and S. Yamaguchi, J. Mater. Sci., 2007, 42, 4031–4035 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaudhari and M. Srinivasan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23049–23056 RSC .
N. Saveh-Shemshaki, M. Latifi, R. Bagherzadeh, M. Malekshahi Byranvand, N. Naseri and A. Dabirian, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2016, 27, 358–365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bognitzki, W. Czado, T. Frese, A. Schaper, M. Hellwig, M. Steinhart, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 70–72 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, D. N. Tafen, J. P. Lewis, Z. Hong, A. Manivannan, M. Zhi, M. Li and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12290–12297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, J. Kunze, V. Haeublein, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1080–1082 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, V. Häublein, N. Liu, N. T. Nguyen, E. M. Zolnhofer, H. Tsuchiya, M. S. Killian, K. Meyer, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3763–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, S. Fujimoto, P. Schmuki and H. Tsuchiya, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 910–913 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, L. Yang, S. Xu, S. Luo and Q. Cai, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1748–1751 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Enache, J. Schoonman and R. Van De Krol, J. Electroceram., 2004, 13, 177–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yin, H. Tang, S. H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045106 CrossRef .
M. Anpo and M. Takeuchi, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 505–516 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 363–367 CrossRef CAS .
P. Triggs and F. Lévy, Phys. Status Solidi, 1985, 129, 363–374 CrossRef CAS .
D. Morris, Y. Dou, J. Rebane, C. E. J. Mitchell, R. G. Egdell, D. S. L. Law, A. Vittadini and M. Casarin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 13445–13457 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Furubayashi, T. Hitosugi, Y. Yamamoto, K. Inaba, G. Kinoda, Y. Hirose, T. Shimada and T. Hasegawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 1–3 CrossRef .
A. Ghicov, S. P. Albu, R. Hahn, D. Kim, T. Stergiopoulos, J. Kunze, C. A. Schiller, P. Falaras and P. Schmuki, Chem. – Asian J., 2009, 4, 520–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy, D. Kim, K. Lee, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 45–59 RSC .
J. Yu and B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 295–302 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. H. Hanaor and C. C. Sorrell, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 855–874 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bauer, A. Pittrof, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 538–541 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1971, 5, 145–399 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shinar and J. H. Kennedy, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1982, 6, 323–335 CrossRef CAS .
F. Amano, B. Ohtani and H. Yoshida, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 766, 100–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Launay and G. Horowitz, J. Cryst. Growth, 1982, 57, 118–124 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lewis, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1991, 42, 543–580 CrossRef CAS .
D. Philip Colombo, K. a. Roussel, J. Saeh, D. E. Skinner, J. J. Cavaleri and R. M. Bowman, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 232, 207–214 CrossRef .
D. P. Colombo and R. M. Bowman, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 11752–11756 CrossRef CAS .
I. Paramasivam, H. Jha, N. Liu and P. Schmuki, Small, 2012, 8, 3073–3103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, L. Vayssieres, S. Shen, L. Guo, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang, B. R. Antoun and S. S. Mao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3889 CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Yu, X. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Ouyang, Z. Li, J. Ye and Z. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 3925–3930 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. H. Bang, C. Tang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 387–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. McDonald and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4863–4869 CrossRef CAS .
W. Smith, A. Wolcott, R. C. Fitzmorris, J. Z. Zhang and Y. P. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10792–10800 RSC .
R. Li, Q. Li, L. Zong, X. Wang and J. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hernández, V. Cauda, A. Chiodoni, S. Dallorto, A. Sacco, D. Hidalgo, E. Celasco and C. F. Pirri, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12153–12167 Search PubMed .
J.-R. Huang, X. Tan, T. Yu, L. Zhao, S. Xue and W.-L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9975 CAS .
Z. Jiao, Y. Zhang, T. Chen, Q. Dong, G. Lu and Y. Bi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2654–2662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Hsu, Y.-C. Chen and Y.-G. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14157–14162 CAS .
Y.-P. P. Yuan, L.-W. W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. Joachim Loo, C. Xue, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934–3951 CAS .
X. Li, J. G. Yu, J. X. Low, Y. P. Fang, J. Xiao and X. B. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
D. Merki and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878 CAS .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, M. T. Mayer, A. Yella, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9927–9936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zuo, L. Wang, T. Wu, Z. Zhang, D. Borchardt and P. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11856–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hoang, S. P. Berglund, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3659–3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Naldoni, M. Allieta, S. Santangelo, M. Marelli, F. Fabbri, S. Cappelli, C. L. Bianchi, R. Psaro and V. Dal Santo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7600–7603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Diebold, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, C. Schneider, D. Freitag, U. Venkatesan, V. R. R. Marthala, M. Hartmann, B. Winter, E. Spiecker, A. Osvet, E. M. Zolnhofer, K. Meyer, T. Nakajima, X. Zhou and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14201–14205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, C. Schneider, D. Freitag, M. Hartmann, U. Venkatesan, J. Müller, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3309–3313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, V. Häublein, X. Zhou, U. Venkatesan, M. Hartmann, M. Mackovic, T. Nakajima, E. Spiecker, A. Osvet, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6815–6820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. G. Gardner, F. Sweett and D. W. Tanner, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1963, 24, 1183–1196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rioult, D. Stanescu, E. Fonda, A. Barbier and H. Magnan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7482–7490 CAS .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Ingram, P. Christopher, J. L. Bauer and S. Linic, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 1441–1447 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, F. Meng, D. Chu and N. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2651 Search PubMed .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
C. Clavero, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naldoni, F. Riboni, U. Guler, A. Boltasseva, V. M. Shalaev and A. V. Kildishev, Nanophotonics, 2016, 5, 112–133 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard III and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 601–607 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, P. Christopher, H. Xin and A. Marimuthu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1890–1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, H. Kozuka and T. Yoko, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 277, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1810–1811 RSC .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 158–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, Y. Jiao, K. Xiong, R. Ogier, Z. J. Yang, S. Gao, A. B. Dahlin and M. Käll, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4059–4065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Lee, T. G. Kim, H. J. Choi and Y. M. Sung, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 2588–2593 CAS .
W. T. Sun, A. Yu, H. Y. Pan, X. F. Gao, Q. Chen and L. M. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1124–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deutsch, L. Neeman and D. Oron, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 649–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Teitelboim and D. Oron, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 446–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qorbani, N. Naseri, O. Moradlou, R. Azimirad and A. Z. Moshfegh, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 162, 210–216 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hola, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, R. Zboril and A. L. Rogach, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 590–603 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473–6475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. S. Fernando, S. Sahu, Y. Liu, W. K. Lewis, E. A. Guliants, A. Jafariyan, P. Wang, C. E. Bunker and Y. P. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8363–8376 CAS .

          R. M. Cornell and U. Schwertmann, The Iron Oxides. Structure, Properties, Reactions and Uses, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, Weinheim, Germany, 1st edn,  1996 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kennedy and K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 125, 709–714 CrossRef CAS .
M. Catti, G. Valerio and R. Dovesi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 7441–7450 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Butler, A. Bandyopadhyay and R. Srinivasan, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 7882–7884 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, P. D. Johnson, N. Wassdahl, J. Guo, P. Skytt, J. Nordgren, S. D. Kevan, J. E. Rubensson, T. Böske and W. Eberhardt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48, 2109–2111 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Dare-Edwards, J. B. Goodenough, A. Hamnett and P. R. Trevellick, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1983, 2027 RSC .
M. Barroso, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
R. K. Quinn, R. D. Nasby and R. J. Baughman, Mater. Res. Bull., 1976, 11, 1011–1017 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gori, H. R. Grüniger and G. Calzaferri, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1980, 10, 345–349 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy, R. Shinar and J. P. Ziegler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 2307–2309 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 2371 CrossRef CAS .
G. Horowitz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1983, 159, 421–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, M. Hendewerk, K. D. Sieber and G. A. Somorjai, J. Solid State Chem., 1986, 61, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sanchez, K. D. Sieber and G. A. Somorjai, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1988, 252, 269–290 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J.-W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 Search PubMed .
L. Fu, H. M. Yu, C. K. Zhang, Z. G. Shao and B. L. Yi, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Ai, R. Mo, H. X. Li and J. X. Zhong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6722–6728 RSC .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759 CAS .
X. Zou, A. Goswami and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17242–17245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Morin, Phys. Rev., 1951, 83, 1005–1010 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Morin, Phys. Rev., 1954, 93, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski and S. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12388–12395 CAS .
P. S. Bassi, Gurudayal, L. H. Wong and J. Barber, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11834–11842 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S. Jiang, W. Song, P. Zhou, H. Ji, W. Ma, W. Hao, C. Chen and J. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1231–1236 CAS .
M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. F. Yan, S. H. Wei and M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 123712 CrossRef .
J. Deng, J. Zhong, A. Pu, D. Zhang, M. Li, X. Sun and S. T. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 6 Search PubMed .
A. Pu, J. Deng, M. Li, J. Gao, H. Zhang, Y. Hao, J. Zhong and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2491 CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, S.-H. Shen, P. Liao, I. S. Cho, O. Zandi, Y.-S. Liu, K. Lashgari, G. Westin, J.-H. Guo, F. J. Himpsel, E. A. Carter, X. L. Zheng, T. W. Hamann, B. E. Koel, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3100–3121 CAS .
D. Wang, H. Chen, G. Chang, X. Lin, Y. Zhang, A. Aldalbahi, C. Peng, J. Wang and C. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14072–14078 CAS .
T. Wang, W. Luo, X. Wen, Z. Zou and W. Huang, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 652–655 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, C. Li, S. Liu, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 91–100 RSC .
Y. Fu, C.-L. Dong, Z. Zhou, W.-Y. Lee, J. Chen, P. Guo, L. Zhao and S. Shen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3846–3853 RSC .
Y. Fu, C.-L. Dong, W.-Y. Lee, J. Chen, P. Guo, L. Zhao and S. Shen, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 704–711 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, G. Hu, Y. Ding, M. Pang and B. Ma, J. Catal., 2016, 340, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
Gurudayal, S. Y. Chiam, M. H. Kumar, P. S. Bassi, H. L. Seng, J. Barber and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5852–5859 CAS .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Guo, L. L. Wang and Y. W. Tan, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 320–328 CrossRef CAS .
A. Annamalai, A. Subramanian, U. Kang, H. Park, S. H. Choi and J. S. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3810–3817 CAS .
J. Krýsa, M. Zlámal, Š. Paušová, T. Kotrla, Š. Kment and Z. Hubička, Catal. Today, 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2016.12.022 .
J. Brillet, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, D. H. Youn, J. H. Kim, H. G. Kim and J. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14123–14129 CAS .
C. Y. Lee, L. Wang, Y. Kado, R. Kirchgeorg and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 308–311 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chitrada, K. S. Raja, D. Rodriguez and D. Chidambaram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, H220–H228 CrossRef CAS .
A. Annamalai, H. H. Lee, S. H. Choi, S. Y. Lee, E. Gracia-Espino, A. Subramanian, J. Park, K. Kong and J. S. Jang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Y. Lee and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 30, 21–25 CrossRef .
A. Kaouk, T.-P. Ruoko, M. Pyeon, Y. Gönüllü, K. Kaunisto, H. Lemmetyinen and S. Mathur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 28345–28353 CAS .
M. Zhang, W. Luo, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 42105 CrossRef .
H. Pan, X. Meng, D. Liu, S. Li and G. Qin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22179–22186 RSC .
X. Qi, G. She, M. Wang, L. Mu and W. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5742–5744 RSC .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and M. Graetzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Badia-Bou, E. Mas-Marza, P. Rodenas, E. M. Barea, F. Fabregat-Santiago, S. Gimenez, E. Peris and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3826–3833 CAS .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16693–16700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Gratzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109–114 RSC .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Norskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu, A. Javey, J. Guo and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7447 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Youn, Y. Bin Park, J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, Y. J. Jang and J. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 437–443 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Y. Rui, Y. Li, Q. Zhang and H. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 436–442 CrossRef CAS .
F. Malara, A. Minguzzi, M. Marelli, S. Morandi, R. Psaro, V. Dal Santo and A. Naldoni, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5292–53000 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Chemelewski, H.-C. Lee, J.-F. Lin, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2843–2850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fan, F. Li, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, H. Chen, E. Gabrielsson, J. Sun and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3242–3247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, K. Fan, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, L. Duan and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3786–3790 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, J. W. Jang, D. H. Youn, G. Magesh and J. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 14004761 Search PubMed .
Y. Yang, M. Forster, Y. Ling, G. Wang, T. Zhai, Y. Tong, A. J. Cowan and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3403–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. B. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kong, J. Tang, C. Selomulya, W. Li, J. Wei, Y. Fang, Y. Wang, G. Zheng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6822–6825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, C. Liu, H. E. Jeong and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 234–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramadurgam, T. G. Lin and C. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4517–4522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Q. Peng, Y. Hu, F. Q. Zhang, B. Hu, L. Li, M. Wang, X. M. Meng and S. T. Lee, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 18–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J. H. Yun, H. Chen, M. Lyu, T. Butburee and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 6405–6410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Y. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, T. Wang, X. X. Chang, L. Zhang and J. L. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5851–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Mayer, C. Du and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12406–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, C. Li, D. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9013–9015 RSC .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Y. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1248–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shen, J. Zhou, C.-L. Dong, Y. Hu, E. N. Tseng, P. Guo, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mao, G. Y. Han and J. H. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2247 RSC .
Z. Zhang, C. Gao, Y. Li, W. Han, W. Fu, Y. He and E. Xie, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 892–899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Qiu, Z. Wei, Q. Lin, Q. Zhang, K. Yan, H. Chen, S. Xiao, Z. Fan and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3651–3658 CAS .
Y. Sun, W. D. Chemelewski, S. P. Berglund, C. Li, H. He, G. Shi and C. B. Mullins, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 5494–5499 CAS .
I. Kondofersky, H. K. Dunn, A. Müller, B. Mandlmeier, J. M. Feckl, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, C. Scheu, L. M. Peter and T. Bein, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4623–4630 CAS .
Y.-F. Xu, H.-S. Rao, B.-X. Chen, Y. Lin, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500049 CrossRef PubMed .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, M. L. Brongersma, T. F. Jaramillo and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mettenboerger, T. Singh, A. P. Singh, T. T. Jaervi, M. Moseler, M. Valldor and S. Mathur, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 4828–4835 CrossRef CAS .
M. Forster, R. J. Potter, Y. Ling, Y. Yang, D. R. Klug, Y. Li and A. J. Cowan, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4009–4016 RSC .
M. T. Nguyen, S. Piccinin, N. Seriani and R. Gebauer, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 715–721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moir, N. Soheilnia, K. Liao, P. O'Brien, Y. Tian, K. S. Burch and G. A. Ozin, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1557–1567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, J. Reddy, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4074–4079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Yang and Y. Li, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 848–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Morrish, M. Rahman, J. M. D. MacElroy and C. A. Wolden, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 474–479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Peng, J. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Su, L. Wang, W. Huang and C. Fan, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 15000051 Search PubMed .
I. S. Cho, H. S. Han, M. Logar, J. Park and X. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501840 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. F. Halverson, J. Y. Kim and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13433–13441 CAS .
S. So, I. Hwang, F. Riboni, J. E. Yoo and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 71, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Burdett, T. Hughbanks, G. J. Miller, J. W. Richardson and J. V. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 3639–3646 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Earle, Phys. Rev., 1942, 61, 56–62 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, K. Prasad, R. Sanjinès, P. E. Schmid, F. Lévy, R. Sanjines, P. E. Schmid and F. Levy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 2042–2047 CrossRef CAS .
L. Forro, O. Chauvet, D. Emin, L. Zuppiroli, H. Berger and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 633–635 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, G. Dai and B. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19378–19385 CAS .
S. So and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7933–7935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawahara, Y. Konishi, H. Tada, N. Tohge, J. Nishii and S. Ito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2811–2813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Boddy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1968, 115, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sato, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 123, 126–128 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, Catal. Surv. Jpn., 1997, 1, 169–179 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, J. Kunze, V. Haeublein, S. Kleber and P. Schmuki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 419, 426–429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, B. Schmidt, J. Kunze and P. Schmuki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 433, 323–326 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 11–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Chen, H. Jin, C. Cao, J. Li and Z. Mi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17820–17827 CAS .
B. Liu, H. M. Chen, C. Liu, S. C. Andrews, C. Hahn and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9995–9998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Nah, N. K. Shrestha, D. Kim and P. Schmuki, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2013, 43, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Z. Zhao, A. Kumar, R. I. Boughton and H. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6920–6937 RSC .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, S. Li, Z. Chen, K.-Q. Zhang, S. S. Al-deyab and Y. Lai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6772–6801 CAS .
R. P. Lynch, A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, G76 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Kelly and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 2773–2780 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beranek, H. Tsuchiya, T. Sugishima, J. M. Macak, L. Taveira, S. Fujimoto, H. Kisch and P. Schmuki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 1–3 CrossRef .
A. Mazzarolo, K. Lee, A. Vicenzo and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 162–165 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan and T. Sultana, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 76, 211–221 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Mali, S. An, M. Liou, S. S. Al-Deyab and S. S. Yoon, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, K. Prasad, R. Sanjinès, P. E. Schmid and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 2042–2047 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mohammadpour, M. Moradi, K. Lee, G. Cha, S. So, A. Kahnt, D. M. Guldi, M. Altomare and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1631–1634 RSC .
S. Ozkan, A. Mazare and P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 819–826 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abd-Lefdil, R. Diaz, H. Bihri, M. Ait Aouaj and F. Rueda, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2007, 38, 217–219 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hwang, C. Hahn, B. Bin Liu and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5060–5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Deák, J. Kullgren, B. Aradi, T. Frauenheim and L. Kavan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 199, 27–34 CrossRef .
P. Roy, C. Das, K. Lee, R. Hahn, T. Ruff, M. Moll and P. Schmuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5629–5631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, B. Zhang, Z. Zuo, M. Wang and Y. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10020–10025 CAS .
H. Wu and Z. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 13481–13487 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, J. Cai, Q. Wu, P. Huang, Y. Su and C. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 108, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Prokes, J. L. Gole, X. Chen, C. Burda and W. E. Carlos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beranek and H. Kisch, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 761–766 CrossRef CAS .
R. Beranek and H. Kisch, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 40–48 CAS .
S. Hejazi, N. T. Nguyen, A. Mazare and P. Schmuki, Catal. Today, 2017, 281, 189–197 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6656–6665 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hahn, F. Schmidt-Stein, J. Sahnen, S. Thiemann, Y. Song, J. Kunze, V. P. Lehto and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7236–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schmidt-Stein, S. Thiemann, S. Berger, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, Acta Mater., 2010, 58, 6317–6323 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Fang, X. L. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Jia, Z. Huo, Z. Li, H. Zhao, H. G. Yang and X. Yao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3513–3520 CAS .
W. Q. I. Fang, Z. Huo, P. Liu, X. L. U. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Jia, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. G. U. Yang and X. Yao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 11439–11444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Aldabergenova, A. Ghicov, S. Albu, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 2190–2194 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, S. Berger, N. Shrestha and P. Schmuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, C409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, D. Kim, H. Jha, K. Lee, J. Paul and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2032–2034 RSC .
Y. Yang, D. Kim, M. Yang and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7746–7748 RSC .
M. Yang, H. Jha, N. Liu and P. Schmuki, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15205–15208 RSC .
C. Das, P. Roy, M. Yang, H. Jha and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3094–3096 RSC .
M. Altomare, K. Lee, M. S. Killian, E. Selli and P. Schmuki, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5841–5844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mishra, L. Wang, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 410–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Resasco, N. P. Dasgupta, J. R. Rosell, J. Guo and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10521–10526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sasaki, N. L. Peterson and K. Hoshino, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1985, 46, 1267–1283 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Leng, Z. Zhang, J. Q. Zhang and C. N. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15008–15023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yun, G. Y. Song, B. E. Ahn, S. K. Lee, J. Heo, K. S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 366, 561–566 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307–7309 RSC .
L. Wang, L. Duan, Y. Wang, M. S. G. Ahlquist and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12947–12950 RSC .
Y. Gao, X. Ding, J. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Lu, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4219–4222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, L. Zhang, X. Ding and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12008–12013 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhao, N. Li, H. Tong, X. Yang and L. Xia, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 4102–4107 RSC .
F. Su, T. Wang, R. Lv, J. Zhang, P. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9001–9009 RSC .
Y. C. Pu, G. Wang, K. Der Chang, Y. Ling, Y. K. Lin, B. C. Fitzmorris, C. M. Liu, X. Lu, Y. Tong, J. Z. Zhang, Y. J. Hsu and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 43, 105–108 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, R. Hahn, M. Altomare, E. Selli and P. Schmuki, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6133–6137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Basahel, K. Lee, R. Hahn, P. Schmuki, S. M. Bawaked and S. A. Al-Thabaiti, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6123–6125 RSC .
J. E. Yoo, K. Lee, M. Altomare, E. Selli and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 7514–7517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Nguyen, J. Yoo, M. Altomare and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9653–9656 RSC .
N. T. Nguyen, M. Altomare, J. Yoo and P. Schmuki, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3208–3215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Altomare, N. T. Nguyen and P. Schmuki, Chem. Sci., 2016, 1–22 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Li and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16451–16455 CAS .
S. Cheng, W. Fu, H. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Ma, H. Zhao, M. Sun and L. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 2615–2621 CAS .
J. Luo, L. Ma, T. He, C. F. Ng, S. Wang, H. Sun and H. J. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11956–11963 CAS .
N. Guijarro, T. Lana-Villarreal, I. Mora-Seró, J. Bisquert and R. Gómez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4208–4214 CAS .
G. Loget, J. E. Yoo, A. Mazare, L. Wang and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 52, 41–44 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tripathy, G. Loget, M. Altomare and P. Schmuki, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 5353–5358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, G. Moon, G. Kim, U. Kang, H. Park and W. Choi, J. Catal., 2017, 346, 92–100 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, S. M. Dellatore, W. M. Miller and P. B. Messersmith, Science, 2007, 318, 426–430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, K. Parvez, F. Hinkel, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5535–5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lim, J. Huang, S. Kim, H. Lee, H. Zeng and D. S. Hwang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3342–3346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Nam, B. Kim, M. J. Ko, M. Jin, J. M. Kim and D. Y. Jung, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14000–14007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. a. Zangmeister, T. a. Morris and M. J. Tarlov, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8619–8628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, H. Fan, Y. Liu, Z. Shi and Z. Jin, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 5497–5505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Kong, D. Zhou, J. M. ing Ang, S. L. ei Phua, W. A. ik Yee, H. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Lu, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 7776–7783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hou, X. Li, X. Zou, X. Quan and G. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 858–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mazare, N. Liu, K. Lee, M. S. Killian and P. Schmuki, ChemistryOpen, 2013, 2, 21–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Shrestha, M. Yang, Y. C. Nah, I. Paramasivam and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 254–257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Yuan, L. Liang, Y. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Jin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 158, 517–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, G. Zhao, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Tong and T. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19067–19076 CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Liu and J. Qu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 4621–4624 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Hwang, A. Boukai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 410–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, H. Lu, Z. Shi, F. Wu, J. Guo, K. Deng and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17200–17207 CAS .
Z. Wu, C. Gong, J. Yu, L. Sun, W. Xiao and C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1292–1299 CAS .
H. Y. Chang, W. J. Tzeng and S. Y. Cheng, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 817–821 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guo, Z. Liu, J. Han, Z. Liu, Y. Li, B. Wang, T. Cui and C. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 16204–16213 RSC .
Z. Liu, K. Guo, J. Han, Y. Li, T. Cui, B. Wang, J. Ya and C. Zhou, Small, 2014, 10, 3153–3161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Xie and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1235–1242 CAS .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059–2062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Arie and N. Voloch, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 355–373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Colodrero, A. Mihi, L. Häggman, M. Ocaña, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and H. Míguez, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nishimura, N. Abrams, B. A. Lewis, L. I. Halaoui, T. E. Mallouk, K. D. Benkstein, J. Van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Yip, H. Huang, L. Zhou, K. Xie, Y. Wang, T. Feng, J. Li and W. Y. Tam, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5624–5628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Guo, K. Xie, J. Lin, Z. Yong, C. T. Yip, L. Zhou, Y. Wang and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9881 CAS .
A. Al-Haddad, Z. Wang, R. Xu, H. Qi, R. Vellacheri, U. Kaiser and Y. Lei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16331–16337 CAS .
H. Zhao, W. Fu, H. Yang, Y. Xu, W. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, Q. Jing, X. Qi, J. Cao, X. Zhou and Y. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8778–8783 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Jeon, W. Choi and H. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7134–7142 CAS .
J.-S. Yang, W.-H. Lin, C.-Y. Lin, B.-S. Wang and J.-J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13314–13321 CAS .
Q. H. Liu, J. F. He, T. Yao, Z. H. Sun, W. R. Cheng, S. He, Y. Xie, Y. H. Peng, H. Cheng, Y. F. Sun, Y. Jiang, F. C. Hu, Z. Xie, W. S. Yan, Z. Y. Pan, Z. Y. Wu and S. Q. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jia, J. Xie, C. Guo and C. M. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 62611–62618 RSC .
D. Monllor-Satoca, M. Bärtsch, C. Fàbrega, A. Genç, S. Hilaire, T. Andreu, J. Arbiol, M. Niederberger and J. R. Morante, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 3242–3254 CAS .
J. J. Deng, X. X. Lv, J. Y. Liu, H. Zhang, K. Q. Nie, C. H. Hong, J. O. Wang, X. H. Sun, J. Zhong and S. T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5348–5356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ginley and M. A. Butler, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 2019–2021 CrossRef CAS .
T.-P. Ruoko, K. Kaunisto, M. Bärtsch, J. Pohjola, A. Hiltunen, M. Niederberger, N. V. Tkachenko and H. J. Lemmetyinen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2859–2864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Bassi, R. P. Antony, P. P. Boix, Y. Fang, J. Barber and L. H. Wong, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 310–318 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Bassi, S. Y. Chiam, Gurudayal, J. Barber and L. H. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22490–22495 CAS .
L. Wang, N. T. Nguyen and P. Schmuki, ChemSusChem, 2016, 1–7 Search PubMed .
C. Li, T. Wang, Z. Luo, S. Liu and J. Gong, Small, 2016, 3415–3422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Mohapatra, S. E. John, S. Banerjee and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, J. He, Z. Sun, Y. Peng, T. Yao, Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, F. Hu, Z. Xie, B. He and S. Wei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24060–24067 CAS .
V. A. N. De Carvalho, R. A. D. S. Luz, B. H. Lima, F. N. Crespilho, E. R. Leite and F. L. Souza, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 525–529 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, M. F. Hossain and T. Takahashi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8528–8535 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, N. de Leon Snapp and H. Park, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 80–87 RSC .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, T. Senty, F. Meng, A. D. Bristow, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8438–8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† These two authors contributed equally.‡ Current address: State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation, National Engineering Research Center for Fine Petrochemical Intermediates, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 730000 Lanzhou, China.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Stepan Kment
	Stepan Kment received his PhD in solid state physics and photoelectrochemistry in 2010 from Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic. He then spent one year as a postdoctoral research fellow at Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Nebrasca – Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA. Since 2011 he has been working at the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials of Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic as a Senior Researcher in the group of Photoelectrochemistry. His research is focused on development of new materials and nanostructures for PEC water splitting application mainly via advanced plasma deposition methods.

Francesca Riboni
	Francesca Riboni studied Chemical Sciences at the University of Milan, Italy, and obtained her PhD in Chemistry from the University of Milan, Italy, in 2014. She joined the group of Prof. Schmuki at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany, in 2015 as a postdoctoral fellow. Her research interests include the synthesis of functional nanomaterials by electrochemical processes and their application as energy conversion and storage devices.

Lei Wang
	Lei Wang received her PhD degree from University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2010. From 2007–2010, she was an exchange student in National Institute for Materials Science, Japan. She worked as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Patrik Schmuki's research group in University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany from 2011–2016. Since Aug. 2016, she is a professor in Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Science. Her research interests include the fabrication of one-dimensional semiconductors for photoelectrochemical water splitting applications.

Josef Krýsa
	Josef Krýsa graduated from University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague (UCT), where he obtained also PhD degree in 1995. In 2008 he obtained full professorship at UCT, Department of Inorganic Technology, where he is at the moment a leader of the group Photocatalysis (http://www.josefkrysagroup.com). He published more than 106 papers, h-index is 24. His research interest is the preparation and characterization of nanostructured photocatalysts materials, photoelectrochemistry, energy and environmental applications of photo(electro)catalysis.

Patrik Schmuki
	Patrik Schmuki obtained his PhD from ETH Zurich, Switzerland, in 1992. From 1994–1997 he worked at Brookhaven National Laboratory, US, and at the Institute for Microstructural Sciences of the National Research Council of Canada. From 1997–2000, he has been Associate Professor for Microstructuring Materials at EPFL, Switzerland, and since 2000 he is Full Professor and Head of the Institute for Surface Science and Corrosion at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg. His research interests target electrochemistry and materials science at the nanoscale, with a particular focus on functional materials and self-organization processes.

Radek Zboril
	Prof. Radek Zboril, PhD after finishing the PhD study (2000) underwent several short-term stays e.g. at University of Delaware and University of Tokyo. From 2010, he is a professor at the Palacky University Olomouc and the general director of the Regional Centre of Advanced Technologies and Materials, RCPTM in Olomouc, Czech Republic. He is an author and co-author of more than 380 papers. He is focused on nanomaterials research including iron, iron oxide, noble metal and carbon-based (graphene derivatives, carbon dots, etc.) nanostructures, magnetic nanoparticles, and hybrid systems. Their advanced nano-architecture and applications in water treatment, energy materials, catalysis, etc.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Principle of operation of a photoelectrochemical cell based on n-type semiconductor; the water splitting reaction steps (i–iv) are described in the text (Section 1.1). (b) Band edge positions of semiconductors in contact with an aqueous electrolyte at pH = 0, relative to NHE and to the vacuum level. For comparison HER and OER redox potentials are also reported.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
ηe−/h+ = 1–10−A	(11)
APCE = IPCE/ηe−/h+	(12)
	(13)
ERHE = Eref + E0ref + 0.059 pH	(14)

 	Fig. 2  Classification of nanostructures based on nanoscale dimensions – their structural and functional features are discussed in Section 3. 1D nanostructures (upper panel) include e.g. (i) carbon nanofibers fabricated by the spin-electrodeposition (reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Elsevier), (ii) TiO2 nanotubes by self-organizing electrochemical anodization (adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16562–16566. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society) and (iii) TiO2 nanorods grown on FTO substrate by a hydrothermal procedure (adapted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4883–4890. Copyright 2014 American Chemical). The lower panel of the picture reports SEM and TEM images of (i) 0D nanoparticles (TiO2 and Au nanoparticles, respectively – unpublished results); (ii) 2D sheaths of TiO2 grown perpendicularly on FTO substrate, and of (iii) 3D nanostructures – left: inverse opal TiO2 (reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the National Academy of Science); right: TiO2 nanorods branched with α-Fe2O3 nanosheets (reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustrating three typical photoelectrodes and their corresponding charge separation/transport behaviors. (b) Cross-sectional (left) and top (right) scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of α-Fe2O3 nanoflake array, grown by thermal oxidation of Fe foil. (c) Cross-sectional (left) and top view (right) SEM images of single crystalline rutile TiO2 nanoplatelet arrays, grown by chemical bath deposition on FTO glass. Fig. (a) is reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (b) is reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (c) is reproduced from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM images of 3D hierarchically branched TiO2 NWs: (a1) tilted view, (a2) top view. The insets show high-magnification images of an individual hierarchically branched array. (b) Tilted view SEM picture of ZnO NW nanoforest. (c) Cross-sectional view SEM image of WO3-α-Fe2O3 host–guest film. The broken white line indicates the FTO/WO3 interface. (d) FESEM image of SnO2 nanowire covered with TiO2 nano needle leaf-like structures via TiCl4 treatment. (e) SEM image of a nanotree heterostructure; (e2) magnified SEM image showing the large surface area of the TiO2 segment used for water oxidation – scale bars are 1 μm. Structural schematics of the nanotree heterostructure: small diameter TiO2 nanowires (blue) and Si nanowires (gray). The two insets report the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs. Energy band diagram of the nanotree heterostructure for solar-driven water splitting. Fig. (a1 and a2) are reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (b) is adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666–671. Copyright 2011 American Chemical. Fig. (c) is adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867. Copyright 2009 American Chemical. Fig. (d) is reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Elsevier. Fig. (e1–e4) are adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992. Copyright 2013 American Chemical.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic view of the replication process and SEM image of the corresponding TiO2 NTs. (b) Schematic representation of TiO2 (or α-Fe2O3) nanotube formation process: first a ZnO seed layer is deposited on FTO, and ZnO nanorods are grown through a hydrothermal method; afterwards, TiO2 (or α-Fe2O3) nanotubes are grown and the ZnO sacrificial template is simultaneously dissolved. Fig. (a) adapted with permission from Langmuir, 1996, 12, 1411–1413. Copyright 1996 American Chemical Society. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Typical 2-electrode electrochemical anodization set-up and possible anodic morphologies for different metal oxides: TiO2 (upper row), and Al2O3, WO3, Ta2O5, and α-Fe2O3 (lower row). (b) High field oxide (TiO2) formation in the presence of fluoride ions: a steady-state is established between the oxide formation at the inner interface and its dissolution at the outer interface (due to dissolution/complexation of Ti4+ as TiF62−). Rapid fluoride migration leads to the formation of a fluoride-rich layer at the Ti/TiO2 interface. Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the setup for electrospinning nanofibers. Spinneret is fabricated by means of a two-capillary coaxial jet, through which heavy mineral oil and an ethanol solution of Ti precursor are simultaneously ejected. (b) SEM image of a uniaxially aligned array of anatase hollow-nanofibers. (c) FESEM images of α-Fe2O3 hollow fibers by electrospinning an iron acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) solution. (d) SEM image of porous fibers obtained via electrospinning of a polymer solution in dichloromethane. Fig. (a and b) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 933–938. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (d) reproduced from ref. 151 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 


α-Fe2O3 NTs	Anodization (H2 annealing)	

	1 M KOH	1.4 at 1.5 VRHE	
450

Ni-doped α-Fe2O3 NTs	Anodization and electrochemical deposition	

	1 M KOH	∼3.3 at 1.45 VRHE	
451

α-Fe2O3 NRs	Hydrothermal synthesis	

	1 M NaOH	3 at 1.6 VRHE	
452

α-Fe2O3 NRs	Template synthesis	

	1 M NaOH	8 at 1.6 VRHE	
311

Sn-doped α-Fe2O3 NWs	Hydrothermal synthesis	

	1 M NaOH	1.2 at 1.23 VRHE	
121

Pt-doped α-Fe2O3 NRs, with Co-Pi co-catalysts	Solution-based methods and two-step annealing	

	1 M NaOH	4.3 at 1.23 VRHE	
247


 	Fig. 8  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry scans of reduced and Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanoarrays, showing the synergistic effect induced by Ti and oxygen vacancies on the photoanode PEC performance (measurements were performed under simulated solar light AM 1.5G irradiation, 100 mW cm−2). (b) SEM images and TEM elemental mapping of Ti-doped α-Fe2O3 nanorods. (c) Effects on α-Fe2O3 morphology and properties induced by low (left) and high (right) Nb doping amounts. (d) Calculated volumes of defective α-Fe2O3 supercells containing 3d TM substitutions. (e) Schematic representation of thermally induced Sn-doping of α-Fe2O3 nanorod arrays and dependence of photoanode performance, extent of Sn diffusion and FTO resistivity on the annealing time. (f) Schematic representation of the destabilizing effect induced in the α-Fe2O3 lattice by Sn4+ dopants, and the recovery of a more ordered structure promoted by Be2+ dopants. Fig. (a and b) reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (d) reproduced from ref. 259 with permission from the American Institute of Physics. Fig. (e) adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 3810–3817. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. Fig. (f) reproduced from ref. 278 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic and band-structure of a Si–Al–α-Fe2O3 CMS NW photoelectrode (upper panel). Integrated absorbed photon flux and ideal photocurrent density of various CSM NW arrays – the gray dashed line indicates the theoretical maximum absorption in bulk hematite (lower panel). (b) Schematic representation of the main electron–hole recombination pathways in hematite NRs photoanodes for solar water splitting, and of the three-step approach to reduce bulk, interface, and surface recombination. SEM image of the Ti/flame hematite NRs after sequential oxalic acid etching and FeOOH decoration. J–V curves measured at 0.8 VRHE of Ti/flame hematite NRs, also modified according to different surface treatments: (i) oxalic acid (OA) etching, (ii) FeOOH deposition, and (iii) combined OA etching and FeOOH deposition. (a) Adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4517–4522. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Reproduced from ref. 326 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 


TiO2 NTs	Anodization	

	1 M KOH	0.90 at 1.23 VRHE	
453

Ru-doped TiO2 NTs	Anodization	

	1 M KOH	1.8 at 1.23 VRHE	
364

TiO2 NWs	Hydrothermal	

	1 M NaOH	2.6 at 1.23 VRHE	
454

Fe-doped TiO2 NRs	Hydrothermal method	

	1 M KOH	3.0 at 1.23 VRHE	
344

CdS–Au–TiO2 NRs	Hydrothermal method and chemical bath deposition	

	0.25 M Na2S and 0.35 M Na2SO3	4.1 at 0.0 VAg/AgCl	
455

TiO2/ln2S3/AgInS2 core–shell branched NRs	Two-step hydrothermal method and SILAR	

	1 M KOH	22.1 at 0.56 VAg/AgCl	
428


 	Fig. 10  (a) Photocurrent and IPCE vs. applied potential measured for flat compact oxide (60 nm thick), 2.4 μm thick nanoparticle, and 2.4 μm thick nanotube TiO2 layers under incident λ = 350 nm. (b) IPCE vs. wavelength spectra measured for different thicknesses of nanotube layers anodized in an ethylene glycol-based electrolyte. (c) SEM images of TiO2 NRs and branched TiO2 NRs (B-NRs). (d) TEM images of a branched nanorod. (e) Photocurrent vs. applied potential measured for TiO2 NRs and B-NRs. Fig. (a and b) reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157(3), G76. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society. Fig. (c and d) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) IPCE spectra of N-modified TiO2 films at 1.4 VRHE, in 1 M KOH. (b) IPCE spectra measured at 1.23 VRHE, 1 M KOH electrolyte and under AM 1.5G irradiation. (c) Proposed mechanism for the interaction between Ti3+ (formed upon hydrogenation) and substitutional N. (d) Photocurrent transient under monochromatic laser (λ = 474 nm) for aminated nanotubes; (e) IPCE spectra of the TiO2 nanotube before and after hydrothermal treatment for amination; at different temperature in DETA; (f) comparison of transport time constants for bare and aminated TiO2 nanotube as a function of the incident photon flux, for monochromatic 369 and 475 nm light illumination. Fig. (a) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Fig. (b and c) adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3659–3662. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Fig. (d–f) reproduced from ref. 371 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) IPCE spectra of different C-contaminated TiO2 nanotube layers that show sub-band gap response: (■) amorphous NTs, (●) NTs annealed in air, (○) NTs annealed in CH3OH-containing atmosphere. (b) Potential-dependent capacity measurements of the different nanotube layers in 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution at 1 kHz and plotted in a Mott–Schottky graph. (c) Hardness vs. carbonization temperature plot for various treated TiO2 nanotube layers, obtained from nanoindentation tests (the inset reports the SEM image of a nanoindentation test spot). (d) Schematic representation of the growth pathway of porous single-crystal rutile TiO2 nanorods; (e) SEM image and dark-field TEM image of F-doped porous single-crystal rutile TiO2 nanorods; (f) linear sweep voltammograms of undoped solid TiO2 NRs, and F-doped solid and porous TiO2 NRs. Fig. (a) reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157(3), G76. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 373 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 374 with permission from Elsevier. Fig. (d–f) reproduced from ref. 376 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of TiO2 nanotube layers with different Ru contents (0–0.5 at%) after annealing at 450 °C for 1 h. Measurements were carried out in 1 M KOH electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination. (b) Photocurrent transients vs. potential curves for TiO2 and Ti0.1Nb nanotube layers after annealing at 450 or 650 °C. Measurements were carried out in 1 M KOH electrolyte under AM 1.5G illumination. (c) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of Ta-doped TiO2 nanotube layers after annealing at 450 °C for 1 h, measured in 1 M KOH solution under AM 1.5G illumination – Ta contents (at%): light grey, 0.1% Ta; medium grey, 0.03% Ta; dark grey, 0.4% Ta; black, pure TiO2. (d–f) Cross-section SEM images of 2 μm TiO2 nanotubes annealed at 650 °C in air: (d) pure TiO2 NTs, (e) 0.1 at% Nb TiO2 NTs, (f) 0.2 at% Nb TiO2 NTs. A clear decrease of the rutile layer thickness underneath the nanotubular layer can be observed, from ∼1 μm for undoped TiO2, to ∼0.75 μm and ∼0.45 μm for 0.1 at% and 0.2 at% Nb doped TiO2, respectively. Fig. (a) adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5629–5631. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 382 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 383 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (d–f) reproduced from ref. 357 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of (i) TiO2, (ii) Fe–TiO2, (iii) Mn–TiO2, and (iv) Co–TiO2 nanorod arrays on FTO substrates. Insets represent the corresponding digital pictures. All scale bars are 1 μm. (b) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of undoped and variously doped TiO2 nanorod layers, under AM 1.5G solar illumination. (c) Photocurrent transient vs. potential curves of undoped and variously doped TiO2 nanorod layers, under visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm). (d) Overpotential measurement for OER using FTO and TiO2 nanowire with/without transition metal doping of electrodes in basic solutions. The dashed vertical line represents the thermodynamic redox potential for water oxidation at pH ∼13.6. (e) Fourier transforms of EXAFS spectra of various transition metal-doped samples. Fig. (a–c) reproduced from ref. 344 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. Fig. (d and e) adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9995–9998. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Flame reduction process and characterization of oxygen vacancy distribution. (a) Schematic illustration of the flame reduction method. (b) A photograph of the flame reduction process. (c) Representative cross-sectional SEM image of the flame-reduced TiO2 NWs. (d) Bright-field STEM image and the corresponding electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) elemental mapping of Ti-L2,3 and O–K edges inside the rectangular box, showing an oxygen deficiency near the NW surface. Darker color: lower concentration of oxygen. (e) O/Ti molar ratio distribution along the NW diameter (as-synthesized TiO2 NW: black rectangles and flame-reduced TiO2 NWs: red circles: 40 s, green triangles: 120 s), which is estimated using EELS spectra taken from a cross-line shown in the inset of a cross-sectional TEM image. Flame reduction conditions: T = 1000 °C, Φ = 1.4, and t = 40 or 120 s. Adapted with permission from Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233–235. Copyright 2001 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) HR-TEM image of TiO2 nanowire array decorated with a TiO2 anatase thin layer prepared from a Ti(OBu)4 solution. (b) Linear sweep voltammograms of pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2-based nanowire photoanodes recorded in 1 M KOH under AM 1.5G (100 mW cm−2) illumination. (c) Photovoltage–time spectra collected for pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2-based nanowire photoanodes. (d) EIS spectra of pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2-based nanowire photoanodes. The inset shows the equivalent circuit used to fit the spectra. In (b–d) TCL, TiCl4; TIP, Ti(OiP)4; TBU, Ti(OBu)4. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15086–15094. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photocurrent versus bias voltage of anodic TiO2 with and without Au nanoparticles irradiated with visible light (λ = 532 nm) – inset: SEM image of a 5 nm thick Au island film deposited on anodic TiO2 NTs. (b) Intensity of the plasmon-generated electric field at the interface of Au–TiO2 calculated using FDTD. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of Au decorated TiO2 nanotubes on 0.2 at% of Au containing TiAu alloy (inset: TEM image of Au decorated TiO2 nanotubes on Ti–(0.2 at%)Au alloy); (d) photoresponse spectra of 12 μm thick TiO2 nanotubes with different contents of Au in TiAu alloy. Photoelectrochemical spectra were measured in 0.1 M Na2SO4 at 500 mV (Ag/AgCl). (e) Example of self-ordering templated dewetting of Au film (20 nm-thick) on a highly ordered TiO2 nanocavity array leading to total filling with exactly one metal nanoparticle per TiO2 cavity (inset: FFT conversion of a top-view SEM image of array of highly-ordered Au NPs embedded in TiO2 nanocavities). (f) SEM image of TiO2 NTs decorated with Au–Ag alloyed-dewetted NPs; (g) photocurrent density vs. potential curves under chopped solar light illumination under solar light illumination of TiO2 NTs and TiO2 NTs decorated with Au–Ag alloyed-dewetted NPs. Fig. (a and b) adapted with permission from Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. Fig. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 396 with permission from Elsevier. Fig. (e) reproduced from ref. 399 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (f and g) reproduced from ref. 401 with permission from with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of CdS QDs deposited on TiO2 nanorods, relative energy band alignment, and photoinduced charge separation and injection mechanisms. (b) Morphologies of FTO/TiO2 and FTO/TiO2/CdS electrodes: typical top view SEM images of FTO/TiO2 electrode at (A) high and (B) low magnifications; (C) cross-sectional view of the well-aligned TiO2 nanorod array; (D) FTO/TiO2/CdS electrode; (E and F) HRTEM image and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of bare TiO2 nanorod array, respectively (inset in panel E: TEM image of a single bare TiO2 nanorod); (G and H) TEM image and the corresponding HRTEM image of a single TiO2 nanorod decorated with CdS QDs. (c) Photocurrent action spectra and (d) IPCE spectra of pristine TiO2 and variously modified TiO2 nanorod array. Photoelectrochemical spectra were measured under 475 nm (15 μW cm−2) monochromatic irradiation. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16451–16455. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representations of (a) the TiO2 BNRs–CulnS2 core–shell structure and (b) TiO2/ln2S3/AgInS2 branched NRs electrode and relative band alignment. (c) Schematic diagram and SEM image of five layers of Bi2S3/rGO (purple and light yellow) modified Bi2S3/TiO2 NRs. Fig. (a) reproduced from ref. 427 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. Fig. (b) reproduced from ref. 428 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. Fig. (c) reproduced from ref. 429 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Energy band structure of TiO2, α-Fe2O3, and Fe2TiO5 relative to the vacuum level (EVAC) and the normal hydrogen electrode (ENHE).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) SEM image of Fe2TiO5–TiO2/Coox nanoarchitecture and schematic drawing of the photoanode design with most likely water oxidation mechanism considering the idealized electronic structure alignment of the composite photoanode, Ef represents the Fermi level; (b) IPCE spectra of pure TiO2, pure α-Fe2O3, Coox decorated TiO2 and Coox decorated Fe2TiO5/TiO2 layers. The spectra were measured in 1 M KOH at 1.23 V for α-Fe2O3, and at 0.4 V vs. RHE for the other layers. (c) SEM and TEM (inset) images, and schematic representation of TiO2 nanorod array covered by a thin α-Fe2O3 layer; (d) linear sweep voltammetry plots of α-Fe2O3/TiO2 nanorod photoanodes, containing different amounts of α-Fe2O3. The data were collected in 1.0 M NaOH, under Xe lamp irradiation (100 mW cm−2). Fig. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 440 with permission from Nature Publishing Group. Fig. (c and d) reproduced from ref. 441 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  Charge generation, recombination, and transfer in the nanocomposite photoelectrodes. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2859–2864. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) O K-edge XAS spectra of pristine and Ti-treated (2 s) hematite nanostructures compared with the spectra of rutile TiO2, anatase TiO2, and Fe2TiO5. The difference spectrum between pristine and Ti-treated hematite is also shown; (b) Ti L-edge XAS spectra of Ti-treated (2 and 40 s) hematite nanostructures compared with the spectra of rutile TiO2, anatase TiO2, and Fe2TiO5; (c) dark field TEM image and corresponding TEM elemental mappings of HF-Ti treated (30 s) hematite 1D nanostructured photoanode; (d) J–V characteristics of pristine hematite photoanode, HF-Ti treated hematite photoanodes for different times (10 s, 30 s, 1 min, 5 min, and 8 min), and a Co-Pi deposited HF-Ti treated (30 s) hematite photoanode. Adapted with permission from ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5348–5356. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  SEM images of hematite α-Fe2O3 photoanodes prepared by thermal oxidation of Fe foils: (a) 1D nanoflakes (NFs) and (b) nanocorals (NCs); (c–e) TEM images of α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 NFs; PEC polarization curves of hematite-based photoanodes: (f and h) NFs and (g and i) NCs. The PEC experiments were performed in 1 M KOH electrolyte AM 1.5G simulated solar light irradiation (intensity 100 mW cm−2) at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 448 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Representation of the process used to fabricate α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 NR photoanodes; (b) HRTEM images of pristine FeOOH nanorod (left), after 90 cycles of TiO2 ALD deposition (middle), and α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 heterojunction NR after a two-step thermal treatment of FeOOH/TiO2 (right); (c) linear sweep voltammetry (under AM 1.5G irradiation, in 1 M KOH), and (d) IPCE spectra (under 150 W Xe lamp irradiation, in 1 M KOH at 1.23 V vs. RHE) of pristine α-Fe2O3, α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5, and α-Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5/FeNiOx based photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 449 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 
Footnotes
† These two authors contributed equally.
‡ Current address: State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis and Selective Oxidation, National Engineering Research Center for Fine Petrochemical Intermediates, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 730000 Lanzhou, China.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
