Eco-friendly synthesis of graphene nanoplatelets  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA06463A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA06463A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15281-15293Eco-friendly synthesis of graphene nanoplatelets

        
          
            Dong Wook 
            Chang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jong-Beom 
            Baek
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Industrial Chemistry, Pukyong National University, Pusan 48547, Republic of Korea. E-mail: dwchang@pknu.ac.kr
bSchool of Energy and Chemical Engineering/Center for Dimension-Controllable Organic Frameworks, Ulsan National University of Science and Technology (UNIST), 50, UNIST, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jbbaek@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      29th July 2016
    , Accepted 28th August 2016First published on 31st August 2016AbstractOwing to its outstanding electrical, mechanical, and thermal properties; as well as to its unique one-atom-thick two-dimensional carbon structure, graphene has attracted tremendous interest from both academia and industry. Although various synthesis protocols exist for graphene (i.e., top-down and bottom-up approaches), the development of eco-friendly green synthesis processes that are simple and scalable is currently still of great importance. Due to the significant detrimental effects on the environment caused by the toxic chemicals and complicated manufacturing procedures often employed in the synthesis of graphene, its practical applications are very limited, as we have experienced with carbon nanotubes (CNTs). In this context, a wide range of facile and green synthesis strategies have been extensively investigated. Examples of such methods include the efficient reduction of graphene oxide using non-poisonous reducing agents and/or procedures, and the direct exfoliation of graphene from pristine graphite using eco-friendly processes under mild conditions. In this review, we summarize the general aspects and recent progress that have contributed to the development of eco-friendly green synthesis procedures for graphene, including mechanisms, properties, and applications. In addition, challenges and perspectives on the future of this field are also discussed.
1. Introduction
Graphene is a monolayer two-dimensional (2D) sp2-hybridized carbon network that has attracted great attention owing to a number of exceptional properties. These include high elasticity (Young's modulus ∼ 1.0 TPa), good optical transparency (>97.7%), high thermal conductivity (∼5000 W m−1 K−1), high specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), and exceptional charge transport properties (∼200000 cm2 V−1 s−1).1–4 The unique structure–property relationships of graphene have caused it to be regarded as one of the most promising candidates for applications in emerging energy conversion and storage devices including supercapacitors, batteries, fuel cells, and photovoltaic cells.5–7 Due to the explosive increase in the demand for graphene and graphene-based materials for various applications, the development of facile, large-scale protocols for producing high-quality graphene has been continuously pursued. Hitherto, several methods have been established for the preparation of graphene and they comprise two types: top-down and bottom-up. In the top-down approaches (e.g., peel-off method using Scotch tape,4 liquid-phase exfoliation,8 use of graphene intercalation compounds (GICs),9 and graphene oxide (GO)-based methods10), single or a few graphitic layers can be obtained by efficient exfoliation of natural or synthetic graphite. On the other hand, graphene can be directly grown from organic precursors using bottom-up approaches such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD)11,12 and epitaxial growth.13 In general, top-down methods are more advantageous from the viewpoints of scalability and cost-effectiveness, whereas bottom-up processes are appropriate for producing large-area, high-quality films.
Despite these recent advances in graphene synthesis, the development of eco-friendly green synthesis processes for graphene is currently of great importance for practical applications. Conventional preparation methods for graphene synthesis involve environmental hazards such as toxic chemicals used as reducing agents and etching of heavy metals as catalysts, in addition to tedious manufacturing processes. These methods often cause significant harmful effects on the environment or human health, and pose limitations for the practical applications of graphene. Various attempts have been made to address these problems in the past few years, which include the development of non-toxic chemical reducing agents, alternative reduction routes for GO, and direct exfoliation of natural or synthetic graphite. In this review, we summarize the general aspects and recent progress of various approaches for green synthesis that have been developed for the mass production of high-quality graphene. The discussions include mechanisms, properties, and applications. Furthermore, challenges and perspectives on the future of this field are also discussed.
2. Green synthesis of graphene from GO
The chemical reduction of GO to yield reduced graphene oxide (RGO) is currently considered one of the most feasible methods for large-scale production of graphene at low manufacturing cost.10 A number of reducing agents (such as hydrazine,14–16 sodium borohydride,17 hydroquinone,18 and dimethylhydrazine19,20) have been widely employed for the reduction of GO; however, these materials are highly toxic and harmful to human health as well as to the environment. Furthermore, the use of excess amounts of reducing agents leads to the presence of undesirable poisonous contamination in the RGO, which can limit its applications, especially in bio-related areas. To solve these problems, various eco-friendly reducing agents, including bio-related materials21–24 and non-hazardous chemicals,25–28 have been investigated extensively. In addition to the solution-based chemical reduction of GO, several alternative green pathways for the reduction of GO have also been developed recently. Examples of such alternative green methods include photo,29,30 hydrothermal,31 microwave-assisted,32–34 electrochemical,35,36 and mechanochemical reduction methods.37 Although harsh oxidation processes involving strong acids are still unavoidable during the preparation of GO, these green approaches are quite meaningful for the synthesis of graphene from the viewpoint of developing a scalable manufacturing process as well as for restoring the intrinsic properties of graphene from the resultant RGO. Herein, we discuss several approaches for the green synthesis of graphene starting from GO, along with details on the mechanisms, properties, and applications.
2.1. Solution-based reduction of GO using bio-related materials as reducing agents
Recently, Zhang et al. demonstrated an eco-friendly process for the reduction of GO using L-ascorbic acid (L-AA), which has mild reducing capabilities and is non-toxic.21 Simple stirring of an aqueous GO dispersion with L-AA results in the efficient restoration of its electronic structure via substantial removal of oxygenated functional groups such as hydroxyl, carbonyl, and epoxy groups. Moreover, the resultant RGO suspension is quite stable in aqueous solutions for several days without any noticeable precipitation (Fig. 1a). An atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the resultant RGO along with the corresponding height profile indicates that the individual graphene sheets are largely preserved (Fig. 1b and c). It is believed that L-AA plays dual roles as a reducing agent and as a stabilizer during the reduction of GO. The high crystallinity of RGO, which was proved by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) and the corresponding selected area electron diffraction patterns (SAED), further supports the conclusion that the graphitic structure has been efficiently recovered during reduction with L-AA (Fig. 1d). Moreover, the electrical conductivity of RGO papers reduced by L-AA can reach up to 800 S m−1, which is almost comparable to that of RGO prepared using hydrazine.38
 Fig. 1  (a) Photographs of aqueous dispersions (0.1 mg mL−1) of GO before (left) and after (right) reduction with L-AA, which were kept at room temperature for over 4 d, (b) tapping mode AFM image of L-AA reduced GO sheets on a mica substrate, (c) height-profile derived from the AFM image, and (d) HR-TEM image of the RGO sheet. The inset is a typical SAED pattern of RGO. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Interestingly, various amino acids and their derivatives including tyrosine,39L-lysine,40L-cysteine,22 and glutathione41 have been widely investigated for use as green and non-toxic reducing agents for the reduction of GO. Recently, Zhang et al. reported the facile reduction of GO using glutathione, which is the main endogenous antioxidant in living cells.41 It is well known that the thiol group in the reduced form of glutathione (denoted as GSH) is able to provide a reducing equivalent (e−) to oxygen-containing molecules. Therefore, the efficient reduction of GO through the removal of various oxygenated functional groups can be realized by simply stirring GO with GSH at elevated temperatures (Fig. 2a). The resultant black RGO (GG) shows superior dispersibility in aqueous media with good structural restoration of the graphitic framework. In addition, a higher specific capacitance of 238 F g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 has been obtained from using a GG-based electrode in 1 M H2SO4 (Fig. 2b and c). This indicates that GG has huge potential for use as an electrode material for supercapacitors. Similarly, several promising results have been achieved by employing other amino acids as reducing agents for the reduction of GO.22,39,40
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction pathway for the reduction of GO with GSH and photographs of the GO and GG dispersions in water, (b) CV curves of GG at various scan rates with potentials swept from 0 to 0.9 V (vs. SCE) in 1 M H2SO4, and (c) galvanostatic discharge curves of GG at different current densities (0.1, 0.5, and 1 A g−1). Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Elsevier. 
In addition to amino acid derivatives, several bio-related materials such as sugars,42 proteins,23 chitosans,43 and bacteria44 have been used for the synthesis of graphene. Zhu et al. have demonstrated a green and facile approach for producing RGO based on reducing sugars (e.g., glucose, fructose, sucrose) using exfoliated GO as the precursor (Fig. 3a).42 When the reaction was conducted with ammonia solution at an elevated temperature, the reduction time for GO was greatly reduced. The chemically converted graphene nanosheets (GNs) exhibited not only good stability in water but also unique electrocatalytic activity towards catecholamines (dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine), which act as neuromodulators or hormones in the human body. Guo et al. reported the simultaneous reduction of GO in the presence of herceptin (a monoclonal antibody often used in the treatment of breast cancer), which acted as a reducing agent as well as a stabilizer (Fig. 3b).23 High biocompatibility was achieved by surface functionalization of RGO with herceptin, and the resultant RGO–herceptin composites were quite stable in water and exhibited great potential for biological imaging applications. This was due to their unique ability for dual-photon photoluminescence without undergoing photobleaching.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of GNS using glucose reduction: reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society, (b) schematics of herceptin-directed reduction and functionalization of GO and its applications in intracellular fluorescent imaging, reproduced from ref. 23, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, various biomaterials from plants such as tea,45 tannin,46 carrot root,47 and phytoextracts48 show enormous potential as environmentally friendly reducing agents for GO. Owing to their widespread distribution in nature and facilitative functions in procedures, the use of such materials could offer advantages including cost-effectiveness for the mass production of graphene. Wang et al. reported the green synthesis of soluble graphene (TPG) via the reduction of GO using green tea as the reducing agent (Fig. 4a).45 It was confirmed that the polyphenols (TPs) present in green tea solutions, which have been widely used as antioxidants in foods and drugs, are mainly responsible for the reduction of GO. TPG shows good dispersibility in most polar organic solvents and superior physical properties in chitosan-based biocomposite applications. Owing to the strong interactions between the amino and hydroxyl groups in chitosan, and to the hydroxyl groups in TPs adsorbed on the graphene surface through hydrogen bonding or electrostatic forces, TPG can be uniformly dispersed in a chitosan matrix, which greatly enhances the mechanical and electrical properties of the resultant composites.
 Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structure of tea polyphenols (TPs) with a schematic illustration of the preparation of TP–reduced graphene. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, (b) proposed mechanism of the reduction of GO by tannin. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similarly, Lei et al. have demonstrated the use of tannin acid (TA) from oak apple galls as a green reducing agent and stabilizer for the reduction of GO.46 The removal of hydroxyl and epoxy groups in GO through two-step SN2 nucleophilic reactions, followed by elimination, is believed to be the main mechanism for GO reduction with TA (Fig. 4b). A high electrical conductivity (424.4 S m−1) was obtained from the resultant RGO. The conductivity further increased (to 656.7 S m−1) after TA was removed using ethanol. These results clearly indicate the efficient restoration of graphitic conjugate structures during the reduction of GO with TA.
2.2. Solution-based reduction of GO using non-hazardous chemicals as reducing agents
In addition to bio-related materials, several non-toxic chemicals such as polyelectrolytes,25 urea,26 formamidinesulfinic acid,27 and ionic liquids28 have been recently utilized as green reducing agents for the reduction of GO. Zhang et al. reported a scalable eco-friendly method for producing water dispersible graphene using a commonplace polyelectrolyte, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride, or PDDA).25 In their study, PDDA also played dual roles as a reducing agent and stabilizer. Simple stirring of the mixture of exfoliated GO and PDDA in an aqueous medium for 5 h at 90 °C successfully yielded water-soluble RGO (Fig. 5A). The removal of oxygenated groups in GO (i.e., the reduction of GO) was attributed to the ring-opening reaction of epoxy groups with ammonium salts in PDDA, followed by further elimination of nitroso groups to form a CC bond (Fig. 5B). The structural and compositional changes of GO during the PDDA-induced reduction reaction were analyzed using measurements via X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The well-defined six-fold symmetry SAED pattern of RGO indicated efficient structural restoration of the graphitic networks (Fig. 5C). In addition, the PDDA adsorbed on the graphene surface can act as an adhesive molecule to facilitate the in situ growth of platinum and palladium nanoparticles on graphene nanosheets (Fig. 5A). The resultant Pt/RGO composites show superior catalytic activity towards formic acid oxidation compared to the commercially available Pt/XC-72 catalyst, indicating their great potential for use in fuel cells and other applications.
 Fig. 5  (A) Procedure for the PDDA-induced reduction of GO and the in situ growth of platinum nanoparticles on them, (B) proposed reaction pathway for the deoxygenation of exfoliated GO in PDDA solution, where “R-N” is used to designate PDDA, (C) typical TEM images and the corresponding SAED patterns of (a) exfoliated GO and (b) graphene nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 25, with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Lei et al. also reported the development of a green process for the reduction of GO using urea as an environmentally friendly reducing agent.26 Simple stirring of a mixture of urea and GO in an aqueous solution at an elevated temperature yielded high-quality RGO. Significant improvement in the electrical conductivity of RGO was achieved, owing to the efficient restoration of the conjugated graphitic structures. Furthermore, superior gravimetric and volumetric capacitances (255 F g−1 and 196 F cm−3, respectively) were achieved from the RGO-based electrodes at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, with good stability up to 1200 cycles. Based on these results, the RGO-based electrodes outperformed most of the graphene-based electrodes prepared using reducing agents such as hydrazine or NaBH4.49,50
Recently, a green method for the deoxygenation of GO using K2CO3 as a reusable reduction agent was developed by He et al.51 Due to facile two-step reduction reactions induced by alkaline K2CO3, including an in situ generated ionic oxygen attack on the oxidized carbon atoms in GO, as well as the removal of carbon dioxide as a byproduct, the efficient restoration of graphitic structures took place.
2.3. Alternative pathways for the reduction of GO
Although solution-based reduction methods for GO using eco-friendly reducing agents have been extensively investigated for the large-scale green synthesis of graphene, they continue to have significant drawbacks such as the inclusion of physical and chemical contaminants. Excess amounts of reducing agents often physically adhere to, or chemically react with, the resultant RGO, which can significantly alter the intrinsic properties of graphene. Therefore, the development of alternative reductant-free green pathways for the reduction of GO is highly desirable. Ding et al. reported a simple UV-induced process for the photoreduction of GO in an aqueous medium.29 In this approach, hydrated electrons produced by the homolysis of water molecules excited by UV irradiation can act as reducing agents for GO (Fig. 6). The gradual reduction of GO by the hydrated electrons was monitored using UV-vis spectroscopy and the structural changes were confirmed by Fourier transform-infrared (FT-IR), Raman, and XPS spectroscopy. However, a long reaction time was required for the complete removal of various oxygenated groups in the GO, owing to the low yield of hydrated electrons under UV irradiation. Similarly, the photoreduction of GO irradiated with the light from a high-pressure Hg lamp was demonstrated by Matsumoto et al.30 In this reduction process, π–π* excitation of electrons in the sp2 domains of GO under irradiation by light generated unstable electron–hole pairs, which readily attacked the epoxy groups in GO. As a result, larger sp2 domains in GO were obtained by the efficient destruction of epoxy groups. In addition, great enhancement in the electrical conductivity of GO (around 105 to 107 times) and a unique catalytic effect of Ag+ ions on the photoreduction of GO was observed in this study. Williams et al. also reported a UV-assisted process for the photocatalytic reduction of GO with TiO2 as the photocatalyst.52 UV irradiation of a mixture of TiO2 colloidal suspension and GO resulted in the efficient reduction of GO through electron transfer from the photo-excited TiO2 particles to the nearby GO. Furthermore, the formation of TiO2–GO nanocomposites was readily observed as a result of the strong affinity between the surface hydroxyl groups of TiO2 and the carboxylic acid functionalities in GO. The TiO2–GO nanocomposites have potential for applications in various optoelectronic and energy-related devices.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the reduction of GO based on UV irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 29, with permission from IOP Publishing. 
Besides photoreduction, electrochemical methods (whereby the electronic states of materials can easily be modified to change the Fermi energy level by applying external power) can also be considered a promising strategy for the green synthesis of graphene. In this context, a facile approach for producing high-quality graphene nanosheets via the electrochemical reduction of GO at cathodic potentials was successfully demonstrated by Guo et al.36 The electrochemical reduction of a GO dispersion was conducted using a typical three-electrode system (Fig. 7A). Graphite, platinum, and saturated calomel electrode (SCE) were used as the working, counter, and reference electrodes, respectively. GO was reduced by applying high negative potentials, which were required to overcome the energy barriers for the reduction of oxygenated functionalities such as hydroxyl, epoxy, and carboxylic acid groups present in GO. The results obtained from this study demonstrated that the reduction of GO using the electrochemical approach occurs quickly and irreversibly. The well-defined spots in the SAED patterns indicate the highly crystalline structures of electrochemically reduced RGO (ERGO) (Fig. 7B). Furthermore, good electrocatalytic activity toward dopamine (DA) was observed from the ERGO-modified electrodes, possibly due to the improved electrical conductivity and good affinity of ERGO towards dopamine. In addition, superior electrochemical capacitance and cycling durability, compared to those of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and chemically reduced GO, were observed in ERGO-based supercapacitors.35
 Fig. 7  (A) Illustration of the experimental setup and optical images of the graphite electrode and the GO suspension before (a and c) and after (b and d) electrochemical reduction. The electrochemical reduction potential of the exfoliated GO dispersion at a graphite electrode was −1.5 V vs. SCE. (B) (a) TEM and (b) HR-TEM images of the graphene nanosheets prepared by the electrochemical reduction of the GO dispersion at −1.5 V vs. SCE. The inset in (b) is the SAED pattern. Scale bar: (a) 100 nm and (b) 5 nm. Reproduced from ref. 36, with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Zhou et al. reported a hydrothermal method for the green reduction of GO.31 In this approach, supercritical water (SC-H2O) acted as a green reducing agent under hydrothermal conditions, because cleavage of the oxygenated functional groups in GO was sufficiently promoted by superheated H2O. It has been previously reported that carbohydrate molecules can be transformed to homogeneous carbon-based nanospheres53 and nanotubes,54 as a result of the catalytic effect of water molecules towards heterolytic bond-cleavage reactions under hydrothermal conditions. As a result of good structural restoration of GO, unique tunable optical transmittance and limiting properties were demonstrated for the hydrothermally reduced RGO.
Recently, Chang et al. developed an eco-friendly solid-state reduction method for GO, by which the undesirable incorporation of heteroatoms or contaminants that often occurs in solution-based reduction processes, could be minimized. Efficient reduction of GO was achieved by simple ball-milling of GO in the presence of H2 gas, using a planetary ball-mill machine at a rotation speed of 500 rpm (Fig. 8).37 The compositional changes of the resultant ball-milled reduced graphene oxide (BMRGO) were initially proportional to the ball-milling time up to 120 min, beyond which they were nearly constant. As expected, BMRGO exhibited good structural restoration of the graphite structures without any heteroatoms or contaminants. As a consequence, the electrical conductivity was greatly improved by conversion from GO (0.2 S m−1) to BMRGO (120 S m−1). In addition, the subsequent heat treatment of BMRGO can induce further enhancement in electrical conductivity up to 3400 S m−1. Therefore, the solid-state mechanochemical reduction of GO used in this study can be regarded as a promising green synthesis approach for low-cost, scalable production of RGO for various applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of solvent-free mechanochemical reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of H2, (b) photographs of GO and (c) BMRGO. The color change from GO (brown) to BMRGO (dark black) is a visual indication of the completion of the mechanochemical reduction and the shiny light reflections (white circles) of BMRGO imply high crystallinity. Reproduced from ref. 37, with permission from Elsevier. 
3. Green synthesis of graphene from graphite
As mentioned previously, various eco-friendly synthesis methods for graphene using GO as the precursor have been developed by many researchers. However, GO-based approaches have a major drawback, in that the graphene produced is of low-quality. Significant compositional and structural damage to the graphitic structures can occur during the preparation of GO, because the oxidation process is harsh and employs corrosive strong acids and oxidants.55 These defects cannot be entirely eliminated even after subjecting the GO to a reduction process. The presence of the defects can often cause significant detrimental effects on the intrinsic properties of graphene and limit its practical applications. Therefore, the development of non-destructive green methods for the large-scale synthesis of high-quality graphene is required. In this context, Baek et al. demonstrated a simple but efficient approach to exfoliate graphene from graphite via a direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction56–58 and mechanochemical ball-milling.59–61 These approaches can not only satisfy the urgent requirements for graphene synthesis including eco-friendliness and non-destructiveness, but also afford additional advantages such as cost-effectiveness and scalability. Owing to the unique features of these reactions, edge-selectively functionalized graphene (EFG) with a high degree of preservation of the crystalline graphitic basal plane was produced. Moreover, an efficient exfoliation of graphitic layers into single or few layers of graphene, due to strong repulsive forces at the functionalized edges, was triggered during the reactions. Further exfoliation could be driven after dispersion in molecular matrices such as solvents and polymers, but was also driven by the presence of various molecular wedges that are covalently bonded to the edges of the graphene.
3.1. Direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction
Friedel–Crafts acylation, a well-known organic reaction, has been widely used for the substitution of aromatic rings with various acyl compounds through an electrophilic mechanism. Baek et al. reported that various carbon-based nanomaterials such as fullerenes,62 CNTs,63,64 and graphene56–58 could also be efficiently modified by a direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction in a mildly acidic polyphosphoric acid (PPA)/phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5) medium, owing to their intrinsic sp2-hybridized carbon structures. The reaction between the graphitic structures and the acyl compounds was previously confirmed using pyrene as the model compound (Fig. 9a).65 In this case, 4-(2,4,6-trimethylphenoxy)benzamide (TMPBA) was selected as the standard reactant to prevent undesirable self-reactions of aromatic ether-activated sites for electrophilic substitution, by blocking the 2, 4, and 6 positions of the aromatic ring in TMPBA. The detailed mechanism of the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction between the acylium ion (Ph-C+O) of TMPBA and the sp2 C–H of pyrene in the presence of PPA/P2O5 was also proposed (Fig. 9b).65 In the case of graphene, PPA can play important roles (as a reaction medium) in promoting the dispersion and functionalization of graphene. The strong shear forces on the surface of graphite and the repulsive ionic interactions between protonated graphene surfaces induce delamination and sequestration of graphitic layers. The intrinsic properties of PPA, such as high viscosity and moderate acidity, are very helpful for efficient exfoliation of graphite with minimal damage during the reaction. These effects are due mostly to the generation of high shear and protonation, respectively. In this way, large-scale structural damage on the graphitic structures often caused by strong acid reaction media such as nitric acid (pKa = −1.5) and sulfuric acid (pKa = −3.0), can be minimized by the mildly acidic nature of PPA (pKa = 2.1).66 In addition to PPA, P2O5, which functions as a dehydrating agent in the reaction medium, can sufficiently promote the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction between the acylium ion (Ph-C+O) of benzoic acid or benzylamine derivatives, and the sp2 C–H of graphene. The reactive sp2 C–H functionalities are usually located at the edge of graphite as defect sites. Therefore, unique EFGs can be produced without significantly damaging crystalline graphitic structures by employing the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction of graphite.
 Fig. 9  (a) The reaction between pyrene and TMPBA in PPA/P2O5 at 130 °C and (b) proposed mechanism of the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction between acylium ion (Ph-CO) of TMPBA and sp2 C–H of pyrene. Reproduced from ref. 65, with permission from Springer. 
Choi et al. demonstrated the synthesis of EFG with 4-aminobenzoic acid (ABA) as an organic molecular wedge via the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction in PPA/P2O5 medium (Fig. 10A(a and b)).57 The resultant 4-aminobenzoyl-functionalized EFG (ABA-EFG) showed not only superior dispersibility in polar solvents such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), but also a highly crystalline graphitic structure on its basal plane (Fig. 10B(a)).57 The existence of molecular wedges at the edge of graphene was confirmed by measuring the topological height profiles of ABA-EFG on a silicon wafer using AFM (Fig. 10B(b)). The fact that the edges were higher than the basal plane clearly demonstrates the exclusive attachment of the molecular wedges to the edges of graphene, where the reactive sp2 C–H are presumably located. Interestingly, the ABA-EFG film exhibited greatly improved electrical conductivity (up to 1291 S cm−1) that was much higher than those of GO and RGO films.57 Apart from small molecular wedges, various macromolecular wedges such as linear67 and hyperbranched68 polymeric wedges can also be efficiently attached to the edge of graphene via the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction in the PPA/P2O5 medium. The resultant EFGs with appropriate edge components show great potential for use in many fields, including the preparation of composites,67,69 transparent electrodes,56 fuel cells,58 lithium–sulfur batteries,70 and lithium-ion batteries.71 Therefore, the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction in PPA/P2O5 medium can be regarded as a promising approach for environmentally friendly and facile synthesis of high-quality graphene with scalability and cost-effectiveness.
 Fig. 10  (A) (a) Schematic representation of graphite exfoliation mechanism and (b) schematic of the reaction between graphite and 4-aminobenzoic acid as a molecular wedge via a direct Friedel–Craft acylation reaction in PPA/P2O5. (B) (a) TEM image with the electron diffraction pattern (inset) of EFG and (b) AFM image of EFG with the topological height profile. Reproduced from ref. 57, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2. Mechanochemical ball-milling
Recently, Baek et al. reported a method for the large-scale and green synthesis of graphene via a facile mechanochemical ball-milling process.59–61 Similar to the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction in PPA/P2O5 medium, unique EFGs with various molecular wedges were obtained by the mechanochemical ball-milling of graphite. Edge-carboxylated graphene (ECG) was produced with high yields when graphite was ball-milled with dry ice (solid CO2) (Fig. 11).60 The mechanochemical ball-milling of graphite generated activated carbon species (radicals, anions, and cations), mainly at the edges of graphite, which efficiently reacted with the CO2 molecules from dry ice. The resultant highly energetic carboxylates (–COO−) were converted to carboxylic acids (–COOH) by hydration with water molecules (H2O) in air at the end of the reaction (Fig. 11D). The use of ECG containing polar carboxylic acids as a molecular wedge is quite useful for solution processing, because it is highly dispersible in various polar solvents and can easily be exfoliated into single or few layers of graphene. In contrast to GO, the highly crystalline structures on the basal plane were preserved to a large extent in the case of ECG. Therefore, superior electrical conductivity was obtained from the solution-processed large-area film of ECG, compared to the corresponding value for GO. In addition, post-thermal annealing of the ECG film at 900 °C resulted in further enhancement of conductivity up to 1200 S cm−1 with high optical transmittance.60 Moreover, ECG-modified counter electrodes exhibited significant improvement in the electrochemical stability of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) containing the Co(bpy)32+/3+ redox couple, and showed a higher power conversion efficiency (9.31%) than other counter electrodes such as PEDOT:PSS (8.25%), RGO (8.94%), and Pt (8.67%), with identical device configurations.61
 Fig. 11  (A) Pristine graphite, (B) dry ice (solid CO2), (C) EFG prepared by ball-milling for 48 h, and (D) schematic of physical cracking and edge-carboxylation of graphite by ball-milling in the presence of dry ice, and protonation through subsequent exposure to moisture in the air. Reproduced from ref. 60, with permission from the National Academy of Sciences. 
Baek et al. also demonstrated the mass production of various edge-selectively halogenated types of graphene (XGnPs = ClGnP, BrGnP, IGnP) via simple ball-milling of graphite (Fig. 12).59 Halogens such as Cl2, Br2, and I2 were used as reactants to yield ClGnP, BrGnP, and IGnP, respectively. However, fluorine-modified graphene (FGnP) could not be synthesized, owing to the high reactivity and toxicity of F2 gas. Interestingly, remarkable electrocatalytic activity towards the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) with high selectivity, good tolerance to methanol crossover/CO poisoning effects, and excellent long-term stability were achieved from XGnPs, properties of which would be highly beneficial for fuel cell applications. The enhanced electrocatalytic performance towards the ORR could be attributed to the more favorable binding affinity of O2 molecules to XGnsP and to the weakened strength of the O–O bonds as a result of the halogenation-induced charge transfer. Furthermore, XGnPs exhibited good electrochemical performance when employed as an anode material in lithium-ion batteries.72 Specifically, IGnP exhibited a high charge capacity of 562.8 mA h g−1 at 0.5C in the voltage range of 0.02–3.0 V, with excellent long-term stability, owing to the high electronegativity of the attached I2 molecules, high surface area of IGnP, and improved lithium ion insertion/extraction at the edges of the graphitic layers. In addition, Guan et al. reported the synthesis of a graphene–fullerene (C60) hybrid material using similar mechanochemical ball-milling and the obtained hybrid exhibits improved ORR electrocatalytical activity under basic conditions.73
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the mechanochemically driven edge-halogenation reaction between active carbon species generated in situ (gold balls) and reactant halogen molecules (twin green balls). Active carbon species were generated by the hemolytic bond cleavage of graphitic C–C bonds and reacted with halogen molecules to produce edge-halogenated graphene nanoplatelets (XGnPs) in a sealed ball-milling capsule. The remnant active carbon species were terminated upon subsequent exposure to moisture in the air. Red and gray balls represent oxygen and hydrogen, respectively, (b) ball-milling capsule containing pristine graphite and stainless steel balls (diameter 5 mm), (c) violent sparking (red spots) occurred when the reaction mixture was exposed to moisture in ambient air and excess purple I2 was sublimated into the air (arrow), and (d) continued sparking from residual IGnP at the bottom of the ball-mill capsule even after most of the IGnPs and stainless steel balls were removed. Reproduced from ref. 59, with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
In summary, newly developed mechanochemical ball-milling processes can indeed outperform current methods to prepare graphene such as chemical reduction of GO, in terms of environmental friendliness, simplicity, versatility, and cost-effectiveness, to produce high-quality graphene with outstanding properties for various applications.
4. Conclusions and perspectives
In this feature article, recent developments for the ecofriendly synthesis of graphene were discussed and some noticeable achievements are summarized in Table 1. Graphene can be synthesized by the solution-based reduction of GO using bio-related materials and non-hazardous chemicals such as green reducing agents. Mostly, these non-toxic materials can play dual roles as reducing agents and stabilizers during the reactions. The resultant RGOs not only exhibit good structural restoration of the graphitic structures, but also show good dispersibility in various solutions. Graphene can also be prepared in an eco-friendly manner by reducing GO using alternate reductant-free pathways such as photochemical, electrochemical, hydrothermal, and mechanochemical reduction processes. With these approaches, the incorporation of heteroatoms and contaminants that greatly alter the intrinsic properties of graphene can be minimized. Finally, graphene can be produced by the less-destructive exfoliation of graphite via the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction and mechanochemical ball-milling. Owing to the unique edge-selective functionalization of graphene during these reactions, a highly crystalline graphitic basal plane is preserved to sustain the inherent properties of these products. Furthermore, the presence of various molecular wedges at the edges of EFGs is quite useful in modulating their properties such as solubility and electrochemical activities.
Table 1 Summary of some noticeable eco-friendly synthesis processes of graphene nanoplatelets




Category
Methods
Types of reducing agents or methods
Remarks
Ref.




Green synthesis from GO
Solution-based approaches
Bio-related materials

L-Ascorbic acid
High electrical conductivity of 800 S m−1

21



Glutathione
High specific capacitance of 238 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1

41



Sugar
Unique electrocatalytic activity towards catecholamines

42



Green tea
Good dispersibility in most polar organic solvents and superior physical properties in chitosan-based biocomposite applications

45



Non-hazardous chemicals
Polyelectrolytes
Excellent catalytic activity towards formic acid oxidation from Pt/RGO

25



Urea
Superior gravimetric and volumetric capacitances of 255 F g−1 and 196 F cm−3, respectively, at 0.5 A g−1

26



K2CO3
K2CO3 as a reusable reduction agent

51



Alternative reduction methods
Photo-induced
UV irradiation
A stable homogeneous colloidal suspension of RGO in aqueous medium

29



Electrochemical
Applied voltage
Good electrocatalytic activity toward dopamine (DA) and high electrical conductivity of 3.5 × 103 S m−1

36



Supercritical
SC-H2O
Tunable optical transmittance and limiting properties

31



Ball-milling
H2 gas
High electrical conductivity of 120 S m−1

37



Green synthesis from graphite
Direct Friedel–Crafts acylation
4-Aminobenzoic acid (ABA) as an organic molecular wedge
High electrical conductivity of 1291 S m−1

57




para-Poly(ether-ketone) as a linear polymer wedge
High tensile strength (79.3 ± 8.2 MPa) and Young's modulus (8.6 ± 1.2 GPa) of pPEK-g-graphite film

67



Hyperbranched poly(etherketone) as a dendritic macromolecular wedge
Excellent dispersibility in organic solvents by enhanced chemical affinity of polar periphery groups

68



Mechanochemical ball-milling
Carboxylic acid modified EFG using CO2
High electrical conductivity up to 1200 S cm−1 with high optical transmittance, good performances as a counter electrode in DSSCs

60




61



Edge-selectively halogenated EFGs using Cl2, Br2 and I2
Remarkable electrocatalytic activity towards the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)

59



Graphene–fullerene (C60) hybrid material
Improved ORR electrocatalytic activity under basic conditions

73





Despite remarkable progress, a great number of challenges still remain in the eco-friendly synthesis of graphene. First, the development of green synthesis strategies for graphene that offer controlled morphological and electronic properties is required, because the performance of graphene and its derivatives is closely related to their intrinsic properties (e.g., purity, band-gap, structural uniformity). Second, green manipulation of graphene-based three-dimensional architectures is another important issue to be addressed, owing to its high potential for use in applications such as supercapacitors74,75 and fuel cells.76 Finally, the exploitation of eco-friendly bottom-up protocols for the preparation of graphene is also of great importance for the synthesis of well-defined, ordered, and porous structures with tunable properties. In this regard, covalent organic frameworks (COFs),77,78 which are lightweight and crystalline porous materials formed by strong covalent linkages between organic precursors, have attracted great interest because of their unique advantages and structure–property relationships.79 Therefore, continued creative effort toward developing methods for the green synthesis of graphene is required to provide graphene products that are more useful and promising for a wide variety of applications.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Basic Science Research (2015R1D1A1A01057410), Creative Research Initiative (CRI), BK21 Plus and Science Research Center (SRC) programs through the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea, funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST).
References
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 31 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Novoselov, A. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. Dubonos, I. Grigorieva and A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1362 CAS .
H.-J. Choi, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 534 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and W. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne and Y. K. Gun'Ko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Behabtu, J. R. Lomeda, M. J. Green, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, D. V. Kosynkin, D. Tsentalovich, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, J. Schmidt and E. Kesselman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 39, 228 RSC .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Poon, W. Chen, E. S. Tok and A. T. S. Wee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 104102 CrossRef .
C. Berger, Z. Song, X. Li, X. Wu, N. Brown, C. Naud, D. Mayou, T. Li, J. Hass and A. N. Marchenkov, Science, 2006, 312, 1191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, J. An, I. Jung, R. D. Piner, S. J. An, X. Li, A. Velamakanni and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Si and E. T. Samulski, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, J. Yang, J. Park, X. Gou, B. Wang, H. Liu and J. Yao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8192 CAS .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, G. H. Dommett, K. M. Kohlhaas, E. J. Zimney, E. A. Stach, R. D. Piner, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2006, 442, 282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Villar-Rodil, J. I. Paredes, A. Martínez-Alonso and J. M. Tascón, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3591 RSC .
J. Zhang, H. Yang, G. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Zhang and S. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1112 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Li and L. Guo, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 325601 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Guo, B. Book-Newell and J. Irudayaraj, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12658 RSC .
S. Thakur and N. Karak, Carbon, 2015, 94, 224 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Shao, H. Liao, M. H. Engelhard, G. Yin and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, L. Lu and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6391 CAS .
Q. Ma, J. Song, C. Jin, Z. Li, J. Liu, S. Meng, J. Zhao and Y. Guo, Carbon, 2013, 54, 36 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, P. Liu, C. Sheng, Y. Duan and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2889 RSC .
Y. Ding, P. Zhang, Q. Zhuo, H. Ren, Z. Yang and Y. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 215601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Koinuma, S. Y. Kim, Y. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Hatakeyama, H. Tateishi and S. Ida, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3461 CAS .
Y. Zhou, Q. Bao, L. A. L. Tang, Y. Zhong and K. P. Loh, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2950 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, A. Velamakanni, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2118 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sridhar, J.-H. Jeon and I.-K. Oh, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2953 CrossRef CAS .
B. Subramanya and D. K. Bhat, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 420 RSC .
Y. Shao, J. Wang, M. Engelhard, C. Wang and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 743 RSC .
H.-L. Guo, X.-F. Wang, Q.-Y. Qian, F.-B. Wang and X.-H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Chang, H.-J. Choi, I.-Y. Jeon, J.-M. Seo, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Carbon, 2014, 77, 501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, M. Li, S. Szunerits and R. Boukherroub, Electroanalysis, 2014, 26, 156 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, X. Wang, Y. Liu, T. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, R. Li, X. Sun, F. Wu and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2192 CAS .
D. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, C. Wang and Y. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 364 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Guo, Y. Fang and S. Dong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, X. Wang, W. Xing, B. Yu, L. Song and Y. Hu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 12906 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Salas, Z. Sun, A. Luttge and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi and J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1127 CAS .
Y. Lei, Z. Tang, R. Liao and B. Guo, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1655 RSC .
T. Kuila, S. Bose, P. Khanra, A. K. Mishra, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Carbon, 2012, 50, 914 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thakur and N. Karak, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5331 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, Z. Fan, T. Wei, W. Qian, M. Zhang and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3825 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, Z. Peng, W. Gong, Y. Luo, P. Zhao and L. Kong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 11966 RSC .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 597 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-B. Luo, S.-H. Yu, H.-S. Qian and T. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers Jr and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef .
S.-Y. Bae, I.-Y. Jeon, J. Yang, N. Park, H. S. Shin, S. Park, R. S. Ruoff, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-K. Choi, I.-Y. Jeon, S.-Y. Bae, H.-J. Lee, H. S. Shin, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6320 RSC .
I.-Y. Jeon, D. Yu, S.-Y. Bae, H.-J. Choi, D. W. Chang, L. Dai and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, M. Choi, J.-M. Seo, S.-M. Jung, M.-J. Kim, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Xia, L. Dai, N. Park and J.-B. Baek, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1810 Search PubMed .
I.-Y. Jeon, Y.-R. Shin, G.-J. Sohn, H.-J. Choi, S.-Y. Bae, J. Mahmood, S.-M. Jung, J.-M. Seo, M.-J. Kim and D. W. Chang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 5588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Ju, I.-Y. Jeon, K. Lim, J. C. Kim, H.-J. Choi, I. T. Choi, Y. K. Eom, Y. J. Kwon, J. Ko and J.-J. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1044 CAS .
D.-H. Lim, C. B. Lyons, L.-S. Tan and J.-B. Baek, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12188 CAS .
S.-W. Han, S.-J. Oh, L.-S. Tan and J.-B. Baek, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1841 CrossRef CAS .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Lee, Y. S. Choi, L.-S. Tan and J.-B. Baek, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 7423 CrossRef CAS .
I.-Y. Jeon, E.-K. Choi, S.-Y. Bae and J.-B. Baek, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Chang, H. J. Choi, I. Y. Jeon and J. B. Baek, Chem. Rec., 2013, 13, 224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-K. Choi, I.-Y. Jeon, S.-J. Oh and J.-B. Baek, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10936 RSC .
I.-Y. Jeon, H.-J. Choi, S.-Y. Bae, D. W. Chang and J.-B. Baek, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7820 RSC .
K.-S. Kim, I.-Y. Jeon, S.-N. Ahn, Y.-D. Kwon and J.-B. Baek, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7337 RSC .
J. Xu, J. Shui, J. Wang, M. Wang, H.-K. Liu, S. X. Dou, I.-Y. Jeon, J.-M. Seo, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Park, M.-H. Lee, I.-Y. Jeon, H.-S. Park, J.-B. Baek and H.-K. Song, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10770 CAS .
J. Xu, I. Y. Jeon, J. M. Seo, S. Dou, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guan, X. Chen, T. Wei, F. Liu, S. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Lu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4139 CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz and M. Thommes, Science, 2011, 332, 1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Du, D. Yu, L. Dai, S. Ganguli, V. Varshney and A. Roy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4810 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Yong, X.-C. Dong, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Song and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, S. Kandambeth, B. P. Biswal, B. Lukose, S. M. Kunjir, M. Chaudhary, R. Babarao, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Bunck and W. R. Dichtel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Getman, Y.-S. Bae, C. E. Wilmer and R. Q. Snurr, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 703 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Photographs of aqueous dispersions (0.1 mg mL−1) of GO before (left) and after (right) reduction with L-AA, which were kept at room temperature for over 4 d, (b) tapping mode AFM image of L-AA reduced GO sheets on a mica substrate, (c) height-profile derived from the AFM image, and (d) HR-TEM image of the RGO sheet. The inset is a typical SAED pattern of RGO. Reproduced from ref. 21 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction pathway for the reduction of GO with GSH and photographs of the GO and GG dispersions in water, (b) CV curves of GG at various scan rates with potentials swept from 0 to 0.9 V (vs. SCE) in 1 M H2SO4, and (c) galvanostatic discharge curves of GG at different current densities (0.1, 0.5, and 1 A g−1). Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of GNS using glucose reduction: reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society, (b) schematics of herceptin-directed reduction and functionalization of GO and its applications in intracellular fluorescent imaging, reproduced from ref. 23, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Chemical structure of tea polyphenols (TPs) with a schematic illustration of the preparation of TP–reduced graphene. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the American Chemical Society, (b) proposed mechanism of the reduction of GO by tannin. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Procedure for the PDDA-induced reduction of GO and the in situ growth of platinum nanoparticles on them, (B) proposed reaction pathway for the deoxygenation of exfoliated GO in PDDA solution, where “R-N” is used to designate PDDA, (C) typical TEM images and the corresponding SAED patterns of (a) exfoliated GO and (b) graphene nanosheets. Reproduced from ref. 25, with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the reduction of GO based on UV irradiation. Reproduced from ref. 29, with permission from IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Illustration of the experimental setup and optical images of the graphite electrode and the GO suspension before (a and c) and after (b and d) electrochemical reduction. The electrochemical reduction potential of the exfoliated GO dispersion at a graphite electrode was −1.5 V vs. SCE. (B) (a) TEM and (b) HR-TEM images of the graphene nanosheets prepared by the electrochemical reduction of the GO dispersion at −1.5 V vs. SCE. The inset in (b) is the SAED pattern. Scale bar: (a) 100 nm and (b) 5 nm. Reproduced from ref. 36, with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of solvent-free mechanochemical reduction of graphene oxide in the presence of H2, (b) photographs of GO and (c) BMRGO. The color change from GO (brown) to BMRGO (dark black) is a visual indication of the completion of the mechanochemical reduction and the shiny light reflections (white circles) of BMRGO imply high crystallinity. Reproduced from ref. 37, with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The reaction between pyrene and TMPBA in PPA/P2O5 at 130 °C and (b) proposed mechanism of the direct Friedel–Crafts acylation reaction between acylium ion (Ph-CO) of TMPBA and sp2 C–H of pyrene. Reproduced from ref. 65, with permission from Springer.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) (a) Schematic representation of graphite exfoliation mechanism and (b) schematic of the reaction between graphite and 4-aminobenzoic acid as a molecular wedge via a direct Friedel–Craft acylation reaction in PPA/P2O5. (B) (a) TEM image with the electron diffraction pattern (inset) of EFG and (b) AFM image of EFG with the topological height profile. Reproduced from ref. 57, with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Pristine graphite, (B) dry ice (solid CO2), (C) EFG prepared by ball-milling for 48 h, and (D) schematic of physical cracking and edge-carboxylation of graphite by ball-milling in the presence of dry ice, and protonation through subsequent exposure to moisture in the air. Reproduced from ref. 60, with permission from the National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of the mechanochemically driven edge-halogenation reaction between active carbon species generated in situ (gold balls) and reactant halogen molecules (twin green balls). Active carbon species were generated by the hemolytic bond cleavage of graphitic C–C bonds and reacted with halogen molecules to produce edge-halogenated graphene nanoplatelets (XGnPs) in a sealed ball-milling capsule. The remnant active carbon species were terminated upon subsequent exposure to moisture in the air. Red and gray balls represent oxygen and hydrogen, respectively, (b) ball-milling capsule containing pristine graphite and stainless steel balls (diameter 5 mm), (c) violent sparking (red spots) occurred when the reaction mixture was exposed to moisture in ambient air and excess purple I2 was sublimated into the air (arrow), and (d) continued sparking from residual IGnP at the bottom of the ball-mill capsule even after most of the IGnPs and stainless steel balls were removed. Reproduced from ref. 59, with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

Green synthesis from GO	Solution-based approaches	Bio-related materials	
L-Ascorbic acid	High electrical conductivity of 800 S m−1	
21

Glutathione	High specific capacitance of 238 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	
41

Sugar	Unique electrocatalytic activity towards catecholamines	
42

Green tea	Good dispersibility in most polar organic solvents and superior physical properties in chitosan-based biocomposite applications	
45

Non-hazardous chemicals	Polyelectrolytes	Excellent catalytic activity towards formic acid oxidation from Pt/RGO	
25

Urea	Superior gravimetric and volumetric capacitances of 255 F g−1 and 196 F cm−3, respectively, at 0.5 A g−1	
26

K2CO3	K2CO3 as a reusable reduction agent	
51

Alternative reduction methods	Photo-induced	UV irradiation	A stable homogeneous colloidal suspension of RGO in aqueous medium	
29

Electrochemical	Applied voltage	Good electrocatalytic activity toward dopamine (DA) and high electrical conductivity of 3.5 × 103 S m−1	
36

Supercritical	SC-H2O	Tunable optical transmittance and limiting properties	
31

Ball-milling	H2 gas	High electrical conductivity of 120 S m−1	
37

Green synthesis from graphite	Direct Friedel–Crafts acylation	4-Aminobenzoic acid (ABA) as an organic molecular wedge	High electrical conductivity of 1291 S m−1	
57


para-Poly(ether-ketone) as a linear polymer wedge	High tensile strength (79.3 ± 8.2 MPa) and Young's modulus (8.6 ± 1.2 GPa) of pPEK-g-graphite film	
67

Hyperbranched poly(etherketone) as a dendritic macromolecular wedge	Excellent dispersibility in organic solvents by enhanced chemical affinity of polar periphery groups	
68

Mechanochemical ball-milling	Carboxylic acid modified EFG using CO2	High electrical conductivity up to 1200 S cm−1 with high optical transmittance, good performances as a counter electrode in DSSCs	
60


61

Edge-selectively halogenated EFGs using Cl2, Br2 and I2	Remarkable electrocatalytic activity towards the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR)	
59

Graphene–fullerene (C60) hybrid material	Improved ORR electrocatalytic activity under basic conditions	
73


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
