Solid oxide electrolysis – a key enabling technology for sustainable energy scenarios  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5FD90071A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5FD90071A
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2015, 182, 9-48Solid oxide electrolysis – a key enabling technology for sustainable energy scenarios

        
          
            John Bøgild 
            Hansen
          
        
      
Haldor Topsøe A/S, Nymøllevej 55, DK-2800, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: jbh@topsoe.dk
Received 
      19th August 2015
    , Accepted 19th August 2015First published on 23rd October 2015AbstractProduction of fuels and chemicals from steam and/or CO2 with solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOEC) and electricity have attracted considerable interest recently. This paper is an extended version of the introductory lecture presented at the first Faraday Discussions meeting on the subject. The focus is on the state of the art of cells, stacks and systems. Thermodynamics, performance and degradation are addressed. Remaining challenges and potential application of the technology are discussed from an industrial perspective.
Introduction
The use of solid oxide cells to electrolyze steam or CO2 is not a new development. It was suggested already in the 1980s and quite advanced technology developments were carried out in Germany and USA. Due to the low price of fossil fuels and the high cost associated with the SOEC (Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells) technology at that time combined with challenges on material degradation the interest, however, waned.
During the last decade the field has attracted increasing interest and the number of research projects and indeed scientific papers has shown exponential growth.
This revival can be ascribed to mainly three factors:
• The progress in developing materials, cells, stacks and system for application of solid oxide cells for fuel cell applications.
• The impressive growth of renewable power generation from mainly wind and solar power which by nature are intermittent.
• The threat of climate change, which necessitates development of carbon neutral energy scenarios.
This paper is not intended to be a comprehensive review paper on the subject. Excellent recent reviews are available.1,2 It is basically an extended version of the introductory lecture presented at the first Faraday Discussion dealing with the fundamental scientific details of the subject. The focus will be on the state of the art, the challenges remaining and the potential applications of the technology as seen from an industrial perspective.
The concept and basic principle
Solid Oxide Electrolyzer Cells (SOEC) operate in the reverse mode of Solid Oxide Fuel Cells (SOFC) and their operating principles are illustrated on Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Basic operating principles of SOEC and SOFC cells. Reprinted with permission from ECS Trans., 2012, 50, 167. Copyright 2012, The Electrochemical Society.3 
In SOEC cells steam or CO2 at the cathode (negative or fuel electrode) are reacting with electrons provided by an external power source producing H2 and CO2, respectively, and oxygen ions, which are transported through a ion-conducting, gas-tight membrane due to the electric field to the anode (positive or oxygen electrode) where the oxygen ions combine and liberate the electrons again. In the SOFC the reverse reactions are taking place so electricity is produced and sent to an external consumer.
Early developments
The decomposition of water by electricity was first accomplished by William Nicholson and Anthony Carlisle, who, in 1800 in London, sent a current from the newly developed Volta pile through water and to their astonishment saw hydrogen and oxygen evolve at the electrodes “several inches apart”.
Michael Faraday coined the term electrolysis in 1833 and developed his two laws to describe these phenomena on a firm scientific basis.
The first use of SOEC was for space exploration, where interest was focused on oxygen generation for life support and the CO generated from CO2 electrolysis was reacted to carbon and CO2 (recycled back to the SOEC) over an iron catalyst.4–6
Isenberg at Westinghouse Electric6 used tubular cells at high temperature and demonstrated convincingly that both steam and CO2 electrolysis was technically feasible as seen in Fig. 2. He also foresaw that utilization of high temperatures may reduce the electrical input required. Furthermore the ability to produce synthesis gas and thus synthetic fuel was also obvious to him: “It is easily seen, that the ability to produce carbon monoxide from CO2 electrolysis could be the basis for a host of organic syntheses via the Fischer–Tropsch process”.
 Fig. 2  
I–V or polarization curves for CO2 electrolysis (A) and steam electrolysis (B). Reprinted from Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3–4, 431–437 with permission from Elsevier.6 
Quite intense development efforts were carried out by Dönitz and Erdle at Dornier also in the 1980s to develop commercial SOEC stacks for efficient hydrogen production by a concept called “Hot Elly”.7–9 Detailed engineering studies were performed and it was the intention to supply hydrogen for low quality oil and coal upgrading, an option which is overlooked today. Furthermore integration with coal gasification was studied and the possibility of doubling the output from the same amount of coal pointed out. The synergy for gasification with the oxygen produced from the SOEC instead from an air separation unit was already then seen as a bonus. The current density was −0.3 A cm−2 at 1.07 V and 100% Faradaic efficiency was demonstrated, but the operating temperature of around 1000 °C and the tubular design of course made the balance of the plant, as well as the SOEC unit, quite expensive.
Thermodynamics
It is important to understand the basic thermodynamics of water and CO2 electrolysis because this is one of the main explanations for the high conversion efficiency achievable with SOEC.1,10–13
Both water decomposition H2O = H2 + 0.5O2 (−ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJ mol−1)(1)and CO2 electrolysis CO2 = CO + 0.5O2 (−ΔH1023 K = 282.5 kJ mol−1)(2)are highly endothermal reactions requiring 3.07 and 3.50 kWh per Nm3 of hydrogen and CO, respectively, produced at 750 °C. The reaction enthalpies, for both reactions are only weakly dependent on temperature, as illustrated on Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  ΔH, ΔG and T × ΔS as a function of temperature for water splitting and CO2 electrolysis. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3253–3257 with permission from Elsevier.14 
The reaction enthalpy consists of two terms ΔH = ΔG + T × ΔS(3)where ΔG is the Gibbs free energy change which has to be provided in the form of electrical energy while the entropy part T × ΔS can be supplied as heat. As ΔS are positive for both reaction (1) and (2), ΔG decreases with temperature. At 80 °C ΔG is 93% of ΔH but at 750 °C it is only 77%.
This heat could be provided by an outside source (such as, for instance, high temperature heat from a nuclear reactor, from solar heat or from exothermal chemical reaction heat in the SOEC stack). These are intriguing possibilities but the heat can simply be provided by the Joule heat generated due to the loss mechanism within the stack.
These loss mechanisms are normally lumped together in the so called area specific resistance (ASR) composed of ohmic resistance and activation overpotentials at both the anode and the cathode. The activation overpotentials are in turn composed of kinetic overpotentials due kinetic activation energies and overpotentials due to mass transport limitations.
The minimum operating voltage to accomplish the reactions is defined by: (4)where n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction (2 for both reaction (1) and (2)) and F is Faraday’s constant 96485 C mol−1. VO is the open circuit voltage at standard conditions. At the actual operating conditions this minimum is defined by the Nernst equation, which for water decomposition takes the form (5)
Now the Joule heat generation is given by Qrest = i2 × ASR = i × (Vop − Vn)(6)
When there is no net heat flux to the SOEC cells the operating voltage is the so called thermoneutral voltage (or enthalpy voltage) (7)
At this voltage the inlet and outlet temperature from a stack are equal. Although the local current densities across the cells are not identical, operation at this voltage will minimize local temperature differences and thus mechanical stresses. This voltage at 750 °C is 1.285 V for steam electrolysis and 1.464 V for CO2 electrolysis.
The electrolysis of steam or carbon dioxide requires a large amount of energy compared to the heat capacity of the reactants or products. This can be illustrated by the fact that small deviation from the thermoneutral voltage will give rise to large adiabatic temperature increases or decreases. Operating without a sweep gas on the oxygen side and normal steam conversion at 33 mV will result in a delta temperature of 100 °C.
The efficiency of the electrolyzer is (8)where LHV is the lower heating value of the fuel produced and W is the total electrical energy input. As LHV by definition is equal to the enthalpy change for reaction (1) and (2) it is seen that the efficiency of the electrolyzer stack is 100% if operated at the thermoneutral voltage. In practice it will normally be slightly lower due to heat losses, gas leakages in the stack and electronic leakage through the electrolytes in some cases, but close to 100% real efficiency has been demonstrated in numerous experiments.
In fact the coupling of exothermal loss mechanisms with endothermal reactions provides an elegant way of upgrading “waste heat” to chemical energy. The same principle is invoked when performing internal steam reforming of methane in SOFC, as discussed extensively in ref. 15. In these SOC cells the heat is furthermore transferred with a negligible temperature difference leading to minimum exergy loss. Nevertheless SOEC operation at the thermoneutral voltage still entails an exergy loss of around 5% even when accounting for the exergy content of the oxygen produced. This is an often overlooked fact, but transforming the pure exergy of electricity into chemical energy in this way comes at minor loss.
It is expedient to use the lower heating value in the efficiency calculation because this normally what is paid for in the fuel industry. In order to achieve 100% efficiency it is thus necessary to electrolyze steam and not start with liquid water. Otherwise the heat needed to evaporate the water needs to be added, which will increase the minimum amount of energy required by approx. 0.5 kWh per Nm3 hydrogen.
When the hydrogen produced in the SOEC stack is used for a downstream chemical synthesis the reaction heat from the synthesis is normally sufficient to provide enough steam for the SOEC. This, together with the ability to electrolyze CO2, creates a strong synergy between SOEC- and synthesis-gas- (mixtures of CO, H2 and CO2) based fuel syntheses, as illustrated on Fig. 4 and discussed later.
 Fig. 4  Synergy between steam production in synfuels synthesis and SOEC. 
When performing co-electrolysis (simultaneous electrolysis of steam and CO2) it is necessary to also consider the reverse water gas shift (RWGS) reaction H2 + CO2 = H2O + CO (−ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJ mol−1)(9)as well as the methanation reaction CO + 3H2 = CH4 + H2O (−ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJ mol−1)(10)
The RWGS reaction is slightly endothermal whereas the methanation is quite exothermal. Both reactions will be fast at normal SOEC operating temperatures, at least with the ubiquitously used nickel containing cathodes, and both reactions can be assumed to proceed to equilibrium. The RWGS is independent of pressure whereas the conversion to methane increases rapidly according to the Le Chatelier principle with operating pressure.
The role of the RWGS in co-electrolysis is still under debate, with some being inclined to believe that for the co-electrolysis case only steam electrolysis is occurring, while CO2 is only being converted to CO via the RWGS because CO2 electrolysis is slower than steam electrolysis.
From above it can be seen that operation at high temperature allows for a higher current density for the stack than low temperature operation given equal ASR. A high temperature is also beneficial for reaction kinetics – even without noble metal electrodes – so ASR will decrease with temperature. Both factors allow for lower stack areas and thus costs.
Compared to the traditional low temperature alkaline electrolyzers as well as PEM based electrolyzers, SOEC thus has the advantages of efficiency and compactness, as well as the ability to produce synthesis gas directly. A comparison of the three electrolysis technologies is provided in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Typical polarization curves for state of the art electrolyzer technologies. Reprinted from Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 with permission from Elsevier.16,94 
On the other hand there are multiple challenges related to high temperature operation with respect to materials selection and degradation issues.
Materials for SOEC cells
The requirements to the materials used for SOEC are many and demanding:
• Chemical stability at the very reducing/oxidizing environment prevailing at the operating temperature.
• Stable with respect to sintering/agglomeration.
• Matching thermal expansion coefficients to avoid undue mechanical stresses.
• Chemical compatibility between adjacent materials.
• Mechanical strength and a good Weibull modulus as the materials are normally ceramic-like.
The electrolyte needs to be absolutely dense and free of pinholes and the electrodes needs to have:
• Adequate porosity to prevent undue diffusion restrictions of reactants and products.
• High electronic conductivity (for the widely used Ni–YSZ cermets this requires percolation of the nickel network).
• High ionic conductivity in order to extend the TPB into the active electrode structure.
• Excellent electrochemical activity.
These properties have now been optimized for decades for SOFC application and the materials used for SOEC have, accordingly, so far been SOFC materials although the operating conditions differ not only in obvious but also in more subtle ways between SOFC and SOEC operation, as will be discussed in the following.

Electrolyte. 
The most widely used electrolyte is zirconia doped with especially yttrium, which was used in the original experiments at both Westinghouse and Dornier and later at most of the research institute like DTU energy conversion (previously Risø National Lab), ECN, Forschungszentrum Jülich as well as most of the commercial companies.6,7,9,17–21 Stabilizing of the zirconia with 8 mol% Y2O3 (YSZ) is the most commonly used due to its good ionic conductivity and good mechanical properties. Less yttrium (3YSZ) makes the electrolyte more robust but at the cost of lower ionic conductivity.22
Another good candidate for electrolyte is scandia doped yttrium (ScZ),23 which has higher ionic conductivity and also lowers the polarization of the cathode. ScZ has also been used by Ceramatec for their electrolyte supported cells tested at INL (Idaho National Lab) with good results.24
Samarium-doped ceria (SDC) also shows very good performance, but due to the high electronic conductivity of ceria under the very reducing conditions prevalent in SOEC operation internal short circuiting occurs, which makes this material unsuitable for SOEC cells.25 Bi-layered gadolinium doped ceria (GDC) and YSZ showed very promising performance, but decayed fast in steam electrolysis experiments.26
Lanthanum gallate doped with strontium and magnesium (LSGM) has been tried as an intermediate temperature electrolyte, but there are problems with formations of lanthanum nitrate by reaction with the fuel electrode.27


Cathodes (fuel electrode). 
Nickel has very high electro-catalytic activity for steam and CO2 electrolysis, but has only electronic conductivity. Hydrogen/protons have high mobility in the metal, but low solubility, which limits the extent of the TPB to approximately 100 nm. Electrons, oxide ions and gas species have to be transported from and to the TPB. This is the reason why nickel is mixed with an ionic conducting material like YSZ in order to maximize the TPB length. Such electrodes are called cermets for ceramic–metal composites. This situation is illustrated in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the steam-hydrogen electrode. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 15887–15902 with permission from Elsevier.28 
Nickel–YSZ cermet is the predominant choice for commercial cells but despite its good properties there some disadvantages. Nickel metal will oxidize if exposed to steam or CO2 at SOEC relevant temperatures, so there is a need on a system level for recycling of part of the product gas from the stacks. According to Hauch it seem that 1% reducing gas should be sufficient.29 Nickel is also very prone to carbon laydown and susceptible to poisoning by sulfur. The same would be the case for iron or cobalt containing electrodes.
There is thus an incentive to develop all-ceramic electrodes and this has been done successfully, especially at the Pacific Northwest National Lab30 and at St. Andrews University.31–35
Lanthanum-doped strontium vanadate (LSV), strontium-doped lanthanum manganite partially substituted with chromium (LSCM), niobium-doped strontium titanates (STN) and lanthanum-doped strontium titanates with ceria (LST–ceria)30 have all been used. LSCM with 0.5% Pd have been shown to be very effective CO2 electrolysis electrodes.36 Double perovskite Sr2FeNbO6 (SFN) have also been claimed to be better than Ni–YSZ.37
Very few experiments have been done with the very promising metal supported cathodes and the longest tests showed significant oxidation of the metal support structure38 and a degradation rate of around 3.2% per 1000 h in the 2000 h durability experiment. Metal supported cells have been used successfully in SOFC operation where the steam partial pressure at the exit is comparable to SOEC operation. The metal supported cells are promising because of materials savings compared to Ni–YSZ and could furthermore be upscaled more easily with respect to their geometric area compared to ceramic supports.


Anodes (oxygen electrode). 
Most anodes are mixed conductor perovskite oxides, ABO3, where A is usually a lanthanide ion, B small tri- or divalent 3d transition metals. The most widely used was initially a LSM–YSZ composite, but recently a host of mixed ionic and electronic conductors (MIEC) have been employed such as strontium doped lanthanum cobaltite (LSC),17,39,40 strontium doped lanthanum ferrite partially cobalt doped LSCF24,30,41–43 or nickelate (LSCN).44 Most of these electrodes require a barrier layer (typically CGO) to prevent reaction with the electrolyte. They provide better performance and seem to have alleviated problems with delamination at the electrolyte/anode interface. The traditional LSM–YSZ performance is compared with LSC and LSCF anodes on Fig. 7.
 Fig. 7  Performance of different anodes with DTU cells at 800 °C with 50% H2/50% H2O. Reprinted from Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10697–10734 with permission from American Chemical Society.1 


Stacks. 
Apart from the early development of the Hot Elly concept by Dornier, tubular cells are rarely used in commercial stacks, which mostly use cathode-supported cells for SOFC applications. Some developers, however, prefer the use of electrolyte supported cells (ESC) despite the requirement for higher operating temperatures. The electrolyte supported cells have the advantage of having very thin electrodes so that polarization issues due to diffusion do not impede performance. ESC cells are also mechanically rugged.

Performance degradation
The initial results from long term testing of SOEC cells were rather discouraging with degradation rates exceeding 3% in applied voltage per 1000 hours for constant current. As the lifetime of SOEC stacks should for most applications be at least 5 years in order for the technology to become economically viable, this rate of degradation is clearly unacceptable as the operating voltage would long before exceed the tolerable. High voltages are unacceptable both with respect to efficiency and thermal management, which becomes critical on a system level if the operating voltage is much higher than the thermo-neutral (say 1.45 V maximum for steam electrolysis). Reference is made to the remark made under the thermodynamics section, that 33 mV would give rise to a 100 °C adiabatic temperature rise without large amounts of sweep gas and low steam conversions.
Unfortunately most tests are by tradition carried out in the galvanostatic mode, i.e. the current (and thus conversion of feed stock for constant flow) is kept constant whereas the voltage is allowed to increase. It is often claimed that this presents no problem when testing small button cells, and the temperatures have been carefully monitored and isothermal operation have been measured. It is however difficult to measure the exact temperature at the TPB and the results can thus be obfuscated severely. Starting the test far below the thermoneutral voltage and ending up far above would tend to mask an even more pronounced degradation than reported.
DTU energy conversion3 has done some very careful experiments where it was shown that the temperature measured 1 mm from the cell deviated from the oven temperature by 0.6 °C, when operating at the voltage where maximum deviation from isothermal condition are found, namely halfway between Vtn and Vn. Impedance spectroscopy did, however, show a variation in pure ohmic resistance (which only depends on temperature) corresponding to a true temperature deviation from isothermal of 2.7 °C.
Another problem with small scale tests on button cells is the large surface area of tubing, seals etc. compared with the active cell area tested. Different poisons in these materials, along with assorted impurities in the feed gases, which are rarely subjected to dedicated cleanup, has thus probably had an unnoticed but major influence on the degradation results.
Finally it should be noted that it is experimentally very challenging to ensure a pulsation free and uninterrupted supply of steam with small-scale test facilities.
The earlier long-term tests did, however, serve to map more safe operating regimes with respect to especially current density and did also reveal by means of post-mortem analysis, impedance spectroscopy and other in situ techniques some important degradation mechanisms.
The database of degradation mechanisms for SOEC at the Haldor Topsøe company has more than 100 entries and it is beyond the scope of the present paper to discuss each of them, especially because there exist many interactions between them. Some of the more important mechanisms are, however, briefly discussed below.
Poisoning
Very few dedicated and controlled experiments have so far been carried out to evaluate the impact of poisons on SOEC performance. The literature on SOFC does, however, contain a wealth of information.15,45 Important poisons are probably sulfur, chlorine, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony and selenium for the SOEC cathode and chromium (from interconnects, etc.) deactivate the anodes. There are differences between SOEC and SOFC with respect to the oxygen transport direction and concentration gradients of steam, hydrogen, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide which may have an influence on the effects of poisons but so far quantitative information is lacking.
DTU energy conversion has carried out a series of careful steam, co-electrolysis and CO2 electrolysis tests with button cells with and without gas clean up.46 They also applied in-plane voltage measurements, which are an ingenious way of detecting poisoning progressing as a front through the cells, as illustrated on Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Evolution of in-plane and cell voltage as a poison front moves through the cell. Reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.46 
This technique can also reveal if the poisoning effect is temporary and reversible as the in plane voltage difference will show a similar picture when the poison(s) are removed from the cell again, like for instance silica being carried out of the cell by steam as silica hydroxide.
The results are quite revealing as shown on Fig. 9 for experiments with gases as received and on Fig. 10 with clean gases using a proprietary cleaning mass.
 Fig. 9  Cell and in plane voltage as function of time at 850 °C with gases as received. Reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.46 
 Fig. 10  Cell and in plane voltage as function of time at 850 °C with cleaned gases. Reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.46 
It was observed that when using the gases without cleaning the degradation rate was between 450 and 700 mV kh−1 for the first few hundred hours and then between 3 and 32 mV kh−1 for all three electrolysis modes.
With cleaned gases no degradation was observed applying current densities up to −0.5 A cm−2. Some of the cells even activated slightly which was explained by removal by steam of impurities stemming from the raw materials, notably silica (33 ppm) used to produce the cells. DTU energy conversion has by SEM identified silica at the TPB.18,47 They also note that for SOEC operation transport of impurities by steam is towards the TPB so that poisons have a more severe impact than in SOFC mode. Impurities should be removed to the ppb level.
The impedance studies showed that poisoning effects only affected the nickel cathodes, whereas the ohmic resistance was constant. A very slight degradation of the LSM/YSZ electrode (with a characteristic frequency of 1 to 3 kHz) was, however, observed even with clean gases.
DTU energy conversion identified traces of sulfur in the gases as received by mass spectroscopy but not in the cleaned gases.
Sulfur is probably the most commonly encountered poison. For SOFC operation Hansen48 found the impact of sulfur could be correlated with a Temkin isotherm: Θs = 1.45 − 9.53 × 10−5T + 4.17 × 10−5TlnY(11)where Y is the ratio between the partial pressures of hydrogen sulfide and hydrogen, Θs the sulfur coverage of the nickel surface. The impact of sulfur could then be correlated with Pl = k × (Θs − Θmin)(12)where Θmin > 0 depends on the current density and anode material. The isotherm gave a very good fit to data covering temperatures from 700 to 1000 °C and H2S contents from 0.05 to 50 ppm, as indicated on Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Increase in cell resistance ASR (%) as function of Θs (galvanostatic). Diamonds 241 mA cm−2, squares 409 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B178–B180. Copyright 2008, The Electrochemical Society.46 
The fact that the performance loss was reduced at higher current densities was hypothesized to be due to a mitigating effect of oxygen reacting with part of the sulfur according to H2S + 1.5O2 = SO2 + H2O(13)
As this mechanism obviously should not be at play in SOEC mode it is to be expected that sulfur poisoning should be more severe in SOEC.
In order to minimize steam reforming of methane when co-electrolyzing biogas (consisting of methane and carbon dioxide) without impacting the electrochemistry too much, experiments were carried out by adding minute amounts of H2S to the gas in SOEC mode.49 It was found that 5–6 ppm H2S completely eliminated the steam reforming activity and the performance loss could surprisingly be described quite well by eqn (12). More systematic tests with cleaned inlet gases are warranted because they could also elucidate more details about the reaction and poisoning mechanism(s).
For pure CO2 electrolysis there are no sulfur isotherms available and no experiments with SOEC operation.
Carbon formation
Carbon formation is set in by distinct mechanisms in the cathodes of high temperature electrolyzer cells (anodes in fuel cells) as well in the balance of plant equipment such as heat exchangers, which most often are steel based. Carbon nanotubes or whiskers may form notably on Ni, Fe, or Co. The limit where carbon is formed is influenced by the crystallite sizes. Carbon can also just be formed as graphite.
Graphite formation reduces the active area and blocks the pores, whereas whisker formation can lead to catastrophic destruction of the cathodes because the carbon nanotubes are very strong.
Graphite formation can occur from the following reactions: 2CO = C + CO2(14) CH4 = C + 2H2(15) CO + H2 = C + H2O(16)
When calculating the potential for carbon formation it is normally assumed that all steam reforming reactions, methanation and the shift reaction are in equilibrium. The potential for carbon then depends only on the C/H/O ratios, the pressure, and the temperature. The carbon limits found are shown in Fig. 12. It seen that the carbon deposition region increases at lower temperatures.
 Fig. 12  Carbon deposition limit lines in the C–H–O diagram at 33 bars with different reactant utilizations. Reprinted from J. Energy Storage, 2015, 1, 22–37 with permission from Elsevier.50 
In SOEC cells carbon formation is also challenging when performing CO2 electrolysis especially at low temperature and if operated at higher pressures, which would otherwise be very advantageous as discussed later. DTU energy conversion has observed an interesting phenomenon where the carbon whiskers were actually formed at the three-phase boundary in co-electrolysis experiments at high current densities (>−1.0 A cm−2), despite the fact that the actual H2O + CO2 conversion of 67% was below the critical conversion, calculated to be 99%. This discrepancy was explained by the concentration gradients and overpotential at high current densities, which are more critical in the SOEC mode than in the fuel-cell mode of operation.51 The microstructure, including the porosity of the active layer thus plays a crucial role. The carbon whiskers actually formed on the zirconia nanoparticles from the YSZ components of the cermet.
Carbon formation has been studied by Raman and EDS spectroscopy on patterned 100 μm wide nickel stripes52 with a CO:CO2 gas mixture at 750 °C. The carbon deposited preferentially at the TPB in SOEC mode but was actually consumed in SOFC (being used as fuel most likely). The Raman spectroscopy showed that the carbon was mainly graphitic.
Researchers at Imperial College53,54 have demonstrated with ex situ Raman and SEM that a 10 μm CGO interlayer between Ni/CGO electrodes and the YSZ electrolyte helps prevent carbon formation and delamination.
Using a copper infiltrated gadolinia doped ceria cathode55 they also succeeded in demonstrating complete suppression of carbon formation in an aggressive simulated biogas mixture with 70% CH4 and 30% CO2. Without the copper the Ni–CGO cathode showed carbon formation across the whole electrode volume as opposed to the situation with CO/CO2 where carbon was only observed close to the TPB. Furthermore the carbon formed was less graphitic with the methane present even close to the TPB. The copper infiltrated electrode had similar electrochemical performance to the Ni–CGO. In order to achieve this and avoid copper sintering during high temperature processing they used low temperature infiltration of a CGO scaffold.
Skafte et al. has developed a technique to detect the onset of carbon formation. The electrolysis current is gradually increased in steps of 0.1 A on a 16 cm2 Ni–YSZ cathode. When the voltage became unstable and started increasing this defined the onset of carbon formation. They found that carbon formation started before the theoretical calculated Boudouard limit. The difference was at approx. 6% lower carbon dioxide conversion than expected, which was ascribed to diffusion limitations and endothermal temperature drop. Impregnation with CGO did not improve the limit but reduced electrode polarization.
Delamination of the anode
In earlier tests, delamination near the electrolyte–anode interface was the most commonly observed reason for degradation of the SOEC cells. It is explained by the buildup of a high internal oxygen pressure inside closed pores and cavities by the different Galvani and electromotive potentials in SOEC mode.56,57 Use of more active anodes has alleviated the problem by lowering the over potential at the anode. Use of MIEC electrolyte has also been suggested although it is probably not the electronic conductivity but rather the lowered over potential which is responsible for the improvements.
Nickel sintering or agglomeration
Sintering of the nickel cathode has been observed at extreme operating conditions of −2.0 A cm−2 and 950 °C decreasing the TPB length.18 The sintering has been ascribed to Ni(OH)2 formation.18,58,59
Loss of reactant
By accident it was found by Schefold et al. that loss of steam to an SOEC lead to an increase in the cell voltage to 1.9 V at 810 °C, where it then stayed constant. The constant plateau was explained by emergence of electronic conduction in the YSZ electrolyte. The cell survived 64 hours without steam at −0.34 A cm−2.
Durability tests
After many of these issues have been resolved recent results are much more promising and some of the most important ones will be discussed below. It was to be expected that degradation rates for complete stacks would be higher than for cell tests because additional poisoning sources (from, for instance, interconnects) are present and loss of contact, flow distribution etc. could play a role.
In a test with a 10-cell stack from Topsoe Fuel Cell A/S in co-electrolysis mode, no degradation was observed with 45% H2O/45% CO2/10% H2 at 850 °C with a reactant conversion of 60% at a current density of −0.5 A cm−2 during the first 800 h and −0.75 A cm−2 during the last 400 h of the experiment.60
Researchers at Forschungszentrum Jülich61 tested a two cell planar cathode supported Ni–YSZ/YSZ/LSCF stack for the first 4000 h in fuel cell mode at −0.5 A cm−2, where the degradation rate was 0.6% per kh at 750 °C. The stack was then tested with steam electrolysis for 3450 h at 800 °C at −0.3 A cm−2 and finally in co-electrolysis mode with current densities varying between −0.3 and −0.875 A cm−2. There was no degradation during the steam electrolysis mode for 2000 h. In the coelectrolysis mode the degradation increased to 2–4% per kh and especially when increasing the current density to −0.875 A cm−2 the degradation increased to 6% per kh. There is no mention of cleaning of the CO2 used.
Schefold from EIFER reports on a 9000 h test of a Ni–YSZ/YSZ/LSCF single cell.62 They operated at −1.0 A cm−2 at 780 °C. The initial voltage was very low (1.06 V) and the test was galvanostatic. There were many incidents with an unstable steam supply. Nevertheless the degradation was 3.8% per kh (40 mV kh−1) during the entire test. During an incident-free period from 2000 to 5600 hours of operation time, the degradation rate was only 1.7% per kh. Tietz performed post mortem analyses of the cell and found severe pore formation along the grain boundaries and transport into the CGO barrier layer. The anode also showed signs of recrystallization.63
Tests at Idaho National lab have demonstrated the improvement in stack durability and the latest test of a Ceramatec stack even showed improvement in performance during 1900 h of operation, as illustrated in Fig. 13. The 10 cell stack consist of a nickel–ceria cathode, a scandia stabilized zirconia electrolyte (ScSz) and a LCF anode. It was tested at 800 °C at −0.25 A cm−2. The improved performance compared to earlier tests was ascribed to the optimized electrodes, electrolyte and interconnecting coatings as well as interface microstructures.
 Fig. 13  Voltage versus time for a Ceramatec stack tested at INL. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 20–28 with permission from Elsevier.24 
The longest test so far has been done at EIFER with a electrolyte supported cell.64 The results from the 11000 hour test are shown on Fig. 14. The electrolyte used as support was scandia/ceria doped zirconia (6Sc1CeSZ) and an LSCF anode with a CGO barrier layer. The cathode was nickel based. Average voltage degradation amounted to 0.6% per kh (ASR increase 8 mΩ 7 kh). Interestingly enough, impedance spectroscopy revealed that the degradation was solely due to an ohmic resistance increase and only after 9000 h did a small (<2 mV kh−1) degradation in electrode overpotential became detectable.
 Fig. 14  Long term test of electrolyte supported cell at EIFER. Reprinted from Electrochim. Acta, 2015, DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2015.04.141 with permission from Elsevier.64 
Corre et al.65 tested a 25 cell stack from Topsoe Fuel Cell A/S for steam electrolysis for 9000 h. They used two different current densities: −0.57 and −0.72 A cm−2, a steam conversion of 50% and operated in the 750 to 780 °C range. An overall degradation of 2.3% per kh was observed, with cells near the bottom of the stack showing even lower degradation rates. The stack was subjected to several incidents during the tests without being affected. The temperature was adjusted to counter partially the degradation and it was calculated that this would prolong the useful lifetime by at least 7000 h.
Hansen has investigated strategies66,67 to counteract degradation at the system level for both SOFC and SOEC plants and concluded that the optimum strategy for SOEC is to operate at thermoneutral conditions, constant current and then compensate for degradation by increasing the operating temperature. This incurs very little efficiency penalty as it only requires minute amounts of extra electrical preheating of the feed reactants. A doubling of the ASR can be counteracted by an increase in operating temperature of 98 °C.
It would be interesting to implement such a strategy for durability tests of SOEC stacks as it would eliminate temperature gradients, which sometimes makes the tests difficult to interpret. Such a test protocol would also provide more meaningful data for the projection of useful stack lifetime on a system level.
Reversible or regenerative operation
This topic has attracted a great deal of attention as it is perceived that an electrical system based on predominantly renewable production platforms would require a very large amount of storage capacity. This could be in the form of different fuels produced by SOEC and then transformed back to electricity by SOFC technology. Ideally this should take place in the same stack and system. This idea is, however, probably the most challenging application from a business point of view as it relies on arbitrage between low and high electricity prices, which will be determined by supply and demand and is difficult to predict decades from now. It is probably more profitable to produce transportation fuels especially for the heavy duty sector. The need for transportation fuels is of the same order of magnitude as electricity demand so in a future 100% renewable energy scenario the peaks in electricity production could be used for transport fuel production.
Nevertheless the R-SOFC concepts are interesting and the questions are now: can the SOEC/SOFC stacks withstand the transient operation required, which fuel is optimum for storage and round trip efficiency and how would the plant look and perform on a system level?
Operation in both the fuel cell and electrolysis mode is done routinely in the lab when testing SOEC cells and it was already proposed for energy storage by the early developer Isenberg as well as Dönitz and Erdle, but it is only recently that dedicated long term tests have been performed.
Versa Power has carried out an extensive development program for the DOE and tested more than 20 cell designs. They managed to bring down the degradation rate to 15 mV kh−1, measured in the SOEC mode when operating with 0.25 A cm−2 and pure H2 in the fuel cell mode and −0.5 A cm−2 and 50% H2/50% H2O in the SOEC mode. Both operation modes were at 750 °C. Fig. 15 shows result from this much extended test. The degradation rate in the reversible operation was not higher than in constant electrolysis operation.68
 Fig. 15  Voltage development in tests of the Versa Power stack during reversible operation (daily cycles). Reprinted from Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10697–10734 with permission from American Chemical Society.1 
Wonsyld et al.69 performed tests with a 10 cell Topsoe Fuel Cell AS/S stack with 12 × 12 cm2 cells consisting of Ni/YSZ fuel electrodes, YSZ electrolyte and LSCF oxygen electrode with a CGO barrier layer. The interconnects are made of chrome rich steel. The tests were performed with 231 mA cm−2 in the fuel cell mode with a furnace temperature of 711 °C and 60% H2 in N2. SOEC operation was done with 55% steam/45% H2 at 718 °C and at a current density of −656 mA cm−2. The stack was operated for 2 h in each mode and the time for changing the cycles was approximately 10 min. In total 113 cycles were performed. The development in the cell voltages are shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Development in cell voltages of a 10 cell TOFC stack switching between SOFC and SOEC mode. 
The small fluctuation in voltages in SOEC mode was due to pulsation of the water evaporator. It is seen that there is no detectable degradation in fuel cell mode and a slight activation in electrolysis mode. Such a test also demonstrates the robustness of the stack because the temperature profile changes quite dramatically when switching from SOEC to SOFC mode.
Graves et al.70,71 undertook studies with single cells at 800 °C consisting of Ni/YSZ cathode, YSZ electrolyte and a LSM anode. In fuel cell mode a 50% steam/50% H2 gas and a current density of 0.5 A cm−2 were used. In SOEC mode 90% steam/10% H2 gas and a current density of −1.0 A cm−2 were used. The cycles were initially 1 h at SOEC conditions and 5 h at SOEC conditions. The results are shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Comparison of the SOEC stability during a constant-current electrolysis test and a reversible cycling test. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 239–244. Copyright 2015.77 
Also shown on the plot in Fig. 17 are data from an experiment with the same type of cell under constant electrolysis operation. This resulted in rapid degradation with an increase of impedance of a factor of 2.8. In the reversible cycling experiment no degradation could be observed.
Longer operation times in SOEC mode between switches were also tested and it was found that it was when 5 h periods (similar to the FC mode time) were applied that the ohmic resistance first gradually increased, albeit at a 20 times lower rate than with operation at constant electrolysis conditions.
Switching between SOEC mode and open circuit voltage but keeping the temperature did not result in the same elimination of degradation. The authors therefore concluded that the “healing” effect of fuel cell operation must be ascribed to reversal of oxygen bubble formation at the electrolyte/cathode interface by the low internal oxygen pressure in fuel cell mode and by the active electrochemical pumping of oxygen from the cavities.
The Barnett group at Northwestern University72,73 has suggested an innovative concept for energy storage SOEC using methane rich synthesis gas as an intermediate product.
The concept is illustrated in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Simplified reversible SOC system using H2–CH4 rich fuel. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 944–951 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.72 
Note that the system is closed and that the feedstock and fuel storage has to be kept hot to avoid steam condensation.
The round-trip efficiency η, neglecting system associated losses and assuming 100% faradaic efficiency will be  where VFC and VEC is the operating voltage in fuel cell and electrolysis mode, respectively. In a stand-alone energy storage plant the SOEC stack could not operate below the thermoneutral voltage unless significant heat was available from the outside, so the round-trip efficiency with hydrogen as intermediate product could at maximum be less than 67%, which does not compare favorably with compressed-air storage or Li-ion batteries which can achieve ηround trip ≥ 80%.
If, however, the operating conditions for the SOEC mode are chosen so that significant amounts of methane are produced in the nickel cathode this will lower the VTN due to the exothermic nature of the methanation reaction (4). In order to have appreciable amounts of methane due to equilibrium constraints the SOEC operating temperature needs to be lowered to 600 °C and/or the pressure increased to 10 bar. The conversion in SOEC also has to be limited so that the gas does not become prone to carbon decomposition, see Fig. 19.
 Fig. 19  (a) C–H–O ternary diagram. The graphite boundaries are indicated for T = 600 °C and 750 °C for P 0, 1 and 10 atm. (b) CH4 content as function of oxygen mole fraction. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 944–951 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.72 
The authors demonstrated by experiment that the nickel cathode was capable of equilibrating the gas with respect to methanation. Their papers also discuss the challenges involved and were of the opinion that pressurized operation at 750 °C will be easiest to realize in practice. Pressurised operation and use of pure oxygen in fuel cell mode will also help. Further internal reforming will be beneficial for FC efficiency and will lower parasitic losses.
One demanding challenge is, however, not addressed and that is thermal management of the methanation reaction, which probably will set in rather abruptly in the SOEC cathode channels.
The system analysis team at Colorado School of Mines has done careful analysis of the concept of the total system and varying the operating parameters.74–76 They have concluded that considering parasitic losses from balance of plant components and heat integration issues the optimum operating conditions are stack temperatures of 680 °C and an operating pressure of 20 bar.
The plant would schematically look like Fig. 20.
 Fig. 20  Energy storage system with SOFC = 1 MW and SOEC = 1.37 MW. Reprinted from J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 133–144 with permission from Elsevier.75 
Please note that the feed stock and fuel are stored at room temperature and 160 bar in the tanks, so that the steam is condensed and re-evaporated. Furthermore air is used as sweep gas in the SOEC and as coolant for the SOFC operation so oxygen storage is eliminated. The energy expended for compression is partly recuperated by expansion.
The overall round-trip efficiency is calculated to be 73% including balance plant losses, which is very respectable also considering the high energy density compared to alternative energy storage options.
Pressurized operation
Operating stacks under pressure would be beneficial from a systems level perspective because, the product being hydrogen, synthesis gas or carbon monoxide is normally used at pressure. Mechanical compression of gases is carried out in multi-step polytropic compressors with intercooling and a typical efficiency range from 70–80% depending on the application. The compression of liquid water or CO2 requires very little energy. On the other hand the OCV voltage increases with the natural logarithm to the square root of the pressure according to the Nernst equation (5) but “electrochemical” compression is still more efficient. Furthermore, at higher operating voltages, such as for instance the most relevant thermoneutral voltage, the increase in pressure lowers the overpotential due to improved electrode kinetics and reduced diffusion restrictions as has been found both by modeling and the relatively few experiments carried out so far. This means that at a low current density the performance is worse at high pressure (higher voltage and thus power consumption) but at higher current density the pressurized operation is better.
Another important argument in favor of pressurized operation is the improvement in heat transfer in the heat exchangers required for the balance of plant. For large scale fuel production plants heat exchanger sizes would become almost unmanageable at atmospheric pressure. For co-electrolysis as well as pure CO2 electrolysis it is obviously necessary to be aware of the carbon formation limitations as pointed out in ref. 77.
The first to report data from pressure experiments were Højgaard Jensen et al. from DTU energy conversion.78 They used Ni–YSZ/YSZ/LSM–YSZ cells at 750 °C and performed both electrolysis and fuel cell tests in both 50% H2/50% H2O as well as in 80% H2/20% H2O. The ASR dropped from 0.52 Ω cm2 to 0.42 Ω cm2 when increasing the pressure from atmospheric to 10 bar absolute. The maximum power density in fuel cell mode increased significantly from 0.6 W cm−2 to 0.95 W cm−2. In electrolysis mode the performance improvement was more modest due to the increase in OCV at the 10 bar pressure. At −0.5 A cm−2 the voltage was 1.29 at 0.4 bar absolute, whereas it was 1.26 V at 10 bar.
O'Brien et al. performed experiments with a two-cell stack at 800 °C and up to −0.4 A cm−2 below the thermoneutral voltage and found a decrease in ASR from 0.6 Ω cm2 at atmospheric pressure to 0.46 Ω cm2 at 6.9 bar.79
Bernadet et al.80,81 carried out tests on two types of single cells. Both were cathode-supported with Ni–8YSZ/YSZ/CGO cells. The difference was that the type 1 cell had a 500 μm cathode and a LSC anode whereas type 2 had a 260 μm cathode and a LSCF anode. The crossover point on the I–V curve occurred at 1.3 V for type 1 and around 1.18 V for type 2. The improvement in hydrogen production was 11% for type 1 but 18% for type 2 at the thermoneutral voltage. The difference in the cell performances was mainly ascribed to microstructural differences. From the shape of the I–V curves it could also be seen that non-linearity indicating steam starvation set in at higher current densities with pressurized operation.
Applications

Hydrogen. 
The simplest application would obviously be hydrogen production. Many system studies have been performed on SOEC based hydrogen production. One of the latest82 also involves an economic evaluation based on experimental data and bottom-up cost estimation of plant components. The calculations have been carried out for a 100 kg per day H2 plant (46 Nm3 h−1) capacity. The SOEC stack is operated at 700 °C and 13 bar. It was assumed that steam would be available from an outside source. The results are displayed on Fig. 21. It is seen that the production, as always, depends strongly on electricity price, but that SOEC is more competitive than alkaline and PEM based electrolyzers.
 Fig. 21  Cost of hydrogen versus electricity price. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.04.085 with permission from Elsevier.82 


Biogas upgrading. 
This is an interesting application because the CO2 feedstock actually has a negative price in the sense that it costs on the order of 15 euro cents per Nm3 to remove it by physical means in order to be able to upgrade the biogas to pipeline quality.
Biogas produced by anaerobic digestion consists of typically 60% methane, the rest being CO2 and up to several thousand ppm of sulfur compounds, predominantly in the form of hydrogen sulfide. Biogas originating from landfill can also contain higher hydrocarbons, halides and siloxanes and varying amounts of nitrogen, which can be difficult to deal with.
Biogas can be upgraded by means of SOEC technology. Steam added to biogas and the CO2 content can be co-electrolyzed generating a CO rich synthesis gas. Alternatively hydrogen from steam electrolysis can be added to the biogas. In both cases the synthesis gas is methanated.83
Production of “synthetic” natural gas by upgrading biogas by means of SOEC and wind power can also act to store renewable energy and may also provide various balancing services to the power grid (up and down regulation of either electricity consumption or production).
If the CO2 in the biogas is co-electrolyzed with steam to produce CO and H2 the synthesis gas can be converted to methane at pipeline quality at relatively low pressure. The present SOEC electrodes, based on nickel are, however, active for steam reforming. This will result in an inefficient plant, because the electrical energy will be used to drive the steam reforming in the SOEC and will be downgraded to steam generation in the methanator. If, however, a small amount of sulphur in the biogas feed to the SOEC is not removed, the steam reforming activity will be reduced to almost zero without sacrificing too much of the electrochemical electrolysis activity.49,84
As mentioned above the electrochemical activity is decreased by (1 − θs) where θs is the sulfur coverage of the nickel whereas the reforming activity is reduced proportional to (1 − θs)3. The experiments at Risø showed that steam reforming of the methane could be completely eliminated by having ppm levels of H2S in the feed.
The plant layout is shown in Fig. 22. The overall energy balances are, however, such that the steam production from CO methanation is more than is needed to cover the need for the SOEC, also because it is only required to evaporate 3 moles of water per mole of methane synthesised, whereas for CO2 methanation 4 moles of water need to be evaporated.
 Fig. 22  Biogas upgrading by co-electrolysis of steam and biogas CO2 route. Reprinted with permission from ECS. Trans., 2013, 57, 3089–3097. Copyright 2013, The Electrochemical Society.83 
The net result is a surplus production of superheated steam. In a large plant this could be utilised to generate power in an expansion turbine (of course with losses incurred compared to the SOEC electricity input), but in a relatively small biogas plant this will most likely prove uneconomical due to the high investment and low availability of such small turbines.
The other possibility is to electrolyze steam to hydrogen separately and mix it with the cleaned biogas and then convert the CO2 to methane.
The plant layout is shown in Fig. 23. The exergy streams for the steam electrolysis route are shown in Fig. 24.
 Fig. 23  Biogas upgrading by electrolysis of steam route. Reprinted with permission from ECS. Trans., 2013, 57, 3089–3097. Copyright 2013, The Electrochemical Society.83 
 Fig. 24  Exergy streams in biogas upgrading plant. Exergy in incoming biogas stream set to 1000. Reprinted with permission from ECS. Trans., 2013, 57, 3089–3097. Copyright 2013, The Electrochemical Society.83 
Lanzini et al. has later studied the impact of sulfur for biogas upgrading both at atmospheric pressure and at 33 bar where there would be no driving force for steam reforming.85 They use 3 adiabatic methanation reactors in series with recycling around the first in order to limit the temperature rise to 600 °C. They only looked at the co-electrolysis cases and found that at atmospheric pressure the sulfur passivation discussed above was the most efficient. Operating the stack at a pressure of 30 bar eliminated the need for sulfur passivation and turned to be the most energy efficient option.


Methane from CO2. 
Methane can also be produced via SOEC from pure CO2, steam and electricity as discussed in ref. 77. In that case several adiabatic reactors as in the Topsøe TREMP scheme would be necessary and co-electrolysis could be beneficial because it would reduce the required methanation catalyst volume and there would a need for the extra steam produced.
Hansen et al. studied both pressurized and atmospheric operation of the SOEC and calculated LHV efficiencies of 74.8 and 77.3%, respectively. The efficiency calculations are based on the DC electricity supply, e.g. potential inverter losses are not included.
Giglio et al.50,86 have also investigated either CO2 or CO methanation e.g. steam or the co-electrolysis route and found that the latter has the highest efficiency but also the highest investment and operating cost. It is thus most competitive at higher electricity costs. The break-even electricity price where SOEC could compete with European natural gas prices were calculated to be 8 $ per MWh and 67 $ per MWh for “state-of-the-art” and future target scenarios, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 25 for the target case with an investment cost for the SOEC of 540 $ per m2 and a degradation rate of 0.2% per kh.
 Fig. 25  Cost of production of methane from CO2 with SOEC compared to European NG market price. Reprinted from J. Energy Storage, 2015, 2, 64–79 with permission from Elsevier.86 


Methanol/DME/gasoline. 
Methanol is almost exclusively produced from natural gas today, but can use a variety of feedstocks including biomass or even just CO2 and water. The only larger scale biomass methanol production facility is based on black liquor but there is also an example of an electrolysis based plant using CO2 from geothermal sources and water as feedstock. The Carbon Recycling International plant in Iceland87 is based on alkaline electrolyzers, but the use of SOEC technology opens up some interesting possibilities also seen from a catalysis perspective. Not only will the SOEC be more efficient than the traditional electrolyzers and can use the steam generated in the methanol synthesis loop, but it also provides almost complete freedom with respect to the composition of the synthesis gas, which can be virtually free of inert components.
A study has been undertaken to investigate the optimum amount of co-electrolysis in an SOEC coupled to a methanol synthesis loop.88 The layout is shown in Fig. 26.
 Fig. 26  Methanol plant based on co-electrolysis of CO2 and steam. Reprinted with permission from ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 2941–2948. Copyright 2011, The Electrochemical Society.77 
The CO2 feedstock is either sent through the SOEC unit together with the steam or directly to the synthesis loop. It is well known that a maximum for the methanol synthesis rate exists at 2–4% CO2 in an stoichiometric synthesis gas.89 Results from laboratory tests as well as industrial feedback has shown that the deactivation rate in CO2 rich gases is faster compared to more CO rich gases, probably due to steam-induced ageing caused by the water formed from the synthesis reaction. On the other hand a more CO-rich gas will lead to increased byproduct formation. Using proprietary Topsøe in-house kinetics including all these factors the catalyst volumes, byproduct formation etc. have been calculated for end-of-run conditions (typically 3–4 years) as a function of the fraction of co-electrolysis. The results are shown in Fig. 27.
 Fig. 27  Space velocity and byproduct formation as function of percentage co-electrolysis in a SOEC based methanol plant. 
An optimum tradeoff between catalyst volume and byproduct formation is around 80% co-electrolysis. The needed amount of catalyst is reduced by a factor of 3–4 compared with a synthesis starting with only CO2 in the make-up to the loop. The consequences of operating the SOEC stacks at a synthesis pressure of around 50 bar has also been calculated. The conversion efficiency is enhanced by 4% absolute due to the fact that “electrochemical” compression of the hydrogen is more efficient than mechanical compression. The overall efficiencies are also quite high, 76% on a LHV and 83% on an exergy basis and close to that theoretically possible. The conversion per pass in the stacks would, however, have to be limited or new cathode materials applied which are not prone to carbon formation as described above.
Another interesting option is to couple SOEC with biomass gasification. A study90 has been carried out using a pressurized, oxygen blown bubbling bed gasifier with downstream tar reforming, shift and CO2 removal feeding a methanol synthesis loop. Topsøe has demonstrated, both in commercial as well as pilot scale, reforming of tars both in dusty and “clean” reforming conditions. This is challenging as the gas contains, besides the tars, up to several hundred ppm of sulfur, olefins, dust and ammonia. The mass balances for a 1000 TPD dry wood (20 wt% moisture) plant are given in Fig. 28.
 Fig. 28  Mass flows in a methanol plant based on gasification of 1000 MTPD of dried wood (20 wt H2O). 
It is seen that 525 MTPD of methanol can be produced using 234 TPD of oxygen for the gasifier. It is necessary to purge 750 MTPD of CO2 after the shift section in order to adjust the synthesis gas composition to the stoichiometric for methanol synthesis. This is a consequence of the fact that the hydrogen-to-carbon molar ratio in woody biomass is generally in the range of 1.4 to 1.6.
Liquid oxygenates and hydrocarbons are very convenient, energy-dense energy or hydrogen carriers and in fossil-free energy scenarios it will be biogenic, renewable carbon which will become the scarce and limiting resource, as already evidenced by the intense ongoing feed-or-fuel discussion. SOEC can then produce with high efficiency the “missing” hydrogen from physical energy sources and water.91 This is illustrated in Fig. 29. The SOEC unit produces 112 MTPD of hydrogen using steam generated in the gasification and synthesis plant, which will require 144 MW of electric power. More than 3 times the needed oxygen for the gasification is at the same time produced as a byproduct, which will make it possible to eliminate the costly air separation unit.
 Fig. 29  Mass flow in a methanol plant based on gasification of 1000 MTPD of dried wood (20 wt H2O) combined with a steam SOEC electrolyzer. 
Economic analysis of the concept is difficult due to uncertainties about the temporal price structure in a future scenario with a high penetration of, for instance. wind turbines. An attempt was, however, made in the study and it turned out to be beneficial to operate the SOEC all the time even with high electricity prices at the minimum, where the gasifier could be supplied with oxygen. The gasifier will have to be operated in steady state at full load. It has been demonstrated that the SOEC can be modulated, when hot from 0 to 100% repeatedly within seconds but it remains to be demonstrated that the shift section, carbon dioxide removal and methanol synthesis proper can operated in such a flexible fashion. The catalyst no doubt will be able to sustain such dynamic operation, but balance of plant components like compressors may have other constraints. The economic evaluation showed that the production price for the combined SOEC plus gasification plant was lower than the stand-alone gasification based methanol plant.


Fischer–Tropsch. 
Small scale production of FT fuel via SOEC has already been demonstrated in the INL laboratories92 but has also been studied by system modelling.
Fu et al. from EIFER93 did a detailed study including sensitivity analyses on key parameters and calculated the production cost of Fischer–Tropsch diesel as function of CO2 and electricity cost as shown on Fig. 30. Note that they included a small credit for oxygen production. They used $20 per MT CO2 as the cost from a nearby ammonia plant. They concluded that cathode supported SOEC cells was best and that the required lifetime should exceed 10000 h. They also concluded that the diesel from SOEC was competitive compared to biomass to liquid production.
 Fig. 30  Cost of Fischer–Tropsch diesel versus electricity price according to ref. 93. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1382–1397 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graves et al.94 also studied Fischer–Tropsch production using some overall estimated efficiencies for the different blocks in the overall plant and they came up with graphs showing production price as function of electricity price and on-stream capacity utilization, as shown on Fig. 31
 Fig. 31  Synthetic Fischer–Tropsch gasoline as function of electricity price and capacity factor. Reprinted from Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 with permission from Elsevier.94 
Becker et al.95 from the Colorado School of Mines and NREL performed a very detailed study of Fischer–Tropsch production from CO2, electricity and steam. They compared two different operating pressure levels: 1.6 bar and 5 bar and included methane production in the SOEC cathode in their model. The LPG produced in the FT unit was used to produce hydrogen for product upgrading and recycling to the SOEC as well as providing heat for the SOEC unit by being burned. The baseline study used a stack operating temperature of 800 °C, 90% reactant conversion and produced a H2/CO ratio of 2.1:1, suitable for a cobalt based FT catalyst. This operation is very close to the carbon limits.77 They did, however, also conclude that the low pressure case was preferred because the savings in compression was more than negated by the increased inert molecules (CH4 and CO2) in the make-up gas stream to the FT unit.
They calculated an overall efficiency of electricity to FT liquid fuel of 54.8% HHV based (51.0% LHV). Operation at 5 bar lowered the efficiency by 2.6% absolute.
They cost-estimated all the equipment and calculated the production price on a $ per gge basis (gge being gasoline gallon equivalent which is approximately 120 MJ) as function of electricity price and plant capacity utilization percentage. The results ranged from 4.4 $ per gge to 15.0 $ per gge for electricity prices of 0.02 to 0.14 $ per kWh and capacity factors of 90 to 40% respectively.
They ascribed the lower efficiency numbers compared to the studies by Fu (59–62%) and Graves (70%) to the higher fidelity of their model and mainly to lower, realistic CO conversion in the FT reactor (80 vs. 95%) as well as greater LPG production in their upgrading unit.
Sunfire GMbH in Dresden has constructed a 1 bbl per day FT unit. The will operate a pressurized SOEC stack at 15 bar. They produce hydrogen by steam electrolysis in electrolyte-supported cells with Ni/GDC cathodes, 6ScCeSZ electrolyte and LSCF anodes from Kerafol at around 850 °C. Synthesis gas is then generated by reacting the part hydrogen with CO2 in a separate RWGS reactor before entering the FT reactor. A conversion efficiency of 70% from electricity to liquid fuel is claimed. Their first product was produced in 2015.

Conclusions
Isenberg stated in one of the first papers on SOEC in 1981:6 “As far as HTSOE electrolysis is concerned, one faces the immediately problem of finding the ecological niche for such a scheme”.
There is no doubt that the progress in understanding the basic scientific details of SOEC, together with progress in materials for and engineering of SOEC stacks, as discussed above have expanded the niche considerably. It is, however, still very difficult to compete with fossil fuels with the present low prices in the absence of mechanisms invoking the external costs of such fuels with respect to local as well as global environment.
SOEC could, however, be competitive for small scale hydrogen production as they are more energy efficient than alkaline as well as PEM-based electrolyzers, which are already commercial today. The synergy with downstream chemical synthesis would also make SOEC attractive for biogas upgrading where the CO2 actually has a negative price, because it incurs both investment as well as operating costs to remove it to produce pipeline quality methane.
The coupling of SOEC with biomass conversion is indeed an attractive option. Biomass is deficient in hydrogen with respect to the carbon based fuels used today. Adding hydrogen produced by SOEC could thus increase the biomass potential substantially and existing infrastructure could be used.
Finally there are geographical areas already today where there is an abundance of cheap, renewable electricity with a limited local demand. In such cases even production of liquid fuels like methanol, DME, gasoline or Fischer–Tropsch diesel may be viable.
If the vision of a fossil-free energy scenario with a large input of renewable electricity and limited biomass potential shall be realized there is no doubt that SOEC will be a key enabling technology. This is exemplified by studies96–100 of the Danish energy system in 2050, where it is foreseen that 30 TWh worth of transport fuel is produced via SOEC per year, corresponding to almost 5 MWh per capita per year (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  Energy streams for Denmark in a 100% renewable energy scenario. Reprinted from Appl. Energy, 2015, 145, 139–154 with permission from Elsevier.100 
References
S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, A. Hauch and M. B. Mogensen, High temperature electrolysis in alkaline cells, solid proton conducting cells, and solid oxide cells, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10697–10734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, Recent advances in high temperature electrolysis using solid oxide fuel cells: a review, J. Power Sources, 2012, 203, 4–16 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Ebbesen and M. Mogensen, Kinetics of oxidation of H2 and reduction of H2O in Ni–YSZ based solid oxide cells, ECS Trans., 2012, 50, 167–182 CrossRef PubMed .
L. M. Elikan and J. P. Morris, Solid electrolyte system for oxygen generation, NASA Contract. Rep., 1969, CR-185612 Search PubMed .
L. M. Elikan, J. P. Wu and C. K. Wu, Development of a solid electrolyte carbon dioxide and water reduction system for oxygen recovery, NASA Contract. Rep., 1972, CR-2014 Search PubMed .
A. O. Isenberg, Energy conversion via solid oxide electrolyte electrochemical cells at high temperatures, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3–4, 431–437 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dönitz, G. Dietrich, E. Erdle and R. Streicher, Electrochemical high temperature technology for hydrogen production or direct electricity generation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1988, 13, 283–287 CrossRef .
W. Dönitz and E. Erdle, High-temperature electrolysis of water vapor-status of development and perspectives for application, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1985, 10, 291–295 CrossRef .
E. Erdle, W. Dönitz, R. Schamm and A. Koch, Reversibility and polarization behaviour of high temperature solid oxide electrochemical cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1992, 17, 817–819 CrossRef CAS .

          J. E. O'Brien, Thermodynamic consideration for thermal water splitting processes and high temperature electrolysis, in 2008 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, IMECE 2008, Boston, Massachusetts, USA,  2008 Search PubMed .
J. E. O'Brien, Thermodynamics and transport phenomena in high temperature steam electrolysis cells, J. Heat Transfer, 2012, 134, 031017 CrossRef .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung and D. Y. C. Leung, Energy and exergy analysis of hydrogen production by solid oxide steam electrolyzer plant, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 4648–4660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, M. Chen, S. H. Jensen, S. D. Ebbesen, C. Graves and M. Mogensen, Thermodynamic analysis of synthetic hydrocarbon fuel production in pressurized solid oxide electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 17101–17110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Jensen, P. H. Larsen and M. Mogensen, Hydrogen and synthetic fuel production from renewable energy sources, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3253–3257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen, Direct reforming fuel cells, in Fuel Cells: Technologies for Fuel Processing, Elsevier,  2011, pp. 409–450 Search PubMed .

          M. Mogensen, S. H. Jensen, S. D. Ebbesen, A. Hauch, C. Graves, J. V. T. Høgh, X. Sun, S. Das, P. V. Hendriksen, J. U. Nielsen, A. H. Pedersen, N. Christiansen and J. B. Hansen, Production of “green natural gas” using solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOEC): status of technology and costs, in 25th World Gas Conference, WGC 2012, International Gas Union, Kuala Lumpur,  2012, pp. 2314–2320 Search PubMed .
A. Momma, T. Kato, Y. Kaga and S. Nagata, Polarization behavior of high temperature solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOEC), J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 1997, 105, 369–373 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen and M. Mogensen, Solid oxide electrolysis cells: Microstructure and degradation of the Ni/yttria-stabilized zirconia electrode, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B1184–B1193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hauch, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen and M. Mogensen, Highly efficient high temperature electrolysis, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2331–2340 RSC .
A. Hauch, S. H. Jensen, S. Ramousse and M. Mogensen, Performance and durability of solid oxide
electrolysis cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1741–A1747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Knibbe, M. L. Traulsen, A. Hauch, S. D. Ebbesen and M. Mogensen, Solid oxide electrolysis cells: degradation at high current densities, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1209–B1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. C. K. Singhal, High Temperature SOFCs: Fundamentals, Design and Applications, Elsevier,  2003 Search PubMed .
N. Osada, H. Uchida and M. Watanabe, Polarization behavior of SDC cathode with highly dispersed Ni catalysts for solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A816–A820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. E. O'Brien, R. C. O'Brien, J. J. Hartvigsen, G. Tao and G. K. Housley, Improved durability of SOEC stacks for high temperature electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 20–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Eguchi, T. Hatagishi and H. Arai, Power generation and steam electrolysis characteristics of an electrochemical cell with a zirconia- or ceria-based electrolyte, Solid State Ionics, 1996, 86–88, 1245–1249 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim-Lohsoontorn, N. Laosiripojana and J. Bae, Performance of solid oxide electrolysis cell having bi-layered electrolyte during steam electrolysis and carbon dioxide electrolysis, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, S223–S228 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Elangovan, J. J. Hartvigsen and L. J. Frost, Intermediate temperature reversible fuel cells, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2007, 4, 109–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Moçoteguy and A. Brisse, A review and comprehensive analysis of degradation mechanisms of solid oxide electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 15887–15902 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Hauch, Solid oxide electrolysis cells – performance and durability, in Risø National Laboratory & Department of Chemistry, Technical University of Denmark, Roskilde, Denmark,  2007 Search PubMed .
O. A. Marina, L. R. Pederson, M. C. Williams, G. W. Coffey, K. D. Meinhardt, C. D. Nguyen and E. C. Thomsen, Electrode performance in reversible solid oxide fuel cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B452–B459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Ruiz-Morales, D. Marrero-López, J. Canales-Vázquez and J. T. S. Irvine, Symmetric and reversible solid oxide fuel cells, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1403–1414 RSC .
G. Tsekouras and J. T. S. Irvine, The role of defect chemistry in strontium titanates utilised for high temperature steam electrolysis, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9367–9376 RSC .
G. Tsekouras, D. Neagu and J. T. S. Irvine, Step-change in high temperature steam electrolysis performance of perovskite oxide cathodes with exsolution of B-site dopants, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 256–266 CAS .
X. Yang and J. T. S. Irvine, (La0.75Sr0.25)0.95Mn0.5Cr0.5O3 as the cathode of solid oxide electrolysis cells for high temperature hydrogen production from steam, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2349–2354 RSC .
X. Yue and J. T. S. Irvine, (La,Sr)(Cr,Mn)O3/GDC cathode for high temperature steam electrolysis and steam-carbon dioxide co-electrolysis, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 131–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bidrawn, G. Kim, G. Corre, J. T. S. Irvine, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, Efficient reduction of CO2 in a solid oxide electrolyzer, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B167–B170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ge, J. T. Ma, D. Ai, C. Deng, X. Lin and J. Xu, Sr2FeNbO6 applied in solid oxide electrolysis cell as the hydrogen electrode: kinetic studies by comparison with Ni–YSZ, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 151, 437–446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schiller, A. Ansar, M. Lang and O. Patz, High temperature water electrolysis using metal supported solid oxide electrolyser cells (SOEC), J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 293–301 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Huang, S. Jung, J. M. Vohs and R. J. Gorte, A comparison of LSM, LSF, and LSCo for solid oxide electrolyzer
anodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A2066–A2070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bo, Z. Wenqiang, X. Jingming and C. Jing, Status and research of highly efficient hydrogen production through high temperature steam electrolysis at INET, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 2829–2835 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Kim-Lohsoontorn and J. Bae, Electrochemical performance of solid oxide electrolysis cell electrodes under high-temperature coelectrolysis of steam and carbon dioxide, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7161–7168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hjalmarsson, X. Sun, Y. L. Liu and M. Chen, Influence of the oxygen electrode and inter-diffusion barrier on the degradation of solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 349–357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. P. Ouweltjes, M. M. A. van Tuel, F. P. F. van Berkel and G. Rietveld, Solid oxide electrolyzers for efficient hydrogen production, in 10th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, SOFC-X,  2007, pp. 933–940 Search PubMed .
M. A. Laguna-Bercero, N. Kinadjan, R. Sayers, H. El Shinawi, C. Greaves and S. J. Skinner, Performance of La2−xSrxCo0.5Ni0.5O4±δ as an oxygen electrode for solid oxide reversible cells, Fuel Cells, 2011, 11, 102–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen and J. Rostrup-Nielsen, Sulfur poisoning on Ni catalyst and anodes, in Handbook of Fuel Cells. Fundamental Technology and Applications, ed. W. Vielstich, H. Yokokawa and H. A. Gasteiger, Wiley, Chichester,  2009, vol. 6, pp. 957–969 Search PubMed .
S. D. Ebbesen, C. Graves, A. Hauch, S. H. Jensen and M. Mogensen, Poisoning of solid oxide electrolysis cells by impurities, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hauch, S. H. Jensen, J. B. Bilde-Sørensen and M. Mogensen, Silica segregation in the Ni/YSZ electrode, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A619–A626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Hansen, Correlating sulfur poisoning of SOFC nickel anodes by a Temkin isotherm, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B178–B180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. D. Ebbesen, J. B. Hansen and M. B. Mogensen, Biogas upgrading using SOEC with a Ni–ScYSZ electrode, in ECS Transactions, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2013, pp. 3217–3227 Search PubMed .
E. Giglio, A. Lanzini, M. Santarelli and P. Leone, Synthetic natural gas via integrated high-temperature electrolysis and methanation: part I-energy performance, Journal of Energy Storage, 2015, 1, 22–37 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tao, S. D. Ebbesen, W. Zhang and M. B. Mogensen, Carbon nanotube growth on nanozirconia under strong cathodic polarization in steam and carbon dioxide, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1220–1224 CAS .
W. Li, Y. Shi, Y. Luo, Y. Wang and N. Cai, Carbon deposition on patterned nickel/yttria stabilized zirconia electrodes for solid oxide fuel cell/solid oxide electrolysis cell modes, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 26–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Duboviks, R. C. Maher, M. Kishimoto, L. F. Cohen, N. P. Brandon and G. J. Offer, A Raman spectroscopic study of the carbon deposition mechanism on Ni/CGO electrodes during CO/CO2 electrolysis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13063–13068 RSC .

          V. Duboviks, R. C. Maher, G. Offer, L. F. Cohen and N. P. Brandon, In-Operando Raman spectroscopy study of passivation effects on Ni–CGO electrodes in CO2 electrolysis conditions, in ECS Transactions, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2013, pp. 3111–3117 Search PubMed .
V. Duboviks, M. Lomberg, R. C. Maher, L. F. Cohen, N. P. Brandon and G. J. Offer, Carbon deposition behaviour in metal-infiltrated gadolinia doped ceria electrodes for simulated biogas upgrading in solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 912–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Jacobsen and M. Mogensen, The course of oxygen partial pressure and electric potentials across an oxide electrolyte cell, in Ionic and Mixed Conducting Ceramics 6-213th ECS Meeting, Phoenix, AZ,  2008, pp. 259–273 Search PubMed .

          A. V. Virkar, A model for solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) stack degradation, in 10th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, SOFC-X,  2007, pp. 453–454 Search PubMed .
R. Knibbe, A. Hauch, J. Hjelm, S. D. Ebbesen and M. Mogensen, Durability of solid oxide cells, Green, 2011, 1, 141–169 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Matsui, A. Ozaki, R. Kikuchi and K. Eguchi, Influence of steam concentration on the degradation behavior of reversible solid oxide fuel cells, in 9th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, SOFC IX, ed. S. C. Singhal and J. Mizusaki, Quebec,  2005, pp. 621–626 Search PubMed .
S. D. Ebbesen, J. Høgh, K. A. Nielsen, J. U. Nielsen and M. Mogensen, Durable SOC stacks for production of hydrogen and synthesis gas by high temperature electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7363–7373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Nguyen, Q. Fang, U. Packbier and L. Blum, Long-term tests of a Jülich planar short stack with reversible solid oxide cells in both fuel cell and electrolysis modes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4281–4290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schefold, A. Brisse and F. Tietz, Nine thousand hours of operation of a solid oxide cell in steam electrolysis mode, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A137–A144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tietz, D. Sebold, A. Brisse and J. Schefold, Degradation phenomena in a solid oxide electrolysis cell after 9000 h of operation, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 129–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schefold, A. Brisse and H. Poepke, Long-term Steam Electrolysis with Electrolyte-Supported Solid Oxide Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2015.04.141 .

          G. Corre and A. Brisse, 9000 hours operation of a 25 solid oxide cells stack in steam electrolysis mode, in 14th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, SOFC 2015; held as part of the Electrochemical Society, ECS Conference on Electrochemical Energy Conversion and Storage, ed. K. Eguchi and S. C. Singhal, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2015, pp. 3481–3490 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen, J. Pålsson, J. U. Nielsen, E. Fontell, T. Kivisaari, P. Jumppanen and P. V. Hendriksen, Design aspects of a 250 kW NG fuelled SOFC system – strategies to counteract stack performance degradation, in Fuel Cell Seminar, Miami Beach, FL, USA,  2003, pp. 790–793 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen, System level strategies to counteract ageing in SOEC plants, in European Fuel Cell Conference, Rome,  2013 Search PubMed .

          E. Tang, T. Wood, S. Benhaddad, C. Brown, H. He, J. Nelson, O. Grande, B. Nuttal, M. Richards and B. Petri, Advanced materials for RSOFC Dual Operation with Low Degradation, Report for United States Department of Energy,  2012 Search PubMed .

          K. Wonsyld, L. Bech, J. U. Nielsen and C. F. Pedersen, Operational Robustness of Solid Oxide Electrolysis Stacks, in 11 European SOFC & SOE Forum, Luzern, Switzerland,  2014, pp. B13–52/67 Search PubMed .

          C. Graves, Reversing and repairing microstructure degradation in solid oxide cells during operation, in ECS Transactions, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2013, pp. 3127–3136 Search PubMed .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, S. B. Simonsen and M. B. Mogensen, Eliminating degradation in solid oxide electrochemical cells by reversible operation, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 239–244 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Bierschenk, J. R. Wilson and S. A. Barnett, High efficiency electrical energy storage using a methane-oxygen solid oxide cell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 944–951 CAS .

          D. M. Bierschenk, J. R. Wilson, E. Miller, E. Dutton and S. A. Barnett, A proposed method for high efficiency electrical energy storage using solid oxide cells,  2011, pp. 2969–2978 Search PubMed .

          P. Kazempoor, C. H. Wendel and R. J. Braun, Pressurized regenerative solid oxide cells for electrical energy storage, in ECS Transactions, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2013, pp. 45–54 Search PubMed .
C. H. Wendel, P. Kazempoor and R. J. Braun, Novel electrical energy storage system based on reversible solid oxide cells: System design and operating conditions, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 133–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. H. Wendel, P. Kazempoor and R. J. Braun, Operating conditions and system considerations for a reversible solid oxide cell system for Electrical energy storage, in ASME 2014 12th International Conference on Fuel Cell Science, Engineering and Technology, FUELCELL 2014 Collocated with the ASME 2014 8th International Conference on Energy Sustainability, Web Portal ASME (American Society of Mechanical Engineers),  2014 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen, N. Christiansen and J. U. Nielsen, Production of sustainable fuels by means of solid oxide electrolysis, in 12th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, SOFC-XII – 219th ECS Meeting, Montreal, QC,  2011, pp. 2941–2948 Search PubMed .
S. H. Jensen, X. Sun, S. D. Ebbesen, R. Knibbe and M. Mogensen, Hydrogen and synthetic fuel production using pressurized solid oxide electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 9544–9549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. E. O'Brien, X. Zhang, C. K. Housley, K. Dewall, L. Moore-McAteer and C. Tao, High temperature electrolysis pressurized experiment design, operation and results, DE-AC07–05ID14517, DOE,  2012 Search PubMed .
L. Bernadet, G. Gousseau, A. Chatroux, J. Laurencin, F. Mauvy and M. Reytier, Influence of pressure on solid oxide electrolysis cells investigated by experimental and modeling approach, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 12918–12928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Bernadet, G. Gousseau, A. Chatroux, J. Laurencin, F. Mauvy and M. Reytier, Assessment of pressure effects on high temperature steam electrolysis based on solid oxide technology, in 14th International Symposium on Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, SOFC 2015; held as part of the Electrochemical Society, ECS Conference on Electrochemical Energy Conversion and Storage, ed. K. Eguchi and S. C. Singhal, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2015, pp. 3369–3378 Search PubMed .
M. Reytier, S. Di Iorio, A. Chatroux, M. Petitjean, J. Cren, M. de Saint Jean, J. Aicart and J. Mougin, Stack performances in high temperature steam electrolysis and co-electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.04.085 .

          J. B. Hansen, F. Fock and H. H. Lindboe, Biogas upgrading: by steam electrolysis or co-electrolysis of biogas and steam?, in ECS Transactions, Electrochemical Society Inc.,  2013, pp. 3089–3097 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen, Process for converting biogas to a gas rich in methane, WO2012003849,  2010 Search PubMed .
G. Lorenzi, A. Lanzini and M. Santarelli, Digester gas upgrading to synthetic natural gas in solid oxide electrolysis cells, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 1641–1652 CrossRef CAS .
E. Giglio, A. Lanzini, M. Santarelli and P. Leone, Synthetic natural gas via integrated high-temperature electrolysis and methanation: part II-economic analysis, Journal of Energy Storage, 2015, 2, 64–79 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Tran and O. Sigurbjornsson, That's why we should all go to Iceland, Chem. Eng., 2011, 28–31 CAS .
J. B. Hansen, N. Christiansen and J. U. Nielsen, Production of sustainable fuels by means of solid oxide electrolysis, ECS Trans., 2011, 2941–2948 CAS .

          J. B. Hansen and P. E. Højlund-Nielsen, Methanol Synthesis Technology, in Handbook of Heterogeneous Catalysis, ed. G. Ertl, H. Knözinger, F. Schüth and J. Wetkamp, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008, pp. 2920–2949 Search PubMed .

          J. B. Hansen, Green SynFuels, Final Project Report March 2011,  2011 Search PubMed .

          H. Wenzel, Breaking the biomass bottleneck of the fossil free society, Concito,  2010 Search PubMed .

          J. Hartvigsen, S. Elangovan, L. Frost, C. Stoots, J. O'Brien, J. S. Herring, M. Sonai and G. Hawkes, Synthetic fuel production utilizing CO2 recycling as an alternative to sequestration, in Energy Technology 2010: Conservation, Greenhouse Gas Reduction and Management, Alternative Energy Sources – TMS 2010 Annual Meeting and Exhibition, Seattle, WA,  2010, pp. 15–26 Search PubMed .
Q. Fu, C. Mabilat, M. Zahid, A. Brisse and L. Gautier, Syngas production via high-temperature steam/CO2 co-electrolysis: an economic assessment, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1382–1397 CAS .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Sustainable hydrocarbon fuels by recycling CO2 and H2O with renewable or nuclear energy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Becker, R. J. Braun, M. Penev and M. Melaina, Production of Fischer–Tropsch liquid fuels from high temperature solid oxide co-electrolysis units, Energy, 2012, 47, 99–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Connolly, B. V. Mathiesen and I. Ridjan, A comparison between renewable transport fuels that can supplement or replace biofuels in a 100% renewable energy system, Energy, 2014, 73, 110–125 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. Hvelplund, P. Østergaard, B. Möller, B. V. Mathiesen, D. Connolly and A. N. Andersen, Analysis: smart energy systems and infrastructures, in Renewable Energy Systems: A Smart Energy Systems Approach to the Choice and Modeling of 100% Renewable Solutions, Elsevier Inc., 2nd edn,  2014, pp. 131–184 Search PubMed .
H. Lund, A. N. Andersen, P. A. Østergaard, B. V. Mathiesen and D. Connolly, From electricity smart grids to smart energy systems – a market operation based approach and understanding, Energy, 2012, 42, 96–102 CrossRef PubMed .

          B. V. Mathiesen, W. Liu, X. Zhang and W. W. Clark, Analysis: 100 percent renewable energy systems, in Renewable Energy Systems: A Smart Energy Systems Approach to the Choice and Modeling of 100% Renewable Solutions, Elsevier Inc., 2nd edn,  2014, pp. 185–238 Search PubMed .
B. V. Mathiesen, H. Lund, D. Connolly, H. Wenzel, P. A. Ostergaard, B. Möller, S. Nielsen, I. Ridjan, P. KarnOe, K. Sperling and F. K. Hvelplund, Smart Energy Systems for coherent 100% renewable energy and transport solutions, Appl. Energy, 2015, 145, 139–154 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Basic operating principles of SOEC and SOFC cells. Reprinted with permission from ECS Trans., 2012, 50, 167. Copyright 2012, The Electrochemical Society.3	 

 	Fig. 2  
I–V or polarization curves for CO2 electrolysis (A) and steam electrolysis (B). Reprinted from Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3–4, 431–437 with permission from Elsevier.6	 
H2O = H2 + 0.5O2 (−ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJ mol−1)	(1)
CO2 = CO + 0.5O2 (−ΔH1023 K = 282.5 kJ mol−1)	(2)

 	Fig. 3  ΔH, ΔG and T × ΔS as a function of temperature for water splitting and CO2 electrolysis. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3253–3257 with permission from Elsevier.14	 
ΔH = ΔG + T × ΔS	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
Qrest = i2 × ASR = i × (Vop − Vn)	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  Synergy between steam production in synfuels synthesis and SOEC.	 
H2 + CO2 = H2O + CO (−ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJ mol−1)	(9)
CO + 3H2 = CH4 + H2O (−ΔH1023 K = 248.1 kJ mol−1)	(10)

 	Fig. 5  Typical polarization curves for state of the art electrolyzer technologies. Reprinted from Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 with permission from Elsevier.16,94	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic representation of the steam-hydrogen electrode. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 15887–15902 with permission from Elsevier.28	 

 	Fig. 7  Performance of different anodes with DTU cells at 800 °C with 50% H2/50% H2O. Reprinted from Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10697–10734 with permission from American Chemical Society.1	 

 	Fig. 8  Evolution of in-plane and cell voltage as a poison front moves through the cell. Reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.46	 

 	Fig. 9  Cell and in plane voltage as function of time at 850 °C with gases as received. Reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.46	 

 	Fig. 10  Cell and in plane voltage as function of time at 850 °C with cleaned gases. Reprinted with permission from J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419–B1429. Copyright 2010, The Electrochemical Society.46	 
Θs = 1.45 − 9.53 × 10−5T + 4.17 × 10−5TlnY	(11)
Pl = k × (Θs − Θmin)	(12)

 	Fig. 11  Increase in cell resistance ASR (%) as function of Θs (galvanostatic). Diamonds 241 mA cm−2, squares 409 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, B178–B180. Copyright 2008, The Electrochemical Society.46	 
H2S + 1.5O2 = SO2 + H2O	(13)
2CO = C + CO2	(14)
CH4 = C + 2H2	(15)
CO + H2 = C + H2O	(16)

 	Fig. 12  Carbon deposition limit lines in the C–H–O diagram at 33 bars with different reactant utilizations. Reprinted from J. Energy Storage, 2015, 1, 22–37 with permission from Elsevier.50	 

 	Fig. 13  Voltage versus time for a Ceramatec stack tested at INL. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 20–28 with permission from Elsevier.24	 

 	Fig. 14  Long term test of electrolyte supported cell at EIFER. Reprinted from Electrochim. Acta, 2015, DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2015.04.141 with permission from Elsevier.64	 

 	Fig. 15  Voltage development in tests of the Versa Power stack during reversible operation (daily cycles). Reprinted from Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10697–10734 with permission from American Chemical Society.1	 

 	Fig. 16  Development in cell voltages of a 10 cell TOFC stack switching between SOFC and SOEC mode.	 

 	Fig. 17  Comparison of the SOEC stability during a constant-current electrolysis test and a reversible cycling test. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 239–244. Copyright 2015.77	 

 	Fig. 18  Simplified reversible SOC system using H2–CH4 rich fuel. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 944–951 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.72	 

 		 

 	Fig. 19  (a) C–H–O ternary diagram. The graphite boundaries are indicated for T = 600 °C and 750 °C for P 0, 1 and 10 atm. (b) CH4 content as function of oxygen mole fraction. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 944–951 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.72	 

 	Fig. 20  Energy storage system with SOFC = 1 MW and SOEC = 1.37 MW. Reprinted from J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 133–144 with permission from Elsevier.75	 

 	Fig. 21  Cost of hydrogen versus electricity price. Reprinted from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2015.04.085 with permission from Elsevier.82	 

 	Fig. 22  Biogas upgrading by co-electrolysis of steam and biogas CO2 route. Reprinted with permission from ECS. Trans., 2013, 57, 3089–3097. Copyright 2013, The Electrochemical Society.83	 

 	Fig. 23  Biogas upgrading by electrolysis of steam route. Reprinted with permission from ECS. Trans., 2013, 57, 3089–3097. Copyright 2013, The Electrochemical Society.83	 

 	Fig. 24  Exergy streams in biogas upgrading plant. Exergy in incoming biogas stream set to 1000. Reprinted with permission from ECS. Trans., 2013, 57, 3089–3097. Copyright 2013, The Electrochemical Society.83	 

 	Fig. 25  Cost of production of methane from CO2 with SOEC compared to European NG market price. Reprinted from J. Energy Storage, 2015, 2, 64–79 with permission from Elsevier.86	 

 	Fig. 26  Methanol plant based on co-electrolysis of CO2 and steam. Reprinted with permission from ECS Trans., 2011, 35, 2941–2948. Copyright 2011, The Electrochemical Society.77	 

 	Fig. 27  Space velocity and byproduct formation as function of percentage co-electrolysis in a SOEC based methanol plant.	 

 	Fig. 28  Mass flows in a methanol plant based on gasification of 1000 MTPD of dried wood (20 wt H2O).	 

 	Fig. 29  Mass flow in a methanol plant based on gasification of 1000 MTPD of dried wood (20 wt H2O) combined with a steam SOEC electrolyzer.	 

 	Fig. 30  Cost of Fischer–Tropsch diesel versus electricity price according to ref. 93. Reproduced from Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1382–1397 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  Synthetic Fischer–Tropsch gasoline as function of electricity price and capacity factor. Reprinted from Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 with permission from Elsevier.94	 

 	Fig. 32  Energy streams for Denmark in a 100% renewable energy scenario. Reprinted from Appl. Energy, 2015, 145, 139–154 with permission from Elsevier.100	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
