Advances and challenges in symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cells: materials development and resource utilization  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3QM00410D View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3QM00410D
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, Advance Article Advances and challenges in symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cells: materials development and resource utilization
Jiamin Gu†
a, 
Xiaoxin Zhang†
b, 
Yunxia Zhao

a, 
Abdullah Alodhayb

c, 
Yifei Sun

*bd and 
Yunfei Bu

*a
aUNIST-NUIST Environment and Energy Jointed Lab, (UNNU), Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Atmospheric Environment Monitoring and Pollution Control (AEMPC), Joint International Research Laboratory of Climate and Environment Change (ILCEC), School of Environmental Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology (NUIST), 210044, Nanjing, People's Republic of China. E-mail: Yunfei.Bu@nuist.edu.cn
bCollege of Energy, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, P. R. China. E-mail: Yfsun@xmu.edu.cn
cDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, College of Science, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
dState Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, P. R. China
Received 
18th April 2023
, Accepted 26th May 2023First published on 29th May 2023AbstractSolid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) have emerged as a promising technology for efficient hydrogen production and syngas conversion to low-carbon fuels. Among various SOEC configurations, symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cells (S-SOECs) offer unique advantages due to their simplicity, reduced operational steps, and reversible operation. The symmetric electrodes enable the production of hydrogen and oxygen during electrolysis, while the generated gases can be harnessed for electricity generation during fuel cell operation. This reversible operation not only minimizes the number of components necessary for the system but also decreases the overall cost of the technology. This review provides a comprehensive overview of the advancements in S-SOEC research, with a primary focus on materials development. We discuss the current challenges associated with material limitations and explore the potential for utilizing syngas products as a resource. Finally, we propose future research directions to further improve the performance and durability of S-SOECs, paving the way for widespread implementation of this versatile technology.Jiamin GuJiamin Gu received her BS in Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Currently, she is a Master's Degree student in Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. She focuses on catalyst design and application of solid oxide fuel cell/electrolysis cell.Xiaoxin ZhangXiaoxin Zhang obtained his BS in China Jiliang University. Currently, he is a doctoral candidate at College of Energy, Xiamen University. He focuses on the electrode materials of solid oxide fuel/electrolytic cells and the catalytic mechanism of solid/gas interface.Yunxia ZhaoYunxia Zhao obtained her PhD at Nanjing University of Science and Technology. At present, she is an associate professor at Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Dr Zhao is dedicated to the capture and resource utilization of the green house gas CO2 and the design and development of environmental materials.Abdullah AlodhaybAbdullah Alodhayb obtained his PhD at Memorial University of Newfoundland. At present, he is an associate professor at Department of Physics and Astronomy of King Saud University. His research mainly focus on chemical sensors, micromechanical resonators, microsensors modal analysis, monolayers and so on.Yifei SunYifei Sun obtained his PhD at University of Alberta and worked as a postdoctoral researcher in Purdue University. At present, he is an associate professor at College of Energy, Xiamen University. His research focuses on the oxide materials, reactions, devices and equipments for advanced energy conversion/storage processes.Yunfei BuYunfei Bu worked as a postdoctoral researcher in Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology. At present, he is a professor at Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. His research fields include fuel cell/electrolysis cell, electrochemistry, perovskite materials and carbon dioxide reduction.
1. Introduction
The increasing consumption of energy, primarily from fossil fuels, has led to a rise in atmospheric pollution and exacerbated global warming.1 To tackle these challenges, it is crucial to develop economically viable technologies for carbon dioxide conversion into valuable products and transition towards clean, renewable energy sources such as solar, tidal, and wind energy.1–3 However, the intermittency and temporal dependence of renewable energy necessitate the implementation of energy storage and conversion technologies.1,4 Electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, including fuel cells, electrolysis cells, secondary cells, and supercapacitors, are expected to play a pivotal role in addressing these issues.
Solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) have garnered considerable attention as they can electrolyze water and carbon dioxide using excess electricity and heat. This technology not only mitigates excessive CO2 emissions but also converts electrical energy into chemical energy for storage. The generated syngas can be stored and utilized in various industrial production processes, with valuable substances synthesized through the Fischer–Tropsch (F–T) reaction and other technologies.5
Each SOEC component, including the anode, cathode, and electrolyte, plays a critical role in the electrochemical reaction. Modifying or replacing any of these components can impact the efficiency and effectiveness of the entire electrolysis process. Symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cells (S-SOECs) are a solution to the challenges posed by the thermal expansion coefficient between the two electrodes and the electrolyte. Using the same materials for the anode and cathode reduces sintering steps and improves actual operability.6
In recent years, researchers have increasingly focused on S-SOECs due to their potential advantages. This review paper aims to summarize the latest achievements in S-SOEC research to promote their practical application and to explore the integration of low-carbon technologies to increase the utilization of syngas products.
2. Co-electrolysis of CO2/H2O by SOECs
2.1. Principle of solid oxide electrolysis cells
SOECs are divided into two types: oxygen ion-conducting type (O-SOEC) and proton-conducting type (H-SOEC). Both types consist of three components: anode, electrolyte and cathode as illustrated in Fig. 1. In O-SOEC, reduction reactions occur at the cathode, which is filled with water, carbon dioxide and other gases. The generated oxygen ion O2− is transferred to the anode through the electrolyte and oxidized to produce oxygen at the air electrode. Currently, research on O-SOEC is mainly focused on high temperature (>600 °C) electrolysis. This method is economically more attractive than low-temperature electrolysis because it requires less electricity and can utilize a wider range of catalytic materials under high-temperature conditions.7 However, traditional materials are prone to degradation during high-temperature electrolysis, and long-term durability is poor under high current density. Additionally, coke deposition is common under high concentrations of CO.8,9 To overcome these problems, traditional materials and reaction mechanisms are being studied and developed. H-SOEC is also being investigated because it can operate at lower temperatures and reduce the activation energy required for the reaction.10 Fig. 1b illustrates the schematic diagram of H-SOEC. In this type, water is transported from the anode to decompose into H+ and O2−. H+ enters the cathode through an electrolyte that can conduct protons to produce H2. On the same side, CO2 also undergoes a reduction reaction to produce CO. The proton-conducting type SOEC helps to obtain dry H2 directly and saves the drying process. However, the electrolytic efficiency of H-SOEC is lower than that of O-SOEC.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of SOECs. (a) O-SOEC, (b) H-SOEC. 
2.2. Thermodynamics
When electrolyzing water and carbon dioxide at high temperatures, the input of heat inevitably causes changes in heat, making the study of thermodynamics essential. The fundamental parameters of thermodynamics include enthalpy (H), entropy (S), Gibbs free energy (G), Helmholtz free energy (A), and chemical potential (μB). H, S, and G are functions of temperature, and changes in these parameters during the electrolysis process are studied to determine thermodynamic changes (ΔH, ΔS, ΔG), which are shown in eqn (1). ΔG is approximately equal to the consumption of electric energy (Eqn (2)).11 ΔG can also be obtained according to the thermodynamic parameters of co-electrolysis under standard conditions (298.15 K, 101.3 kPa). To obtain ΔS and ΔH in the standard state, eqn (3) and (4) are used, which can then be used to calculate ΔS and ΔH at any temperature using eqn (5) and (6).3 Thermodynamic changes during the co-electrolysis process can be determined (Fig. 2a).12 From the figure, it can be observed that the energy demand ΔH in the co-electrolysis process is met through the input of both electrical energy ΔG and thermal energy Q. As temperature increases, the growth of ΔH slows down and the contribution of electric energy ΔG to the total energy demand decreases significantly. Consequently, thermal energy Q becomes the primary energy source. Hence, operating at high temperature helps to reduce costs and enhance efficiency, leading to extensive research on oxygen ion-conducting O-SOECs that operate at high temperature. The co-electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide involves the presence of RWGS (eqn (7)), which adds complexity to the reaction process. Therefore, Zhang et al. studied the role of RWGS in the reaction process.13 Fig. 2b–f explore the relationship between energy demand and temperature, x, and y. The proportion of water electrolysis reaction increases as the total electrolysis reaction proceeds, leading to a decrease in the total energy demand. However, the RWGS reaction requires additional energy, and the energy demand for CO2 electrolysis is higher than that for water electrolysis. Consequently, as the proportion of RWGS reaction increases, the total energy demand increases. Since the total energy demand consists of both electrical energy and thermal energy, the changes in electrical energy and thermal energy in the reaction process are examined in Fig. 2c and d, respectively. From the perspective of electrical energy change, the RWGS reaction does not consume electrical energy, and the electric energy required for electrolyzing water is higher than that for electrolyzing CO2. Therefore, the increase in the RWGS reaction does not affect the change in electric energy. From the perspective of thermal energy change, the RWGS reaction only consumes thermal energy, and the thermal energy required for CO2 electrolysis is higher than that for water electrolysis. From the analysis of Fig. 2b–f, it can be observed that the increase of RWGS reaction leads to an increase in heat energy consumption and total energy demand. As a result, the trend lines of x and y in Fig. 2b and d are consistent. Fig. 2e also supports the conclusion drawn in Fig. 2a that operating at high temperatures is beneficial to reducing costs and improving efficiency in co-electrolysis.
 Fig. 2  (a) Thermodynamic calculation as function of temperature for co-electrolysis process.12 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 261–267. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V. (b) Effect of x and y on total energy, (c) Effect of x and y on Gibbs free energy, (d) Effect of x and y on thermal energy, (e) Effect of temperature on energy demand with x = 0.5, y = 0.5, (f) Effect of x and y on overall effificiency,(T = 850 °C, ηEI = 53%, ηHeat = 0.9, ηEsH2 = 99.34%, ηEsCO = 96.15%)(x = mole percentage of H2O electrolysis attributable to all the electrolysis reaction, y = mole percentage of H2 which generated by H2O electrolysis occurs RWGS reaction).13 Reprinted with permission from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 15960–15969. Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. 
The electrolysis efficiency is a crucial index for evaluating the performance of SOECs. However, as the RWGS reaction increases, the electrolysis efficiency decreases, especially when more hydrogen is produced by water electrolysis. This is because the increase in RWGS reaction leads to more heat energy consumption and energy consumption, which decreases the overall electrolysis efficiency. Therefore, avoiding RWGS reaction is essential to improve the electrolytic performance of SOECs. One approach to achieve this is through proton conduction-type H-SOEC. 
ΔH = ΔG + TΔS
(1) 
−ΔG = nFE
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
H2(g) +CO2(g) → CO(g) + H2O(g)
(7)where T is the reaction temperature, n is the number of electrons transferred by electrolysis of 1 mole of water and carbon dioxide, F is Faraday constant, E is the reversible voltage, which can be deduced from Nernst equation, vB is the stoichiometric number of reactants or products in the reaction, ΔfHB is the enthalpy of formation for B, ΔCP is the heat capacity change (J mol−1 K−1).
2.3. Kinetics
As thermodynamics is discussed on the basis of the ideal state, practical short-circuiting can occur. Hence, it is necessary to consider the open-circuit voltage (Voc), as its chemical formula is shown in eqn (8).14 When the cell is in a reversible state, the open circuit voltage is theoretically the cell's theoretical electromotive force. However, in practice, the open circuit voltage of the cell is always less than the theoretical electromotive force due to the various resistance. When the applied voltage is higher than the open-circuit voltage, the entire cell system will pass through the current. At this point, the electrochemical potential of the electrode will be deviated, resulting in electrode chemical reactions. Co-electrolysis reactions produce three polarization phenomena in the whole cell system: Ohmic polarization, activation polarization and concentration polarization. 
Voc = Erev − (Ro + Ra + Rc)is
(8)where Erev is reversible voltage, Ro is the total Ohmic impedance, Ra is the polarization resistance of anode, Rc is the polarization resistance of cathode, is is the short circuit current of the cell.
Ohmic polarization (ηOhm), also known as resistance polarization, refers to the polarization caused by the Ohmic voltage drop when the current flows through the Ohmic resistance on the cell system, especially on the electrolytes. Ohmic polarization is related to the transfer of electrons and ions. In general, ions migrate at a much lower rate than electrons, so Ohmic polarization is often caused by the low ionic conductivity of the electrolyte. The solution is to select electrolyte materials with high ionic conductivity. The overvoltage of Ohmic polarization that needs to be overcome is eqn (9). 
ηOhm = i × ROhm
(9)where i is the electrolysis current, ROhm is the Ohmic resistance.
Activation polarization, also known as electrochemical polarization, is a polarization phenomenon that depends on catalytic reaction to improve the overall reaction rate due to the insufficient electrocatalytic activity of the electrode itself. Butler–Volmer equation is often used to explain this phenomenon (eqn (10)).15 However, this equation only describes the basic reaction, not the whole reaction, so it can only be used to describe the basic reaction mechanism, which can be changed by variables during the experiment. For this reason, activation polarization is often further observed by spectroscopic analysis. 
(10)where i is current density, i0 is exchange current density, α is the charge transfer coefficient, z is the amount of charge transferred, F is Faraday's constant, η is the activation overpotential, R is the gas constant and T is temperature.
Concentration polarization mainly occurs when the electrochemical reaction rate exceeds the reactant diffusion rate, resulting in the lack of reaction products at the active site of the electrode and causing the polarization phenomenon of concentration difference. When concentration polarization occurs, there is an obvious concentration gradient on both sides of the electrode. Therefore, optimization is usually done by changing the cell structure, controlling the pressure on both sides of the electrode, and the gas that goes in.
2.4. 3D modeling
The previous discussion mainly focused on microscopic models for SOECs, but there are also other types of modeling approaches available, such as three-dimensional (3D) models. 3D modeling can investigate the dynamic behavior of SOECs under various working conditions and suggest beneficial control strategies. The 3D model is typically simulated in the form of an SOEC stack (Fig. 3a),16 which is often calculated using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). CFD is based on the conservation equations of mass, energy, and momentum as well as reaction dynamics.17 The model employs the modified Butler–Volmer equation to describe the electrochemical kinetics of water and carbon dioxide at the three-phase boundary (TPB) and the related thermal catalysis kinetics. For instance, Wang's research paper analyzed the electrochemical reaction process and heat conduction mechanism of an SOEC stack.18 Fig. 3c shows the three-dimensional heat distribution of the stack. As depicted in the figure, there is a cold zone in the center of this model, and the temperature changes gradually from all sides to the center. This temperature gradient is likely due to the heat absorption of the electrolytic reaction. However, this temperature gradient is not conducive to the continuous electrochemical reaction, and hence, the overall structure is optimized by changing the relevant variables. Additionally, the excess air ratios (εair) can also be studied.4 Fig. 3d–f investigate the differences in temperature gradients achieved with different εair. When the excess air ratio reaches 14, the temperature distribution of the stack is more uniform, mainly due to the improvement of heat transfer between the airflow and the SOEC stack.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of SOEC stack.16 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 14. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (b) Dynamic responses of average temperature of the 40-cell F-design SOEC stack for various εair.4 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 255–264. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (c) Temperature distribution of the 50-cell SOC stack at base case operation in SOEC mode.18 Reprinted with permission from Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 196, 484–496. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. Temperature distributions of the 40-cell F-design SOEC stack with LRU = 8.94 cm, operating at Tg,in = T0 = 1123.15 K, uin,fuel = 0.8 m s−1, xin,fuel = 10%H2|57.1%H2O|32.9%CO2, Ecell = 1.2 V and excess air ratios of (d) εair,base = 2.45 (e) εair = 14 and (f) εair = 0.36.4 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 255–264. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. 
3. Research progress of S-SOECs electrode
The material and structure of the electrode play a critical role in the electrochemical reaction as the main site of the reaction. Currently, various types of perovskites are commonly used as anode and cathode materials due to their mixed ion and electronic conductivity (MIEC) and excellent oxidation-reduction stability.19 When studying the impact of electrode material and structure on cell performance, the focus is mainly on factors such as ion conductivity, current density, and other factors that reflect the electrocatalytic effect. To enhance the catalytic effect, continuous optimization of electrode material and structure is necessary.
3.1. Material optimization
3.1.1. Perovskite material. Perovskites are commonly used as electrodes in SOECs, and they can be classified into three types: single perovskite, double perovskite, and Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite. Single perovskite oxide has the general formula ABO3, where the A and B sites are cations. The A-site cations have a larger radius and coordinate with 12 oxygen ions, while the B-site cations with a smaller radius coordinate with 6 oxygen ions, which can form BO6 octahedra in space (Fig. 4a).20 When low-valent cations replace the A and B sites, oxygen vacancies are generated in the perovskite structure to maintain electrical neutrality, resulting in oxygen ion transport properties.
 Fig. 4  Crystal structure of perovskite oxide. (a) single perovskite structure (ABO3), (b and c) double perovskite structure (AA′B2O5+δ and A2BB′O6−δ), (d) Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite (An+1BnO3n+1, n = 1).21 Reprinted with permission from Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 18. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Double perovskite oxide has the general formula AA′B2O5+δ or A2BB′O6−δ (Fig. 4b).21 The double perovskite structure can accommodate elements that cannot exist in the single perovskite structure and has higher chemical stability and ion-electron conductivity, making it a research hotspot.22 Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite is a layered perovskite derivative composed of alternating layers of perovskite (ABO3) and rock salt (AO). Its chemical formula can be written as An+1BnO3n+1 (Fig. 4c).21 The RP perovskite structure can provide abundant oxygen vacancies and interstitial oxygen, which can positively impact the diffusion of oxygen ions.
The electrode material and structure are continuously optimized to improve the catalytic effect. In H-SOEC, the specific conduction mechanism has not been clearly studied, but due to the possibility of proton defects in RP perovskite and the fact that proton conduction mainly occurs through hopping and rotating, RP perovskite can be used in proton-conducting type electrolysis cells.23
Compared to an asymmetric cell, a symmetrical cell structure uses the same material for both the anode and cathode. This reduces the number of cell modules, making assembly more convenient, and helps ensure stability and chemical compatibility at the electrode/electrolyte interface. However, since the anode and cathode have different electrochemical reactions, the electrode material used must meet the requirements of stable phase structure and acceptable conductivity.24 Currently, the most commonly used electrode materials for symmetrical cells are single perovskite LSF (LaxSr1−xFeO3) and double perovskite SFM (Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6) (Table 1).5,6,25–31 These two types of perovskite have excellent electrochemical performance as symmetrical cell electrodes, and the Faraday efficiency of H2 and CO produced by decomposing H2O and CO2 exceeds 50%.
Table 1 Summary of the electrochemical performance of symmetrical cells in SOEC and co-SOEC conditions




Cell type
Electrode
Operation mode
Current (A cm−2)
Voltage (V)
T (°C)
Ref.




LSFT|YSZ|LSFT
La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.7Ti0.3O3
100%CO2
0.521
2.0
800
25


LSFNb|LSGM|LSFNb
La0.5Sr0.5Fe0.9Nb0.1O3−δ
20% H2O–80% CO2
1.46
1.3
850
5


0.97
1.3
800


LSCFNb-GDC|YSZ|GDC-LSCFNb
La0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ
100%CO2
0.442
1.5
800
26


LSCFNb-GDC|YSZ|GDC-LSCFNb
La0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ
75%CO2–15%H2O–10%H2
0.638
1.3
850
27


LSFM-GDC|GDC||YSZ||GDC|LSFM-GDC
La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.9Mn0.1O3−δ
100%CO2
1.107
2.0
800
28


1.744
2.0
850


LCaFN-GDC|YSZ|LCaFN-GDC
La0.6Ca0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ
100%CO2
1.5
2.0
800
29


SFM|YbScSZ|SFM
Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6−δ
90%H2O–10%Ar
1.4
1.3
900
6


75%H2O–25%CO2
1.1
1.3
900


SFM-SDC|LSGM|SFM-SDC
Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6
16%H2O–16%CO2–20%H2–48%N2
0.73
1.3
850
30


LSFTi|LSGM|LSFTi
La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.9Ti0.1O3−δ
100%CO2
1.9
1.5
800
31




For RP perovskite, the most common elements at the A position in electrode materials are Pr, La, and Sr. At the same time, some other elements could be employed in B site, such as Ni, Mn, Co, Fe. Li et al.32 synthesized three types of PrxSr2−xNi0.2Mn0.8O4(RP-PSNM-1,2,3) with different stoichiometric ratios of elements at the A site using the sol–gel method. By calculating the lattice parameters, they found that the a and b values of RP-PSNM were less than PSNM due to the existence of more oxygen vacancies. The lower the Pr content and the more oxygen vacancies, the higher the mobility of oxygen ions, and even the max power density at 700 °C can reach 206.6 mW cm−2. However, RP perovskite's stability in water or carbon dioxide atmosphere is poor, and further research is needed.33

3.1.2. Material optimization methods. 
3.1.2.1. Doping method. The process of electrolytic H2O and CO2 involves the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), which are crucial reaction rates in the overall electrochemical process. In the OER reaction, the reactant must first be adsorbed onto the perovskite surface. Currently, the oxygen vacancy site is considered the active site for adsorption of carbon dioxide and water during electrolysis.7 The existence of a large number of oxygen vacancies is believed to increase the adsorption sites and improve electrocatalytic performance. Additionally, the ionic radius of the A and B sites not only affects the structure of perovskite, but also influences the electrocatalytic reaction. ORR involves the conversion of oxygen species on the surface of the catalyst, and the B–O bond is closely related to ORR performance. As such, research into modifying the ionic radius of the A and B sites remains ongoing.Doping refers to the intentional introduction of foreign atoms into a lattice, which can induce electron or hole transfer, thereby altering the electronic properties of the material.34 Successful doping should not alter the crystal structure or microscopic characteristics, which makes it a useful strategy for modifying perovskite materials.35 Perovskite's crystal structure at A and B sites is highly flexible, making it amenable to doping. Transition metal elements are commonly used for doping. By substituting some A sites with transition metals, covalent bonds can be formed, which can prevent the precipitation of alkaline earth metals. The introduction of low-valence metal ions can create additional oxygen vacancies, which can improve the OER and ORR activity.36 Doping at the A site can have a significant impact on the transition metal elements at the B site, particularly if the A site dopants have high valence states. This can inhibit the ionic valence at the B site, reducing its valence state or leading to an unstable oxidation state. For instance, Xu et al. found that Pr doping at the A site introduced tetravalent Pr, which suppressed the high valence of Fe ions and resulted in more divalent iron ions, as observed by XPS.37 The metal cations at the B site also play a crucial role in the electrocatalysis process, and doping at the B site can lead to more oxygen vacancies in the perovskite lattice, affecting the B–O covalent bond and ORR performance.7,38 Sundell et al. used BaZrO3 perovskite oxide as an example and combined with DFT calculations to explore the energy and charge changes after cation doping (Fig. 5a, b).39 When the abundance of elements at the A and B sites differs, the position of the ions doped into the site also differs. For example, in this article, most dopants entered the A site when Zr was abundant. The abundance of oxygen vacancies formed by ion doping varies due to the different radii of each ion and the size of the interaction between the ions. LSF perovskite is an excellent catalytic material for symmetrical electrolysis cells. Bi doping at the A site significantly improves the catalytic activity of fuel cells, reduces the polarization resistance between interfaces, and has good stability in air and reducing atmosphere, as reported by Wan et al.40 In this regard, Bi element was applied to symmetrical electrolytic CO2 by Wan et al., who synthesized La0.75−xBixSr0.25Cr0.5Fe0.5O3−δ (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) with different doping amounts.41 The results were ideal as the performance of electrolytic CO2 was significantly improved. At 1.5 V and 800 °C, when x = 0.05, its current density increased by about 30% compared to undoped Bi, and the current density continued to increase by about 10% with an increase in Bi doping. However, when the content of Bi is too high, it can be unstable in the reducing atmosphere. Therefore, the proportion of metal element doping should be carefully considered. B-site cations also play a vital role in the catalytic performance of perovskite materials. LCFN, with good OER and ORR performance, was confirmed by Tian et al., who doped Sc at the B site to explore its electrocatalytic activity.42 At elevated temperatures ranging from 750–850 °C, perovskite materials exhibit significantly reduced polarization resistance and do not exhibit carbon deposition during CO2 electrolysis, leading to enhanced cell performance. Research has shown that RP perovskite, due to its excellent oxygen transport properties and thermal expansion coefficient, is a popular focus for developing SOEC electrodes. Crystal modifications, including A and B cation doping, have been adopted to enhance electrochemical performance. While partially replacing La with Sr failed to yield significant performance improvements, doping Mn at the B site in La1.5Sr0.5Ni1−xMnxO4+δ led to increased oxygen vacancy and decreased polarization resistance, according to Zheng et al.43,44 Other elements like Cu and Bi have also been successfully doped at the B site.45–47 Pr2NiO4+δ is another commonly used RP perovskite due to its high anion diffusion and conductivity that rivals La2NiO4+δ. However, despite its higher electrochemical performance, Pr2NiO4+δ is less stable. To overcome this limitation, researchers have experimented with doping and improving its structure, such as A-doping with Ba48 and Sr,32 as well as B-doping with Cu.49
 Fig. 5  (a) Acceptor and donor levels corresponding to various dopant atoms incorporated on either Ba or Zr sites in BaZrO3 calculated for a low defect concentration (c = 1/27). Energies of defect levels below the gap center are given relative to the valence band maximum εCBM, whereas energies of the levels above the gap center are given relative to the conduction band minimum εCBM.39 Reprinted with permission from Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 10. Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. (b) Difference in solution energy for various dopants on Ba or Zr sites in BaZrO3 calculated for a low defect concentration (c = 1/27). Only the most stable charge state of each dopant on either site is considered. Results are shown for the two limiting values of the Fermi-level position within the theoretical band gap: μe = εVBM and μe = εCBM.39 Reprinted with permission from Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 10. Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of possible proton (H+) diffusion.51 Reprinted with permission from Energy Fuels, 2022, 36, 7219–7244. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (d) Proposed reaction mechanism of the F-doping catalyst for CO2 electrocatalysis.58 Reprinted with permission from ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 1047–1058. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. 
Compared to the well-studied oxygen ion-conducting type (O-SOEC), proton-conducting (H-SOEC) systems have received less attention. The proton conduction mechanism in H-SOEC is mainly attributed to hopping and rotating pathways, and the doping of cations affects the energy required for these two mechanisms. Doping ions with smaller radii can reduce the hopping energy, while the rotating path will generally be reduced due to the shorter inter-ion spacing and the increase in Coulomb force. However, the rotating energy may increase due to these factors, and therefore, the total energy required for proton conduction must be determined experimentally.37,50 Fig. 5c shows a possible proton conduction pathway (represented by a green dot).51 Currently, the doping of H-SOEC is mainly focused on ordinary perovskite materials doped with Dy, K, and Ba metal elements, or on improving the proton conductivity of BaZrO3, a material with high proton conductivity.52–55 RP perovskites such as La2NiO4+δ and Pr2NiO4+δ, which exhibit excellent performance in O-SOEC, have conductivity and electrocatalytic performance that can continue to improve in H-SOEC. However, BaLaInO4 has been receiving attention due to its potential for exhibiting pure proton conductivity under certain conditions.56 The doping of this material is mainly concentrated on the A and B positions. The chemical formula can be expressed as BaLa0.9M0.1InO3.95 (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) or BaLaIn0.9M0.1O4+d (M = Ti, Zr, Nb), and the conductivity after doping is higher by more than one order of magnitude.57
Besides the doping of metal ions at A and B sites, the doping of non-metallic ions at O sites has been proposed to optimize the electronic structure, crystal structure, and ion/proton mobility of perovskite catalysts. Currently, the O position can be partially replaced by F−, N3−, Cl−, S2−, Br−, and other ions.58–65 Fig. 5d presented proposed reaction mechanism of the F-doping catalyst for CO2 electrocatalysis.58 It is noteworthy that F− has a slightly greater electronegativity (v = 3.98) than O (v = 3.44), but its ionic radius and valence electron density are both less than O2−. Consequently, F− doping reduces the bond strength between metal ions and oxygen ions, particularly the B–O bond. This reduces the energy required for the formation of oxygen vacancies and increases the mobility of oxygen ions, thereby enhancing the activity of perovskite catalysts.65,66 Additionally, after F− doping, the alkalinity between metal ions and fluorine ions is less than that between metal ions and oxygen ions, resulting in superior stability during CO2 electrolysis.58 However, research on anion doping in RP perovskite is limited, and F− doping remains the most common choice of O-site doping to enhance sulfur resistance.67
3.1.2.2. Defecting method. Doping is a method that introduces other elements into perovskite without changing its stoichiometric ratio. However, it may cause some side effects due to the interaction between elements. To avoid this, the non-stoichiometric ratio of perovskite, known as ionic defect, has been proposed. In this case, the ratio of A and B cations of ABO3 perovskite is not equal to 1, and the degree of cation defects at A and B sites will affect the perovskite structure. Within a certain range, the crystal structure can still be maintained under the condition of cation defects.68 Cationic defects are more likely to appear at A than B because the energy required for the formation of cationic defects at B is stronger than that at A.68 A-site cation defects generate more oxygen vacancies, providing space for electrochemical reaction.69 The advantages of A-site cation defects are also evident in their impact on OER, ORR, and oxygen ion migration.70,71 For example, Liu et al. analyzed the XRD diagram of (La0.3Sr0.7)1−δTi0.3Fe0.7O3−δ (δ = 3%, 5%, 7%, 9%), and observed that the diffraction peak shifts to low angle, the lattice expands, and the oxygen vacancy increases.70 Similarly, during CO2 electrolysis, Zhu et al. successfully increased oxygen vacancies in La2−xCuO4-δ (x = 0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3) using A-site defects. Even when there are too many defects, CuO/RP mixture is formed, which has a positive effect on CO2 adsorption and activation.72 However, Su et al. have suggested that La defects are not suitable for RP perovskite.68 Therefore, further research is needed to fully understand the application of defect chemistry to RP perovskite.

3.2. Optimization of electrode microstructure
In addition to the improvement measures for the material itself, the microstructure of the material can also be designed and optimized, such as nanocomposites, surface/interface engineering, vertical arrangement structure, etc.
3.2.1. Nanocomposites. 
3.2.1.1. In situ exsolution. Nano-composite materials have emerged as a promising technology for harnessing the advantages of multiple phases, which can be obtained through in situ exsolution. In-situ metal exsolution involves the transfer of transition metal or alloy nanoparticles from the bulk to the surface or interface of the electrode material, leading to enhanced properties of perovskite and increased reaction space and catalytic activity. Fig. 6a illustrates the exsolution of nano-metal particles in metal oxides and the separation in alloys, while Fig. 6b shows the precipitation diagram inside the particles.73,74 The precipitation of nanoparticles can occur through direct and indirect methods (Fig. 6c),75 and the gradual precipitation process is closely linked to the oxygen partial pressure, which affects the rate of surface oxygen release reaction and oxygen anion diffusion in the bulk. Fig. 6d confirms that more oxygen release leads to more metal nanoparticles precipitation, resulting in more oxygen vacancies and creating more reaction space.74
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of exsolution of nano-metal particles in metal oxides and alloys.74 Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 1714-1727. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic representation of in situ exsolution of catalysts from a particle.73 Reprinted with permission from Small Methods, 2021, 5, 35. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic diagram of the direct and indirect formation of metal nanoparticles in the exsolution process.75 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mat., 2018, 30, 2838–2847. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Simplified sketch of the coupling between the oxygen deficiency in STF and the total amount of exsolved Fe0.74 Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 1714-1727. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society. 
The nanoparticles precipitated from in situ metal can be single metal or alloy. Common transition metals used for precipitation include non-noble metals such as Fe, Co, and Ni, and noble metals such as Pd, Rh, and Ru.76–83 These transition metal elements are preferred because they are easier to reduce and have a better effect at the B position.84 Therefore, experimental studies usually synthesize them into perovskite through doping and then reduce them. Compared to other methods such as the infiltration method, in situ growth of metal nanoparticles is advantageous due to its low cost and better effect, and this method can keep the particle size and distribution more uniform during long-term operation. However, the variables should be controlled during the experiment to prevent the dissolution of nanoparticles from agglomerating, which can reduce the electrocatalytic activity. TEM images can be used to confirm the success of exsolution by observing the uniform distribution of precipitated metal anchored on the surface of perovskite substrate, which not only increases the particle size but also significantly increases the three-phase boundary, making the electrochemical reaction space broader and promoting the electrolysis of CO2 or H2O (Fig. 7a–c).77,78,83
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM and STEM-EDS mapping images of a Ru nanoparticle.83 Reprinted with permission from Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 9. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) HRTEM image of the reduced SF1.58M.77 Reprinted with permission from International J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 11901–11907. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (c) TEM of SFCM-reduced.78 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 8. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d) An HR-TEM image of Co–Fe nanoparticles on position A.75 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mat., 2018, 30, 2838–2847. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM image, magnified HRTEM image, and STEM-EDS mapping images of a Ru/RuO2 core–shell nanoparticle, which was oxidized at 750 °C in air for 3 h from a Ru nanoparticle.83 Reprinted with permission from Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 9. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) HR-TEM image of LSCFN55 sample.89 (g) Magnified HR-TEM images of exsolved Co-Fe alloy of LSCFN55 sample.89 Reprinted with permission from Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 10. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. 
In addition to single metal exsolution, alloy nanoparticles are also commonly used in nano-composite technology. Ni–Fe85–87 and Co–Fe88,89 alloys are the most commonly used due to the easy dissolution of Ni, Fe, and Co. Ni–Fe alloys have better performance for electrolytic carbon dioxide. The interaction between alloy nanoparticles and the perovskite substrate is stronger, making the sintering of nanoparticles more difficult and helping to improve the stability of the electrode. The exsolution of FeNi3 as one of the Ni–Fe alloys makes the current density of pure CO2 electrolysis as high as ∼0.5A cm−2at 750 °C under 1.1 V, and the current density does not decrease during the short-term stability test, demonstrating its resistance to carbon deposition. Besides single metal and alloy nanoparticles, metal/oxide interfaces, such as Ru/RuO2 and Ni–Fe/CaO,83,90 also precipitate during the experiment, which can improve the carbon dioxide electrolysis performance. Fig. 7d–g illustrate the TEM diagrams of alloy nanoparticles and metal/oxide interfaces, respectively.75,83,89
3.2.1.2. Low-dimensional perovskite oxide nanostructures (PONs). The materials synthesized by the in situ exsolution method described above are based on 0-dimensional nanoparticles grown on a 3-dimensional perovskite matrix to improve electrocatalytic performance. Reducing the spatial scale of perovskite oxides to nanometers is also worth further exploration in the field of catalysts. Currently, low dimensional perovskite oxide nanostructures (PONs) have received considerable attention. PONs such as perovskite nanoparticles (zero-dimensional, 0D), nanowires (1D), nanorods (1D), nanotubes (1D), nanofibers (1D), nanobelts (1D), and two-dimensional oxide nanostructures (2D), play an important role in the field of electrodes due to the size effect in the process of spatial geometry reduction.91The perovskite oxide nanoparticles synthesized by Molten salt synthesis (MSS) method are different from the materials extracted by in situ exsolution method, and the synthesized materials are in the form of nanoparticles as a whole. The synthesized nanoparticles exhibit a porous structure with a small particle size (basically less than 300 nm). Moreover, there are a large number of voids in the grains, exposing more active sites, which is conducive to improving the electrocatalytic reaction (Fig. 8a–c).92,93
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM, (b) TEM images of the LSF particles.92 (c) SEM image of the as-synthesized LSFN powders.93 Reprinted with permission from Mater. Lett., 2019, 245, 114–117. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (d) Enlarged view of LBSCF-Ru nanofiber with a schematic image.96 Reprinted with permission from Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 186–194. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (e) STEM-EDX images of LBSCF-Ru.96 (f and g) SEM images of reduced Ag-PBSC with 200 nm.95 Reprinted with permission from J. Alloy. Compd., 2022, 900, 8. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (h) Short-term performance of symmetrical cell with SFCuM nanotubes as cathode at 750 °C and 1.5 V.97 (i) Current density of SFCuM powder and nanotubes at different voltages at 800 °C and (j) Faraday efficiency at 750 °C.97 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2023, 556, 8. Copyright 2023, Elsevier B.V. SEM images of KNbO3 particles obtained from different precursors: (k) KNb3O8 particles, (l) H3ONb3O8 particles, and (m) Nb2O5 particles.98 (n) SEM micrograph of the KNb3O8 particles. (o) TEM image of an isolated H3ONb3O8 rod with (inset) a typical SEAD pattern obtained from the same rod.98 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mat., 2009, 21, 1207–1213. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 
Perovskite oxide 1D nanostructures cover a wider range, and exploring their inherent physical effects can lay the foundation for the construction of nano devices. In recent years, perovskite nanofibers synthesized using electrospinning technology have garnered attention due to their higher specific surface area and mechanical strength.94 The increased surface area of perovskite nanofibers is conducive to the increase of TPB, thereby promoting gas adsorption/transfer, particularly for expanding the active area of ORR/OER.95 SEM and TEM images of some nanofibers are shown in Fig. 8d–g.95,96 Additionally, Xu et al. synthesized SFCuM fiber powder and nanotubes using electrospinning and employed them for CO2 electrolysis.97 The results indicated that the adsorption capacity of CO2 was significantly enhanced, and the CO2RR kinetics were accelerated. The electrolytic capacity of nanotubes was superior to that of powder, as shown in Fig. 8h–j. In addition to electrospinning, MSS, phosphating, and facile hydrodynamic approach can all synthesize one-dimensional nanostructures. The nanostructures synthesized by MSS are mainly limited to several perovskite oxides, such as niobic acid, titanic acid, and some manganate systems.91 And that, the microstructure of nanostructures that can be formed by different precursors is also different (Fig. 8k–m).98 Even if the same precursor is synthesized using different salts, it can form different nanostructures, such as nanowires and nanorods (Fig. 8n–o).98 The one-dimensional nanostructures synthesized by the Molten salt synthesis method can maintain a finer particle size and porous morphology. Operation steps are saved because perovskite oxygen vacancies can be formed in one step.
Two-dimensional oxide nanostructures include quantum wells, nanoplates and nanofilms, and graphene.91 Due to its large surface volume ratio, two-dimensional nanostructures are conducive to high surface reaction activity and high catalytic efficiency, which deserve attention in the field of catalysts. Except for this, there is also layered perovskite-RP perovskite that is two-dimensional in itself. However, the two-dimensional nanomaterials used in solid oxide electrolysis cells are more commonly RP perovskite and graphene. The case in point is that S. Seetharaman employed a graphene oxide modified non noble metal-based electrode electrolyzing water.99 The surface groups of graphene oxide can adhere to the Ni electrode through electrostatic attraction, thereby forming a continuous thin film. Increasing the contact area with the electrode ultimately improves electrochemical performance.

3.2.2. Surface/interface engineering. Apart from the in situ metal exsolution method for enhancing the surface properties of perovskite materials using nano-metal particles, topological ion exchange is another approach for surface engineering. Unlike in situ metal exsolution, topological ion exchange involves complete dissolution of metal cations, resulting in an intact main lattice structure.100 Fig. 9a illustrates the precipitation process of PrBaMn1.7Co0.3O5+δ perovskite oxide with and without topological ion exchange.100 It can be seen that Co is completely precipitated after the exchange, leaving no oxygen vacancy at B position. The ion energetics calculated according to DFT in the exchange process are shown in Fig. 9b.100 The lower Gibbs free energy results in the formation of Co–Fe alloy. Furthermore, the choice of metal for replacement is also of research significance. For example, a study on Fe-infiltrated Cu and Cu-infiltrated Fe samples (Fig. 9c and d)101 suggests that topological exchange only occurs when Fe permeates Cu. SEM analysis reveals that the size of precipitated nanoparticles is larger in this case, which is more consistent with the properties of all precipitates. While the in situ metal exsolution method leads to the formation of metal nanoparticles anchored on the surface of perovskite, topological ion exchange offers the advantage of controlling the distribution of the metal cations in the main lattice, providing an alternative way for surface modification of perovskite materials.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of exsolution process with and without topotactic ion exchange.100 (b) Topotactic ion exchange energetics for the mechanism of particle exsolution via Fe infifiltration on the PBMCo surface.100 Reprinted with permission from Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 9. Copyright 2019, Springer Communications. (c) XPS depth profile and its growth mechanism of Fe-infiltrated Cu100 and Cu-infiltrated Fe100 after reduction at 800 °C in a dry H2 atmosphere.101 (d) SEM image of Fe-infiltrated Cu100 and Cu-infiltrated Fe100 reduction at 600 °C after Fe/Cu infiltration on Cu100/Fe100.101 Reprinted with permission from Appl. Energy, 2022, 323, 9. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. SEM micrographs of YSZ electrolyte surface after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2 for (e and f) 1 h and (g and h) 12 h.102 The LSM electrodes were removed (e and g) by stick tape and (f and h) by HCl treatment. The original YSZ electrolyte surface without LSM coating is given in (i). AFM micrographs and line scan of (j, k and l) YSZ in contact with LSM electrode after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2.102 (m) TEM micrographs of LSM/YSZ interface after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h.102 (n) HRTEM micrographs of directly assembled LSM cathode on YSZ electrolyte after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h.102 The FFT shows the diffractograms of the YSZ and LSM phases. The red arrows indicate the locations of lattice distortion. Reprinted with permission from Solid State Ionics, 2018, 325, 176–188. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. 
Otherwise, directly assembled method also affects the electrode/electrolyte interface. The commonly used electrode synthesis methods often involve the pre sintering step, which increases the complexity. At the same time, the sintering temperatures of the electrolyte and the electrode are different, and the thermal expansion coefficient often affects the reaction chemistry between the two. Therefore, it is necessary to add a barrier layer or add an electrolyte material to the electrode to form a composite electrode, which adds difficulty to the widespread promotion of solid oxide batteries. The direct assembly method saves the pre sintering step, but it also does not affect the overall electrochemical reaction. Especially in the case of electrochemical polarization, a dense interface layer will be formed at the electrode/electrolyte contact surface, and there are obvious contact cavities that provide channels for ion conduction. Fig. 9e–i show the microstructure of YSZ electrolyte surfaces before and after polarization.102 Before and after polarization, the surface morphology of the electrolyte undergoes significant changes. Annular contact marks appear on the surface of the electrolyte in contact with the LSM electrode, and as the polarization time increases, the range of the contact marks expands and even merges. It is worth noting that some fine particles may appear in the middle of the contact mark, which is likely due to polarization leading to the disintegration of the LSM electrode. AFM micrographs were later used to demonstrate this change (Fig. 9j–l).102 Those particles will gradually agglomerate to form a La–Mn–Zr interface (Fig. 9m and n).102 The formation of this contact surface is beneficial to the reduction of the relevant impedance and to the improvement of the electrocatalytic reaction.

4. Research progress of S-SOECs electrolyte
Electrolyte selection is critical for ion conduction in SOECs. The chosen electrolyte should meet the following requirements: high ionic conductivity to achieve high conversion efficiency, good compactness to prevent the contact of reaction gases on both sides, stability to enable long-term operation, and a thermal expansion coefficient that matches the electrode to prevent component detachment and cracking. Consequently, a considerable amount of research has been conducted to develop high-conductivity electrolytes. The perovskite system materials have emerged as a promising option due to their significant derivatives.103 Among them, the research on oxygen ion-conducting electrolytes has been the most extensive. In recent years, research on proton-conducting electrolytes has also gained momentum, and studies on electrolyte materials for simultaneous oxygen ion and proton conduction have commenced.
The conductivity of solid electrolytes is influenced by various factors, such as grain size, grain arrangement structure, grain boundaries, ambient temperature, element distribution, and element segregation. Xue et al. have utilized the brick layer model to investigate the impact of grain size and element segregation on the conductivity of different parts, including grain boundary conductivity, specific grain boundary conductivity, and volume conductivity (as illustrated in Fig. 10).104 Element segregation can vary based on the sintering temperature employed. The research findings indicate that larger grain size, greater crystallinity, and smaller grain boundaries lead to increased grain boundary and volume conductivity. However, due to element segregation, oxygen vacancy near the grain boundary also increases, causing the specific conductivity to decline. Moreover, the optimal operating temperature varies for different ions conducted by the electrolyte, and therefore, requires analysis for different electrolyte types.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of brick layer model, (b) Bulk conductivity Arrhenius plots of different grain sizes, (c) The grain boundary conductivity Arrhenius plots of different grain sizes, (d) Arrhenius plots of 1Ce10ScSZ electrolyte sintered at 1350 °C, 1450 °C and 1550 °C.104 Reprinted with permission from J. Rare Earths, 2019, 37, 645–651. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. 
4.1. In O-SOEC
Solid electrolytes that conduct oxygen ions include zirconia-based (ZrO2), ceria-based (CeO2), bismuth-based (Bi2O3), and lanthanum gallate (LaGaO3) electrolytes. Among these, ZrO2 and CeO2 have been studied extensively.105 To enhance the ionic conductivity of ZrO2-based electrolytes, low-valence cations such as Y3+, Er3+, Gd3+, Eu3+, Dy3+, Sc3+, Ca2+, Yb3+, and Mg2+ are doped.90 Y-doped yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) is a relatively efficient electrolyte that can sustain electrolysis for a long time.106 However, its high cost and tendency to degrade over time and under high current densities limit its practical use.106 To address this, nickel is doped on the basis of YSZ to form Ni-YSZ electrolyte, which has better stability and lower polarization impedance.107 Scandium is also used to synthesize scandium-stabilized zirconia (ScSZ), which has a significantly higher ionic conductivity than YSZ, but it is prone to phase change at low temperatures.105 Co-doping with Ce3+ and Gd3+ enhances its structural stability.108
Ceria-based electrolytes have a higher ionic conductivity within the temperature range of 500–800 °C than YSZ. However, its stability is reduced due to the reduction of its high valence cation Ce4+ to Ce3+.108 To improve its performance, Sm3+, Gd3+, and Dy3+ are doped.109 Sm3+ and Gd3+ doped CeO2 electrolyte (SDC, GDC) show significantly improved conductivity. GDC and SDC are often combined with YSZ to make use of their advantages. For example, a YSZ-SDC double-layer electrolyte is prepared, with YSZ acting as a barrier layer of SDC to reduce current loss and increase the stability of the cell structure.110
Bismuth-based (Bi2O3) electrolytes have a ionic conductivity one to two orders of magnitude higher than YSZ at the same temperature. However, they are prone to degradation under low oxygen partial pressure, and therefore need to be combined with other electrolytes to enhance their practical application.111 For example, P Temluxame doped Bi2O3 into gadolinium-stabilized zirconia (SCGZ), which helps to reduce unnecessary phases and increase the densification of electrolyte particles, maintaining the high ionic conductivity of the electrolyte.112
Lanthanum gallate (LaGaO3) is a perovskite oxide that exhibits high ionic conductivity (>0.01 S cm−1 at 600 °C) and good stability.113 Sr and Mg-doped La1−xSrxGa1−yMgyO3−δ (LSGM) is an excellent oxygen ion conductor, with negligible electronic conductivity. However, when LSGM is used as an electrolyte, it reacts with the traditional Ni-YSZ electrode to form a heterophase that affects the conductivity.114 Therefore, it can be combined with other electrolyte materials, such as GDC and SDC, to improve its performance. There are two main methods for combining LSGM and SDC/GDC. On the one hand, LSGM and SDC/GDC are mixed proportionally as electrolyte materials, and on the other hand, SDC/GDC is used as a barrier layer to prevent the reaction between the electrolyte and the electrode. Recently, researchers have found that SDC can be grown in situ on electrolyte sheets through water bath heating, which better addresses the shortcomings of traditional screen printing methods.
4.2. In H-SOEC
The high operating temperature required for oxygen ion-conducting type solid oxide electrolysis cells (O-SOEC) can negatively impact the long-term performance of electrode materials, resulting in decreased electrolytic performance. Therefore, there is a need to reduce the operating temperature of O-SOEC. However, reducing the temperature also reduces the performance of O-SOEC, leading to increased interest in proton-conducting type solid oxide electrolysis cells (H-SOEC) that can operate at intermediate temperatures.
Perovskite-type oxides are commonly used as electrolyte materials in H-SOEC, and among them, BaCeO3 and BaZrO3 have been extensively studied. BaCeO3 and its derivatives exhibit high proton conductivity at 700 °C but are prone to react with acidic gases such as CO2. To address this, the structure and properties of perovskite can be optimized by doping other cations on the Ba and Ce ionic sublattice or doping anions at the oxygen site (Table 2).115–119
Table 2 Properties of BaCeO3 based perovskite as electrolyte for H-SOEC




Electrolyte
Current (A cm−2)
Conductivity (S cm−1)
Ref.




BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ
−0.707(1.5 V 600 °C)
—
118


−1.078(1.5 V 650 °C)


−1.768(1.5 V 700 °C)


Ba0.8Sr0.2Ce0.8Zr0.2O3−δ
—
0.007(650 °C)
119


Ba0.7Sr0.3Ce0.7Zr0.3O3−δ
0.008(650 °C)


BaCe0.2Zr0.7Y0.1O3−δ
−8.25(1.75 V 700 °C)
—
115


BaCe0.8Gd0.2O2.8±δBr0.2
—
0.058(750 °C)
117


BaCe0.7Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1O3-δ
—
0.0189(800 °C)
116




BaZrO3-based perovskite has excellent chemical stability and long-term operation under acidic gas conditions. However, its proton conductivity is lower than that of BaCeO3-based perovskite, and it requires extremely high sintering temperature, which increases production costs.105 Therefore, BaZrO3-based perovskite is also doped and optimized by adding Ce3+ and Y3+.115,120
Combining the doped ions of the two perovskites, a composite oxide system synthesized by combining BaCeO3 and BaZrO3 has shown good performance, high chemical stability, and conductivity. Additionally, BaZrxCeyYzYb1−x−y−zO3−δ (BZCYYb), formed by doping Y3+ and Yb3+ cations, is the most effective proton conduction electrolyte at present. However, some issues still exist in composite materials, and their chemical and thermal stability is not yet sufficient. To address this, Gd3+ is continuously doped at the B site to optimize performance.121
4.3. Hybrid-SOEC
The oxygen ion-conducting type SOEC is often limited by high operating temperatures, which can lead to degradation of electrode materials and decreased electrolytic performance. On the other hand, the proton-conducting type SOEC can operate at intermediate temperatures, but has lower electrolytic performance compared to O-SOEC. Thus, efforts in O-SOEC research are focused on reducing operating temperature while maintaining conductivity, while in H-SOEC research, efforts are aimed at improving conductivity. Some researchers have attempted to combine the two types of electrolytes, resulting in the concept of Hybrid Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell (Hybrid-SOEC). In 2018, Kim et al.122 proposed a Hybrid-SOEC that utilized NdBa0.5Sr0.5Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ (NBSCF) as the electrode material and BaZr0.1Ce0.7Y0.1Yb0.1O3-δ(BZCYYb) as the electrolyte, achieving mixed conduction of oxygen ions and protons and improving electrolytic performance (Fig. 11a). However, research in this area has stagnated, and BZCYYb remains the most suitable electrolyte material for mixed conduction. In the future, our team will continue exploring the potential of Hybrid-SOEC and investigate the effect of mixed conduction on co-electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide, as shown in Fig. 11b.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of hybrid-SOEC.122 Reprinted with permission from Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 121–126. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b) Schematic diagram of co-electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide on hybrid-SOEC. 
5. Resource utilization of syngas
The H2/CO ratio of syngas can be adjusted by varying the ratio of water and carbon dioxide. The different proportions of H2/CO in syngas can be synthesized using the F–T process, which produces mainly alkanes (eqn (11)) and olefins (eqn (12)).123 
(11) 
(12)
In addition to the F–T process, there are other methods for utilizing syngas. Among these, ammonia synthesis via the shift reaction and methanol production are noteworthy.
As the electrolysis process is carried out at high temperatures, the H2 produced can be directly co-converted with the CO2 produced in industry to maximize benefits.124 Microchannel reactor technology can also be used to utilize the syngas platform for biomass cogeneration.125
6. Summary and prospect
After multiple optimizations of electrode and electrolyte materials, the performance of SOEC electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide has been greatly improved. However, there are still some technical and economic challenges that need to be addressed. Most of the technical challenges are due to the high temperature environment, which can cause changes in the material and structure of the cell module and degrade its electrolytic performance. Therefore, the materials used in SOEC design should meet strict requirements, including good chemical and thermal stability at high temperature and a matching coefficient of thermal expansion between components. Additionally, attention should be paid to factors such as air tightness, smooth startup, and suitability for large-scale production. Economic challenges stem from high input costs and the lack of a complete SOEC raw material supply system. The power cost required by SOEC electrolysis is currently higher, and the loss of materials and devices during operation increases operational costs. As a result, the entire SOEC industry is still in the process of continuous optimization and improvement.
In the future, research directions will focus on reducing the reaction temperature to the intermediate temperature range (500–750 °C), exploring materials and structures with good performance at lower temperatures, and analyzing the RWGS reaction mechanism in co-electrolysis reactions. In addition, research on H-SOEC operating at lower temperatures will continue, with a focus on exploring more electrode and electrolyte materials suitable for proton conduction and analyzing the proton conduction mechanism. Furthermore, the newly discovered Hybrid-SOEC can not only electrolyze CO2 but also realize the co-electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide, and explore electrolyte materials other than BCZYYb. Additionally, more gases such as CH4 and C2H6 can be electrolyzed to realize the diversification of resource utilization. Along with exploring the cell itself and the incoming gas, the final syngas products can also be utilized. Currently, the commonly used resource technology is the F–T process, which adds catalysts in different proportions of H2/CO syngas to synthesize various valuable fuels under appropriate conditions. Additionally, H2 produced by SOEC can be combined with CO2 discharged from industry. Under high-temperature conditions, CO2 can be hydrogenated into a variety of hydrocarbons, such as methanol, high alcohol, and liquid fuel. Similarly, machine learning is currently a research hotspot, and combining machine learning with SOEC is also a promising direction. In conclusion, the exploration in the field of SOEC is worth continuing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
AcknowledgementsThis research was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 22272081, 22272136, 22102135), Y. Sun acknowledges the financial support from Science and Technology Project of Fujian Province (2022L3077). Jiangsu Provincial Specially Appointed Professors Foundation. The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research, king Saud University for funding through Vice Deanship of Scientific Research Chairs; Research Chair for Tribology, Surface, and Interface Sciences.
Notes and referencesY. Zheng, Z. W. Chen and J. J. Zhang, Solid Oxide Electrolysis of H2O and CO2 to Produce Hydrogen and Low-Carbon Fuels, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 4, 508–517 CrossRef CAS .L. Z. Bian, C. C. Duan, L. J. Wang, Z. Y. Chen, Y. T. Hou, J. Peng, X. W. Song, S. L. An and R. O'Hayre, An all-oxide electrolysis cells for syngas production with tunable H2/CO yield via co-electrolysis of H2O and CO2, J. Power Sources, 2021, 482, 10 CrossRef .Y. Zheng, J. C. Wang, B. Yu, W. Q. Zhang, J. Chen, J. L. Qiao and J. J. Zhang, A review of high temperature co-electrolysis of H2O and CO2 to produce sustainable fuels using solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs): advanced materials and technology, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .Y. Q. Wang, A. Banerjee and O. Deutschmann, Dynamic behavior and control strategy study of CO2/H2O co-electrolysis in solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .L. Z. Bian, C. C. Duan, L. J. Wang, Y. T. Hou, L. Z. Zhu, R. O'Hayre and K. C. Chou, Highly Efficient, Redox-Stable, La0.5Sr0.5Fe0.9Nb0.1O3-δ Symmetric Electrode for Both Solid-Oxide Fuel Cell and H2O/CO2 Co-Electrolysis Operation, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F981–F985 CrossRef CAS .L. Bernadet, C. Moncasi, M. Torrell and A. Tarancon, High-performing electrolyte-supported symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cells operating under steam electrolysis and co-electrolysis modes, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 14208–14217 CrossRef CAS .U. Ozkan, D. Deka, S. Gunduz, J. Miller and A. Co, Production of syngas with controllable H2/CO ratio by high temperature co-electrolysis of CO2 and H2O over Ni and Co- doped lanthanum strontium ferrite perovskite cathodes, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 258, 2 Search PubMed .F. He, M. Y. Hou, F. Zhu, D. L. Liu, H. Zhang, F. F. Yu, Y. C. Zhou, Y. Ding, M. L. Liu and Y. Chen, Building Efficient and Durable Hetero-Interfaces on a Perovskite-Based Electrode for Electrochemical CO2 Reduction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 11 Search PubMed .H. F. Lv, L. Lin, X. M. Zhang, D. F. Gao, Y. F. Song, Y. J. Zhou, Q. X. Liu, G. X. Wang and X. H. Bao, In situ exsolved FeNi3 nanoparticles on nickel doped Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6- perovskite for efficient electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11967–11975 RSC .L. B. Lei, J. H. Zhang, Z. H. Yuan, J. P. Liu, M. Ni and F. L. Chen, Progress Report on Proton Conducting Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 17 Search PubMed .R. L. Yin, L. Sun, A. Khosravi, M. Malekan and Y. X. Shi, Control-oriented dynamic modeling and thermodynamic analysis of solid oxide electrolysis system, Energy Convers. Manage., 2022, 271, 13 CrossRef .Y. Wang, T. Liu, S. M. Fang, G. L. Xiao, H. T. Wang and F. L. Chen, A novel clean and effective syngas production system based on partial oxidation of methane assisted solid oxide co-electrolysis process, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 261–267 CrossRef CAS .W. Q. Zhang, B. Yu, X. Wang and J. Chen, Thermodynamic analysis of the efficiency of high temperature co-electrolysis system for syngas production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 15960–15969 CrossRef CAS .Y. A. Jiang, F. L. Chen and C. R. Xia, A review on cathode processes and materials for electro-reduction of carbon dioxide in solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Power Sources, 2021, 493, 22 Search PubMed .J. Fleig, On the current-voltage characteristics of charge transfer reactions at mixed conducting electrodes on solid electrolytes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 2027–2037 RSC .A. D. N. Kamkeng and M. H. Wang, Long-term performance prediction of solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) for CO2/H2O co-electrolysis considering structural degradation through modelling and simulation, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 14 CrossRef .Z. Li, H. Zhang, H. R. Xu and J. Xuan, Advancing the multiscale understanding on solid oxide electrolysis cells via modelling approaches: A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 141, 12 Search PubMed .Y. Q. Wang, A. Banerjee, L. Wehrle, Y. X. Shi, N. Brandon and O. Deutschmann, Performance analysis of a reversible solid oxide cell system based on multi-scale hierarchical solid oxide cell modelling, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 196, 484–496 CrossRef CAS .C. Sun, L. Z. Bian, J. Qi, W. Yu, S. T. Li, Y. T. Hou, L. J. Wang, J. Peng and S. L. An, Boosting CO2 directly electrolysis by electron doping in Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6-δ double perovskite cathode, J. Power Sources, 2022, 521, 7 CrossRef .B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Organic–Inorganic Perovskites: Structural Versatility for Functional Materials Design, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. F. Song, X. M. Zhang, K. Xie, G. X. Wang and X. H. Bao, High-Temperature CO2 Electrolysis in Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells: Developments, Challenges, and Prospects, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 18 Search PubMed .X. M. Xu, Y. J. Zhong and Z. P. Shao, Double Perovskites in Catalysis, Electrocatalysis, and Photo(electro)catalysis, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 410–424 CrossRef CAS .P. P. Ding, W. L. Li, H. W. Zhao, C. C. Wu, L. Zhao, B. H. Dong and S. M. Wang, Review on Ruddlesden-Popper perovskites as cathode for solid oxide fuel cells, J. Phys. Mater., 2021, 4, 18 Search PubMed .Y. H. Li, Z. L. Zhan and C. R. Xia, Highly efficient electrolysis of pure CO2 with symmetrical nanostructured perovskite electrodes, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 980–984 RSC .Z. Q. Cao, B. Wei, J. P. Miao, Z. H. Wang, Z. Lu, W. Y. Li, Y. H. Zhang, X. Q. Huang, X. B. Zhu, Q. Feng and Y. Sui, Efficient electrolysis of CO2 in symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cell with highly active La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.7Ti0.3O3 electrode material, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .Z. B. Yang, C. Y. Ma, N. Wang, X. F. Jin, C. Jin and S. P. Peng, Electrochemical reduction of CO2 in a symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cell with La0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3-δ electrode, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 33, 445–451 CrossRef CAS .Z. B. Yang, N. Wang, C. Y. Ma, X. F. Jin, Z. Lei, X. Y. Xiong and S. P. Peng, Co-electrolysis of H2O-CO2 in a solid oxide electrolysis cell with symmetrical La0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3-δ electrode, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 836, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .X. Z. Peng, Y. F. Tian, Y. Liu, W. J. Wang, L. C. Jia, J. Pu, B. Chi and J. Li, An efficient symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cell with LSFM-based electrodes for direct electrolysis of pure CO2, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 36, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Tian, Y. Liu, L. C. Jia, A. Naden, J. Chen, B. Chi, J. Pu, J. T. S. Irvine and J. Li, A novel electrode with multifunction and regeneration for highly efficient and stable symmetrical solid oxide cell, J. Power Sources, 2020, 475, 9 CrossRef .Y. Wang, T. Liu, S. M. Fang and F. L. Chen, Syngas production on a symmetrical
solid oxide H2O/CO2 coelectrolysis cell with Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6-Sm0.2Ce0.8O1.9 electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2016, 305, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .Y. T. Hou, L. J. Wang, L. Z. Bian, Y. D. Wang and K. C. Chou, Excellent Electrochemical Performance of La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.9Ti0.1O3-δ as a Symmetric Electrode for Solid Oxide Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22381–22390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Li, R. Z. Dong, R. C. Wang, T. Q. Shao, F. Yan, P. Zhang, D. Fu and R. J. Wang, The Performance of Ruddlesden-Popper (R-P) Structured Pr2-xSrxNi0.2Mn0.8O4 for Reversible Single-Component Cells, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 13582–13594 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Huan, L. Zhang, S. W. Zhang, N. Shi, X. Y. Li, K. Zhu, C. R. Xia, R. R. Peng and Y. L. Lu, Ruddlesden-Popper oxide SrEu2Fe2O7 as a promising symmetrical electrode for pure CO2 electrolysis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9 RSC .Y. Y. Zhou, Z. M. Zhou, M. Chen, Y. X. Zong, J. S. Huang, S. P. Pang and N. P. Padture, Doping and alloying for improved perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17623–17635 RSC .Y. Zhou, J. Chen, O. M. Bakr and H. T. Sun, Metal-Doped Lead Halide Perovskites: Synthesis, Properties, and Optoelectronic Applications, Chem. Mat., 2018, 30, 6589–6613 CrossRef CAS .W. J. Yin, B. C. Weng, J. Ge, Q. D. Sun, Z. Z. Li and Y. F. Yan, Oxide perovskites, double perovskites and derivatives for electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and photovoltaics, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 442–462 RSC .X. Xu, H. Q. Wang, J. M. Ma, W. Y. Liu, X. F. Wang, M. Fronzi and L. Bi, Impressive performance of proton-conducting solid oxide fuel cells using a first-generation cathode with tailored cations, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18792–18798 RSC .Y. Sun, Z. Y. Liu, W. Zhang, X. F. Chu, Y. G. Cong, K. K. Huang and S. H. Feng, Unfolding B-O-B Bonds for an Enhanced ORR Performance in ABO(3)-Type Perovskites, Small, 2019, 15, 8 Search PubMed .P. G. Sundell, M. E. Bjorketun and G. Wahnstrom, Thermodynamics of doping and vacancy formation in BaZrO3 perovskite oxide from density functional calculations, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 10 CrossRef .Y. H. Wan, Y. L. Xing, Z. Q. Xu, S. S. Xue, S. W. Zhang and C. R. Xia, A-site bismuth doping, a new strategy to improve the electrocatalytic performances of lanthanum chromate anodes for solid oxide fuel cells, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 10 CrossRef .Y. H. Wan, Y. Yang, Y. L. Lu, R. R. Peng and C. R. Xia, A Strategy to Enhance the Catalytic Activity of Electrode Materials by Doping Bismuth for Symmetrical Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2022, 5, 2339–2348 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Tian, C. C. Yang, Y. T. Li, S. He, X. X. Wang, Y. H. Ling, W. L. Li, B. Chi and J. Pu, A Simple Sc Doping Strategy to Enhance Electrocatalytic Activity and Stability in Symmetrical Solid Oxide Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 7 Search PubMed .Z. A. Li, R. Haugsrud and T. Norby, Oxygen bulk diffusion and surface exchange in Sr-substituted La2NiO4+δ, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 184, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .Y. F. Zheng, H. G. Jiang, S. Wang, B. Qian, Q. S. Li, L. Ge and H. Chen, Mn-doped Ruddlesden-Popper oxide La1.5Sr0.5NiO4+δ as a novel air electrode material for solid oxide electrolysis cells, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 1208–1217 CrossRef CAS .H. G. Jiang, Z. M. Lu, B. Qian, S. Wang, B. Yin, Y. F. Zheng, L. Ge, H. Chen and C. Z. Zhang, Bi-doped La1.5Sr0.5Ni0.5Mn0.5O4+δ as an efficient air electrode material for SOEC, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 36037–36045 CrossRef CAS .A. P. Tarutin, J. G. Lyagaeva, A. S. Farlenkov, A. I. Vylkov and D. M. Medvedev, Cu-substituted La2NiO4+δ as oxygen electrodes for protonic ceramic electrochemical cells, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 16105–16112 CrossRef .S. Wang, Z. F. Li, B. Qian, Q. Ni, Y. F. Zheng, L. Ge, H. Chen and H. Yang, Evaluation of Cu-substituted La1.5Sr0.5NiO4+δ as air electrode for CO2 electrolysis in solid oxide electrolysis cells, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 31509–31518 CrossRef CAS .Z. F. Li, P. K. Shan, W. Tang, Q. Ni, B. Qian, S. Wang, Y. F. Zheng, L. Ge, H. Chen and C. Z. Zhang, Enhancing the catalytic activity and stability of the Pr2NiO4+δ Ruddlesden-Popper perovskite air electrode for high-temperature steam electrolysis with barium doping, J. Alloys Compd., 2023, 932, 10 Search PubMed .C. Berger and A. Egger, High-Temperature Electrolysis: From fundamentals to applications, IOP Publishing,  2023 Search PubMed .H. L. Dai, X. Xu, C. Liu, C. J. Ma, Q. F. Zhang and L. Bi, Tailoring a LaMnO3 cathode for proton-conducting solid oxide fuel cells: integration of high performance and excellent stability, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12553–12564 RSC .D. Vignesh, B. K. Sonu and E. Rout, Factors Constituting Proton Trapping in BaCeO3 and BaZrO3 Perovskite Proton Conductors in Fuel Cell Technology: A Review, Energy Fuels, 2022, 36, 7219–7244 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Regalado Vera, H. Ding, J. Urban-Klaehn, M. Zhou, H. Luo and D. Ding, 2022.A. B. Munoz-Garcia and M. Pavone, First-Principles Design of New Electrodes for Proton-Conducting Solid-Oxide Electrochemical Cells: A-Site Doped Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6-δ Perovskite, Chem. Mat., 2016, 28, 490–500 CrossRef CAS .C. Y. Regalado Vera, H. Ding, M. Zhou, H. Luo and D. Ding, 2021.J. Lyagaeva, N. Danilov, G. Vdovin, J. F. Bu, D. Medvedev, A. Demin and P. Tsiakaras, A new Dy-doped BaCeO3-BaZrO3 proton-conducting material as a promising electrolyte for reversible solid oxide fuel cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15390–15399 RSC .N. Tarasova, A. Galisheva, I. Animitsa, D. Korona, H. Kreimesh and I. Fedorova, Protonic Transport in Layered Perovskites BaLanInnO3n+1 (n = 1, 2) with Ruddlesden-Popper Structure, Appl. Sci., 2022, 12, 10 Search PubMed .N. Tarasova and I. Animitsa, Materials A(II)LnInO(4) with Ruddlesden-Popper Structure for Electrochemical Applications: Relationship between Ion (Oxygen-Ion, Proton) Conductivity, Water Uptake, and Structural Changes, Materials, 2022, 15, 28 Search PubMed .C. C. Yang, Y. F. Tian, J. Pu and B. Chi, Anion Fluorine-Doped La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3-δ Perovskite Cathodes with Enhanced Electrocatalytic Activity for Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell Direct CO2 Electrolysis, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 1047–1058 CrossRef CAS .F. F. Li, D. R. Liu, G. M. Gao, B. Xue and Y. S. Jiang, Improved visible-light photocatalytic activity of NaTaO3 with perovskite-like structure via sulfur anion doping, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166, 104–111 CrossRef .J. X. Gao, Y. J. Zhang, X. K. Wang, L. J. Jia, H. Q. Jiang, M. H. Huang and A. Toghan, Nitrogen-doped Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6-δ perovskite as an efficient and stable catalyst for hydrogen
evolution reaction, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 20, 7 Search PubMed .L. M. Zhang, S. Y. Yang and S. Z. Zhang, A novel perovskite oxychloride as a high performance cathode for protonic ceramic fuel cells, J. Power Sources, 2019, 440, 5 Search PubMed .Y. H. Li, Y. Li, Y. H. Wan, Y. Xie, J. F. Zhu, H. B. Pan, X. S. Zheng and C. R. Xia, Perovskite Oxyfluoride Electrode Enabling Direct Electrolyzing Carbon Dioxide with Excellent Electrochemical Performances, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 10 Search PubMed .H. Dai, C. Ng and C. Au, Perovskite-type halo-oxide La1− xSrxFeO3− δXσ (X= F, Cl) catalysts selective for the oxidation of ethane to ethene, J. Catal., 2000, 189, 52–62 CrossRef CAS .Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. M. Xu, J. P. M. Veder and Z. P. Shao, Recent advances in anion-doped metal oxides for catalytic applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7280–7300 RSC .S. Zhang, C. Yang, Y. Jiang, P. Li and C. Xia, A robust fluorine-containing ceramic cathode for direct CO2 electrolysis in solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Energy Chem., 2023, 77, 300–309 CrossRef CAS .P. Qiu, S. C. Sun, J. Li and L. C. Jia, A review on the application of Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6-based oxides in solid oxide electrochemical cells, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 298, 14 CrossRef .S. Park, H. Han, W. Yoon, J. Choi, Y. Kim, H. Kim and W. B. Kim, Improving a Sulfur-Tolerant Ruddlesden-Popper Catalyst by Fluorine Doping for CO2 Electrolysis Reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6564–6571 CrossRef CAS .C. Su, W. Wang and Z. Shao, Cation-deficient perovskites for clean energy conversion, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 477–488 CrossRef CAS .O. V. Merkulov, R. R. Samigullin, A. A. Markov and M. V. Patrakeev, Impact of A-Site Cation Deficiency on Charge Transport in La0.5-xSr0.5FeO3-δ, Materials, 2021, 14, 21 CrossRef PubMed .L. M. Liu, M. X. Wu, X. L. Zhou, H. Y. Chen, X. Y. Qian, Z. Wang, F. F. He, Y. Sheng, J. Q. Qian and L. Pan, La0.3Sr0.7Ti0.3Fe0.7O3-δ-Based Electrodes for Symmetrical Solid Oxide Fuel Cells by A-Site Deficiency Manipulation, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2023, 6, 841–855 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Zhang, F. Z. Han, C. X. Li and S. L. Zhang, A-site deficient Sr0.9Ti0.3Fe0.7O3-δ perovskite:A high stable cobalt-free oxygen electrode material for solid oxide electrochemical cells with excellent electrocatalytic activity and CO2 tolerance, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2022, 42, 5801–5812 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Zhu, Y. Y. Wang, A. M. Zhi, Z. T. Chen, L. Shi, Z. B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. L. Zhu, X. Y. Qiu, X. Z. Tian, X. D. Bai, Y. Zhang and Y. F. Zhu, Cation-Deficiency-Dependent CO2 Electroreduction over Copper-Based Ruddlesden-Popper Perovskite Oxides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 10 Search PubMed .Y. C. Wei, Z. Weng, L. C. Guo, L. An, J. Yin, S. Y. Sun, P. F. Da, R. Wang, P. X. Xi and C. H. Yan, Activation Strategies of Perovskite-Type Structure for Applications in Oxygen-Related Electrocatalysts, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 35 Search PubMed .J. Y. Wang, D. Kalaev, J. Yang, I. Waluyo, A. Hunt, J. T. Sadowski, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Fast Surface Oxygen Release Kinetics Accelerate Nanoparticle Exsolution in Perovskite Oxides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 1714–1727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K. Y. Lai and A. Manthiram, Evolution of Exsolved Nanoparticles on a Perovskite Oxide Surface during a Redox Process, Chem. Mat., 2018, 30, 2838–2847 CrossRef CAS .Y. X. Li, Y. Wang, W. Doherty, K. Xie and Y. C. Wu, Perovskite Chromates Cathode with Exsolved Iron Nanoparticles for Direct High-Temperature Steam Electrolysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8553–8562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. H. Chen, J. Xu, X. Wang and K. Xie, Sr2Fe1.5+xMo0.5O6-δ cathode with exsolved Fe nanoparticles for enhanced CO2 electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 11901–11907 CrossRef CAS .Y. R. Yang, Y. H. Wang, Z. B. Yang, Y. Chen and S. P. Peng, A highly active and durable electrode with in situ exsolved Co nanoparticles for solid oxide electrolysis cells, J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 8 Search PubMed .S. Park, Y. Kim, H. Han, Y. S. Chung, W. Yoon, J. Choi and W. B. Kim, In situ exsolved Co nanoparticles on Ruddlesden-Popper material as highly active catalyst for CO2 electrolysis to CO, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 147–156 CrossRef CAS .V. Kyriakou, D. Neagu, E. I. Papaioannou, I. S. Metcalfe, M. C. M. van de Sanden and M. N. Tsampas, Co-electrolysis of H2O and CO2 on exsolved Ni nanoparticles for efficient syngas generation at controllable H2/CO ratios, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 8 CrossRef .Y. Nishihata, J. Mizuki, T. Akao, H. Tanaka, M. Uenishi, M. Kimura, T. Okamoto and N. Hamada, Self-regeneration of a Pd-perovskite catalyst for automotive emissions control, Nature, 2002, 418, 164–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Kyriakou, D. Neagu, G. Zafeiropoulos, R. K. Sharma, C. Y. Tang, K. Kousi, I. S. Metcalfe, M. C. M. van de Sanden and M. N. Tsampas, Symmetrical Exsolution of Rh Nanoparticles in Solid Oxide Cells for Efficient Syngas Production from Greenhouse Gases, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1278–1288 CrossRef CAS .J. K. Wang, J. Zhou, J. M. Yang, D. Neagu, L. Fu, Z. J. Lian, T. H. Shin and K. Wu, Tailoring the Surface of Perovskite through In Situ Growth of Ru/RuO(2)Nanoparticles as Robust Symmetrical Electrodes for Reversible Solid Oxide Cells, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 9 Search PubMed .O. Kwon, S. Joo, S. Choi, S. Sengodan and G. Kim, Review on exsolution and its driving forces in perovskites, J. Phys. Energy, 2020, 2, 18 Search PubMed .P. Li, Y. M. Xuan, B. A. Jiang, S. W. Zhang and C. R. Xia, Hollow La0.6Sr0.4Ni0.2Fe0.75Mo0.05O3-δ electrodes with exsolved FeNi3 in quasi-symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cells for direct CO2 electrolysis, Electrochem. Commun., 2022, 134, 5 CrossRef .X. Wang, Z. B. Yang, H. R. Wang, Y. Zuo, G. Zsurzsan and Z. Zhang, La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3-δ perovskite with in situ exsolved Ni–Fe nanoparticles as high activity catalyst for symmetric solid oxide electrolysis cells, Mater. Res. Bull., 2022, 156, 10 Search PubMed .S. W. Zhang, Y. N. Jiang, H. R. Han, Y. H. Li and C. R. Xia, Perovskite Oxyfluoride Ceramic with In Situ Exsolved Ni-Fe Nanoparticles for Direct CO2 Electrolysis in Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 28854–28864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. B. Niu, C. L. Lu, W. D. Yi, S. J. Luo, X. N. Li, X. W. Zhong, X. Z. Zhao and B. M. Xu, In-situ growth of nanoparticles-decorated double perovskite electrode materials for symmetrical solid oxide cells, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 15 CrossRef .Z. Y. Teng, Z. R. Xiao, G. M. Yang, L. Guo, X. Q. Yang, R. Ran, W. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. P. Shao, Efficient water splitting through solid oxide electrolysis cells with a new hydrogen electrode derived from A-site cation-deficient La0.4Sr0.55Co0.2Fe0.6Nb0.2O3-δ perovskite, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 10 Search PubMed .Y. F. Tian, Y. Liu, A. Naden, L. C. Jia, M. Xu, W. Cui, B. Chi, J. Pu, J. T. S. Irvine and J. Li, Boosting CO2 electrolysis performance via calcium-oxide-looping combined with in situ exsolved Ni-Fe nanoparticles in a symmetrical solid oxide electrolysis cell, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14895–14899 RSC .P. J. Xue, H. Wu, Y. Lu and X. H. Zhu, Recent progress in molten salt synthesis of low-dimensional perovskite oxide nanostructures, structural characterization, properties, and functional applications: A review, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2018, 34, 914–930 CrossRef CAS .X. D. Zuo, Z. Y. Chen, C. Z. Guan, K. F. Chen, S. Z. Song, G. P. Xiao, Y. P. Pang and J. Q. Wang, Molten Salt Synthesis of High-Performance, Nanostructured La0.6Sr0.4FeO3-δ Oxygen Electrode of a Reversible Solid Oxide Cell, Materials, 2020, 13, 10 Search PubMed .C. Z. Guan, Y. D. Wang, K. F. Chen, G. P. Xiao, X. Lin, J. Zhou, S. Z. Song, J. Q. Wang, Z. Y. Zhu and X. D. Zhou, Molten salt synthesis of Nb-doped (La, Sr) FeO3 as the oxygen electrode for reversible solid oxide cells, Mater. Lett., 2019, 245, 114–117 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Wang, Y. Jiang, Y. X. Zhao, X. L. Ge, Q. Lu, T. Zhang, D. S. Xie, M. Li and Y. F. Bu, Design strategies of perovskite nanofibers electrocatalysts for water splitting: A mini review, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 451, 14 Search PubMed .L. Zou, Y. F. Tian, J. Pu and B. Chi, Smart utilization of in situ exsolution occurring in Ag doped PrBa0.5Sr0.5CO2O5+δ nanofiber air electrode of intermediate temperature reversible solid oxide cells, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 900, 8 CrossRef .M. Li, B. Hua, J. Chen, Y. M. Zhong and J. L. Luo, Charge transfer dynamics in RuO2/perovskite nanohybrid for enhanced electrocatalysis in solid oxide electrolyzers, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 186–194 CrossRef CAS .C. M. Xu, L. H. Zhang, W. Sun, R. Z. Ren, X. Yang, X. X. Yang, M. J. Ma, J. S. Qiao, Z. H. Wang and K. N. Sun, Building efficient and durable 3D nanotubes electrode for solid oxide electrolytic cells, J. Power Sources, 2023, 556, 8 CrossRef .L. H. Li, J. X. Deng, J. Chen, X. Y. Sun, R. B. Yu, G. R. Liu and X. R. Xing, Wire Structure and Morphology Transformation of Niobium Oxide and Niobates by Molten Salt Synthesis, Chem. Mat., 2009, 21, 1207–1213 CrossRef CAS .S. Seetharaman, R. Balaji, K. Ramya, K. S. Dhathathreyan and M. Velan, Graphene oxide modified non-noble metal electrode for alkaline anion exchange membrane water electrolyzers, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 14934–14942 CrossRef CAS .S. Joo, O. Kwon, K. Kim, S. Kim, H. Kim, J. Shin, H. Y. Jeong, S. Sengodan, J. W. Han and G. Kim, Cation-swapped homogeneous nanoparticles in perovskite oxides for high power density, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 9 CrossRef PubMed .S. Jo, Y. H. Kim, H. Jeong, C. H. Park, B. R. Won, H. Jeon, K. T. Lee and J. H. Myung, Exsolution of phase-separated nanoparticles via trigger effect toward reversible solid oxide cell, Appl. Energy, 2022, 323, 9 CrossRef .S. He, K. F. Chen, M. Saunders, Z. Quadir, S. W. Tao, J. T. S. Irvine, C. Q. Cui and S. P. Jiang, Interface formation and Mn segregation of directly assembled La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 cathode on Y2O3-ZrO2 and Gd2O3-CeO2 electrolytes of solid oxide fuel cells, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 325, 176–188 CrossRef CAS .S. Fop, J. M. S. Skakle, A. C. McLaughlin, P. A. Connor, J. T. S. Irvine, R. I. Smith and E. J. Wildman, Oxide Ion Conductivity in the Hexagonal Perovskite Derivative Ba3MoNbO8.5, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16764–16769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Q. N. Xue, X. W. Huang, J. X. Zhang, H. Zhang and Z. Y. Feng, Grain boundary segregation and its influences on ionic conduction properties of scandia doped zirconia electrolytes, J. Rare Earths, 2019, 37, 645–651 CrossRef CAS .A. Pandiyan, A. Uthayakumar, R. Subrayan, S. W. Cha and S. B. Krishna Moorthy, Review of solid oxide electrolysis cells: a clean energy strategy for hydrogen generation, Nanomater. Energy, 2019, 8, 2–22 CrossRef .A. Nechache, M. Cassir and A. Ringuede, Solid oxide electrolysis cell analysis by means of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy: A review, J. Power Sources, 2014, 258, 164–181 CrossRef CAS .A. Sciazko, T. Shimura, Y. Komatsu and N. Shikazono, Ni-GDC and Ni-YSZ electrodes operated in solid oxide electrolysis and fuel cell modes, J. Therm. Sci. Technol., 2021, 16, 10 Search PubMed .P. Temluxame, P. Puengjinda, S. Peng-ont, W. Ngampuengpis, N. Sirimungkalakul, T. Jiwanuruk, T. Sornchamni and P. Kim-Lohsoontorn, Comparison of ceria and zirconia based electrolytes for solid oxide electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 24568–24580 CrossRef CAS .R. Kirkgecit and H. O. Torun, Synthesis and characterization of CeLaMO2 (M: Sm, Gd Dy) compounds for solid ceramic electrolytes, Process. Appl. Ceram., 2020, 14, 314–320 CrossRef CAS .D. Heidari, S. Javadpour and S. H. Chan, An evaluation of electrochemical performance of a solid oxide electrolyzer cell as a function of co-sintered YSZ-SDC bilayer electrolyte thickness, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 567–573 CrossRef CAS .P. Shuk, H. D. Wiemhöfer and W. Göpel, Electronic Properties of Bi2O3 Based Solid Electrolytes, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1997, 623, 892–896 CrossRef CAS .P. Temluxame, N. Laosiripojana, S. Assabumrungrat, P. Puengjinda and P. Kim-Lohsoontorn, Phase transformation and electrical properties of bismuth oxide doped scandium cerium and gadolinium stabilized zirconia (0.5Gd0.5Ce10ScSZ) for solid oxide electrolysis cell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 29953–29965 CrossRef CAS .R. Gao, A. C. P. Jain, S. Pandya, Y. Q. Dong, Y. K. Yuan, H. Zhou, L. R. Dedon, V. Thoreton, S. Saremi, R. J. Xu, A. Luo, T. Chen, V. Gopalan, E. Ertekin, J. Kilner, T. Ishihara, N. H. Perry, D. R. Trinkle and L. W. Martin, Designing Optimal Perovskite Structure for High Ionic Conduction, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 9 Search PubMed .X. Zhang, B. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Jia and Y. Sun, Advances in component and operation optimization of solid oxide electrolysis cell, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 108035 Search PubMed .N. Bausa, S. Escolastico and J. M. Serra, Direct CO2 conversion to syngas in a BaCe0.2Zr0.7Y0.1O3-δ-based proton-conducting electrolysis cell, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 231–238 CrossRef CAS .Z. Z. Leng, Z. Z. Huang, X. Zhou, B. Zhang, H. Bai, J. Zhou and S. R. Wang, The effect of sintering aids on BaCe0.7Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1O3-d as the electrolyte of proton-conducting
solid oxide electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 33861–33871 CrossRef CAS .Y. D. Luo, Y. Li, N. Zhang, Y. S. Ding, H. Z. Li and G. Chen, Electrical properties and chemical stability of Br addition in BaCe0.8Gd0.2O3-alpha proton-conducting electrolyte, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 26027–26034 CrossRef CAS .Y. B. Wen, S. J. Yang, S. Gu, X. F. Ye and Z. Y. Wen, Fabrication and characterization of a double-layer electrolyte membrane for BaCeO3-based reversible solid oxide cells (RSOCs), Solid State Ionics, 2017, 308, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .S. Mumtaz, M. A. Ahmad, R. Raza, M. S. Arshad, B. Ahmed, M. N. Ashiq and G. Abbas, Nano grained Sr and Zr co-doped BaCeO3 electrolytes for intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 14354–14360 CrossRef CAS .L. Bi and E. Traversa, Steam electrolysis by proton-conducting solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) with chemically stable BaZrO3-based electrolytes, ECS Trans., 2015, 68, 3387 CrossRef CAS .S. Rajendran, N. K. Thangavel, H. P. Ding, Y. Ding, D. Ding and L. M. R. Arava, Tri-Doped BaCeO3-BaZrO3 as a Chemically Stable Electrolyte with High Proton-Conductivity for Intermediate Temperature Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells (SOECs), ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38275–38284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Kim, A. Jun, O. Gwon, S. Yoo, M. Liu, J. Shin, T. H. Lim and G. Kim, Hybrid-solid oxide electrolysis cell: A new strategy for efficient hydrogen production, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .R. G. dos Santos and A. C. Alencar, Biomass-derived syngas production via gasification process and its catalytic conversion into fuels by Fischer Tropsch synthesis: A review, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 18114–18132 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, L. Zeng, G. Pang, X. Wei, M. Wang, K. Cheng, J. Kang, J. M. Serra, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, Direct conversion of carbon dioxide into liquid fuels and chemicals by coupling green hydrogen at high temperature, Appl. Catal., B, 2023, 324, 122299 CrossRef CAS .R. Rauch, J. Hrbek and H. Hofbauer, Biomass gasification for synthesis gas production and applications of the syngas, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2014, 3, 343–362 CAS .
Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:
Jiamin Gu	Jiamin Gu received her BS in Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Currently, she is a Master's Degree student in Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. She focuses on catalyst design and application of solid oxide fuel cell/electrolysis cell.
Xiaoxin Zhang	Xiaoxin Zhang obtained his BS in China Jiliang University. Currently, he is a doctoral candidate at College of Energy, Xiamen University. He focuses on the electrode materials of solid oxide fuel/electrolytic cells and the catalytic mechanism of solid/gas interface.
Yunxia Zhao	Yunxia Zhao obtained her PhD at Nanjing University of Science and Technology. At present, she is an associate professor at Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. Dr Zhao is dedicated to the capture and resource utilization of the green house gas CO2 and the design and development of environmental materials.
Abdullah Alodhayb	Abdullah Alodhayb obtained his PhD at Memorial University of Newfoundland. At present, he is an associate professor at Department of Physics and Astronomy of King Saud University. His research mainly focus on chemical sensors, micromechanical resonators, microsensors modal analysis, monolayers and so on.
Yifei Sun	Yifei Sun obtained his PhD at University of Alberta and worked as a postdoctoral researcher in Purdue University. At present, he is an associate professor at College of Energy, Xiamen University. His research focuses on the oxide materials, reactions, devices and equipments for advanced energy conversion/storage processes.
Yunfei Bu	Yunfei Bu worked as a postdoctoral researcher in Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology. At present, he is a professor at Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology. His research fields include fuel cell/electrolysis cell, electrochemistry, perovskite materials and carbon dioxide reduction.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of SOECs. (a) O-SOEC, (b) H-SOEC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Thermodynamic calculation as function of temperature for co-electrolysis process.12 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 261–267. Copyright 2015, Elsevier B.V. (b) Effect of x and y on total energy, (c) Effect of x and y on Gibbs free energy, (d) Effect of x and y on thermal energy, (e) Effect of temperature on energy demand with x = 0.5, y = 0.5, (f) Effect of x and y on overall effificiency,(T = 850 °C, ηEI = 53%, ηHeat = 0.9, ηEsH2 = 99.34%, ηEsCO = 96.15%)(x = mole percentage of H2O electrolysis attributable to all the electrolysis reaction, y = mole percentage of H2 which generated by H2O electrolysis occurs RWGS reaction).13 Reprinted with permission from Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 15960–15969. Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V.	 

ΔH = ΔG + TΔS
	(1)

−ΔG = nFE
	(2)

	(3)

	(4)

	(5)

	(6)

H2(g) +CO2(g) → CO(g) + H2O(g)
	(7)

Voc = Erev − (Ro + Ra + Rc)is
	(8)

ηOhm = i × ROhm
	(9)

	(10)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of SOEC stack.16 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 429, 14. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (b) Dynamic responses of average temperature of the 40-cell F-design SOEC stack for various εair.4 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 255–264. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (c) Temperature distribution of the 50-cell SOC stack at base case operation in SOEC mode.18 Reprinted with permission from Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 196, 484–496. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. Temperature distributions of the 40-cell F-design SOEC stack with LRU = 8.94 cm, operating at Tg,in = T0 = 1123.15 K, uin,fuel = 0.8 m s−1, xin,fuel = 10%H2|57.1%H2O|32.9%CO2, Ecell = 1.2 V and excess air ratios of (d) εair,base = 2.45 (e) εair = 14 and (f) εair = 0.36.4 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 255–264. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 4  Crystal structure of perovskite oxide. (a) single perovskite structure (ABO3), (b and c) double perovskite structure (AA′B2O5+δ and A2BB′O6−δ), (d) Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) perovskite (An+1BnO3n+1, n = 1).21 Reprinted with permission from Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 18. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

LSFT|YSZ|LSFT	La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.7Ti0.3O3	100%CO2	0.521	2.0	800	25
LSFNb|LSGM|LSFNb	La0.5Sr0.5Fe0.9Nb0.1O3−δ	20% H2O–80% CO2	1.46	1.3	850	5
0.97	1.3	800
LSCFNb-GDC|YSZ|GDC-LSCFNb	La0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ	100%CO2	0.442	1.5	800	26
LSCFNb-GDC|YSZ|GDC-LSCFNb	La0.4Sr0.6Co0.2Fe0.7Nb0.1O3−δ	75%CO2–15%H2O–10%H2	0.638	1.3	850	27
LSFM-GDC|GDC||YSZ||GDC|LSFM-GDC	La0.6Sr0.4Fe0.9Mn0.1O3−δ	100%CO2	1.107	2.0	800	28
1.744	2.0	850
LCaFN-GDC|YSZ|LCaFN-GDC	La0.6Ca0.4Fe0.8Ni0.2O3−δ	100%CO2	1.5	2.0	800	29
SFM|YbScSZ|SFM	Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6−δ	90%H2O–10%Ar	1.4	1.3	900	6
75%H2O–25%CO2	1.1	1.3	900
SFM-SDC|LSGM|SFM-SDC	Sr2Fe1.5Mo0.5O6	16%H2O–16%CO2–20%H2–48%N2	0.73	1.3	850	30
LSFTi|LSGM|LSFTi	La0.3Sr0.7Fe0.9Ti0.1O3−δ	100%CO2	1.9	1.5	800	31

 	Fig. 5  (a) Acceptor and donor levels corresponding to various dopant atoms incorporated on either Ba or Zr sites in BaZrO3 calculated for a low defect concentration (c = 1/27). Energies of defect levels below the gap center are given relative to the valence band maximum εCBM, whereas energies of the levels above the gap center are given relative to the conduction band minimum εCBM.39 Reprinted with permission from Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 10. Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. (b) Difference in solution energy for various dopants on Ba or Zr sites in BaZrO3 calculated for a low defect concentration (c = 1/27). Only the most stable charge state of each dopant on either site is considered. Results are shown for the two limiting values of the Fermi-level position within the theoretical band gap: μe = εVBM and μe = εCBM.39 Reprinted with permission from Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 73, 10. Copyright 2006, American Physical Society. (c) Schematic diagram of possible proton (H+) diffusion.51 Reprinted with permission from Energy Fuels, 2022, 36, 7219–7244. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (d) Proposed reaction mechanism of the F-doping catalyst for CO2 electrocatalysis.58 Reprinted with permission from ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 1047–1058. Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of exsolution of nano-metal particles in metal oxides and alloys.74 Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 1714-1727. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society. (b) A schematic representation of in situ exsolution of catalysts from a particle.73 Reprinted with permission from Small Methods, 2021, 5, 35. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic diagram of the direct and indirect formation of metal nanoparticles in the exsolution process.75 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mat., 2018, 30, 2838–2847. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Simplified sketch of the coupling between the oxygen deficiency in STF and the total amount of exsolved Fe0.74 Reprinted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 145, 1714-1727. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM and STEM-EDS mapping images of a Ru nanoparticle.83 Reprinted with permission from Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 9. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) HRTEM image of the reduced SF1.58M.77 Reprinted with permission from International J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 11901–11907. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (c) TEM of SFCM-reduced.78 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2020, 478, 8. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V. (d) An HR-TEM image of Co–Fe nanoparticles on position A.75 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mat., 2018, 30, 2838–2847. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) HRTEM image, magnified HRTEM image, and STEM-EDS mapping images of a Ru/RuO2 core–shell nanoparticle, which was oxidized at 750 °C in air for 3 h from a Ru nanoparticle.83 Reprinted with permission from Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 9. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (f) HR-TEM image of LSCFN55 sample.89 (g) Magnified HR-TEM images of exsolved Co-Fe alloy of LSCFN55 sample.89 Reprinted with permission from Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 10. Copyright 2020, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM, (b) TEM images of the LSF particles.92 (c) SEM image of the as-synthesized LSFN powders.93 Reprinted with permission from Mater. Lett., 2019, 245, 114–117. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (d) Enlarged view of LBSCF-Ru nanofiber with a schematic image.96 Reprinted with permission from Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 186–194. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V. (e) STEM-EDX images of LBSCF-Ru.96 (f and g) SEM images of reduced Ag-PBSC with 200 nm.95 Reprinted with permission from J. Alloy. Compd., 2022, 900, 8. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. (h) Short-term performance of symmetrical cell with SFCuM nanotubes as cathode at 750 °C and 1.5 V.97 (i) Current density of SFCuM powder and nanotubes at different voltages at 800 °C and (j) Faraday efficiency at 750 °C.97 Reprinted with permission from J. Power Sources, 2023, 556, 8. Copyright 2023, Elsevier B.V. SEM images of KNbO3 particles obtained from different precursors: (k) KNb3O8 particles, (l) H3ONb3O8 particles, and (m) Nb2O5 particles.98 (n) SEM micrograph of the KNb3O8 particles. (o) TEM image of an isolated H3ONb3O8 rod with (inset) a typical SEAD pattern obtained from the same rod.98 Reprinted with permission from Chem. Mat., 2009, 21, 1207–1213. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of exsolution process with and without topotactic ion exchange.100 (b) Topotactic ion exchange energetics for the mechanism of particle exsolution via Fe infifiltration on the PBMCo surface.100 Reprinted with permission from Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 9. Copyright 2019, Springer Communications. (c) XPS depth profile and its growth mechanism of Fe-infiltrated Cu100 and Cu-infiltrated Fe100 after reduction at 800 °C in a dry H2 atmosphere.101 (d) SEM image of Fe-infiltrated Cu100 and Cu-infiltrated Fe100 reduction at 600 °C after Fe/Cu infiltration on Cu100/Fe100.101 Reprinted with permission from Appl. Energy, 2022, 323, 9. Copyright 2022, Elsevier B.V. SEM micrographs of YSZ electrolyte surface after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2 for (e and f) 1 h and (g and h) 12 h.102 The LSM electrodes were removed (e and g) by stick tape and (f and h) by HCl treatment. The original YSZ electrolyte surface without LSM coating is given in (i). AFM micrographs and line scan of (j, k and l) YSZ in contact with LSM electrode after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2.102 (m) TEM micrographs of LSM/YSZ interface after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h.102 (n) HRTEM micrographs of directly assembled LSM cathode on YSZ electrolyte after polarization at 900 °C and 500 mA cm−2 for 12 h.102 The FFT shows the diffractograms of the YSZ and LSM phases. The red arrows indicate the locations of lattice distortion. Reprinted with permission from Solid State Ionics, 2018, 325, 176–188. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of brick layer model, (b) Bulk conductivity Arrhenius plots of different grain sizes, (c) The grain boundary conductivity Arrhenius plots of different grain sizes, (d) Arrhenius plots of 1Ce10ScSZ electrolyte sintered at 1350 °C, 1450 °C and 1550 °C.104 Reprinted with permission from J. Rare Earths, 2019, 37, 645–651. Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V.	 

BaCe0.8Y0.2O3−δ	−0.707(1.5 V 600 °C)	—	118
−1.078(1.5 V 650 °C)
−1.768(1.5 V 700 °C)
Ba0.8Sr0.2Ce0.8Zr0.2O3−δ	—	0.007(650 °C)	119
Ba0.7Sr0.3Ce0.7Zr0.3O3−δ	0.008(650 °C)
BaCe0.2Zr0.7Y0.1O3−δ	−8.25(1.75 V 700 °C)	—	115
BaCe0.8Gd0.2O2.8±δBr0.2	—	0.058(750 °C)	117
BaCe0.7Zr0.1Y0.1Yb0.1O3-δ	—	0.0189(800 °C)	116

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of hybrid-SOEC.122 Reprinted with permission from Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 121–126. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. (b) Schematic diagram of co-electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide on hybrid-SOEC.	 

	(11)

	(12)
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
