Impact of processing on the chemical and electronic properties of phenyl-C 61 -butyric acid methyl ester   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TC00769G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TC00769G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7934-7942Impact of processing on the chemical and electronic properties of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester†

        
          
            Julia 
            Maibach
          
        
      af, 
      
        
          
            Torben 
            Adermann
          
        
      bf, 
      
        
          
            Tobias 
            Glaser
          
        
      cf, 
      
        
          
            Ralph 
            Eckstein
          
        
      df, 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Mankel
          
        
      *af, 
      
        
          
            Annemarie 
            Pucci
          
        
      cf, 
      
        
          
            Klaus 
            Müllen
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Uli 
            Lemmer
          
        
      df, 
      
        
          
            Manuel 
            Hamburger
          
        
      *bf, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Mayer
          
        
      af and 

        
          
            Wolfram 
            Jaegermann
          
        
      af
aTechnische Universität Darmstadt, Materials Science Department, Surface Science Division, Jovanka-Bontschits-Straße 2, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany
bUniversität Heidelberg, Organisch-Chemisches Institut, Im Neuenheimer Feld 270, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
cUniversität Heidelberg, Kirchhoff-Institut für Physik, Im Neuenheimer Feld 227, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
dKarlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Light Technology Institute, Engesserstraße 13, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany
eMax Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany
fInnovationLab GmbH, Speyerer Straße 4, 69115 Heidelberg, Germany
Received 
      16th April 2014
    , Accepted 4th August 2014First published on 5th August 2014AbstractFor the comparison of solution-processed to evaporated materials in organic optoelectronic devices, phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) has been claimed to be a suitable material. However, we ascertained differences between spin-coated and vacuum sublimed thin films. In this contribution, we thoroughly investigate the effects of thermal evaporation of PCBM in a strongly interdisciplinary approach, applying physical characterization techniques such as photoelectron (PES) and infrared (IR) spectroscopy in combination with further chemical analysis using thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and ultra-performance liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS), as well as proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-NMR). The methods were applied to thin films prepared by solution-based deposition techniques and by thermal evaporation. Additionally, comparison to an evaporated C60 film and the crucible residues is carried out. Changes in the IR spectrum of the PCBM films already indicate a change in the molecular structure of PCBM. The UPLC chromatogram of the redissolved organic film proves the formation of several molecular species, including bare C60. However, the effect of degradation on the electronic properties was found to be limited, as an almost unchanged ionization potential of 6.1 eV was determined with UPS for both the solution processed as well as the evaporated films. Also bulk-heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells fabricated using pure and thermally treated PCBM showed the same J–V characteristics under illumination.
Introduction
In the field of organic electronics a major stimulus for research and development is the solution-based processability of organic semiconductor materials. In a common approach, vacuum processed organic materials with good semiconducting properties are rendered soluble through functionalization with solubilizing groups, hopefully without (significantly) altering the molecular electronic properties. This was accomplished for the n-type material C60 in many ways, the most prominent representative being PCBM which became one of the standard electron acceptors and transport materials in organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices (Fig. 1).1,2 The material was first presented by Hummelen et al.3 and enabled one of the first realizations of efficient bulk heterojunction solar cells.4,5 To prove the validity of this minimal invasive approach for obtaining solution processable materials, one needs to compare solution processed and evaporated samples of a material.
 Fig. 1  
C60 and soluble derivative PCBM used in solution- and vacuum-processed organic solar cells. 
In our ongoing research on the differences between solution processed and evaporated thin films6,7 we became interested in compounds used as acceptors in organic BHJ solar cells. PCBM is designed for solution processing. It is repeatedly reported in literature that deposition via thermal evaporation in vacuum was performed to achieve either ultrathin or very clean films suitable for e.g. photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) characterization.8–11 However, the published contradicting results (see e.g.ref. 12) on the feasibility to evaporate this material as well as irregularities we observed during the deposition process motivated this detailed study on PCBM under the thermal stress encountered e.g. during physical vapor deposition. Besides PES to characterize the electronic states in dependence of the preparation technique, detailed chemical analysis via IR, TGA, DSC and UPLC-MS as well as 1H-NMR were performed.
Experimental

PCBM used in this study was obtained from American Dye Source with a specified purity larger than 99.5%. All experiments were performed with material from the same batch (Lot. 12KO18EA). As substrate material for the film depositions approx. 1 × 1 cm2 pieces of a polished silicon wafer with a natural oxide layer (Siltronix) was used. The substrates were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone and isopropyl alcohol prior to thin film fabrication.
The PES experiments were performed at the integrated UHV system “Clustertool” at the InnovationLab in Heidelberg. This unique integrated multi-deposition and multi-characterization tool allows both solution based deposition via spin coating and drop casting under highly clean inert gas atmosphere as well as thermal evaporation under vacuum conditions. A Phi VersaProbe II spectrometer was used equipped with a monochromatized Al-Kα X-ray source and a gas discharge lamp operated with helium (HeI: hν = 21.22 eV) as excitation sources for X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and UV photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), respectively. The energetic resolution determined by the 2σ Gaussian broadening used to fit the Fermi edge of a freshly sputter-cleaned silver sample measured at room temperature is 0.35 eV for XPS and 0.13 eV for UPS. All spectra are referenced in binding energy to the Fermi level. The core level lines of in situ cleaned Au, Ag and Cu metal foils were used to calibrate the XPS binding energy scale. While binding energy values are given to the 10 meV digit to track relative changes, the absolute values should be rounded to the next 100 meV digit.
IR spectroscopic measurements were performed in the sample compartment of a Fourier-transform-IR spectrometer (Vertex80v, Bruker) that is an integral part of the Clustertool. The IR spectra were taken in transmission geometry with a resolution of 4 cm−1 after the samples have been characterized by PES. In order to assign the experimental absorption bands of PCBM to the various vibrational modes of a molecule, quantum chemical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) have been performed using the program suite Turbomole13,14 with the BP86 functional.15,16 For better comparability with the experimental spectra, the DFT-calculated absorption lines have been broadened using a Gaussian profile with a full width half maximum (FWHM) of 10 cm−1.
For thermal evaporation a home-built effusion cell based on an α-Al2O3 crucible was used. The evaporation temperature was measured with a thermo couple placed on the outside of the resistively heated crucible. The base pressure was held in the 10−7 mbar regime during evaporation although pressure bursts of up to 10−6 mbar may occur as the material melts prior to evaporation and eventually boils in the crucible. In order to achieve a considerable layer thickness the substrate was placed over the crucible as soon as the PCBM melted and the first pressure bursts occurred. The temperature reading ranged from 240 °C at the beginning of the deposition to finally 280 °C. The overall deposition time was 75 min.
Spin coating of PCBM films was performed in an integrated glovebox at 1000 rpm for 50 s with an acceleration of 500 rpm per second. The material was dissolved at a concentration of 10 mg ml−1 in dry chlorobenzene by stirring at 50 °C for 1 h. The material recovered from the crucible after the evaporation was dissolved at the same concentration as pristine PCBM to produce a drop-cast film in an integrated glass cell.17
To further evaluate thermally induced chemical changes of the PCBM molecules due to evaporation the photoemission spectra were compared to a thermally evaporated C60 film deposited from an evaporation source as used for PCBM. The crucible temperature was kept at 450 °C and the deposition time was 20 min at a base pressure of 10−8 to 10−7 mbar.
DSC and TGA measurements were carried out on differently heat treated PCBM samples using a Mettler-Toledo TGA/DSC1 instrument with a TGA/DSC-Sensor 1100 equipped with a MX1 balance (Mettler-Toledo) and a GC100 gas control box for nitrogen supply. 10 mg TGA/DSC samples were measured in 40 μl aluminum crucibles that have a lid with a pinhole. Preparative thermal treatment was performed in 70 μl Al2O3 crucibles. All measurements were carried out under a 20 mL min−1 flow of nitrogen.
UPLC-MS measurements were carried out on a Waters ACQUITY H-Class UPLC with a SQD2 single quadrupole mass detector equipped with an atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI−) source. Chromatography conditions for the separation of fullerene species used a solvent mixture of acetonitrile with a gradient isopropanol fraction (40–95% in 10 min) with a solvent flow of 0.5 mL min−1 through a Waters ACQUITY UPLC BEH-C18 1.7 μm 2.1 × 50 mm reversed-phase column. Chromatographic traces were recorded with a UV detector at a wavelength of 255 nm. Negative atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI) was performed applying a source temperature of 550 °C, a corona voltage of −1.5 kV and a cone voltage of 50 V. PCBM samples were dissolved in 100 μl o-dichlorobenzene (DCB, puriss. p.a.) and diluted with 600 μl THF (UPLC grade). Thin film extract samples were prepared by placing the coated wafer into a glass vial and shaking with 1 ml of DCB for 3 minutes. The resulting solution was separated and evaporated to dryness and redissolved in 20 μl DCB followed by 60 μl THF. UPLC injection volumes were below 1 μl for all DCB containing samples.

1H-NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance III 300 MHz instrument in deuterated DCB (99.0% D, Deutero GmbH).
The inverted solar cells were fabricated on structured pre-cleaned ITO covered glass substrates. ITO with a ZnO layer prepared from a precursor as described in ref. 18 was used as the cathode in our inverted stack. P3HT:PCBM was used as the active material blend. P3HT (MaDriX) and pristine and thermally treated PCBM (ADS) respectively were dissolved separately in 1,4-dichlorobenzene (40 g L−1) and blended afterwards in a ratio of 1:0.9. The solution was then spin coated in nitrogen atmosphere and solvent annealed under a Petri dish resulting in a layer thickness of 180 nm. The top anode consisted of 100 nm PEDOT:PSS (VPAi 4083, Heraeus Precious Metals) and 100 nm evaporated silver. The current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics were recorded under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) using a 2-point measurement setup with an Oriel 300 W solar simulator.
Results
Photoelectron spectroscopy
The core level spectra of PCBM films prepared by spin coating (SC), thermal evaporation (evap), and drop cast crucible residues (CR) as well as evaporated C60 are displayed in Fig. 2. The corresponding valance band spectra are displayed in Fig. 3. The XP and UP spectra of a drop cast film from pristine PCBM appeared almost identical to the SC sample (see ESI Fig. S1†). All C1s carbon detail spectra displayed in Fig. 2a are clearly dominated by the emission from the C60 cage located at 285 eV. On the high binding energy side of the PCBM spectra a characteristic structure arises which appears to be similar to the shake-up satellite structure of C60 (ref. 19) but has also been assigned to the side chain.20,21 To evaluate the differences of the C60 and PCBM C1s spectra further, the emission lines are also represented normalized to their maximum intensity in Fig. 2b. The main emission of the PCBM samples is slightly broadened compared to C60 probably due to the additional carbon atoms in the side chain and the reduced molecular symmetry. Furthermore, some additional intensity on the high binding energy side of the main emission is observed as encircled in Fig. 2b. Difference spectra of PCBM and C60 were calculated in such a way as to eliminate to the best the satellite structure (see inset in Fig. 2b). After the subtraction of the C60 contributions, two distinct maxima at 287 eV and 289 eV are left. These can be attributed to the carbon emissions from the methoxy and the carbonyl groups, respectively. Therefore, we conclude that the high binding energy features observed for PCBM are a superposition of shake-up satellites from the C60 body and emissions from the methoxy and carbonyl groups. In the O1s signal for the spin coated (SC) and the evaporated (evap) films the two different oxygen binding sites within the PCBM molecule can be clearly distinguished. For the spectrum of the spin coated and drop casted film (see ESI Fig. S1†) PCBM film, Voigt profiles were applied for curve fitting. The results are two components with equal intensity. The lower binding energy component (1) at 532.2 eV is attributed to the oxygen in the carbonyl group. The second component (2) at 533.7 eV is generated by the oxygen in the methoxy group.22 In case of the XP spectra of the drop casted crucible residues (CR), the PCBM O1s signal (dotted green) is superimposed by the substrate oxygen emission. By subtracting the pure substrate emission (for details see ESI Fig. S2†), the methoxy and carbonyl emissions become evident. The presence of the SiOx (substrate) emission results from a poorer film quality when the same processing conditions as for pristine PCBM were applied. This indicates molecular changes which affect the solution processability of the material. For CR PCBM a slightly changed ratio of the two oxygen components is observed. This could hint towards a change in the molecular structure of PCBM. However, chemical analysis (see below) proofed that the loss of oxygen containing groups due to temperature treatment can be excluded. As can be seen in the ESI† the difference spectra were calculated consistently but the peak shape is very sensitive to this process. Therefore, the change in the intensity ratio might be an artifact introduced by the difference spectrum calculation.
 Fig. 2  C1s and O1s core level spectra of C60, spin coated PCBM, evaporated PCBM, and drop cast PCBM crucible residues. The spectra of drop cast pristine PCBM (not displayed) are almost identical to the (SC) PCBM spectra. (a) C1s core level spectra (b) C1s emission normalized to maximum intensity to evidence the differences between PCBM and C60 spectra. In the inset, difference spectra are shown in which the C60 emission was subtracted from the PCBM spectra to eliminate the common shake-up contributions on the high binding energy side. The remaining intensity is assigned to C–O binding sites in PCBM as indicated. (c) O1s core level spectra showing no oxygen emission for C60 and two oxygen components for PCBM as expected. In case of the crucible residue spectra, the original data is given in light green dots while the solid dark green line represents the difference spectra after the elimination of substrate signal intensity (see ESI†). 
 Fig. 3  Secondary electron (SE) cutoff spectra (a) and valence region spectra (b) of C60 in comparison to the differently prepared PCBM films (spin-coated, evaporated, drop-cast crucible residues from bottom to top). Both the values for the work function (in (a)) and the HOMOonset positions (in (b)) are given. 
For all PCBM-related samples we calculated the composition from the integral intensity ratios of carbon and oxygen (see Table 1). While the solution processed as well as the evaporated samples give very similar carbon to oxygen ratios, the oxygen content in the crucible residues is reduced. This further indicates a decomposition of PCBM during the temperature stressing in the crucible. The fact that the actual atomic ratio of 36:1 is not reached in any case is possibly due to the underestimation of the C1s intensity. Due to inelastic scattering and other loss mechanisms the C1s intensity contributions can extend up to several tens of electron volt on the high binding energy side for fullerenes23 but only the shake-up contributions within the first 10 eV were recorded and included in the calculations.
Table 1 Carbon to oxygen ratios derived from the integrated intensities




Sample
C:O ratio





PCBM (SC)
31:1



PCBM (evap)
31:1



PCBM (CR)
34:1



PCBM (molecule)
36:1




The valence level spectra are shown in Fig. 3. The HOMOonset values are determined from the low energy onset and the work function values were obtained from the secondary electron cutoff (SE cutoff). Comparing the valence fingerprint spectrum of C60 with the obtained PCBM spectra a striking similarity is observed (Fig. 3b). This is as expected as the character of most frontier electronic orbitals is mainly determined by the orbitals of the C60 cage (see e.g.ref. 10 and 24). Comparing the evaporated PCBM layer to the spin-coated layer, a shift towards lower binding energies in the HOMOonset is observed for the evaporated layer. However, the ionization potential derived by adding HOMOonset and work function stays constant at about 6.1 eV. The shift could therefore be due to a slightly different position of the Fermi level, which may be induced by the substrate or different unintentional doping. In case of the drop-cast CR spectra a broadening of the valence features is observed. This could be caused by the poor film quality mentioned afore. Nonetheless a determination of the electronic levels is possible. From this evaluation a slightly reduced ionization potential of 5.96 eV is obtained. As the ionization potential is usually considered to be a material or molecular property this may further indicate changes in the molecular structure.
While the line shapes of the valence features and the HOMOonset for C60 and PCBM are very similar, the ionization energies differ by about 300 meV with C60 (6.4 eV) having the higher value than PCBM (6.1 eV). A possible explanation could be the higher polarity of PCBM which leads to a molecular surface dipole that may effectively reduce the layer work function.
Infrared spectroscopy
In order to further investigate the impact of the evaporation process on the chemical structure of PCBM, IR spectra of the spin-coated and evaporated sample have been recorded. These two experimental spectra are shown in Fig. 4 together with the DFT-calculated spectrum of PCBM and the experimental spectrum of an evaporated layer of C60. The spectrum of the spin-coated sample shows reasonable agreement to the calculation, such that all the strongest absorption bands could be assigned to specific vibrational modes in the calculated spectrum, as indicated by dashed lines. The spectrum of the evaporated PCBM layer shows the same absorption bands and corresponding relative intensities as the spin-coated layer. However, in the range between 1500 cm−1 to 1700 cm−1, several additional absorption bands clearly appear in the spectrum of the evaporated layer that are not found in the spectra of the spin-coated layer, the DFT-calculation and the evaporated C60 layer. The additional absorption bands have frequencies that are typical for CC-stretching vibrations (at about 1650 cm−1) and CO-stretching vibrations (at about 1700 cm−1). The appearance of these additional absorption bands indicates changes in the chemical structure of PCBM due to the evaporation process as already indicated by the PES experiments.
 Fig. 4  DFT-calculated IR-spectrum of PCBM (a), experimental IR-spectra of a spin-coated PCBM layer (b), of an evaporated PCBM layer (c) and of an evaporated C60 layer (d). The dashed lines indicate the assignment of the strongest absorption bands of the spin-coated PCBM layer to the vibrational modes of the calculated spectrum. δ and ν refer to deformation and stretching vibrations, respectively. The subscripts of the mode assignments refer to the dominant localization of the mode on the molecule. 
Chemical analysis
In a first step the PCBM source material was characterized as a reference. No impurities were detected with UPLC and the APCI−-MS detector confirmed the desired mass signal of m/z = 910.2. The thermal properties were investigated with DSC shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  DSC-traces of the as-received commercial PCBM sample used for this study. Phase transitions are depicted with their onset temperatures. 
A first transition occurs with an onset temperature of 245 °C, a second at 273 °C. The final phase transition which is very likely to be the melting point is observed at 281 °C. Ngo et al. reported previously, that the DSC signal at 245 °C accounts for evaporation of undefined solvent residues in the range of 1 wt%.25 The sample described in this study indeed confirms a weight-loss at 248 °C, but only of approximately 0.05 wt%. As the intensity of the detected heat flow at 245 °C is comparable to the succeeding melting process, it is very likely that a major phase-transition occurs at 245 °C and minor solvent residuals are liberated simultaneously. Apart from this, no quantifiable weight loss is observed during these processes, confirming the interpretation of both DSC-signals at 245 °C and 271 °C to account for phase transitions. A second heating cycle of the same sample then shows only one single phase transition with an onset point at 283 °C, which is in accord with the literature.25
Temperature stressing of PCBM
In order to study the effect of thermal treatment during evaporation of PCBM several PCBM samples were heated to defined temperatures in the TGA. The different heating conditions are shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Thermal treatment conditions of PCBM for preparative temperature stressing




Sample
Temperature
Time
Comments




1
130 °C
5 min
BHJ thermal annealing


2
240 °C
60 min
Just before first phase transition


3
275 °C
60 min
Just before final phase transition


4
300 °C
60 min

PCBM melt


5
350 °C
60 min
Molten PCBM with thermal stress




The treatment at 130 °C for 5 minutes simulates the common thermal annealing of a PCBM containing solution processed bulk hetero junction solar cell.26,27 All other temperatures were chosen with respect to the phase conditions observed with DSC in order to correlate product stability with a phase condition. Thermal treatment was then applied for 60 minutes, as this corresponds to the minimum time needed to evaporate a PCBM film. All samples were heated under a flow of nitrogen to eliminate oxidation.
The samples treated at 130 °C and 240 °C were recovered as a black powder without noticeable changes in morphology. The sample treated at 275 °C for 60 min, which has undergone the first phase transition at 245 °C, did not melt down in the TGA crucible but showed a calcination-like shrinkage to form a shiny brittle solid with a metal-like reflection on crystal facettes. The samples heated above the melting point at 283 °C were recovered as solid to brittle films covering the bottom of the crucible. Mechanical scraping of the residue readily afforded black powdered samples.
UPLC-MS analysis of thermally treated PCBM
The differently treated PCBM samples were analyzed with UPLC-MS to determine their chemical composition. A sample of the crucible residues from the above described UHV evaporation experiment was also analyzed. The resulting chromatograms are shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  UPLC-chromatograms of thermally treated PCBM samples. The red chromatogram corresponds to the crucible residues which were collected after an evaporation experiment. The appearances of PCBM degradation products (SP 1, SP 2, and C60) are indicated. 
As can be seen in the chromatograms, decomposition products can be detected after the solid PCBM has undergone the first phase transition at 245 °C (Fig. 6, 275 °C trace). A considerable increase in decomposition products (SP 1, SP 2 and C60) is observed for temperatures above the melting point (Fig. 6, 300 °C trace). The amounts of PCBM and the side products extracted from UPLC analysis are shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Chromatography results showing content of PCBM and selected side products







PCBM


SP 1


SP 2


C60



4.8a min
5.7a min
8.0a min
9.6a min





a Retention time in the UPLC analysis.





275 °C – 60 min
98.6%
0.6%
0.01%
0.2%


300 °C – 60 min
89.1%
3.6%
0.3%
0.9%


350 °C – 60 min
9.9%
18.0%
17.6%
15.7%


Crucible residues
31.7%
21.2%
12.0%
10.7%




After treating PCBM at 275 °C for 60 minutes (3), its purity is reduced from 99.8% to 98.6%. It is noteworthy that so far the PCBM sample had undergone a solid state phase transition only. After keeping PCBM in the melt at 300 °C for 60 minutes (4), the purity drops below 90%. After one hour at 350 °C (5), less than 10% of PCBM are left. The chromatogram corresponding to the recovered crucible residues (red line in Fig. 6) shows a decomposition pattern which is similar to the thermal stress observed at 350 °C. This observation seems to be in contradiction to the temperatures which were employed during the evaporation experiment (240 °C to 280 °C). However, the evaporation temperature was read with a thermo couple positioned outside the crucible and hence only gives a rough measure for the actual temperature of thermal stress to the PCBM inside the crucible. Since the evaporation experiment was monitored using the pressure increase inside the deposition chamber to ensure a sufficient evaporation rate of PCBM, the actual temperature inside the crucible must have been in a range of 320 to 340 °C causing considerable material degradation.
After separation of the molecular species with UPLC, their chemical nature was investigated with a mass spectrometry (MS) system featuring atmospheric pressure chemical ionization (APCI−), allowing negative ionization of extended π-systems, such as the fullerene core. It is noteworthy, that the vast majority of decomposition products show a molecular mass between m/z = 904 and 913. As PCBM itself has a molecular mass of 910, no carbon–carbon or carbon–oxygen bonds are broken in the course of most decomposition reactions. One exemption to this observation is the formation of C60 (tR = 9.6 min, m/z = 720) which is formed by complete elimination of the side chain. The abundance of C60 in the crucible residue of PCBM is found to be greater than 10%.
Two products besides C60 were found to be characteristic for PCBM degradation. The first one (SP 1), at a retention time of 5.7 min, already occurs after thermal treatment at 275 °C. The molecular mass of this molecule has not changed compared to pure PCBM. The most probable reaction scheme would be the isomerization of the [6,6]-methanofullerene (PCBM) to the [5,6]-cage-opened fulleroid3 or the product of the recently reported thermal [6,6] → [6,6] isomerization28 (Fig. 8). The other prominent side product (SP 2) has a retention time of 8.0 minutes. The highest registered m/z of this species is found to be m/z = 904, corresponding to the formal elimination of 6 hydrogen atoms. It is noteworthy that this product is only significantly formed above 300 °C. Since at this temperature radical reactions come into play, a vast variety of structures can be devised.
In order to derive the chemical nature of major decomposition products besides C60, PCBM samples were analyzed with 1H-NMR spectroscopy in deuterated DCB. Sample spectra are shown in Fig. 7. It becomes evident that major chemical transformations occur in the aromatic (7–9 ppm), the methoxy (3–4 ppm) and the aliphatic region (1–3 ppm). Thus, the major decomposition pathways indeed involve chemical transformations of the aliphatic side-chain. Bimolecular reactions of the phenyl moiety (e.g. dimerisation) cannot be excluded either.
 Fig. 7  
1H-NMR spectra of PCBM standard and crucible residue in o-dichlorobenzene-d4. 
The exact chemical nature of the side products SP 1 and SP 2 could not be resolved but it is likely that the loss of hydrogen occurs either via thermal elimination of side chain protons resulting in alkenes or alkines (DECOMP 1) or by radical loss of hydrogen and addition to the fullerene core (DECOMP 2) or a combination of both (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Structures of possible species created upon thermal decomposition of [6,6]-PCBM. [5,6]-PCBM3 and iso-PCBM28 have been reported in the literature, DECOMP 1 and DECOMP 2 could be formed by the loss of two hydrogen atoms and could thus be intermediates for the formation of SP 1 and SP 2. 
In order to clarify whether the generated impurities in the evaporation crucible also appear in the evaporated film, the deposited material films were also analyzed by UPLC-MS. Even though the quantity of material deposited both via spin-coating and evaporation in the studied films is not high, it was possible to extract representative amounts in DCB.
Concentration and dilution with THF gave samples suitable for UPLC-MS analysis. The spin-coated samples were identified to contain pure PCBM (Fig. 9, left). The evaporated sample (Fig. 9, right) shows a reduced PCBM content of approx. 77% and the presence of considerable amounts of SP 1 and C60 as well as undefined side-products around tR = 4.15 min. These results support the XPS and IR findings on chemical degradation of PCBM during thermal evaporation obtained for these films.
 Fig. 9  UPLC chromatograms (λ = 255 nm) of PCBM wafer extracts after spin-coating (left) and UHV evaporation (right). 
Preparation of P3HT BHJ solar cells using pure and thermally treated PCBM
In order to correlate the results obtained from XPS, IR, and chemical analysis with an electronic performance, BHJ solar cells were prepared with pure and thermally treated PCBM, respectively. The thermal treatment of PCBM was performed in the TGA setup such that its composition corresponded to the composition determined for the evaporated sample. It was not possible to exactly reproduce the composition of the evaporated sample by simple thermal treatment, as C60 was always found to be underrepresented compared to PCBM or SP 1. Heating PCBM at 300 °C for 60 minutes gave a sample with composition most similar to evaporation. The PCBM content of this sample is with 83%, slightly overrepresented, whereas the C60 with 1%, is largely underrepresented. However, in both cases, the absolute amount of identifiable fullerene species (PCBM + C60) is around 84%, ensuring that the thermally treated sample is not of lower quality than the corresponding evaporated sample (see ESI Table S1†).
Inverted P3HT:PCBM solar cells were fabricated with a pristine blend and a blend with thermally pre-treated PCBM at 300 °C for 60 min. The recorded J–V characteristics of both blends displayed in Fig. 10 show similar device performances, such as short circuit current density and open circuit voltage, while the dark current density of heat treated PCBM is higher. All solar cell performance parameters are summarized in Table 4. The considerably higher dark-current density can be attributed to a lower shunt resistance in the tempered PCBM containing device. This could be explained by a morphological change in the active layer which may influence the PCBM and P3HT domain formation, or a direct change of the electrical properties of the decomposed PCBM derivatives, or its segregated side chains. Nevertheless, for efficient solar cells this mostly affects the dark-current characteristics only and has no impact on the device performance of organic solar cells under illumination. However, highly dark current sensitive devices such as organic photodiodes, will be negatively impacted by the use of evaporated PCBM.
 Fig. 10  Dark and illuminated J–V-characteristics of inverted P3HT:PCBM solar cells with pristine PCBM as reference cell (black compact lines), and thermally treated PCBM at 300 °C for 60 min (dashed red lines). 
Table 4 Open circuit voltage (VOC), short cut current density (JSC), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the inverted solar cells with pristine and tempered blends







V
OC (mV)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




Pristine P3HT:PCBM
590
−9.16
59.2
3.21


Tempered P3HT:PCBM
582
−8.61
59.7
2.99




Summary and conclusion
For the first time the effect of thermal stress during UHV evaporation in contrast to solution processing on PCBM was comprehensively investigated.
While XPS and UPS of liquid deposited and evaporated PCBM films show very similar core level and even valence band spectra, there appear clear differences in IR, TGA and UPLC-MS. With UPLC C60 could be identified as one decomposition component. With the help of UPLC-MS two other modifications observed in UPLC are assigned to side chain reactions due to the loss of hydrogen resulting in alkenes or alkynes or by radical loss of hydrogen and addition to the fullerene or a combination of both. These thermal induced modifications accumulate in the crucible.
The evaporated film mainly consists of PCBM but also about 15% of other fullerene-derived impurities. The chemical analysis of the PCBM exposed to different controlled temperature treatments and of PCBM undergone thermal evaporation allows to specify the actual evaporation temperature inside the crucible in the range of 320 to 340 °C. Chemical analysis clearly shows that thermal stress during evaporation induces chemical changes in the molecules. The chemical analysis of thermally treated PCBM reveals that degradation of PCBM powder occurs as the first phase transition takes place and increases significantly above the melting point temperature of 283 °C. Most of the species involved in this process are formed by proton elimination and/or cycloadditions or -reversions with the fullerene moiety. Besides the formation of C60via a cycloreversion elimination reaction of the entire side chain, no significant carbon–carbon or carbon–oxygen bond cleavage was observed. The similarity of XP and UP spectra show, that the effect of the above described reactions on the electronic structure of the material is almost negligible. However, this is not surprising as most of the frontier orbitals in the valence region stem from the π-system of the C60-cage, which seems to be mostly unaltered and the side chain with the oxygen survives albeit differently bound to the C60 cage, or the chain is lost completely. Thus for the major fraction of molecules the C60 cage structure that gives the strongest C1s signal in photoelectron spectroscopy as well as the binding states of the two oxygen atoms in PCBM are not significantly affected and therefore the XP spectra change only slightly.
As long as the C60 cage is not altered during thermal evaporation, the effect on the valence features and thus electronic properties will be limited and hardly visible by PES. Similarly the impact of the thermal induced modifications on the electronic performance of PCBM in solar cells is limited as validated by comparing devices prepared from thermal modified and pristine PCBM, which show similar solar cell characteristics. While the thermal degradation affects the dark current behavior of BHJ solar cells by reducing the shunt resistance, the J–V characteristics under light do not suffer.
Concluding, thin films of PCBM deposited via thermal evaporation are not suitable for detailed analysis of pristine PCBM but the effects of thermal stress on the electronic performance is limited as could be shown for organic BHJ solar cells.
Acknowledgements
Funding from the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the MESOMERIE project and the German leading-edge cluster “Forum Organic Electronics” are gratefully acknowledged. Special thanks to the competence center “simulation” at the InnovationLab in Heidelberg for the DFT calculations of the PCBM IR spectrum.
References
A. Mishra and P. Baeuerle, Small Molecule Organic Semiconductors on the Move: Promises for Future Solar Energy Technology, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51(9), 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Anthony, 
            et al., n-Type Organic Semiconductors in Organic Electronics, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(34), 3876–3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hummelen, 
            et al., Preparation and Characterization of Fulleroid and Methanofullerene Derivatives, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60(3), 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, 
            et al., Polymer Photovoltaic Cells – Enhanced Efficiencies Via a Network of Internal Donor–Acceptor Heterojunctions, Science, 1995, 270(5243), 1789–1791 CAS .
D. Minh Trung, L. Hirsch and G. Wantz, P3HT:PCBM, Best Seller in Polymer Photovoltaic Research, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23(31), 3597–3602 CrossRef .
J. Maibach, E. Mankel, T. Mayer and W. Jaegermann, Band Energy Diagram of PCBM-DH6T Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells: Synchrotron-Induced Photoelectron Spectroscopy on Solution Processed DH6T:PCBM Blends and In situ Prepared PCBM/DH6T Interfaces, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1(45), 7635–7642 RSC .
R. Hock, T. Mayer and W. Jaegermann, p-Type Doping of Spiro-MeOTAD with WO3 and the Spiro-MeOTAD/WO3 Interface Investigated by Synchrotron-Induced Photoelectron Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(34), 18146–18154 CAS .
A. Kumar, 
            et al., High efficiency polymer solar cells with vertically modulated nanoscale morphology, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(16), 165202 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Akaike, 
            et al., Influence of side chain of [6,6]-phenyl-C(61)-butyric acid methyl ester on interfacial electronic structure of [6,6]-phenyl-C(61)-butyric acid methyl ester/Ag substrate, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(4), 043309 CrossRef .
K. Akaike, 
            et al., Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy and inverse photoemission spectroscopy of [6,6]-phenyl-C-61-butyric acid methyl ester in gas and solid phases, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104(2), 023710 CrossRef .
W. H. Tseng, 
            et al., Enhancement of poly(3-hexylthiophene)-based solar cell with thermal-evaporated [6,6]-phenyl-C60-butyric acid methyl ester layers, J. Photonics Energy, 2012, 2, 021009 CrossRef .

          A. Gopal, Effects of Thickness, Morphology and Molecular Structure of Donor and Acceptor Layers in Thermally Interdiffused Polymer Photovoltaics, in Physics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg,  2007 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol and K. D. Bomben, Handbook of X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Physical Electronics, Inc.,  1995 Search PubMed .
P. Deglmann, F. Furche and R. Ahlrichs, An efficient implementation of second analytical derivatives for density functional methods, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 362(5–6), 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, Density-functional approximation for the correlation energy of the inhomogeneous electron gas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 33(12), 8822–8824 CrossRef .
A. D. Becke, Density-functional exchange-energy approximation with correct asymptotic behavior, Phys. Rev. A, 1988, 38(6), 3098–3100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Maibach, 
            et al., Synchrotron induced photoelectron spectroscopy on drop casted donor/acceptor bulk heterojunction: Orbital energy line up in DH6T/PCBM blends, Surf. Sci., 2013, 612, L9–L11 CrossRef CAS .
P. de Bruyn, D. J. D. Moet and P. W. M. Blom, A facile route to inverted polymer solar cells using a precursor based zinc oxide electron transport layer, Org. Electron., 2010, 11(8), 1419–1422 CrossRef CAS .
C. Enkvist, 
            et al., C(1s) Shakeup Spectrum of C-60-Global Charge-Transfer Satellites and Their Relation to the X-Ray Threshold Singularities in Macroscopic Systems, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1993, 48(19), 14629–14637 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Richter, D. Friedrich and D. Schmeißer, Valence and Conduction Band States of PCBM as Probed by Photoelectron Spectroscopy at Resonant Excitation, BioNanoScience, 2012, 2(1), 59–65 CrossRef .
M. P. Felicissimo, 
            et al., Determination of vertical phase separation in a polyfluorene copolymer: fullerene derivative solar cell blend by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19(28), 4899–4901 RSC .
G. P. López, D. G. Castner and B. D. Ratner, XPS O 1s binding energies for polymers containing hydroxyl, ether, ketone and ester groups, Surf. Interface Anal., 1991, 17(5), 267–272 CrossRef .
J. A. Leiro, 
            et al., Core-level XPS spectra of fullerene, highly oriented pyrolytic graphite, and glassy carbon, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2003, 128(2–3), 205–213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Zhang, 
            et al., First Principle Calculations of the Electronic Properties of the Fullerene Derivative as an Electron Acceptor in Organic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(48), 19158–19161 CAS .
T. T. Ngo, D. N. Nguyen and V. T. Glass, Glass transition of PCBM, P3HT and their blends in quenched state, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3(4), 045001 CrossRef .
V. D. Mihailetchi, 
            et al., Charge transport and photocurrent generation in poly (3-hexylthiophene): Methanofullerene bulk-heterojunction solar cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16(5), 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, 
            et al., Manipulating regioregular poly(3-hexylthiophene): [6,6]-phenyl-C-61-butyric acid methyl ester blends – route towards high efficiency polymer solar cells, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17(30), 3126–3140 RSC .
B. W. Larson, 
            et al., Thermal [6,6] → [6,6] Isomerization and Decomposition of PCBM (Phenyl-C61-butyric Acid Methyl Ester), Chem. Mater., 2014, 26(7), 2361–2367 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00769gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  
C60 and soluble derivative PCBM used in solution- and vacuum-processed organic solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 2  C1s and O1s core level spectra of C60, spin coated PCBM, evaporated PCBM, and drop cast PCBM crucible residues. The spectra of drop cast pristine PCBM (not displayed) are almost identical to the (SC) PCBM spectra. (a) C1s core level spectra (b) C1s emission normalized to maximum intensity to evidence the differences between PCBM and C60 spectra. In the inset, difference spectra are shown in which the C60 emission was subtracted from the PCBM spectra to eliminate the common shake-up contributions on the high binding energy side. The remaining intensity is assigned to C–O binding sites in PCBM as indicated. (c) O1s core level spectra showing no oxygen emission for C60 and two oxygen components for PCBM as expected. In case of the crucible residue spectra, the original data is given in light green dots while the solid dark green line represents the difference spectra after the elimination of substrate signal intensity (see ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 3  Secondary electron (SE) cutoff spectra (a) and valence region spectra (b) of C60 in comparison to the differently prepared PCBM films (spin-coated, evaporated, drop-cast crucible residues from bottom to top). Both the values for the work function (in (a)) and the HOMOonset positions (in (b)) are given.	 


PCBM (SC)	31:1

PCBM (evap)	31:1

PCBM (CR)	34:1

PCBM (molecule)	36:1

 	Fig. 4  DFT-calculated IR-spectrum of PCBM (a), experimental IR-spectra of a spin-coated PCBM layer (b), of an evaporated PCBM layer (c) and of an evaporated C60 layer (d). The dashed lines indicate the assignment of the strongest absorption bands of the spin-coated PCBM layer to the vibrational modes of the calculated spectrum. δ and ν refer to deformation and stretching vibrations, respectively. The subscripts of the mode assignments refer to the dominant localization of the mode on the molecule.	 

 	Fig. 5  DSC-traces of the as-received commercial PCBM sample used for this study. Phase transitions are depicted with their onset temperatures.	 

1	130 °C	5 min	BHJ thermal annealing
2	240 °C	60 min	Just before first phase transition
3	275 °C	60 min	Just before final phase transition
4	300 °C	60 min	
PCBM melt
5	350 °C	60 min	Molten PCBM with thermal stress

 	Fig. 6  UPLC-chromatograms of thermally treated PCBM samples. The red chromatogram corresponds to the crucible residues which were collected after an evaporation experiment. The appearances of PCBM degradation products (SP 1, SP 2, and C60) are indicated.	 



275 °C – 60 min	98.6%	0.6%	0.01%	0.2%
300 °C – 60 min	89.1%	3.6%	0.3%	0.9%
350 °C – 60 min	9.9%	18.0%	17.6%	15.7%
Crucible residues	31.7%	21.2%	12.0%	10.7%

 	Fig. 7  
1H-NMR spectra of PCBM standard and crucible residue in o-dichlorobenzene-d4.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structures of possible species created upon thermal decomposition of [6,6]-PCBM. [5,6]-PCBM3 and iso-PCBM28 have been reported in the literature, DECOMP 1 and DECOMP 2 could be formed by the loss of two hydrogen atoms and could thus be intermediates for the formation of SP 1 and SP 2.	 

 	Fig. 9  UPLC chromatograms (λ = 255 nm) of PCBM wafer extracts after spin-coating (left) and UHV evaporation (right).	 

 	Fig. 10  Dark and illuminated J–V-characteristics of inverted P3HT:PCBM solar cells with pristine PCBM as reference cell (black compact lines), and thermally treated PCBM at 300 °C for 60 min (dashed red lines).	 

Pristine P3HT:PCBM	590	−9.16	59.2	3.21
Tempered P3HT:PCBM	582	−8.61	59.7	2.99
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4tc00769g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
